SEAL Project: User-Centric Application of Linked Digital Identity for Students and
Citizens
Francisco José Aragó-Monzonís
Universitat Jaume I
Castellón, Spain
e-mail: farago@uji.es
Basurte-Durán, Alberto
Universidad de Málaga
Málaga, Spain
e-mail: abasurte@uma.es
Laura Domínguez-García
Universidad de Málaga
Málaga, Spain
e-mail: lauradomg@uma.es
Victoriano Giralt
Universidad de Málaga
Málaga, Spain
e-mail: victoriano@uma.es
Raúl Ocaña
Universidad de Málaga
Málaga, Spain
e-mail: raulocana14@uma.es
Abstract— The SEAL (Student and Citizen Identity Linked)
project targets two important aspects of identity management:
give the users control over their own data, and facilitate the
reconciliation of the multiple electronic identities citizens have
across public and private institutions. Through a modular,
extensible, and scalable design, the SEAL service empowers the
citizen to build his own persistent and unique identity, while
still having control over the anonymity and traceability. This
citizen empowerment is due to the exploration of the Self-
Sovereign Identity concept, which reduces data exposition and
critical dependencies, building a bridge between the federated
data world and the Self-Sovereign Identity new horizons. In
this paper we describe the paradigm that SEAL proposes for
dealing with identity reconciliation issues and its contribution
to secure digital identities, and how users can control all of this
through the SEAL service dashboard.
Keywords-identity
reconciliation;
self-sovereign
identity;
identity federation; know your customer; eIDAS.
I. INTRODUCTION
SEAL has been born amidst a complex situation. The
rapid growth in online service usage and needs in the last
decades greatly exceeded the organisational capacity of the
regulatory bodies, producing an environment where users
own personal data in a myriad of different and non-
interoperable sources. This situation has been tackled
partially through different aspects, like for example the
authentication.
In
the
academia
sector,
the
eduGAIN
(Education Global Authentication Infrastructure) network [1]
facilitated an effective sharing of online services and
resources among higher education and research institutions
using SAML2 (Security Assertion Markup Language v2)
standard [2], and later, the European Commission has taken a
similar approach to produce a framework for cross-border
acceptance of state-issued electronic identities [3]. However,
this tendency is not limited to authentication: EMREX
project [4] created a framework for the trusted exchange of
academic records, to support students moving abroad in
getting credit recognition. The main common factor behind
these initiatives is a user-centric approach, in accordance
with the evolution of the data protection legislation that aims
at giving the users full sovereignty over the personal data.
The increasing demand for integrated online user services
requires trusted, effective data interoperability. At the centre
of this lies a key but usually ignored issue: how to determine
if two sets of data identified by non-matching identifiers
belong to the same individual. The usual solution to this lies
in trusting the users’ statement of ownership. However, on
many
high-profile
use
cases
(especially
on
official
administrative procedures), this is not an option, as the users
can benefit from counterfeiting data. This would not be an
option in the context of trusted infrastructures, but the blind
spot of non-matching identifiers in data sources can open the
door to borrowing data from another citizen. Ensuring the
ontological relationship between two sets of data and an
individual requires a process of comparing contextual data of
the subject of both sets (i.e., comparing name, surname, date
of birth, etc.). This process is costly and probabilistic,
requiring human interaction in many edge-cases, especially if
the trust standards are high. This is the reason for the growth
of specialised Know-Your-Customer (KYC) companies that
provide this identity reconciliation service. However, this is
still a chaotic and non-standard field.
SEAL tries to build a key element to formalise the
management of data and their relationships, by coordinating
the different involved actors to let the users be in the centre
of it, bringing the data under a virtually unified and
persistent identity, while still guaranteeing all his rights and
giving full control over the traceability and anonymity. The
SEAL service develops a modular and extensible framework
that allows plugging in to sources of identity and data, KYC
providers and data consumers, to let the users collect her data
sets, establish trusted links among them, and deliver them to
the consuming parties, namely university user services.
This work is organised in two main sections: SEAL
innovation
as
digital
identity,
which
shows
SEAL
architecture, and user-centric management for students,
where the user-centric approach of the SEAL project is
detailed and the users’ experience interaction -web and
mobile- is described.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 1.
SEAL service architecture structure layout.
II. SEAL INNOVATION AS DIGITAL IDENTITY
SEAL proposes an innovative framework aimed at
creating a standardized and holistic way of dealing with an
often disregarded issue: identity reconciliation. Only in the
latest years, the growth in the demand for online services,
has brought into light this missing piece, that hinders the
establishment of online services and procedures(especially
in the public sector and in banking) that show a big potential
demand but also need to establish with a high level of trust
that two identities refer to the same individual citizen,
without having to trust the citizen for that. This has brought
to the appearance of KYC companies that develop complex
assurance procedures to establish this fact, and sell their
services to interested companies, and also the approval of
specific regulations, like eIDAS (Electronic Identification
Authentication and trust Services) [5] regulation, that settle
the legal grounds for the public acceptance of said methods.
The state of the art, shows independent KYC providers
dealing with independent consumer entities, doing specific
and
no-portable
integrations.
The
SEAL
project
has
recognised this gap and proposes a structured, common and
standardised approach to create a common ground that
brings together all the actors in this scenario: KYC
providers, data providers, data consumers, and builds it
around the user, to ensure the protection of the users’ rights
regarding data management. And it tries to do so in a
manner to open the way for standardization of procedures,
and minimisation of efforts for the implied stakeholders,
coordinating the actions of all of them in the most efficient
way.
A. Architecture
SEAL is not a new data transport infrastructure, but a
support framework. It minimises the reconciliation effort for
data consumers by centralising this management on the
SEAL service and allowing the reuse of this effort by storing
the trusted links on secure storage areas. SEAL is divided in
three layers, with information flowing from top to down, as
shown in Figure 1. First, we find a data acquisition layer,
where we find three specific interfaces that allow data into
SEAL: identity data access, identity reconciliation and
identity derivation. Of these interfaces, multiple pluggable
implementations can be provided to support almost any
source of data or KYC provider. Out of the box, SEAL
provides integration with eduGAIN and with eIDAS, and
internal automated and manual KYC support procedures.
On the middle layer, we find the management and
storage interfaces. SEAL allows any API (Application
Programming Interface) compliant client to allow users to
connect and interact, to retrieve data and establish links. Two
clients are provided: a mobile and a browser-based client.
The storage can be performed on a series of locations under
the control of the users: mobile storage, local storage on the
computer or, cloud storage services. Stored data is encrypted,
so only the users can decrypt it and decide when it is
decrypted and fed into SEAL, but also the data is signed to
ensure the users do not tamper with it, breaking the chain of
trust: the user owns the data, however, SEAL does not trust
the users.
The lower layer is the data presentation layer. There, any
data consumer can access the data users want to deliver
through multiple ways, divided into two main blocks:
federated access and self-sovereign access. On the federated
access, the relaying party sends a request to SEAL using a
standard delegation protocol: SAML2 and OIDC (Open ID
Connect) [6], having this last one more fitted with the
concept of user-centric federated identity management [7].
Then, the users are requested to access their storage to
retrieve the required data and send it back to the relaying
party. On the self-sovereign access, SEAL acts as an issuer
of verifiable claims. These claims are stored on a user wallet
(similar to the SEAL storage, but designed as an independent
agent) that the users can carry around and deliver to data
consumers, that will verify the integrity and trust on those
claims through validation data published on a distributed
ledger. This access model skips the SEAL service once the
data has been issued, removing critical central points in the
processing, which is the base of the self-sovereign concept.
III. USER-CENTRIC APPLICATION MANAGEMENT
FOR STUDENTS
A user-centric approach allows for general-purpose
infrastructures supporting a wide array of use cases, because
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

the users interact with the components. They can be properly
informed and can request their consent over any operation
that needs to be performed on their data, asked to discover
the sources, and is able to follow and cut the process at any
point.
This concept has evolved into the self-sovereignty of the
data, which advocates for the users to be the keeper and have
an effective control over their data, not just a formal one.
The concept has been gaining strength, especially in the
context of the increasing risks and costs for private
companies to secure the sensitive user data being kept in
their systems: if the users keep their own data and offer it to
be processed only when needed, the window of risk is
greatly reduced, and companies become less appealing
targets.
SEAL
linked
identity
offers
key
advantages
regarding privacy and security of High Education Institutions
(HEI) students in their operations and interactions as users of
educational, institutional and private services. In this regard,
there are some potential features to be addressed not only
from the student perspective, but also from the whole
academic community. The SEAL project is an example of
how compatible data of interest can be linked as other
projects previously did, like Europeana [8] focuses on
electronic resources data aggregation, to fulﬁl citizens needs 
providing
a
secure
user-controlled
digital
identity
framework.
The European Blockchain Services Infrastructure (EBSI)
speciﬁes four use cases for 2019: Notarisation, Diplomas, 
European Self-Sovereign Identity and Trusted Data Sharing
[9]. The SEAL service covers all these cases and can
contribute to secure the process, resulting in a reduction of
the veriﬁcation costs and an improvement of the authenticity 
trust between organizations [10]. The potential of the SEAL
service lies in its power to create and utilise the user-centric
service features of digital identity to improve the user
experience of accessing restricted personal digital areas
among institutions or e-Government authorities. Facilitating
the authentication process improves the user experience by
avoiding nowadays long administrative processes. This has
been addressed by A. Crespo et al. [11] as the offering of
cross-border services allows access to new services with
credentials that the citizen already possesses and without the
need for issuing local ones.
A. Dashboard application and user interaction
As described by X. Liu et al. [12] the Web has undergone
toward a highly user-centric environment where millions of
users can participate and collaborate for their own interests
and beneﬁts. Thus, the SEAL dashboard allows users to lead 
their actions. The SEAL service can be used from different
devices and two service applications have been designed: a
web dashboard and a native mobile application compatible
with Android and iOS (iPhone Operating System) systems.
1)
Access methods and data storing: Two access options
are offered: centralised and decentralised. Both of them
fulﬁl the security requirements established for the SEAL
service and the same privileges are granted. The centralised
Personal Data Store (PDS) access requires the user’s
password. Nevertheless, as personal data is a complex issue,
not all the attributes are available to users as linked ones
[13]. This access method offers two options for storing the
data ﬁle: local and cloud, both of them require the user’s
password, and when locally stored, the file is saved in the
user device’s system.
The decentralised Self-Sovereing Identitty (SSI) access
method uses a Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) to
assure and verify the identity of a person, together with the
integrity of the personal data. As suggested by A. Benzekri
et al, this could avoid uploading official documents during
the registration process, which is tedious and degrades the
users’ experience, especially with mobile [14]. This access
method requires an external mechanism to connect, read and
generate data over the DLT infrastructure, and it behaves as
an intermediary between the SEAL service and the ledger:
the uPort [15] API. Since this API needs a local wallet [16]
to fulﬁl the users’ credentials, which in turn authorise the 
operations over the DLT, the SSI access method can be seen
as a conjunction of the dashboard, the uPort API and the
DLT infrastructure.
2)
SEAL
Dashboard
functionalities:
Linked
digital
identities can be defined as linked data capable of storing
data and allowing a service to tie linked resources into a
worldwide network [17]. The SEAL service uses this new
technology to retrieve different identities, link them and
expand users’ feature options while strengthening the
authentication process; as this is the major advantage of
Linked Data technology [18].
The soul of the service in terms of identity collection is
the Identity Reconciliation functionality, which allows the
users to link two identities (manually or automatically) and
create a new one. In order to assure the users’ privacy, the
identity reconciliation only takes place when the users select
a suitable pair of identities and start the process. The users
can check its progress thanks to the Reconciliation Status
function. Besides, the SEAL service offers the possibility of
loading a new identity and including it among those from
the Identity Reconciliation functionality. The Retrieve
Identity Data function performs the data collection and its
storage in the session. Thus, the users can display the loaded
identities data and store the current session. About the
storage, the Conﬁguration Data Store functionality presents 
the two options: local and cloud; the selected one will
remain for future access.
Concerning the DLT operations, the Manage Veriﬁable 
Claims functionality allows the users to create, retrieve and
store a Veriﬁable Credential (VC), which is a set of tamper-
resistant claims made by an issuer (the SEAL service in this
case) where each claim asserts a set of properties about a
subject [19]. The last feature of the Identity Manager
interface is the Derive Identiﬁer functionality. It can 
generate a new identifier from a current stored identity.
B. Mobile – Desktop interoperability
In today’s world, smartphones have become a central
technology. For this reason, the SEAL service is designed to
be accessible from a mobile perspective. The SEAL App
provides all the web service functions to cover the users’
needs when using their digital identity. This is possible as
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

the digital identity is linked to the web app via the SEAL
servers. Besides, the SEAL App can be combined with a
personal
wallet
for
decentralised
authorisation
and
identiﬁcation process. Thus, the veriﬁcation and certiﬁcation 
of personal data can be done on demand basis.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The SEAL project addresses security and assurance, the
two critical issues of cloud computing in public sectors as
described by D. Shin [20]. SEAL-linked digital identity can
be used as a multiple identity detector becoming a keystone
in the EU ecosystem. Its platform allows both authorities
and
users
to
obtain
limitless
digital
resources
from
authentication and identiﬁcation mechanisms. Furthermore, 
features and functionalities of the SEAL service are
designed from a user-centric approach, focusing on the ﬁnal 
user’ beneﬁts and the compliance of the service 
interoperability with the EU information systems.
The SEAL service offers an easy-to-use user experience,
ending up in a better users’ interaction of their digital linked
identities, giving the users the full control of their single
lifetime identity and data across borders - in a trusted and
secured manner. SEAL, more than competing with existing
infrastructures, tries to fill a gap in the management of
identities: the reconciliation of identities. Moreover, it tries
to do so in a manner to open the way for standardization of
procedures and minimisation of efforts for the implied
stakeholders, coordinating the actions of all of them in the
most efficient way.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Howlett, V. Nordh, and W. Singer, “Deliverable DS3. 3.1:
eduGAIN
service
definition
and
policy
Initial
Draft,”
GÉANT.
Deliverable
DS3.3.1,
May
2010,
URL:
https://geant3.archive.geant.org/Media_Centre/Media_Library
/Media%20Library/GN3-10-081-
DS3_3_1_eduGAIN_service_definition_and_policy.pdf
accesed: 2020-11-05.
[2]
S. Cantor et al., “Assertions and Protocols for the OASIS
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) V2.0,” Oasis
Standard,
March
2005,
URL:
https://docs.oasis-
open.org/security/saml/v2.0/saml-core-2.0-os.pdf
accessed:
2020-11-05.
[3]
European
Commission,
“eID
Documentation,”
URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/CEFDIGITAL/Wh
at+is+eID accessed: 2020-11-05.
[4]
T.
Fridell,
“EMREX
The
User-centered
Solution
for
Electronic
Transfer
of
Student
Data,”
URL:
https://emrex.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/Emrex-
EUNIS2019-16-9.pdf accessed: 2020-11-05.
[5]
European
Commision,
“Trust
Services
and
Electronic
identification (eID),” URL: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/trust-services-and-eid accessed: 2020-11-05.
[6]
R. Sakimura, N. Bradley, J. Jones, M. De Medeiros, and C.
Mortimore,
“Openid
connect
core
1.0.,”
The
OpenID
Foundation
S3,
February
2014,
URL:
https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0-final.html
accessed: 2020-11-05.
[7]
R. Laborde et al., “A User-Centric Identity Management
Framework based on the W3C Verifiable Credentials and the
FIDO Universal Authentication Framework,” IEEE 17th
Annual
Consumer
Communications
&
Networking
Conference
(CCNC),
January
2020,
doi:
10.1109/CCNC46108.2020.9045440.
URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9045440
accessed: 2020-11-04.
[8]
A. Isaac, R. Clayphan, and B.Haslhofer, “Europeana: Moving
to Linked Open Data,” Information Standards Quarterly, vol.
24, Jun. 2012, pp. 34–40, doi: 10.3789/isqv24n2-3.2012.06
URL: https://www.niso.org/niso-
io/2012/06/europeana accessed: 2020-11-04.
[9]
European Commission, “European countries join Blockchain
Partnership,” April 2018, URL: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
single-market/en/news/european-countries-join-blockchain-
partnership accessed: 2020-11-04.
[10] European
Commission,
“Introducing
the
European
Blockchain
Services
Infrastructure
(EBSI),”
URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/CEFDIGITAL/EB
SI accessed: 2020-11-05.
[11] A. Crespo, N. Rodríguez, F.J. Aragó, and V. Andreu,
“Feasibility
Study
on
Cross-border
Use
of
eID
and
Authentication
Services
(eIDAS
compliant)
to
support
Student Mobility and Access to Student Services in Europe,”
doi:
10.2759/735197.
URL:
https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
/publication/c0bc89a9-437b-11e8-a9f4-
01aa75ed71a1/language-en/format-PDF/source-69424735
accessed: 2020-11-05.
[12] X. Liu, G. Huang, and H. Mei, “Discovering Homogeneous
Web
Service
Community
in
the
User-Centric
Web
Environment,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
vol. 2, nº. 2, 2009, pp. 167–181, doi:10.1109/TSC.2009.11.
URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4912192
accessed: 2020-11-05.
[13] H. L. Moulaison and A. J. Million, “The disruptive qualities
of linked data in the library environment: Analysis and
recommendations,” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly,
vol.
52,
nº.
4,
2014,
pp.
367–387,
doi:
10.1080/01639374.2014.880981
URL:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01639374.2014
.880981 accessed: 2020-11-05.
[14] A. Benzekri et al., “Know Your Customer: Opening a new
bank account online using UAAF,” IEEE 17th Annual
Consumer
Communications
&
Networking
Conference
(CCNC),
January
2020,
doi:10.1109/CCNC46108.2020.
9045148 URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9045148
accessed: 2020-11-05.
[15] uPort
Mobile,
“uPort
Project,”
Github
page.
URL:
https://github.com/uport-project/uport-mobile accesed: 2020-
11-05.
[16] O. Johnston-Watt, “DLT is your passport to work,” URL:
https://medium.com/blockchaintp/dlt-is-your-passport-to-
work-e0183457b54b accessed: 2020-11-04.
[17] E. Miller, U. Ogbuji, V. Mueller, and K. MacDougall,
“Bibliographic Framework as a Web of Data: Linked Data
Model and Supporting Services,” Washington DC: Library of
Congress,
2012
URL:
https://www.loc.gov/bibframe/pdf/marcld-report-11-21-
2012.pdf accessed: 2020-11-04.
[18] T. Baker et al., “Library linked data incubator group final
report,” W3C Incubator Group Report, vol. 25, 2011 URL:
https://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/lld/XGR-lld-20111025/
accessed: 2020-11-05.
[19] D.W. Chadwick et al., “Improved Identity Management with
Verifiable Credentials and FIDO,” IEEE Communications
Standards
Magazine,
December
2019,
doi:10.1109/MCOMSTD.001.1900020
URL:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9031543 accessed: 2020-
11-04.
[20] D. Shin, "User centric cloud service model in public sectors:
Policy
implications
of
cloud
services,"
doi:
10.1016/j.giq.2012.06.012,
URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0740624X
13000099
accessed:
2020-11-05.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

