Dilemmas of Branding for Start-ups   
The Opportunities and Challenges in the Digital Era 
Amirhossein Roshanzamir 
Bradford University School of Management 
 Bradford, UK 
Email: A.H.Roshanzamir@bradford.ac.uk 
Abstract – Most of the start-ups have challenges in building up 
their corporate brand as they have no resources, such as money 
and internal structure, nor do they have customers or even a 
consistent idea how the end-product should look like. Having a 
strong brand enables start-ups to increase their visibility and 
ensure a certain level of quality which ultimately increases their 
chance of success. Nonetheless branding, as a growing field, 
focuses mainly on well-established firms who are already 
successful as opposed to start-ups whose business model 
involves lots of risks and their success is still uncertain. 
Digitalization provides immersive opportunities for the start-
ups to engage and communicate with their potential customers 
and stakeholders. The tremendous success of the new wave of 
start-ups, such as Facebook, Uber, Airbnb, and Coursera, which 
are now revolutionary brands, testifies the critical impact of 
digitalization on start-up brand building. This paper reviews the 
opportunities and challenges which start-ups face in building up 
their brands in the digital era and suggests a conceptual model 
with three notions including emotion, innovation, and co-
creation to address these dilemmas. Later, Coursera is reviewed 
as one of the most successful education-focused technology start-
ups in order to illustrate the application of the model. This paper 
highlights the vital role of branding for start-ups in the digital 
era and the findings contribute to the literature by articulating 
a three stages modular and incremental approach to build a 
start-up’s brand from scratch.  
Keywords–Start-up; 
Branding; 
Digitalization; 
Digital 
disruption;  Emotion; Innovation; Co-creation 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The new wave of start-ups fueled by information 
technology has flourished throughout the world, where 
leading companies emerge unexpectedly and cause what is 
state-of-the-art today to become outdated tomorrow  [1]. We 
see start-ups like Uber valued at $68B [2] and Airbnb valued 
at $31B [2] in digital technologies, which are transforming 
the business environment, igniting major changes in the way 
we buy, sell, consume, communicate and even work and 
ultimately standing among the most valuable and beloved 
brands. The trend is also strong in other places of the world 
wherein those 
developing 
economies, 
start-ups 
are 
addressing local problems through creative technologies and 
solutions [3]. 
     Meanwhile, it is important to note that, in today’s world, 
everybody including customers increasingly face more 
choices with less time to make them and that is where a strong 
brand plays a major role to simplify decision making, reduce 
risk, and set expectations [4]. Customers are surrounded by 
alternatives in every step of the way and the companies need 
to stand up, get customers’ attention, and deliver the message 
they want them to hear [5].  
Reputation and brand are considered as pivotal engines 
for growth and financial asset for any organization which 
fosters business development [6]. Though there is an 
increased attention towards branding and also the term start-
up and disruptive innovation are widespread, however, the 
intersection of these fields is still not thoroughly explored 
especially in the digital era. In other words, there are few 
papers on the branding of start-ups and the main focus 
remained on large and successful companies and recently on 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) [7]. The major reason 
perhaps is that most academics and practitioners take a 
holistic and result-oriented approach and prefer to study the 
brand of the companies who are successful as opposed to 
those whose business model involves lots of risks. However, 
branding plays a vital role during the start-up growth phases, 
when the company is seeking to make the first impressions, 
building the reputation in the public, attracting investors and 
ultimately securing the long-term loyalty of the customers.  
In fact, for a start-up, “visibility creates Opportunities”, 
the faster it gets visible the closer the possibility of a business 
success is [8].  Moreover, the digital era has provided start-
ups with tremendous opportunities to communicate and 
engage with their potential customers and stakeholders but 
substantial risks at the same time. Young ventures have 
specific branding needs due to their lack of resources [9], lack 
of internal structures and processes [7], and fundamental need 
to build a reputation [10] in order to find customers and 
investors.   
This paper, therefore, aims to explore the corporate 
branding of start-ups by reviewing the extant literature in 
order to identify the opportunities and challenges these new 
ventures face in building up their brand in the digital context. 
It further suggests a conceptual model with three notions 
including emotion, innovation, and co-creation which are 
built upon each other. The paper is structured in six sections 
where Section 2 reviews literature and works related to start-
up branding and identifies gaps. Section 3 is dedicated to the 
impact of digitalization. In Section 4 the notions that 
correspond to start-up branding and implications of 
digitalization on each are reviewed. In Section 5, the findings 
to be discussed and a conceptional model is suggested to deal 
with the corporate branding of start-ups. In Section 6, 
Coursera is reviewed as one of the most successful education-
focused technology start-ups in order to illustrate the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

application of the model. The conclusion summarizes the 
findings, discusses limitations and suggests further domain 
for research.  
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The term “start-up” is widespread and has grown in recent 
years especially in line with the great success of San 
Francisco new ventures.  Yet, the term is not limited to 
Silicon Valley and Seattle, since start-ups and incubators 
have been popping up in other places including Barcelona, 
Shanghai, Sydney, and Bangalore who now rank among the 
world’s top twenty start-up ecosystems, according to the 
Start-up Genome Project [1]. In many new industries, the 
most successful firms tend to be start-ups rather than 
established firms [11].  For example in IT field, it was newly 
established companies, such as Apple, Microsoft, Amazon, 
Google and more recently, Facebook, Twitter, Uber, and 
Airbnb who came up with outstanding ideas and solutions 
which mattered to our daily life. Start-ups have always been 
a symbol of change by devising a new way of doing things in 
a more efficient and cost-effective way. They crystalize 
ambitious team who are ready to take big risks and change 
the industries and classic business models with their 
creativity and innovation. We can observe that in just a few 
years, start-up companies like Facebook, Uber, and Airbnb 
have disrupted and changed the rules of business and stood 
among the top most valuable brands. These companies have 
become the new principal points of power and created 
influential social and financial impacts on how we live, think, 
work, and interact with each other—even how we feel and 
sense [3].  In fact, disruption is one of the most popular terms 
in management today and it is associated in part with the 
notion of “disruptive technology” outlined by Clayton 
Christensen [12]. Digital disruption can be defined as the 
change that occurs when new digital technologies and 
business models affect the value proposition of existing 
goods and services. These technologies often enter at the 
bottom of the market which is ignored by established 
companies and then start-ups grow and beat the old systems 
from that point.[12]. Jonikas [13] states that most start-ups 
even high-end innovation-based businesses face fearsome 
competition and must compete with the old ways of solving 
or simply ignoring the problem. He further insists on the 
important role of branding and argues that a solid brand can 
transform a business from an unknown start-up into a 
successful competitor and niche, or even market leader.  
Tai [14] argues that all great brands over the last 100 years 
were born out of the creation of a new category. He further 
insists that the creation of a new category or a next-generation 
product is usually what makes the big brands successful in 
the first place and this ultimately enables them to cement their 
position as the leader of that category. Rode and Vallaster [7] 
argue that start-ups provide a specific context to research 
corporate branding, especially in its early stage, as the 
internal structure and process do not yet exist. It could be 
tempting for start-ups to skip branding in the rush to get a 
new product to the market [15]. Some research and 
interviews show that many entrepreneurs do not consider 
branding important at the early stage and see it as later stage 
luxury, a nice-to-have thing as against a must-have [16]. The 
major reason perhaps is that most entrepreneurs are as short 
on cash as they are on time and they don’t think they can 
afford to spend either to attend to brand-building [15]. Others 
consider it a difficult and long process which does not create 
actionable results. Some people even mistake online presence 
on a few social media or even personal branding and PR 
program as a sufficient measure. Talbott [17] analyzes 
common reasons for the failure of a start-up in the article 
"Four Trends That Can Kill Your Start-up".  Ruzzier and 
Ruzzier [18] summarizes these trends by highlighting the first 
one to be an incorrect or overly narrow understanding of 
brands, which is usually associated only with a nice, good-
looking logo and some other design elements. Second, is the 
perception that customers buy your features instead of your 
brand (meaning how the product makes them feel). This is 
particularly common in engineering and tech start-ups. The 
third trend is related to the issue of brand differentiation, 
which most start-ups tend to seek through the most likable 
and trendy visual identity elements, while the fourth most 
common mistake concerns creativity and founder's 
perception, that creativity could be acquired on the market by 
hiring designers.  
One of the recent streams in branding which has strong 
implication in start-ups is brand co-creation. Co-creation, 
which is developing as a new paradigm in the management 
literature, allows companies and stakeholders and customers 
to create value through interaction. It was first defined by 
Kambil [19] and further developed by Prahalad and 
Ramaswamy [20] where it is argued that the supplier needs 
to engage all stakeholders and create value with them rather 
than creating value for them. Schultz [21] defines brand co-
creation as a process in which the company involves 
stakeholders to become part of designing, creating and 
innovating the brand. France, Merrilees and Miller [22] 
develop the customer brand co-creation model which 
discusses the influence of brand engagement, self-congruity, 
and involvement as antecedents to brand co-creation and 
identifies the moderating effect of brand interactivity and 
brand communities. The model actualizes the impact of brand 
co-creation upon the brand value and brand knowledge after 
all.  
Figure 1. The customer brand co-creation model [22] 
     This is a solid framework for understanding the factors 
influencing customers to co-create and the impacts of 
customer co-creation on the brand. Though, it highlights the 
complexity of co-creation in contrast to traditional practices 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

of marketing planning, yet, it ignores to take the other 
stakeholders into account within co-creation process. Also, 
the focus of this paper is not on start-ups. Another model 
which is developed by Juntunen [23] identifies internal and 
external corporate brand elements in B2B start-ups and 
argues that brand co-creation is a process that begins with the 
stakeholders inventing the corporate name before the 
company is established, and continues at the start-up phase 
by developing the new corporate name, updating the logo and 
communications material, and developing the product and 
business.  
Figure 2. Corporate brand elements in B2B start-ups [23] 
She addresses branding from superficial aspects and a visual 
viewpoint by concentrating on changes to corporate name 
and logo. Both internal and external elements of branding are 
identified with a focus on brand co-creation. Yet,  less 
attention is given to exploring the ways to develope a great 
product and service which is at the core of the brand building. 
Figure 3. Corporate brand co-creation process [23] 
     Bresciani and Eppler [24] argue that branding is vital for 
the survival of start-ups, given their lack of resources and 
fundamental need to find and maintain clients. They propose 
a three phases development framework and key guidelines 
for start-up branding.  First, the entrepreneur should define 
the brand strategy aligned to the strategy of the new 
organization before inception. Second, the brand strategy 
should be enacted through an appropriate brand design 
(name, logo, colors, and visual elements) in line with the 
brand mission and philosophy and finally, brand building 
activities should be developed carefully which entail using 
the power of the internet and also creating measurement tools 
[24]. This would enable start-ups to improve the branding 
strategy, in a continuous and iterative process [24]. 
Figure 4.  Brand creation sequences [24] 
Each of the above-mentioned studies offers an important 
contribution to start-up branding and brand co-creation. We 
can also observe the importance of value co-creation from the 
early stage as well as creation sequences or development 
phases. Yet, emotion and innovation are two important 
notions which must be taken into consideration and their role 
in development phases to be identified. Meanwhile, none of 
the studies specifically reveal the role of the internet and 
digital marketplaces. With rapid growth and popularity of the 
internet, all companies including start-ups are forced to have 
a digital presence to connect with stakeholders in order to 
communicate and interact with them. Moreover, the platform 
is also an emerging business model that leverages digital 
technology to connect people, organizations, and resources in 
an interactive ecosystem in which amazing amounts of value 
can be created and exchanged [25]. Through these platforms 
and networks, companies like Google, Uber, and Airbnb are 
changing the structure of major industries and transforming 
businesses. 
III.
THE IMPACT OF DIGITALIZATION
The marketing communications environment, as Keller 
[4] argues, has changed dramatically in recent years, resulting
in new challenges for marketers to build and manage their
brand and reputation in the digital age. Digitalization which
is defined as the mass adoption of Internet-connected digital
technologies and applications by consumers, enterprises, and
governments is a global phenomenon that touches every
industry and nearly every consumer in the world [26].
The new technologies including machine learning, 
mobile, big data and social media, which are facilitated and 
promoted by internet connectivity, are driving companies 
beyond the boundaries of the local and traditional ways of 
doing business. We can observe that the world of marketing 
is shifting from mass market to customer networks in which 
the core behaviour of customers is focused on access, 
connect, engage, customize and collaborate [27]. Kotler [5] 
describes how marketing has evolved from product-driven 
marketing (1.0) to customer-centric marketing (2.0) to 
human-centric marketing (3.0) and now value-driven 
marketing (4.0) which leads to the convergence between 
digital marketing and traditional marketing and ultimately 
changes consumer's landscape to reach more customers. 
Today, social networks grow the power of connected 
consumers and put endless amount of information to share 
with each other and respectively interact with brands. Brands 
have less control over what is said about them in the digital 
era as online users are more autonomous than ever and have 
quick and easy access to other users, which heavily influence 
their opinions [28]. The successful start-ups in digital-born 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

business have played the major role in digital disruption by 
suggesting new business models, new revenue streams, and 
new sources of competitive advantage not only possible, but 
in ways that are cheaper, faster, and more customer-centric 
than ever before [29][31]. For example, while many business 
executives seek solutions to digitally automate their existing 
operations, we observe start-ups like Uber and Airbnb find 
nontechnology improvement opportunities, simplify and 
standardize them and finally digitally automate the same [28]. 
Branding is as much about products and services as about 
everything that exists between the company and its 
stakeholders. Businesses throughout the world are interested 
to board digital transformation journey by engaging in e-
commerce because they see digitalization an essential 
ingredient for growing their businesses, improving customer 
experience and upgrading their business models. Yet, senior 
business executives admit they are not sure how to do it, as 
Gartner found when it surveyed CEOs [30]. The reason 
perhaps is that digitalization is an emerging concept and there 
are few well-tried and known frameworks to guide 
companies through the digital transformation process. The 
author presumes "the five domains of digital transformation" 
described by Rogers [31] builds a good foundation to 
explains how digitalization is reshaping five key domains of 
strategy including customers, competition, data, innovation, 
and value. These domains are important ingredients of start-
up branding. Table I. sets out strategic themes and key 
concepts as businesses move from the analogue to the digital 
age.   
TABLE I. THE FIVE DOMAINS OF DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATIONS [31]
DOMAIN 
STRATEGIC THEMES 
Customers 
Harness Customer Networks 
Competition 
Build Platforms, not just products 
Data 
Turn data into assets 
Innovation 
Innovate by rapid experimentation 
Value 
Adapt value proposition 
 The first and most important domain is customers since 
digital 
technologies 
transform 
the 
whole 
customer 
experience. For example today a start-up can easily use social 
media 
and 
mobile 
apps 
for 
exploring 
customer's 
requirements, building communities of potential customers, 
using analytics to know them better and ultimately offering 
personalized sales and services. Further, the new 
technologies facilitated the power of the platform and today's 
most valuable companies like Facebook, Uber, and Airbnb 
are increasingly successful in building and managing 
platforms which are digitized, open, and participative that 
create commercially connected ecosystems of producers and 
consumers. Moreover, the possibility of direct interaction 
with customers offered via digital technologies, such as social 
media and mobile applications provide tremendous data and 
information about customers. The data can be analysed 
through data mining and machine learning techniques to 
know the customers’ characteristics, buying patterns, 
spending, and other information. Digitalization and 
innovation facilitate the process and offer massive 
opportunities for visitors and potential customers through 
crowdsourcing and receiving feedbacks via social media and 
platforms. These are invaluable for designing new products 
and services and improving the existing one as Parker [25] 
argues innovation is no longer the province of in-house 
experts and research and development labs. Lastly, digital 
technologies enable start-ups to build, enhance, extend or 
reshape the customer value proposition with digital contents, 
insight, and engagement i.e. to offer better, cheaper, faster 
and personalized products and services. The digital 
transformation also underlies the success of many of today’s 
biggest, fastest-growing, and most powerfully disruptive 
companies, from Google, Amazon, and Facebook to recent 
successful start-ups, such as Uber, Airbnb, and Pinterest.  
IV.
NOTIONS THAT CORRESPOND TO START-
UP BRANDING 
Talbott [17] indicates that it is not possible to differentiate 
in a crowded marketplace without a distinct brand. He further 
refers to a quotation from Rob Frankel who puts it best when 
he says, "Branding is about getting your prospects to perceive 
you as the only solution to their problem." The clear and 
consistent association with the defined category as Tai [14] 
argues is critical, especially when the brand is young and 
unknown to the world. There are a number of papers on 
SMEs in marketing literature but a few of it reflects on 
branding [32]. Rode and Vallaster [7] argue that literature on 
branding and corporate communication is rich, and studies 
about new ventures and entrepreneurship are also numerous, 
however, the intersection of these two fields is still an under-
explored area. Abimbola [33] conducts one of the earliest 
explicit studies on SME branding and explores the role of 
branding as a competitive strategy. He further suggests 
SMEs, having fewer resources, require greater focus and 
effectiveness, and run specified and targeted campaigns. 
Though SMEs and start-ups look similar as they are small in 
revenue and staffing and built by entrepreneurs, they pursue 
different objectives and have a dissimilar business model, 
function and funding arrangement. An SME is a stable and 
structured business which focuses on the delivery of value to 
its already-known customers. Therefore, there is a base and 
foundation to build up a brand on top. A start-up, on the other 
hand, is a new, unstable, and unstructured business which is 
uncertain about its value proposition or even target customers 
and uses innovation to create new value.  
 Related research on SMEs is not applicable to start-ups, 
because they mainly focus on ongoing brand management 
[32], while start-ups face specific challenges, such as lack of 
resources and consistent idea how the end product should 
look like as well as the absence of reputation and customers.  
So, a start-up goes through experimenting and testing its 
business model and lacks a base and build upon foundation 
especially in the early stage. Therefore, branding for a start-
up would be more challenging since the business model and 
value proposition for potential customers are yet to be 
developed. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

TABLE II. SMEs VS START-UPS DEVELOPED BY THE 
AUTHOR 
SMEs 
Start-Ups 
Stable and Structured 
Unstable, Risky 
Final Products  
Products are being developed 
Delivery of Value 
Create Value via Innovation 
Known Customers 
Seeking Customers 
     In this section, the major notions that correspond to 
start-up branding and implications of digitalization on each 
will be identified and reviewed.  
A. Emotionally focused branding
Smith [34] says that branding is the creation of an idea, 
then communicating it in such a way that the market thinks 
and feels what you want them to know about you and your 
products.  Talbott [17] argues that people often buy purely 
based on how a product makes them feel. However, we must 
remember that at the heart of a great brand is a great product 
or service [4], though, branding goes beyond features of the 
product and focuses on feelings of the consumers for the 
brand.  The below matrix shows that the most beloved 
companies have both a fundamentally sound product and an 
emotionally connected brand [35]. 
Figure 5. The matrix of Brand by Beloved Brands Inc [35] 
Wasserman [36] argues that new ventures are usually 
labours of love for entrepreneurs, and they become 
emotionally attached to them using similar parenting 
language without even noticing. Therefore, start-ups need to 
sustain the high energy and determination to push the idea 
through the marketplace and that requires a powerful vision 
as argued by Maital and Seshadri [37] which excites the 
emotions, not just the power of reason [38]. 
The emotions and feelings can, therefore, play two roles 
in the branding of start-up. First, emotions and burning desire 
usually motivate an entrepreneur to initiate a solution and 
start a business and then he or she tries to create more 
authentic moments of customer engagement for example by 
story-telling and touching specific points which resonate with 
customer’s requirements.  
Li [39] argues that an entrepreneur’s hope of creating a 
successful 
new 
venture 
significantly 
increases 
the 
attractiveness and perceived success likelihood of the new 
venture. Forgas [40] indicates that emotions influence 
individuals’ judgment more strongly when the situation is 
ambiguous, information is limited, and decision making is 
intuitive rather than analytical. This is the case during the 
start-up process as decisions are made using emotions or rules 
of thumb, rather than systematic thinking during this stage. 
Kaplan [41] considers a passion or a cause as the common 
denominator among the innovators who organized around it 
and make things happen. Likewise, today we can see 
successful start-ups, such as Uber and Airbnb are built on a 
passion and clear point of view of their founders and then 
they fulfilled their promises on specific benefits, quality, and 
value by using credible, trustworthy, transparent media to 
communicate stories and information. All these ultimately 
cause the customers of these companies fall in love with 
brands, trust them, and believe in their superiority and feel 
emotionally connected.  For example, the founders of Uber 
had trouble hailing a cab on a snowy Paris evening in 2008 
and that is how they devised the idea of the tap a button, get 
a ride. Today, Uber connects people who need a reliable ride 
with people looking to earn money driving their car in 633 
cities throughout the world with $6.5B annual revenue [42]. 
The Airbnb story is perhaps one of the most inspiring stories 
of the 21st century when the founders moved from New York 
with no job and had trouble paying their rent. They were 
looking for a way to earn some extra money and that is why 
they bought a few airbeds and set up a site called “Air Bed 
and Breakfast.” to offer visitors a place to sleep and breakfast 
next day. Today, Airbnb has over 4 million lodging listings 
in 65,000 cities and 191 countries with $2.6B annual revenue 
[42].  
The founder of Pinterest was inspired by the movie 
"Pirates of Silicon Valley," about Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, 
and got a job at Google in customer support because he was 
more excited than the previous applicant about the internet. 
He further quit his job and started Pinterest, a photo-
collecting, sharing, and publishing site that allows users to 
"Pin" 
pictures 
they 
like 
and 
upload 
their 
own 
recommendations to their "pinboards". As of September 
2017, the company has over 200 million monthly active 
users. All these success stories are full of persistence, 
determination and most of all fear and uncertainty but the 
founders seemed to crystallize this quote from Friedrich 
Nietzsche “He who has a why to live can bear almost any 
how.”   
B. Brand-driven innovation
The emotions and feelings are probably a good start to
initiate a solution, devise an idea and get people together and 
connect them, especially at the early stage. Yet, after 
formation of a start-up, it seems that everybody is trying to 
speak the same emotional language today which fed up the 
customers. Margaret Thatcher says [43] "If you just set out to 
be liked, you would be prepared to compromise on anything 
at any time and you would achieve nothing." Joachimsthaler 
[44] suggests that trying to focus on emotions and being
liked, cause a company to fall for everything and achieve
nothing at the end. That is where creativity, invention, and
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

innovation comes in. Having fewer resources are pushing 
start-ups to think differently and innovatively in order to 
solve problems, and get things done Yet, people normally 
equate innovation with creativity or invention.  However, 
innovation is different from invention and creativity. Sloane 
[45] has defined these terms as follows: creativity is the
capability or act of conceiving something original or unusual,
the invention is the creation of something that has never been
made before and is recognized as the product of some unique
insights, while innovation is the implementation of
something new. Payne [46] says that branding rarely gets a
mention in the literature on innovation generally and co-
creation especially. This was perhaps due to misconceptions
about the terminology in the 1st decade of 21st century. Yet,
brand-driven innovation, introduced by Abbing [47] helps
companies grow in a way that fits their vision and values, and
delivers a real and lasting value to their customers. In this
light, the brand needs innovation to fulfill its promise, and
innovation needs branding to define the relationship between
the organization and its customers.  The design thinking is the
glue that creates the synergy between branding and
innovation. For example, Nintendo's Wii or Apple's iPod re-
defined what a video game means and how we listen to music
[48] respectively.  More recently, Uber and Airbnb utilized
the power of digital disruption by crafting a unique
perspective and massive brand awareness for their customers.
Uber became a pioneer in the sharing economy and is the
world's largest taxi company owns no vehicle. In the same
token, Airbnb is the world’s largest accommodation provider,
owns no property. Both these companies are innovative
companies who are redefining the rules and principles of taxi
and hotel industry respectively. Uber and Airbnb have built
and changed entirely new industry sectors by connecting the
consumers and suppliers via technology.  This requires a very
strong brand supported by huge fans. Abbing [47] explores
branding theory and argues that the brand both creates a
frame for innovation and evolves as a result of innovation by
consumers and other stakeholders. This is closely related to
brand co-creation theme in start-ups in which innovation with
brand strategy are intertwined whilst providing inspiration
and guidance to engage all stakeholders in the process of
creativity.
C. Brand co-creation
Steiner [49] investigates the corporate identity of young
ventures and finds five factors that affect early corporate 
identity: vision, aesthetics, play, charisma, and trust.  
In fact, the purpose of various statements, such as mission, 
vision, and values (which are called brand ideologies) is to 
connect stakeholders including employees and customers to 
a longer-term, purposeful yet abstract ideal model which 
brand hopes to achieve. Ind and Fuller [50] argue that a brand 
ideology creates a framework which guides the organization 
toward developing relevant products and services that are 
different from others. They further indicate that brands are 
fluid entities that are shaped by the interaction between 
employees, customers, and other stakeholders. The brands 
evolve because of the experiences and resulting expectations 
of people as they buy, use, adapt, discuss, interact with the 
brand and the absorption of those experienced by employees 
who in turn can use that knowledge to re-structure and re-
present the brand [50]. This is, in fact, the co-creation of a 
brand which involves customer's active involvement and 
interaction with their supplier in every aspect, from product 
design to final product [24], [20]. It is particularly important 
for start-ups since they are pushed to listen to the stakeholders 
from early days and take their feedback and criticism 
seriously. Co-creation is now substantially facilitated by 
digitalization and has become a business norm. As 
manifested in Uber and Airbnb business model, co-creation 
blends business expertise and digital technology and 
ultimately creates a new value proposition together with 
partners and customers to shape a different future. Facebook 
is the most noticeable example in which the customers create 
all of the content and thus create the reason to engage as well 
as the value of the platform. Co-creation demands a 
mechanism and a platform to engage customers and inspire 
them to add their own content, opinions, code or connections. 
V.
MODEL DEVELOPMENT AND DISCUSSION
Joachimsthaler [44] suggests the building of brand 
substance in which companies must try to improve people's 
life by solving something, enabling people, delivering value, 
fitting into their lives and giving people time back. 
These ingredients resonate with the ideology of most 
successful start-ups like Uber and Airbnb who have tried to 
improve people’s life by addressing most of the above.  In the 
line of three notions discussed in former section and 
considering the brand substance, the below conceptual model 
is suggested. The model is called EIC (Emotion, Innovation, 
Co-Creation) which provide a roadmap for start-up as how to 
build up their brands in the digital era.   
Figure 6. The EIC model for start-up branding in the digital era 
We can see that there is a transition from start-up 
formation to validation and escalation by integrating three 
important notions including emotions and feelings which 
inspire a start-up to form, a brand-driven innovation which 
embraces creativity and invention to innovate something new 
and put into practice which can contribute into people’s life. 
Ultimately, brand co-creation leverages the power of 
customers, stakeholders and their network in order to 
constitute a platform of a partnership between a start-up and 
its stakeholders. This is anchored by common goals, driven 
by a common vision to co-create values in order to meet the 
challenges of the new era. The blue line in the model shows 
the growth curve of a start-up and indicates the relationship 
between time on horizontal scale and growth or success on 
the vertical scale. Building on the matrix of the brand [35], 
the third dimension of co-creation is added to suggest 3 by 3 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

matrix of start-up branding. The most successful start-ups are 
emotionally connected, extremely innovative and highly co-
creative and this is embodied in the shaded cubic.  
Figure 7. Three dimension matrix of start-up branding notions 
The EIC model resonates with the Golden Circle 
developed by Simone Sinek in which he has been inspiring 
and challenging executives since his TED talk [51]. In his 
books [52] [53], he examines the emotional aspect of what 
makes employees and customers buy into a company.  
Figure 8. The Golden Circle [52] 
Sinek [52] argues that when we’re selling from the inside 
out, the WHY is the reason we might start and buy which 
correspondences 
with 
emotions. 
The 
HOWs 
are 
‘’differentiating value proposition’’ or ‘’unique selling 
proposition,’’ which will be manifested in innovation as it is 
the implementation of something new. Finally, WHATs 
serve as the tangible proof of former stages to create value 
and become valuable as suggested by Thiel and Masters [54] 
which resonates with co-creating of products and service in 
EIC model 
Today, we see Apple as one of the most successful 
companies in the world and it cannot be considered as a start-
up anymore. Nonetheless, we can capture and share insights 
and best practices from the tremendous success of iPhone as 
a new and unknown product which was introduced by Steve 
Jobs on January 9, 2007. In fact, a very solid marketing 
strategy which controls over the consumer experience 
including the omnipresent advertising campaigns, the price 
positioning as a maker of premium goods, and the lingering 
nimbus of Steve Jobs’s personal charisma all contributed to a 
perception that Apple offers products so good as to constitute 
a category of their own [52]. Moreover, the marketing 
success and brand strategy of iPhone can be simulated 
through the suggested model in the digital era.  A burning 
desire and inspiration of the founder brought all the features 
of internet communication into one small and lightweight 
handheld concept. He then leveraged innovation to design a 
device which had a massive impact on worldwide 
communication and transformed people lives. Apple further 
utilized the power of co-creation by providing apple store 
platform in which the consumers could work with company-
provided resources to produce their own value offering 
applications. The ongoing participation of active consumers 
in the production of new applications and exchanging value 
made the software even more important than hardware and 
created a huge source of income from marketing and selling 
apps and in-app advertisements both for Apple and its 
partners.  
VI.
CASE STUDY – COURSERA
Online learning has made huge changes in contemporary 
education and provided new opportunities for everyone who 
wants to learn something. Accelerated by the rapid and 
dramatic growth of the Internet, Massive Open Online Course 
(MOOC) emerged in 2012 when several well-financed 
providers, associated with top universities, including 
Coursera, Udacity, and edX were introduced. MOOCs 
penetrate the corporate environments and empower employee 
competencies and innovation [55] and provide an affordable 
and flexible way to learn new skills deliver quality 
educational experiences at scale, 
Coursera which is one of the most successful MOOCs 
was founded in 2012 by two Stanford Computer Science 
professors who wanted to share their knowledge and skills 
with the world [56]. Today, Coursera has become as the 
world’s leading and well-known brand in learning and 
education whose courses sought after by individuals and 
employers around the world because of evidence of mastery 
and verified certificates of completion. Coursera has built a 
platform where anyone, anywhere can learn and earn 
credentials from the world's top universities and education 
providers. With over 25 million registered users who have 
access to 2,000 courses by 149 partner universities, Coursera 
offers Specializations – collections of courses that build skills 
in a specific subject – as well as degrees and a workforce 
development product for businesses and government 
organizations [56]. 
     Here, we briefly review Coursera case study and examine 
how it resonates with the conceptual model suggested in this 
paper.  
A.
Emotion
In the formation stage, we can observe that passion of the 
two founders is a bold contributor and a valid predictor of 
business creation as well as an outcome of their behavior. 
Daphne Koller and Andrew Ng were inspired by the 
experiences offering their courses online in fall 2011 at 
Stanford [56]. Specifically, Andrew, in 2011, led the 
development of Stanford's Massive Open Online Course 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

platform and taught an online machine learning class that was 
offered to over 100,000 students - the initiative that led to the 
co-founding of Coursera [56] and offering the same there as 
one of the first courses. The founders’ desire and passion to 
design, deliver and assure the high quality and integrity of 
their own courses embodied the reason and cause around 
which people showed up in Coursera as employees and 
developers. This also resonates with a research, in which it is 
argued that recruitment and a human capital building is vital 
to the survival and growth of new ventures [57]. The sense of 
purpose to help anyone to learn from top universities was so 
strong that attracted many students and courted the attention 
of other universities. Princeton, Stanford, the University of 
Michigan and the University of Pennsylvania were the first 
universities to offer content on the platform afterward [56]. 
Innovation and Co-creation mindsets are other important 
ingredients for successful brand building that were cultivated 
from early days since Coursera was perhaps the first MOOCs 
which started to provide universal access to the world's best 
education through partnering with top universities and 
organizations to offer courses online. These universities 
primarily expect branding and reputation benefits from 
participation [58]. Also, Coursera creates value through the 
design and engineering of the technological platform to 
facilitate access of students, which contains sophisticated 
search and recommender systems [59]. 
B.
Innovation
Green [60] argues that MOOCs foster innovation by 
enabling both people with no formal education and those with 
a degree from a higher education institution to embrace the 
opportunities as these courses are provided for free or at low 
prices. Coursera like many other successful MOOCs, such as 
EDX and Udacity provides a platform upon registration 
which forms a diverse community of practice in which 
participants can share ideas and get deeply involved in the 
subject via a rich variety of synchronous and asynchronous 
online activities. Students at Coursera become engaged with 
the course, watching videos, communicating with peers, and 
accomplishing assignments. As of 2014, statistics show that 
only about 5 percent of students who enroll in MOOCs 
receive certificates of completion—a data point that has led 
many to conclude that online teaching is ineffective [25]. 
Nonetheless, Coursera has harnessed innovation and 
developed a community around its Courses by engaging 
learners and developing tools to facilitate their social 
interaction among each other [61] up to a level that some 
specializations in IT and programming can earn students a 
job in par with degree Carnegie Mellon and Caltech. 
Meanwhile, at Coursera, college credit is a “premium 
service” students pay extra for. This is the manifestation of 
brand-driven innovation in which Coursera delivers real and 
lasting values to the students and fulfills its promise to help 
anyone to learn and earn credentials from the world's top 
universities. 
C.
Co-creation
Co-creation practically happened in escalation stage 
when 
different 
stakeholders 
including 
individuals, 
organizations, and universities are brought together in order 
to produce a mutually valued output i.e. best education which 
benefits 
everybody. 
The 
platform, 
accessible 
upon 
registration allows learners to participate in thousands of 
courses offered and explore hundreds of contributions by 
other students, which often leads to further inspiration for 
their own and others assignment and even carrier experience. 
Freemium model, which is built on an expectation of 
converting a portion of free students to paying customers, 
increases the number of students and acts as a signal for 
content quality, thus increasing the legitimacy of Coursera's 
offering [59]. As the number of students grows, University 
partners have the benefit of predictive algorithms and data 
mining tools to identify their target students and evaluate the 
efficiency and effectiveness of their courses. All these are 
invaluable sources both for Coursera and university partners 
to design and introduce new courses as well as improving and 
enhancing the existing ones.  Registering more free students 
increases the chance for payment and consequently increases 
the level of captured value (revenues, profit), thus raising the 
value creation capacity and ultimately reinforcing the societal 
value proposition [59]. Though every free student incurs 
costs to Coursera, each individual equally increases the 
societal value co-creation for Coursera, university partner 
and students themselves. 
     We can observe the integration of emotion, innovation 
and co-creation in Coursera as it envisions the future of 
online learning and challenges stakeholders including 
students and university partners to stretch and grow which 
ultimately excites (emotion), empowers (innovation) and 
benefits (co-creation) everybody.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Start-up branding cannot be addressed in a holistic 
approach since a new venture follows a growth curve where 
it goes through experimenting and testing its business model 
and lacks a base and build upon foundation especially in the 
early stage. The purpose of this paper was to provide a 
conceptual framework that helps to understand the vital role 
of branding in the digital era for survival and growth of start-
ups. This has been met by articulating a three stages modular 
and incremental approach for building a start-up's brand from 
scratch. 
First, founders must have a strong sense of purpose, cause 
or belief to solve a market need or take advantage of an 
existing market opportunity and cultivate innovation and co-
creation mindset. Second, they need to innovate things that 
make them special and differentiate them from their 
competition. Third, they must seek to jointly create and 
develop value as the tangible manifestation of first two 
stages.  
The paper is conceptual in nature and therefore future 
research is suggested to focus on validating and expanding 
the model through a qualitative research approach. Also 
identifying branding imperatives and developing quantitative 
metrics under each notion will be beneficial to measure the 
impact of a start-up brand in each growth stage.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

REFERENCES 
[1]
H. Love “The Start-Up J Curve: The Six Steps to Entrepreneurial
Success, “Greenleaf Book Group Press. Kindle Edition, 2016
[2]
http://www.businessinsider.com/most-valuable-us-startups-10-billion-
decacorns-2017-12#7-dropbox-1 [retrieved : Feb. 27, 2018]
[3]
G. Ozkan “Tech Startups Touching Hearts,” Design Management
Review, Vol. 25, pp. 34–35. 2014
[4]
K. L. Keller “Strategic Brand Management,” 4th Edition Pearson HE,
Inc. Kindle Edition. 2013
[5]
P. Kotler, H. Kartajaya, and I. Setiawan, "Marketing 4.0: Moving from
Traditional to Digital, “ Wiley. Kindle Edition. 2017
[6]
C. J. Fombrun and C. B. M. Van Riel “ Fame & Fortune: How
Successful Companies Build Winning Reputations” FT Press 1st
Edition August 16, 2003
[7]
V. Rode and C. Vallaster “Corporate branding for start-ups: the crucial
role of entrepreneurs, “Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp.
121-135. 2005
[8]
M. 
Nair 
“Why 
Is 
Branding 
Crucial 
For 
Start-ups 
?”
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/279331 ; [retried Feb. 2018] 
[9]
T. Abimbola, and C. Vallaster “Brand, organizational identity and
reputation in SMEs: an overview, “Qualitative Market Research: An
International Journal, Vol. 10 Issue: 4, pp. 341-348. 2007
[10] A. P. Petkova, and V. P. Rindova, and A.K. Gupta "How can new
ventures build reputation? An exploratory study,” Corporate
Reputation Review, Vol. 11, Issue 4, pp 320–334. 2008
[11] R. M. Grant, “Contemporary Strategy Analysis, “ John Wiley and
Sons. Kindle Edition. 2016
[12] C. M. Christensen “The innovator's dilemma: When new technologies
cause great firms to fail, “ Harvard Business School Press. 1997
[13] D. Jonikas,  “ Start-up Evolution Curve From Idea to Profitable and
Scalable Business: Start-up Marketing Manual,” Kindle Edition. 2017
[14] J. Tai “ Brand Zero: The Complete Branding Guide for Start-Ups,”
Marshall Cavendish International Asita Pte Ltd. Kindle Edition. 2014
[15] D.L. Yohn “Start-Ups Need a Minimum Viable Brand," 2014;
Available: https://hbr.org/2014/06/start-ups-need-a-minimum-viable-
brand [retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018]
[16] A. Parida “ Why Start-ups Need Branding? ,” 2017; Available  :
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/294595 [retrieved : Feb. 27,
2018] 
[17] S. Talbott, “Four trends that can kill your start-up,”  Forbes. 
Published 2/ 06/ 2014 Available : 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/theyec/2014/02/06/four-trends-that-can-
kill-your-start-up/ [retrieved : Feb. 27, 2018]
[18] M. K Ruzzier and M. Ruzzier “ Startup Branding Funnel: Find Your
Perfect Brand-Market Fit to Hack Your Growth Meritum l.l.c.” Kindle
Edition. 2015
[19] A. Kambil “ Co-creation: A New Source of Value,” Accenture Outlook
pp. 38-43. 1999
[20] CK. Prahalad and V. Ramaswamy “Co-creating unique value with
customers, “ Strategy & Leadership Vol. 32, No. 3 pp. 4-9. 2004
[21] Schultz, Majken(2013), Co-creating brands with stakeholders, 2013
Available: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HZcT-hL6lOc
[retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018]
[22] C. France, B. Merrilees and Dale Miller “Customer brand co-creation:
a conceptual model,” Marketing Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 33 No.
6, pp. 848-864, 2015
[23] M. Juntunen “Co-creating corporate brands in start-ups,“ Marketing
Intelligence & Planning, Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 230-249, 2012
[24] S. Bresciani and M. J. Eppler "Brand new ventures? Insights on start‐
ups' branding practices, " Journal of Product & Brand Management,
Vol. 19 Issue. 5, pp.356-366. 2010
[25] G. G. Parker, M. W. Van Alstyne, S. P. Choudary “ Platform
Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the Economy
and How to Make Them Work for You, “  W. W. Norton & Company.
2016 
[26] O. Acker, F. Gröne, L.Kropiunigg and T. Lefort  “The digital future of
creative Europe The impact of digitalization and the Internet on the
creative 
industries, 
" 
2015 
Available:
https://www.strategyand.pwc.com/reports/the-digital-future-creative-
europe [retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018]
[27] D. Sanchez " The Importance of Brand Building in the Digital Age"
June 20, 2016, Available : 
https://www.mediavisioninteractive.com/digital-marketing-2/the-
importance-of-brand-building-in-the-digital-age/ [retrieved: Feb. 27, 
2018] 
[28] D. L. Rogers “The Network Is Your Customer: Five Strategies to
Thrive in a Digital Age,”  Yale University Press. Kindle Edition. 2011
[29] W. Heitman, “It's time for IT teams to digitize like the start-ups do,”
CIO | Dec. 17, 2015
[30] M. Raskino, and J.  Lopez “ CEO and Senior Executive Survey 2013:
As Uncertainty Recedes, the Digital Future Emerges” Gartner, Inc., p1-
43. 2013
[31] D. L. Rogers “The Digital Transformation Playbook: Rethink Your
Business for the Digital Age,” Columbia Business School Publishing,
Columbia University Press. Kindle Edition. 2016
[32] B. Merrilees “A theory of brand-led SME new venture development”,
Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, Vol. 10 No. 4,
pp. 403-415. 2007
[33] T. Abimbola “Branding as a competitive strategy for demand
management in SMEs,” Journal of Research in Marketing &
Entrepreneurship, Vol. 3 No. 2, pp. 97‐106. 2001
[34] S. Smith "Legally Branded," Rethink Press Limited. 2012
[35] http://beloved-brands.com [retrieved : Feb. 27, 2018]
[36] N. Wasserman “The Founder’s Dilemma " Harvard Business Review,
February 2008 Issue
[37] S. Maital and D.V.R. Seshadri “Innovation Management: Strategies,
Concepts and Tools for Growth and Profit, SAGE Publications Pvt.
Ltd.  2013
[38] J. Collins and J. Porras “Building Your Company's Vision,” Harvard
Business Review, September– October 1996. 
[39] Y. Li, “ Emotions and new venture judgment in China,” Asia Pacific
Journal of Management, Vol. 28, Issue 2, p277–298. 2011
[40] J. P. Forgas Mood and judgment: The affect infusion model (AIM),
Psychological Bulletin, 117 p39-66. 1995
[41] S. Kaplan, S. “The Business Model Innovation Factory: How to Stay
Relevant When The World is Changing Hardcover,” Wiley 1st edition.
2012 
[42] List 
of 
largest 
Internet 
companies 
; 
Available 
: 
https://wikivividly.com/wiki/List_of_largest_Internet_companies
[retrieved : Feb. 27, 2018]
[43] M. Fidelman “The Top 5 Leadership Lessons Margaret Thatcher
Taught Us,”  April 10, 2013; Available:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/markfidelman/2013/04/10/the-top-5-
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

leadership-lessons-margaret-thatcher-taught-us/#1711776b32d1          
[retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018] 
[44] E. Joachimsthaler  “ Love is Not Enough ! “  at TEDx London 
Business School, 2013 ; Available: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drA-LBs4-Wk&t=334s                
[retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018] 
[45] P. Sloane “ The Innovative Leader: How to Inspire Your Team and 
Drive Creativity,“ Kogan Page. 2007 
[46] A. Payne, K. Storbacka, P. Frow, and S. Knox “ Co-creating brands: 
Diagnosing and designing the relationship experience,” Journal of 
Business Research Vol. 62, Issue 3, pp. 379-389. 2009 
[47] E. R. Abbing “Brand-driven innovation,”  AVA Publishing.  2010 
[48] R. Verganti “ Design-Driven Innovation: Changing the Rules of 
Competition by Radically Innovating What Things Mean,”  Harvard 
Business Review Press. 2009 
[49] L. Steiner “Roots of identity in real estate industry,” Corporate 
Reputation Review, Vol. 6 No. 2, pp. 178-96. 2003  
[50] N. Ind and C. Fuller “ Brand Together: How Co-Creation Generates 
Innovation and Re-energizes Brands,”  Kogan Page; 1st Edition. 2012 
[51] S. Sinek “Start with why -- how great leaders inspire action 
"TEDxPugetSound; Available 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4ZoJKF_VuA&vl=en 
[retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018]  
[52] S. Sinek “Start with Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to 
Take Action Paperback” Portfolio; Reprint edition.  2011 
[53]  S. Sinek,  D. Mead and P. Docker  "Find Your Why: A Practical Guide 
for Discovering Purpose for You and Your Team " Penguin Publishing 
Group. 2017  
[54] P. Thiel and B. Masters “ Zero to One: Notes on Start-ups, or How to 
Build the Future,” The Crown Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 2017  
[55] S. Karnouskos "Massive open online courses (MOOCs) as an enabler 
for competent employees and innovation in the industry," Computers 
in Industry, Vol. 2017, pp. 1-10. 2017  
[56] www.coursera.org ; [ retrieved : Feb. 27, 2018] 
[57] K. J. Moser, A. Tumasjan and I. M. Welpe "Small but attractive: 
Dimensions of new venture employer attractiveness and the 
moderating role of applicants' entrepreneurial behaviors, ‘ Journal of 
Business Venturing, Vol. 32, Issue 5, pp. 588-610. 2017   
[58] S. Porter "The economics of MOOCs: a sustainable future?", The 
Bottom Line, Vol. 28 Issue: 1/2, pp. 52-62. 2015  
[59] K. Täuscher and N. Abdelkafi ‘ Scalability and robustness of business 
models for sustainability: A simulation experiment,” Journal of 
Cleaner Production Vol. 170, pp. 654-664. 2018 
[60] S. Green (2015) “ Pedagogy of MOOCs And Benefits For Modern 
Professionals,” 2015; Available on 
http://elearningindustry.com/pedagogy-of-moocs-benefits-modern-
professionals ; [retrieved: Feb. 27, 2018] 
[61] R. Casadesus-Masanell and K.  Hyunjin Kim. "Coursera," Harvard 
Business School Case pp. 714-412. 2013 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

