Creating Innovative Structures in Workplace and Vocational Digital Learning to 
Ensure Social Distancing 
 
Ileana Hamburg  
IAT, Westfälische Hochschule, GE Gelsenkirchen, Germany 
E-Mail: hamburg@iat.eu 
 
Abstract—The COVID-19 pandemic has influenced learning, 
including Vocational Education and Training (VET) and 
workplace learning in companies. Many people with special 
needs (social or disabilities) have not benefited from the e-
learning systems used in this period, and emphasized the fact 
that digital innovations are necessary in all types of education. 
This paper highlights the importance of disruptive digital 
innovations in education, such as personalized e-learning and 
e-mentors, and presents examples of structures and social 
measures, which can be developed around improving learning 
during the COVID-19 crisis to ensure social distancing.  
 
Keywords-COVID-19; 
workplace 
learning; 
vocational 
education and training; disruptive innovation. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The COVID-19 pandemic has influenced all types and 
levels of learning including Vocational Education and 
Training (VET) and workplace learning in companies: a 
generation of learners have seen their usual education and 
training processes disrupted [5][7].  
E-learning systems and other digital tools change the way 
people approach learning and training and could offer 
access to learning content to everyone. They support 
learners to be more active and motivated, allowing them to 
choose how, when and where they learn. Learners can 
progress at their own pace and review what they have not 
understood. Such systems support life-long learning, 
allowing people to gain new skills and knowledge in order 
to adapt to a changing job market. During a pandemic, these 
digital systems may create new opportunities for stronger 
international collaboration. Adaptability will be crucial for 
the next generations to navigate through the present—and 
any future—pandemics. 
Many people with special needs (social or disabilities) 
that limit learning activities should also be beneficiaries of 
e-learning systems because such systems offer the flexibility 
to adapt training programs to meet their specific needs. 
However, this has not happened. Special measures and 
disruptive innovations are necessary so that students and 
companies’ employees do not suffer when continuity is not 
being ensured through distance learning. 
In the first section of this paper, the necessity and 
importance of disruptive digital innovation in education is 
discussed and some examples are given. The next section 
includes structures and social measures, which can be 
developed around improving learning in the COVID-19 
crisis to ensure social distancing, particularly in Germany.  
Such measures have been taken within a workplace-oriented 
learning program for companies developed and tested 
during the COVID-19 pandemic within a European project 
and adapted for VET. In addition, other measures taken in 
Germany to help teachers and trainers to move into their 
virtual classrooms and workplaces are also presented. Some 
conclusions for educational institutions, companies and 
governments to improve education in the existing pandemic 
crisis are given in the last section of the paper, with 
particular reference being made to e-learning. 
 
 
II. 
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION IN EDUCATION 
Disruptive innovations in education are intended to break 
with an established model and to introduce an improved 
one. Ken Robinson underlines in [12] that, while economic, 
cultural and personal spheres have undergone enormous 
transformation over the last 50 years, education systems 
have not modified their syllabuses or their objectives. Curtis 
Johnson, co-author of the bestseller Disrupting Class: How 
Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World 
Learns [4], explains that the current form of teaching "is 
unable to provide today's pupils with the skills they need to 
master in order to interact with and within the digital 
society" and so disruptive education is necessary that 
approaches learning in another way. However, innovators in 
the education segment have not disrupted the status quo 
significantly so far. In 2008’s Disrupting Class, Christensen 
predicted great disruptions in the segment from online 
learning. However, while there has been much adoption of 
digital learning, this has not proved very disruptive; online 
education continues to reflect traditional models rather than 
a disruption.   
Disruptive innovation has the capacity to improve 
education and outcomes. One condition is that educators 
embrace a free-market mindset [6]. Cooperation and new 
ways of thinking can also help to replace an obsolete 
schooling model of education [1]:  
A. Disruptive innovation supports equitable access to 
mentors.  
Mentoring is an old approach used within education, but 
it has not been equitably distributed [11]. Disruptive 
technological innovations enable the use of e-mentors who 
are accessible to the masses independent of location. This 
includes all students with social problems or disabilities, not 
just a few.  
B. Disruptive innovation supports the creation of a 
personalized education system.  
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

New digital technologies, also disruptive ones, support 
personalized e-learning through flexible online curricula, 
new staffing structures and personalized support, which is 
particularly important for people with special needs [16]. 
Some examples include [4]:  
• 
Power MyLearning, which actively involves 
teachers in wraparound services and family 
engagement so that teachers’ academic decisions 
can be sensitive to the non-academic factors 
present in students’ lives. 
• 
City Connects, which integrates a range of targeted 
poverty relief and afterschool services into schools.  
These are an important reminder that, just as personalized 
instructional models focus on using instructional data to 
target learning, personalized support models also hinge on 
high quality, longitudinal non-academic data. Luckily, tools 
are starting to emerge to make these data-driven practices 
more feasible. 
Education is a complex services business in which 
quality is difficult to define, particularly in times of Covid-
19. However, innovative approaches, innovative methods 
and innovative formats are necessary. Universities and other 
training institutions have a big role in disruptive innovations 
in education – also in workplace ones – and they have to 
adapt to changes. Some milestones include [2][10]: 
• 
Practice 
over 
theory: 
universities 
should 
concentrate their efforts on the acquisition of skills 
and abilities adapted to the new reality rather than 
to concepts. 
• 
Multidisciplinary learning: the frontiers between 
disciplines no longer exist and training must be 
adapted and content-rich to create far-reaching 
professionals. 
Methods 
like 
Problem-Based 
Learning (PBL) should be used.  
• 
Digital innovation: many universities now have 
their own virtual areas for training, partnerships 
and shared knowledge purposes. 
• 
Closer links with the job market: universities 
should become platforms for connecting companies 
and students and promoting the entrepreneurial 
spirit. 
• 
Making competitiveness a priority: universities 
must be ever more competitive in order to 
transform themselves into research leaders and new 
knowledge areas. 
Turning to VET and workplace learning, VET teachers 
and trainers have an important role in companies, but they 
face difficulties in their efforts to respond to the current 
crisis [3].  COVID-19 consequences are seen at all levels of 
education, but seem more severe for the workplace learning 
and VET sector. The work-based component has been 
interrupted in companies offering apprenticeships due to 
closures in many European countries.  
Teachers and trainers have to meet the new demands 
imposed on them during the crisis and to overcome the new 
challenges that they must now face, and they need more 
support and greater investment in their area. Only 60% of 
teachers received professional development in Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT) in the year 
preceding the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) survey [13] while 18% reported a 
great need for development in this area. These figures 
highlight that teachers need to renew their skills regularly in 
order to be able to innovate their practices and adapt to the 
rapid transformations inherent in the 21st century. This is 
even more important in the current context, where the 
COVID-19 health crisis has pushed teachers to adapt very 
quickly, especially in countries where they do not 
necessarily have the pedagogical and technical skills to 
integrate digital tools into learning.  
Workplace learning in companies is emerging as one of 
the earliest and hardest-hit business activities [8]. Efforts are 
made to reskill employees, but companies cannot simply 
take a pause of critical workplace learning, even as they try 
to focus on employee safety first. 
In connection with COVID-19, disruptive innovation in 
education should be combined with better socially oriented 
service models that are built around an improved 
educational program quality for all.  
III. 
THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON THE 
MOST VULNERABLE LEARNERS AND CONTRIBUTION OF E-
LEARNING  
Social distancing measures have a big impact on a large 
section of the population who do not have the means to 
protect themselves against the virus, which requires means 
and resources that a large section of the population lacks. 
Many people do not have access to suitable learning 
facilities or the required skills to use digital technologies 
and a large number of learners from disadvantaged 
backgrounds or with disabilities are missing education 
because they do not have access to the Internet or the digital 
skills to take part in online classes. As an example, in 
Gelsenkirchen, Germany, the unemployment rate is about 
40% and there are many refugees and European migrants 
with big families and very limited digital skills [9]. This gap 
is seen across countries and between income brackets within 
countries. 95% of students in Switzerland, Norway and 
Austria have a computer to use for schoolwork, but only 
34% in Indonesia (OECD Data). Therefore, the pandemic 
will widen the digital divide [14][15]. 
In Germany, the education ministers decided to provide 
financial support so that each teacher has a laptop 
(Notebook) and each student an Internet connection. 
To continue to enable and deliver value-creating efforts, 
learning leaders have to consider taking a number of tactical 
steps to protect learners with social problems and/or 
disabilities, adapt programs and delivery, and establish and 
expand virtual live learning. E-learning programs were 
already on the rise before COVID-19 and there is a marked 
increase in such learning programs. Many younger 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

employees embrace such approaches, but they should be 
available for all.  
In the following, we describe some tactical steps and 
strategic measures, such as exploring alternative digital 
learning strategies, which managers can develop during this 
time of social distancing and thus avoid disrupting 
workplace learning. 
Within the European Erasmus+ project [7], involving a 
consortium with higher education institutions and research 
organizations, chambers of commerce and Small and 
Medium Size Enterprise (SME) representative bodies from 
Germany, Ireland, Spain, Lithuania and Romania, a hybrid-
training program for workplace-oriented learning has been 
developed, supported by a digital platform. Discussions 
have been held in Germany on how to adapt it for a special 
course within VET. A short time after starting the program, 
some companies and VET institutions closed due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic and later the program had to be 
continued exclusively digitally. Initially, 178 employees 
from all five-project partner countries registered for the 
learning program. In each country, 20 learners or more 
planned to take part. After their companies were closed 
(March 2020), only 30 learners wanted to continue.  
To create a comprehensive picture of how to adapt the 
training to this new environment, a cross-functional 
response team composed of members of the German partner 
responsible for the project, managers of some interested 
companies and VET has been formed. Because some people 
with cognitive disabilities and migrants wanted to undertake 
the training, we invited two persons with knowledge in this 
context. Therefore, the COVID-19-response effort was 
coordinated within the project.  Two e-mentors and one 
tutor supported the training program. The tutor particularly 
supported the learners with special needs, i.e. with 
registration, simplification of some activities and exercises, 
and e-mails to communicate more often with these learners. 
At the end of the project, (August 2020) 20 learners from 
Germany finished the course. It is planned that an adapted 
form of the e-learning program will be started at the 
company Flüchtlingshilfe Solingen that is embarking on a 
new project. 
Turning to VET, in order to provide individual learning 
support for learners at risk during the pandemic in Germany, 
so-called “transition coaching” supports students at school 
to acquire general secondary education or to complete 
(assisted) VET or another form of upper-secondary 
education. In cooperation with the individual student, the 
coach prepares a transition plan. To ensure continuity of 
tailored support during this crisis, the transition coaches 
have adjusted their services, steering young people as much 
as possible towards individual guidance services by phone. 
To support apprentices at risk in Germany, a programmer 
managed by PES Germany and co-funded by the European 
Social Fund offers a special form of support for 
disadvantaged young people to reduce early school leaving 
from VET, given this disruption to the apprenticeships of 
VET learners [3]. 
Germany celebrated Digital Day 2020 with many high-
profile guests, such as government officials and business 
leaders, on 18 June 2020. The Digital Day is connected to 
1,435 campaigns related to digitalization across Germany. 
The theme of the event was "Digital for all” with a focus on 
digital participation. 
On September 22, 2020, the Federal Foreign Office, the 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, the Federal 
Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and 
the German Commission for UNESCO held a digital event 
to present the 2020 UNESCO Global Education Monitoring 
Report: Inclusion and Education. It was highlighted that 
poverty is the main obstacle to success in education, that 
global partnerships for education have to be strengthened, 
and that inclusion needs well-trained teaching and training 
staff because they have a crucial role to play when it comes 
to ensuring participation in the education sector.  
“Inclusion 4.0 Ruhr - Digital Support Systems for 
Employees with Cognitive Disabilities” is a network funded 
by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research to teach 
employees with intellectual disabilities to secure and expand 
their jobs in workshops and companies by using innovative 
digital assistance systems [9]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The COVID-19 pandemic has created the largest 
disruption of education systems in history, affecting nearly 
1.6 billion learners in more than 190 countries and on all 
continents [15]. 
      During the COVID-19 pandemic, companies, VET 
institutions and other educational establishments have 
needed to address new issues.  Massive efforts have been 
made in a short time to respond to the shocks to education 
systems and have showed that change is possible. However, 
the solutions were not always fit for purpose because the 
necessary − and not always available − equipment had to be 
found, including new online tools and resources. Many 
teachers and trainers have to be reskilled. Marginalized and 
vulnerable learners have to be involved in e-learning 
procedures. Educational institutions have to think carefully 
about their choices regarding e-learning, particularly 
personalized forms, e-mentors and inclusive education 
technologies. Disruptive innovations are necessary because 
the crisis has shown that no digital inclusion without 
measures to minimize social distancing exists [9].  
Governments should consider focusing on equity and 
inclusion, reinforcing capacities for risk management at all 
levels 
of 
the 
system, 
enhancing 
consultation 
and 
communication mechanisms, addressing learning losses and 
preventing dropouts, offering skills for employability 
programs, supporting the teaching profession and teachers’ 
readiness, and supporting flexibility across levels and types 
of education and training. 
 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
                                       REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] T. Arnett, “How disruptive education addresses 3 of 
education 
most 
critical 
issues”, 
https://www.christenseninstitute.org/blog/how-disruptive-
innovation-addresses-3-of-educations-most-critical-issues-
today/ [retrieved: 10, 2020], 2020. 
[2] E. Blass, A. Jasman, and S. Shelley, “Postgraduate research 
students: You are the future of the Academy.” Futures 
44:166, 2012.  
[3] Cedefop, “Digital gap during COVID-19 for VET learners at 
risk in Europe. Synthesis report on seven countries based on 
preliminary information provided by Cedefop’s Network of 
Ambassadors tackling early leaving from VET”, 2020. 
[4] C. Christensen, C. Johnson, and B. Horn, “Disrupting class: 
How disruptive innovation will change the way the world 
learns”, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2008 
[5] H. D’Orville, “COVID-19 causes unprecedented educational 
disruption: 
Is 
there 
a 
road 
towards 
a 
new 
normal? “Prospects. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11125-
020-09475-0, 2020. 
[6] FEE, “Education Entrepreneurs Are the Only Ones Who Can 
Disrupt the Status Quo”, https://fee.org/articles/education-
entrepre-neurs-are-the-only-ones-who-can-disrupt-the-
status-quo/, [retrieved: 10, 2020], 2019. 
[7] I. Hamburg, “Facilitating lifelong learning in SMEs towards 
SDG4.”, in Advances in social sciences research journal 7, 
no. 9, p. 262-272, 2020a. 
[8] 
I. 
Hamburg, 
“Supporting 
digital 
innovations 
by 
interdisciplinary entrepreneurial learning”, in Advances in 
social sciences research journal 7, no. 4, p. 8-17. 2020b. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [9] I. Hamburg, “Digital Inclusion should be at the heart of 
response to COVID-19, Exploring the Meaning and 
Experience of Digital Inclusion Limerick Lifelong Learning 
Festival”, 2020c. 
[10] E. O'Brien, J. McCarthy, I. Hamburg and Y. Delaney, 
“Problem-based learning in the Irish SME workplace”, in 
Journal of workplace learning 31, no. 6, pp. 391-407, 2019. 
[11] B. Ragins and K. Kram, “The Handbook of Mentoring at 
Work.” Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007. 
[12] K. Robinson, “Creative schools: the grassroots revolution 
that's transforming education.” New York: Viking, 2015.   
[13] OECD survey, https://www.oecd.org/education/the-impact-
of-covid-19-on-education-insights-education-at-a-glance-
2020.pdf, [retrieved: 10, 2020], 2020. 
[14] UNESCO, COVID-19 educational disruption and response. 
Paris: 
UNESCO. 
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse, 
(2020a), 
[retrieved: 10, 2020], 2020. 
[15] UNESCO, “Global education coalition.” Paris: UNESCO. 
https://enunesco.org/covid19/educationresponse/globalcoalit
ion, (2020b), [retrieved: 10, 2020], 2020. 
[16] World Economic Forum, 4 ways “COVID-19 could change 
how 
we 
educate 
future 
generations.” https://www.weforum/agenda/2020/03/4-
ways-covid-19-education-future-generations, [retrieved: 10, 
2020], 2020. 
 
 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

