An Extended UTAUT2 Model 
for e-Government Project Evaluation 
 
Maria Aristea Kalamatianou, Flora Malamateniou 
Department of Digital Systems 
University of Piraeus 
Piraeus, Greece 
e-mail: kalam.mar.ar@gmail.com; flora@unipi.gr 
 
 
Abstract—Recently the Greek Government has devoted 
significant effort to streamlining business processes using ICT 
to better manage public administration resources.  To this end, 
public sector services are designed so that they are accessed 
through single points, while increasing transparency and 
reducing cycle time for executing processes and disseminating 
information to civil and other agencies. To control the services 
provided by state agencies and to improve them continuously, 
it seems essential that they are continuously evaluated by users. 
This paper focuses on the field of e-government and more 
precisely describes an evaluation method for investigating the 
success of an e-government project. Specifically, a technology 
adoption model is proposed, which focuses on the specific 
characteristics of users for the on-line services of an 
Independent Authority. The model is essentially based on the 
framework of the Unified Theory of Acceptance and the Use of 
Technology (UTAUT2) model, which has been enhanced with 
four additional criteria.  
Keywords-e-government; evaluation model; unified  theory 
of  acceptance and  use of  technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-government is defined by the European Union (EU) 
Commission as the use of information and communication 
technologies in public administrations combined with 
organizational change and new skills in order to improve 
public services and democratic processes and strengthen 
support to public policies [1]. Interaction between e-services; 
provided by the government to stakeholders; may be 
classified into four key models, depending on who is 
involved. 
These 
models 
are: 
government-to-citizen 
/customer 
(G2C), 
government-to-employees 
(G2E), 
government-to-government 
(G2G) 
and 
government-to-
business (G2B) [2][3]. The goal is to improve public services 
and streamline business processes to support public policies. 
Through e-government methods, civil service authorities 
may offer easier access to public information, upgrade 
operations 
to 
facilitate 
citizen 
interaction, 
increase 
productivity 
and competitiveness, 
combat 
corruption, 
facilitate decision-making and promote active participation 
of citizens, by empowering them. In order to achieve this, the 
supply management of goods and services must be 
improved. The implementation of an e-government project 
can have many benefits, despite the high risk of the project 
failing due to various factors, such as user resistance to 
change and their insufficient expertise [4]-[6]. 
For successful implementation of the e-government 
services and applications, criteria - such as time, cost, 
quality, satisfaction of e-government stakeholders and 
fulfillment of functional requirements - are deemed critical. 
E-government success means successful ICT implementation 
in government units in order to rebuild government 
processes and provide e-government services. It also means 
effective and efficient use of e-government by all 
government stakeholders (citizens, businesses and other 
government agencies) [7]. User acceptance is one of the 
main issues involved in e-government projects; however, 
other issues (such as reengineering of work processes, policy 
changes and management commitment) need also be 
considered. In addition, convenience, citizen empowerment, 
exclusivity, choice and cost saving are parameters of utmost 
importance and relevance for web-based services.  
From 
a 
citizen’s 
perspective, 
availability 
and 
accessibility are the two critical requirements that must be 
met for adopting an e-government project. Services must be 
delivered to them in the easiest and fastest way and be 
available 24/7. This enables citizens to process transactions 
at any time, even outside government office hours [8].  
Therefore, the evaluation of an e-government project 
from the citizens’ perspective is indispensable, since its 
success depends on their acceptance. This can be achieved 
by applying an evaluation model to it.  Through evaluation, 
government agencies understand more easily what factors 
influence the citizens in adopting such projects. With 
systematic evaluation, state agencies promptly understand 
the users’ expectations and improve their services, making 
them friendlier and safer.  
A large number of governments throughout Europe have 
viewed the economic crisis as an opportunity for them to 
speed up the implementation of their e-government services, 
with the aim of improving efficiency and effectiveness, 
increasing savings on public administration operations and 
enhancing trust-building with citizens. In this context, and in 
Greece in particular, the necessity for public services to use 
e-government became evident and imperative, so it may have 
a positive direct or indirect impact on economic recovery at 
this difficult point in time. This paper focuses on the field of 
e-government services; more precisely, on evaluating the 
G2C services provided by the information system of the 
Greek Ombudsman, an Independent Authority in Greece, 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

and on identifying the factors which facilitate or hinder users 
in using the e-government IS. The evaluation model used is 
based on the framework of the extended Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and the Use of Technology (UTAUT2) model, 
and has been enhanced by four additional criteria to achieve 
more insightful results. This study provides useful insights 
into the motivations underlying the user’s intention to use e-
government services in developing countries and helps gain 
a better understanding of the factors that influence the user to 
adopt such systems.  
This paper is structure as follows: In Section II, the 
relevant theories and the background research are described, 
along with the main point that this research aims to achieve. 
In Section III, the case study is presented, and the developed 
research model and hypotheses are proposed.  In Section IV, 
the study results are presented and analyzed. Finally, in 
Section V, the conclusions of the study and the future 
projects are discussed. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
There are several models and theories in the literature 
aiming at studying the success of an e-government project 
based on user acceptance.  Many studies focus on examining 
the various factors that might influence the decision of 
users/citizens to adopt and use such systems. Earlier 
evaluation models focused on behavioral intention and 
attitude of the users towards the use of technology, using as 
main criteria the perceived usefulness and perceived ease of 
use [9][10]. Because of the enormous development and 
evolution of digital technology, these models had to be 
extended to give more accurate results, by adding new 
factors (criteria) for evaluation.   
As noted in recent literature, many research studies have 
proved that factors - such as demographic characteristics, 
social 
influence, 
trust, 
risk 
perception, 
quality 
of 
information, user characteristics and user satisfaction - may 
be instrumental in adopting e-government services [11]-[14]. 
Also, the national culture of the population may influence the 
citizens’ intention to use government-offered digital services 
[15]-[18]. Hence, new integrated models that combine 
independent and dependent variables have emerged, which 
use variables such as gender, age, experience and the 
willingness to use in an attempt to examine whether they 
significantly affect digital technology use [19]-[21].  
Among the most widely accepted evaluation models for 
e-government services are the following: the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) [22] and its expanded versions 
models TAM2 [23] and TAM 3 [24]; the Information 
System Success Model (IS Success Model) [25] and its 
refined version [26]; the Unified Theory of Acceptance and 
Use of Technology  (UTAUT) [27] and its extended Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (UTAUT2) 
[28]; the Integrated Success Model (ISM) [29]; the Model 
for Mandatory Use of Technologies (MMUST) [30]; and the 
Diffusion of Innovations Model (DOI) [31]. 
To investigate and analyze factors that influence the 
adoption and use of an e-government project, researchers 
have most often adopted various forms of the TAM and 
UTAUT models. For instance, the TAM has been extended 
with the self-efficacy measure, to evaluate the use of an e-
government website and more specifically, to investigate and 
understand the fundamental factors that influence the 
citizens’ continued intention to use it. The results of the 
analysis reveal that TAM, together with computer self-
efficacy, can be applied to better understand the citizens’ 
continuous intention to use e-government websites [32].  
Furthermore, the use of an amended version of the 
UTAUT model in the adoption of e-government services has 
been investigated in Kuwait and it was found that 
performance expectancy, effort expectancy and peer 
influence determine the students’ behavioral intention for 
use. Moreover, facilitating conditions and behavioral 
intentions determine the students’ use of e-government 
services [33]. 
In addition, the UTAUT model has been used to explore 
the citizens’ behavioral intention to adopt e-government 
services and the factors affecting e-government adoption in 
Qatar. The findings indicate that there is a significant 
positive relationship between performance expectancy, effort 
expectancy, social influence and behavioral intention to use 
e-government services for the citizens of Qatar [34][35].  
A model that is essentially a blend of TAM, TAM2 and 
DOI has been used in Greece, along with trust and perceived 
risk as factors, for describing teachers’ behavioral intentions 
to adopt e-government services. The research findings 
revealed that cognitive and intrinsic factors have significant 
effects on the intention to use e-government websites. Out of 
both attitudinal (trust and perceived risk) and operational 
variables (compatibility, advantage and job relevance), it is 
the second set that had a significant effect on the users’ 
intention [36]. 
A more recent study aims at investigating citizen 
behavior and the role of Citizen Service Centers in e-
government adoption in Greece. Since trust and culture 
cannot be considered with TAM, an extended UTAUT 
model was deemed more suitable. The findings revealed that 
performance expectancy, effort expectancy, trust of 
intermediary, trust of the government, trust of the internet 
and finally, social influence are key drivers, influencing 
directly or indirectly the users’ intention. In addition, all the 
demographic variables that were included in the study (age, 
gender, educational level and internet experience) were 
found to be related to the adoption of e-government in 
Greece [37].   
To examine the perspective of trust towards e-
government 
initiatives 
in 
a 
study 
in 
Sri 
Lanka, 
trustworthiness was included as an additional construct to 
TAM. The results showed that the model is well suited to 
investigate the adoption and use of e-government services 
from the perspective of trustworthiness [38].  
Among a multitude of models, researchers face 
difficulties in finding the most appropriate and suitable 
model for the evaluation of e-government systems that 
would improve their adoption by the end users. That is 
because the users’ behavioral intention is determined by 
factors that may vary along with the situation studied, such 
as groups in different cultures, level of use and interaction, 
money constraints, and time [12][37][39][40]. In fact, many 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

authors propose the UTAUT model as an ideal choice for e-
government 
evaluation 
because 
it 
offers 
a better understanding of the factors which determine the 
citizens' intention to adopt [33][41][42] . 
Based on previous studies, although the UTAUT model 
seems appropriate to evaluate the adoption of e-government 
in Greece, there are factors that have not been explored and 
have a direct impact on the Behavioral Intention of the Greek 
citizens. Recent studies by the Hellenic Statistical Authority 
and the Greek Information Society show that there are many 
factors in Greece that may affect the citizens’ intention to 
adopt e-government systems, including digital technology 
culture, social influence, face-to-face interaction, gender, 
age, etc. In light of these -  and in view of analyzing the 
influence of social and demographic characteristics, 
profession, user satisfaction, privacy and continuous usage 
on the adoption of an e-government service in Greece - an 
in-depth study must be conducted using an enhanced 
adoption model. In what follows, an extended version of the 
UTAUT2 model was used, which was enriched with four 
additional criteria, as determinants of user behavioral 
intention. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
A. The Independent Authority of the Greek Ombudsman 
The Greek Ombudsman is an Independent Authority 
sanctioned by the Constitution, which provides its services to 
the public free of charge. The Authority mediates between 
public administration and citizens to help citizens exercise 
their rights effectively. As a mediator, the Greek 
Ombudsman makes recommendations and submits proposals 
to the public administration (ministries, regions and 
municipalities, social insurance funds, tax offices, hospitals, 
schools and universities, prisons, the police, public utility 
companies and organizations). Additionally, the Authority's 
mission is to safeguard and promote children's rights; to 
promote equal treatment and fight discrimination based on 
race, ethnicity, religious or belief, disability, age or sexual 
orientation; and to monitor and promote the application of 
equal opportunities and treatment between men and women 
in matters of employment, as well as in matters of access of 
men and women to goods and services [43][44]. Anyone 
facing a problem with a Greek public service, anywhere in 
Greece or abroad, can submit a complaint to the Greek 
Ombudsman, regardless of their nationality. 
From the beginning of its operation, the Authority had a 
modern IT system installed. This was updated in 2009 to 
capitalize on modern technology, by improving its services 
to the citizens. The new Integrated Information System (IIS) 
aimed at providing a more effective and efficient operation 
for citizens, employees and stakeholders, by promoting the 
automation of the Authority’s processes to cope with the 
increased workload created by the citizens. To facilitate and 
expedite the services offered to complainants on its website, 
besides general information about the Ombudsman, the 
system enables a secure two-way communication between 
the Authority and the users.  An on-line form is available to 
submit a complaint [45].  Through this process, complainants 
are able to monitor their complaint and receive updates about 
its progress. Thus, each complainant is able to submit 
complaints and send additional information regarding his/her 
case electronically. 
B. Evaluation Model Selection 
Given the diversity of the Authority’s complainants 
(Greek and foreign citizens, refugees, children, prisoners), 
it is hypothesized that complainant behavior on using the 
Authority’s 
website 
is 
affected 
by 
demographic 
characteristics (gender, age, nationality), culture, friends or 
relatives, habits and their skill/experience in using IT 
services. Also, other parameters might determine the users’ 
behavioral intention for the Authority’s website. Thus, it was 
decided to examine the following factors: user privacy, 
satisfaction, profession and continuous usage [46]. 
User privacy: A wide variety of users use the Authority’s 
services (Greek or foreign citizens, children, disabled people, 
immigrants, refugees). Hence, the level of trust between the 
users and the Authority may be crucial, since it is widely 
recognized as very important that the user feels safe and 
protected when registering personal data. Private data 
protection is an important issue in the evolving relationship 
between digital technology and the legal right to privacy 
when collecting and sharing data. The need for state 
computerization has led to a greater demand for personal 
information from citizens. Concerns about privacy arise 
when sensitive personal data are collected and stored in 
digital form. These concerns relate to how these data are 
collected, stored, modified, transmitted, become available 
(open data) and connected. There is a specific legal and 
regulatory framework on data protection in place, based on a 
European Commission regulation [47]. 
User satisfaction: A satisfactory project offers users the 
ability to complete their tasks successfully. By asking them 
to reply if they are satisfied by a service, it can provide a 
measure of all the parties’ contribution to the overall user 
experience, such as ease of use, navigation and design.  
User profession: Through this factor, one can specify the 
types of users, in terms of occupation, who consider the e-
government service friendlier due to the same occupation.  
Continuous usage: This factor determines whether users 
would be willing to use the services at a future time. The 
more satisfied they are by the e-government services the 
more likely it is that they may use them.  
Figure 1 shows a conceptual model that was created by 
extending the traditional UTAUT2 model with these four 
additional criteria. Gender, age and experience are factors, 
which are already included in the UTAUT2 model, and, as 
has been determined, have a direct impact on behavioral 
intention towards e-government services [48] and play an 
important role to the evaluation of the Authority’s e-
services.  
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Facilitating Contitions
Effort Expectancy
Performance Expectancy
Social Influence
Hedonic Motivation
Behavioral Intention
Use Behavior
Price Value
Habit
Continuous Usage
Profession
User Satisfaction
Privacy
Experience
Gender
Age
Additional 
Criteria
 
Figure 1. The proposed evaluation model. 
C. Research Hypotheses 
To improve the quality of the results, we focused on 
several hypotheses between these variables and behavioral 
intention: 
H1: Age: Younger people are more inclined to use e-
government services compared to older ones. 
H2: Gender: Gender plays an important role in 
influencing behavioral intention and how an individual 
perceives the usefulness of e-government services. 
H3: Experience: There is a significant positive 
relationship between internet experience and behavioral 
intention in the use of e-government services. 
H4: Privacy: Privacy determines the influence of 
behavioral intention and moderates individual behavior 
towards e-government services. 
H5: User satisfaction: User satisfaction can affect the 
user’s behavioral intention and how an individual perceives 
the usefulness of e-government services. 
H6: Profession: Profession may possibly moderate the 
individual’s influence on behavioral intention to use e-
government services. 
H7: Continuous Usage: The continuous use of electronic 
services and internet positively affects the intention of a 
person to use e-government services. 
D. Method – Data Collection 
To this end and in view of enabling users to provide their 
feedback in a smooth and effective manner, a questionnaire 
was created in April 2015 and was posted online for 
completion on a voluntary basis. To maintain confidentiality, 
individuals responded anonymously. For the purpose of 
speed and convenience, we chose the method of multiple 
choice questions. Likert's five-point scale was chosen for the 
answers. With this scale, the respondent indicated the degree 
of his/her agreement or disagreement to the questions. The 
questionnaire was developed through free online software, 
specialized 
for 
specific 
routing, 
supplementing 
and 
monitoring on-line forms-questionnaires [49]. After data 
submission by users, the software stored the collected 
information in a special database, which was processed by 
the researcher (collector).  
The questionnaire was divided into two main parts. The 
first part contained the individual elements of the user 
associated with the factors of gender, age and profession, as 
well as three additional questions related to the original 
topic. The second part contained general questions referring 
to applying factors for evaluating the model. The individual 
factors are presented as follows:  
Performance Expectancy: The degree to which a person 
believes that using the system will help them benefit 
professionally. 
Effort Expectancy: The degree of convenience associated 
with the use of the system. 
Social Influence: The extent to which an individual 
perceives that important others (family and friends) believe 
they should use the new system.  
Facilitating Conditions: The degree to which a person 
believes 
there 
is 
an 
organizational 
and 
technical 
infrastructure in place to support their use of the system.  
Price Value: The pricing method based on the perceived 
value of the new system was intended. 
Hedonic Motivation: Pleasure or happiness from the use 
of a technology may play an important role in determining its 
adoption.  
Habit: The degree of influence of habit through 
behavioral intention.  
Experience: The acquired experience of someone when 
using technology. 
Additional Factor 1 – Privacy: The degree of safety 
through behavioral intention for technology use. 
Additional Factor 2 - User Satisfaction: How pleased the 
user is with the technology. 
Additional Factor 3 - Continuous Usage: The intention of 
the user to continue using the technology.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
Table 
1 
depicts 
the 
descriptive 
statistical 
data 
(percentage) of this study, obtained through the survey of 97 
users/total respondents to the Authority’s online system.  
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDY SUBJECTS N=97 
Characteristics 
% 
Characteristics 
% 
Characteristics 
% 
 
Effort Expectancy 
Hedonic Motivation 
Gender 
Not at all 
1 
Not at all 
1 
Slightly 
5 
Slightly 
7 
Moderately 
24 
Moderately 
35 
Male 
43 
Very 
48 
Very 
38 
Female 
57 
Extremely 
22 
Extremely 
19 
Age 
Performance Expectancy 
Habit 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
5 
Slightly 
3 
Slightly 
8 
Up to 18 
1 
Moderately 
16 
Moderately 
27 
19-29 
21 
Very 
43 
Very 
38 
30-39 
31 
Extremely 
38 
Extremely 
22 
40-49 
36 
Social Influence 
User Satisfaction 
50-59 
6 
Not at all 
5 
Not at all 
1 
Experience 
Slightly 
8 
Slightly 
5 
Moderately 
31 
Moderately 
30 
Very 
34 
Very 
51 
Not at all 
0 
Extremely 
22 
Extremely 
13 
Slightly 
4 
Facilitating Conditions 
Privacy 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Moderately 
17 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
12 
Very 
43 
Slightly 
4 
Slightly 
14 
Extremely 
36 
Moderately 
17 
Moderately 
26 
Profession 
Very 
52 
Very 
28 
Extremely 
27 
Extremely 
20 
Price Value 
Continuous Usage 
Private 
Employee 
44 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
0 
Public Servant  
23 
Slightly 
5 
Slightly 
7 
Freelancer 
12 
Moderately 
28 
Moderately 
24 
Unemployed 
8 
Very 
39 
Very 
42 
Else 
13 
Extremely 
28 
Extremely 
27 
    
These are the main findings of the study: 
 
Gender has no specific impact. The difference in 
percentage is relatively small and does not display 
preference of a specific gender group of users. 
 
Age shows strong impact between the ages of 19 to 
49. If these percentages are associated with the 
"experience" rates, it is concluded that experience is 
very high among these groups. 
 
Most respondents were private employees, as they 
believed that e-government services help them save 
time and money. The next high percentage of public 
servant users considered that e-government services 
were closer to their job and workplace. 
 
The majority of respondents positively accepted the 
system and believed that the Authority’s online 
services help increase performance. Only a small 
percentage considered that the objective was not 
achieved. It is worth mentioning that a significant 
percentage (16%) had a "moderate" stance towards 
the Authority’s website and web services, which 
questions the need for further improvement.  
 
Most of respondents believed that the website was 
comprehensible and well organized, provided clear 
information material to guide users and, to a large 
extent, met the needs of its users. Again, there was a 
high percentage of users (24%), who described the 
degree of the Authority’s “ease of use” as 
"moderate", which means that the Authority must 
examine certain details that will enrich the content 
and image of the website.  
 
According to the factor of “social influence”, 34% of 
users considered that using the Authority’s web 
services enhanced their status in their social system. 
Furthermore, they would recommend the Authority’s 
web services to other people. 
 
Referring to facility conditions, over half of the 
respondents believed that the Authority's website 
facilitated citizens, and that the information provided 
was accurate and compatible with other technologies 
they use. 
 
In relation to “price value”, 39% of users believed 
that using the online services significantly decreased 
cost and considered that the cost for providing the 
services was mostly justified. 
 
As to “hedonic motivation”, while citizens were 
"very" satisfied with the navigation environment on 
the Authority's website and felt satisfaction with the 
use of electronic services, 35% had a "moderate" 
view on this. This rate may mean that users might 
not have the required free time to navigate through 
the Authority’s website. Alternatively, the content of 
the offered services may not correspond to their 
interests or they may not have yet identified the 
benefits that they may gain from the use of e-
governance.  
 
Regarding the users’ “habit”, most of them felt very 
familiar to website navigation and they considered it 
very important to expand its use through mobile 
equipment. 
 
The “user satisfaction” from the Authority's website 
and the perceived usefulness of the e-services 
provided were significant.  The users appeared 
"very" satisfied with the overall service system, 
which indicates a positive view for the service and 
obviously reinforces the attitude that they will 
continue using it in the future. 
 
Concerning “citizen privacy” and the “sensitive data 
protection”, users seemed to have a more "moderate" 
view associated with the security of the e-services 
when a complaint was submitted to the Authority.  
 
69% of the respondents were positive to the factor of 
“continuous usage” and only 24% continued to have 
"moderate" intent to use.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
An e-government project was evaluated to extract 
descriptive statistical data and to deal with any problems 
regarding specific features of an e-government system. The 
study aimed at producing better products and services, as 
well as at enhancing the existing situation and the intention 
of the end users. By increasing the productivity and 
effectiveness, the project evolves towards quality and 
success. 
This 
study 
used 
a 
specific 
evaluation 
framework/model (an extended UTAUT2) to evaluate the 
design and effectiveness of an e-government project owned 
by an independent Greek Authority - specifically, the Greek 
Ombudsman service. The study also made an initial attempt 
towards understanding the adoption of on-line web services 
from the users’ perspective.  
The proposed model proved to be a well-fitted model, 
which fully met the evaluation requirements of the 
Authority’s online services. Amongst the adoption factors 
considered, performance expectancy, effort expectancy, 
facilitating conditions, age, Internet experience, profession, 
privacy and continuous usage had a significant impact on 
user behavior for use. On the contrary, factors such as 
gender, social influence and hedonic motivation did not seem 
significant predictors of behavioral use. 
The results show that the above-mentioned e-government 
project largely covers the success criteria of people 
saving time and money. User satisfaction - through 
their navigation on the Authority’s website, the convenience 
of the services offered, but also the familiar and secure 
environment offered by the specific website- was the 
driving force and seemed to meet initial expectations and 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

needs. The respondents’ answers showed that citizens 
consider the system beneficial with regard to the e-services 
and consequently encouraged e-government adoption. It is 
worth mentioning that most of the website users assessed 
positively the usability of the system, as well as the security 
offered 
to 
them 
and 
had 
a 
positive 
attitude 
towards encouraging others to use it. However, formal 
statistical methods must be implemented so as to examine 
the significance of the factors considered. The results of this 
study should only be considered as indications of factor 
significance.  
Finally, user satisfaction increases the intention for future 
use of the system. This puts an extra key to the concept of 
success of this project and is related to the sustainability of 
the Independent Authority’s website. Moreover, the success 
of the project is characterized by its complete acceptance by 
the complainants and end users, through the satisfaction of 
their initial expectations, the cost savings and the protection 
of their personal data. The fact that the specific Authority 
project and the practices implemented are considered 
successful encourages administrators to further enhance the 
functional and technical design of system.  
The findings of this study can be further extended to 
cover more e-government projects in the Greek Public 
Administration.  
A future research study may be undertaken, which would 
expand on this one, by thoroughly and extensively analyzing 
additional crucial independent variables which may affect 
the citizens’ intention to use e-government services. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Communication from the Commission to the Council, the 
European Parliament, the European Economic and Social 
Commttee and the Committee of the Regions – The role of 
eGovernment 
for 
Europe’s 
Future, 
2003, 
Available: 
http://balkantenderwatch.eu/btw/uploaded/EU%20eng/Docum
ents/com2003_0567en01.pdf, [retrieved: February, 2017]. 
[2] D. G. Garson, “Public Information Technology and E-
governance”, Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 
The vision of e-governance, 2006, pp.23. 
[3] M. M Brown and J. L. Brudney, “Achieving advanced 
electronic government services: An examination of obstacles 
and implications from an international perspective”, Paper 
presented at the National Public Management Research 
Conference, Bloomington, IN, October 2001. 
[4] OECD E-Government Task Force, The Case for E-
Government: Excerpts from the OECD Report “The E-
Government 
Imperative”, 
2003 
Available: 
https://www.oecd.org/gov/budgeting/43496369.pdf, 
[retrieved: February, 2017].   
[5] United Nations E-Government Survey, “Expanding usage to 
realize the full benefits of e-government”, chapter Six, 2012. 
[6] J. Nograšek, “Change Management as a Critical Success 
Factor in e-Government Implementation”, Business Systems 
Research, Vol.2, No.2, 2011, pp. 1-56. 
[7] E. Ziemba, T. Papaj  and M. Jadamus-Hacura, “E-government 
Success Factors: A Perspective on Government Units”, Issues 
in Information Systems Volume 16, Issue II, 2015, pp. 16-27. 
[8] T. Almarabeh and A. AbuAli, “A General Framework for E-
Government: Definition Maturity Challenges, Opportunities, 
and Success”, European Journal of Scientific Research, ISSN 
1450-216X Vol.39 No.1, © EuroJournals Publishing, Inc., 
2010, pp. 29-42 
[9] N. M. Suki and T. Ramayah, “User Acceptance of the E-
government Services in Malaysia: Structural Equation 
Modelling 
Approach”, 
Interdisciplinary 
Journal 
of 
Information, Knowledge, and Management”, Volume 5, 2010. 
[10] F. D. Davis, "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user 
acceptance 
of 
information 
technology", MIS 
Quarterly 13 (3), 1989, pp.319–340, doi:10.2307/249008.  
[11] M. Alruwaie, “The role of social influence and prior 
experience on citizens' intention to continuing to use E-
government systems: A conceptual framework”, International 
Journal of Electronic Government Research, 2014, pp. 1-20. 
[12] T. D. Susanto, “Individual Acceptance of e-government: A 
Literature Review”, The Second International Conference on 
Informatics 
Engineering 
& 
Information 
Science 
(ICIEIS), 2013, pp. 334-342. 
[13] A.-A. Al Athmay, “Demographic Factors as Determinants of 
E-governance Adoption: A Field Study in the United Arab 
Emirates 
(UAE)”, 
Transforming 
Government: 
People, 
Process and Policy, 9 (2), 2015, pp. 159-180. 
[14] V. Kumar, B. Mukerji, I. Butt  and A. Persaud, “Factors for 
Successful 
e-government 
Adoption: 
a 
Conceptual 
Framework”, The Electronic Journal of e-government, 
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2007, pp.63-76. 
[15] O. Al-Hujran, M. Al-dalahmeh and A. Aloudat,  "The Role of 
National Culture on Citizen Adoption of eGovernment 
services: An Empirical Study”, 2011, pp. 93-106. 
[16] K. Bagchi, R. Cerveny, P. Hart and M. Peterson,  “The 
Influence of National Culture in Information Technology 
Product Adoption” , Ninth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems,  2003, pp. 967-965. 
[17] Z. J Kovačić, “The Impact of National Culture on Worldwide 
eGovernment Readiness”, Informing Science Journal Volume 
8, 2005, pp. 143-158. 
[18] A. Aida and M. Majdi, “National Culture and E- Government 
Services adoption Tunisian case”, International Journal of 
Business & Economic Strategy (IJBES), Vol.1, 2014.  
[19] S. A. Alateyah, R. M. Crowder and G. B. Wills, “Towards an 
integrated model for citizen adoption of E-government 
services”, International Journal of Information Technology & 
Computer Science (IJITCS), (ISSN No : 2091-1610), Volume 
6 : Issue on November / December, 2012, pp. 47-57. 
[20] R. Raudah and A. Akilah, “User's Satisfaction on E-
government Services: An Integrated Model”, International 
Conference on Accounting Studies 2014, ICAS, 2014, pp. 18-
19 .  
[21] S. Alateyah, “An integrated model for citizens to adopt e-
government 
services 
in 
the 
Kingdom 
of 
Saudi 
Arabia”, University of Southampton, Physical Sciences and 
Engineering, Doctoral Thesis, 2014, pp. 225. 
[22] F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi and P. R. Warshaw, "User 
acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two 
theoretical models", Management Science35, 1989, pp. 982–
1003, doi:10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982. 
[23] V. Venkatesh and  F. D. Davis, "A theoretical extension of the 
technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal field 
studies", Management Science 46 (2), 2000, pp. 186-204,  
doi:10.1287/mnsc.46.2.186.11926. 
[24] V. Venkatesh and H. Bala, "Technology Acceptance Model 3 
and a Research Agenda on Interventions", Decision 
Sciences 39 (2), 2008, pp. 273–315, doi:10.1111/j.1540-
5915.2008.00192.x. 
[25] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “Information systems 
success: the quest for the dependent variable”, Information 
systems research, 3(1), 1992, pp. 60-95. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[26] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “The DeLone and McLean 
Model of Information Systems Success: A Ten-Year Update”,  
Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4), 2003, 
pp. 9-30. 
[27] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis and F. D. Davis, 
"User acceptance of information technology: Toward a 
unified view" (PDF), MIS Quarterly 27 (3), 2003,  pp. 425–
478. 
[28] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. L. Thong and X. Xu, “Consumer 
acceptance and use of information: extending the unified 
theory of acceptance and use of technology”, MIS Quarterly 
36(1), 2012, pp. 157- 178. 
[29] B. H. Wixom, P. A. Todd, “A Theoretical Integration of User 
Satisfaction and Technology Acceptance”, Information 
Systems Research 16 (1), 2005,  pp. 85 – 102. 
[30] C. E. Koh, V. R. Prybutok, S. D. Ryan, and Y.A. Wu, “A 
Model for Mandatory Use of Software Technologies: An 
Integrative Approach by Applying Multiple Levels of 
Abstraction of Informing Science”, Informing Science: the 
International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline, 13, 
2010, pp. 177-203.. 
[31] E. M. Rogers, “Diffusion of innovations”, 4th ed. New York: 
Free Press, 1995, pp. 1-453. 
[32]  S. Wangpipatwong, W. Chutimaskul, and B. Papasratorn, 
“Understanding Citizen’s Continuance Intention to Use e-
government Website: a Composite View of Technology 
Acceptance Model and Computer Self-Efficacy”, The 
Electronic Journal of e-government, Volume 6, Issue 1, 2008, 
pp. 55 – 64. 
[33] S. Al Awadhi and A. Morris, “The use of the UTAUT model 
in the adoption of e government services in Kuwait”, 41st 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2008,  
pp. 219-230. 
[34] S. Al-Shafi, and V. Weerakkody, “ Understanding citizens’ 
behavioral intention in the adoption of e-government services 
in the state of Qatar”, 17th European Conference on 
Information Systems - EMCIS, 2009.  
[35] S. Al-Shafi and V. Weerakkody, “Factors Affecting E-
government Adoption in the State of Qatar”, European and 
Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems - EMCIS,   
pp. 1-23. 
[36] I. Karavasilis, K. Zafiropoulos and V. Vrana, “Assessing the 
Adoption of e-Government Services by Teachers in Greece”, 
Future 
Internet,  
4(2), 
2012, 
pp. 
528-544,  
doi:10.3390/fi4020528 
[37] A. Voutinioti, “Determinants of user adoption of e-
government services in Greece and the role of citizen service 
centres”, Procedia Technology 8, 6th International conference 
on ICT in agriculture, food and environment (HAICTA 2013), 
pp. 238–244, 2013. 
[38]  H. Ranaweera, “Perspective of trust towards e-government 
initiatives in Sri Lanka”, SpringerPlus. 2016, 5(1), pp.1-11, 
2016. 
[39] M. Alshehri, S. Drew and R. AlGhamdi, “Analysis of 
Citizens’ Acceptance for E-government  Services: Applying 
the UTAUT Model”, International Conference Internet 
Applications and Research, Lisbon, Portugal:  IADIS, 2012 
p.p  95-105. 
[40] H. Al-Khatib and H Lee, “E-government Systems Success 
and User  Acceptance in Developing Countries: The Role of 
Percieved Support Quality”, International Journal Of 
eBusiness and eGovernment Studies, Vol 3, No 2, 2011, pp. 
69-78, ISSN: 2146-0744. 
[41] I. B. Hassan, M. and A. A. Murad, “Acceptance of Health 
Information Application in Smart National Identity Card 
(SNIC) Using a New IP Framework”, World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology International Journal of 
Social, Behavioral, Educational, Economic, Business and 
Industrial Engineering, Vol:8, No:12, 2014, pp. 3767-3775.  
[42] N. P. Rana, Y. K. Dwivedi, Β. Lal,  M. D. Williams and M. 
Clement., “Citizens’ adoption of an electronic government 
system: towards a unified view”, Inf Syst Front, 2015, pp. 1-
20, doi:10.1007/s10796-015-9613-y. 
[43] The 
Greek 
Ombudsman 
site, 
Available: 
http://www.synigoros.gr/?i=stp.en, 
[retrieved: 
February, 
2017]. 
[44] The Greek Ombudsman- Department of Children’s Rights 
and 
the 
Institute 
of 
Child 
Health 
site, 
Available: 
http://www.0-18.gr/paidikiprostasia/statement-of-principles-
for-child-protection-in-greece, [retrieved: February, 2017]. 
[45] The Greek Ombudsman, Complaint Submission, Available: 
http://www.synigoros.gr/?i=submission-system.en, 
, 
[retrieved: February, 2017]. 
[46] A. Omari, “Technology Adoption in the Arabian Gulf 
Countries: The Case of E-government”, International Journal 
of Computer Science and Information Technology (IJCEIT), 
vol.3, No 3, 2013, pp. 1-8,  DOI : 10.5121/ijcseit.2013.3301.  
[47] European 
Commission 
– 
Justice, 
Available:   
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/, 
[retrieved: 
February, 2017]. 
[48] A. Touray, A. Salminen, and A. Mursu, “The Impact of 
Moderating factors on Behavioural intention towards internet: 
A transnational perspective,” International Journal of 
Computer and Information Technology, vol. 2(6), 2013, pp. 
1035-1041. 
[49] https://www.jotform.com/, [retrieved: February, 2017]. 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

