Assessing e-Government Service & Trust: Government to Citizen 
 
Syed Faizan Husain Zaidi, Farhi Marir, Sahithi Siva 
Knowledge Management Research Centre, 
Department of Computing, London Metropolitan University,  
London, United Kingdom  
e-mail: zaidi.sfaizan@gmail.com, f.marir@londonmet.ac.uk, s.siva@londonmet.ac.uk 
                                                   
    
Abstract—Technological 
advancements 
have 
enabled 
governments across the globe to explore online facilities in 
offering a range of services to their citizens. One necessary 
element of offering quality online services is to understand 
citizens’ views and perception towards using such services in 
contrast with the traditional service methods that they are 
accustomed to. Therefore, periodical performance assessment 
of online services is critical to any e-government. In this paper, 
the authors attempt to explore the underlying factors and 
various dimensions of e-government service delivery, and 
propose a performance assessment framework that will assess 
the quality and trust dimensions of the e-services from citizens’ 
standpoint. A systematic study of the existing performance 
assessment models such as SERVQAUAL, E-S-Qual and D & 
M model, has been carried out in establishing the basis for 
conceptualising a new framework called e-GSQTA (e-
government 
Service 
Quality 
and 
Trust 
Assessment 
Framework). The proposed framework will be validated by 
using the e-tax service offered by the Indian government in 
subsequent studies. 
 
       Keywords-e-government; performance assessment; e-services; 
quality; trust; e-tax; framework. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
E-government has been a popular topic and countries 
across the world are actively investing resources to improve 
public services. Despite the significant progress made in e-
government services, research indicates that citizens as main 
customers are not fully taking the advantages of such e-
services. This may be due to the poor quality of these 
services and /or lack of public trust in using them. In order 
to provide efficient and cost effective services and to retain 
citizens’ confidence, governments should have better 
understanding of how its citizens perceive, use and evaluate 
the quality of the e-services offered to them. Literature 
review indicates lack of information in this area and also 
lack of effective measures to evaluate the quality of e-
government services [1].  
For governments, as the main service providers, it is 
important to know what constitutes a high quality e-service 
within the public domain and to have a clear and structured 
guidance on assessing its quality on a regular basis. 
Literature review also indicates the need for further research 
to interpret and synthesize the work done so far and to 
propose a comprehensive set of dimensions that determine 
the quality and effective use of e-services from citizens’ 
perspective. This paper focuses on bridging this gap by 
proposing a new framework ‘e-GSQTA’ to conceptualise 
and assess the quality and trust aspects of the e-government 
services.   
The paper is divided into five sections. Section II 
presents previous work on existing e-government service 
assessment frameworks and trust measurement frameworks. 
Section III introduces the theoretical framework with 
associated assessment dimensions. Section IV discusses the 
methodological approach for the data collection and data 
analysis on a selected sample of e-government e-services in 
India. The final section ends up with discussion, conclusion 
and future research directions. 
 
II.       PREVIOUS WORK 
 
Enormous amount of literature on e-service is available 
which focuses on e-commerce. Most of the studies show 
that many researchers speak on the e-service quality of e-
commerce. Some of the known models for assessing e-
service quality are SERVQAUAL [2], E-S-Qual [3], 
SITEQUAL [4], and E-GovQual [5], etc. Practitioners have 
been using these instruments for assessing e-service quality 
of retail and e-banking sectors. Similarly e-government is an 
area where citizens interact online for e-services; hence for 
determining the e-service quality, studies used many facets 
from the above mentioned models. Researchers compare e-
commerce and e-government domain as identical since 
channel of service delivery is same. It is, therefore, 
necessary to do a comprehensive literature survey of e-
service in e-government and e-commerce. 
 
A.     E-Service and Classification 
 
E-services are defined by researchers in various ways. 
Papadomichelaki and Mentzas [5] state that e-service is web 
services which are delivered through the Internet. In e-
service customer’s interaction or contacts with service 
providers is through technology, such as their web sites. 
Customers have to rely entirely on information technology 
in an e-service encounter [5]. Zeithaml, Parasuraman, and 
Malhorta [6] conceptualize e-service as an information 
service or self-service since the primary value exchanged 
between the two parties (buyer and seller) is information. 
Services in e-government play a very important role by 
becoming the main conduit for a government in reaching out 
to citizens with specific, dynamic, explicit and implicit 
needs. In other words, digital government services 
encapsulate public administration functions by making 
information available through digital interfaces [7]. A 
common classification of services in e-government is related 
to the users: Government-to-Citizen (G2C) services provide 
full support to citizens, Government-to-Business (G2B) 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

services to firms, and Government-to-Government (G2G) 
services 
to 
the 
same 
or 
different 
administration, 
Government-to-Employee (G2E) [22].   
 
B.     Dimensions of e-Service Quality Measurements 
 
         As discussed before, most of the models introduced 
for measuring e-service quality are related to the online 
shopping, online retailing, and online banking. Now we will 
emphasize upon more studies related to the e-service quality 
measurements. Madu and Madu [9] developed a 15 
dimensional scale of e-service quality based on better 
understanding of customer perspective and providing 
services to meet the needs and expectations of customers 
[9]. An 11 sub-dimensional scale developed based on the 
two dimensions of eservice quality [10]. Heim and Sinha 
[11] developed a process model for assessing and improving 
service quality by identifying eservice system entities and 
transactions between those entities and mapping key quality 
dimensions onto them [11]. Kim, Kim, and Lennon [12] 
suggested that the different dimensions of perceived service 
quality are influenced by different antecedents [12]. As 
mentioned earlier, [3] developed the dimensions for core 
service delivery and recovery services delivery in e-service 
quality [3]. Kim, Kim, and Lennon [12] extends the 
dimensions developed by [3] into a 9-dimensional scale in 
e-service quality in order to use them for content analysis 
and evaluation of web sites in the apparel retailing sector.  
Agrawal [8] introduced a model EGOSQ for 
measuring 
online 
service 
quality 
from 
the 
users’ 
perspective. Model suggests relationship between service 
quality and user’s perception. DeLone and McLean [13] 
introduced the information success model which includes 
system quality, information quality and user satisfaction 
quality as main dimensions. Studies show that some 
researchers use the term “process quality” instead of 
“system quality”. Wang and Liao [19] validated D&M IS 
success model in assessing systems success of G2C e-
Government environment in Taiwan. They offer six 
dimensions: information quality; system quality; service 
quality; usage; user satisfaction; and perceived net benefit.  
With this validation it can be concluded that the quality of e-
government services can be evaluated by user satisfaction 
and inclination of future use. Bhattacharya, Gulla, and 
Gupta [21] studied two main dimensions: system quality 
and information quality from D&M model. However 
process quality is not included. This model is good for e-
government portal quality assessment. It does not show 
relationship between quality and trust. 
 
C.    The ISO/IEC 9126 Standards For Software Quality 
 
The ISO/IEC 9126 [14] standard developed in 1991 by 
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
provided the framework for evaluating software quality by 
providing the quality characteristics of the software 
throughout the development process. ISO/IEC 9126 [14] 
contains six quality characteristics: functionality, portability, 
maintainability, efficiency, usability, and reliability, which 
are used for supporting the quality goals, quality assurance 
criteria, design review, verification and validation. These 
characteristics can be deployed for assessing e-government 
quality. The ISO/IEC 9126 [14] standard is used as a tool to 
identify the quality considered in each application. The 
ISO/IEC 9126 [14] standard describes an internal and 
external software quality. The internal software quality 
derives from the product itself. The external software 
quality derives from the behavior of the system of which it 
is a part, either direct or indirect. Both the internal and 
external software qualities are prescribed in a quantitative 
manner. ISO 9241 [15] is another standard for ergonomics 
of human system interaction. ISO 9241 [15] describes every 
aspect of usability including hardware usability, software 
usability, and usability processes. Furthermore, ISO 13407 
[14] is the standard for human-centered design processes for 
interactive system (ISO 13407) [14]. 
 
III.      THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
An extensive literature survey and critical studies of the 
existing approaches on e-service quality, information 
quality, system quality, and various other e-service related 
dimensions identified for assessing e-service quality and 
trust in e-government services are in the proposed study. In 
this ongoing study we adopt the E-S-QUAL dimensions 
scale developed by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and, Malhotra 
[3] as the measurement of customers’ satisfaction on e-
service quality in their online purchasing process. E-S-
QUAL was developed for measuring e-service quality in 
business environment but its dimensions can be used for 
assessing citizen's satisfaction for measuring e-service 
quality. Similarly study follows another model e-
GOVQUAL focusing on reliability and validity though this 
model includes important dimensions [4]. E-S-QUAL 
model involves 7-dimensional scale: four core dimensions 
and three recovery part of the e-service quality [3].  
The four core dimensions of E-S-QUAL are: 1) System 
availability: the correct technical functioning of the site. 2) 
Efficiency: the ease and speed of accessing and using the 
site. 3) Fulfillment:  the extent to which the site’s promises 
about order delivery and item availability are fulfilled. 4). 
Privacy: The degree to which the site is safe and protects 
customer information. The ESQUAL has a recovery service 
quality scale (E_Rec_S-Qual) for problem resolution. It is 
only applied when customers have questions or run into 
problems in eservice process. The three dimension of E-
Rec-S-Qual are: 
 
1) Responsiveness: effective handling of problems and 
returns through the site.  
2) Compensation: 
the 
degree to which 
the site 
compensates customers for problems. 
3) Contact: the availability of assistance through 
telephone or online representatives.  
Some of the dimensions like functionality, reliability, 
information appearance, interactivity, ease of use and trust 
are considered from e-GOVQUAL [4]. These dimensions 
are also suggested by ISO/IEC 9126 [14] for software 
product quality. D&M model [20] includes system quality, 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

information quality, use, user’s satisfaction and perceived 
net benefit were used and validated by Wang and Liao [19].  
From D&M we consider system quality, and information 
quality measures. To measure the performance of a system, 
“system quality” is the most important quality components. 
This is measured in terms of functionality, reliability, 
availability flexibility, data quality, portability, integration, 
and system efficiency [13][20]. Therefore, user satisfaction 
depends upon the system quality. Concerning the process 
quality, business processes should be defined, documented 
and streamlined to improve information flow within the 
organization [23].  
Change in business process may affect the e-services. 
The information quality refers to the quality of information 
relating to government activities. It basically contains the 
measures like accuracy, timeliness, relevance, precision, and 
completeness. Information Quality is concerned with issues 
such as the relevance, timeliness, and accuracy of the 
information generated by an information system [13][20]. 
Trust element in e-service is based on overall e-service 
quality. Determination of trust is done by citizen’s 
satisfaction in utilizing e-services, whereas citizen’s 
satisfaction is based upon overall e-service quality.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The proposed e-GSQTA framework 
 
Number of hypotheses and studies has been considered 
for the development of e-GSQTA. Here, association among 
various dimensions is being presented and tried to show 
how e-government service quality and trust are assessed.  
 
Hypothesis (H1): While using online e-services the 
system quality in the government Web site affects 
the citizen’s satisfaction. Hence it should be an 
essential part of e-GSQTA. 
 
Hypothesis (H2): Organizational processes should 
be included in an e-GSQTA assessment. 
 
Hypothesis (H3): While using online e-services the 
information quality in the government Web site 
affects the citizen’s satisfaction. Hence it should be 
an essential part of e-GSQTA. 
 
Hypothesis 
(H4): 
E-service 
quality 
in 
the 
government Web site has a significant effect on 
citizen’s satisfaction. Hence it should be an essential 
part of e-GSQTA. 
 
Hypothesis (H5): System quality, process quality, 
information quality, and e-service quality affects 
user’s satisfaction in the G2C e-Government 
context. 
 
Hypothesis (H6): While using online e-services, 
interactivity, transparency, information value, and 
contacts are important measures and should be in 
the consideration since these all are related to e-
government system quality dimensions. Hence it 
should be an essential part of e-GSQTA. 
 
Hypothesis (H7): Consolidation of e-service quality 
in e-government is done weighting all depicted 
measures and their dimensions of e-GSQTA 
framework.  Hence it should be an essential part of 
e-GSQTA. 
 
Hypothesis (H8): Perceived usefulness of the 
government e-services has a positive effect on 
satisfaction and therefore it is positively related to e-
service quality and becomes an important factor in 
assessing e-government performance.   
 
Hypothesis (H9): e-government “trust” is positively 
related to the use, and citizen’s satisfaction which is 
based on the overall weight of e-service quality. 
 
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A.  Data Collection 
       
The target population includes citizens who had 
experience with browsing and searching for the information 
in e-government web portals. Research model is validated 
through conducting the surveys. Series of interviews took 
place in India from the users of e-Tax services. A set of 
questionnaires were distributed among the online e-tax 
users. Questionnaires were divided into 5- sections which 
included sib-questionnaires on information quality, e-
service delivery, website quality, citizen's satisfaction and 
trust. This helped author in understanding the citizen's 
opinions about the existing offered e-service quality. In each 
section users are asked to rate from 1 to 5 each dimensions 
of online service quality.  
 
 
 
 
Privacy & 
Security  
System 
Availability 
Functionality  
 
Efficiency 
Responsiveness  
Information 
value 
 
Compensation 
Contact 
 
Information 
Appearance 
Interactivity 
& 
Transparency  
e-GSQTA 
E-government 
System 
 
Over all 
E-service Quality 
System 
Quality 
Process 
Quality 
Information 
Quality 
Reliability  
Citizen’s Satisfaction 
 & Trust 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

B. Methodology 
    
 
Collected set of questionnaires will be analyzed using 
partial least squares (PLS) method [24]. The PLS approach 
is superior to other structural equation modeling (SEM) 
approaches for this study because of its flexibility for 
distributional postulation, and its strength in handling 
complex predictive models [16]. Smart PLS version 3.0 or 
advance can be used for the analysis. SPSS 18.0 is used to 
store the collected data and produce descriptive statistics. 
PLS would be used to study the validity of the framework's 
main components and to determine the relationships among 
the constructs of framework. PLS as an analytical tool, is 
used in two sequential steps: these are assessments of 
validity of measurement model and of structural model [17]. 
 
V.  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
The proposed framework focuses on the main 
dimensions like system quality, process quality and 
information quality. There are measures like system 
availability, functionality, reliability, privacy, security, 
efficiency, interactivity, information value, compensation, 
and transparency associated with the framework which 
determines e-service quality. Various hypotheses introduced 
show the relationships among various dimensions. The 
introduced framework e-GSQTA will improve both 
practitioners and researchers understanding about the 
quality criteria. The purpose of this paper is to propose 
suitable framework and dimensions for measuring e-service 
quality and trust in e-government which will be beneficial 
for digital society. The proposed framework is based on 
revising the literature and adapting the E-S-Qual, E-
GovQual and ISO/IEC 9126 [18] standards for the studies. 
The framework includes various dimensions like web site 
quality, design, reliability, responsiveness, security, privacy, 
effectiveness, ease of use and citizen's trust. A high quality 
e-government service is a determinant factor in building 
trust in the offered e-government services. The Objective of 
this study was to design a framework e-GSQTA which will 
help practitioners to assess e-government service quality and 
also citizen's trust. Next phase of this study will be the 
verification and validation. India’s e-government is offering 
various e-services in different areas hence validation of the 
proposed framework is to be done using e-tax services. The 
objective of choosing this area is based on the idea that e-tax 
service is widely used by a majority of the citizens. 
Proposed framework may have some limitations. Cultural 
political, demographical and governmental issues always 
vary from country to country. These factors may impact the 
e-service quality assessment along with trust also. Second 
thing is, this framework focuses on G2C interaction, 
meaning that the assessment is done from a citizen’s point 
of view. It does not include G2G interaction. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]. T. Carbo and J. G. Williams, “Models and metrics for evaluating 
local electronic government systems and services”, in Electronic 
Journal of E-Government, 2(2), pp. 95−104, 2004.  
[2]. A. Parasuraman , Valarie A. Zeithaml, and  Leonard L. Berry,  “A 
conceptual model of service quality & its implications for future 
research”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 49, autumn, pp. 41-50, 1985.  
[3]. A. Parasuraman, V. A. Zeithaml, and A. Malhotra “E-S-QUAL: A 
Multiple-Item Scale for Assessing Electronic Service Quality”, 
Journal of Service research 7, pp. 213–234, 2005.  
[4]. Yoo, Boonghee & Naveen, Donthu. Developing a Scale to Measure 
the Perceived Quality of Internet Shoing Sites (SITEQUAL), 
Quarterly Journal of Electronic Commerce, 2 (1). 31-47, 2001.  
[5]. X. Papadomichelaki and G. Mentzas, “A Multiple-Item Scale for 
Assessing E- Government Service Quality”, LNCS 5693, Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 63–175, 2009.  
[6]. V. A. Zeithaml, A. Parasuraman, and A. Malhorta, “Service Quality 
Delivery Through Web Sites: A Critical Review of Extant 
Knowledge”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 30(4),  
pp. 362–375, 2002. 
[7]. J. Buckley, “E-service quality and the public sector”, Managing 
Service Quality Volume 13, pp. 453-462, 2003.  
[8]. A. Agrawal, “Assessing e-governance online-service quality 
(EGOSQ)”, in Sahu, G.P., Dwivedi, Y.K. and Weerakkody, V. (Eds), 
E-government Development and Diffusion, Inhibitors and Facilitators 
of Digital Democracy, IGI Global, Hershey, PA, pp. 133-48, 2009.  
[9]. C. N. Madu and A. A. Madu, “Dimensions of e-quality”,  
International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, Vol. 19, 
No. 3, pp. 246-259, 2002.  
[10]. J. Santos, “E-service quality a model of virtual service dimensions”, 
Managing Service Quality, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 233-247, 2003.  
[11]. J. M. Field, G. R. Heim, and K. K. Sinha, “Managing quality in the 
eservice system: Development and application of a process model”, 
Production and Operations Management, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 291-306, 
2004.  
[12]. M. Kim, J. H. Kim, and S. J. Lennon, “Online service attributes 
available on apparel retail web sites: An ESQUAL approach”, 
Managing Service Quality, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 51-77, 2006.  
[13]. W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “The DeLone and McLean Model 
of Information Systems Success: A Ten-Year Update”, Journal of 
Management Information Systems, vol. 19(4), pp. 9-30, 2009.  
[14]. D. Travis, Bluffers’ Guide to ISO 9241, User Focus, London, pp. 1-
28, 2007.  
[15]. ISO 9126, ISO 13407: Human-Centered Design Processes for 
Interactive Systems, 1999.  
[16]. W. W. Chin, “Structural equation modeling analysis with small 
samples using partial least squares” Hoyle RH, editor, statistical 
strategies for small sample research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 
publications, pp. 307-341, 1995. 
[17]. C. Fornell and F. Bookstein, “Two structural models: LISREL &   
PLS applied to consumer exit voice theory”, journal of marketing 
research 19(4), pp. 440-452, 1982. 
[18]. Essiscope, ISO 9126: The Standard of Reference, available online at 
http://www.cse.dcu.ie/essiscope/sm2/9126ref.html 
(Retrieved 
September, 2012). 
[19]. Y. S. Wang and Y. W. Liao, “Assessing e-Government systems 
success: a validation of the DeLone and McLean model of 
information systems success”, Government Information Quarterly, 
Vol. 25, pp. 717-33, 2008. 
[20]. W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “Information systems success: the 
quest 
for 
the 
dependent 
variable”, 
Information 
Systems          Research, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 60-95, 1992. 
[21].  Debjani Bhattacharya,Umesh Gulla, M.P. Gupta, “E-service quality 
model for Indian government portals: citizens perspective” Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, Vol. 25, Issue 3,   pp. 246-271, 
2012. 
[22]. Ahmed Al-Omari and Hussein Al-Omari, “A framework model for 
assessment of e-Government readiness. IMTC 2004 - Information 
Technology Conference Amman, Jordan, 2004. 
[23]. C. Baum, A. Di Maio, and F. Caldwell, “What is e-Government? 
Gartner’s definitions. Research Note (TU-11-6474), 2002.  
[24].  G. Mateos-Aparicio Partial Least Squares (PLS) Methods: Origins, 
Evolution, and Application to Social Sciences" Communications in 
Statistics - Theory and Methods, 40,13, pp.2305-2317, 2011.  
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

