Social Networking: Cyber Communities and Security Issues
Shaftab Ahmed
Software Engineering Department
Bahria University, Islamabad, Pakistan
email Shaftab_2010@yahoo.com,
Abstract -- The world is experiencing a smart change of life style
as a result of a wide range of developments in the information
and communication technology (ICT) sector. The computation
and storage centers are vanishing in the cloud domain leaving
human communication interface as the only requirement for
using these resources. Evolving cyber communities (CC) are
groups of users having common interest areas. Information
sharing across such communities is easily possible which, leads
to
more
complexity
and
vulnerabilities.
The
platform
independent
applications
in
service
oriented
architectures
(SOA) over the web offer a variety of opportunities for users of
all walks of life. They are able to create mashups integrating
different applications and services to suit their requirements.
Cloud service providers (CSP) extend the social network
applications for information collection and conducting surveys
for business and marketing strategies. Internet of things (IOT) is
a concept to converge data, process and people to extend
business applications in virtual domain. ICT applications over
cloud architecture are ubiquitous and pervasive; developers are
extending the concept to develop smart city and smart home
architectures for the future. In this paper, we address the
challenges offered by growing interest in social networking and
ease of information availability for applications in virtual
domain. Various new issues have to be carefully studied as the
component of human interaction has to be controlled besides the
information security to avoid miss use of information.
Keywords—Service Oriented Architecture (SOA); Information and
Communications Technology (ICT); Internet of Things (IOT);
Cloud Service Provider (CSP); Cyber Communities (CC)
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile communications, networking and Internet based
solutions for virtualization and resource sharing have given
birth to a new life style through social networking. The
participation of humans of all ages, professions and interests
has given rise to formation of cyber communities. Community
is a group of users sharing common interest for example
content creators, users, developers and service providers, etc.
form communities spanning social networks [1]. Hence, a
community in the ICT domain may be seen as interlinked web
pages in the Internet cloud. Social networks like LinkedIn,
Facebook, Tweeter, WhatsApp, etc. have assumed importance
for sharing information in professional and social groups or
communities. These communities are usually able to interact
with each other hence, making bigger picture of social
networking. Whereas it is an interesting phenomenon, it is
often complicated and dangerous [2].
The cyber communities (CC) usually have no restriction on
membership
and
cross
community
information
sharing.
Hence, explicit and implicit communities may be formed. The
implicit communities are difficult to control and monitor for
content distribution, etc. Some methods are available to ensure
privacy of information between participants of the groups but
it is not effective when a group member may provide
information knowingly or unknowingly to others which, may
eventually be compromised. The social network users need to
be educated on the weaknesses of global phenomena of social
networking. The user must understand that all information
placed in a social network is vulnerable so it should be
carefully selected before sharing [3]. As the members present
them in virtual domain it is often difficult to differentiate
genuine or fake information. Hence, making judgment for
selecting a member in a community is usually difficult.
Cloud services virtualize the platform and infrastructure to
be used by clients through software. It offers infrastructure as
a service (Iaas), platform as a service (Paas) and software as a
service (Saas). Lately a new term IT as a service (ITaas) has
also been introduced. Cyber communities enlarge their scope
through a marriage of cloud computing and social networking
[4]. Social network users may access information available in
the cloud through service oriented architecture [5]. ICT tools
are often used to extract information from social networks and
cyber communities related to market trends, evaluation of
strategies to forecast and setting targets for future.
Human reliance on the information systems hosted on the
web has led to development of community based computing
infrastructure or Community Cyber Infrastructure (CCI) in
which, the information discovery and extraction is performed
through
various
ICT
technologies.
National
Science
Foundation (NSF) defines Cyber Infrastructure (CI) as
integration of computing, data networks, digitally enabled
sensors,
observatories,
experimental
facilities
and
interoperable suit of software and middleware services [1][6].
Cyber enabled Discovery and Innovation (CDI) is an initiative
of NSF to develop a new generation of computationally based
discovery concepts and tools to deal with complex data rich
interacting systems. The discovery of information may be
from structured (conforming to a schema) or unstructured (not
conforming to a schema) data sets.
In Section II, we review related work. In Section III, social
networking, cyber community and supporting technologies are
discussed. In Section IV, the security issues in cyber
communities are highlighted. In Section V, research work
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

initiated is presented. Finally, in Section VI, the paper is
concluded with discussion on challenges and future trends.
II.
RELATED WORK
Social networks are attacked in mainly of two ways. First,
manipulating executable code to gain access or be able to
install malicious software. Secondly, the human hackers
exploit personal information gathered by peeking and poking
the social network. Sometimes, a passive listener is installed
to gather information useful to attack a social network [7].
The data posted on the social media is not limited to
malicious software attacks; the cyber criminals may mine
networks to obtain persisting useful information, and use it to
steal intellectual property, highjack a website or compromise
company profile. Often data remains available in various
cache buffers even after a user has logged out; malicious
users may get access of this data intelligently [8]. Most
enterprises have adopted security and firewalling schemes to
control and filter malicious activities. Social networks open a
new window where employees of a company may un-
intentionally expose useful information in public domain
leading to exploitation or financial losses to the enterprise.
Social network users must bear in mind that information
posted on a social network is no longer private. However
secure the site may be yet the information can be easily
leaked either by a member or through a loop hole in the
security mechanism [9]. Some of the tactics used are as
under:
Click-jacking:
Concealing hyperlinks beneath a
visible link
Cross –Site Scripting:
Injecting client side script into
web page
Doxing:
Publically
releasing
identity
information and pictures, etc.
Pharming:
Redirecting to fraudulent sites to
extract personal data
Phishing:
An email or other content often
sent
on
behalf
a
known
user
containing a malicious link
Phreaking
Gaining unauthorized access to
telecommunication
device
also
call physical theft.
Spoofing:
A
passive
listener
to
gather
information
to
be
used
for
exploitation
Business communities are using social media to extract useful
information for marketing strategies and human resource
management. For example [10] Linked in is being used for
hiring
skilled
manpower.
Business
to
business
communications has strengthened collaboration for increase
in productivity of a company due to broader area of exposure.
The developers and service providers offer large storage
spaces over the cloud e.g., S3 of Amazon. According to a
recent survey [11] the commercial enterprises are not
comfortable with the virtualization of storage for confidential
information; they would prefer to explicitly know the location
/ custody of confidential data. To build their confidence it is
important
to
implement
proactive
security
strategies,
effective user policies and reinforcing methods to monitor
and protect enterprise resources [10]. The employees often
use social networks while at home or work place; it is
recommended that regular training on security issues and
company policies should form a part of the policy. The
network at home is usually not adequately protected hence,
important information may be compromised.
The social networks have a niche market in e-Healthcare,
and education sectors because of direct human involvement.
Developers are providing all time guidance and help to
patients through social media; often warning messages and
other useful information is provided to the community.
III.
SOCIAL NETWORKING AND CYBER COMMUNITY AND
SUPPORTING TECHNOLOGIES
Social networks virtualize the usage of resources through
applications used to interact with them. A typical social
network is based on layers of abstraction, shown in Figure 1
where the human interface for user registration is the highest
layer;
followed
by
service
registration
and
discovery
mechanisms setup by service provider. The services are
virtualized through tools for query, access control, data
management
and
visualization.
Resource
virtualization
presents the physical hardware and networks in a cloud
hiding all the complexities and offering a service oriented
architecture. The social networks allow users to form
communities which, may be overlapping in terms of interests
and users. Various controls over such groups are also
provided to share or present only the authorized information.
Some of the enabling technologies have been shown in
Figure 2.
Discovery
Software artifacts like Registry to process or redirect queries and
utilization of underlying layers
SOA
Inter-operable suit of software services to host applications on
heterogeneous platforms
Resource Virtualization
Middleware for abstract presentation for services through hypervisor
Physical Layer
Computer Hardware, Data Network, Sensors, Cell Phones and PDAs
Hardware Layer
Physical machines from various OEMs having different Architectures
Figure 1. Layered architecture of Social Network Services
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 2. Enabling technologies for social networking
A. Social networks implementation
The growth of communities in social, healthacre, medicine
and hundreds of others, has been possible as a result of
developments of service oriented architecture (SOA) offered
through web engineering and data communication networks.
Service oriented architecture is used for abstration, low
cohesive concepts for data mangement and presentation [5].
The services offered are recorded in a registry which, is
looked up for selection. The discovery tools hosted by social
networks
facilitate
selection
of
desred
services.
Web
engineering is vital in abstracting the underlying network and
communication systems. Hence, social network users may
interact with virtual environments without being a computer
literate. Lately cloud storage and archiving services are being
offered by all the mobile commmuications companies used
for availability on anywhere anytine basis through smart
phones or PDAs.
B. Cloud computing offered to social networks
An emerging field in ICT domain is social networking
conceived to exploit the ubiquitous nature of social networks
and cloud services offered through various web sites. The
users are able to share resources and use cloud services for
creating mashups. A mashup application blends services for
data, presentation and functionality. It also allows integration
of different APIs in a single application. For example
Facebook users can make applications hosted by a CSP like
Amazon [12][13].
Volunteer computing is a distributed computing resource
like SETI@Home, Storage@Home and Folding@Home. The
experience of such sites can be used in social networks to
provide enormous computing power and storage space
through
collaboration
of
IT
communities
[14].
Some
examples of potential applications are:
-
Document sharing by Google Docs and Zoho
-
Pictures and video sharing by Piccasa and Flicker
-
Location based services like Google Maps and
Bingo Maps
-
Context aware applications using mobile mashup
services
using
memory enabled
sensors,
touch
screen, cameras, GPS and accelerometer, etc.
C. Social Networks and technology developments towards
smart homes and smart cities
The world is experiencing a fundamental change in social
setup and lifestyles. The popularity of smart phones and all
time Internet connectivity through wireless, Wi-Fi and
WiMAX technologies has motivated technology developers
to introduce a new concept of smart homes and smart cities.
Some examples are smartcities of IBM [15], sustainable-
cities of Siemens [16], citynext of Microsoft [17] and mycity
of atos [18].
Smart cities require development of tools to address cross
domain
communication
for
information
sharing
and
distributed computing. Such solutions have to cater for a
variety of features and perspectives in modern society. The
developers are in pursuit of tangible services and solutions
for the social networks mostly ubiquitous and pervasive.
Innovative solutions and new ideas are being matured to meet
the requirements of smart homes especially for aging
population [20].
Internet of Things (IOT) is a concept to converge data,
processes,
people,
and
business
system
providing
an
opportunity to extend business scenarios [21][22]. Cloud
Service Providers are offering services to build and deploy
smart city projects in real world to evaluate the potentials /
weaknesses and devise methods to meet new challenges. For
example Microsoft Azure services may be used to monitor
assets
for
operational
performance
improvement
and
provision of innovative solutions through data analysis and
business models [23]. Home care and e-Healthcare models
are being rapidly developed to provide better quality of life,
protection and health monitoring. The elder populations,
patients getting prolonged medical treatment or requiring
post-surgical monitoring are clients for smart homes and
smart cities [24] [25]. A cyber-home connected to a service
provider over the Cloud architecture is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Smart applications in a cyber-home
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 4. IOT Smart city architecture
D. Web and open access to learning and role of social
networks
Web
2.0
technologies
promote
effective
use
of
collaborative network operation for information sharing and
interactive
learning
[26].
The
open
access
learning
oportunities
are
available
for
integrated
professional
education. Open access helps break the barrier between
instructor
and
student
to
promote
academic
learning.
Shulman [27] states, “learning is useful when it is private and
hidden; it is most powerful when it becomes public and
commercial”. Other scholars have emphacized the benifits of
public learning and are of the view that, “open source” and
“open access” software resources have been instrumental in
generating
useful
academic
activities
and
promoting
innovative ideas [28].
ICT has experienced rapid development of open source
tools including bulletin boards, courseware, portals and
content
mangement
software
for
open
access
learning
environments [29]. A number of institutions and research
groups have used open sharing, mutual aid and knowledge
disseminstion concepts to promote establishment of free e-
learning resourses [30].
IV.
SECURITY ISSUES
A.
Cyber Domain of Social Networks
The social networks are ubiquitous and pervasive; they
have wide acceptability in communities shaped by human
interest and social information interchange extending homes
and offices into virtual domains. It has been observed that
developers
often
use
these
networks
for
information
gathering for their business and marketing applications. The
information is live instead of old documented surveys so it is
good for dynamic market engagement.
Hence, social networks strengthen connectivity, attract
and engage customers to get inputs for devising strategies for
the company. However social networks are easy targets for
malicious
activities.
Often
users
expose
themselves
unnecessarily in social communities without releasing that
their data or communication may be misused. Hence, it is
extremely important to educate social network users about the
risks and pitfalls that they have to watch out for fruitful
experience and avoid embarrassment [31].
B.
School communitity concerns regarding networking
Besides private, business and commercial organizations a
large community affected by social networking is the
students. Schools are integral part of society today; where
besides academic activities, meetings and counseling sessions
of teachers, parents and students are conducted to enhance
academic performance and reduce discipline problems. The
online environments are easily accessible to students of all
levels; hence they are causing new problems in society and
learning environments. While controlled online activities
within a school may ensure safe usage to some extent; the
students may use the networks from home or other places
leading to serious problems.
It is necessary that school and community policy makers
should realize the severity of problems associated with
learning communities; where the students need parenting and
guided use of information. It is necessary that comprehensive
school wide and community wide policies should be made for
collaborative
management
through
training,
sharing
of
information and introducing guidelines for safe schools and
neighborhoods
C.
Limitations and vulnerabilities
Social network users are inclined to have trust relationships
and informal communications instead of well thought of and
well-grounded business communication The sites encourage
users to share personal information, photos and videos,
opinions and comments or tagging which, is source of
enjoyment. They are usually unaware that in spite of careful
information sharing in restricted groups; the vulnerability of
host site may compromise their information leading to misuse
by cyber-criminal. Some of the scenarios are as under [32]:
i.
A friendly looking website may incite a user to
divulge his profile information and personal detail
which, can be used by malware [7].
ii.
The user may be fooled by a masquerading attack
where he might engage with a cyber-criminal
iii.
A
community
member
may
turn
to
be
not
trustworthy; he may expose the information unsafely
iv.
The nonprofessional employees of a company are
often unaware of the importance of exercising
privacy in company details and secrets. If not
properly trained they may help malware to break in
the security barriers of the company. Some experts
emphasize that periodic training and briefing is
necessary for both professional and nonprofessional
users. A professional user may forget that he is using
the laptop of the company while at home; or visit a
social network through his official mobile, etc.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

v.
Email spams are used for marketing of products and
utilities; a user may be tempted to click a link,
leading to malicious activity besides going to the
website.
vi.
Human resource managers are often using social
networks to acquire profiles and professional detail
of applicants. The negligence in maintaining this
information may compromise the detail; for misuse
by cyber-criminal.
vii.
The website pages may have some security flaws
which, may be identified by a hacker for misuse.
Such incidents have been reported for Facebook and
Tweeter where suitable measures were taken by
them
D.
Some of the concerns of using social networks:
The user experience with social networks has revealed
many weak areas which, need to be addressed by the
developers
and
managers
of
social
networks.
This
is
especially important in the evolving scenario of social
network hosting in cloud domains. The iCloud, Google docs,
etc. are a few of the important ones. They may have an
overlap with social network activities.
A few weak areas to watch out are as under:
-
No restriction on membership of social network
-
No check on creating an official site hence, can be
misused to create fake institutions
-
Judgment of friend or foe in cyber network is
difficult; users have to be educated on how to
ascertain that he is communicating with a genuine
member
-
Cross community information sharing; either it
should be restricted or sufficient controls and
forensic data management should be enforced so
that information may not land into irresponsible
hands after legitimate usage
-
Loss of control over information shared may lead to
wrong reporting or making it controversial; hence,
users in a community or an enterprise should be
educated to avoid putting all information on the
social site. An option to leave or migrate from the
host site gracefully should be kept in mind
-
Information sources like email, blogs, Twitter,
Facebook
and
Myspace
increase
visibility
in
communities and widens the scope but overloads the
educators and may be annoying in some cases.
E.
Attack on host or computer network
Social networks weakness is not the only source of cyber
attack [33]. The host network or service provider in virtual
domain may also be hit by cyber-criminal compromising all
the information of the clients maintaind on it. In such cases,
the social services may suffer severely hence, the enterprises
using social networks should have proactive strategies in
place to handle such situations.
F.
Recommendations and guidelines for secure use of social
networks
Detailed study of social networking sites, discussion with
user
communities,
entrepreneurs,
students,
scientists,
researchers, medical professionals, etc. has revealed that the
awareness of security threats is not adequate. We recommend
that suitable measures should be adopted for their education
as under:
-
Self awareness of suitability of sharing information
-
Avoid third party usage of account
-
Treat everything is public; the world not only your
closed community may be seeing the information
shared
-
Protect yourself protect others or the community by
not
allowing
information
to
across
to
other
communities without suitable authorization
-
Campagn to educate social network users and
administartors for rational usage and abiging by
security policies.
-
A regulatory framawork maintaining forensic data
for social network is becoming important so that
suitable measures can be taken to fix responsibility
for unauthorized usage or informatin leak
-
Stronger authentication and access control methods
have to adopted to discourage BOTs by using
captchas or other methods
-
Provision of suitable tools to revoke user accounts as
well as edit or remove profiles from the posts should
be available
-
The social networks should use filtering tools to
establish legitimacy of information and forbidden
content distribition
V.
RESEARCH WORK
We have chosen e-healthcare, e-learning and business
communities as domains of interest for research work. It is
understandable that collection of useful social interaction data
is instrumental for assessment and analysis. However, while
using popular social networking sites, there are two issues i.e.
i)
Non availability of data from popular sites
ii)
Non serious activities are more common
Since we intend to focus on three domains (e-healthcare, e-
learning and business), which require useful and extensive
data, we will develop social networking facilities of our own.
These sites will be available to the closed communities in the
above said domains
The first two domains are human centric where sharing
personal
data
and
experiences
securely
is
of
prime
importance. The third has a wide perspective where the
market trends, user experiences etc., are used for making
strategies
to
market
products
and
human
resource
management etc.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

In healthcare and patient handling / rehabilitation, the data
collected from the patient history and interactive sessions will
be used for treatment, rehabilitation, nutrition plans, etc.
Learning communities have a wide perspective; however, we
will focus on schools first. We aim to bring parents, teachers,
students and policy makers together, through social network
for learning, parenting, teaching and socialization. They may
evolve strategies to be adopted for upbringing of children in
highly volatile ICT induced information overload. Our forum
will promote shared vision, communication without barriers
and collaboration towards achieving common goals of
education and integrated society.
For business community product marketing and human
resource management have been identified. We intend to
perform behavior analysis of social network users with
respect to thoughts, daily routine, likes, dislikes etc. The data
collected about market requirements, human consumption
alongwith end user comments on social sites will be used to
predict future trends and plan product marketing. Intelligent
use of data available on other competitors / manufactures
sites regarding their products and end user feedbacks will be
used to derive competitive advantage.
For human resource
management, the data
will be
collected through social networks and processed to help
entrepreneurs in making strategies for carrier planning, hiring
and granting relief or bonus for employees / shareholders.
Managers may use the new applicant’s data to prepare
suitable probing questions before formally interviewing
individuals.
While developing the above said model applications we
will focus on vulnerabilities of the data collected and shared
between communities. Suitable measures will be adopted,
alongwith educating the users for safe usage of social
networks through recommended policies, guidelines and safe
practices for safe use of social networks.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
Social networks are being used for business purposes for
human resource management, marketing, forecasting etc.
Trends indicate that the phenomena of increasing interest and
usage of social networks in all walks of life will rapidly
increase in future. It is important to avoid pitfalls and threats
while reaping the benefits of social media. The business
models need to be carefully developed through clearly
articulated procedures, policies and role of users in various
departments, guests and members from outside. It implies
that clarity on what information can be posted on which, site
and by who should be ensured. It is equally important to
devise remedial strategies, in failures before engagement in
social network.
The employees of a business enterprise are the weakest
link which, is usually exploited by the cyber criminals. For
example a careless download by an individual on his personal
computer or mobile may be used to compromise important
resources of an enterprise. Similarly an employee may
innocently post information following a link helping malware
to break the cyber defense of a company. It is recommended
that companies using social networks should evolve a
continuous training program for employees demonstrating
threats and their impact. Furthermore, these sessions should
include all the IT employees not just those who matter.
Social networking has significantly changed human life
cycle, business
models and
the level
of awareness
/
dependency in digital world today. It must be realized that
opportunities offered by social networks should be tapped
cautiously realizing risks and devising suitable strategies /
counter measures for smooth running of an enterprise.
VII.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Elmagarmid, A. Samuel and M. Ouzzani,” Community Cyber
Infrastructure Enabled Discovery in Science and Engineering”, RPI,
Troy, NY, September 2007
[2]
R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan and A. Tomkins “Trawling
the
Web
for
emerging
cyber-communities”
1999,
pp
402-415,
Published by Elsevier Science B.V. doi=10.1.1.387.3453
[3]
S. A. de Chaves, C. B. Westphall, C. M. Westphall, and G. A.
Gerônimo, “Customer Security Concerns in Cloud Computing” IARIA,
2001, pp. 7-11 ISBN 978-1-61208-113-7
[4]
D. Fu, J. Zhu and G. Dasmalchi,” IT as a service Cloud Computing”
IBM Alliance at Cisco Systems Cisco Systems, IT Pro March/April
2009 Publ ished by the IEEE C omputer S ociet y, 1520-9202/09, 2009
IEEE, pp. 10-13
[5]
L. Ngo, “ Service-oriented architecture for home networks” TKK T-
110.5190 Seminar on Internetworking 2007-3-4/5
[6]
M. McDowell and D. Morda, “ Socializing Securely: Using Social
Networking Services”, Carnegie Mellon University. Produced for US-
CERT, a government organization 2007.
[7]
S. Abraham and I. Chengalur, “An overview of social engineering
malware: Trends, tactics, and implications” Technology in Society 32
2010, pp 183–196 doi:10.1016/j.techsoc.2010.07.001
[8]
S. Singh , R. Bagga, D. Singh and T. Jangwal,” Architecture of mobile
application, security issues and services involved in mobile cloud
computing environment”, India International Journal of Computers and
Electronics research, www.ijcer.org ISSN2278 August 2012, pp 58-67
[9]
Mike Gotta, “ Risks & Benefits of More Open Social Networking”,
Burton Group, http:// www.burtongroup.com
[10] F. Lin and C. hung, C. , “Developing and Evaluating the Social
Network Analysis System for Virtual Teams in Cyber Communities”
Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences – 2004
[11] A. L. Beberg and V. S. Pande2 ,”Storage@home: Petascale Distributed
Storage” 1-4244-0910-1/07 2007 IEEE
[12] A. Mohaisen, H Tran, A. Chandra and Y. Kim, “Social Cloud: Using
Social
Networks
for
Building
Distributed
Computing
Services”
doi=10.1.1.232.1553
[13] K. Chard, S. Caton, O. Rana and K. Bubendorfer, “Social Cloud: Cloud
Computing in Social Networks”, DOI 10.1109/CLOUD.2010.28 IEEE
Computer Society, 2010, pp 99-106
[14] S. S. Sivan and S. Durga, “ A Survey on Accessing Cloud Services in
Social Networks” International Journal of Advanced Research in
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Computer Science and Software Engineering, Volume 4, Issue 1, ISSN:
2277 128X , January 2014, pp784-787
[15] http://www.ibm.com/smartercities
[16] www.siemens.com/sustainable-city
[17] http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/citynext
[18] http://www.oracle.com/us/industries/public-sector/national-local-
government/city-platform/index.html
[19] http://atos.net/en-us/home/your-business/government-and-
cities/mycity.html
[20] H. Chourabi et al,” Understanding Smart Cities: An Integrative
Framework”
45th
Hawaii
International
Conference
on
System
Sciences, 978-0-7695-4525-7/12 IEEE,
2012, pp 2289-2297, DOI
10.1109/HICSS.2012.615
[21] D. Evans, “The Internet of Things How the Next Evolution of the
Internet Is Changing Everything” Cisco Internet Business Solutions
Group (IBSG) 2011
[22] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic and M Palaniswami, “Internet of
Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions”
Future Generation Computer Systems Volume 29, Issue 7, September
2013, pp-1645–1660, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
[23] C. Weinhardt, A. Anandasivam, B. Blau, and J. Stößer “Business
models in the service world” IT Pro March/April 2009 Publ ished by
the IEEE C omputer Societ y 1520-9202/09, 2009 IEEE, pp-28-33
[24] A. Venkatesh “Smart Home Concepts: Current Trends” CRITO,
doi=10.1.1.125.8597
[25] M.
Shanmugasundaram,
G.
Muthuselvi
and
S.
Sundar,
“
Implementation
of
PIC16F877A
Based
Intelligent
Smart
Home
System, ISSN : 0975-4024 Vol 5 No 2 Apr-May 2013, pp 1608-1624
[26] R. Guha and D. Al-Dabass, “Impact of Web 2.0 and Cloud Computing
Platform on Software Engineering” International Symposium on
Electronic System Design 2010,978-0-7695-4294-2/10 IEEE Computer
Society, 2010, pp 213-218, DOI 10.1109/ISED.2010.48
[27] L. Shulman, “Taking learning seriously, Change: The magzine for
Higher
Learning”,
31:4
March
2010,
pp
10-17,
DOI:10.1080/00091389909602695
[28] N. Jackson. “E-learning material and open access” 18th BILETA
Conference: Controlling Information in the Online Environment, April
2003, QMW London, http://www.bileta.ac.uk/03papers/jackson.html
[29] K. Mentor,”Open source and open access: Alternatives to hidden
learning environments”, 20th annual conference on distance teachning
and learning, http://UNWEX.edu/disted/conference, 2006
[30] J. Jiang “Web-Based Open Access for Wide Learning Platforms” 978-
1-4244-4507-3/09, 2009 IEEE
[31] http://www.nsa.gov/snac,
“Service
Oriented
Architecture
Security
Vulnerabilities Web Services” Systems and Network Analysis Center
Information Assurance Directorate
[32] “Security: Protect Your Service-Oriented Architecture Network” Cisco
Systems 2008, pp1-7.
[33] D. Sancho “Security Guide to social networks” white paper, Trend
Micro
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

