 
 
eParticipation for Lurkers and Stand-by Citizens? 
Evaluating a Norwegian Rapid Feedback eParticipation Solution 
 
Marius Rohde Johannessen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: marius.johannessen@usn.no 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: lasse.berntzen@usn.no
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an evaluation of an 
eParticipation solution for rapid feedback and dialogue between 
citizens and politicians. The solution consists of a mobile 
application with survey-like functionality and a methodology 
for politicians' use of the app. We report the findings from our 
evaluation of a pilot study involving five Norwegian 
municipalities. Our findings clearly show that this type of 
solution has the potential to engage so-called lurkers and 
standby citizens to provide feedback on politicians' concrete 
issues. Further, the solution's complexity level places it between 
existing solutions for open/unstructured debate and more 
complex solutions. Both politicians and participating citizens 
report that they were happy with the pilot results and would like 
to continue using the solution. A test of an extended version of 
the solution is planned in 2021. 
Keywords - eParticipation; implementation; survey; pilot 
study; implicit participation; evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many technological systems have been, and are being, 
developed to further democracy. In the 1990s, open discussion 
forums were popular, but had limited success [1]. In later 
years, we have seen several complex and advanced systems 
designed top-down for decision-makers to receive input on 
concrete issues. The Seventh Framework Program (FP7) of 
the European Union had calls for the development of 
participation systems, and in the early to mid-2010s, many 
different tools were presented in academic journals and 
conferences (See, i.e., [2][3]), along with evaluations of pilot 
projects [4]. The evaluations seem to conclude that such 
systems provide excellent feedback but are also complex and 
time-consuming and struggle to attract enough participants. In 
social media, participation threshold is lower and more people 
discuss politics [5][6]. Still, the quality of communication is 
lacking, and it is difficult to extract meaningful information 
and handle the conversation [7][8]. 
Arguably, there is a need for a middle ground between 
complex tailored systems and social media's anarchy. Hibbing 
and Theiss-Morse argue for what they call "stealth 
democracy" [9], claiming that most people want to be heard 
but are not interested in taking the time to read up on and 
understand complex issues. Instead, they argue that a good 
approach to participation is to ask simple questions about 
issues where citizens can form an opinion without reading 
hundreds of pages of documentation. While stealth democracy 
is an idea situated in a different context from the European and 
Norwegian democratic tradition, it nonetheless provides a 
starting point for discussing the merits of lightweight systems 
as a bridge between traditional deliberation and involvement 
and the sarcastic comments found in social media and news – 
a middle ground in terms of complexity and democratic 
outcome.  
Amnå and Ekman [10] call for research on how we can 
involve citizens with low motivation for time-consuming 
activities. In this paper, we respond to this call by presenting 
findings from an evaluation of a Norwegian eParticipation 
system based on lightweight or stealth democracy ideas. The 
question is if this is a good and effective form of 
eParticipation, engaging otherwise passive citizens. 
This paper's remainder is structured as follows: Section II 
presents related research on democracy models and implicit 
participation. Section III presents our research collection and 
analysis approach, while Section IV summarizes our 
evaluation findings. In Section V, we present the next steps of 
the project and outline some future research avenues.  
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Signs are indicating that liberal democracy is struggling. 
Since 2015, Europe has experienced a major refugee crisis. 
Populists have been elected for president or prime minister 
positions, the yellow vests movement emerged in France, and 
Eastern Europe has seen an increase of "illiberal democracy." 
The Norwegian paper Morgenbladet created a map of 
authoritarian changes in the legal systems of European 
nations, which shows that several countries, including 
Western European ones, are moving away from liberal ideals 
[11]. This trend is aided by social media polarization, fake 
news, bots spreading propaganda, and an increasing number 
of activist websites positioning themselves as alternatives to 
mainstream 
media 
[12][13]. 
The 
so-called 
alt-right 
(alternative right) find each other in online fora, such as 
4chan.org, tumblr.com, and 8kun.top to coordinate campaigns 
against political opponents. Disinformation is an issue high on 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
the European Union agenda [14]. Hence, finding ways of 
engaging citizens is perhaps more important than ever.  
In Norway, most of us still report high trust levels in the 
political system and institutions, but a significant minority is 
less trusting and chooses not to vote in elections [15]. Voter 
turnout is lower among the young, and few are actively trying 
to influence policy. Those who do tend to be in the high 
income/higher education demographic, which typically would 
be labeled as elites [16]. Earlier research shows several 
reasons for non-participation. eParticipation systems need a 
clear purpose and form [17], the concretization of the 
outcomes of participation [18], and feedback mechanisms 
allowing citizens to see the impact of participation [19], and 
failing in these has proven to alienate citizens from using the 
system. 
A. Models of participation and democracy 
eParticipation is defined as a range of actors conducting 
different activities with varying outcomes and effects, 
targeting different democratic ideal-types [20]. Fig. 1 shows 
the relationship between the actors, activities, and outcomes. 
This means that researchers should be clear about the type of 
democracy the system supports when discussing specific 
systems and applications.   
 
 
Figure 1.  eParticipation actors, activities, and outcomes. Based on [20]. 
The activities and outcomes of participation can also be seen 
as a stage model. Arnstein [21] has shown how we can rate 
participation from low (voting, information) to high (direct 
democracy). The purpose of participation, according to 
Arnstein, is to reach as high as possible on what she calls the 
"ladder of participation" to empower citizens as much as 
possible. 
Democracies should involve citizens through elections, 
political parties [22][23], and citizen/politician dialogue in 
various channels and media within the frames of 
representative democracy [24]. There are several models of 
democracy, with different normative criteria for participation. 
One example, proposed by Ferree and colleagues [25], 
describes four different models of democracy; representative 
liberal, participatory liberal, discursive, and constructionist. 
The models outline the amount of citizen participation, based 
on "who should speak, the content of the process (what), style 
of speech preferred (how), and the relationship between 
discourse and decision-making (outcomes) that is sought (or 
feared)." While some countries focus only on voting, others, 
such as Norway, see it as a democratic value that citizens 
engage in dialogue and are involved in decision-making 
between elections (participatory liberal model). Participation 
in the public debate is seen as a value in and of itself 
(Habermasian discursive model). The Norwegian constitution 
(§100, part 6) states that "government is required to facilitate 
open and rational public discourse." Even so, membership in 
political parties is in decline, with only 7 percent of the adult 
population being members of a political party  [26]. Thus, 
there is a need to find new ways of communicating between 
politicians and citizens. We believe the system presented in 
this paper can support the participatory liberal model of 
democracy if politicians wish to do so.   
B. Stealth democracy, lurking or standby citizens 
In their book Stealth Democracy, Hibbing and Theiss-
Morse [9] found that many American citizens were tired of 
politics and political debates as they play out in the media. 
Citizens report being tired of conflict, constant debates, and 
difficult-to-understand political compromise. They have little 
interest in how democracy works in practice and do not wish 
to become too involved. At the same time, citizens want to 
express their opinion and be heard, but without having to 
spend time reading long policy documents or become too 
involved. They are happy to participate in surveys or 
contribute in other ways, such as through FixMyStreet-type 
services related to their areas of interest [27].  
Other researchers also look into the phenomenon of 
passive or observing citizens from a European perspective. 
Edelmann applies the concept of "lurking" – being a passive 
observer, or someone who only participates occasionally but 
is still interested enough to follow the conversation [28]. 
Amnå and Ekman [10] similarly define what they call 
"standby citizens": citizens with high political efficacy and 
interest, but rarely choose to participate actively in political 
discourse. This group chooses not to participate but can 
become active if the situation calls for it. In the Nordic 
countries, youth have both knowledge and skills. Still, they 
report a weaker sense of "participatory attitudes," in other 
words, typical standby or lurking behavior. In less stable and 
wealthy democracies, people report a higher level of 
motivation for engagement [29], perhaps because they see 
participation as a way of improving their living conditions.  
Amnå and Ekman call for research on encouraging the 
standby citizen to become a more active participant [10]. 
Based on the survey of PostLocal, and previous research by 
Cruikshank, Smith, and Edelmann on how other low-
complexity systems can transition citizens from standby to 
active [30], we believe the system presented in this paper can 
contribute to activating standby/lurking/stealthy citizens. It is 
designed as a low complexity/low time demand tool for 
consultation, where politicians ask questions, and the citizens 
answer them. The outcome is increased civic engagement and 
general democratic effects, depending on how the politicians 
decide to use the system. The findings we present below 
indicate that it could be seen as part of a participatory liberal 
model, as citizens are asked their opinion on matters being 
addressed by city councils.  
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
This paper aims to present the initial findings from our 
evaluation of a system for lightweight participation. In 
addressing this, we applied a case study mixed-methods 
approach grounded in interpretivism. Our theoretical lens is 
that of stealth democracy and democracy models, and the 
case is the start-up PostLocal and their system for lightweight 
participation.  
Data collection: The data collection period lasted 
approximately twelve months in 2018-19, covering 
development, implementation, and pilot testing. For the 
development and implementation phases, data is mainly 
qualitative in the form of participant observation [31] in 
project meetings and workshops with municipal, volunteer- 
and private sector stakeholders. Twelve mayors and fifty 
politicians were present in these workshops. We also 
conducted email interviews with politicians in the pilot 
municipalities and informal talks with colleagues researching 
media, democracy, and digitalization. In this process, we had 
an active role in the shaping of the system. For the pilot study, 
we distributed a survey to the pilot participants (N=389), 
receiving 189 answers. We had colleagues in the department 
verify the survey and tested it on five random users before 
distribution.  
Data analysis: The analysis was based on stealth 
democracy and the system creators' idea of reaching those 
who do not normally participate in political processes. Field 
notes and interview questions were structured and coded 
accordingly. For the survey, we relied on literature discussing 
acceptance of technology. We was inspired by the constructs 
in the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) [32], adding trust and demographic variables as 
these have shown to be relevant for technology acceptance 
[33]. Finally, we were curious if gamification, found to be an 
effective incentive in similar applications [34], was important. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
A. Presentation of case and system 
In January 2018, we were approached by a small start-up 
who wanted to discuss the possibilities of a system for 
lightweight democracy. As their ideas corresponded well 
with our previous research, we agreed to provide input based 
on prior research and evaluate the pilot project. PostLocal 
consists of people with a broad background in business, the 
voluntary sector (youth sports), and the media industry. They 
used a local UX (User eXperience)/web company to build the 
app and ecosystem. They focused their efforts on their wide 
network of possible partners. They were extremely active in 
building a network of business-, government-, NGOs (Non-
Governmental Organizations), and political partners, who 
stated their support for the system. This has likely been an 
important factor in the process, from idea to realization.  
PostLocal's objectives for the system were as follows:  
• 
Create a system that would ensure the "silent 
majority" could easily participate in political 
processes. The silent majority was defined as those 
not represented via organizations and rarely raised 
their hand in public meetings. Young citizens were 
targeted as being especially important. 
• 
Develop an app where the mayor can consult with 
citizens on current issues (In practice, it is not the 
mayor that decides on questions, it is more the 
executive council, but citizens relate to the mayor). 
• 
 Citizens should spend no more than two-three 
minutes on each round of questions. 
• 
 So quick and easy to use that it can be done in the 
checkout queue at the supermarket. 
Fig. 2 shows the system architecture, consisting of a 
common database, a back-end system for generating questions 
and analyzing responses, and a mobile app dialogue tool. 
Privacy is built-in, and external consultants have verified the 
GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) compliance of 
the system. 
 
 
Figure 2.  System architecture. 
When logging in to the app, users choose their 
municipality and are greeted by a short video from the mayor, 
informing about the app's intentions and how to use it. Users 
can register to participate in all surveys or surveys on areas of 
interest. Participation is in the form of a simple survey with a 
few questions and the opportunity to reply more in-depth at 
the end. When the survey is completed, users get a "thank you" 
note and an option to contact the mayor with their concerns 
through the app. PostLocal is currently developing this part of 
the system (messages from citizens to politicians), but at the 
time of testing it was just implemented as a simple form.  
Finally, users can see the responses of others. This was an 
important part of the app, as seeing others' opinions can aid 
mutual understanding [35]. After completing a set of 
questions, users get feedback from the mayor on how the 
results are being used (an option in the system, not mandatory 
but 
highly 
recommended). 
The 
methodology 
under 
development includes 1) ideas on how the municipality can 
apply this input, and 2) guidelines and functionality for using 
the system in physical public meetings. This was not ready for 
the pilot but is part of the ongoing work with creating a 
methodology and ecosystem for municipal participation, 
which is the project's ultimate goal. Fig. 3 presents screenshots 
from the app.  
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
Figure 3.  Screenshot from the survey. 
B. Qualitative data from workshops 
The workshops we observed revealed that the general 
issue of participation and democracy needs to be discussed 
more often. Several politicians stated that the workshop's most 
interesting part was that it gave them a space to discuss 
normative and fundamental democratic issues. These are often 
left out of hectic day-to-day politics. Besides, participants 
raised the following issues:  
The need for improved communication: Almost all of 
the participants agreed that there is a need to reach out to a 
broader range of citizens, especially the young citizens and 
those who are not members of the organizations typically 
invited to hand in formal statements to policy processes. A 
small group of often older citizens tends to contact their local 
politicians, raise their hands in public meetings, etc. Several 
politicians say they have tried social media, but the tone and 
style of communication are not fostering a civil and rational 
debate. There was a general agreement that more needs to be 
done to reach the young and the silent, and politicians 
welcomed initiatives, such as PostLocal. 
Ownership and organization: A lot of the discussion was 
related to practical issues, such as ownership, financing, and 
organization. Specifically, participants raised the following 
issues: Who should be invited to participate? Should there be 
a representative panel, or should everyone be invited to 
answer every survey? Ensuring representative and valid 
answers was also an issue. Who should be in control of the 
system and act as the figurehead? This raised heavy debate on 
the pros and cons of having the mayor act as front and 
controlling the questions being asked. This was discussed over 
several workshops, and the consensus seemed to be that 
mayors should front the app, as a human face tends to work 
better than a municipal logo. The internal organization should 
be up to a committee of politicians from the parties 
represented in the municipal government to avoid party 
politics coloring the questions and topics being addressed via 
the app. 
Formulation of questions: Anyone who has attempted to 
create a survey from scratch knows how difficult it is to get 
the questions right. This was also a major area of concern 
among the workshop participants. The consensus was that 
simple questions about what [do you think about…] and how 
[should we handle…] acting as a temperature gauge on issues 
being discussed in the municipal government was the correct 
approach. Several politicians added they wanted to prioritize 
issues high on the agenda in local news and local social media 
groups. Issues of a more ideological nature should be avoided, 
as simple survey questions are less suited to address this type 
of debate. 
Criticism: While most workshop participants were 
positive, some NGOs raised concerns about the democratic 
outcomes of PostLocal's system. They asked what kind of 
democracy this would facilitate. They discussed being heard 
vs. affecting policy outcomes, if the app was any different 
from a regular survey, and if this type of system manages to 
involve those who are not participating and the young.  
As for the type of democracy, the workshops and previous 
research would put this in the "consultation" category. 
PostLocal is not designed to be a deliberative system for the 
reasons mentioned in the theory section. The difference 
between an app and using a polling agency is mostly related 
to costs and time. The system allows for a quick and easy 
round of temperature gauging related to current issues while 
using a polling agency would be more costly and more time-
consuming. The expected outcome of participation and public 
interest is discussed further in the next section. 
C. Survey – feedback from citizen test users 
Background and demographic variables: Gender 
distribution is equal, with 47% female, 53% male respondents. 
When it comes to age distribution, there is a decent spread: 35 
respondents are between 15-24 years old. 56 between 25 and 
39, 56 between 40 and 54, and 36 are 55 years or older. 
Crosstab-analysis of age shows that age has little impact on 
the recorded responses. Young citizens are somewhat more 
active social media users and more positive towards 
gamification, while the older groups are more likely to sign a 
petition. Young adults (25-39) are the least politically active. 
When implementing the pilot, we found that youth in high 
school were the ones most positive towards the app, as they 
started out with little interest in both the app and politics, but 
in the end, was the group who was most positive – contacting 
the mayor and PostLocal to have more questions pushed out 
more frequently. 
Our sample has a somewhat higher education level 
compared to the total Norwegian population [38], especially 
for the master's level (sample: 29%, population in 2019: 
10.3%).  
The respondents are also somewhat more politically active 
than the general population. 5% of the general population have 
written a political letter to the newspaper, vs. 13% of the 
respondents. 6% have attended a demonstration, vs. 8% of the 
respondents. 12% of the general population and 25% of our 
respondents say they have directly contacted a politician. Our 
questions differ from those of Statistics Norway, as we wanted 
a more detailed overview of political activity. However, the 
comparison still indicates that our respondents are somewhat 
more educated and politically active compared to the 
Norwegian population. Even so, most of our respondents are 
in the silent majority category, as they claim not to be 
politically active. 
Gamification as a motivational factor: Gamification 
was discussed in both workshops and project meetings. 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Existing studies of gamification show varying results but lean 
towards a positive direction (see, e.g., [34][36]). Our data do 
not provide a definite answer, as 34% are positive towards 
gamification, 37% are neutral, and 30% claim they do not see 
gamification as a motivational factor. However, age plays a 
role here, with 58% of the youngest respondents agreeing 
(somewhat or fully) that gamification is a motivational factor. 
At the same time, the 40+ group is neutral to negative and 55+ 
leaning even more towards negative.  Fig. 4 shows the 
distribution of answers for the different age groups. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Age and gamification as a motivational factor. 
Attitudes to personalization: Another important element 
that emerged from the workshop discussions was using the 
mayor as the front of the app vs. using the municipality logo. 
This was heavily debated, with politicians having strong 
opinions for and against. We chose to have the mayor present 
the app for the pilot, as there is a general trend towards politics 
becoming more person-oriented [37]. 70% of the respondents 
saw it as positive that the mayor's face was the first thing to 
greet them in the app. 65% also respond positively to the 
statement: "the mayor is a unifying force in my municipality." 
In Norway, mayors are expected to be mayor first and party 
member second; this seems to be the case in the five pilot 
municipalities.  
Expectations towards outcome: As previous research 
has shown [18], being clear about the outcome of participation 
is important. As this was a pilot test, we were more concerned 
about mapping citizens' expectations in later full-scale use. 
65% of the respondents reported that they expect the app 
outcome as "being heard and taken into account as part of the 
formal hearing process in policymaking," with only 6% 
expecting their input to have a direct consequence. 29% had 
no expectations whatsoever or were unsure what to expect.  
Trust and intention to use: Trust, or a lack of trust, is one 
possible explanation for the current wave of populism and 
anti-elitist sentiment [15]. Our respondents are in line with the 
general population and show high levels of trust in local 
politicians and information from local government. Trust is 
positively correlated with respondents' intention to continue 
using the system. When asked if they intend to continue using 
the app if it becomes available after the pilot, 70% somewhat 
or fully agree that they would like this, while 25% are 
neutral/unsure. While there is some uncertainty about how this 
translates to the general population, this is still a good number, 
which shows a need and a market for this type of system.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented a selection of the 
findings from evaluating a system for lightweight 
participation. Our findings indicate that the test users were 
mostly happy with the system and have moderate 
expectations about how their input should be used (in line 
with representative democratic ideals). A majority are clear 
that they would like to use the system if it becomes available. 
Section IV B illustrates the complexity of eParticipation, 
even for a lightweight tool, such as this. Expectations, 
outcome, organization, and use are important factors that 
each municipality needs to define.  
The literature review indicates that there is a link 
between system complexity and outcome. Systems with high 
complexity and time demands from the user have potentially 
valuable outcomes but few users. Systems that are easy to use 
have more users. Still, the democratic outcome is "lower" on 
a scale ranging from voting (requires little of the user) to 
deliberation and active participation (requires much of the 
user). Table 1, using Arnstein's "ladder of participation" [21] 
as a measure, illustrates this relationship. 
 
TABLE I. PARTICIPATION LEVEL IN RELATION TO SYSTEM COMPLEXITY 
 
Participation level 
Low: Voting  
 
High: Deliberation 
System 
complexity 
Low complexity/time  
High complexity/time 
 
We argue that the system presented here has the potential 
to be a missing link between the open and unstructured debate 
found in social media and the more tailored and complex 
systems for participation. This acts as a middle-ground on the 
participation level/system complexity scale presented above. 
This supports a participatory liberal model where citizens are 
involved between elections [25]. 
Lightweight, "stealth" participation in the form of 
surveys, data analysis through sensors or apps, such as 
FixMyStreet, allow citizens to participate in a way that gives 
valuable insights to decision-makers without having to spend 
too much time and effort. Over the past few years, we have 
participated in several studies examining how lightweight 
participation can contribute to democracy. While this does 
not contribute directly to a discursive type of democracy [25], 
we still argue that this form of participation has a place in 
democratic practice. The workshops we attended indicate that 
we should rather see this as one important part of a broader 
set of tools for local democracy and perhaps as a way of 
activating the standby/lurking citizen. 
The project will continue in its second phase, starting fall 
2020. In future work, we will have to work harder to reach a 
sample in line with the general population to ensure validity 
and verify the pilot's results. Further, we intend to dig deeper 
into personalization and gamification as motivational factors 
Fully agree Somewhat
agree
Neutral
Somewhat
disagree
Fully
disagree
55+
40-54
25-39
15-24
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
through workshops and possibly track use in gamified vs. non-
gamified situations. The extent to which the system manages 
to activate standby citizens and act as a bridge towards more 
discourse-based participation given the right methodology, is 
a further avenue for future research. We expect to build on the 
experiences from the pilot to create a methodology and 
framework for use by municipalities and to examine the extent 
to which this type of tool has an impact on local policymaking. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was partially funded by a grant from the 
Oslofjord Regional Research Fund for the pilot project "Tools 
for dialog and methodology for citizen participation in local 
democracy," project number 289252. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ø. Sæbø, J. Rose, and J. Molka-Danielsen, "eParticipation: 
Designing and Managing Political Discussion Forums," Social 
Science Computer Review, vol. 28(4), pp. 403-426, 2010. 
[2] A. De Liddo and S. B. Shum, "New ways of deliberating 
online: An empirical comparison of network and threaded 
interfaces for online discussion," E. Tambouris, A. Macintosh, 
and F. Bannister (eds.) Electronic Participation. ePart 2014. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8654, Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 90-101, 2014. 
[3] L. Porwol, A. Ojo, and J. Breslin, "A semantic deliberation 
model for e-Participation," Proc. 15th Annual International 
Conference on Digital Government Research (dg. o' 14), pp. 
263-272, 2014. 
[4] A. Taudes and H. Leo, "Determinants of the Willingness to 
Contribute to an eConsultation," Joint Proceedings of Ongoing 
Research, Posters, Workshop and Projects of IFIP EGOV 2014 
and ePart 2014, IOS Press, pp. 13-19, 2014. 
[5] G. S. Enli and E. Skogerbø, "Personalized campaigns in party-
centred politics: Twitter and Facebook as arenas for political 
communication," Information, Communication & Society, vol. 
16(5), pp. 757-774, 2013. 
[6] E. Elvestad and M. R. Johannessen, "Facebook and local 
newspapers' effect on local politicians' popularity," Northern 
Lights Film and Media Studies Yearbook, vol. 15, Intellect, pp. 
33-50,  2017. 
[7] M. R. Johannessen, "Genres of Participation in Social 
Networking Systems: A Study of the 2017 Norwegian 
Parliamentary Election," N. Edelmann, P. Parycek, G. 
Misuraca, P. Panagiotopoulos, Y.  Charalabidis, and S. Virkar 
(eds.) Electronic Participation. ePart 2018. Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, vol. 11021, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
pp. 64-75, 2018. 
[8] S. R. Majumdar, "The case of public involvement in 
transportation planning using social media," Case Studies on 
Transport Policy., vol. 5(1), pp. 121-133, 2017. 
[9] J. R. Hibbing and E. Theiss-Morse, "Stealth Democracy: 
Americans' Beliefs About How Government Should Work," 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. 
[10] E. Amnå and J. Ekman, "Standby citizens: diverse faces of 
political passivity," European Political Science Review, vol. 
6(2), pp. 261-281, 2014. 
[11] H. Ø. Jakobsen, M. B. Reinertsen, C. Belgaux, and S. 
Indregard. “Lovendringer i Europa som svekker demokratiet, 
(Legislative changes in Europe weakens democracy),” 
Morgenbladet 2019.03.22, 2019. 
[12] C. R. Sunstein, "Republic divided: Divided democracy in the 
age of social media," Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
2018. 
[13] H. Allcott and M. Gentzkow, "Social media and fake news in 
the 2016 election," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 
31(2), pp. 211-236, 2017. 
[14] European Commission High Representative of the Union for 
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, "Joint Communication to 
the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the 
Committee of the Regions.  Report on the implementation of 
the Action Plan Against Disinformation," JOIN(2019) 12 final, 
2019. 
[15] Ø. Kleven, “Nordmenn på tillitstoppen i Europa, (Norwegians 
are most trusting in Europe,” Samfunnsspeilet, 2/2016, 
Statistics Norway, 2016. 
[16] M. L. With, “Politiske ressurser og deltakelse,” Slik har vi det 
-  livskvalitet og levekår, 2017 edition, Statistics Norway, 
2017. 
[17] R. Hurwitz, "Who needs politics? Who needs people? The 
ironies of democracy in cyberspace," H. Jenkins, and D.  
Thorburn (eds.) Democracy and new media, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, pp. 101-112, 2003. 
[18] A. Kolsaker and L. L. Kelly, "Citizens' attitudes towards e-
government and e-governance: a UK study," International 
Journal on Public Sector Management , vol. 21(3), pp. 723-738, 
2008. 
[19] A. Kolsaker, "Third Way e-Government: The Case for Local 
Devolution," M. Böhlen, J. Gamper, W. Polasek, and M. 
Wimmer (eds.), Proc. E-Government: Towards Electronic 
Democracy (TCGOV 2005), Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 3416, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 70-80, 
2005. 
[20] Ø. Sæbø, J. Rose, and L. Skiftenes Flak, "The shape of 
eparticipation: Characterizing an emerging research area," 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 25(3), pp. 400-428, 
2008. 
[21] S. R. Arnstein, "A Ladder Of Citizen Participation," Journal of 
the American Institute of Planners, vol. 35(4), pp. 216-224, 
1969. 
[22] J. Dewey, "The Public and its Problem," Swallow Press/Ohio 
University Press, Athens, 1927. 
[23] F. E. Oppenheim, "democracy — characteristics included and 
excluded," The Monist,  vol. 55(1), pp. 29-50 , 1971. 
[24] C. Brooks and J. Manza, "Why welfare states persist: The 
importance of public opinion in democracies," University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 2007. 
[25] M. M. Ferree, W. A. Gamson, J. Gerhards, and D. Rucht, "Four 
models of the public sphere in modern democracies," Theory 
and Society 31(3), pp. 289-324,  2002. 
[26] Statistics Norway, "Få aktive medlemmer i politiske partier, 
(Few active members of political parties)," [Online]. Available 
from:https://www.ssb.no/kultur-og-fritid/artikler-og-
publikasjoner/fa-aktive-medlemmer-i-politiske-partier 
2020.11.01 
[27]  L. Berntzen, M. R. Johannessen, S. Böhm, C. Weber, and R. 
Morales, "Citizens as sensors: Human sensors as a smart city 
data source," Proc. Seventh International Conference on Smart 
Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies (SMART 2018), 
pp. 11-18, 2018. 
[28] N. Edelmann, "Reviewing the definitions of "lurkers" and some 
implications for online research," Cyberpsychology, Behavior 
and Social Networking, vol. 16(9), pp. 645-649, 2013. 
[29] B. Hoskins, C. Villalba, and M. Saisana, "The 2011 civic 
competence composite indicator (CCCI-2): measuring young 
people's civic competence across Europe based on the IEA 
international citizenship and civic education study," European 
Commission Joint Research Centre, Institute for the Protection 
and Security of the Citizen, 2012. 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
[30] P. Cruickshank, N. Edelmann, and C. F. Smith, "Signing an e-
petition as a transition from lurking to participation," J. 
Chappellet, O. Glassey, M. Janssen, A. Macintosh, J. Scholl, 
E. Tambouris, and M. Wimmer (eds.), Electronic Government 
and Electronic Participation, Trauner, pp. 275-282, 2010. 
[31] H. S. Becker and B. Geer, "Participant observation and 
Interviewing: A Comparison," Human Organization, vol. 
16(3), pp. 28-32, 1957. 
[32] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F.D. Davis, 
"User acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified 
view," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27(3), pp. 425-478, 2003. 
[33] M. Naranjo Zolotov, T. Oliveira, and S. Casteleyn, "E-
participation adoption models research in the last 17 years: A 
weight and meta-analytical review," Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 81, pp. 350-365, 2018. 
[34] J. E. Coronado Escobar, A. R. Vasquez Urriago, 
"Gamification: an effective mechanism to promote civic 
engagement and generate trust?" Proc. 8th International 
Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, 
ACM, pp. 514-515, 2014. 
[35] S. Indregard, “Det som skiller oss (og ikke), (What divides us 
(and not)),” Morgenbladet 2019.05.31, 2019. 
[36] H. Nothhaft and J. Seiffert, "The Gamification of Democracy," 
W. T. Coombs, J. Falkheimer, M. Heide, and P. Young (eds.) 
Strategic Communication, Social Media and Democracy. 
Taylor & Francis Group,  pp. 130-142, 2015. 
[37] I. McAllister, "The personalization of politics," The Oxford 
handbook of political behavior. Oxford University Press, 2007. 
[38] Statistics Norway, "Befolkningens Utdanningsnivå, (The 
Education Level of the Population)," [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ssb.no/utniv/ 2020.11.01 
 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

