Research on Criteria for Personal Information Collection Consent Based on Trust
Goo Yeon Lee
Dept. of Computer and Communication Eng.
Kangwon National University
Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do, Korea
email: leegyeon@kangwon.ac.kr
Hwa Jong Kim
Dept. of Computer and Communication Eng.
Kangwon National University
Chuncheon-si, Gangwon-do, Korea
email: hjkim@kangwon.ac.kr
Abstract—In this paper, we study the criteria for determining
whether to provide personal information to a service provider
based on its trust. The study analyzes the relation between the
service provider’s trust, the profit gained from subscribing to
the service, the expected loss of the potential personal
information leakage or misuse, and the activation cost. The
analyzed results will be useful for the development of an
automated personal information consent algorithm in the
future.
Keywords-trust; personal information; consent; collection.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND RELATED WORK
Generally, when a user wants to use a specific service
related to the individual, a personal information collection
procedure is performed by the service provider. In case of
offline,
the
consent
process
for
collecting
personal
information is signed face-to-face. In the online case, the
user
understands
the
terms
of
processing
personal
information through a screen of a computer or a smart phone,
and the consent or rejection indication thereof is performed.
However, when we actually agree to the collection of
personal information, we worry about whether our personal
information may be misused later and some loss occurs.
In many cases, the confidence in a service provider is
determined based on its reputation or the past experience of
using other services from the provider. However, some users
may consent without any prior knowledge of a service
provider, which is recommended to avoid because there is a
risk of personal information abuse such as voice phishing.
Recently, a lot of researches have been made to measure
and utilize mutual or objective trust in the exchange of
information between various entities on the Internet. If trusts
from different entities on the Internet can be developed and
quantified, these trusts can be used when providing personal
information to service providers for using specific services.
There are many research and standardization efforts on
trust. International Standardization of Trust Technology in
ITU-T SG13 and ITU-T Y.3052 document [1] classify trust
into direct trust such as belief, faith, confidence and
dependence,
and
indirect
trust,
such
as
reputation,
recommendation, expectation and experience. In addition,
trust
value
evaluation
methods
based
on
knowledge,
experience and reputation have been proposed [2][3] and
several studies related to trust have been conducted [4].
However, it is considered that there has not been any
research on the trust combined with the consent for
providing personal information when joining services.
When a trust is applied to the service provider that
collects personal information, the user can make a decision
on whether to provide personal information based on the
trust. However, trust cannot be 100% certain, so no matter
how high the trust is, there is a possibility of personal
information leakage and misuse. Therefore, there is a
tradeoff between the benefit of using the service and the
potential loss from personal information leakage and misuse.
Accordingly, it is necessary to make an optimal decision to
ensure that the benefit can be greater than the potential loss.
In this study, we analyze the criteria for judging whether to
provide personal information by quantifying the benefit
obtained
from
the
service
and
the
risk
of
personal
information exposure and abuse based on the trust of the
service provider.
In this paper, we perform an analysis in Section 2 and
discuss results in Section 3. Finally, we draw a conclusion in
Section 4.
II.
ANALYSIS MODEL
In this section, we analyze the relation between the
benefit from using the service and the potential loss due to
the exposure or misuse of personal information based on the
trust. The followings are definitions of parameters used in
this section.
T : It indicates the trust of a provider. It has a value between
0 and 1. A trust of 1 represents the case where the trust is
100%, and 0 represents the case where there is no trust at all.
This value is estimated by a trust model. We expect that
some trust rating companies like the existing credit rating
companies will be formed and users may obtain the trust
information of providers from the companies.
R : It presents the risk to be taken by providing personal
information. This can be expressed as a function of
provider's trust. It has a value from 0 to 1, and has a value of
0 when there is no risk at all and a value of 1 when the risk is
100%.
P : It represents the service profit that a user obtains from
using the service. This value may be specified by a user, but
a normal value can be recommended as the service is settled.
L : It shows the expected loss if the user's personal
information is exposed or misused. This value may be
specified by a user, or may use the amount of the court's
reimbursement decision for recent personal information
leakage.
C : It represents the activation cost. The user does not use the
service immediately just because the service profit is greater
than the expected loss. Basically, the net profit must be
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

above the activation cost. This value is different depending
on the user's disposition and situation.
We consider the risk R for the service provider according
to the trust(T). If T is 1, it has 100% confidence and R=0.
And if T is 0, it is 100% dangerous and R=1. In general, risk
decreases sharply as trust increases from zero, and gradually
decreases after some confidence. In other words, risk is
convex down when trust changes from 0 to 1. There are
many relations that satisfy these conditions, but we choose
the following approach. The exponential function is suitable
as a function that satisfies these characteristics. If the
boundary condition of R = 1 when T = 0 and R = 0 when T=1
is applied, we suggest the following relation.
ܴ =
௘షಲ೅ି௘షಲ
ଵି௘షಲ
,
(1)
where A is a characteristic constant representing the
confidence sensitivity. When A is larger, the risk has smaller
value even at the same trust value. On the contrary, when A
becomes
small,
it represents
a
situation
of judicious
judgment. In Figure 1, we give a graph of the relationship
between T and R when A is 1, 3 and 5. The measurement of
A value is outside the scope of this study, so it may be
determined sociologically or economically. We expect that
trust rating companies will assess the characteristics of a
country or society to determine its confidence sensitivity and
provide it to users.
Figure 1.
Relation between T and R when A=1, 3 and 5
The user subscribes to the service only when the net
profit after subtracting the expected loss from the profit is
greater than the activation cost. Here, we use the value of
risk R as the probability that personal information will be
exposed or misused. Therefore, when the following formula
is established, the user provides consent in the agreement
procedure to the service provider.
ܲ −ܮ∙ܴ≥ܥ(2)
Substituting (1) into (2) gives the following equation:
ܲ −ܮ∙
௘షಲ೅ି௘షಲ
ଵି௘షಲ
≥ܥ(3)
Solving (3) with respect to T, we get
ܶ ≥ −
ଵ
஺ ln
(௉ି஼)൫ଵି௘షಲ൯ା௅௘షಲ
௅
(4)
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
From (3) and (4), we have ܲ୫୧୬ =ܥ+ܮ when T=0 and
ܲ୫୧୬ =ܥ when T=1. That is, the value of P is meaningful
when it exists in the interval between C and C + L. In Figure
2, we give the graph of minimum trust as P varies when C =
5000KRW(Korean won) and L = 10000KRW. Parameter A
was assigned a value of 3.
When P=5000, the profit P from signing up for the
service is just equal to C = 5000. In the case, there is no
reason to join the service if there is any risk. That means the
user can join only if there is no risk of personal information
leakage or misuse. When P = 15000, there remains
5000KRW even if 100% loss (L=10000) is assumed. In this
case, even if there is a 100% loss of personal information
leakage or abuse, motivation for signing up is sufficient. In
addition, we can see that when P = 6000, the minimum trust
should be about 0.649. However, when P = 11000, the
customer will sign up for the service even if the trust is
lowered to 0.161.
Figure 2.
Minimum trust as P varies when C = 5000KRW, L = 10000
KRW and A =3
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we study the case where a user provides
personal information to a service provider. In the study, we
define the provider's risk based on its trust, and then derive
the decision equation for the personal information collection
consent by analyzing the profit gained when subscribing the
service and the expected loss of the provider's personal
information leakage or misuse. The analyzed results will be
useful
for
the
consent
decision
to
provide
personal
information at the time of subscription.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Institute for Information &
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded
by the Korea government (Ministry of Science and ICT)
(No.2018-0-00261, GDPR Compliant Personally Identifiable
Information Management Technology for IoT Environment).
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

REFERENCES
[1]
Telecommunication Standardization Sector of ITU, ITU-T Y.3052:
Overview of trust provisioning in information and communication
technology
infrastructures
and
services,
Mar.
2017.
Online:
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.3052/en [accessed Jan. 2020]
[2]
N. B. Truong, T. Um, B. Zhou, and G. M. Lee, “Strengthening the
Blockchain-Based
Internet
of
Value
with
Trust,”
2018
IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2018, pp.1-7.
[3]
F. Alam and A. Paul, “A computational model for trust and reputation
relationship in social network,” 2016 International Conference on
Recent Trends in Information Technology (ICRTIT), 2016, pp.1-6.
[4]
M. Jäger, S. Nadschläger, and J. Küng, “Concepts for Trust
Propagation in Knowledge Processing Systems - A Brief Introduction
and Overview,” 2018 17th IEEE International Conference On Trust,
Security And Privacy In Computing And Communications/ 12th
IEEE
International
Conference
On
Big
Data
Science
And
Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE), 2018, pp.1502-1505.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

