Mapping Features of Smartphone on Consumer Behavior Model toward O2O2O
Shoichi Morimoto
School of Business Administration
Senshu University
Kanagawa, Japan
morimo@isc.senshu-u.ac.jp
Kaori Nagahata
School of Business Administration
Senshu University
Kanagawa, Japan
kaori555.n@gmail.com
Abstract—The smartphone has become a popular choice
among mobile phones all over the world. Smartphones can
provide more advanced services than feature phones can.
They have also changed the way users perform information
search and distribution. Consumers can access information
and enterprises can distribute information via the Internet
with smartphones anytime and anywhere. Thus, the spread
of smartphones has caused revolutionary changes in consumer
behavior and in enterprises’ approach to consumers. Therefore,
we have analyzed such changes based on actual services using
smartphones and have systematized smartphone features with
traditional consumer behavior theories. The mapping proposes
a vision of what services using smartphones should be from
the viewpoint of consumers.
Keywords-O2O; GPS; NFC; AR
I. INTRODUCTION
A smartphone is a mobile phone that offers an advanced
operating system and compares favorably with a laptop
computer. Modern smartphones have various functions; e.g.,
media player, digital camera, global positioning system
(GPS) navigation unit, near ﬁeld communication (NFC), and
touch screen. The most important feature to be noted is
a smartphone’s ability to can display standard web pages
as well as mobile-optimized sites. People can easily obtain
information they are looking for via the Internet using a
smartphone anywhere they go [9]. Therefore, users’ behav-
ior, especially in transactions, has changed drastically with
the use of these devices [7].
A consumer can compare prices of a product in a real
store using a smartphone. A consumer can also search the
route map from the current location to the store which sells
the product at the lowest price. On the other side of the
commercial transaction, an enterprise can send advertising to
a consumer according to his/her location. For instance, when
a store holds a sale event, it can broadcast an advertisement
announcing the event to the smartphones of consumers in
proximity of the store. Thus, consumer behavior is changing
through functions of smartphones.
Due to these changes, enterprises’ approaches to con-
sumers are also changing. Enterprises are trying to lead
consumers to real stores to make purchases in their stores
through various online services over the Internet using
smartphones. One such service is called Online to Ofﬂine
(O2O). O2O2O also denotes that consumers go back and
forth between online and ofﬂine status.
It is not a premise that O2O is implemented by the use of
smartphones. However, most O2O services are implemented
through functions of a smartphone. The spread of smart-
phone use has triggered the expansion of O2O businesses. It
has also broken down the borders between the real world and
the Internet. The approach of consumers using smartphones
is becoming more important for enterprises. Enterprises are
being pressured to respond to changes in consumer behavior.
That is, they must provide attractive and novel services
using smartphones after obtaining understanding of modern
consumer behavior.
Many studies and models of online consumer behavior
have been performed [3][6][8]; however, there are no studies
of consumer behavior of O2O-specialized smartphone fea-
tures. Therefore, we attempt to examine the features/services
of smartphones within the consumer behavior model. First,
we have surveyed actual services using smartphones and
analyzed changes in consumer behavior and the response
from enterprises. Based on this survey, we have related
the features to elements of the consumer behavior model
and made a map of the relationships found. This map
can help enterprises to capture with certainty a consumer’s
motivations within the O2O generation.
II. THE FEATURES OF SMARTPHONES
We herein enumerate and explain the major features of
smartphones. Modern smartphones have the following de-
vices in addition to telephone, e-mail, and Internet browsing.
NFC is a form of contactless communication between
devices. Contactless communication enables a user to wave
his or her smartphone over a NFC-compatible device to send
information without physical contact between the devices or
going through multiple steps to set up a connection. NFC is
a set of short-range wireless technologies, typically requiring
a distance of 1.6 inches or less. NFC-enabled devices can be
used in contactless payment systems, similar to those cur-
rently used in credit cards and electronic money smartcards,
and enable mobile payment to replace or supplement these
systems.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Table I
THE MAP AMONG ELEMENTS OF THE CONSUMER BEHAVIOR MODEL, PURCHASING PROCESSES, AND SMARTPHONE FEATURES
Consumer
behavior
Purchasing process
Smartphone services/applications
Smartphone
features
Funds access
Payments
NFC, App
Rewards/CLO (Card linked offers) NFC, App
Customer loyalty
All
Digital coupons
All
Store contact
In-store marketing
NFC, App
Bar code scanners
Camera
Digital coupons
NFC
Payments
NFC, App
Point of sale
NFC, App
eReceipts
App
Consumption and disposition
䠉
䠉
Communication
Social media
App
㻿㼏㼍㼚㼚㼑㼞
㻭㻾
㻳㻼㻿
㻺㻲㻯
㻹㼑㼙㼛㼞㼥
㻭㼏㼠㼕㼛㼚
㼏㼍㼙㼑㼞㼍
㼟㼑㼚㼟㼛㼞
Information contact
Transaction
All
All
App
Market research/data analytics
Digital commerce
Web browsing
Store selection
Product contact
Action
Attention
Interest
Desire
Memory
GPS is one of the more frequently overlooked enhance-
ments in consumer technology. GPS on smartphones is no
longer an emerging trend; it’s almost a must-have feature
today, and more and more handsets offer it. With the
embedded GPS receiver and a mapping service, we can get
real-time position tracking, graphic-guided directions, and
points of interest.
Most smartphones have a digital camera function that can
capture both still photographs and video. Today, the tech-
nology on new smartphones has leapt forward enormously
with better quality lenses, shooting modes, zoom functions,
and even image enhancement built right in. There are many
epoch-making applications with the camera; e.g., bar code
scanner and Augmented Reality (AR). The bar code scanner
application using the smartphone’s camera can capture the
UPC or EAN bar code on a product in any store. The
user then relies on the application to search the Internet for
reviews of the product, places to buy, and the best pricing
available.
AR is a live, direct or indirect, view of a physical,
real-world environment whose elements are augmented by
computer-generated sensory input such as sound, video,
graphics, or GPS data. For instance, Google Sky Map will
appeal to stargazers and astronomers of all skill levels. The
user simply points his or her phone at the sky and identiﬁes a
legion of constellations, stars, and planets. Upon moving the
camera around, the information will change in accordance
with the coordinates. AR can be used to display certain
products in many other ways.
III. RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN SMARTPHONE FEATURES
AND CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
The consumer takes control of his or her in-store shopping
experience through the use of smartphone applications.
Consumers are using these features to access highly targeted
offers, decide when and where to shop, compare product
pricing and features, and even make purchases.
Many consumer behavior models can be applied for
the Internet, ubiquitous, and mobile society. However, the
consumer behavior in the O2O generation can be explained
using traditional (ofﬂine behavior) theories, because the
purpose of O2O is making a consumer purchase within
a physical store in the end. O2O does not make a clear
distinction between online behavior and ofﬂine behavior.
Thus, we systematize the major features and services of a
smartphone using the AIDMA model [5] and the purchasing
model of overt consumer behavior [2].
The 13 O2O key technologies have been listed by Gridley
& Company LLC as follows [4]:
1) Market Research/Data Analytics
2) Payments
3) Point of Sale (POS)
4) In-Store Marketing
5) Integrated Systems
6) Bar Code Scanners
7) Digital Coupons
8) Rewards/CLO (Card Linked Offers)
9) Customer Loyalty
10) Traditional Coupons
11) Account Marketing
12) Digital Commerce
13) eReceipts
For the purposes of mapping, we have used only the tech-
nologies relevant to smartphone use. Table I shows the map
of the relationships of O2O technologies with features of
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

smartphones and elements of consumer behavior.
The ﬁrst step of the purchasing process, information
contact, demonstrates the importance of shops and products
publicizing themselves or making themselves known to the
market. Consumers search information via the Internet using
smartphones, and retailers provide applications focused on
digital commerce and Internet marketing. In the second
element, funds access, retailers provide various means of
payment; e.g., e-money by NFC and applications for online
payment with credit cards. In the third aspect, store selection,
stores have to make themselves attractive in order to be
selected, using such methods as online-distributed digital
coupons, loyalty programs, and services of CLO (Card-
Linked Offers).
In the fourth aspect, store contact, retailers can push their
recommended information to the smartphones of consumers
as a form of in-store marketing. The ﬁfth step, product
contact, involves consumers weighing the beneﬁts of buying
a product from one store against another store through
web browsing or applications using bar code scanners.
Consumers also seek lower prices and discount services, like
in-store-distributed digital coupons by NFC.
In the sixth step, transaction, retailers focus on providing
convenient payment methods. Moreover, retailers should
develop the appropriate infrastructure, not only for collecting
and processing payments, but also for storing customer
payment information (e.g., customer’s purchase history, POS
data) to ensure pleasant shopping and the assortment of
products. In the seventh and eighth steps, customers review
products, thus providing valuable information for other
shoppers. Customer reviews through avenues like social
media are considered the most effective way of mobilizing
consumers to “talk up” products online.
IV. DISCUSSION
As mentioned above, the O2O consumer behavior can be
mapped with the features and services of smartphones. We
have validated the map by the case study of actual smart-
phone services. For example, the map explains consumer
behavior with a smartphone application AisleBuyer [1]. This
application offers convenient in-store shopping with the use
of the bar code scanner. With AisleBuyer, retailers enable
consumers quickly and easily to access detailed product
information and instantly make a purchase without waiting
in line, all while standing in the store using a smartphone. By
scanning product bar codes or browsing the store’s product
catalog, shoppers can instantly ﬁnd the information they
need to make the best purchasing decisions, resulting in
a higher conversion rate and deeper customer satisfaction.
AisleBuyer enables shoppers to skip checkout lines or even
self-serve checkouts by paying with their credit card directly
on their smartphones. Consumers can also search nearby
member stores of AisleBuyer and access information about
14 
27 
16 
14 
11 
32 
39 
9 
6 
16 
15 
6 
1 
21 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 1.
The number of O2O cases using each smartphone application
their products with GPS. This application faithfully traces
the process of the map.
Moreover, we have surveyed 73 cases of O2O with
smartphones and gathered the statistics of the features on
the map. Figure 1 shows the number of the cases using the
smartphone services/applications on the map. In the graph,
the online digital coupon is the most frequent service used by
enterprises to activate the O2O actions of consumers. The
majority of the enterprises have distributed online digital
coupons (in the Internet) to potential ofﬂine customers (in
the real store) via smartphones. This fact also backs up that
store selection is the most important step in the purchasing
process for O2O.
In contrast, the in-store services with smartphones after
store selection have currently not been popular. The enter-
prises are quite free from care when potential customers
come to the real store. However, in the near future, they
will have to provide these in-store services in order to
differentiate among the competing stores when O2O spread
in a larger scale and removes the distinction between the
real store and the Internet shopping site. To aim the real
O2O, retailers should give customers incentives for visiting
real stores. Moreover, the data which is gathered in the O2O
process is not effectively used for marketing at the moment
(see the bars of Market research/data analytics and Point of
sale in Figure 1). The features of smartphones (e.g., GPS,
NFC) in addition to the usual Internet technologies enable
sellers to grasp detailed movement of customers both in
online and in ofﬂine (e.g., the ﬂow/trafﬁc line or the behavior
pattern of purchasers). Enterprises should utilize such “big
data” which is obtained in the O2O process for the further
O2O activities. This cycle can be an iterative management
method used in business for the continuous improvement of
the O2O processes. It follows from what has been said that
eReceipts will be the particularly key service.
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 2.
The virtual store of Tesco in the South Korea subway platform
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we have proposed a consumer behavior
model related to the use of smartphone features. Moreover,
we have surveyed 73 cases of O2O and discussed the actual
situation of O2O and the proposals for the future. The
spread of smartphone use has changed consumer behavior
and implemented practical O2O services. In order to achieve
success, each enterprise must develop and provide a novel
service according to purpose they aim to fulﬁll. For example,
if improving name recognition is one company’s purpose,
the enterprise has only to develop an application focusing
on offering users its contact information through GPS. Thus,
the map supports changes in how retailers should behave
during the O2O generation. Furthermore, enterprises can
plan an unerring O2O strategy leading to O2O2O through
consumers’ smartphone use based on the map.
The ultimate goal of O2O2O is to establish competitive
advantage. Nowadays retailers consider O2O2O services as
advanced marketing strategies and aim to expand range of
customers and business spheres by them. For example, the
major British supermarket chain Tesco opened virtual stores
in the South Korea subway platform (Figure 2). Tesco, as
compared with the other supermarkets, is inferior in the
number of the real stores, however, Tesco succeeds in an
exploitative monopoly lock on commuters to provide novel
customer experience of shopping with this service. We be-
lieve that the map help enterprises to create such innovative
services with smartphones and their dissemination.
REFERENCES
[1] (2012)
The
AisleBuyer
website.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.aislebuyer.com/
[2] R. D. Blackwell, P. W. Miniard, and J. F. Engle, Consumer
Behavior, 10th ed., Boston, MA: South-Western College Pub-
lishing, 2005.
[3] C. M. K. Cheung, L. Zhu, T. Kwong, G. W. W. Chan, and M.
Limayem, “Online consumer behavior: a review and agenda
for future research,” in Proc. of the 16th Bled eCommerce
Conference, 2003, pp. 194-218.
[4] Gridley & Company. (2012, Mar.) POS goes digital: evolution
of the in-store shopping experience. [Online]. Available:
http://www.gridleyco.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/
2012/03/POS-Goes-Digital-Evolution-of-the-In-Store-
Shopping-Experience1.pdf
[5] S. R. Hall, Retail Advertising and Selling. New York, NY:
Facsimiles-Garl, 1985.
[6] N. Li and P. Zhang, “Consumer online shopping attitudes and
behavior: an assessment of research,” in Proc. of the Eighth
Americas Conference on Information Systems, 2002, pp. 508-
517.
[7] W. K. Tan, Y. D. Yeh, S. J. Chen, Y. C. Lin, and C.
Y. Kuo, “How consumers assess product’s features?: a case
study of product features of smartphone,” in Proc. of the 6th
international conference on Applied Mathematics, Simulation,
Modelling, 2012, pp. 131-137.
[8] L. Zhou, L. Dai, and D. Zhang, “Online shopping acceptance
model –a critical survey of consumer factors in online shop-
ping,” Journal of Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 8, no.
1, pp. 41-62, 2007.
[9] X. Zou and K. W. Huang, “A model on location-based service
as infomediary,” in Proc. of the 14th Annual International
Conference on Electronic Commerce, 2012, pp. 247-254.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

