New Service Development Method for Prosumer Environments 
Ramon Alcarria, Tomás Robles, Augusto Morales, Sergio González-Miranda 
ETSI Telecomunicación 
Technical University of Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
{ralcarria,trobles,amorales,miranda}@dit.upm.es 
 
 
Abstract—Prosumer environments are characterized by user 
participation in the service creation and provision processes. 
These services, which become increasingly important in recent 
years, have some peculiarities that differentiate them from the 
services that follow the traditional model of supplier-customer. 
However, there is little research on how to adapt existing 
business models to harness the prosumer’s value and the 
implications of this new role for the company’s business model. 
In this paper we design a methodology for the development of 
prosumer services by using the New Service Development 
approach to provide creation tools, used by prosumers to 
create final services. We pay special attention to the 
relationship between creation process participants by modeling 
this relationship as co-creation mechanisms. The proposed 
method is applied to a use case, based on prosumer interaction 
in the Future Intelligent Universe. 
Keywords-new service development; co-creation; service 
composition; service customization; QFD 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A new service provision model is needed in a society in 
which individuals, companies and cities are related; and in 
which users contribute with his suggestions, interesting 
information and even his own services to the rest of the 
community. This paper focuses on a new environment for 
the current society, based on user participation, not only in 
information provision but also in the creation and 
composition of their services, called Prosumer Environment.  
Users participating in this society, called prosumer users 
or prosumers, want to get involved in service development 
stages, but they are not experts in the use of traditional tools 
of service development. Companies are aware of the 
evolution of the society and they view their customers as 
important resources when they develop new products and 
services. Thus, they try to involve their customers in the co-
creation and co-development of new services [14]. Currently, 
some projects focused on the figure of prosumer are 
appearing, such as iStockphoto or Lego Mindstorms, and the 
term prosumer begins to be used by companies such as Sony 
to describe video camera users, producers and publishers of 
multimedia content. 
From our knowledge, there are no product and service 
development models that explicitly take into account the new 
prosumer role but only as customer involvement in the 
business process [15] [4]. Nor is there much information on 
the related work on how to adapt existing business models to 
harness the prosumer business value and the implications of 
this new role for the company’s business model.  
The New Service Development (NSD) methodology is 
often used for the development of services that are new to 
the company, and that involve resources, processes and 
customer interaction [2]. In this paper, we extend the 
development model proposed by NSD in order to involve 
prosumer users, who wish to take responsibility for the 
creation and provision of services, in the service 
development process. The benefits of this new business 
model is perceived from the viewpoint of the company, 
which harnesses the power of the prosumer development to 
improve and test new products, and from the prosumers’ 
point of view, which get involved in service development by 
using creation tools adapted to their experience level. 
The rest of the paper is as follows. Section II describes 
the service provision prosumer model we want to achieve 
with our method and Section III analyzes and discusses the 
related work regarding service development with user 
participation. Section IV describes our proposed method 
through the NSD stages. Section V presents a scenario in 
which this methodology has been applied as a validation and 
Section VI presents the conclusions of our work. 
II. 
PROSUMER MODEL 
Internet has become a powerful distributed infrastructure 
that enables information to be widely available and its actors 
to interact with the rest of the world. Users require tools for 
providing their own services and consuming services 
published by others, and thus, transform the network into a 
collaborative infrastructure, adapted to different areas, such 
as social, personal and commercial ones. There are some 
initiatives to provide this type of tools, such as ICT-2007.1.6 
challenges (14 projects) of the European FP7 program, 
focused on validating highly innovative and revolutionary 
ideas for new service paradigms. 
The term prosumer [16] (as an acronym formed by the 
fusion of the words producer and consumer) is applied to 
those users that are at the same time consumers and 
producers of services or contents. The proposed prosumer 
model is shown in Fig. 1 and is described below. In the 
creation process, the prosumer, using his mobile phone or a 
computer, can design his services using the tools he has at 
his disposal. This is the most critical stage, because of the 
technical difficulty of transforming service creation ideas 
from a non-expert user to machine interpretable code. The 
Creation tools are oriented to a specific personal or 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

professional domain. They are provided by companies or 
third-party developers, using the traditional software 
development paradigms. Service composition graphical 
environments have been developed to solve this problem, 
using different paradigms (automatic, semiautomatic, static 
workflow-based service composition [20], natural written 
language [19], etc.). Customizable services are service 
models that already solve most of the technical issues 
regarding service creation and they allow the prosumer to 
introduce some configuration and customization parameters, 
both in GUI and in the service logic. From the service 
presentation’s point of view, the service composition 
paradigms that have proven to be more effective are based 
on 
User 
Interface 
Composition 
as 
some 
Mashup 
contributions [18] or those based on predefined templates 
[17]. The former allow greater flexibility in creation process 
while the latter usually have a more eye-catching look, 
providing that they have not been assembled by individual 
graphical blocks. The result of this stage is called final 
service, completely or partially created by a prosumer user 
and ready to be consumed. 
Service provision and execution take place after the 
creation process. As these stages are very similar to those of 
traditional services we will not explain them in detail. 
 The complexity in the creation phase requires an 
infrastructure deployment to facilitate contact between the 
developers of creation tools and the prosumer user that will 
use these creation tools. A methodology is required to decide 
between different design strategies, according to the captured 
design requirements. Section IV explains the method we 
developed. 
III. 
RELATED WORK ON SERVICE DEVELOPMENT 
In this section, we focus on the related work about two 
key aspects developed in this paper: User participation in 
service 
development 
process 
and, 
specifically, 
the 
relationship between users and other participants in the NSD 
methodology. 
A. Customer participation in service development 
In recent years, companies have considered the 
importance of the presence of the customer in service 
development in order to understand customers’ needs and 
wishes properly [21], evolving from the traditional model of 
service development, which produces common failure to 
involve service personnel and customers [1]. The presence of 
the customer in the production process results in increased 
customer value, as the overall benefit perceived in the 
solution at the price the customer is willing to pay [22]. 
Customer value is an aspect of the service that must be 
continually revisited for the company so that it can anticipate 
an alteration in customer’s needs (the customer’s perspective 
on a service offering can change from being favorable to 
being unfavorable).  
With the emergence of the Web 2.0 in the information 
and communications society, based on user participation, the 
user acquires a leading role in service development. 
Therefore, user involvement in the service production 
process is more justified. Some authors believe that users are 
the root of the service idea. Matthing et al. [23] illustrate that 
the consumers’ service ideas are found to be more 
innovative, in terms of originality and user value, than those 
of professional service developers. 
The role that the user plays is evolving from “content 
prosumer”, who uses the Internet and other technologies to 
find information and also to produce content, to “service 
prosumer”, which develop services and make them available 
to other users. The FIA (Future Internet Assembly) mentions 
this evolution of Internet users in his roadmap [27], defining 
prosumer as “a new kind of Internet user, playing both roles 
consumers of services as well as creators of added value 
services based on those consumed”. In this paper we focus 
on this second type of prosumers. 
B. Co-creation in New Service Development 
NSD is a service development methodology that is often 
used in corporate environments [2][21][22]. Johnson et al. 
synthesized past service development research and created a 
general four-stage NSD process model involving the phases 
of 
design, 
analysis, 
development 
and 
full 
launch, 
emphasizing the interdependence on design and development 
as well as the cyclical aspects of the new service creation 
process [2]. The difficulty of finding flexible tools for 
creating prosumer services is covered with large number of 
tools that relate the prosumer with NSD. In this section we 
review the tools, methods and practices found in the 
literature. 
In the design phase, related tools focus on identifying 
costumer needs. Although there are tools that extract 
qualitative information on customer perception, as focus 
groups and face-to-face interviews, and stimulate the 
production of new ideas (brainstorming), other authors [6] 
consider that the best method to identify customer needs is to 
select the so called “lead users”, which present strong needs. 
In our work, we define domain-expert as a lead user with 
good knowledge of his environment and who is aware of 
specific and general needs of the users it represents. Data 
mining techniques (artificial neural networks, decision trees, 
case-based reasoning, and multivariate discriminant analysis) 
[7] are used for classifying user need types for 
recommendation systems.  
In the analysis phase, recommendation systems use 
techniques to analyze the information on user needs, 
Creation 
ideas
Creation Process
Service 
Customization
Service 
Composition
GUI Composition
Prosumer
Developers
Tool 
generation
Final Services
S1
S1
S2
S2
Execution Process
Provision
Creation 
tools
 
Figure 1. Prosumer model  
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

processed in the previous stage in order to quantify its 
importance and thus, estimate the value of service for the 
target customers and the company. One of these techniques, 
the conjoint analysis [8], consists of a multivariate statistical 
technique which studies the joint effects of service 
components on consumers. This technique is often used 
along with the graphic technique of perceptual mapping [8], 
which helps marketers to visually display the perceptions of 
customers or potential customers. 
Related to service development, Quality Function 
Deployment (QFD) [4] tools have been proposed to 
transform the needs of users into service design 
requirements, which are more easily understandable by 
developers. Once the service concept has been created, other 
service engineering models are used, which map, describe, 
and/or analyze the design of service processes and include 
the customer experience in form of interactions through the 
process [9]: blueprinting, SADT (Structured Analysis and 
Design Technique), STA (service transaction analysis) and 
IDEF3. Among these methods we highlight SADT, which 
proposes the involvement of NSD providers, project 
managers and customers. 
Regarding the launching phase, the quality of the service 
being deployed and the customer satisfaction with the service 
once deployed is evaluated. Before service launching it may 
be necessary to identify potential failures in the service 
design or implementation. One of the most used techniques 
is the Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA) [10], 
which identifies failure modes based on past experience with 
similar products or services and provide corrective actions. 
The model proposed by Kano et al. [11] is often used, which 
complements the QFD to measure customer satisfaction and 
ranks customer demands with threshold attributes, in such a 
way that if a new service is not examined using the threshold 
aspects, it may not be possible to enter the market.  
IV. 
PROSUMER NSD METHODOLOGY 
In this work, we rely on the NSD model to define a New 
Service Development method in which the prosumer is 
present from service conception to the deployment of the 
infrastructure and the tools to personalize and provide 
services to other prosumers that consume them. The ultimate 
goal of this methodology is that users unfamiliar with 
traditional creation tools may be responsible for the creation 
of final services (through mechanisms such as composition 
or template customization). 
Our methodology is based on the phase model proposed 
by Johnson et al. [2]. In this section, we describe our 
adaptation of the processes carried out at each stage in order 
to involve customers as service co-producers.  
A. Design 
As shown in Fig. 2, in this first stage we identify the 
target customer and choose a customer representative. We 
call him domain expert and he serves as a link between 
prosumers and company developers. To meet the prosumer 
involvement needs we have adopted a customer-centric 
approach and, using the technique of Quality Function 
Deployment (QFD) [4], we ensure that the dimensions most 
valued by customers are adequately captured and translated 
into objective metrics, as the main task of service 
development is to create the right prerequisites for the 
service [1]. To do this, the domain expert must acquire the 
best possible knowledge of the target customers (prosumer 
users) to feed QFD, and he should be able to appropriately 
translate customer expectations into design requirements.  
A major challenge in this stage is to ensure that every 
decision is made based on delivering the correct services to 
potential customers. So, we first determine what type of 
service is going to be developed and the characteristics of the 
target customers. We define the service concept for prosumer 
environments as the combination of the co-creation level and 
service scope. The service concept helps to focus the 
relationship between customer needs and the company’s 
strategic intent. The co-creation level measures the domain 
expert involvement in the NSD process. A low co-creation 
level means that the users are little involved in the co-
creation process. We define service scope as the set of 
service requirements, covering both the design (functional 
and non-functional requirements) and the co-creation. The 
service scope is affected by two attributes: level of flexibility 
demanded in the service and experience level of the target 
prosumers regarding service creation. These attributes are 
interdependent, so that a lack of experience using creation 
tools will involve the development of creation tools with a 
lower degree of flexibility, which inevitably affects the 
service scope. Likewise, a service which requires a wide 
scope demands a high degree of flexibility and experienced 
target prosumers. As the service scope is defined by the 
target users, or the domain expert that represents them, the 
design phase analyses whether the relationship between 
service scope, flexibility and experience level of target 
customers is met. If the analysis fails some solutions are 
Domain 
Expert
Prosumers
Service Concept
Co-creation level
Service scope
Company 
developers
Required 
Flexibility
Prosumer 
experience
Scope 
Analysis
 
Figure 2. Design phase  
 
Value Estimation
Domain 
Expert
Company 
developers
Prosumer value 
estimation
Business value 
estimation
Prosumer 
input
Threshold 
definition
Service 
viability 
analysis
 
Figure 3. Analysis phase  
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

sought, such as increasing user experience through training 
courses for prosumers or reducing the service scope by 
dividing it into several sub-services, whose combined scope 
makes up the full scope. 
B. Analysis 
In the analysis stage, organizations estimate the market-
performance potential, strategy and financial prospects of the 
new service concept. The analysis phase, shown in Fig. 3, 
analyses whether the new service concept is aligned with the 
business strategy. Two simultaneous value calculation 
processes are produced, which determine the suitability of 
the service creation process: prosumer value and business 
value estimations. 
We define prosumer value as the overall benefit 
perceived in the service solution at the price the prosumer is 
willing to pay. In the prosumer environment, users create and 
consume services as long as their perception (i.e., the 
prosumer value) of the service creation and provision tools is 
adequate. Prosumer value must be identified at early stages 
of the methodology by using customer input information. 
While customers may be able to provide some guidance, 
some of the most successful cases of value identification 
occur when a company provides a service that addresses a 
need that the customer was not aware of previously [3]. 
We define business value as the benefit experienced by 
the company for the acquisition of knowledge, experience 
and presence in the sector. The business model of prosumer 
service development has been exploited before, and is 
adopted by major online stores such as Android Market or 
Apple Store. These stores provide development tools, a 
service search and publication infrastructure and a control 
mechanism for published applications. In return, they benefit 
from a percentage of the applications’ selling price, which is 
estimated by the application creator. 
We define a threshold below which the project is not 
viable. This threshold depends on the benefit margins of the 
project development and the business value mentioned 
above. These concepts will not be studied in depth in this 
paper. 
C. Development 
The development phase is described in Fig. 4. In the 
model proposed by QFD, customer expectations are often 
described as verbations, for example: “I want to have an 
on/off button in the main screen of my creation tool”. At this 
stage these verbations must be converted to re-worded data 
using simple expressions as “higher customization” and “add 
control buttons”. These data are classified into clusters that 
share a common theme (e.g., interface customization, easy to 
use) and prioritized. The house of quality diagram [13] can 
be used for this task, which utilizes a planning matrix to 
define the relationship between customer desires and firm 
capabilities. The result of this classification and prioritization 
is a set of requisites (design and co-creation requisites). If the 
domain expert involvement is high it is advisable to validate 
with the domain expert the collection of customer 
expectations to meet the term voice of the customer [12], 
widely used in QFD to describe the in-depth process of 
capturing customers preferences and expectations. Once the 
requirements are validated, decision criteria are used to 
select service design strategies. The attributes affecting the 
service concept are used as criteria: service flexibility of 
prosumer tools demanded by customers and experience level 
in service creation for target customers. Fig. 6 shows the 
relationship between these two attributes and characteristics 
of the design strategies for the described use case. 
A process whose objective is to develop a co-creation 
support system takes place once the design strategies are 
chosen. This system allows customers and developers to 
agree upon prototype evaluation, intermediate versions and 
co-creation requirements adjustment. Prototypes are used as 
proof of concept to demonstrate that the requirements of the 
prosumer are properly understood by the creation tools 
developers. Prototyping is considered a design strategy for 
environments with high involvement of the domain expert. 
The outcome of this phase is a set of creation tools, 
templates, prototypes, atomic and customizable services as 
well as the mechanisms for monitoring the service life cycle. 
D. Launch 
The launch phase (see Fig. 5) is divided into two phases. 
Domain 
Expert
Clustering
Company 
developers
Customer 
expectations
Prioritization
Requisite Validation
Requisites
Co-creation
Design
1
2
3
Design 
Strategy 
Decision
Service Concept
Co-creation 
level
Service scope
Creation tools
Prototypes
Components
Customizable 
services
Prosumers
 
Figure 4. Development phase  
 
Prosumers
Company 
developers
Service Provision 
Infrastructure
Creation
Prov.
Exec.
Monitoring
POST-LAUNCH
Customer 
satisfaction 
analysis
NSD process 
performance
Feedback
Monitoring 
information
 
Figure 5. Launch phase  
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

In the pre-launch analysis phase, the service provision 
infrastructure is designed, according to the developed 
services and the mechanisms for monitoring them. 
In the post-launch evaluation phase, the information 
collected by the infrastructure and customer feedback is 
iteratively analyzed in order to evaluate the prosumer 
satisfaction for the service (NSD outcome quality). It also 
evaluates the process performance for the company (NSD 
process performance), from the point of view of the 
operational effectiveness and market-place competitiveness 
[5]. Measures to analyze this performance are divided into 
the prosumer satisfaction by the use of developed services 
(NSD outcome quality) and the process performance for the 
company (NSD process performance). 
V. 
VALIDATION CASE 
We present a scenario in which we applied this 
methodology for the creation of prosumer service delivery 
infrastructure in the Future Intelligent Universe, as part of 
the mIO! project [26], supported by the CENIT Spanish 
National Research Program (CENIT-2008 1019). 
In this scenario the prosumer user, using his mobile 
phone, interacts with the elements (sensors, actuators, smart 
devices) that are around him in order to obtain their 
functionality. The prosumer user creates and shares services 
by following the prosumer model shown in Fig. 1. Our goal 
is to use our NSD method, defined in Section IV, to create an 
infrastructure for service creation, delivery and execution. 
The first step is to select a domain expert (based on the 
concept of lead user [6]) to identify customer needs. We 
determine that the user experience is varied, because, 
although this environment is focused on non-expert users, 
some of them are familiarized with creation paradigms. 
Thus, if we want to achieve high flexibility, the scope 
analysis requires dividing the infrastructure design in several 
subsystems, to cover the service scope. 
The viability analysis concluded with satisfactory results, 
thanks to high prosumer value and a sustainable business 
model for both the company and prosumers. The company 
business model is based on sponsored final services and the 
incorporation of advertisings and sponsorship in creation and 
execution tools. The business model for prosumers is based 
on applying the Freemium model, combination of free and 
premium services. 
In the development stage, following the proposed QFD 
model, the ideas expressed by the domain expert are 
processed and clustered. In total we extracted 104 
requirements, divided into 9 clusters (Infrastructure, User 
and 
Subsystem 
Interaction, 
Security, 
Context, 
Personalization, 
Service 
Model, 
User 
Interface 
and 
Technologies) y 32 subclusters. For example, through this 
process, the user idea “I want to take my services on my 
mobile” was turned into the “mobile service provision” 
requirement, and was introduced in the subcluster called 
Service Provision, within the Service Model cluster. 
We relate the prosumer experience level to the creation 
flexibility required in order to determine the most 
appropriate design strategy. Fig. 6 shows the considered 
decision strategies. 
As prosumers in this scenario have a mixed experience 
for service creation we need to take more than one design 
strategy. The main determinant for the decision is the 
requirement of high flexibility. Thus, we discard the 
strategies that provide only a few customization options 
(GUI customization, Template configuration, Creation 
wizards), and also the WYSIWYG (What You See Is What 
You Get) paradigm, for being difficult to be used in a 
domain as general as mobile and ubiquitous sensor access. 
Regarding the remaining options, we discard the Mashup 
creation strategy for being somewhat less flexible than the 
choice of Service composition. Therefore we consider the 
development of tools to enable Service composition for 
experienced prosumers and Natural Written Language 
(NWL) creation interface for non-expert users. Thanks to a 
high domain expert involvement in NSD we consider 
advisable to use Prototyping as a strategy to avoid deviations 
in the design objectives. 
After selecting the design strategies we proceed to the 
infrastructure implementation stage. Some parts of the 
implementation, such as service creation environment based 
on natural written language and sensor access can be seen in 
[24] and [25] respectively. 
The launch phase is performed on a test group that 
studied the platform and we received several conclusions. 
Due to space limitation we only describe four of them: 
 
The creation mechanism for service composition is 
somewhat difficult to assimilate by non-experts, who 
have found the creation system based on natural 
written language [24] more intuitive. 
 
To really obtain consumer satisfaction we need to 
provide a large set of components so that 
composition is versatile. 
 
The limited display capabilities of a mobile terminal 
delegate the composition creation method to devices 
with larger screens, such as tablets. 
 
It is recommended to support service provision with 
the help of fixed infrastructure, to avoid provision 
issues due to lack of coverage or battery problems. 
As conclusions of the analysis we believe that the 
application of our NSD method to the implementation of this 
scenario has been very helpful and the application of the 
defined design strategies has been successful.  
Prosumer 
experience
+
-
Flexibility
+
-
Mashups
Composition
Creation 
wizards
GUI 
customization
Service 
prototyping
NWL 
interface
Template 
configuration
WYSIWYG
 
Figure 6. Design strategy decision criteria. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed a tool development method for 
creating services for prosumer users, based on NSD. We 
evolve this methodology to cover the interrelationships of the 
different roles that traditionally participate in the creation 
process (company developers and customers) with the new 
prosumer user role. This prosumer user is the consequence 
of the evolution of information society, in which users are 
more participative and feel responsible for the generation of 
services and their publication into the user community. 
In this paper, we develop a NSD method for prosumer 
environments. We review some concepts belonging to the 
service development process, such as service concept, 
service scope, value estimation, and we define other 
concepts, as co-creation level, prosumer value and co-
requisites, which became contributions to the traditional 
NSD stages. As a validation, we show a service creation 
scenario for mobile prosumers and, following our proposed 
method, we develop some creation tools and a service 
delivery infrastructure. 
We consider the implications in NSD of the new 
prosumer role as a contribution to the traditional service 
development process. This prosumer role reflects the current 
evolution of society towards a service provision model 
focused increasingly on the user.  
Feedback from users allows us to identify future work on 
the proposed model, such as developing service composition 
tools for distributed service provision and task delegation 
and studying the characteristics of creation skills of non-
expert prosumers thoroughly. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Johne and C. Storey, “New Service Development: A 
Review of the Literature and Annotated Bibliography,” 
European Journal of Marketing, 1988, vol. 34, pp. 184-251. 
[2] S.P. Johnson, L.J. Menor, A.V. Roth, and R.B. Chase, A 
critical evaluation of the new service development process: 
integrating service innovation and service design. Eds. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 1999, pp. 1-32. 
[3] C. Liu, “Constructing a value-based service development 
model,” Journal of Applied Business Research, Dec. 2006, 
vol. 22, pp. 47-60. 
[4] T. Ohfuji and T. Noda, Quality function deployment: 
integrating customer requirements into product design. Eds. 
New York: Productivity Press, 2004. 
[5] M.V. Tatikonda and M.M. Montoya-Weiss, “Integrating 
operations and marketing perspectives of product innovation: 
the influence of organizational process factors and capabilities 
on development performance,” Journal of Management 
Science, 2001, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 151–172. 
[6] E. von Hippel, “Lead users: A source of novel product 
concepts,” Journal of Management Science, 1986, vol. 32, pp. 
791-805. 
[7] K. Kim, “Customer Need Type Classification Model using 
Data Mining Techniques for Recommender Systems,” World 
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, vol. 80, 
pp. 279- 284 
[8] K. Ramdas, O. Zhylyevskyy, and W.L. Moore, “A 
Methodology to Support Product-Differentiation Decisions,” 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, Nov. 2010, 
vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 649-660. 
[9] J. Frauendorf, Customer Processes in Business-to-Business 
Service Transactions. Eds. duv, Nov. 2006. 
[10] Z. Bluvband and P. Grabov, “Failure analysis of FMEA,” 
Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, Jan. 2009, pp. 
344-347. 
[11] N. Kano, N. Seraku, F. Takahashi, and S. Tsuji, “Attractive 
quality and must-be quality,” The Journal of Japanese Society 
for Quality Control, 1984, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 39–48. 
[12] E. 
Roman, 
Voice-of-the-Customer 
Marketing: 
A 
Revolutionary 5-Step Process to Create Customers Who Care, 
Spend, and Stay. Eds. McGraw-Hill, Sep. 2010. 
[13] D. Kim, “Application of the HoQ framework to improving 
QoE of broadband internet services,” IEEE Network, March-
April 2010, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 20-26. 
[14] L. Witell, P. Kristensson, A. Gustafsson, and M. Löfgren, 
“Idea Generation: Customer Cocreation versus Traditional 
Market 
Research 
Techniques,” 
Journal 
of 
Service 
Management, 2011, vol. 22, no. 2. 
[15] A. Lundkvist and A. Yakhlef, “Customer Involvement in New 
Service Development: a conversational approach,” Managing 
Service Quality, 2004, vol. 14 no. 2/3, pp. 249-257. 
[16] A. Toffler, The Third Wave. Eds. Bantam Books, 1980 . 
[17] J. Ling, P. Ping, Y. Chun, L. Jinhua, and T. Qiming, “Rapid 
Service Creation Environment for service delivery platform 
based on service templates,” in Proc. of IFIP/IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Integrated 
Network 
Management, June 2009, pp. 117-120. 
[18] Q. Zhao, G. Huang, J. Huang, X. Liu, and H. Mei, “A Web-
Based 
Mashup 
Environment 
for 
On-the-Fly 
Service 
Composition,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on 
Service-Oriented System Engineering, Dec. 2008, pp. 32-37. 
[19] M. Cremene, J-Y. Tigli, S. Lavirotte, F-C. Pop, M. Riveill, 
and G. Rey, “Service Composition Based on Natural 
Language Requests,” in Proc. of IEEE International 
Conference on Services Computing, Sept. 2009, pp. 486-489. 
[20] N. Laga, E. Bertin, and N. Crespi, “User-centric Services and 
Service Composition, a Survey,” in Proc of Annual IEEE 
Software Engineering Workshop, Oct. 2008, pp. 3-9, 15-16. 
[21] B. Edvardsson and J. Olsson, “Key concepts for new service 
development,” The Service Industries Journal, April 1996, 
vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 140-164. 
[22] M. Reinoso, S. Lersviriyajitt, N. Khan, W. Choonthian, and P.  
Laosiripornwattana, ”New service development: Linking 
resources, processes, and the customer,” in Proc, of Portland 
International Conference on Management of Engineering & 
Technology, Aug. 2009, pp. 2921-2932. 
[23] J. Matthing, B. Sanden, and Bo Edvardsson, “New service 
development: 
learning 
from 
and 
with 
customers,” 
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 2004, 
vol. 15, pp. 479-498. 
[24] G. Sebastian, J.A. Gallud, and R. Tesoriero, “A Proposal for 
an Interface for Service Creation in Mobile Devices Based on 
Natural Written Language,” in Proc. of the Fifth International 
Multi-conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology, Sept. 2010, pp. 232-237. 
[25] U. Aguilera, A. Almeida, P. Orduña, D. López-de-Ipiña, and 
R. de las Heras, “Continuous service execution in mobile 
prosumer environments,” in Proc. of Int. Symposium of 
Ubiquitous Computing and Ambiente Intelligence, Sept. 
2010, pp. 229-238. 
[26] mIO! project Web page: http://www.cenitmio.es (web in 
Spanish) 
[27] Future Internet Assembly Research Roadmap v1.0. Available 
at the European Future Internet Portal: http://www.future-
internet.eu [Retrieved: Nov. 22, 2011]                                 .           
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

