Social Networks: Privacy Issues and Precautions
Mohamad Ibrahim Ladan
Computer Science Department
Haigazian University
Beirut – Lebanon
mladan@haigazian.edu.lb
Abstract—Social networks,
such as Facebook, Myspace,
LinkedIn, Google+, and Twitter have experienced exponential
growth and a remarkable adoption rate in recent years. These
social networks are touching our lives at home and at work by
providing attractive means of online social interactions and
communications with family, friends and colleagues from
around the corner or across the globe; however, this comes
with a growing concern regarding the privacy and security
risks that accompany the use of such networks. In this paper,
we will investigate and discuss the different privacy issues
pertaining to social networks, in addition, we will propose
some precaution measures that should be applied to tackle
these issues.
Keywords: Social Networks privacy issues; online privacy;
information revelation; Social Networks privacy precautions
measures.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The size, growth adoption rate, and popularity of social
media networks, such as Facebook, Myspace, LinkedIn, and
Google+, are phenomenal. Facebook has reached more than
700 million users and according to a brochure released by
Websense, a company specializing in computer security
software, Facebook has an annual growth rate of 41% and
Twitter is growing at 85% year after year. In 2011 Google
released its Google+ social networking offering, first by
invitation only and then generally opening the site [1]. In
2014, the largest social network is Facebook and other
popular networks include Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, and
Pinterest. [22]. This fast growth is due in part to the latest
advancements in the field information and communication
technologies, tablets, mobile smart phones, and other similar
mobile computing and communication devices that have
become very popular and sometimes necessary home and
individual type of appliances to both kids and adults. These
types of networks are useful and have a lot of benefits to all
kind of users. They were built upon the concept of
traditional social networks where you are connected to new
people through people you already know. Their goal could
be purely social, allowing users to establish friendships or
romantic relationships, while others may focus on
establishing business connections. They can be used for
professional networking and job searches, as a means to
increase sales revenue, as a way to reconnect with current
and old friends, as a way to make new friends, or as a way
to share information and to socialize.
Social networks can be described as web applications
that allow users to create their semi-public profile [13], i.e.,
a profile that some information is public and some is
private, communicate with friends, and build an online
community. It is based on social relationships among users.
Most people join social networks to share their information
and keep in contact with people they know. The main
feature of social networks is a friend finder that allows
social network users to search for people that they know and
then build up their own online community. They have
changed radically the way people interact with each other
regardless of their physical location. They provides every
person, regardless of its age, the ability to easily
communicate and share data and information of all types,
audio, video, or text on one-to-one basis, one-to-many, and
many-to-many in a matter of fraction of seconds without
any difficulties. These benefits are accompanied with a
growing concerns regarding the privacy of the information
exchanged or stored on the communication links and servers
of those social networks. These information could be
sensitive or critical, such as the identification, confidential
conversation, personal, and private data, and credit and
financial data. So every user of social networks should be
concerned one way or the other about these types of privacy
risks. Most people became more aware and more concerned
about these risks when Facebook inadvertently exposed
millions of users’ phone numbers and e-mail addresses to
unauthorized viewers over years that began in 2012. The
major reason for causing such breaches in social network
security and privacy emerges from the massive amount of
information that these sites process every day, making it
much easier to exploit even if there is a little fault in the
system. Furthermore, social networking is now no longer
restricted to just desktop and laptop computers, the
technology is available on smartphones, tablets, and just
about anything that is connected to the Internet [4]. This
wide spread of smart mobile devices has opened new paths
for 
malware transmission, bringing concerns about
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

information theft, and tracking
user's location and
preferences.
Despite the fact that most of the privacy risks in using
social 
networks 
are 
related 
to 
the 
Information
Communication Technology and the internet infrastructure
that these social networks are operating on. However, most
privacy risks come from the nature of the social network
application itself and sometimes from their privacy policies
and the way people use the networks. This paper is focused
on what we call user-related part of these risks, i.e., risks
that are stemmed from user’s behavior, privacy policies, and
the nature of the application and its default configuration.
The application-related part tends to be more technical, i.e.,
data and communication security, protocols used, enforcing
privacy 
setting, 
security 
measures, 
encryption 
and
decryption will be addressed in another paper.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, the various social networks privacy issues and
concerns are presented and discussed. In Section III,
different precaution measures and guidelines to maintain an
adequate level of privacy on social networks are proposed
and presented. In Section IV, discussion of the need for
security and privacy legislation and policies to tackle the
privacy concerns are discussed. Finally, in Section V, a
summary and conclusion of the paper is given.
II.
SOCIAL NETWORKS PRIVACY ISSUES
“If you feel like someone is watching you, you're right.
If you're worried about this, you have plenty of company. If
you're not doing anything about this anxiety, you’re just like
almost everyone else.” [15]
The increased pervasiveness and use of information
communication technologies have changed many people's
lives in terms of how they work, form, and maintain social
relations. This rise in social networks or networked societies
comes with a lot of concerns, mainly the privacy concern.
Social networks usually share three common elements. They
allow individuals to construct a public or semi-public profile
within a confined system, articulate a list of other users with
whom they share a connection, and view and traverse their
list of connections and those made by others within the
system. While the concept of privacy is not new, modern
technological advancements have meant that privacy
concerns have evolved. New information communication
technologies have transformed our ability to collect,
aggregate, and share data. Modern technology has the
ability and power to capture, store, aggregate, redistribute,
and use data from individual users. The problem is that the
owner of this information is often unaware of, or at least
unconnected to, its storage and utilization, and that such
ubiquitous data collection is harmful to personal privacy
[23].
The "State of the Net" research and statistics from
Consumer Reports suggest that there is an overall increase
in certain digital problems, such as ID thefts, phishing
schemes, and security breaches. The most surprising
findings however, involve how much Facebook knows
about more than 900 million members, and how much we,
members, freely offer information that could be extracted by
employers, insurers, some government offices, as well as
identity thieves and other criminals [17].
Most if not all social network user’s profiles contain
real information about users. Sensitive information, such as
user’s full name, contact information, relationship status,
date of birth, previous and current work, and education
background attract hackers. In addition, most social network
users share a large amount of their other private information
in their social network space, and publish the information
publicly without careful consideration. Hence, social
networks have become a large pool of sensitive data.
Moreover, social network users tend to have a high level of
trust toward other social network users. They tend to accept
friend requests easily, and trust items that friends send to
them.
Most social networks ask users to agree to Terms of
Use policy before they can use their services. However,
these Terms of Use often contain phrases permitting social
networks to store user’s data on their servers and even share
it with third parties. The levels of privacy presented for
users in social networks vary from one network to the other.
Some encourage users to provide real names and other
personal information, such as age, family, education,
interests, and even relationship status.
Facebook has
attracted attention over its policies regarding data storage,
such as making it difficult to delete an account, holding onto
data after an account is de-activated and being caught
sharing personal data with third parties [12].
Privacy can be viewed from the perspective of control.
Whether it is control over personal data, the choice to
disclose data, the physical presence of others, the number of
others present in disclosure, or choosing which person to
discuss and share issues with, control is central to
maintaining privacy. The main privacy issue in social
networks is the abuse and the leakage of profile and
personal information of the users. Several cases related to
privacy issues have surfaced up lately. A report in the Wall
Street Journal indicates that the Facebook, along with
MySpace, and a handful of other social networks, have been
sharing users' personal data with advertisers without users'
knowledge or consent [6]. The data shared includes names,
user IDs, and other information sufficient to enable ad
companies, such as the Google-owned DoubleClick to
identify distinct user profiles. Moreover, Facebook appears
to have gone farther than the other networks when it comes
to sharing data. When Facebook's users clicked on ads
appearing on a profile page, the site would at times provide
data, such as the username behind the click, as well as the
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

user whose profile page from which the click came. In
addition, Twitter has admitted that they have scanned and
imported their user's phone contacts onto the website
database so that they can learn more about their users. Most
users were unaware that Twitter is created this way for new
users to search for their friends. More than 1,000 companies
are waiting in line to get access to millions of tweets from
users that are using the popular social networking website.
Companies believe that by using data mining technologies
they would be able to gather important information that can
be used for marketing and advertising [11]. Twitter has
stated that they will have their privacy guidelines illustrated
more clearly in the future [10].
Although some users may have no problem in revealing
their personal information to a large group of people and
may not care about the privacy policies and setting of the
network, others they care and try to make use of the
available security features. However most social networks
restore the relaxed default setting after each update.
Facebook was criticized due to the perceived carelessness
regarding privacy in the default setting for users [8].
Other main issue related to privacy is stemmed in the
fact that many social networks provide an Application
Programming Interface (API) for 3rd party developers to
create applications for the network’s platform. These 3rd
party applications are very popular among social network
users, and once installed, they are able to access user’s data
automatically, and are capable of posting on users’ space or
user’s friend’s space, or may access other user’s information
without user’s knowledge. In addition, these 3rd party
applications are able to track social network user’s
activities, or allows advertisement partner to access and
collect social network user’s data for commercial and
advertising purposes [14].
On the other hand, posting and sharing, directly or
indirectly, photos or videos may result in an individual's
breach of privacy or to an organization's breach of
confidentiality.
Another important issue related to privacy is that
potential employers are looking up information about their
potential employees using social networks. The information
found is used to screen job applicants and may affect or hurt
their chances of being employed. Employers may find out
that an applicant made a political statement that conflicts
with 
the 
company 
ideologies.
Facebook and Twitter are being used a lot to screen job
applicants. On Facebook and Twitter, we believe employers
are trying to get a more personal view of a candidate, rather
than the resume-like view they will see on LinkedIn. This
means that is important for social networks users to keep in
mind that some, if not most, employers use these networks
to do some sort of pre-screening their job applicants [16].
Many social networks have responded to criticism and
concerns over privacy. It is claimed that changes to default
settings, the storage of data and sharing with third parties
have all been updated and corrected in the light of criticism,
and/or legal challenges. However, many critics remain
unsatisfied, noting that fundamental changes to privacy
settings in many social networking sites remain minor [9].
III.
SOCIAL NETWORKS PRECAUTIONS
The popularity of social networks continues to increase,
especially among teenagers and young adults, and the
concerns related to privacy risks and issues continue to
increase. Fig. 1 shows the worldwide number of active
Facebook users from 2008 to 2014. As of the third quarter
of 2014, Facebook had 1.35 billion monthly active users
[24].
Figure 1: Number of monthly active Facebook users worldwide from 3rd
quarter 2008 to 3rd quarter 2014 (in millions)
Therefore, privacy issues become more and more critical
and some precautions should be taken to address these
issues while using social networks. These precautions can
be stated as a set of guidelines and helpful tips that social
network users should follow to protect their private
information while making use of the benefits of the
networks. These guidelines and helpful tips include the
following:

Review the social network’s privacy policy before
signing up. If the privacy policy is not clear on how
it protects the member’s information, do not sign
up or limit your use of such a network.

Choose a strong password that cannot easily be
guessed and different than other passwords you
have on different systems or social networks.

Check and configure the privacy settings. The
default settings for some social networks may
allow anyone to see your information, these setting
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

should be changed to allow only those people you
trust to have access to the information you post.

Remember that social networks are based on the
internet which is a public resource.

Keep in mind that once information is posted
online, it can possibly be viewed by anyone and
may not be withdrawn after that even if you delete
the information from your account, cached or
saved copies may still exist on other computers on
the network. Therefore, confidential information
should not be posted or shared. You should only
post information you are comfortable revealing to a
complete stranger.

Limit the amount of personal information you post.
Do not post information that would make you
vulnerable, such as your address or information
about your daily schedule or routine.

Do not post information like your address, mobile
phone number or any information that could be
used for banking site security questions, such as
your mother’s maiden name, hometown, favorite
car, school name etc. Identity thieves can find out a
lot about you just by the information you may
already have on your profile, and they can fill in
the blanks.

Do not tag your location and whereabouts, and do
not announce that you are on vacation or away for
an extended period of time. You don’t want to
compromise your feeling of safety and security if
someone may know you’re not home. It also opens
up opportunities for cyber stalkers.

Be careful about installing third-party applications.
Some social networks provide the ability to install
third party applications, such as games or other
entertainment functionality, however some of these
applications may be malicious and may have full
access to your account and the data you share. In
addition, some of these applications may modify
your security and privacy settings. Hence, do not
install applications unless they come from trusted,
well-known sources.

Don't believe everything you read online. People
may post false or misleading information about
their own identities. The internet makes it easy for
people to misrepresent their identities and goals.

Limit the people who are allowed to contact you on
social networks. If you interact with people you do
not know, be cautious about the amount of
information you disclose.

Think twice before clicking a link to another page
or running an online application, even if it is from
someone you know. Many applications require you
to share your information when you use them.
Attackers use these sites to distribute their
malware.

Be careful when adding new friends. A “Friend” is
anyone on the Facebook network whom you permit
to see your personal information, such as birth
date, photos, job, comments and list of other
Friends. Friends can also see Friends of Friends,
which means that you have possibly added strange
individuals whom you may never have met as your
active%20users%202008individuals have access to
your personal and private information.

Limit the number of your friends. The more friends
you have the more people who have access to your
information and the more vulnerable your account
is.

Teach children about internet safety and be aware
of their online habits. Children are more
susceptible to the threats resulted from the use of
social networks. Although many of these networks
have age restrictions, children may misrepresent
their ages so that they can join.

If you are working in a company and you often
communicate with your colleagues using social
networks then talk to the manager to put a social
Network Use Policy in place for your company to
protect the privacy of information exchanged using
these networks.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Although more people and companies are finding new
ways in using social networks, their successes have been
faced by major concerns of privacy risks. The control of
information or data is lost once it is posted to a social
network. Despite the fact the posted info is meant to only go
to selected friends may seem protected by the limited
distribution to a restricted audience, nothing prevents one of
those friends from forwarding that post to someone else
outside of the original poster’s group of friends [18]. The
same can occur within a group of employees collaborating
on a project, it only takes one person to become a leak and
forward information to outside the group. And if privacy
permissions on a social media site are not set correctly, the
data may leak out and become public by default. This can
easily happen with FaceBook’s privacy policy that keeps
changing from time to time. As a matter of fact, as the
popularity of social networks continues to grow, the
concerns over privacy risks and privacy protection becomes
more important and more serious for the users. On the other
hand, users are having more concerns about not being able to
delete permanently their data they have on the social
networks. As humans, we can forget. But the Internet never
forgets. And once that data is released, there is no getting rid
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

of it [1]. Viviane Reding, the Vice President of the European
Commission said: “God forgives and forgets, but the Internet
never does” [2]. Privacy advocates are working to change
this problem by introducing a “right to be forgotten”. This is
being proposed in a new draft of the European Data
Protection Directive that “measures will be put in place to
allow European citizens’ to have their data deleted by private
companies” [3].
Furthermore, as social networks continue to take
advantage of mobile devices and location-based services,
users will be exposed to even more privacy concerns.
Although users will unquestionably enjoy using some of
these services, they could possibly be making themselves
exposed to more serious privacy risks. Hence, social
networks that employ location-based services will have to
focus on user privacy concerns to gain people trust.
As people increase the amount of information they
share on social networks, some of these giant social networks
will have and store a huge amount of personal information
about their users. Hence, the need for more privacy controls
increases. In addition, without good universal guidelines and
overall legislation and privacy laws on how this information
can be gathered and used, it could be misused, either
intentionally or unintentionally. As a matter of fact, there has
been quite a bit of controversy over how much data social
networks, such as Facebook and Twitter collect. Facebook
lately had a scandal where it used people’s profile
information to post ads on Facebook that appeared to be
authorized by the person whose profile was pulled. It had
their profile picture and text that stated that one should buy
this product or use such and such a service. There was a
lawsuit and millions of people received an e-mail informing
them about this lawsuit and how they could take action and
possibly receive a settlement of money. Facebook lost
millions of dollars because of this blooper [19].
The privacy legislation process has already started
developing in the USA and other part of the world, and it’s
likely to gain even more momentum in years to come and
that there will be additional towards universal legislation on
privacy regulations.
An instance of the new privacy
legislation process that is taking place in the USA is the
Commercial Privacy Bill of Rights Act of 2011 (“CPBR”). It
represents one approach to protecting consumer privacy, and
it 
aims 
to 
establish 
a 
regulatory 
framework 
for
comprehensive protection of personal data for individuals
under the protection of the Federal Trade Commission. The
CPBR would require companies that collect consumer data
to adhere to certain security practices and would also require
consumers to
opt-in to the collection of sensitive
information. Consumers could also access, correct, and
control information that companies have stored. In addition,
the bill would limit the data that a company could collect
during any given transaction to only data that is necessary for
the transaction’s completion. For instance, an online clothes
store could not require the consumer to provide personal
information, such as his or her birthday if such information is
peripheral to the consumer’s purchase of snow suits [20, 21].
Without universal privacy regulation and legislation
social networks have been setting their own privacy policies,
and there is currently an enormous amount of variation
between networks. As a result of that, users are often
confused as to what privacy controls are available and how
they should be used. Additionally, most people do not really
understand how to recognize the potential for information
misuse. People often share information innocently because
they want to use a specific feature, or because they wish to
qualify for a free product or service. When universal
legislation is in place, social networks will have standard
guidelines and policies to follow, thus creating a more
secure, safe, private, and less confusing user experience [5].
V.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
With the constantly growing popularity of
social
networks, such as Facebook, Google+, MySpace, Twitter
etc. in the personal scope, and others, such as LinkedIn in
business circles, undesirable privacy risk issues have arisen
as a result of this unexpected rapid rise and due to the
availability of huge amount of sensitive information related
to large number of users. Therefore, concerns related to
privacy issues and breach of privacy in social networks that
can put the individual or a company in a serious risk are
increasing.
A privacy issue occurs, in its simplest form, when
someone, who may be a hacker or not, gain access to private
and confidential information about users who are   not
careful about what they expose on their Social network
accounts. In addition, the potential damage to a user as a
result of privacy breach depends on how much this user is
actively participating or engaging in the social networks, as
well as the amount of information he or she is posting. The
more information in general, and private information in
particular, is posted the higher the risk and harm.
Moreover, privacy issues in social networks, other
than those rising from security issues, are more related to
users behaviors and awareness of privacy policies and terms
and conditions for using these networks. The more
information a user posts, the more information becomes
available for a potential misuse by malicious users/hackers.
Users who provide private, sensitive, and confidential
information about themselves and their friends will be more
vulnerable, themselves and their friends, for being attacked
or hacked. Information, such as a person's social security
number, street address, phone number, financial information,
or confidential business information should not be posted
and shared online. A well-informed user will not only help to
maintain privacy, but will also educate others on these
issues. The best solution to social network privacy issues is
to limit the amount of shared and posted information.
Social networks developers try to implement different
mechanisms and measures to protect their users’ information
and data, but attackers will always find new methods to
break through those measures. Therefore, social network
users should be aware of all these threats, and be more
careful when using such networks and to limit the amount of
shared and posted information. In addition, until universal
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

privacy regulation and legislation are developed and
enforced, social networks are setting their own privacy
policies that sometime, intentionally or unintentionally, do
not protect the privacy of users date and personal
information.
This paper addressed, discussed and presented the
different types of privacy issues and risks arising from the
use of social networks. In addition, it summarized and
presented different privacy precautions tips, measures, and
helpful guidelines to be followed to protect the user’s private
information while making use of the benefits of social
networks.
REFERENCES
[1]
Shullich, 
R. 
Risk 
Assessment 
of 
Social 
Media:
http://www.sans.org/reading-room/whitepapers/privacy/risk-
assessment-social-media-33940. Dec. 5, 2011
[2]
Berwaerts, 
P.
The 
right 
to 
be 
Forgotten:
http://www.business2community.com/government-
politics/the-right-to-be-forgotten-0111815. Dec. 28, 2011
[3]
Whittaker, Z. European data protection law proposals
revealed:
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/london/european-dat-
protection-law-proposals-revealed/1365. Dec. 7, 2011
[4]
V. Jain, InformationWeek, May 19, 2014
[5]
Top 
Five 
Social 
Media 
Privacy 
Concerns
2014.
http://www.reputation.com/reputationwatch/articles/top-five-
social-media-privacy-concerns, 2014.
[6]
E. 
Bangeman, 
http://arstechnica.com/tech-
policy/news/2010/05/latest-facebook-blunder-secret-data-
sharing-with-advertisers.ars, May 21 2010
[7]
Staying Safe on Social Network Sites, http://www.us-
cert.gov/ncas/tips/ST06-003, Feb. 06, 2013.
[8]
Kelly, S. Identity ‘at risk’ on Facebook. BBC News.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/click_online/7375772.
stm
[9]
N. Saint, Facebook’s Response to Privacy Concerns: “If
you’re 
not 
Comfortable 
Sharing, 
Don’t”.
http://www.businessinsider.com/facebooks-response-to-
privacy-concerns-if-youre-not-comfortable-sharing-dont-
2010-5, 2010.
[10] Sky news, "Twitter admits peeking at address books,
announces privacy improvements". Feb. 16, 2012.
[11] K. Gladdis, "Twitter secrets for sale: Privacy row as every
tweet for last two years is bought up by data firm". London:
daily mail. Feb. 28,  2012.
[12] Bangeman, E. Report: Facebook caught sharing secret data
with 
advisers.
http://arstechnica.com/tech-
policy/news/2010/05/latest-facebook-blunder-secret-data-
sharing-with-advertisers.ars, 2010.
[13] D. M. Boyd and N. B. Ellison, “Social Network Sites:
Definition, History, and Scholarship,” J. Computer-Mediated
Communication, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
210–30.
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol13/issue1/boyd.ellison.html, 
Oct.
2007.
[14] Online Social Networks,” WOSN '08 Proceedings of the first
workshop
on 
Online 
social 
networks,
pp. 
37-42.
http://www2.research.att.com/~bala/papers/posn.pdf, 2008
[15] Sullivan, B. Social Media Polarizes Our Privacy Concerns.
Facebook And Its Competitors Are Challenging Long-Held
Perceptions 
of 
Privacy.
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/41995992/ns/technology_and_
science/t/study-social-media-polarizes-our-privacy-
concerns/#.UMEDzYNtjjU. October 3, 2011
[16] How Employers Use Social Media to Screen  Applicants,
INFOGRAPHIC.http://theundercoverrecruiter.com/infographi
c-how-recruiters-use-social-media-screen-applicants/
[17] Rosa Golijan, Consumer Reports: Facebook privacy problems
are 
on 
the 
rise, 
NBC 
News,
http://www.nbcnews.com/technology/technolog/consumer-
reports-facebook-privacy-problems-are-rise-749990. 2012.
[18] Associate 
press,
http://www.foxnews.com/us/2011/11/08/judge-rules-teacher-
should-lose-job-after-facebook-post/, 2011.
[19] Smith, M.; Szongott, C.; Henne, B.; von Voigt, G.; , "Big data
privacy issues in public social media," Digital Ecosystems
Technologies 
(DEST), 
2012 
6th 
IEEE 
International
Conference on ,vol., no., pp.1-6, 18-20 June 2012, doi:
10.1109/DEST.2012.6227909
[20] TO TRACK OR NOT TO TRACK: RECENT LEGISLATIVE
PROPOSALS TO PROTECT CONSUMER PRIVACY, Harvard
Journal on Legislation, Vol 49, 2012.
[21] Danah Boyd & Ezster Hargittai, Facebook Privacy Settings:
Who 
Cares?, 
FIRST 
MONDAY.
http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article
/viewArticle/3086/2589. Aug. 2, 2010
[22] The U.S. Digital Consumer Report". Featured Insights, Global, Media
+ Entertainment. Nielsen. Retrieved 25 November 2014.
[23] D. J. Houghtona and A. N. Joinsona,  Privacy, Social Network Sites,
and Social Relations,  Journal of Technology in Human Services,
Volume 
28, 
pages 
74-94, 
Issue 
1-2, 
2010.
DOI:10.1080/15228831003770775
[24] Statistica 2014, http://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-
monthly-active-facebook-users-worldwide/,  access date Dec., 22,
2014.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

