 
Determining Authentication Strength for Smart Card-based Authentication Use 
Cases 
 
Ramaswamy Chandramouli  
Computer Security Division, Information Technology Lab 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Gaithersburg, MD, USA 
mouli@nist.gov 
 
Abstract - Smart cards are now being extensively deployed for 
identity verification(smart identity tokens) for controlling 
access to Information Technology (IT) resources as well as 
physical resources. Depending upon the sensitivity of the 
resources and the risk of wrong identification, different 
authentication use cases are being deployed. Assignment of 
authentication strength for each of the use cases is often based 
on: (a) the total number of three common orthogonal 
authentication factors – What You Know, What You Have and 
What You are – used in the particular use case and (b) the 
entropy associated with each factor chosen. The objective of 
this paper is to analyze the limitation of this approach and 
present a new methodology for assigning authentication 
strengths based on the strength of  pair wise bindings between 
the five  entities involved in smart card based authentications – 
the card (token), the token secret, the card holder, the card 
issuer  and the person identifier stored in the card The use of 
the methodology for developing an authentication assurance 
level taxonomy for a real world smart identity token 
deployment is also illustrated. 
 
Keywords - Identity Verification; Smart Identity Token; 
Authentication Strength 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
       Smart cards are now being extensively deployed for 
identity verification for controlling access to Information 
Technology (IT) resources as well as physical resources 
[1,2,3].  We refer to them as Smart Identity Tokens and use 
the two terms interchangeably throughout this paper. These 
types of smart cards generally carry: (a) A Person Identifier 
(PI), (b) A Secret (TS) usually in the form of a 
cryptographic key [4], and (c) A Credential linking the 
Secret and the Identifier (CR). Along with these data, a PIN 
(a combination of numbers) is often used for: (a) Activating 
the card (token) and for (b) Restricting access to certain data 
objects and operations. In some instances, presentation of a 
live biometric data (such as a fingerprint) is used to enable 
the above functions instead of a PIN. In any enterprise 
deploying smart cards, there may be different types of 
resources that may have to be protected by restricting access 
to only those whose identity is verified through a smart card 
based authentication mechanism. Depending upon the 
sensitivity of the resource and the risk associated with 
wrong identification of the entity requesting access to those 
resources, authentication mechanisms using different 
combinations of the three data types enumerated above (PI, 
TS or CR) along with/without an activation data may be 
used. A set of authentication mechanisms used by an 
enterprise for controlling access to different types of 
resources (or stated differently- different applications of 
smart identity token) are called Authentication Use Cases. 
     In general (irrespective of whether a smart identity token 
is used or not), the choice of an Authentication Use Case in 
the context of an access control to a resource is often made 
based on authentication strength or assurance level 
associated with the token artifact used in the Authentication 
Use Case. These artifacts are: (a) an identifier specific to a 
domain and (b) a credential that is a combination of an 
identifier and a secret – examples for the latter being: (a) a 
PIN (b) a one-time password and (c) a cryptographic key. 
The usage of a token by a claimant during an authentication 
event results in a value called Authenticator that is 
generated by the token and is transmitted from the token to 
the authentication module or the verifier. The basis for 
designating an authentication strength associated with a 
token is a fundamental unit called “Authentication Factor”. 
There are three main authentication factors [5]: 
 What the Entity Knows (e.g., Password, PIN, etc) 
 What the Entity Has (e.g., possession of a token that 
generates one-time passwords) 
 What the Entity Is (e.g., inherent physiological 
characteristic such as a Fingerprint) 
     A token that uses one of the above three factors is called 
a single factor token (e.g., a password that belongs to “ 
What the Entity Knows” factor). A token that uses a 
combination of two or more of the above factors is called a 
multi-factor token. A smart card that contains an embedded 
private cryptographic key (thus using What the Entity Has 
authentication factor) that can be used to generate an 
authenticator when it is activated by a PIN (using the What 
the Entity Knows authentication factor) is deemed a multi-
factor token. An authentication use case may use one or 
more tokens and hence may involve the use of one or more 
authentication factors. In general, the authentication strength 
associated with an authentication use case is determined 
based on the combination of the following metrics: 
153
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 The number of authentication factors used in the 
authentication use case 
 The 
Entropy 
associated 
with 
each 
of 
the 
authenticator factor used 
    In this paper, we argue that the logic for assigning 
authentication 
strength 
based 
on 
the 
number 
of 
authentication factors in an authentication use case is valid 
only under certain limiting conditions and that these 
conditions do not hold in the case of authentication use 
cases using smart cards as identity tokens. This is the 
rationale for proposing a new methodology for assigning 
authentication strengths for various authentication use cases 
involving smart identity tokens.  
     The description of the conditions under which the 
number of authentication factors can be used as a reliable 
metric for authentication strength and an illustration of how 
those conditions do not hold in the case of smart cards are 
given in Section II. Section III discusses the basis vector 
that is applicable for smart card based identity verification 
approaches. The development of our methodology for 
determining authentication strengths for various smart card-
based authentication use cases based on the basis vector 
referred to above is the topic of Section IV. The application 
of this methodology for assigning authentication strengths 
for building a taxonomy of authentication assurance levels 
for the set of authentication use cases specified for a major 
government 
smart 
card-based 
identity 
verification 
deployment is done in Section V. Section VI presents the 
benefits of our methodology and provides the conclusions. 
II. LIMITATIONS OF AUTHENTICATION FACTOR-
BASED APPROACH FOR DETERMINING
 AUTHENTICATION STRENGTHS 
     In order that the number of authentication factors is a 
valid metric for determining the authentication strength of 
an authentication use case, it must satisfy the following 
properties: 
 AF-AS-P1: The authentication factors must be 
mutually independent. If there is any mutual 
dependency between any two authentication 
factors, then assuming the additive property is not 
valid for computing the metric indicating the 
authentication strength. This is not an issue as the 
three authentication factors – What You Know, 
What you Have and What you Are do not have any 
pair wise mutual dependency. 
 AF-AS-P2: 
All 
authenticators 
used 
in 
the 
authentication use case must flow directly from the 
claimant 
to 
the 
verifier 
in 
the 
resulting 
authentication message protocol. This property 
must hold since any authentication decision by the 
verifier is based entirely on the outcome of the 
process of verifying one or more authenticators 
received 
from 
the 
claimant. 
Hence 
any 
authentication decision based on a lesser number of 
authenticators is certainly of lower authentication 
strength than an authentication decision using a 
higher number of authenticators. 
     We illustrate through an example that the second 
property is not satisfied in many smart card based 
authentication 
use 
cases 
deployed 
in 
real-world 
implementations [3,8]. For example, in an authentication 
use case called Challenge-Response, the smart card 
responds to a random challenge string sent by the 
authentication system by encrypting the string with its 
private key and sending the encrypted string back. Some 
cards are programmed to require the card holder to provide 
a PIN to perform this private key operation. This 
authentication use case is classified as a two factor 
authentication (since it involves demonstrating the presence 
of a secret cryptographic key (one factor) and the PIN 
(second factor)) although the only authenticator that flows 
to the authentication system (verifier) is the encrypted 
challenge. Thus, we see that, in order to truly assess the 
authentication strength associated with smart card based 
authentication use cases, we need a basis vector other than 
just the number of authentication factors. To identify and 
derive such a basis vector, we find that there is a need to 
look at the various basic entities that participate in 
authentication protocols using smart cards and the nature of 
pair-wise binding that exists among them. The logic for 
development of these pair wise bindings is described in the 
next section. 
III. DEVELOPMENT OF BASIS  VECTOR FOR SMART
 CARD-BASED AUTHENTICATION USE CASES 
     Before we start using the pair-wise binding as 
components of a basis vector used for determining 
authentication strengths, we need to make a comprehensive 
list of the basic entities involved in them. These basic 
entities, building on the smart card contents we saw in the 
last section are: the physical token (smart card), the card 
holder, the token secret, card issuer and the person 
identifier. Please note that we do not term the credential as a 
basic entity since credential is a derived artifact providing 
the binding of the two basic entities – Person Identifier and 
the Token Secret. Before we start listing the pair-wise 
bindings, we find that any authentication use case is itself 
built from some primitive authentication usage modes each 
of which uses one or more of three categories of smart card 
data – Person Identifier, Token Secret and Credential. 
Hence every pair-wise binding should trace its link to a 
primitive authentication usage mode and the associated 
smart card data used in that mode. This link is provided 
through the data in Table I. Table I, in addition to providing 
the bindings, also provides the strength associated with each 
binding based on the nature of the primitive authentication 
usage mode and the associated data used in it. Out of the six 
possible valid bindings, the person identifier participates in 
three of them being associated with card issuer (through 
digital signature), token secret (being used in digital 
certificate) and card holder (being used in biometric object). 
154
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
TABLE I. SMART IDENTITY CARD – PRIMITIVE AUTHENTICATION USAGE MODES & BINDINGS 
Smart Card Data 
Primitive Authentication Usage 
Mode 
Pair-wise Bindings with associated 
strength 
Embedded Cryptographic Key 
(private key of an asymmetric Key 
Pair) – Token Secret 
PUM-1: Verifying Presence of 
embedded token secret (tested by 
sending an input data from the 
Verifier and receiving an associated 
Authenticator) 
Token- Token Secret Binding 
(Strong) 
Embedded Cryptographic Key 
(private key of an asymmetric Key 
Pair) – Token Secret that requires an 
activation data to demonstrate its 
presence 
PUM-2:  Same as previous + card 
holder providing a PIN for generating 
the authenticator 
1.Token – Token Secret Binding 
(Strong) 
2.Card Holder – Token Binding 
(Strong or Weak depending upon 
entropy of activation data) 
Person Identifier 
PUM-3: Person Identifier’s origin 
and integrity checked using its 
associated digital signature 
Person Identifier- Card Issuer 
Binding (Strong) 
Credential (A Public Key Certificate) 
linking the token secret to the Person 
Identifier 
PUM-4: Trust in the certificate 
established through Certificate 
Validation 
Token Secret – Person Identifier 
Binding (Strong) 
Credential (A digitally signed 
Biometric Object) linking a Card 
Holder Trait (biometric) to the Person 
Identifier 
PUM-5: The digital signature 
associated with biometric data object 
is verified. Live biometric sample 
sent to the card for matching with the 
stored biometric data 
Card Holder – Person Identifier  
Binding (Strong or Weak depending 
upon how live sample is collected) 
IV. METHODOLOGY FOR ASSIGNING 
AUTHENTICATION STRENGTHS FOR 
AUTHENTICATION USE CASES 
     In the previous section, we identified the primitive 
authentication usage modes and the bindings (along with 
their associated strength) enabled by those modes. An 
authentication use case that is used in a smart identity token 
deployment will be a combination of one or more of the 
primitive authentication usage modes. Now our final goal is 
the determination of authentication strength for a given 
authentication use case. In order to compute this value, we 
need to know the security properties satisfied and the 
weakness in each of the primitive authentication usage 
modes that constitute that authentication use case. The 
derivation of these security properties satisfied and 
weaknesses from the bindings (and their associated 
strengths) provided by each of the five primitive 
authentication usage modes (taking into consideration the 
state of smart card technology) is shown in Table II. 
     Now, based on the observation that the primitive 
authentication modes are independent of each other (except 
for PUM-2 which is a superset of PUM-1), the security 
properties associated with the set of primitive authentication 
usage modes constituting an authentication use case can all 
be added up to obtain the total set of security properties 
satisfied in an authentication use case. 
     Let us consider the following Authentication use case 
which we shall call as BIO-A: 
1. The Authentication Module (Verifier) reads the 
signed biometric object on the card. 
2. The digital signature of the biometric object is 
verified. 
3. The Authentication station is attended by a guard 
under whose watch the claimant provides his /her 
fingerprint through a scanner present in the station. 
4. The Live sample of the biometric is compared with 
the stored biometric data on the card. 
5. When the match is successful, the person identifier 
extracted from the signed biometric object is 
compared with identifier stored in the identifier 
object on the card. The digital signature associated 
with identifier object is verified. 
6. If the verification is successful, the identifier is sent 
to the Physical Access Control Server which in 
turn sends a signal to open the door leading to the 
facility controlled by the authentication station. 
    From the description of the above steps in our example 
Authentication Use Case BIO-A, we find that steps 1-4 map 
to our primitive authentication usage mode PUM-5. Step 5 
maps to our usage mode PUM-3. Hence adding the 
properties associated with these primitive authentication 
usage modes, we find that the authentication use case BIO-
A satisfies the following total set of properties: 
1. Card Holder is authenticated (Strong – since the live 
sample is collected under a supervised condition 
ensuring freshness and hence no replay using 
duplicated fingerprints possible) 
2. Validity of the Identifier is established 
   The security property set associated with an authentication 
use case can be used as a metric for establishing a partial 
order among the various authentication use cases specified 
for a smart card based identity verification deployment 
scenario. This partial order can then be used to construct an 
authentication 
assurance 
level 
taxonomy 
for 
that 
deployment instance. 
 
155
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE II. SECURITY PROPERTIES OF AUTHENTICATION USAGE MODES 
Primitive  Authentication Usage 
Mode 
Bindings Established with 
associated strength 
Security Properties Satisfied 
(WEAKNESS in CAPS) 
PUM-1: Verifying Presence of 
embedded token secret (tested by 
sending an input data from the 
Verifier and receiving an associated 
Authenticator) 
Token- Token Secret Binding 
(Strong) 
1.Card is Authenticated 
 
1.STOLEN CARD 
2. CARD HOLDER IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
3. NO LINK FROM TOKEN 
SECRET TO PERSON IDENTIFIER 
PUM-2:  Same as previous + sending 
an activation data to the token 
(a)Token – Token Secret Binding 
(Strong) 
(b)Card Holder – Token Binding 
(Strong or Weak depending upon 
activation data) 
1. Card is Authenticated 
2. Card Holder is Authenticated 
(Strength based on Activation Data) 
 
1.NO LINK FROM TOKEN 
SECRET TO PERSON IDENTIFIER 
PUM-3: Person Identifier’s origin 
and integrity checked using its 
associated digital signature 
Person Identifier – Card Issuer 
Binding  (Strong) 
1.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
1.STOLEN CARD 
2. CLONED CARD 
3. CARD IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
4. CARD HOLDER IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
5. NO LINK FROM TOKEN 
SECRET TO PERSON IDENTIFIER 
PUM-4: Trust is established on a 
credential (a public key certificate) 
linking embedded token secret and 
the person identifier through 
certificate validation 
Token Secret – Person Identifier 
Binding (Strong) 
1.Link from Token Secret to Person 
Identifier established 
 
1.STOLEN CARD 
2. CLONED CARD 
3. CARD IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
4. CARD HOLDER IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
PUM-5:  Trust is established on a 
credential (signed biometric object 
containing the identifier in addition to 
biometric data) by verifying the 
digital signature. Live biometric 
sample sent to the card for matching 
with the stored biometric data 
Card Holder – Person Identifier 
Binding (Strong or Weak depending 
upon how live sample is collected) 
1. Card Holder is Authenticated 
(Strength based on how live 
biometric sample is collected) 
 
1.CLONED CARD 
2. CARD IS NOT 
AUTHENTICATED 
V. ILLUSTRATION OF METHODOLOGY FOR A REAL 
WORLD SMART IDENTITY TOKEN DEPLOYMENT 
     In this section, we illustrate the application of our 
methodology for assignment of authentication strengths for 
authentication use cases used in a real world smart identity 
token deployment scenario. The first step of our 
methodology is to express each authentication use case 
specified for the deployment in terms of our primitive 
authentication usage mode. This will automatically provide 
us the total set of security properties associated with that 
authentication use case. We then use the property set 
containment to derive a partial order among the 
authentication use cases and to finally derive an 
authentication assurance level taxonomy for the entire smart 
identity token deployment. The real world smart identity 
token deployment we have chosen for our illustration is the 
 
 
Implementation of Personal Identity Verification (PIV) 
smart card for controlling physical access to federal 
facilities and logical access to U.S government IT systems 
[7,8]. For the sake of space and brevity, we do not describe 
each of the authentication use cases in the PIV deployment 
scenario. We also do not illustrate the process by which our 
primitive authentication usage modes can be composed to 
obtain a PIV authentication use case. These liberties have 
been taken since our final goal is just to illustrate the use of 
our methodology for developing an authentication assurance 
level taxonomy. Table III below provides a compilation of 
all the PIV Authentication uses [8], the list of primitive 
authentication 
usage 
modes 
that 
comprise 
each 
authentication use case and total set of security properties 
satisfied by each authentication use case specified in a PIV 
deployment instance. 
156
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
TABLE III. PROPERTIES SATISFIED BY PIV AUTHENTICATION USE CASES 
PIV Authentication Use Case 
Set of Primitive Authentication 
Usage Modes involved 
Properties Satisfied  
Authentication using PIV CHUID 
(CHUID) 
PUM-3: Identifier’s origin and 
integrity checked using its associated 
digital signature 
1.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
 
Unattended Authentication using PIV 
Biometric (BIO) 
PUM-5:  Trust is established on a 
credential (signed biometric object 
containing the identifier in addition to 
biometric data) by verifying the 
digital signature. Live biometric 
sample sent to the card for matching 
with the stored biometric data 
PUM-3: Identifier’s origin and 
integrity checked using its associated 
digital signature  
1. Card Holder is authenticated 
(Weak) 
2.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attended Authentication using PIV 
Biometric (BIO-A) 
PUM-5:  Trust is established on a 
credential (signed biometric object 
containing the identifier in addition to 
biometric data) by verifying the 
digital signature. Live biometric 
sample sent to the card for matching 
with the stored biometric data 
PUM-3: Identifier’s origin and 
integrity checked using its associated 
digital signature  
1. Card Holder is authenticated 
(Strong) 
2.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
 
Authentication using PIV 
Asymmetric Cryptography (PKI-
AUTH) 
PUM-4: Trust is established on a 
credential (a public key certificate) 
linking embedded token secret and 
the person identifier through 
certificate validation 
PUM-2: Verifying Presence of 
embedded token secret (tested by 
sending an input data from the 
Verifier and receiving an associated 
Authenticator) (derived from PUM-1) 
+ sending a activation data of robust 
strength to the token 
PUM-3: Identifier’s origin and 
integrity checked using its associated 
digital signature 
1.Link from Token Secret to 
Identifier established 
2. Card Holder is authenticated 
(Strong) 
3. Card is Authenticated 
4.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
Authentication using Card 
Authentication Certificate Credential 
(PKI-CAK) 
PUM-4: Trust is established on a 
credential (a public key certificate) 
linking embedded token secret and 
the person identifier through 
certificate validation 
PUM-1: Verifying Presence of 
embedded token secret (tested by 
sending an input data from the 
Verifier and receiving an associated 
Authenticator) 
PUM-3: Identifier’s origin and 
integrity checked using its associated 
digital signature 
1.Link from Token Secret to 
Identifier established 
2. Card is Authenticated 
3.Validity of the Identifier is 
established 
 
 
     Based on the property containment relationship between the 
various PIV authentication use cases, we derive a partial order and 
use that partial order to develop a complete authentication 
assurance level taxonomy. The taxonomy thus derived in shown in 
Figure 1 below:  
 
157
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
Figure 1. Authentication Assurance Level Taxonomy for a Smart Identity Token Deployment 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND BENEFITS 
     The observation that not all authenticators flow between 
the smart identity token and the authentication module 
(verifier) has driven the need for a new basis vector other 
than just the number of authentication factors and an 
associated 
methodology 
for 
assigning 
authentication 
strengths for various authentication use cases involving 
smart cards. In this paper, we developed such a 
methodology which uses pair wise bindings between the 
five entities involved in smart identity token authentication 
use cases –i.e., token (the card), the token secret, the card 
holder, the card issuer and the person identifier - as the basis 
for deriving a set of properties satisfied for each primitive 
authentication usage mode. The primitive authentication 
usage modes are in turn identified based on the types of data 
a smart identity token usually holds. Next, we illustrated the 
process of expressing an authentication use case in terms of 
 
 
 
 
the combination of primitive authentication usage modes  
and using the additive properties associated with each usage 
mode, derived the total set of properties satisfied by an 
authentication use case. Finally the property set associated 
with an authentication use case is used to derive a partial 
order among the use cases. This partial order was then used 
to derive an entire authentication assurance level taxonomy 
for a smart identity token deployment scenario. The 
advantages of this approach are: (a) It takes into account all 
entities participating in the authentication protocol (the five 
that we referred to earlier) and the pair wise bindings 
between them and (b) considers technology-specific 
weaknesses (e.g., token can be stolen and cloned) that may 
affect the security properties satisfied in each primitive 
authentication usage mode and by extension in an 
authentication use case. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Securing e-business applications using Smart Cards, IBM  
Systems Journal, Vol 40, Number 3, 2001, (Oct, 2011),  
 http://www.research.ibm.com/journal/sj/403/hamann.html 
[2] Kumar, M.: New Remote User Authentication Scheme Using 
Smart Cards, IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. 
Volume 50,  Issue 2, 597 – 600 (2004) 
[3] TWIC Reader Hardware And Card Application 
Specification, May 30, 2008, (Nov, 2011) 
http://www.tsa.gov/assets/pdf/twic_reader_card_app_spec.pdf 
[4] NIST SP 800-63-1 Recommendation for Electronic 
Authentication, Dec 2008, (Oct, 2011)  
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-63-rev1/SP800-63-
Rev1_Dec2008.pdf 
 
 
[5] OMB M04-04 – E-Authentication Guidance for Federal 
Agencies, Dec 16, 2003, (Oct, 2011) 
  http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/fu04/m04-04.pdf 
[6] Internet X.509 PKI Certificate & CRL Profile, (Nov, 2011) 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5280.txt 
[7] Identity Management Task Force Report, National Science 
and Technology Council (NSTC) Subcommittee on       
Biometrics and Identity Management, 2008, (Oct, 2011) 
http://www.biometrics.gov/documents/idmreport_22sep08_final
.pdf  
[8] FIPS 201 – Personal Identity Verification of Federal 
Employees and Contractors, (Oct, 2011) 
 http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/fips201-2/Draft_NIST-
FIPS-201-2.pdf  
158
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

