Information Technology Planning For Collaborative 
Product Development Through Fuzzy QFD 
 
Jbid Arsenyan 
Industrial Engineering Department  
Bahcesehir University 
Istanbul, 34100, Turkey  
jbid.arsenyan@bahcesehir.edu.tr 
Gülçin Büyüközkan 
Industrial Engineering Department 
Galatasaray University  
Istanbul, 34357, Turkey 
gulcin.buyukozkan@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—Collaborative Product Development (CPD) becomes 
a more complex process to manage by the rapid technological 
change. As a consequence of various system features 
introduced by research groups and commercial packages, CPD 
practitioners lose track of the available platforms, protocols, 
applications, system features, and tools supporting CPD 
processes. This study aims to provide a mapping between the 
technological requirements for CPD and system features of 
these 
various 
infrastructures. 
Fuzzy 
Quality 
Function 
Deployment (QFD) is employed for mapping between 
requirements and features. An industrial expert is consulted 
for evaluation of derived relationships and consequently 
system features are prioritized.   
Keywords: Collaborative Product Development; Fuzzy QFD; 
Technology requirements. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Due to its technology-centric nature, Collaborative 
Product Development (CPD) is typically based on 
technological infrastructures, which require for information 
technologies (IT) to be essential conveyors of good CPD 
performance [1]. However, the management of requirements 
and implementation of necessary tools to respond to these 
requirements 
constitute 
a 
complex 
process 
as 
the 
technological diversity grows rapidly. Current tools become 
hard to track and thus, evaluations are performed with 
incomplete and biased information given that assessing all 
systems is not possible.  
Previous studies do not propose a comprehensive review 
of CPD systems mainly because these systems including 
various applications, tools, and plug-ins are numerous; they 
can be easily outdated by new researches and are only 
known by a limited community. On the other hand, various 
systems are proposed by literature and commercial ventures 
in order to facilitate collaboration, integration, co-design, and 
co-development processes of CPD teams. 
In this highly uncertain environment, with various 
different requirements and numerous technological solutions, 
a systematic methodology is essential to plan the 
technological infrastructure needed to start and maintain the 
CPD process. Determining requirements and accordingly 
prioritizing technological response compose an important 
phase in IT planning. Some projects may require only 
communication tools, while others are dependent on highly 
skilled 
web-based 
engineering 
applications. 
A 
comprehensive and detailed planning methodology utilizing 
Quality Function Deployment (QFD) is introduced to help 
CPD practitioners in their development and collaboration 
efforts. 
QFD is a well established methodology in transforming 
customer needs into engineering characteristics and therefore 
its House of Quality (HoQ) diagram appears to be a suitable 
tool for mapping needs of CPD into existing tools and 
technologies. Additionally, mapping is performed under a 
fuzzy environment in order to translate linguistic evaluations 
of the expert into quantifiable performance measures. The 
aim of this study is to introduce a comprehensible 
methodology for IT planning, which can be employed by 
CPD practitioners before launching CPD projects.  
The study is organized as follows: next section 
introduces the technology planning literature, which covers 
studies in a general context. Then the fuzzy QFD is 
described and the methodology backgrounds are established. 
The fourth section presents CPD technology overview, 
which includes commonly used standards and environments, 
technology requirements and system features in CPD 
infrastructure. Then the IT planning with fuzzy QFD is 
presented with an evaluation of an industrial expert. The 
study concludes with a few remarks. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGY PLANNING BACKGROUND 
Use of proper technology is the most preferred factor in 
maintaining competitive advantage [2]. Systematic planning 
of technological infrastructure is therefore important in 
improving CPD performance. Efficiency and effectiveness of 
CPD are enhanced by appropriate implementation of tools 
and technologies enabling CPD [3], which can be attained 
through accurate mapping of requirements into the system 
features.  
A technology planning framework is proposed by Porter 
et al. [4], which includes technology forecasting, as well as 
environmental analysis and aims to design organizational 
actions. 
Value 
adding 
chain 
concept 
requires 
the 
implementation of technology within all aspects of the 
business. Martin [5] also starts with technology forecasting 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

and applies scenario analysis to define technology 
allocations according to short term and long term needs. Rip 
and Camp [6] propose a four step methodology, which starts 
with market research then determine product features and 
technology options for these features and finally finishes 
with future consideration of technology resources.  
Pretorius and Wet [7] define a framework based on the 
hierarchy of the enterprise, business processes and functions. 
Technological assessment can be mapped on the relationship 
between technology and processes on the three dimensional 
framework. Kumar and Midha [8] employ. They utilize the 
QFD approach to compare company's requirements in CPD 
with different functionalities of Product Data Management 
(PDM) systems and technical specifications are then 
compared to a specific PDM system. 
Büyüközkan et al. [3] present a comprehensive review on 
tools, 
techniques 
and 
technologies 
enabling 
agile 
manufacturing in concurrent Product Development (PD). 
Rodriguez and Al-Ashaab [9] identify CPD supporting 
system 
characteristics 
and 
classify 
corresponding 
technological requirements. They also perform a survey in 
injection mould industry and they propose a knowledge 
based CPD system architecture responding to industrial 
requirements.  
Koc and Mutu [2] present a technology planning 
methodology, from selection of competitive priorities to 
designing the activities, by integrating different system 
design perspectives through AD. Rueda and Kocaoglu [10] 
state that market and technology performance uncertainty 
make technological investment highly risky and they focus 
on diffusion of emerging technologies. They combine 
bibliometrics analysis, Delphi method, utility curves, and 
scenarios to define a composite indicator for the diffusion. 
Shengbin et al. [11] focus on technology roadmap concept 
and they present a visual guide to map market, product, and 
technologies to achieve technology selection. The three 
phased design process includes trend discussion, industrial 
and 
academic 
investigation, 
expert 
feedback 
on 
technological demand and it provides a tool to make strategic 
level technology selection decision.  
Luh et al. [12] combine Design Structure Matrix with 
Fuzzy Sets Theory into FDSM to present a dynamic planning 
method for PD, increasing PD efficiency and decreasing 
development time. Ko [13] also employs FDSM to present a 
methodology enhancing PD management by organizing 
design activities and measuring dependency strength. Palacio 
et al. [14] presents a tool to facilitate collaboration in 
distributed Software Development (SD) teams, which aims 
to increase collaboration awareness by focusing on 
individuals and their activities. 
Previous studies do not address a generic approach, 
which investigates and classifies the CPD requirements, as 
well as the tools and techniques provided by researchers and 
commercial packages. This study aims to introduce a 
planning framework within the fuzzy HoQ in order to 
capture these aspects and map their relationships.   
III. 
FUZZY QFD OVERVIEW 
HoQ, the planning tool within QFD methodology, can 
be described as a “conceptual map that provides the means 
of inter-functional planning and communications” [15]. It 
translates customer needs into customer attributes (CAs) in 
order to meet them through engineering characteristics 
(ECs).  
As a first step in constructing a HoQ, CAs are collected 
from customers (Domain 1). Then engineering teams try to 
answer the question “how to achieve this attribute”. ECs 
that affect CAs are listed accordingly (Domain 2). CAs are 
prioritized in order to have a trade off basis in the case of 
conflicting objectives (Domain 3). As depicted in Fig. 1, 
right hand side of HoQ offers a benchmarking tool, where 
customer perception of other brands as well as focal firm’s 
brand in response to CAs is depicted (Domain 3a).  
 
 
Figure 1 Main domains of HoQ 
Then relationships between CAs and ECs are 
represented in symbols in accordance with the strength of 
the relationship (strong positive, medium negative, etc.). 
This step of the methodology serves to identify how an EC 
can affect a specific CA (Domain 4). 
ECs effect on each other is represented in the roof matrix 
of the HoQ (Domain 5). Interdependent characteristics are 
thus displayed and the total outcome of engineering change 
is visualized. ECs are also marked regarding the direction of 
change in that specific characteristic (Domain 5a). Finally, 
target values and the degree of technical difficulty are set 
for ECs in order to present the amount of work and its 
complexity (Domain 6).  
Majority of QFD applications stop at the planning stage, 
i.e. the HoQ and nevertheless, many benefits can be 
achieved through only the first matrix [16]. However, 
conventional HoQ matrix is not sufficient in describing the 
relationships between CAs and ECs. In some cases, 
application is performed in a fuzzy environment. Fuzzy 
QFD is employed in these cases in order to translate the 
vagueness of relationships and the subjectivity of the 
evaluator into quantifiable data. 
Literature proposes many examples of fuzzy QFD 
applications. Şen and Baraçlı [16] investigate enterprise 
software selection requirements with fuzzy QFD. Linguistic 
variables are employed to prioritize non-functional criteria 
 
Domain 4 
 
Domain 2 
Domain 3 
 
Domain 5 
 
Domain 1 
Domain 6 
Domain 3a 
Domain 5a 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

in order to provide a decision making framework to 
determine the order of criteria to be satisfied during 
software selection decisions of a company. In their two 
concurrent studies [17] and [18], Vinodh and Chintha 
investigate the enabling effect of fuzzy QFD to leanness and 
agility in a manufacturing organization. Fuzzy QFD is 
employed to prioritize the lean competitive bases, lean 
attributes, lean enablers in one case and the agile decision 
domains, agile attributes and agile enablers in the other by 
employing linguistic terms for both relationship matrix and 
correlations.  
Lee and Lin [19] employ fuzzy QFD in PD. They 
incorporate fuzzy Delphi, fuzzy Interpretive Structure 
Modelling and fuzzy Analytic Network Process into QFD 
framework. Linguistic variables are employed for both 
relationships between CAs and ECs and the correlation 
between CAs to investigate priorities of PD in CAs, ECs, 
part characteristics, key process operations, and production 
requirements. Liu [20] employs fuzzy QFD to investigate 
priorities in product design and selection by (1) computing 
the relative importance of CAs, (2) computing the final 
importance of CAs and (3) computing the final importance 
of ECs through linguistic variables. Their methodology is 
also two phased, the second phase adopting a multi-criteria 
decision making approach. Jia and Bai [21] apply fuzzy 
QFD in manufacturing strategy development. Fuzzy 
integrated HoQ helps to capture the highly imprecise and 
vague nature of the strategy decisions. 
In this study QFD is employed in a fuzzy environment 
considering that IT planning of CPD projects, in terms of  
requirements and features, is dependent on subjective 
judgments of CPD managers,. We aim to translate 
subjective and linguistic judgments of evaluators into 
quantifiable relationships by integrating fuzzy sets theory 
into HoQ. In the proposed methodology; CA weightings, 
CA-EC relationships, and EC correlations are defined in 
linguistic terms and then translated into triangular fuzzy 
numbers (TFNs) in the form of 
(l,m,u)
.After defining CAs 
and ECs for the study, the industrial expert is consulted for 
his judgments. Collected linguistic judgments are fuzzified.  
Fuzzy computation processes in this study are adapted 
from Vinodh and Chintha [18]. The relationship matrix and 
the weights of CAs are employed to compute the relative 
importance of ECs as follows: 
 
j, = 1,…,m. 
R
W
=
RI
n
1
i
ij
i
j 


 
(1) 
Then the correlation matrix is considered. The final 
score of the jth EC is computed by the following equation: 
 
j, = 1,…,m. 
RI
T
RI
score
j'
j
j'
jj'
j
j





 
(2)  
The final score is defuzzified in order to obtain a final 
crisp score: 
 
Sj = (l + 2m + u)/4
 
(3) 
The ECs are ranked in decreasing order of crisp scores. 
A higher score of EC implicates a higher priority to consider 
and thus, a higher importance to attribute. 
IV. 
CLASSIFICATION OF IT FOR CPD 
Technological 
change, 
especially 
in 
PD 
and 
collaborative technologies domains, are increasingly rapid 
and hard to track. However, services offered by various 
systems do not transform in the same pace as the complexity 
level increases.  
CPD 
systems 
are 
generally 
built 
on 
various 
infrastructures. Commercial software and academic projects 
based on these infrastructures are numerous to cite and 
easily outdated, therefore out of the scope of this research. 
Nevertheless, some systems and commercial packages, 
summarized in [9] and [22], can be a reference on the 
services offered by researchers and industry.  
A. Requirements overview 
CPD literature and industrial experts express similar 
opinions when it comes to technological requirements in 
CPD projects, although some differences may be observed. 
Li and Su [23] state that CPD environment should comprise 
scalability, openness, heterogeneity, resources access and 
inter-operation, legacy codes reusability, and artificial 
intelligence as features. According to Rodriguez and Al-
Ashaab [9], common access of design information, 
collaborative 
visualization 
of 
the 
component, 
and 
collaborative design of the component are the requirements 
to be supported by collaborative technologies. Palacio et al. 
[14] classify SD requirements in four groups: scale, 
uncertainty, interdependence, and communication. These 
requirements form a starting point for both collaboration 
and development processes. Requirements of CSD, which 
can be viewed as CPD sub-domain, include interaction, 
knowledge, awareness, coordination, communication, and 
control [14].  
These aspects are categorized in nine groups under the 
Requirements domain, each requirement followed by its 
label. 
Communication 
(CA1) 
emerges 
as 
a 
principal 
requirement in IT planning to assure awareness [22]. Project 
Management (CA2) and Knowledge Management (CA3) are 
two essential requirements as stated in [1,3,9,24], which 
clearly suggest that these two requirements should be 
considered within any type of project, regardless of its 
collaborative aspect. Another important requirement while 
planning the technological infrastructure of CPD is the 
product model (CA4) itself. The technological infrastructure 
should comprise a system that enables the representation, 
visualization, modification of the product model. Data 
Integration & Analysis (CA5) requirement can be described 
as a mechanism to integrate data available on different sites 
from different collaborating teams and to analyze this data 
in 
a 
most 
efficient 
manner 
[25]. 
Accordingly, 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Interoperability (CA6) requirement emerges as a natural 
result of collaboration in order to assure diverse systems to 
work together.  
Security (CA7) and privacy issues arise as CPD projects 
become a part of the business routine. This requirement 
implicates data protection as well as system back-up, as 
mentioned in [1]. Accordingly, defined by ISO 31000 as the 
effect of uncertainty on objectives, Risk Management (CA8) 
is a requirement to control uncertainties that may result in 
project failures. Lastly, CPD infrastructure requires 
Technical 
Support 
(CA9) 
given 
that 
collaborative 
infrastructure consisting of technology products may often 
necessitate maintenance and repair services.  
The next section discusses the features presented by the 
various tools available in the technology arena. These 
features will be employed to respond to the aforementioned 
requirements.   
B. System features overview  
Nine requirement groups described in the previous 
section are met by various tools presented by commercial 
applications and academic researches. These tools are 
gathered in ten groups, labelled as features of CPD systems. 
Each feature is followed by its label.  
Palacio et al. [14] state that technological infrastructure 
to meet the specified requirements should include features 
such as communication service, mechanism to share and 
filter relevant information, mechanism to spot individual 
project progress, interaction mechanism for team members, 
status updates and tasks progress, search tool based on 
profile, status, and activity; synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. PD oriented studies are also reviewed to 
support development process while technology planning. 
Sky and Buchal [26] categorize tools to support PD in six 
groups: information gathering, drawing and design, 
analysis and evaluation, general documentation, planning 
and 
scheduling, 
synchronous 
workspace 
sharing. 
Büyüközkan et al. [3] classify concurrent PD tools as 
networking and management tools, modelling and analysis 
tools, predictive tools, and intelligent tools.  
Studies 
clearly 
emphasize 
the 
importance 
of 
communication tools. It is essential to assure coordination 
with ICT [1] and therefore communication tools are 
considered as primary features in a CPD system. Literature 
shows that synchronous and asynchronous communication 
tools are nearly always included in any collaborative 
system. Synchronous communication tools (EC1) assure 
real-time communication while spatially and temporally 
different communication is realized by asynchronous 
communication tools (EC2); which include e-mail, faxing, 
discussion boards, etc. 
System integration mechanisms (EC2) are also widely 
studied in the literature. Some argue web-based interfaces to 
integrate various design models while others propose 
unification of modelling schemes [27]. Project management 
tool (EC4) is indispensable in a CPD project and it serves to 
control and coordinate the virtual team and their tasks [9]. 
Product visualization (EC4) is another feature of CPD 
systems. Collaborative visualization and collaborative 
design of the product allows teams to view, design, modify, 
mark-up, and measure the 3D virtual geometric model.  
Document management tools (EC6) systems aim to store 
electronic 
documents 
and 
images, 
which 
enables 
engineering teams to create knowledge out of the 
information shared throughout the CPD project. Content 
management tools (EC7), serve to manage the workflow in 
collaborative environments.  
Described as tools to keep track of history of a dataset 
[25], Data Tracking & Analysis Tool (EC8) enables the 
collaborating teams to make sense of the data they are 
handling. Data tracking is therefore important as it provides 
a detailed history of the data and the origin it generated 
from. Archiving tools (EC9) is also an important feature 
where large data is shared by distributed teams as storing, 
retrieving, and accessing the data are assured by archiving. 
It is important to be able to make use of the information 
created during the collaboration process. Decision support 
tools (EC10) become necessary at this stage, where a system 
is required to analyze all data and present an understandable 
report to assist decision makers’ in their decision process.  
Overall, ten system features are identified in response to 
the nine requirements of CPD projects. 
V. 
IT PLANNING USING FUZZY QFD 
Defining the requirements and the system features 
provides a better understanding of the current situation of 
CPD infrastructure. However, a planning methodology is 
required in order to map the aforementioned requirements 
into the features. HoQ diagram, the most recognized form of 
QFD, emerges as an appropriate planning tool. The 
translation of customer requirements into technical 
specifications becomes IT requirements for CPD mapped 
into CPD system features. Consequently, CAs are mapped 
into ECs in order to define how the system features respond 
to CPD requirements.  
TABLE I.  
FUZZY SCALE FOR IMPORTANCE LEVELS 
Scale for importance levels 
Linguistic variable 
Abbreviation 
TFN 
Very low 
VL 
(0, 1, 2) 
Low 
L 
(2, 3, 4) 
Medium 
M 
(4, 5, 6) 
High 
H 
(6, 7, 8) 
Very high 
VH 
(8, 9, 10) 
Scale for relationships 
Linguistic variable 
Abbreviation 
TFN 
Strong 
Θ 
(7, 10, 10) 
Moderate 
Ο 
(3, 5, 7) 
Weak 
▲ 
(0, 0, 3) 
Scale for correlations 
Linguistic variable 
Abbreviation 
TFN 
Strong positive 
 
(3, 5, 7) 
Positive 
 
(0, 3, 5) 
Negative 
 
(-5, -3, 0) 
Strong Negative 
 
(-7, -5, -3) 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Our expert; an e-Business specialist, Knowledge 
Management Group leader, and CRM coordinator; is 
consulted for his industrial insight on the importance of 
requirements, requirement-system feature relationships, and 
system features correlations. He is asked to evaluate 
domains 3, 4, and 5 according to the scales presented in 
Table I.  
The HoQ evaluation is displayed in Fig. 2. The expert 
evaluation, contrary to expectations, covers all pairwise 
relationships in Domain 4 and all pairwise correlations in 
Domain 5. 
 
 
Figure 2 Expert judgments on weights, relationships and correlations 
Fig. 2 lists the importance of the requirements. Then the 
mapping phase shows how these requirements are satisfied 
through the system features. Lastly, correlations between the 
system features are defined in order to observe their effect 
on each other. 
These expert judgments are translated into TFNs 
according to the scales in Tables I. Priorities of system 
features are computed through equations (1) and (2). Final 
crisp priorities, displayed in Table II, are computed through 
equation (3). As a result, a priority vector is obtained for 
implementation of system features.  
TABLE II.  
SYSTEM FEATURE PRIORITIES 
 
System Feature 
Priorities 
(Normalized) 
EC9 
Archiving tools 
0.122 
EC7 
Content management tools 
0.119 
EC5 
Product visualization  
0.106 
EC6 
Document management tools 
0.105 
EC8 
Data tracking & analysis 
0.098 
EC4 
Project management tool 
0.098 
EC10 
Decision support tools 
0.094 
EC3 
System integration mechanisms 
0.090 
EC2 
Asynchronous communication 
tools 
0.088 
EC1 
Synchronous communication tools 
0.080 
 
Final ranking of normalized priorities clearly suggest the 
importance of the archiving tools. This outcome can be 
interpreted as the importance of co-learning in CPD projects 
[1]. Archiving tools assure communication of the created 
information and sharing during collaboration efforts. 
Content management tools hold the second level of priority. 
This feature is also strongly connected with co-learning, 
whşch is a result of CPD. In a CPD project, product 
visualization tools rank as the third important system 
feature. This tool enables various engineering teams from 
various sites to conduct development process and therefore 
emerges as another high priority feature.  
It is interesting to observe that communication tools 
(asynchronous and asynchronous) are the two system 
features with the least priorities. However, when combined, 
they emerge as the system feature with the most priority. 
This outcome can be linked to the fact that communication 
tools do not require high technology or high specification. 
Even the most basic communication tools can achieve the 
communication required in the CPD projects. 
The outcome can be interpreted as an investment route 
for IT implementation at the beginning of a CPD project. 
This HoQ outcome aims to provide an understanding of 
implementation priorities from our expert’s perspective.  
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
An essential part of CPD performance is IT; given that 
both the PD and the collaboration of various teams on 
different sites require a comprehensive technological 
infrastructure to support the communication as well as the 
integration of the firms. However, the rapid evolution of the 
IT complicates the forecasting and the planning of 
technological infrastructure. 
The contribution of this study is two-fold. First, this 
paper proposes a set of technological requirements for CPD 
and a generic set of system features that includes tools and 
applications to respond to these requirements. On the other 
hand, a HoQ framework is employed to map the 
requirements to the system features. Importance of 
requirements, relationships between requirements and 
features, and correlations between system features included 
in the HoQ are evaluated by an industrial expert and Fuzzy 
QFD methodology is employed to 
interpret these 
evaluations.  
Results show that system features associated with 
collaborative learning have the most priorities when 
planning technological infrastructure. However, it is 
apparent that all system features concur approximately to 
the same importance level. This can be interpreted as the 
need to cover all aspects of technological infrastructure 
within a CPD process. The outcome provides an 
implementation route for system features while considering 
IT infrastructure for CPD projects. 
Further research includes extension of the current work 
through evaluations of different industrial experts in order to 
observe the differences in the priorities outcome according 
to industrial profile of the assessor. It is also anticipated to 
further develop the HoQ application in order to present a 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

comprehensive 
planning 
methodology, 
considering 
additional inputs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors wish to thank TUBITAK for the financial 
support for this research, which is realized in the scope of 
TUBITAK Project No: 109M147. Authors also wish to 
thank Lemi Tuncer for his industrial insight during the 
development and evaluation processes. 
REFERENCES 
 [1] J. Arsenyan and G. Büyüközkan, "Modelling Collaborative Product 
Development Using Axiomatic Design ," in CD proceedings of 15th 
International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising (ICE 2009) , Leiden, 
The Netherlands, 22-24 June 2009. 
[2] 
T. Koc and Y. Mutu, "A Technology Planning Methodology Based 
on Axiomatic Design Approach," in PICMET 2006 Proceedings, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2006, pp. 1450-1456. 
[3] 
G. Büyüközkan, T. Dereli, and A. Baykasoğlu, "A survey on the 
methods and tools of concurrent new product development and agile 
manufacturing," Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 15, pp. 731-751, 
2004. 
[4] 
A. L. Porter, A. T. Roper, T. W. Mason, F. A. Rossini, and J. Banks, 
Forecasting and Management of Technology. New York: Wiley, 1991. 
[5] 
M.J. Martin, Managing innovation and entrepreneurship in 
technology-based firms. Canada: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994. 
[6] 
A. Rip and R. Kemp, "Technological Change," in Human Choice and 
Climate Change. Columbus, OH: Batele Press, 1998, pp. 327-399. 
[7] 
M. W. Pretorius and G. de Wet, "A model for the assessment of new 
technology for the manufacturing enterprise," Technovation, vol. 20, no. 1, 
pp. 3-10, 2000. 
[8] 
R. Kumar and P.S. Midha, "A QFD based methodology for 
evaluating a company’s PDM requirements for collaborative product 
development," Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 101, no. 3, pp. 
126-132, 2001. 
[9] 
K. Rodriguez and A. Al-Ashaab, "Knowledge web-based system 
architecture for collaborative product development," Computers in 
Industry, vol. 56, pp. 125-140, 2005. 
[10] G. Rueda and D.F. Kocaoglu, "Diffusion of emerging technologies: 
An innovative mixing approach," in PICMET 2008 Proceedings, Cape 
Town, South Africa, 2008, pp. 672-697. 
[11] H. Shengbin, Y. Bo, and W. Weiwei, "Research on application of 
technology roadmap in technology selection decision," in Control and 
Decision Conference, 2008. CCDC 2008, Yantai, Shandong , 2008, pp. 
2271 - 2275. 
[12] D.-B. Luh, Y.-T. Ko, and C.-H. Ma, "A Dynamic Planning Approach 
for New Product Development," Concurrent Engineering, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 
43-59, 2009. 
[13] Y.-T. Ko, "A dynamic planning method for new product development 
management," Journal of the Chinese Institute of Industrial Engineers, vol. 
27, no. 2, pp. 103-120, 2010. 
[14] R.R. Palacio, A. Vizcaino, A.L. Moran, and V.M. Gonzalez, "Tool to 
facilitate appropriate interaction in global software development," IET 
Software, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 157-171, 2011. 
[15] J.R. Hauser and D. Clausing, "The House of Quality," Harvard 
Business Review, vol. 66, no. 3, p. 63–73, 1988. 
[16] C.G. Şen and H. Baraçlı, "Fuzzy quality function deployment based 
methodology for acquiring enterprise software selection requirements," 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 37, p. 3415–3426, 2010. 
[17] S. Vinodh and S.K. Chintha, "Application of fuzzy QFD for enabling 
leanness in a manufacturing organisation," International Journal of 
Production Research, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 1627-1644, 2011. 
[18] S. Vinodh and S.K. Chintha, "Application of fuzzy QFD for enabling 
agility in a manufacturing organization: A case study," The TQM Journal, 
vol. 23 , no. 3, pp. 343 - 357, 2011. 
[19] A. Lee and C.-Y. Lin, "An integrated fuzzy QFD framework for new 
product development," Flexible Services and Manufacturing Journal, vol. 
23, pp. 26-47, 2011. 
[20] H.-T. Liu, "Product design and selection using fuzzy QFD and fuzzy 
MCDM approaches," Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 35, p. 482–
496, 2011. 
[21] G.Z. Jia and M. Bai, "An approach for manufacturing strategy 
development based on fuzzy-QFD," Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
vol. 60, p. 445–454, 2011. 
[22] W. D. Li and Z. M. Qiu, "State-of-the-art technologies and 
methodologies 
for 
collaborative 
product 
development 
systems," 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 44, no. 13, pp. 2525-
2559, 2006. 
[23] J. Li and D. Su, "Support modules and system structure of web-
enabled collaborative environment for design and manufacture," 
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 2397-2412, 
2008. 
[24] W. Shen, Q. Hao, and W. Li, "Computer supported collaborative 
design: Retrospective and perspective," Computers in Industry, vol. 59, p. 
855–862, 2008. 
[25] E.S. Lee, D.W. McDonald, N. Anderson, and P. Tarczy-Hornoch, 
"Incorporating collaboratory concepts into informatics in support of 
translational interdisciplinary biomedical research," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 10-21, 2009. 
[26] R.W.E. Sky and R.O. Buchal, "Modeling and Implementing 
Concurrent Engineering in a Virtual Collaborative Environment," 
Concurrent Engineering, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 279-289, 1999. 
[27] G. 
Buyukozkan 
and 
J. 
Arsenyan, 
"Collaborative 
Product 
Development: A Literature Overview," Production Planning & Control, 
vol. Accepted., 2010. 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

