Digital Services for the Aging Society: 
The Impact of Previous Workplace Priviliges on Mature Adults’ Use of the Internet 
 
Heiko Gewald and Robert Rockmann 
Center for Research on Service Sciences (CROSS) 
Neu-Ulm University of Applied Sciences 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
e-mail: heiko.gewald@hs-neu-ulm.de; robert.rockmann@hs-neu-ulm.de 
 
 
Abstract—Developed economies face severe challenges from 
demographic change. A popular measure to counter this 
development is to empower the aging society for longer 
independent living. Digital services offered through the Internet 
are discussed as major enabling factor. However, although this 
seems the natural way to help this clientele, our knowledge on 
Internet usage habits of the elderly is still limited. Therefore, we 
conducted a quantitative study targeting the 50+ population to 
assess the effect previous Internet usage at work has on current 
private Internet use. Our findings underline the high 
importance which Internet self-efficacy and anxiety have on the 
actual use of Internet services. 
Keywords: Internet Use; Mature Adults; Computer Self-
Efficacy; Computer Anxiety. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Literally all developed economies face the problem of an 
adverse demographic structure [2]. Especially Europe has 
been struck by the challenge that the general population 
rapidly grows older and in the near future old people will have 
outnumbered the young ones [3]. The demographic change 
affects society in many ways. One of the most pressuring 
being a severe shortage of people working in the service 
industry to care for the aging generation. This applies 
specifically to health professionals [4] as older people tend to 
increasingly request health related services. But not only 
healthcare, also other service areas suffer from a lack of 
qualified personnel. 
As widely propagated answer to counter this challenge is 
to provide digital services for the elderly to enable them to 
longer live autonomously. eHealth and telemedicine offerings 
are booming these days [5]. However, despite the numerous 
offerings the proof that these mechanisms are effective is still 
outstanding. Several studies point out that adoption rates for 
eHealth and telemedicine are low [2]. 
To a certain extent, this mismatch between supply and 
demand may arise from a lack of knowledge about the level 
of comfort elderly people have interacting with the Internet. 
This poses a severe challenge for current research, as there is 
certain ignorance about old people’s attitude towards the 
Internet and the offerings presented via this channel. In fact, 
even the few IS studies that used the concept of age as a 
substantive variable have mostly relied on stereotypical 
accounts alone to justify their age-related hypotheses [6]. 
In order to provide digitalization to the aging society, we 
first need to understand more about the behavioral intention 
and attitudes of the elderly. This research aims to provide 
insights into these matters. As pointed out before, the elderly 
are not a homogenous group but in fact as heterogeneous as 
all other segments of the population. With respect to Internet 
use we see different shades of grey ranging from frantic users 
to total rejection.  Reason for rejection could be that the person 
had no prior contact to the Internet during younger times. 
Therefore, we hypothesize that there is a positive relation 
between previous Internet experience and current use. To 
investigate this question we put forward the research question: 
What is the relationship between previous Internet usage at 
work and current Internet use in private life? 
Our findings are assumed to help developing more suitable 
digitalization services for the aging society. 
To shed light on this question we developed a theory-
guided questionnaire that was tested with 148 participants 50 
and above. As we were targeting the general population 
(including those who only make very limited use of the 
Internet) the research needed to be conducted as physical 
interviews to avoid bias towards those who use the Internet 
more frequently. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we briefly 
outline important individual differences found in prior 
literature on mature adults’ technology use. In Section 3 we 
develop our research model and derive according hypotheses 
how mature adults’ private Internet usage is influenced by 
prior workplace Internet usage. Thereafter, in Section 4, the 
research method is described in detail and participants' 
demographics, as well as results are discussed. Following that, 
the findings are presented and limitations explicated in 
Section 5. The paper closes with an outlook to further research 
and the conclusion in Section 6. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Research identified several sources of individual 
differences in IT related behavior. These are demographic 
factors (age, gender, income, level of education, etc.), 
situational variables (knowledge, expertise, etc.) or IT-
specific individual characteristics [7][8]. Naturally, the latter 
are regarded as prime candidates in explaining and predicting 
individual differences in IT-related behavior [8][9]. 
Specifically Computer Self-Efficacy and Computer Anxiety 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

have previously shown to assert a severe impact towards 
human behavior on IT-related matters, both, in general [8][9] 
and in the context of mature adults [10][11]. Within this 
section, we briefly outline these two distinct individual 
characteristics – Computer Self-Efficacy and Computer 
Anxiety– and their importance for mature adults. 
A. 
Computer Self-Efficacy 
Computer Self-Efficacy (CSE) is defined as the “judgment 
of one's capability to use a computer” [12, p. 192]. The 
concept originated from Bandura’s Social Cognitive Theory 
[13][14] where general self-efficacy reflects “the belief in 
one's capability to organize and execute the courses of action 
required to manage prospective situations” [14, p. 2]. Self-
efficacy thereby acts as a key determinant of behavioral 
control [14][15]. It has been consequently incorporated into 
the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) by reflecting internal 
control beliefs [16]. 
IS researching utilizing CSE consequently theorized about 
the role of CSE as determinant of IT-related behavior from 
different perspectives [17][18][19]. Consequently, CSE has 
been found to play an important role in individual's 
technology-directed behavior by influencing adoption 
decisions and actual use both directly and indirectly 
[20][21][22]. For instance, CSE significantly influences ease 
of use and usefulness perceptions and thereby indirectly 
influences behavioral outcomes such as intention or actual use 
of a given technology [23]. Likewise, several direct effects of 
CSE have been reported in the literature, whereby CSE 
significantly individuals’ intention to use or to continue using 
a technology [15][22][24][25]. 
With respect to Internet usage, Davis and Mun [26] 
revealed that CSE highly predicts the extent to which 
individuals utilize the web by means of how frequently certain 
functions such as online-shopping or social networks are used. 
Wang, Li and Hsieh [27] show that CSE acts as a strong 
contingent effect on how individuals found innovative uses of 
IT. In contrast to these findings Mcelroy, Hendrickson, 
Townsend and Demarie [28] found that general self-efficacy 
does not predict how often users surf the Internet or visit chat-
rooms, but that it predicts whether users are willing to shop 
online or not, thereby reflecting an absolute measure of an 
extended use case. 
In the realm of mature adults, research likewise 
emphasized the important role of CSE on elderly individuals’ 
technology behavior. By drawing on Social Cognitive Theory, 
Lam and Lee [11] have shown how CSE among with outcome 
expectations predicts Internet use intentions. In a recent study 
investigating the predictive power of major technology 
acceptance models, Niehaves and Plattfaut [29] reported that 
CSE constitutes the strongest predictor by outperforming 
other important factors. 
Given these insights about the importance of CSE in 
explaining general and mature adults’ Internet behavior, it 
becomes important to understand how CSE is actually 
determined. Hereunto, Marakas, Yi and Johnson [30] 
identified in their literature review a broad variety of 
environmental, cognitive and behavioral influences on CSE, 
such as training, experience, social persuasion, but likewise 
individual factors, such as age, gender, emotional states, or 
personality. 
B. 
Computer Anxiety 
Computer Anxiety (CA) reflects the tendency of 
individuals to be uneasy, apprehensive or fearful when 
confronted with using computers. Typical fear comprises data 
loss or irrevocable mistakes by the user (e.g., deleting a file or 
formatting a hard drive) [31][32]. Individuals with computer 
anxiety often possess feelings of helplessness [33].  
In a review of two decades of research on CA, Powell [34] 
found a variety of antecedents for CA. For instance, the broad 
trait of neuroticism and other emotional forms of anxiety have 
been found to predict one's CA while computer training and 
experience have been found to be countermeasures in 
decreasing 
–especially 
older– 
individuals’ 
anxiety 
[11][35][36]. CA is an established, important anchor how 
individuals form ease of use perceptions and thereby 
indirectly influences technology-directed behavior [17][37].  
The relationship between CA and CSE has been 
consistently 
reported 
to 
be 
negatively 
associated 
[8][10][12][30] indicating that individuals with higher anxiety 
tend to pose decreased self-beliefs in their ability to use a 
computer. Considering CA’s relevance for mature adults’ 
computer behavior, CA was commonly found to increase with 
higher age [34]. 
III. 
RESEARCH MODEL 
Our study seeks to investigate the sources and effects of 
individual differences in mature adults’ use of computer 
technology and in our specific case: the use of the Internet in 
private settings. Based on the aforementioned reflections on 
prior literature, we pose that CSE and CA as factors 
accounting for individual differences directly influence 
mature adults’ Internet usage. Although these two factors have 
been found to be of importance for adults’ technology use 
behavior, less is known how these factors are determined. 
Most of todays’ available studies observed the impact of 
explicit training interventions [11][35][36] that are likewise 
generically applicable to other populations. 
Consequently, existing studies fall short in explaining 
these differences with factors distinct to mature adults, leading 
researchers frequently to call for further unique studies how 
CSE and CA are determined for mature adults [6][29]. 
Therefore, our research seeks to investigate the effect of prior 
working environments on mature adults’ current Internet use 
behavior. Our research model in Fig. 1 depicts our research 
model graphically. We elaborate on the constructs and 
hypothesized relationships between them in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
Private Internet Use (PIU) acts as the dependent variable 
in our research model and is hereunto defined as an 
individuals’ utilization of the Internet in the last period (i.e., 
six months) in a private setting. Our PIU measure considers 
important dimensions of actual technology behavior [38] by 
incorporating the dimensions of duration (i.e., how much time 
spent), frequency (i.e., how often), and intensity (i.e., extent 
of Internet-related activities) [39][40]. 
The Internet has become an ubiquitous tool with the 
potential to support nearly all mature adults’ life aspects. It 
serves not only as a knowledge base, but likewise as a handy 
tool for communication purposes, commerce activities or 
banking. Many mature adults only partially take advantage of 
the broad spectrum of features the Internet offers and remain 
at lower level uses, such as information retrievals. As such, 
we expect that especially the dimension of intensity is 
heterogeneously distributed among mature adults. To 
understand these differences in Internet usage, we draw on 
above outlined factors accounting for individual differences in 
technology behavior: CA and CSE. 
As outlined, CA reflects the tendency of individuals to be 
uneasy, apprehensive or fearful when confronted with using 
computers, such as data losses and other mistakes by the user 
[31][32]. Individuals with computer anxiety often possess 
feelings of helplessness [33]. CA is a IT-specific derivate of 
the broad the broad trait of neuroticism and other emotional 
forms of anxiety [34]. Our review of prior literature in Section 
2 indicated that CA both, in general and especially in cases of 
mature adults, directly and indirectly influences individuals’ 
technology usage. It has been shown that mature adults 
generally possess higher anxieties towards technologies 
compared to younger counterparts [34].  Since our study is 
concerned with Internet usage, we adapt CA to this context 
and denote CA as the fear or apprehension that individuals 
experience when using the Internet [41][42]. Based on prior 
evidence, we expect that mature adults with high computer 
anxiety feel insecure and try to avoid using the Internet and 
vice versa. We consequently position CA as a direct 
determinant of PIU by hypothesizing: 
 
H1: Computer Anxiety negatively influences Private 
Internet Use. 
 
CSE generally reflects an individual’s judgment about 
her/his capabilities to use a computer [12, p. 192]. 
As outlined above, CSE reflects an important individual 
differentiator of mature adults’ technology use. For our study 
purpose we adapt CSE similar to CA to the Internet context 
by defining it as one’s ability to make use of Internet websites. 
We assume that people with high degrees of CSE are more 
actively engaged in their Internet usage. Given the high 
importance and prior evidence for CSE’s general role, we 
hypothesize that: 
 
H2: Computer Self-Efficacy positively influences Private 
Internet Use. 
 
According to Social Cognitive Theory [13][14], emotional 
arousal and self-efficacy are reciprocally determined; 
depending on which variable acts as a stimulus, an effect in 
the other variable can be observed [17]. Prior research on CSE 
and CA provides evidence that both effects also occur in the 
context of technologies [8][22][43]. CSE thereby might act as 
an important coping mechanism in dealing with negative 
emotions in technology use [37]. In our study context, we 
assume that mature adults with a higher degree of CSE have a 
lower degree of CA as they are more confident in working 
with computers and the Internet. Users who reached that status 
are usually not afraid of computers or the Internet as they 
know what to do and which actions to avoid. This level of 
security is assumed to decrease feelings of anxiety. Therefore, 
we hypothesize: 
 
H3: Computer 
Self-Efficacy 
negatively 
influences 
Computer Anxiety. 
 
Despite the reported important role CA and CSE play in 
mature adults’ technology usage, little is known how these 
factors specifically for mature adults are determined leading 
researchers frequently to call for dedicated research [6][29]. 
Both factors –CA and CSE– are argued to be dynamic in 
nature, as that they be altered by dispositional and 
environmental factors [8][33]. As outlined in Section 2, 
especially computer training and experience have been 
frequently found to be of importance as that these factors are 
able to increase CSE and decrease CA of mature adults 
[11][34][36]. 
In a different, yet related research context of the digital 
divide among pupils, Wei, Teo, Chan and Tan [44] revealed 
that school IT access and usage “had a significantly stronger 
impact on CSE for students without home computers than 
students with home computers” (p. 179). The study indicates 
that IT-related behavior can be in part determined through 
distinct types of experience gained in dedicated environments 
giving greater insights into the causal, underlying mechanisms 
of individual differences in IT use. 
Adults in general or ‘digital immigrants’ today often 
receive dedicated computer training and gain thorough 
experiences in handling digital media at their working places, 
where working with computer technologies and the Internet 
has become a natural routine. In contrast to that, however, a 
lot of mature adults are naturally already in retirement. As 
Tams, Grover and Thatcher [6] state, most of those mature 
adults, received their, if any, computer education in times 
 
Figure 1.  Research Model.  
 
PIU: Private 
Internet Use
CA: Computer 
Anxiety
CSE: Computer 
Self-Efficacy
PWIU: Previous
Work Internet Use
H1 (-)
H2 (+)
H3 (-)
H4 (-)
H5 (+)
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

where information technologies were far less multifaceted 
than today. 
Following the rationale that CA and CSE can be altered 
through environmental factors, the preliminary evidence of 
the effects from dedicated environments, and given that many 
workplaces increasingly relied computer and Internet use for 
the last two decades [10], some mature adults might have 
gained their computer and Internet experience during their last 
years of work affecting their CA and CSE.  
Consequently, we propose the factor of Previous Work 
Internet Use (PWIU), defined as an individuals’ utilization of 
the Internet in the last period at her/his workplace (time frame 
of six months) that encompasses the dimensions of duration 
and frequency of Internet use [adapted from 45]. For those 
being retired, this definition denotes the last six months before 
retirement. Based on the above outlined discussion, we 
hypothesize that: 
 
H4: Previous Work Internet Use negatively influences 
Computer Anxiety. 
H5: Previous Work Internet Use positively influences 
Computer Self-Efficacy. 
 
Based on these theoretical considerations and hypotheses, 
we conducted our empirical research as described in the 
following Section 4. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A. 
Questionnaire Development 
In order to test our research model, we conducted a 
quantitative survey-based research approach. We developed a 
questionnaire with measurement items drawn from previously 
published information systems research. The measurement 
instrument for our core constructs is depicted in Table 4 at the 
end of the paper. For CSE and CA, available items were 
carefully transferred from the context of general computer 
interactions, to the Internet use context. 
CSE was measured with a 5-item version [21][46] based 
on the original CSE scale of Compeau and Higgins [12] and 
adapted to the context of using a new Internet service. 
Measures for CA were taken from Compeau and Higgins [12] 
and adapted to using the Internet. PWIU was assessed with 
two items along the dimensions of duration and frequency 
[45]. Duration of PWIU measures the average amount of time 
a person spent using the Internet (i.e., how long) in a typical 
week in her/his last period at work [adapted from 45]. 
Frequency, in contrast, asks respondents how often one used 
the Internet at work in a typical week in her/his last period at 
work. PIU asked respondents about their Internet use in a 
private context and was assessed along three dimensions of 
duration, frequency and intensity. While duration and 
frequency are assessed similar as to those of PWIU, we 
additionally measured intensity by asking respondents typical 
Internet offerings they use, such as (e.g. information search, 
communication, online shopping, etc.). Based on binary 
values (yes/no) of features used, we calculated intensity with 
values ranging from 1 to 7. 
As most items were originally published in English they 
have been translated in to German first. In several iterations, 
we validated the instrument with a total of 18 respondents 
from the target group to ensure readability, clarity and proper 
wording. The questionnaire was modified until the pre-tests 
did not bring up any new suggestions for improvement. 
B. 
Data Collection 
Access to the target group has been frequently shown to 
be difficult [e.g. 2] and using an online-survey might attract 
rather technology-savvy adults causing potentially biased 
results. Therefore, we employed a convenience sampling 
method using a paper-and-pen based field survey approach 
that has been shown to be successfully in gathering data from 
the target group [e.g. 47]. Like other studies before [e.g. 36], 
we collected data at public places such as pedestrian zones, 
libraries, gyms, adult schools, and senior citizen centers. 
Three independent researchers conducted the field study 
from May to October 2015 in southern Germany by randomly 
asking people (who appeared to be 50+) to participate in the 
survey. The researchers ensured the participants for 
anonymity and that there are no ‘wrong’ or ‘right’ answers for 
the survey questions asked while collecting data [48]. We only 
addressed participants that actually used the Internet at least 
once in their lifetime. The reason for this was that only people 
who had seen the Internet before are able to answer the 
questions correctly.  
To motivate participation, a tablet computer was raffled 
amongst all participants who provided contact details. The 
latter data were kept on a separate sheet and destroyed after 
the winner received the price. 
C. 
Participants’ Demographics 
In total, we collected 165 surveys, whereby 19 surveys 
were incomplete and needed to be dropped from the dataset. 
The remaining 146 surveys constitute the dataset of our 
analysis. Table 1 outlines the demographics of our dataset. 
V. 
RESULTS 
To validate our research model, the data was analyzed as 
structural equation model using the partial least squares (PLS) 
TABLE I.  
 PARTICIPANTS’ DEMOGRAPHICS (N=146) 
 
TABLE II.  
MEASUREMENT MODEL VALIDATION 
 
 
 
Age
Gender
Retired
Marital status
Household's (net) 
income p.m. 
40’s
4%
Male
33%
Yes
65%
Single
12%
< 1 k Euro
1%
50’s
22%
Female
67%
No
34%
Married
65%
1–2 k Euro
20%
60’s
42%
n.a.
1%
Divorced
8%
2–3 k Euro
23%
70’s
26%
Widowed
13%
3–4 k Euro
23%
80’s
6%
n.a.
1%
4–5 k Euro
7%
n.a.
1%
> 5 k Euro
10%
n.a.
16%
Construct
Mean
S.D.
AVE
CR
CRA
1
2
3
4
1
CA
1.84
1.29
0.613
0.888
0.842
0.783
2
CSE
5.07
2.46
0.689
0.917
0.887
-0.307
0.830
3
PWIU
3.13
2.65
0.918
0.957
0.912
-0.075
0.159
0.958
4
PIU
3.50
1.66
0.637
0.840
0.715
-0.536
0.321
0.134
0.798
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

method with the software package SmartPLS 3.0 [49]. 
Although the dataset with 146 responses seems to be small, it 
is sufficiently large to analyze the model according to the rule 
of ten [50]. Following the two-step procedure as proposed by 
Chin [1], we first analyzed the measurement model, followed 
by an assessment of the structural model. 
The measurement model represents the relationships between 
the observed data and the latent variables. Table 2 reports the 
results of the measurement model that can be interpreted as 
follows. 
All item loadings are above 0.70 and each item loaded on 
its construct significantly (p < 0.001); items with insufficient 
loading have been dropped [51]. To ensure further construct 
quality, we assessed whether values for composite reliability 
(CR) and Cronbach’s Alpha (CRA) are above 0.70 [52], 
values for average variance extracted (AVE) are at least 0.50 
[53]. Sufficient discriminant validity is given since construct 
correlations are smaller than the square root of the AVE 
[53][54]. In sum, the results demonstrate adequate 
psychometric properties of the measurement model allowing 
us to proceed and test the structural model. 
The structural model represents the relationships between 
the latent variables. To evaluate the structural model we 
assessed the coefficients of determination (R2) and the 
significance levels of the path coefficients [1]. For our 
dependent variable the model explains 31.5% of the variance 
in private Internet use. The results on all hypothesized 
relationships are illustrated in Table 3 and Fig. 2 below. 
Finally, we checked typical control variables. We 
controlled for effects of gender and age on Internet use. No 
effects of age (-0.118; p=0.140) or gender (-0.104; p=0.187) 
were observed. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. 
Findings 
Our research model is able to explain about 30% of the 
variance in mature adults’ private Internet usage. Although 
these values might seem to small, the results correspond with 
research that relied on such factors related to individual 
differences in explaining technology use with reported R2 
values of 20% [11], 25% [26], or 34% [22]. 
We see that CA has a highly significant negative effect on 
private Internet use, thereby supporting our hypothesis (H1). 
This forges the obvious explanation that mature adults who 
are more anxious of the Internet do not like to use it. In the 
same vain, we see a significant positive effect going from self-
efficacy towards private Internet use as hypothesized (H2). 
Although we would have expected this relationship to be 
stronger and higher in significance, the hypothesized 
relationship still finds good support: mature adults with a 
higher level of self-confidence towards an action are likely to 
perform it. Moreover, we found a highly significant negative 
path from self-efficacy towards anxiety giving support for the 
hypothesized negative effect of CSE on CA (H3). Hence, 
mature adults with higher confidence in their own abilities 
significantly decrease their fears towards the Internet. 
We further sought to unravel the distinct influence of prior 
exposure to IT from a workplace (i.e., PWIU). Our underlying 
hypothesis is that the influence is positive, i.e., people who 
used the Internet as part of their (previous) work routines have 
a higher CSE and lower CA. 
In this study, we did not find a significant relationship 
between PWIU and CA leading us to reject our hypothesis 
(H4), yet we found solid support for the effect of PWIU on 
CSE supporting our hypothesis (H5). Given the strong effect 
of CSE on CA, in turn, our results indicate that CSE acts as a 
mediator between PWIU and CA as that PWIU poses indirect 
effects on CA. 
B. 
Implications 
In this study, we sought to unravel the effects of individual 
differences on mature adult’s Internet usage. In our research 
model, we incorporated CA and CSE as direct antecedents of 
Internet usage and positioned PWIU as a novel and distinct 
determinant for these differences in mature adults. We 
empirically tested our model with 146 adults aged 50 and 
above. Drawing on these results, we can derive the following 
contributions and implications. 
First, prior research highlighted the role of self-efficacy 
beliefs and emotional fears as predictors for mature adults’ 
technology behavior. Our results indicate, that CA and CSE 
solely account for 30% of the variance in mature adults’ 
Internet usage. Our study thereby supports prior research and 
highlights again that these two factors must be taken into 
account to understand mature adults’ technology behavior. 
Prior research that likewise solely on individual differences as 
predictors of Internet usage frequently observed younger 
adults. Comparing our results with those studies, we observe 
that CA is indeed of higher relevance for mature adults than 
TABLE III.  
 STRUCTURAL MODEL RESULTS 
 
*** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05 
a. Effect size interpretations according to Chin [1] 
 
 
Figure 2.  Research Model Results. 
Path
Path 
Coefficient
t-value
Effect Sizea
Result
PWIU à CA
-0.026
0.303
–
Not supported
PWIU à CSE
0.159*
2.015
0.026 (small)
Supported
CSE à CA
-0.303***
3.922
0.099 (small)
Supported
CA à PIU
-0.483***
7.244
0.309 (medium)
Supported
CSE à PIU
0.172*
2.417
0.039 (small)
Supported
PIU: Private 
Internet Use
(R2 = 31.5%)
CA: Computer 
Anxiety
CSE: Computer 
Self-Efficacy
PWIU: Previous
Work Internet Use
H1 -0.483***
H2 0.172*
H3 -0.303***
H4 -0.026 n.s.
H5 0.159*
*** p < 0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05; n.s. not significant
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

for younger adults. In sum, our study supports prior research 
about the importance of CSE and CA for mature adults.  
Second, given the importance of CSE and CA for mature 
adults, less is known about the sources for these individual 
differences of mature adults. Although training interventions 
and general experience have been found to be of predictive 
relevance, researchers frequently urged for further research on 
distinct sources as outlined in above. Given this gap in 
research, we conceptualized PWIU as a distinct source of 
mature adults’ CA and CSE. In contrast to explicit training 
interventions, PWIU reflects a rather salient source of 
‘mastery experience’, an important source of one’s self-
efficacy. Our results demonstrate that PWIU indeed 
determines CSE meaning that people who used the Internet on 
the job are likely to have a higher self-confidence towards 
using the Internet. In contrast, we did not found support for 
PWIU’s impact on CA. The absence of the direct effects of 
PWIU on CA is, however surprising and contrary to our 
hypotheses. A potential explanation is that PWIU poses rather 
indirect effects of CA with CSE serving as a mediating factor; 
PWIU increases mature adults’ CSE, which, in turn, decreases 
their anxieties towards the Internet. 
Another potential explanation for the insignificant 
relationship between PWIU and CA might be the frequent 
media coverage on the dangers of using the Internet could play 
a role. Especially in the last years, several threats in the 
dynamic Internet environment emerged, such as fraud, scams, 
and phishing. Given that most of our study’s participants are 
already retired, we suggest that they gained their experiences 
in interacting with the Internet in times were such dangers 
were less wide spread or of less great concern than today. As 
such, our results suggest that mature adults’ anxieties towards 
the Internet are frequently adapted to novel and emerging 
threats of the Internet and that their prior experiences are not 
supportive in dealing with such endangering situations of the 
Internet. This issue might further amplify the longer 
individuals have left the working environment respectively 
the longer they are retired. 
Based on our findings and discussion, the derived 
implications of our research are manifold. We were able to 
show that the ageing generation is by far not Internet-adverse. 
On the contrary, the behavioral mechanisms are very similar 
to those of other age clusters. We see that people need a certain 
level of self-efficacy in order to use the Internet and when they 
possess this confidence then they are more actively using it. 
Practice needs to be aware that although the Internet became 
widespread already 15 years ago, most individuals of higher 
ages started using the Internet at a far later time. While some 
of those ‘senior surfers’ got in touch with the Internet already 
during their working time that resulted in higher self-
confidence in their abilities to navigate through the Web, 
others did not have the chance to gain earlier experience. 
Thus, practice needs to be aware of these differences and 
should either provide Internet-based solutions that do not 
require sophisticated Internet skills or policy makers that are 
in charge to foster Internet education for the elderly. Prior 
research has shown that even rather simple computer and 
Internet training interventions are highly effective for mature 
adults in increasing their CSE and significantly decreasing 
their CA [11][36]. However, given that not all mature adults 
are necessarily willing or have the chance to take part in 
dedicated training interventions, we further suggest that media 
should not only cover the threats of the Internet but should 
likewise offer educational material on countermeasures in 
dealing with those issues in a format that is easily 
understandable and applicable for older individuals. 
From a theory perspective we were able to increase our 
knowledge on Internet-related behavior of the aging society. 
Our results first of all underline the general applicability of 
individual differences in explaining technology-related 
behavior and highlight the importance these factors play for 
the aging segment of the population. Second, as outlined, we 
offered a novel source accounting for these individual factors 
that is distinct to mature adults: previous work Internet use. 
We thereby enriched our understanding on the important 
behavioral factors of mature adults’ Internet usage and a 
novel, yet salient, source accounting to the digital divide.  
C. 
Limitations 
Our research is not without its limitations and these must 
be taken into account when interpreting the results. First, we 
had to rely on a convenience sampling approach given the 
difficulties in access to the target group. Therefore, we 
surveyed mature adults at public places and institutions 
thereby potentially mitigating those individuals, which are 
less outgoing or have severe issues forcing them to stay at 
home. Although our sample size of 146 responses is 
sufficiently large to calculate our research model, these can be 
no means be regarded as representative for the general 
population. Consequently, our results and contributions are 
limited in their generalizability. Moreover, we measured all 
independent and dependent factors at one time, which might 
have primed the participants about the purpose of our study 
[48]. We further employed self-reported usage measure that 
involve subjective judgments and individuals often tend to 
over- and underestimate their actual usage behavior [38]. This 
poses a problem specifically in previous work Internet use as 
in some cases (the older population) the work experience 
dated back several years (sometimes decades).  
Second, although our explained variance of about 30% for 
mature adults’ correspond with those of related studies 
drawing primarily on factors accounting for individual 
differences [11][22][26], we acknowledge that there are 
obviously further influential factors causing for mature adults’ 
Internet usage. We only relied on two important individual 
factors accounting for variance and left out technology-related 
beliefs about usefulness or ease of use. 
Third, given that –to the best of our knowledge– our 
research is one of the first that sought to understand the effects 
prior Internet exposure at the workplace, our study is best 
positioned as exploratory in nature. We only observed the 
direct effects of PWIU on CA and CSE and left out potential 
moderating effects such as the length of retirement. 
Fourth, since our technology under investigation was the 
Internet, we adapted the measurements to the Internet context, 
which consequently limit our results to the specific Internet 
context. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

To address these shortcomings of our study, we outline our 
further steps and additional potential avenues for further 
research next. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This research elaborated on the influence of previous work 
Internet usage on current private Internet usage. We selected 
computer anxiety and computer self-efficacy as mediating 
constructs. In a quantitative research with 146 valid responses, 
we targeted an audience of 50+, i.e., people who did not grow 
up with widespread Internet experience. 
Our findings underline the strong influence of the chosen 
constructs, CA and CSE. We were able to show that “the 
elderly” are not a homogenous group of people not using the 
Internet. However, digital services need to be presented in a 
way that mature adults feel they possess the right skillset to 
use it and do not fall for anxiety. This calls for easy solutions 
and creative training mechanisms. 
However, taking the stated limitations into account, our 
future goal is to enlarge the interview base and recruit 
informants on a global basis. We expect novel insights when 
comparing national differences in elderly’s Internet use. 
Furthermore, we suggest that more research is needed to 
elaborate on the mechanisms accounting for mature adults’ 
technology behavior. In a recent review on mature adults’ 
technology usage, Chen and Chan [55] outlined literature on 
studies of that draw on the well-known Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) [56][57] and reflect that usefulness 
and ease of use perceptions constitute important factors for 
older adults’ technology use as they often consider novel 
technologies as irrelevant and unnecessary for their daily life 
leading them to reject technologies. The authors echo that 
these usefulness beliefs are likewise derived from their 
perceptions about the efforts with which the technologies can 
be used (i.e., perceived ease of use) [55]. Given that, as 
outlined in Section 2, CA and CSE both act as important 
anchors of these traditional TAM factors, incorporating CA 
and CSE among TAM factors should consequently lead to 
greater explanations in terms of explained variance (i.e., 
higher R2 values). However, TAM-based models are likewise 
generically applicable in other research contexts and for other 
target groups. We suggest that other, rival theories are needed 
to derive distinct insights into mature adults’ technology 
behavior. We suggest that age-related theories, such as from 
the domain gerontology, could be worth of further research to 
observe in the domain of adults’ technology acceptance and 
use. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research received funding from the German Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) under grant 
code 01FR14021. The responsibility for the content of this 
publication lies with the authors. 
 
VIII. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. W. Chin, “The partial least squares approach to structural equation 
modeling,” Modern methods for business research, vol. 295, no. 2, pp. 
295-336, 1998. 
[2] T. Heart and E. Kalderon, “Older adults: Are they ready to adopt health-
related ict?,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 82, no. 
11, pp. e209-e231, 2013. 
[3] World Health Organization, “Strategy and action plan for healthy 
ageing in europe, 2012–2020”, 2012 
[4] N. Crisp and L. Chen, “Global supply of health professionals,” New 
England Journal of Medicine, vol. 370, no. 10, pp. 950-957, 2014. 
[5] H. Eren and J. G. Webster, The e-medicine, e-health, m-health, 
telemedicine, and telehealth handbook,   CRC Press,  2015. 
[6] S. Tams, V. Grover, and J. Thatcher, “Modern information technology 
in an old workforce: Toward a strategic research agenda,” The Journal 
of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 284-304, 2014. 
[7] R. Agarwal and J. Prasad, “Are individual differences germane to the 
acceptance of new information technologies?,” Decision Sciences, vol. 
30, no. 2, pp. 361-391, 1999. 
[8] J. B. Thatcher and P. L. Perrewe, “An empirical examination of 
individual traits as antecedents to computer anxiety and computer self-
efficacy,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 381-396, 2002. 
[9] C. Maier, “Personality within information systems research: A 
literature analysis”, Proceedings of the Twentieth European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), 2012 
[10] N. Wagner, K. Hassanein, and M. Head, “Computer use by older adults: 
A multi-disciplinary review,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, 
no. 5, pp. 870-882, 2010. 
[11] J. C. Y. Lam and M. K. O. Lee, “Digital inclusiveness-longitudinal 
study of Internet adoption by older adults,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 177-206, 2006. 
[12] D. R. Compeau and C. A. Higgins, “Computer self-efficacy: 
Development of a measure and initial test,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 
2, pp. 189-211, 1995. 
[13] A. Bandura, “Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency,” American 
Psychologist, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 122-147, 1982. 
[14] A. Bandura, Self-efficacy: The exercise of control,  New York:  
Freeman,  1997. 
[15] J. P.-A. Hsieh, A. Rai, and M. Keil, “Understanding digital inequality: 
Comparing continued use behavioral models of the socio-economically 
advantaged and disadvantaged,” MIS quarterly, vol., no., pp. 97-126, 
2008. 
[16] I. Ajzen, “Perceived behavioral control, self-efficacy, locus of control, 
and the theory of planned behavior1,” Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 665-683, 2002. 
[17] V. Venkatesh, “Determinants of perceived ease of use: Integrating 
control, intrinsic motivation, and emotion into the technology 
acceptance model,” Information Systems Research, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 
342-365, 2000. 
[18] S. Taylor and P. A. Todd, “Understanding information technology 
usage: A test of competing models,” Information systems research, vol. 
6, no. 2, pp. 144-176, 1995. 
[19] S. Taylor and P. Todd, “Assessing IT usage: The role of prior 
experience,” MIS quarterly, vol., no., pp. 561-570, 1995. 
[20] V. Venkatesh and F. D. Davis, “A model of the antecedents of 
perceived ease of use: Development and test*,” Decision sciences, vol. 
27, no. 3, pp. 451-481, 1996. 
[21] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User 
acceptance of information technology: Toward a unified view,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol., no., pp. 425-478, 2003. 
[22] D. Compeau, C. A. Higgins, and S. Huff, “Social cognitive theory and 
individual reactions to computing technology: A longitudinal study,” 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 145-158, 1999. 
[23] R. Agarwal and E. Karahanna, “Time flies when you're having fun: 
Cognitive absorption and beliefs about information technology usage,” 
MIS Quarterly, vol., no., pp. 665-694, 2000. 
[24] L. R. Vijayasarathy, “Predicting consumer intentions to use on-line 
shopping: The case for an augmented technology acceptance model,” 
Information & Management, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 747-762, 2004. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[25] J. He and L. A. Freeman, “Understanding the formation of general 
computer self-efficacy,” Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 26, no. 1, p 12, 2010. 
[26] J. M. Davis and Y. Y. Mun, “User disposition and extent of web 
utilization: A trait hierarchy approach,” International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 346-363, 2012. 
[27] W. Wang, X. Li, and J. P.-A. Hsieh, “The contingent effect of personal 
IT innovativeness and IT self-efficacy on innovative use of complex 
IT,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1105-
1124, 2013. 
[28] J. C. Mcelroy, A. R. Hendrickson, A. M. Townsend, and S. M. 
Demarie, “Dispositional factors in internet use: Personality versus 
cognitive style,” MIS Quarterly, vol., no., pp. 809-820, 2007. 
[29] B. Niehaves and R. Plattfaut, “Internet adoption by the elderly: 
Employing IS technology acceptance theories for understanding the 
age-related digital divide,” European Journal of Information Systems, 
vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 708-726, 2014. 
[30] G. M. Marakas, M. Y. Yi, and R. D. Johnson, “The multilevel and 
multifaceted character of computer self-efficacy: Toward clarification 
of the construct and an integrative framework for research,” 
Information Systems Research, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 126-163, 1998. 
[31] R. K. Heinssen, C. R. Glass, and L. A. Knight, “Assessing computer 
anxiety: Development and validation of the computer anxiety rating 
scale,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 3, no., pp. 49-59, 1987. 
[32] S. Parasuraman and M. Igbaria, “An examination of gender differences 
in the determinants of computer anxiety and attitudes toward 
microcomputers among managers,” International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 327-340, 1990. 
[33] G. M. Marakas, R. D. Johnson, and J. W. Palmer, “A theoretical model 
of differential social attributions toward computing technology: When 
the metaphor becomes the model,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 719-750, 2000. 
[34] A. L. Powell, “Computer anxiety: Comparison of research from the 
1990s and 2000s,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 
2337-2381, 2013. 
[35] K. V. Wild, N. C. Mattek, S. A. Maxwell, H. H. Dodge, H. B. Jimison, 
and J. A. Kaye, “Computer-related self-efficacy and anxiety in older 
adults with and without mild cognitive impairment,” Alzheimer's & 
Dementia, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 544-552, 2012. 
[36] A. Chu, J. Huber, B. Mastel-Smith, and S. Cesario, “Partnering with 
seniors for better health: Computer use and Internet health information 
retrieval among older adults in a low socioeconomic community,” 
Journal of the Medical Library Association, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 12-20, 
2009. 
[37] G. Hackbarth, V. Grover, and Y. Y. Mun, “Computer playfulness and 
anxiety: Positive and negative mediators of the system experience 
effect on perceived ease of use,” Information & management, vol. 40, 
no. 3, pp. 221-232, 2003. 
[38] A. Burton-Jones and D. W. Straub Jr, “Reconceptualizing system 
usage: An approach and empirical test,” Information Systems 
Research, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 228-246, 2006. 
[39] V. Venkatesh, S. A. Brown, L. M. Maruping, and H. Bala, “Predicting 
different conceptualizations of system use: The competing roles of 
behavioral 
intention, 
facilitating 
conditions, 
and 
behavioral 
expectation,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 483-502, 2008. 
[40] M. Z. Lallmahomed, N. Z. A. Rahim, R. Ibrahim, and A. A. Rahman, 
“Predicting different conceptualizations of system use: Acceptance in 
hedonic volitional context (facebook),” Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2776-2787, 2013. 
[41] C. Presno, “Taking the byte out of Internet anxiety: Instructional 
techniques that reduce computer/Internet anxiety in the classroom,” 
Journal of educational computing research, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 147-161, 
1998. 
[42] J. B. Thatcher, M. L. Loughry, J. Lim, and D. H. Mcknight, “Internet 
anxiety: An empirical study of the effects of personality, beliefs, and 
social support,” Information & Management, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 353-
363, 2007. 
[43] J. Davis, L. Lee, and M. Yi, “Examining the relationships among 
personality traits, IT-specific traits, and perceived ease of use,” AMCIS 
2007 Proceedings, vol., no., p 295, 2007. 
[44] K.-K. Wei, H.-H. Teo, H. C. Chan, and B. C. Tan, “Conceptualizing 
and testing a social cognitive model of the digital divide,” Information 
Systems Research, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 170-187, 2011. 
[45] S. S. Kim, N. K. Malhotra, and S. Narasimhan, “Research note—two 
competing perspectives on automatic use: A theoretical and empirical 
comparison,” Information Systems Research, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 418-
432, 2005. 
[46] V. Venkatesh and H. Bala, “Technology acceptance model 3 and a 
research agenda on interventions,” Decision Sciences, vol. 39, no. 2, 
pp. 273-315, 2008. 
[47] X. Guo, Y. Sun, N. Wang, Z. Peng, and Z. Yan, “The dark side of 
elderly acceptance of preventive mobile health services in china,” 
Electronic Markets, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 49-61, 2013. 
[48] P. M. Podsakoff, S. B. Mackenzie, J.-Y. Lee, and N. P. Podsakoff, 
“Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of 
the literature and recommended remedies,” Journal of Applied 
Psychology, vol. 88, no. 5, p 879, 2003. 
[49] C. M. Ringle, S. Wende, and J.-M. Becker, “Smartpls 3”, SmartPLS 
GmbH, Boenningstedt, 2015 
[50] J. F. Hair, C. M. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, “PLS-SEM: Indeed a silver 
bullet,” Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 
139-152, 2011. 
[51] J. F. Hair, R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. Black, Multivariate 
data analysis,  5th ed.,  Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice Hall,  1998. 
[52] J. C. Nunnally, Psychometric theory,  2nd ed.,  New York:  McGraw-
Hill,  1978. 
[53] C. Fornell and D. F. Larcker, “Evaluating structural equation models 
with unobservable variables and measurement error,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol., no., pp. 39-50, 1981. 
[54] J. Hulland, “Use of partial least squares (PLS) in strategic management 
research: A review of four recent studies,” Strategic management 
journal, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 195-204, 1999. 
[55] K. Chen and A. Chan, “A review of technology acceptance by older 
adults,” Gerontechnology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2011. 
[56] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user 
acceptance of information technology,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 3, 
pp. 319-340, 1989. 
[57] F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, “User acceptance of 
computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models,” 
Management science, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 982-1003, 1989. 
[58] M. Limayem, S. G. Hirt, and C. M. Cheung, “How habit limits the 
predictive power of intention: The case of information systems 
continuance,” MIS Quarterly, vol., no., pp. 705-737, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

TABLE IV. 
MEASUREMENT INSTRUMENT (TRANSLATED FROM GERMAN) 
Items 
Source 
Computer Self-Efficacy (CSE) 
 
I could use a heretofore unknown website… 
Adapted from 
[12][21][46] 
CSE.1 
if I had previously used similar websites for the same purpose. 
CSE2 
if someone showed me how to do it first. 
CSE.3 
if I had just the built-in help facility for assistance. 
CSE.4 
if I had never used a website like it before. 
CSE.5 
if there was no one around to tell me what to do while using it. 
Computer Anxiety (CA) 
CA.1 
I feel apprehensive about using the Internet. 
Adapted from 
[12] 
CA.2 
It scares me to think that I could lose data by mistake by using the Internet. 
CA.3 
It scares me to think that I could inadvertently reveal sensitive information on the Internet. 
CA.4 
I hesitate to use the Internet for fear of making mistakes that I cannot correct. 
CA.5 
The Internet is somewhat intimidating to me. 
Past Work Internet Use (PWIU) 
PWIU.FRQ 
If you think (back) about your job, how often did you use the Internet on average in the last 6 months of your career in 
your job? 
Adapted from 
[45][58] 
PWIU.DUR 
If you think (back) about that period, how many hours did you spend using the Internet on average in a typical week at 
your job? 
Private Internet Use 
PIU.FREQ 
On average how often did you use the Internet in your private life in the last 6 months? 
Adapted from 
[45][58] 
PIU.DUR 
If you think about the last 6 months, how many hours did you spend using the Internet on average in a typical week in 
your private life? 
PIU.INT 
For what do you use the Internet in your private life? Check all that apply: (1) Information searching, (2) Reading news, 
(3) Online shopping, (4) Communication (e.g., e-mail, chat, telephony), (5) Entertainment (e.g., videos or games), (6) 
Online banking, (7) Browsing/Surfing 
Scale for Duration (DUR):  (8) Several times a day, (7) Approx. once a day, (6) Several times a week, (5) Approx. once a week, (4) Several times a month, (3) Approx. once a month, (2) Less, (1) Not at all 
Scale for Frequency (FRQ): (7) More than 30 hours, (6) 20-30 hours, (5) 10-20 hours, (4) 5-10 hours, (3) 1-5 hours, (2) Less than 1 hour, (1) Not at all  
Scale for Computer Self-Efficacy (CSE): 10-point ranging from ‘Not at all confident’ to ‘Totally confident’ 
Scale for Computer Anxiety (CA): 7-point ranging from ‘Strongly disagree to ‘Strongly agree’ 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

