Detecting New Concepts in Social Media using
Co-burst Pattern Mining
Takako Hashimoto∗, David Shepard†, Basabi Chakraborty‡ and Tetsuji Kuboyama§
∗Commerce and Economics, Chiba University of Commerce, Chiba, Japan
Email: takako@cuc.ac.jp
†Center for Digital Humanities, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
Email: shepard.david@gmail.com
‡Software and Information Science, Iwate Prefectural University, Japan
Email: basabi@iwate-pu.ac.jp
§Computer Centre, Gakushuin University, Japan
Email: kuboyama@tk.cc.gakushuin.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes a method for detecting new
concepts in social media using co-burst pattern mining technique.
The new concepts are deﬁned as correlations between unexpected
words. The target social media are viewers’ comments attached to
web videos and Twitter’s tweets related to the East Japan Great
Earthquake that happened on Mar. 11 in 2011. Our proposed
method ﬁrst crawls viewers’ comments from web videos, and
extracts words from them. Then it selects motive words candi-
dates from words, and counts the occurrence numbers of tweets
that include motive words candidates. To detect new concepts, it
generates burst patterns based on occurrence numbers of motive
words candidates over time and detects unexpected correlations
between motive words candidates. By our method, after the
earthquake, new unexpected correlations between motive words
in social media are recognized as new concepts. For example, the
method could extract motive words from web video comments,
such as ”escape, nuclear plant” and ”Tokyo Electric Power Co.,
Inc.(TEPCO, that owns the nuclear plant), president.” Then it
could detect the new concept ”escape (from) nuclear plant” and
”TEPCO’s president” on Twitter. In this paper, we provide the
preliminary approximation results and discuss the effectiveness
of our proposed method.
Keywords—Social meda, burst pattern, unexpected words’ cor-
relation, video service, Twitter, East Japan Great Earthquake.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social media in which individual users post their opinions
and gradually build new concepts together, is recognized as one
of the important collaborations in today’s information oriented
society. After the East Japan Great Earthquake, we could detect
discussions related to the nuclear plant, Tokyo Electric Power
Company (TEPCO) and so on, that could not be recognized
before the earthquake. We deﬁned new concepts as correlations
between unexpected words that could not be recognized before
the earthquake, such as ”nuclear plant, escape” and ”TEPCO,
president.” Exploring newly-built concepts over time on social
media is signiﬁcant, so that we believe we can gain a rich
insight into social context.
We already proposed the graph-based topic extraction
method [1] using the modularity measure [2]. We also pro-
posed an approach to extract hidden topics over time from
social media messages using the latent semantic analysis
(LSA) technique [3] , [4]. Our previous work targeted single
social media such as a blog or a buzz marketing site. However,
new concepts are sometimes created triggered by mutual
relationships between different social media. This paper targets
multiple social media and proposes the method to explore
new concepts by analyzing multiple social media. The target
social media are web video comments and tweets related to
the East Japan Great Earthquake. Our proposed method ﬁrst
crawls viewers’ comments attached to web videos, and extracts
words from them. It selects motive words candidates from
extracted word, and then counts the occurrence numbers of
tweets that include the motive words candidates in Twitter.
To detect new concepts, it generates burst patterns based on
occurrence numbers of motive words candidates over time and
analyzes burst correlations between them. By our method, new
burst correlations between motive words triggered by social
media are recognized as new concepts. For example, after the
earthquake, we could extract ”escape, nuclear plant” as motive
words from web video comments, and detect the new concept
”escape (from) nuclear plant” on Twitter.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
•
Propose the method for detecting new concepts from
mutual correlation of multiple social media (cross-
media analysis)
•
Show concrete examples for new concepts that ap-
peared after the East Japan Great Earthquake
This paper is organized as follows. Section II refers to
existing researches. Section III introduces our target social
media. Section IV illustrates our proposed method to explore
new concepts by analyzing relationships between different
social media. Section V shows the preliminary approximation
result of our method that targets web video comments and
tweets related to the East Japan Great Earthquake. Finally,
Section VI concludes this paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Most related works for detecting topics/concepts focus
on single media, such as blogs, Twitter, and web videos
respectively. Sekiguchi et al. [5] treated recent blogger posts
and analyzed the word co-occurrence and the repeating rate of
word. They visualized the relation between words and showed
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

topics in social media through the visualization results. Asur et
al. [6] investigated trending topics on Twitter. They proposed a
simple model based on the number of tweets and found that the
resonance of the content with the users of the social network
plays a major role in causing trends. Liu et al. [7] and Cao et
al. [8] focus on web video analysis. Especially, Cao et al. [8]
clusters video tags into groups to get small events and then link
these events into topics based on textual and video similarity.
On the other hand, our proposed method focuses on multiple
social media and analyzes them. It can ﬂexibly show concepts
transition by taking into cross-media over time.
As for cross-media analysis, most existing works focus
on co-clustering among multiple social media. Xue et al. [9]
proposed the cross-media topic detection method that was
based on co-clustering and detect new topics. Our proposed
method focuses on characteristic words extracted from social
media and then detect co-occurrence patterns among them that
can be recognized as new concepts.
Regarding research on detecting temporal relations, Radin-
sky et al. [10] proposed Temporal Semantic Analysis (TSA), a
semantic relatedness model, that captures the words’ temporal
information. They targeted words in news archives (New York
Times, etc.) and used the dynamic time warping technique
to compute a semantic relation between pre-deﬁned words.
Wang et al. [11] proposed time series analysis which has been
used to detect similar topic patterns. They focus on speciﬁc
burst topic patterns in coordinated text streams and try to
ﬁnd similar topics. Zhou et al. [12] addressed the community
discovery problem in a temporal heterogeneous social network
of published documents over time. They showed temporal
communities by threading the statically derived communities in
consecutive time periods using a new graph partitioning algo-
rithm. Qiu et al. [13] focused on the problem of discovering
the temporal organizational structure from a dynamic social
network using a hierarchical community model. The above
existing methods focused on single media and analyzed their
transition. In our method, on the other hand, new concepts
exploration can be analyzed by investigating multiple social
media over time based on co-burst pattern of characteristic
words.
III.
TARGET SOCIAL MEDIA
The aim of our proposed method is cross-media concepts
detection, so that it targets multiple social media. As the ﬁrst
targets, Nicovideo and Twitter have been selected in our work.
A. Nicovideo comments related to the East Japan Great Earth-
quake
Nicovideo is one of the most popular video sharing web
sites in Japan [14]. In Nicovideo, users can upload, view and
share videos, and also add comments while watching videos.
Unlike other video sharing sites, comments are overlaid di-
rectly onto the video, synchronized to a speciﬁc playback time.
Users can communicate each other through video comments
and a sense of a shared watching experience could be created.
After the East Japan Great Earthquake, Nicovideo provided
live programs like the government press conferences, TEPCO
press conferences and so on (Figure 1).
Fig. 1.
An example of Nicovideo.
These live programs were not provided by major TV broad-
casting companies and viewers could get actual information
that they could not watch through mayor TV programs. Users’
comments that were attached to the live program could be
a trigger to produce new concepts related to the earthquake
among users, and the concepts had an inﬂuence on users’
behavior. Hence, the video sharing website may lead opinions
in society. By analyzing comments on Nicovideo, we expect
that the relationships between Nicovideo and other social
media can be detected and the new concepts propagation can
be illustrated.
B. Twitter’s tweets related to the East Japan Great Earthquake
Tweets related to the East Japan Great Earthquake is also
targeted in this paper. During the earthquake, people tweeted
a lot of things about concerns for affected people and disaster
situation, fear for future and so on (Table I).
TABLE I.
EXAMPLE OF TWEETS RELATED TO THE EAST JAPAN GREAT
EARTHQUAKE.
Date
Tweet (translated into English)
2011/03/11
I can not contact my parents who live in Miyagi.
#jishin, #miyage
2011/03/11
Be strong, we are with you #jishin
2011/03/11
The JR train service has returned to normal.. #jishin
2011/03/12
The government press conference has just started.
#jishin#nhk
2011/03/12
My friend was almost to get robbed. Please take
care.. #jishin
The social media monitoring company Hottolink [17]
tracked users who used one of 43 hashtags (for example,
#jishin, #nhk, and #prayforjapan) or one of 21 keywords
related to the disaster. Later, they captured all tweets sent
by all of these users between Mar. 9th and Apr. 2nd. This
resulted in an archive of around 200 million tweets, sent by
around 1 million users. Capturing programs searched tweets
by hashtag, consequently, and many of these tweets contain
useful information about users responses to the disaster. These
tweets are one of big data and it is signiﬁcant to analyze them
to detect new concept generated after the quake.
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

IV.
PROPOSED METHOD FOR DETECTING NEW
CONCEPTS IN SOCIAL MEDIA USING CO-BURST PATTERN
MINING
Our proposed method focuses on detecting new concepts
in social media. We deﬁne a new concept as new words’
burst correlation. Suppose there are two words like ”president”
and ”Tokyo Electric Power Co., Inc.(TEPCO, that owns the
nuclear plant).” Before the East Japan Great Earthquake,
we did not have the special meaning between ”president”
and ”TEPCO,” so that the correlations between ”president”
and ”TEPCO” could not be recognized. But after the press
conference by TEPCO, we suddenly began to have the new
meaning of ”president” and ”TEPCO” as the person who was
accountable for the nuclear accident. Actually, we could ﬁnd
new co-occurring patterns between ”president” and ”TEPCO”
in Twitter. Our hypothesis is that new concepts are suddenly
generated by communications in social media, and propagated
quickly in social media. Hence, the objective of our method is
to ﬁnd new motive words candidates that can be basis of new
concepts, and detect new correlations between them in social
media.
There are two types of social media in our method. One
generates motive words, and the other propagates motive words
correlation (new concepts). As the social media for motive
words generation (TriggerSM) and the social media for words
correlation propagation (PropagateSM), in this paper, we use
Nicovideo and Twitter respectively.
Our method consists of the following 3 steps.
STEP A: Find motive word candidates from TriggerSM.
STEP B: Count occurrence numbers of motive words can-
didates in PropagateSM.
STEP C: Analyze time series motive words’ co-occurring
patterns and detect new concepts on Propa-
gateSM.
Figure 2 illustrates our proposed method’s steps.
Fig. 2.
Proposed method.
The following is the description of each step.
A. Find motive word candidates from TriggerSM.
This step consists of the following 3 sub-steps.
1)
Crawl messages from TriggerSM.
2)
Extract words candidates and compute their
scores.
3)
Select motive words candidates with high scores.
Each sub-step is explained in the following:
1) Crawl messages from TriggerSM: This sub-step crawls
messages from TriggerSm. The target social media is viewers’
comments attached to Nicovideo live contents (the press con-
ferences related to the East Japan Great Earthquake). A set of
comments attached to one video content were recognized as
one document di as the following tuples:
di = (MIDi, Postedi, Titlei, Contenti)
(1)
Here, MIDi is an ID of each document, Postedi is a broadcast
date-time that the document (content), Titlei is a title of each
document (content) and Contenti is a combined text of video
comments. Table II shows some example of di.
TABLE II.
EXAMPLE OF di.
MID
Posted i
Titlei
Contenti
1
2011/03/11 Press Confer-
ence by Gov-
ernment
I can not believe, we should
send something to affected
people, It is really danger-
ous., ....
2
2011/03/14 Press
Conference
by TEPCO
The
president
should
take
responsibility, Where is the
president? The vice president
is also wired, ....
3
2011/03/15 Press
Conference
by TEPCO
The nuclear plant is really
bad, melt down?, TEPCO is
untrustworthy, ....
2) Extract words candidates and compute their scores:
This sub-step extracts words that are nouns, verbs, adjectives,
and adverbs from Contenti of each di by morphological anal-
ysis. We use Mecab that is yet another Japanese Dependency
Structure Analyzer [19] for word extraction. Then, the score
of an individual word in di is calculated using RIDF [20]
measure that is based on the poison distribution. We form a
list of keywords KW = {kw i}.
kw i = (MIDi, Postedi, {wij, vij})
(2)
Here, {wij, vij} is a list of a pair that consists of an extracted
word wij from document di, and the corresponding RIDF
value vij of wij.
3) Select motive word candidates according to their
scores.: This sub-step sorts {wij, vij} in descending order by
vij. Then the step analyzes KW over time and ﬁnds newly
appeared words that are high on the list {wij, vij} of each
kw i. We focus on top n words of each kw i and among those,
we ﬁnd characteristic words that did not seem appear before
the earthquake as motive words candidates.
B. Count occurrence numbers of motive words candidates in
PropagateSM
Then the method counts time series occurrence numbers
of candidates words in PropagateSM. The occurrence number
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

is counted before and after the earthquake. If the occurrence
number of the word is low before the quake, and becomes high
after the quake, the word can be recognized to become burst
after the quake.
C. Analyze time series motive words’ co-occurring patterns
and detect new concepts on PropagateSM.
The method checks the time series burst pattern for each
motive word candidate from the occurrence number of each
word. To detect the burst pattern, we adopt the method pro-
posed by Zhu et al. [18]. Zhu et al. proposed the burst detection
method using elastic windows over time. They propose the
shifted wavelet tree as the data structure for efﬁcient burst
monitoring, so that their method can detect burst ﬂexibly. The
shifted wavelet tree uses the adjacent windows of the same
level are half overlapping (Figure3). These additional windows
provide valuable overlapping information for the time series.
It will be better to analyze co-burst patterns between words
than the conventional wavelet tree.
Fig. 3.
Shifted Wavelet Tree proposed by Zhu et al..
Any subsequence with length w, w ≤ 2i is included in
some subsequence(s) with length 2i, and therefore is included
in one of the windows at level i + 1. We say that windows
with size w; 2i−1 ≤ w ≤ 2i, are monitored by level i + 1 of
the SWT.
The method computes the coefﬁcient of correlation be-
tween burst patterns of motive words candidates. If the co-
efﬁcient of correlation is larger than the threshold γ, the new
concept is supposed to be generated.
V.
PRELIMINARY APPROXIMATION
We crawled around 94000 viewers’ comments attached to
67 live videos (broadcasted from Mar. 13 to 24 in 2011) related
to the East Japan Great Earthquake in Nicovideo (TriggerSM).
Then words were extracted from crawled comments and the
RIDF score for each word was computed. Table III shows
some example of documents {di} x words {wij} matrix with
the RIDF scores.
Then {wij} in di were sorted in descending order by {vij}.
We set n = 10, and top 10 words with high RIDF value in each
di were extracted. Table IV shows some example of extracted
top 10 words for each di.
For example, in the document of MID = 1, words
such as ”blackout”, ”TEPCO”, ”press”, ”escape”, ”stop” and
TABLE III.
EXAMPLE OF {di} − words{wij} MATRIX.
MID
Postedi
escape
JSDF
[15]
life
publish
president
...
1
2011/03/13
20:00
0
0
0
0
0.1
...
2
2011/03/15
8:30
0.027
0.026
0.013
0.01
0.11
...
3
2011/03/15
14:00
0
0
0
0
0.01
...
4
2011/03/15
21:00
0
0.01
0.01
0
0.03
...
5
2011/03/15
23:30
0.02
0.01
0.01
0
0.01
....
6
....
....
....
....
....
....
....
TABLE IV.
EXAMPLE OF TRIGGER WORDS WITH HIGH RIDF VALUES
IN {di}.
MID
1
2
3
4
...
21
...
Datei
3/13
3/15
3/15
3/15
...
3/16
...
20:00
8:30
14:00
21:00
...
18:00
...
#1
blackout
ask
conference
blackout
...
vice-
president
...
#2
TEPCO
Fukushima
NISA[16]
TEPCO
...
nuclear-
plant
...
#3
press
president
TEPCO
nuclear-
plant
...
president
...
#4
escape
escape
rain
NISA
...
TEPCO
....
#5
stop
nuclear-
plant
ﬁeld
electricity
...
measures
....
#6
president
planned-
outrage
mass-
media
conference
...
TEPCO
....
#7
measures
JSDF
measures
no-
problem
...
problem
....
#8
ﬁre-
ﬁghting
TEPCO
cover-up
power-
saving
...
electricity
....
#9
Fukushima
ﬁeld
ofﬁcer
time
...
ﬁeld
....
#10
nulcear-
plant
ﬁx
nuclear-
plant
affected
...
remote
....
”president” were listed up. In the document of MID = 6,
words such as ”president”, ”planned-outrage”, ”mass-media”,
”TEPCO”, ”conference” and ”TEPCO” were listed up. These
words that characterize contents were recognized as trigger
words candidates.
In this paper, we deﬁned the follwoing 23 words as trigger
words candidates.
”planned-outrage”, ”blackout”, ”ﬁeld”, ”Edano”, ”JSDF”,
”employee”,
”ﬁre-ﬁghting”,
”government”,
”Shimizu”,
”power-saving”,
”measures”,
”stop”,
”power”,
”escape”,
”NISA”, ”radioactivity”, ”nuclear plant”, ”ofﬁcer”, ”TEPCO”,
”Fukushima”, ”president”, ”vice-president”, ”director”
As for above trigger words candidates, we counted occur-
rence number of each candidate in Twitter data (from Mar. 9
to Apr. 2) provided by Hottolink [17]. Figure 4 and Figure
5 show some result of the occurrence number of each trigger
word candidate.
In Figure 4, we can not ﬁnd the explicit correlation between
the occurrence pattern between president, vice-president and
director in Twitter. On the other hand, in Figure 5, the occur-
rence pattern between nuclear plant and Fukushima in Twitter
seems strongly co-related. Actually, ”Fukushima nuclear plant”
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

became the general word after the quake, so that these words
must be co-related. However, correlations between other words
were unexpected. To analyze correlations precisely, co-burst
patterns were considered.
Then, we adopt the burst detection method proposed by
Zhu et al. [18] to analyze co-burst patterns between trigger
words candidates. Figure 6 shows results of burst patterns of
trigger words candidates. The horizontal axis shows time (from
Mar. 9 to Apr. 2), and black cells indicate burst periods for
each word Figure 7 shows correlations between burst patterns
of trigger words. We set the threshold value γ as 0.5 and
the correlations larger than the threshold are shown by shaded
region.
According to Figure 7, we could observe the following
unexpected concepts
•
escape → Fukushima, nuclear-plant
•
TEPCO → president, vice-president, director, em-
ployee
•
ﬁreﬁghting → power, JSDF, radioactivity, nulcear-
plant
•
measures
→
nuclear-plant,
power,
radioactivity,
Fukushima
We could ﬁnd the new concepts such as ”escape (from)
Fukushima”, ”TEPCO president/vice-president/... (for con-
demnation)” ”(new relationships between) ﬁreﬁghting, power,
JSDF, radioactivity, and nulcear-plant”, and ”(the impor-
tance of) measures for nuclear-plant, power, radioactivity and
Fukushima.”
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed the method to detect new concepts
in multiple social media after the topical problem like the
East Japan Great Earthquake. As the preliminary approxima-
tion result, after the East Japan Great Earthquake, from web
video service (Nicovideo) and Twitter, new concepts could be
detected and shown as unexpected words co-occurrences. For
example, after the earthquake, new concepts for the nuclear
plant, TEPCO, and so on were recognized on social media.
As the future work, we plan to improve the method for
automatically selecting trigger words candidates, and analyze
the time series concepts detection using the video time line.
Moreover, the method should be applied to other data and eval-
uated compared to the conventional method such as wavelet
tree. As the future work, we are going to improve the technique
for trigger words candidates selection and focus on precisely
analyzing burst patterns over time using the time line of the
video. In addition, we will improve the method by considering
scalability.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Hashimoto, T. Kuboyama, B. Chakraborty, and Y. Shirota, Discovering
Topic Transition about the East Japan Great Earthquake in Dynamic
Social Media, GHTC 2012, Oct. 2012, pp. 259-264.
[2]
M. E. J. Newman, Modularity and community structure in networks,
National Academy of Science USA 103(23), 2006, pp. 8577-8696.
[3]
T. K. Landauer and S. T. Dumais,
A solution to Plato’s problem:
The latent semantic analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge, Psychological Review, 104(2), 1997, pp.
211-240.
[4]
T. Hashimoto, B. Chakraborty, T. Kuboyama, and Y. Shirota, Temporal
Awareness of Needs after East Japan Great Earthquake using Latent
Semantic Analysis, EJC2013 (the 23nd European-Japanese Conference
on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases), Jun. 2013, pp.214-
226.
[5]
Y. Sekiguchi, H. Kawashima, and T. Uchiyama, Discovery of related
topics using series of blogsites’ entries,
JSAI 2008, 2I1-1, 2008 (in
Japanese).
[6]
S. Asur, B.A. Huberman, G. Szba´o, and C. Wang, Trends in social media:
Persistence and decay, ICWSM 2011, Jul. 2011, pp. 434-437.
[7]
L. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Rui, Y. Shi, and S. Yang, Web video topic discovery
and tracking via bipartite graph reinforcement model, IWWWC 2011,
Apr. 2011, pp. 1009-1018.
[8]
J. Cao, C. W. Ngo, Y. D. Zhang, and J. T. Li, Tracking web video topics:
discovery, visualization and monitoring, IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems for Video Technology 21(12), 2011, pp. 1835-1846, 2011.
[9]
Z. Xue, Z. Jiang, G. Li, and Q. Huang, Cross-media topic detection
associated with hot search queries, ICIMCS 2013, Aug. 2013, pp. 403-
406.
[10]
K. Radinsky, E. Agichtein, E. Gabrilovich, and S. Markovitch, A word
at a time: Computing word relatedness using temporal semantic analysis,
WWW 2011, Mar. 2011, pp. 337-346.
[11]
X. Wang, C. Zhai, X. Hu, and R. Sproat, Mining correlated bursty
topic patterns from coordinated text streams, KDD 2007, Aug. 2007,
pp. 784-793.
[12]
D. Zhou, I. Councill, H. Zha, and C. L. Giles, Discovering temporal
communities from social network documents, ICDM 2007, Oct. 2007,
pp. 745-750.
[13]
J. Qiu, Z. Lin, C. Tang, and S. Qiao,
Discovering organizational
structure in dynamic social network, ICDM 2009, Dec. 2009, pp. 932-
937.
[14]
Nicovideo,
[Online]. Available: http://www.nicovideo.jp/, [retrieved:
Jan., 2014]
[15]
JSDF,
[Online].
Available:
Japan
Self-Defense
Forces,
http://www.mod.go.jp/asdf/English page/, [retrieved: Jan., 2014]
[16]
NISA,
[Online]. Available: Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency,
http://www.nsr.go.jp/archive/nisa/english/, [retrieved: Jan., 2014]
[17]
Hottolink,Inc.,
[Online]. Available: http://hottolink.co.jp, [retrieved:
Jan., 2014]
[18]
Y. Zhu and D. Shasha, Efﬁcient elastic burst detection in data streams
KDD 2003, Aug. 2003, pp. 336-345.
[19]
T. Kudo,
MeCab : Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological
Analyzer, [Online]. Available: http://mecab.sourceforge.net/, [retrieved:
Jan., 2014]
[20]
K. W. Church and W. A. Gale, Poisson mixtures, Natural Language
Engineering 1, 1995, pp. 163–190.
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 4.
Occurrence number of president, vice-president and director in Twitter
Fig. 5.
Occurrence number of escape, nuclear plant and Fukushima in Twitter
Fig. 6.
Burst patterns of trigger words candidates
Fig. 7.
Correlations between trigger words candidates
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

