A Preliminary Analysis of the Determinants of
Acceptance of Contact Tracing Apps in Brazil
Patricia Takako Endo
Caruaru Campus
Universidade de Pernambuco (UPE)
Recife, Brazil
email: patricia.endo@upe.br
Grace Fox
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: grace.fox@dcu.ie
Theo Lynn
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: theo.lynn@dcu.ie
Pierangelo Rosati
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: pierangelo.rosati@dcu.ie
Lisa van der Werff
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: lisa.vanderwerff@dcu.ie
Abstract—This research investigates the factors driving accep-
tance and use of mobile contact tracing apps in Brazil. The
study leverages Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB), Privacy
Calculus Theory (PCT) and social contract theory, and a sample
of 1,114 Brazilian residents to demonstrate the importance of
perceived control and perceived surveillance in the formation of
individuals’ perceptions of privacy. Preliminary ﬁndings suggest
that perceived privacy, reciprocal beneﬁts, and social inﬂuence
have a positive effect on individuals’ intentions to download or
continue use of contact tracing mobile apps. Similarly, intention
to adopt, perceived privacy, and reciprocal beneﬁts have a positive
effect on intentions to disclose information.
Keywords—Privacy; Social Contract; Social Inﬂuence; COVID-
19; Mobile Apps; Contact Tracing.
I. INTRODUCTION
The COVID-19 pandemic has radically changed all aspects
of our lives. Given the initial lack of effective pharmaceutical
countermeasures, a number of exceptional public health mea-
sures have been introduced by various governments in order
to reduce the transmission of the virus. Most governments
mainly focused on keeping the public informed, timely contact
tracing, and isolation of individuals who have been exposed to
the virus. Digital technologies have proven to be particularly
useful in this context by enabling fast dissemination of infor-
mation to citizens and location-based contact tracing. Contact
tracing apps in particular have become a common feature of
the battle against COVID-19 [1]. Some of these apps have
been introduced by national governments while others have
been introduced by application developers [1] .
Brazil is one of the countries that have been most affected
by COVID-19 [2]. A number of mobile contact tracing apps
have been introduced in the country including one funded
by a local state government to monitor symptoms and self-
isolation (Monitora), and a contact tracing app, which links
information from healthcare organizations with geo-location
data to infer users’ risk of infection (Dycovid). While these
apps require users to disclose different information, they both
collect sensitive data, such as users’ health information and
location. As such, the use of these apps raise signiﬁcant
privacy concerns as they can be perceived as a form of
government surveillance. Widespread adoption and users’ will-
ingness to disclose information are necessary conditions for
the success of these apps [3], thus it is important to investigate
how individuals’ perceptions regarding privacy and beneﬁts
associated with these applications inﬂuence their acceptance
and ultimate use of the apps. In this study, we combine Theory
of Planned Behaviour (TPB), Privacy Calculus Theory (PCT),
and Social Contract Theory (SCT) to answer the following
research question: what roles do individuals’ perceptions of
privacy and beneﬁts play in determining their acceptance and
use of contact tracing applications? By doing so, we aim
to contribute to the growing literature on privacy and the
adoption of new online services, and to the emergent literature
on the beneﬁts and challenges of digital technologies during a
pandemic. The remainder of this article is organised as follows.
Section II introduces the theoretical framework; Section III
provides a brief overview of the sample and data collection;
Section IV presents a summary of some preliminary ﬁndings;
and Section V presents some concluding remarks.
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Academic research on privacy and technology adoption
has recently begun to focus on emerging online services and
the privacy implications of such technologies. However, most
studies follow the Antecedents-Privacy Concerns-Outcomes
(APCO) framework presented by Smith et al. [4] and do
not examine the relationship between antecedents, privacy and
behavioral outcomes. In this study, we aim to the overcome
such a limitation by investigating the role of privacy in
the context of contact tracing mobile apps across the entire
APCO framework. To this aim, we leverage TPB as our
underlying framework. It posits that the behavioural intentions
of an individual are a function of their attitudes towards the
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

behaviour, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control
[5]. While TPB has been the dominant theoretical approach
for investigating health-related behaviour for decades, it has
also attracted a number of criticisms mostly because of its
low explanatory power in real-life experiments [6]. For these
reasons, we combined TPB with SCT and PCT and as a result
take into account a larger number of factors that might affect
the behavioural intentions of a given user.
According to SCT, a social contract exists every time an
exchange of information is required; this equally applies to
the use of a mobile app. Such a contract is directly related to
how information should be used. Individuals are more likely
to engage in the exchange when they believe that the social
contract will be honored [7]. SCT also states that organisations
must provide the individual with control over how their
information is used [8]. We argue that the same logic applies
to contact tracing apps and that, if individuals’ perceive that
these apps can be used for government surveillance purposes,
their perception of privacy will diminish. In turn, a lower
perception of privacy would negatively affect their willing
to accept and use the contact tracing app. In contrast, PCT
posits that individuals compare positive and negative outcomes
associated with a behavior prior to deciding whether or not to
engage in that behavior [7], and that they will then engage in
the behavior if the positive outcomes outweigh the negatives
[9]. In this study, we adopt PCT to examine the inﬂuence
of perceived privacy and several positive beliefs on users’
acceptance of mobile contact tracing apps.
III. DATA COLLECTION AND SAMPLE
Data was collected using an online survey in Portuguese
based on validated scales with minor wording amendments
to adapt items to the context. Given the existence of several
contact tracing apps in Brazil, participants were initially asked
if they had downloaded any of the main apps. We only
explored beneﬁts and privacy perceptions of the users who had
experience with this type of apps. Participants with no prior
experience using contact tracing apps were presented with a
neutrally-framed description of a hypothetical contact tracing
app and asked questions on their intentions to (i) adopt such
an app, (ii) disclose accurate data, and (iii) rely on the app
for health advice. Responses were collected using stratiﬁed
sampling with gender, age and regional quotas and an online
panel provided by Qualtrics. 1,175 complete responses were
collected however 50 responses were ﬁltered out due to low
standard deviation in the responses and other 11 responses
due to a completion time that was too short. Table I provides a
breakdown of the 1,114 responses included in our ﬁnal sample.
Responses were analysed using Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis
and Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modelling (PLS-
SEM).
IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Preliminary ﬁndings suggest that perceived privacy, recip-
rocal beneﬁts, and social inﬂuence have a positive effect on
individuals’ intentions to download or continue use of contact
TABLE I
SAMPLE OVERVIEW
Gender
#
Age Range
#
Male
524
18-20
79
Female
589
21-29
252
Rather Not Say
1
30-39
286
Other
0
40-49
214
50-59
175
60-69
96
70+
12
Employment Status
#
Education Level
#
Employed
507
Primary School
9
Self-employed
272
High School
467
Unemployed
149
Technical College
14
Student
86
Bachelor degree
382
Unavailable for work
11
Masters degree
294
Retired
89
Doctorate degree
35
Other
13
tracing applications. Similarly, intention to adopt, perceived
privacy, and reciprocal beneﬁts have a positive effect on
intentions to disclose information. Interestingly, the results
also show that perceived health beneﬁts have a positive effect
on intention to continue to use the app by current users while
it has a negative effect on non-users’ intention to adopt.
V. CONCLUSION
Our research aims to contribute to the academic literature
on privacy and technology adoption in at least two ways. First,
we combined PCT and SCT to investigate the role that privacy
antecedents play in the context of mobile contact tracing app
acceptance. Second, we compared the role of perceived privacy
on acceptance of both users and non-users. The ﬁndings of our
study have also practice implications as it demonstrates that
the perception of privacy is a major driver of acceptance in the
context of contacting tracing apps. It is therefore important for
developers and organisations invested in these apps to foster
these perceptions prior to the introduction of new applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Raman, K. Achuthan, R. Vinuesa, and P. Nedungadi, “Covidtas covid-
19 tracing app scale—an evaluation framework,” Sustainability, vol. 13,
no. 5, p. 2912, 2021.
[2] Worldometer,
“Countries
where
covid-19
has
spread,”
2021,
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/countries-where-coronavirus-
has-spread/ (last accessed on 28 June 2021).
[3] T. M. Yasaka, B. M. Lehrich, and R. Sahyouni, “Peer-to-peer contact
tracing: development of a privacy-preserving smartphone app,” JMIR
mHealth and uHealth, vol. 8, no. 4, p. e18936, 2020.
[4] H. J. Smith, T. Dinev, and H. Xu, “Information privacy research: an
interdisciplinary review,” MIS quarterly, pp. 989–1015, 2011.
[5] I. Ajzen, “From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior,” in
Action control.
Springer, 1985, pp. 11–39.
[6] F. F. Sniehotta, J. Presseau, and V. Ara´ujo-Soares, “Time to retire the
theory of planned behaviour,” Health psychology review, vol. 8, no. 1,
pp. 1–7, 2014.
[7] M. J. Culnan and P. K. Armstrong, “Information privacy concerns,
procedural fairness, and impersonal trust: An empirical investigation,”
Organization science, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 104–115, 1999.
[8] N. K. Malhotra, S. S. Kim, and J. Agarwal, “Internet users’ information
privacy concerns (iuipc): The construct, the scale, and a causal model,”
Information systems research, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 336–355, 2004.
[9] T. Dinev and P. Hart, “An extended privacy calculus model for e-
commerce transactions,” Information systems research, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 61–80, 2006.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

