Innovation Policy Analytics for Economic Crisis 
 
Euripidis  Loukis 
Dept. Information & Communication 
Systems Engineering 
University of Aegean 
Karlovassi, Greece 
e-mail: eloukis@aegean.gr 
            Spyros Arvanitis 
KOF Swiss Economic Institute 
  ETH Zürich 
          Zürich, Switzerland 
  e-mail: arvanitis@kof.ethz.ch 
 
 
       Charalampos Alexopoulos 
Dept. Information & Communication 
          Systems Engineering 
          University of Aegean 
            Karlovassi, Greece 
        e-mail:alexop@aegean.gr
Abstract— Policy analytics is defined as the exploitation of 
existing 
data 
from 
government 
agencies, 
possibly 
in 
combination with data from private sector firms, and using 
advanced analytical techniques in order to support different 
stages of public policy making. It constitutes a highly 
ambitious new generation of electronic (digital) government, 
aiming to provide substantial support to higher government 
functions. However, the area of policy analytics is still in its 
infancy, so extensive further research is required in this area in 
order to develop effective methodologies for supporting 
various stages of policy-making in important domains of 
government intervention. This paper contributes to filling this 
research gap for a highly important domain of government 
intervention and policy, the promotion of firms’ innovation 
activity, in difficult times of economic crisis. It presents a 
methodology for exploiting existing data from Taxation 
Authorities and Statistical Agencies in combination with data 
from private sector consulting and business information firms 
in order to identify characteristics of the firm and its external 
environment that affect its innovation behaviour (the extent of 
their product/service innovation reduction) during economic 
crises. Our methodology exploits findings of previous research 
in the areas of innovation and economic crises. It can generate 
valuable insights, which can support substantially the 
development of innovation policies in times of economic crisis. 
Furthermore, an application of this methodology is presented, 
using existing Greek firms’ data from the Hellenic Statistical 
Authority, in combination with data from the business 
information and consulting firm ICAP, for the economic crisis 
period 2009 – 2014, which provides interesting insights. 
Keywords - Electronic Government; Digital Government; 
Policy Analytics; Policy Informatics; Innovation; Economic 
Crisis.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Policy analytics (previously called also as policy 
informatics) is defined as the exploitation of existing data 
from government agencies, possibly in combination with 
data from private sector firms, and using advanced analytical 
techniques in order to support different stages of public 
policy making [1]. It constitutes a highly ambitious new 
generation of electronic (digital) government, aiming to 
provide substantial support to higher government functions. 
While the first generation of electronic (digital) government 
aimed to support government agencies’ internal processes as 
well as their transactions with firms and citizens, and the 
second generation aimed to support communication and 
consultation with the society (with a special focus on the 
exploitation of the social media for this purpose), this new 
third generation aims to support and enhance the whole cycle 
of policy-making for addressing serious problems of modern 
societies [2][3].  
Though there has been a long interest in providing 
support for the design and implementation of important 
public policies (due to their high importance for and impact 
on the society and also the large amounts of financial 
resources they consume), recently this has become much 
more intensive, leading to an exponential development of 
policy analytics, mainly for three reasons:  
i) The development and success of the data science and 
business analytics in the private sector, which aims at the 
exploitation of the large quantities of data collected by firms 
in order to support decision making, strategy formulation, as 
well as development of new products and services [4][5]. 
ii) The increasing availability of data in government 
agencies, which can provide (after appropriate processing) 
significant support of policy and decision making. The main 
sources of these data are: the increasingly complex internal 
information systems (IS) of government agencies, as well as 
their electronic transactions and consultations IS; the 
growing use of social media by government agencies, which 
generates large quantities of textual data, containing valuable 
citizens’ knowledge, experience, proposals, ideas, opinions 
and comments; and recently the development of the Internet 
of Things (IoT), especially in the context of modern cities 
[6][7]. 
iii) The increasing complexity and severity of the challenges, 
problems and needs of modern societies. The ‘traditional’ 
social problems that governments face have become more 
complex and severe, while at the same time new problems 
have appeared (e.g., due to the globalization of the economy, 
the climate change, the ageing population, the migration of 
massive populations from underdeveloped countries or areas 
facing serious conflicts, warfare or social unrest to the more 
developed countries) [6][7]. 
It is widely recognized that the potential of the above 
massive government data, especially if combined with 
related private sector data (e.g., from consulting and business 
information firms), towards the provision of valuable support 
of highly important public policies, is quite high. This 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

potential can be exploited to a much greater extent if these 
data 
undergo 
advanced 
processing 
using 
various 
sophisticated analytical techniques from the areas of 
statistics, data mining, operational research, etc., such as 
regression analysis, clustering, association analysis, data 
segmentation, classification analysis, anomaly detection, 
social network analysis and computer simulation [1]. 
However, the area of policy analytics is still in its infancy, so 
extensive further research is required in this area in order to 
develop effective policy analytics methodologies for 
supporting various stages of policy-making in important 
domains 
of 
government 
intervention. 
Some 
useful 
knowledge has already been developed in the area of policy 
analytics, which includes methodologies for exploiting 
different sources of data, using advanced basic or more 
advanced analytical techniques in order to support some of 
the stages of the policy making cycle in some domains of 
government intervention, such as the environment [8], the 
energy provision [9], the justice [10] and the management of 
emergency crises (both natural disasters, such as earthquakes 
and hurricanes, and man-made crises, such as terrorism and 
ethnic violence) [11][12]. However, extensive additional 
research is required in this area in order to increase our 
knowledge concerning the exploitation of the large quantities 
of data available today in government, in combination with 
data from various private sector firms, and using advanced 
analytical techniques for supporting all the stages of public 
policies’ development and implementation, in various 
important domains. It is necessary to experiment with 
exploiting a variety policy-related public and private sector 
datasets, 
using 
various 
analytical 
techniques, 
from 
‘traditional’ statistical analysis to advanced data mining and 
artificial intelligent ones, in order to extract from them 
insights and knowledge that can be useful for policy making.  
This paper contributes in this direction towards filling the 
abovementioned research gaps, dealing with a highly 
important domain of government intervention and policy: the 
promotion of firms’ innovation. We focus on periods, in 
which this is more difficult and at the same time more useful 
for the economy and the society: on periods of economic 
crisis. It is widely recognized that innovation has become an 
important element of the modern economy, of critical 
importance for the competitiveness and growth of firms, 
sectors and countries [6][7][13]. It involves development of 
new products and services (or substantial improvement of 
existing ones) in order to adapt to evolving needs and 
preferences of customers, development of new markets or 
market segments, and exploitation of new technologies that 
have emerged. Governments of various layers (central, 
regional and municipal governments) of most countries 
exhibit active interest in promoting innovation, and design 
and implement policies for this purpose that take the form of 
financial support through grants, subsidies and tax credits, 
but also the form of relevant laws and regulations. 
Government initiatives become much more difficult, but at 
the same time much more necessary and important in periods 
of economic crisis, which are an inevitable trait of market-
based economies [14][15]. Economic crises are repeatedly 
occurring with varying intensities and durations in market-
based economies, with quite negative consequences for the 
economy and the society in general. One of the most 
important (however less observable and debated) negative 
consequences is the reduction of firms’ product/service 
innovation activities, which has quite negative impact on 
their medium- and long-term competitiveness. So, during 
periods of economic crisis it is even more important than in 
the ‘normal’ periods to design and implement policies for 
mitigating this reduction of firms’ innovation activities and 
promoting product/service innovation that can contribute to 
overcoming the crisis. However, this necessitates a sound 
evidence-base, which will allow achieving higher levels of 
effectiveness and maturity of these critical policies. 
In this direction this paper presents a methodology for 
exploiting existing data from Taxation Authorities and 
Statistical Agencies, in combination with data from private 
sector consulting and business information firms, in order to 
identify characteristics of the firm and its external 
environment that affect its innovation behaviour (the extent 
of their product/service innovation reduction) during econo-
mic crises. Our methodology is based on and leverages 
findings of previous research in the areas of innovation and 
economic crises. It can generate valuable insights, as to the 
types of firms exhibiting higher or lower sensitivity to the 
crisis with respect to innovation activity, which can support 
substantially the development of innovation policies in 
periods of economic crisis. Furthermore, an application of 
this methodology is presented, using Greek firms’ data from 
the Hellenic Statistical Authority, in combination with data 
from the business information and consulting firm ICAP, for 
the economic crisis period 2009 – 2014; it has revealed inte-
resting characteristics of firms and their external environ-
ment affecting innovation behaviour during the Greek crisis.  
The paper is organized in five sections. The following 
section II outlines the conceptual background of our study. 
Section III describes the proposed methodology of 
innovation policy analytics for economic crisis periods, 
while Section IV presents the abovementioned application. 
Finally, Section V summarizes the conclusions and proposes 
future research directions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In this section we briefly present the background of the 
proposed methodology concerning innovation and economic 
crise.s 
A. Innovation 
The ‘Oslo Manual 2018’ [13] defines product/service 
innovation as ‘a new or improved good or service that differs 
significantly from the firm’s previous goods or services and 
that has been introduced in the market’. Innovation is more 
than simply a new idea or an invention: it includes 
implementation, diffusion and active use by other parties, 
such as individuals, firms or public organisations. It is the 
wide diffusion of an innovation that can actually generate 
economic and social positive impact and value. However, 
beyond the above positive value, innovative products and 
services might replace some existing ones, and this can cause 
problems to firms producing the latter (e.g., reduction of 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

sales, profitability and personnel employment), and in 
general lead to significant disruptions; however, in the long-
term innovation leads to economic growth. The main 
theoretical foundations of innovation have been developed in 
the beginning of the 20th century by the Austrian economist 
J. Schumpeter, who created theories on how firms search for 
new opportunities and competitive advantage over current or 
potential competitors [16]. He also introduced the concept of 
“creative destruction” to describe the disruption of existing 
economic activity that can be caused by innovations creating 
new ways of producing goods or services, or even entirely 
new industries. 
In the modern economy innovation is highly important 
for firms’ competitiveness, or even survival [6][7]. As new 
technologies are continuously emerging, firms have to 
develop new or substantially improved products and services 
that incorporate and exploit these technologies, acting either 
as ‘first movers’ (i.e., before their competitors) - leaders, or 
as ‘late movers’ (i.e., after some of their competitors have 
taken action) – followers. Furthermore, customers’ needs and 
preferences are evolving, and also markets are changing 
(e.g., new competitors, substitutes or suppliers appear), and 
firms have to respond by introducing new or substantially 
improved products and services. 
Innovation is a highly knowledge-intensive activity; it 
requires the use and combination of both internal and 
external knowledge, which necessitates significant human 
capital (human competences and skills) as well as 
organizational capital (appropriate practices and processes). 
In particular, innovation requires absorbing relevant 
knowledge from their external environment (e.g., from 
universities, research centres, suppliers, customers, partners, 
etc.), combining it with internal knowledge they possess, and 
then exploiting this combined knowledge for making 
product/service innovations [17]-[19]. So, modern firms in 
order to be innovative need to possess high levels of 
knowledge ‘absorptive capacity’, which has four main 
components: a) acquisition capacity (ability to locate, 
identify, value and acquire external knowledge that is related 
to firm’s products and services); b) assimilation capacity 
(ability to analyse, process, interpret, understand, internalize 
and classify the acquired external knowledge); c) trans-
formation capacity (ability to associate and combine the 
existing knowledge base of the firm with the newly acquired 
knowledge); d) application or exploitation capacity (ability 
to incorporate acquired, assimilated and transformed 
knowledge into new or significantly improved products and 
services) [18]. 
Due to the high importance of innovation for firms, 
sectors and countries considerable research has been 
conducted for the identification of factors that influence 
firm’s 
innovation 
activity, 
termed 
as 
‘innovation 
determinants’; reviews of this research are provided in 
[13][20][21][22]. This research has revealed characteristics 
of the firm and its external environment that affect its 
innovation activity; the most important of them are size, 
human capital, adoption of ‘organic’ non-hierarchical forms 
of 
workplace 
organisation 
(such 
as 
teamwork, 
decentralisation of decision making and job rotation), 
technological capabilities, financial resources, creativity and 
innovation culture, as well as demand prospects and 
competition, which impact positively firm’s innovation 
activity. A more recent relevant research stream has focused 
on and revealed the strong positive impact that information 
and communication technologies (ICT) can have on both the 
‘process’ of innovation (i.e., the design and implementation 
of it) as well as its ‘outcomes’ (i.e., the resulting ICT-
enabled 
innovative 
products 
and 
services) 
[6][7][13][23][24][25][26]. In [25] are identified three main 
channels through which the use of ICT impacts positively 
firms’ innovation activities. The first channel is the support 
and improvement of the management of the knowledge 
(internal or external) required for the innovation process. 
ICT enables an efficient storage, accessibility and exchange 
of this knowledge throughout the firm. Internal networks, e-
mail systems, and electronic databases all facilitate the 
transfer of knowledge and the communication between 
innovation participants. Second, ICT enables a more efficient 
cooperation for innovation with external partners, which has 
become even more important in the last twenty years, with 
the wide adoption of ‘open innovation’ models [23]. Third, 
ICT enable new products and services, and also the variety 
and personalization of existing products and services, which 
were not operationally and economically feasible before 
without ICT [24]. Furthermore, some specific kinds of 
information systems (IS) have been identified, such as 
enterprise resource planning (ERP), customer relationship 
management (CRM), business intelligence/analytics (BI/BA) 
and e-business ones, as well as social media, which can 
substantially improve firm’s absorptive capacity and finally 
ability for innovation, by enabling the collection and 
processing of data that can be quite useful for firms’ 
innovation activity [27][28]. Also, the use of cloud 
computing can provide rapid and low-cost electronic support 
of product/process innovations, so it can positively impact 
firms’ innovation activity [29][30]. 
B. Economic Crises 
One of the most important problems that governments 
face, and have to address through appropriate policies, are 
the economic crises of varying intensities and durations that 
repeatedly occur in market-based economies [14][15]. They 
can be defined as significant contractions of economic 
activity, which can be due to ‘business cycles’ (i.e., the 
fluctuations that economic activity usually exhibits, with 
periods of expansion followed by periods of contraction) or 
other events that happen in the society or economy (such as 
the oil crisis in the early 1970, or banking crises) [15]. 
Economic crises have quite negative both short-term as 
well as medium- and long-term consequences for the 
economy and the society. The short-term consequences 
(which are much more ‘observable’ and widely debated by 
the society, as they directly affect large number of citizens) 
include reductions of the demand for many goods and 
services, resulting in serious decrease of firms’ sales, 
production and profits, leading to reductions in personnel 
employment and materials’ procurement (and through this 
mechanism the crisis propagates further towards the 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

suppliers, etc.). For the above reasons economic crises 
increase 
unemployment, 
especially 
among 
some 
disadvantaged groups, such as the young people, the low-
skilled, the immigrants and the temporary workers [14]. This 
causes big social problems, increasing the number of citizens 
living in poverty and social exclusion; furthermore, it 
increases 
the 
required 
government 
spending 
for 
unemployment benefits, as well as for other types of social 
welfare and assistance for the unemployed (e.g., further 
training), while at the same time during these economic 
crises government income from taxation decreases due to 
lower firms’ profitability and individuals’ income.  
Another highly important (however much less debated) 
negative consequence is that during economic crises firms 
usually reduce investment in fixed assets (e.g., in production 
equipment, ICT, buildings, etc.) and also in innovations, due 
to the reduction on one hand of the external demand for 
products and services, which makes such investment more 
risky, and on the other hand of the available financial 
resources for investment [14][15][31][32]. This is called 
‘pro-cyclical’ behaviour’ (i.e., investment follows the ups 
and down of the business cycle), having quite negative 
impact on firms medium- and long-term competitiveness. 
Especially the reduction of firms’ innovation activities 
during economic crises decreases the degree of renewal of 
their products and services, exploitation of emerging new 
technologies, and adaptation to changing needs and 
preferences of customers, and results finally in lower compe-
titiveness. However, for some innovation investments has 
been observed the opposite behaviour by some firms during 
economic crises: increase, in order to take advantage of 
lower prices of some required inputs (such as specialized 
personnel and equipment) [33]; this is called ‘anti-cyclical’ 
or ‘counter-cyclical’ investment behaviour’. 
The above negative consequences of the economic crises 
are not the same for all firms: some firms are more efficient 
than the others, offer higher value-for-money products and 
services, so they have weaker negative consequences on their 
sales revenue, and therefore on employment and investment, 
including investment in innovation. Therefore, it is important 
to identify characteristics of the firm and its external 
environment that affect positively or negatively its sensitivity 
to economic crises, especially with respect to innovation 
activity. In this paper we present an innovation policy 
analytics methodology for this purpose (described in the 
following section III). This can be quite useful for 
government agencies in order to develop effective and 
focused policies for reducing the negative consequences of 
economic crises on firms’ innovation activity. It allows 
identifying 
characteristics 
(with 
respect 
to 
strategy, 
organization, human resources, use of ICT, external 
environment) of firms exhibiting lower sensitivity to the 
crisis with respect to innovation (i.e., lower or even no 
product/service innovation reduction due to the crisis), and 
therefore learning from them (which strategies, forms of 
organization, human resources, kinds of ICT reduce a firm’s 
innovation sensitivity to the crisis). It further allows 
identifying characteristics of firms exhibiting higher 
sensitivity to the crisis with respect to innovation (i.e., higher 
product/service innovation reduction due to the crisis), in 
order to design effective policies for assisting and supporting 
them (e.g., financial support of innovation activities, relevant 
laws and regulations). 
III. 
PROPOSED  METHODOLOGY  
As mentioned above, the proposed innovation policy 
analytics methodology aims to identify characteristics of the 
firm and its external environment that affect its innovation 
behaviour (the extent 
of 
product/service 
innovation 
reduction) during economic crises. It exploits findings of 
previous research in the areas of innovation (concerning 
innovation determinants, briefly reviewed in the last 
paragraph of section II.A) and economic crises (see section 
II.B). In particular, our methodology uses two main data 
sources: 
i) existing public sector data concerning firms’ innovation 
behaviour (i.e., extent of product/service innovation 
reduction) during economic crises, possessed by Taxation 
Authorities and Statistical Agencies, 
ii) existing public and the private sector data concerning 
various characteristics of firms (e.g., concerning strategy, 
organization, human resources, use of ICT) and their external 
environment, possessed by Statistical Agencies, and also 
business information firms and consulting firms.  
These data are used for the estimation of innovation 
reduction regression models, having as dependent variables 
various measures of the reduction of different kinds of firm 
product/process innovation (e.g., incremental, radical, etc.) 
due to the economic crisis (INN_RED), and as independent 
variables various characteristics of the firm and its external 
environment (fchk, k = 1,.. ,n): 
INN_REDi=b0+b1*fch1i+b2*fch2i+…+bnfchni+bn+1*d_sizei+ 
bn+2 *d_sectori , for firm i  
 
 
      (1) 
where: d_size are dummy variables for firm size, and 
d_sector are dummy variables for firm sector affiliation. 
These regression models allow the identification of 
independent 
variables 
having 
statistically 
significant 
regression coefficients, which reveal characteristics of the 
firm and its external environment that affect the extent of 
innovation reduction due to economic crisis.  
In these innovation reduction regression models we can 
include as independent variables: 
a) Firm characteristics that can influence the extent of 
reduction of sales revenue due to the economic crisis, which 
is the main determinant of the financial resources available 
for investments in innovation. For instance, the extent of 
adopting an export strategy to countries not facing economic 
crisis can reduce the negative impact of a domestic economic 
crisis on firm’s sales revenue and therefore increase the 
availability of financial resources for innovation investments. 
b) Characteristics of the firm and its external environment 
that can influence its innovation activity. According to 
previous research on innovation determinants (briefly 
reviewed in the last paragraph of section II.A) the most 
important of them are: 
- size (with larger firms in general having more financial 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

resources for innovation investments, and also more 
opportunities for bank loans); 
-  human capital (employing personnel of higher educational 
levels, competences and skills can increase firms’ capacity to 
perform the extensive and complex knowledge related 
activities required for making product/service innovations 
[34] - see third paragraph of section II.A); 
- adoption of ‘organic’ non-hierarchical forms of workplace 
organisation, such as teamwork, decentralisation of decision 
making and job rotation (they facilitate the exchange and 
combination of knowledge of firms’ employees from 
different functions and background, which is of critical 
importance for innovation [26]); 
- financial resources and technological capabilities (for 
financing projects of product/service innovation, and for 
producing innovative products/services respectively); 
-  creativity and innovation culture; 
- use of ICT (which as mentioned in II.A can significantly 
support and enhance both the ‘process’ and the ‘outcome’ of 
innovation [6][7][26], and especially use of some specific 
kinds of IS that can substantially increase firm’s knowledge 
absorptive capacity and therefore ability for innovation, such 
as ERP, CRM, BI/BA, e-business, social media and cloud 
computing [27][28][29][30]; 
and also some characteristics of firm’s external environment 
that according to previous innovation determinants’ research 
(see section II.A) affect innovation activity, such as: 
- demand prospects (larger demand potential increases firm’s 
incentives for fostering product/service innovations);  
- competition conditions (higher competitive pressures also 
increase firm’s incentives for product/service innovation). 
The above provide useful guidelines for specifying the 
innovation reduction regression models for the practical 
application of this methodology. 
IV. 
APPLICATION 
The innovation policy analytics methodology described 
in the previous section III has been applied for the 
identification of characteristics of Greek firms and their 
external environment that affect the extent of their 
product/service innovation reduction due to the long and 
intensive economic crisis that Greece experienced from 2009 
until today. For this purpose, we have used existing Greek 
firm’s data for the period 2009-2014 from two sources: i) the 
Hellenic Statistical Authority (data concerning the extent of 
firms’ innovation reduction in the period 2009-2014); and ii) 
ICAP S.A., a well-known business information and 
consulting firm (data concerning characteristics of firms and 
their external environment). In particular, we have used data 
from these two sources for 363 Greek firms, which belong to 
the most technologically developed manufacturing and 
services sectors of the Greek economy; 40.2% of them were 
from manufacturing sectors, 9.4% from constructions, and 
50.4% from services sectors; 52.6% of them were small, 
36.1% medium and 11.3% large ones. From these data an 
innovation reduction regression model was estimated. 
Our dependent variable is the extent of reduction of 
firm’s product/service innovation due to the crisis, which is 
assessed in a 5-point Likert scale (“negligible, “small”, 
“moderate”, “large”, “very large”). In Table 1 we can see the 
relative frequencies of these values. 
TABLE 1. RELATIVE FREQUENCIES FOR EXTENT OF INNOVATION REDUCTION 
Negligible 
small 
moderate 
Large 
very large 
30.5% 
21.1% 
25.5% 
16.4% 
6.6% 
We can see that more than half (51.6%) of the firms of our 
sample (coming from the most technologically developed 
manufacturing and services sectors of the Greek economy, as 
mentioned above) had negligible or small extent of 
innovation reduction due to the crisis, while about one 
quarter (25.5%) had moderate extent of reduction, and less 
than one quarter of them (23%) had a large or very large 
extent of innovation reduction.  
The independent variables were: 
- characteristics of firm: adoption of export strategy (EXP - 
binary variable); use of ‘organic’ forms of workplace 
organization, such as teamwork, decentralization and job 
rotation (ORG – binary variable); human capital (HC – 
percentage of firm’s employees having tertiary-level 
education); 
- ICT use: extent of use of customer relationship 
management, business intelligence/analytics and collabo-
ration support systems (CRM, BI/BA, CS – ordinal variables 
measured on a 5-point Likert scale: “not at all”, “to a small 
extent”, “to a moderate extent”, “to a large extent”, “to a 
very large extent”); use of social media and cloud computing 
(SM and CLO – binary variables); 
- characteristics of a firm’s external environment: decrease of 
demand in the last three years (DEMDEC – ordinal variable 
measured in a 5-point Likert scale: “increased strongly”, 
“increased”, “remained the same”, “decreased”, “decreased 
strongly”); intensity of price competition and intensity of 
non-price competition (PRCOMP and NPRCOMP - ordinal 
variables measured in a 5-point Likert scale: “very weak”, 
“weak”, “moderate”, “strong”, “very strong”). 
-  size and sector control variables: two control variables for 
size: D-L (taking value 1 for large firms having more than 
250 employees and 0 for all other firms) and D-M (taking 
value 1 for medium-size firms having 50 - 250 employees 
and 0 for all other firms); and one control variable for sector: 
D-SE (taking value 1 for manufacturing or construction 
sectors’ firms, and 0 for service sectors’ firms). 
In Table 2 we can see the innovation reduction model we 
estimated from the above data through ordinal regression 
estimation (since the dependent variable is a five-level 
ordinal variable) and using negative log-log link function (as 
the lower categories of the dependent variable are more 
probable); the statistically significant coefficients at levels of 
1%, 5% and 10% are shown with ***, ** and * respectively. 
This model reveals two ICTs that have statistically 
significant negative effects on the extent of Greek firms’ 
innovation reduction due to the crisis (i.e., reduce the 
negative effects of the crisis on firms’ product/service 
innovation): the cloud computing and the BI/BA. The use of 
cloud computing can provide rapid and low-cost electronic 
support of firm’s activities and processes, improving their 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

efficiency, and this can make the firm more resistant to the 
crisis and reduce the negative impact of economic crisis on 
its sales revenue. This increases the availability of financial 
resources for innovation projects. Also, cloud computing can 
provide rapid and low-cost electronic support of firm’s 
product/service innovations, and this has positive influence 
on its innovation activity. The use of BI/BA allows 
extracting useful insights from the data stored in a firm’s IS 
(concerning sales, production, procurement, expenses, etc.), 
which can lead to efficiency improvements, making the firm 
more resistant to the crisis, reducing the negative impact of 
economic crisis on sales revenue, and therefore increasing 
the availability of financial resources for innovation projects. 
Furthermore, the use of BI/BA enables gaining valuable 
insights from firm’s sales data, which allow identifying 
opportunities for making product/service innovations. 
TABLE 2. ESTIMATED INNOVATION REDUCTION MODEL 
Independent 
variable 
Coefficient 
Independent 
variable 
Coefficient 
EXP 
-0.275** 
CLO 
-0.348** 
ORG 
-0.073 
DEMDEC 
0.218*** 
HC 
-0.298 
PRCOMP 
0.108 
CRM 
0.040 
NPRCOMP 
0.084 
BI/BA 
-0.094* 
D-L 
-0.375 
CS 
0.033 
D-M 
-0.053 
SM 
-0.151 
D-SE 
-0.100 
Nagelkehre Pseudo R2 = 0.125 
Also, the estimates in Table 2 indicate that the adoption 
of export strategy has statistically significant negative effect 
on the extent of Greek firms’ innovation reduction due to the 
crisis (i.e. reduces the negative effects of the crisis on firm’s 
product/service innovation). The adoption of export strategy 
reduces the reliance of firm’s sales revenue on its domestic 
market. So if there is an economic crisis in the home country 
of the firm the sales revenue from the domestic market is 
reduced, but this does not happen with the sales revenue 
from the markets of the other foreign countries, in which the 
firm is present (if in these countries there is not economic 
crisis, or at least it is less severe, which is the case for 
Greece). Therefore, the negative impact of an economic 
crisis in a firm’s home country on overall firm’s sales 
revenue is finally weaker. This results in higher availability 
of financial resources that can be used for product/service 
innovation. Finally, our model indicates that the extent of 
demand decrease that the firm experienced during the last 
three years due to the Greek economic crisis has statistically 
significant positive effect on the extent of innovation 
reduction due to the crisis (i.e., increases the negative effects 
of the crisis on firm’s product/service innovation). If the firm 
belongs to a sector that experienced higher demand decrease 
during the crisis then the decrease of its sale revenue will be 
stronger, reducing the financial resources for innovation.   
Furthermore, interesting and useful insights can be 
gained also from the independent variables that do not have 
statistically significant effects on the extent of firm’s 
innovation reduction due to the crisis. They indicate that 
Greek firms do not exploit their human capital, their organic 
forms of workplace organization (such as teams, decentra-
lisation of decision making and job rotation) and their 
collaboration support systems for coping better with the 
crisis and for promoting product/service innovation. The 
same holds for their CRM systems and social media. Also, 
they do not react to competition pressures during the 
economic pressure with product/service innovation.  
Our conclusions indicate that the design and implementa-
tion of public policies for promoting and facilitating export 
activities of Greek firms, and also the use of cloud 
computing and BI/BA, especially for sectors experiencing 
higher demand decrease during the economic crisis, would 
contribute to the reduction of the negative consequences of 
the economic crisis on their innovation activity, and 
therefore on their medium- and long-term competitiveness. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In the previous sections has been presented a 
methodology of innovation policy analytics, for the difficult 
periods of economic crises that market-based economies 
repeatedly face. It exploits and combines existing data from 
Taxation Authorities and Statistical Agencies, and also from 
private sector consulting and business information firms, and 
performs advanced processing of them (based on regression 
modelling), in order to identify characteristics of the firm and 
its external environment that affect its innovation behaviour 
(the extent of their product/service innovation reduction) 
during economic crises. Our methodology is based on and 
leverages findings of previous research on innovation 
determinants and economic crises. A first validation of this 
methodology was made through an application of it in the 
context of Greece, which provided some first evidence 
concerning the capabilities and usefulness of it. This 
application enabled the identification of some characteristics 
of Greek firms and their external environment that affect 
their innovation behaviour during economic crisis, which 
provide a useful base for innovation policy making. 
However, our study has some limitations. The proposed 
methodology is based on the estimation of regression 
models, so it would be interesting to extend it with 
estimations of other kinds of models as well, e.g., from the 
areas of data mining and artificial intelligence (such as 
various classifiers). Also, the first application of the method-
logy was based on a cross-sectoral sample of Greek firms, so 
it would be interesting to proceed to more applications of it, 
in various other national contexts, and also in specific 
sectors, for different kinds of firm product/process innova-
tion (e.g., incremental, radical, etc.), and using wider sets of 
characteristics of firms and their external environments as 
independent variables. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. R. Gil-Garcia, T. A. Pardo, and L. F. Luna-Reyes, “Policy 
Analytics: Definitions, Components, Methods, and Illustrative 
Examples”, in Policy Analytics, Modelling, and Informatics, 
ed. by J. R. Gil-Garcia, T. Pardo, L. F. Luna-Reyes. 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG – Public 
Administration and Infor-mation Technology, pp. 1–16, 2018. 
[2] T. 
Janowski, 
“Digital 
government 
evolution: 
From 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

transformation to contextualization”, Government Informa-
tion Quarterly, 32(3), pp. 221-236, 2015. 
[3] Z. Lachana, C. Alexopoulos, E. Loukis, Y. Charalabidis, 
“Identifying the Different Generations of e-Government – An 
Analysis Framework” 12th Mediterranean Conference on 
Information Systems (MCIS 2018), September 28 - 30, 2018, 
Corfu, Greece. 
[4] T. H. Davenport and J. G. Harris, Competing on analytics: the 
new science of winning”, Harvard Business Press, Boston, 
2017. 
[5] T. H. Davenport, Big Data at Work: Dispelling the Myths, 
Uncovering the Opportunities, Harvard Business Press, 
Boston 2014 
[6] OECD, “OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 
2016”, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2016. 
[7] OECD, “OECD Science, Technology and Innovation Outlook 
2018”, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2018. 
[8] J. A. Ekstrom, G. T. Lau and K. H. Law, “Policy Analytics 
Tools to Identify Gaps in Environmental Governance”, in: 
Policy Analytics, Modeling, and Informatics – Innovative 
Tools for Solving Complex Social Problems, ed. by J. R. Gil-
Garcia, T. Pardo, L. F. Luna-Reyes. Switzerland: Springer 
International Publishing AG – Public Administration and 
Information Technology, pp. 289 – 314, 2018. 
[9] D. Baer, M. Wimmer, J. Glova, A. Papazafeiropoulou and L. 
Brooks, “Analysis of Policy Cases in the Field of Energy 
Policy”, in: Policy Practice and Digital Science – Inte-grating 
Complex 
Systems, 
Social 
Simulation 
and 
Public 
Administration in Policy Research, ed. by M. Janssen, M. 
Wimmer, A. Deljoo. Switzerland: Springer International 
Publishing AG – Public Administration and Information 
Technology, pp. 355 – 378, 2015 
[10] S. Vaan den Braak, and S. Choenni, S., “Development and 
Use of Data-Centric Information Systems to Support 
Policymakers: Applied to Criminal Justice Systems”. In: 
Policy Analytics, Modeling, and Informatics – Innovative 
Tools for Solving Complex Social Problems., ed. by J. R. Gil-
Garcia, T. Pardo, L. F. Luna-Reyes. Switzerland: Springer 
International Publishing AG – Public Administration and 
Information Technology, pp. 99 – 122, 2018. 
[11] S. R. Hiltz, P. Diaz, and G. Mark, “Introduction: Social Media 
and Collaborative Systems for Crisis Management”, ACM 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 18(4), pp. 1-6, 
2011. 
[12] C. H. Park, and E. W. Johnston, “An Event-Driven Lens for 
Bridging Formal Organiza-tions and Informal Online 
Participation: How Policy Informatics Enables Just-in-Time 
Re-sponses to Crises”, in: Policy Analytics, Modeling, and 
Informatics – Innovative Tools for Solving Complex Social 
Problems, ed. by J. R. Gil-Garcia, T. Pardo, L. F. Luna-Reyes. 
Switzerland: Springer International Publishing AG – Public 
Administration and Information Technology, pp. 343 – 361, 
2018 
[13] OECD/Eurostat, 
Oslo 
Manual 
2018: 
Guidelines 
for 
Collecting, Reporting and Using Data on Innovation - 4th 
Edition, OECD Publishing, Paris/Eurostat, Luxembourg, 
2018. 
[14] B. Keeley, and P. Love, From Crisis to Recovery – The 
Causes, Course and Consequences of the Great Recession, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, 2010. 
[15] T. A. Knoop, Recessions and Depressions: Under-standing 
Business Cycles -2nd edition, Praeger Santa Barbara, 
California, 2015. 
[16] J. Schumpeter, The Theory of Economic Develop-ment: An 
Inquiry into Profits, Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle, 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1934. 
[17] W. M. Cohen, and D. A. Levinthal, “Absorptive Capacity: A 
New 
Perspective 
on 
Learning 
and 
Innovation”, 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(1), pp. 128-152, 1990. 
[18] S. A. Zahra, and G. George, “Absorptive Capacity: A Review, 
Reconceptualization, 
and 
Extension”. 
Academy 
of 
Management Review, 27(2), pp. 185-203, 2002 
[19] C. Camisón, and B. Forés (2010). “Absorptive Capacity: New 
Insights for Its Conceptualization and Measurement”, Journal 
of Business Research, 63(7), pp. 707-715, 2010. 
[20] D. Wan, C. H. Ong, and F. Lee, “Determinants of firm 
innovation in Singapore”, Technovation, 25, pp. 261-268, 
2005. 
[21] C. Van Beers, A. Kleinknecht, R. Ortt, R. and R. Verburg, 
Determinants of Innovative Behaviour: A Firm’s Internal 
Practices and its External Environment”, Palgrave Macmillan, 
London, 2008.  
[22] M. Buesa, J., Heijs, and T., Baumert, “The determinants of 
regional innovation in Europe: A combined factorial and 
regression production function approach”, Research Policy, 
39, 722-735, 2010. 
[23] E. Enkel, O. Gassmann, and H. Chesbrough, “Open R&D and 
Open Innovation: Exploring the Phenomenon”, R&D 
Management Journal, 39(4), pp. 311-316, 2009. 
[24] E. Brynjolfsson, and A. Saunders (2010), Wired for 
Innovation: How Information Technology Is Reshaping the 
Economy, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 2010. 
[25] L. Kleis, P. Chwelos, R. Ramirez, and I. Cockburn, 
“Information Technology and Intangible Output: The Impact 
of IT Investment on Innovation Productivity”, Information 
Systems Research, 23(1), pp. 42-59, 2012. 
[26] S. Arvanitis, E. Loukis, and V. Diamantopoulou, “Are ICT, 
Workplace Organization and Human Capital Relevant for 
Innovation? A Comparative Study Based on Swiss and Greek 
Micro Data”, International Journal of the Economics of 
Business, 23(3), pp. 319-349, 2016. 
[27] E. Loukis, S. Arvanitis, N. Kyriakou, A. Famelou, M. 
Chatzianastasiadis, and F. Michailidou, “The Effects of 
Enterprise Systems on the Absorptive Capacity of Greek 
Firms”, in Proceedings of 10th Mediterranean Conference on 
Information Systems (MCIS), Paphos, Cyprus, September 
2016. 
[28] E. Loukis, S. Arvanitis, N. Kyriakou, A. Famelou, M. 
Chatzianastasiadis, and F. Michailidou, “ERP, e-Commerce, 
Social Media and Absorptive Capacity of Greek Firms - An 
Empirical Investigation”, in Proceedings of 20th Panhellenic 
Conference on Informatics (PCI2016), Patra, Greece, 
November 2016. 
[29] S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Brandyopadyay, J. Zhang, and A. 
Ghalsasi, “Cloud computing – The business perspective)”, 
Decision Support Systems, 51(1), pp. 176–189, 2011. 
[30] S. D. Müller, S. R. Holm, and J. Søndergaard, “Benefits of 
cloud computing: Literature review in a maturity model 
perspective”, Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, 37, pp. 851 – 878, 2015. 
[31] OECD, OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 
2012, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2012. 
[32] K. Izsak, P. Markianidou, R. Lukach, R., and A. Wastyn, 
“The impact of the crisis on research and innovation policies”, 
Study for the European Commission, DG Research by 
Technopolis Group Belgium and Idea Consult, Brussels, 
2013. 
[33] S. Arvanitis, Woerter, M., “Firm Characteristics and the 
Cyclicality of R&D Investments”, Industrial and Corporate 
Change, 23(5), pp. 1141-1169, 2014. 
[34] P. Lopez-Garcia, and J. M. Montero, “Spillovers and 
Absorptive Capacity in the Decision to Innovate of Spanish 
Firms: The Role of Human Capital”, Economics of 
Innovation and New Technology, 21(7), pp. 589-612, 2012. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

