Security Issues of WiMAX Networks with High Altitude Platforms 
 
Ilija Basicevic, Miroslav Popovic 
Faculty of Technical Sciences 
University of Novi Sad 
Novi Sad, Serbia 
ilibas@uns.ac.rs, miroslav.popovic@rt-rk.com 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we discuss the possibility of securing   
High Altitude Platform Networks (HAP) networks with 
intrusion detection systems (IDS). We assume that it is a 802.16 
network, in point-to-multi point mode. An analysis of possible 
threats and attack sources is given. Based on that analysis and 
specific properties of HAP networks an IDS concept is 
proposed. The main idea of the concept is that a network-based 
IDS system is collocated with the base station (BS) software. 
The BS is on board the HAP. The extensions to the concept, in 
order to provide for prevention feature, are outlined. In that 
case, the correlation module is a publish/subscribe server for 
dissemination of events that are the results of alert correlation. 
Its subscribers are policy enforcement points in the HAP 
network. 
Keywords-high altitude platforms; IEEE 802.16; intrusion 
detection system; network security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the recent years, there has been a strong incentive in 
research of High Altitude Platform (HAP) networks. While 
in the first place they were envisioned as a means for rapid 
provisioning of connectivity in the case of disasters (because 
of the short time needed to launch a HAP vehicle and 
establish connectivity), soon other scenarios have been 
proposed as well. For example, in rural areas, with scarce or 
not existing ground infrastructure, HAPs can be used to 
provide broadband connectivity, see Fig 1. Another possible 
application is in mobile sites (e.g., trains). Applications in 
military communications are also considered. Researchers 
envisioned high-rate communications (up to 120 Mb/s) 
delivered directly to a user in line of site of a HAP within a 
coverage area up to 60 km wide [6]. There are three expected 
scenarios regarding the position of HAP in the end-to-end 
path [6]: 
• 
Isolated from any core networks, providing 
connectivity for private networks 
• 
Between core networks as point-to-point trunk 
connections 
• 
In the access network, providing users with access 
to core networks 
The significance of first-responder communications (e.g., 
Enhanced 911 service in US) during catastrophic events is 
utmost. Such services can be provided by dispatching HAP 
vehicle with telecommunications equipment in the affected 
area. 
HAP is defined as a solar-powered unmanned airship or 
airplane, capable of long endurance on-station (several 
months or more) [7]. The HAP payload can be a complete 
base station. Besides up- and down-links to the user 
terminals, and backhaul links, links to satellites can be 
established as well. In some scenarios, where networks of 
HAPs are applied, there are also inter-HAP links.  
The coverage region is determined by line-of-sight 
propagation and the minimum elevation angle at the ground 
terminal. The advantages of HAP communications are [7]: 
1. 
Large area coverage (compared with terrestrial 
systems) 
2. 
Flexibility to respond to traffic demands - flexible 
and responsive frequency reuse patterns and cell sizes, 
unconstrained by the physical location of base-stations. 
3. 
Low cost - cheaper to launch than a geostationary 
satellite or a constellation of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) 
satellites, cheaper to deploy than a terrestrial network. 
4. 
Incremental deployment - service may be provided 
initially with a single HAP and expanded gradually - in 
contrast to LEO satellites.  
5. 
Rapid deployment - it is possible to design, 
implement and a deploy HAP service relatively quickly, 
especially when compared to satellites. 
6. 
Platform and payload upgrading - can be relatively 
easily and safely brought down for payload upgrading. 
7. 
Environmentally friendly 
The backhaul link is realized using cellular scheme too, 
because a single link can not provide full backhaul capacity. 
Thus there are going to be a number of distributed backhaul 
ground stations, though this number can be fewer than the 
number of user cells served because of the higher order 
modulation schemes that would be used in backhaul links, 
which would provide greater capacity [7]. 
HAP-based services have been allocated frequencies by 
the ITU at 47/48 GHZ, also at 28 GHz in ITU Region 3 - 
Asia. 
Most of the scenarios predict use of HAPs for 802.16 
networks, although Universal Mobile Telecommunications 
System (UMTS) is present in application scenarios as well, 
albeit in much smaller extent. We assume that 802.16 
network is in point-to-multi point (PMP) mode. With regard 
to physical characteristics of the network, HAP is usually 
positioned at an altitude of approximately 17-22 kilometers. 
It covers up to 256 cells. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 1. HAP network 
Use of HAP platforms for different applications has been 
studied in the scope of several projects (HAPCOS – EU 
COST action 297, HELINET and CAPANINA EU 
Framework Programme projects), but to the best of our 
knowledge this is the first  analysis of the possibilities for 
protection of HAP WiMAX networks with IDS systems. 
Section 2 briefly presents security mechanisms that are 
used in 802.16 networks. Section 3 describes architecture of 
a network based intrusion detection system for 802.16 
networks. It includes analysis of possible threats and possible 
improvements in order to realize prevention feature (besides 
detection). Section 4 contains concluding remarks. 
 
II. 
SECURITY MECHANISMS IN 802.16 NETWORK 
TECHNOLOGY 
Compared to IEEE 802.11, a serious effort has been 
undertaken in designing the security mechanisms in IEEE 
802.16. The following description is based on [1]. 
IEEE 802.16 protocol stack contains Media Access 
Control (MAC) layer, which is divided into three sublayers 
(convergence sublayer, common part sublayer and privacy 
sublayer). Service specific convergence sublayer has two 
types, one that interfaces ATM as upper layer, and the other 
for TCP/IP. Common part sublayer is the core part of IEEE 
802.16 MAC. It manages connections and bandwidth, among 
other functions. There are three types of connections: 
Primary, Basic and Secondary. Primary are used for 
authentication. Basic are used for time critical MAC control 
messages. Secondary are used for standards based 
management messages (e.g., SNMP [5]). MAC is connection 
oriented, and all data communications are in the context of 
connection. Connections are added, modified and deleted 
dynamically. Privacy sublayer is responsible for security 
functions:  
• 
Encryption,  
• 
Decryption,  
• 
Authentication,  
• 
Secure key exchange.  
This sublayer contains two protocols: Encapsulation and the 
Privacy and Key Management Protocol (PKM).  
Security protocols use Security Associations (SA). There 
are three types of SAs: primary, static and dynamic. Primary 
are established during initialization process. Static and 
dynamic can be shared between different subscriber stations 
(SS). Shared information may include traffic encryption key 
(TEK) and initialization vector (IV). 
BS is responsible for maintaining keying information for 
all SAs. SA keying material has limited lifetime. When BS 
provides SS with a keying material, it includes information 
on remaining lifetime. Keying system is a two-tier one. The 
first tier is: using public keys, BS sends authorization key 
(AK) to SS. The second tier is that by using AK, the TEK 
exchange is protected.  
PKM protocol is used for synchronization of keying 
information between BS and SS. PKM has two finite state 
machines: 
Authorization 
and 
TEK 
exchange. 
PKM 
authorization is realized as an exchange of three messages. In 
this exchange, SS provides BS with its certificates 
(certificate of the manufacturer and of the station itself) - BS 
authenticates SS, and BS provides SS with AK and with 
identification of SAs it is authorized to access. Key 
encryption key (KEK) and message authentication keys are 
derived from AK. Security components use X.509 Version 3 
certificates. PKM TEK exchange is an exchange of two or 
three messages, in which BS sends TEK parameters for each 
requested SA. Three messages are exchanged. PKM is a 
client/server protocol where SS is a client. PKM uses RSA 
with SHA-1. IEEE 802.16 encryption uses DES CBC over 
payload. Generic MAC Header (GMH) and CRC fields are 
not encrypted. 
New subscriber station enters the network in five steps: 
1. SS scans for a BS downlink signal and uses it to 
establish channel parameters 
2. Primary management connection established 
3. SS authorized using PKM 
4. SS sends a register request and BS responds with 
second management connection Id 
5. Transport connections are created 
The first phase is security capabilities negotiation during 
which SS informs BS which cryptographic suites it supports 
and BS tells SS which of those to use in the subsequent 
communication (this information is contained in the 
descriptor of the primary SA).  
BS generates AKs and TEKs using random or pseudo-
random generators. IVs are generated in such a manner as to 
be unpredictable. 
III. 
NIDS FOR IEEE 802.16 - HAP CASE 
Network-based 
IDS 
are 
an 
important 
class 
of 
contemporary IDS systems. In this class of systems, IDS 
processes the stream of packets that are transmitted over the 
network. In the typical wired environment IDS is usually 
placed in the network perimeter. In the HAP network, which 
is a 802.16 network in the point-to-multi point (PMP) mode, 
a logical place for NIDS is the base station. We propose 
architecture with a NIDS sensor in each cell, a NIDS sensor 
that monitors link to the gateway and a coordination and 
correlation module which has the following functions: 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

• 
It correlates alerts from NIDS sensors in 802.16 cells 
• 
It sends the results of the correlation phase to the 
network operations center 
• 
It downloads signature updates from public 
repository or vendor web site 
• 
It uploads signature updates to NIDS sensors 
Snort is a popular IDS system, significantly present both 
in everyday use, and in research. It is an IDS system for 
wired networks, but there are important common concepts 
that IDS systems for wired and wireless networks share. The 
Snort 3.0 architecture [8] promotes separation of the Snort 
Security Platform (SnortSP) from the Engines module which 
contains analytics modules. We propose that Snort 3.0 
architecture can be used as IDS architecture for HAP 
systems. In the HAP case, the Dispatcher module connects 
not only to the local Data Source, but also receives alerts 
from the coordination module. 
SNMP [5] is a de-facto standard for network 
management in Internet environment, thus we propose that in 
HAP IDS system the same protocol would be used. In case 
of HAP networks, it is usually assumed that the network 
operations center is placed on the ground, and that a wireless 
link is used for network management of the HAP network, 
for software updates and maintenance and also in some cases 
for the maneuvering of the HAP vehicle. The network 
operations center contains the Security Officer console, 
which allows for visual inspection of the state of HAP IDS, 
the list of most recent alerts and similar features. 
 
A. Threats to the HAP network 
 As a primary attack venue, we see subscriber stations. 
We divide the attacks into three classes:  
• 
Attacks at the physical layer,  
• 
Attacks at the MAC layer,  
• 
Attacks at higher layers.  
Subscriber stations in the HAP cell can mount physical 
layer attacks. In the literature are often mentioned jamming 
and packet scrambling, belonging to this class. The jamming 
attack is mounted using information from UL-MAP message 
received from BS, and if it is a targeted attack, attacker has 
to map the CID from UL-MAP message to the station 
address. This attack can be realized with short transmissions 
and low radiated power, which protects the attacker [11]. 
At MAC layer, subscriber stations are capable of 
mounting Denial of Service (DOS) attacks. DOS attacks at 
MAC layer are realized as flooding of signalization requests 
(authentication, capabilities negotiation, key management 
frames, etc.). The primary means of those attacks are 
resource intensive cryptographic operations. 
Some of messages in IEEE 802.16 are not authenticated 
(Traffic Indication Message, Neighbor Advertisement 
Message, Fast Power Control, Multicast Assignment 
Request, Downlink Burst Profile Change Request, Power 
Control Mode Change Request) [12] which leaves space for 
attacks. 
At higher layers, a distributed variant of DOS (DDOS) 
attacks is possible. DOS attacks at application layer that 
disturb the normal application operation instead of depleting 
network resources as in classical DOS, are becoming more 
and more serious threat recently. At application layer, also 
are possible targeted attacks at users. Typical examples are 
different types of malware hidden in email attachments. 
Protective measures include application level filters at 
network servers. Those are outside the scope of this paper. 
One often cited type of attack, which is possible in 
802.16, although it is more difficult to realize than in 802.11 
is the rogue base station attack. This type of attack belongs to 
the class of man-in-the middle attacks. In the attack, the 
rogue base station impersonates a legitimate one. A short 
description of the attack is given in [4]. Other attacks in this 
class are more probable in a mesh network, rather than in a 
network in PMP mode. The proposed IDS system at this 
moment does not include the detection feature for this type 
of attacks. 
Besides subscriber stations, the source of attacks in 
higher layers of protocol stack can be in external networks - 
mounted over the link to the gateway. Those attacks are 
targeted at stations in the HAP network. As this is the last 
hop in the communication path between attacker and its 
target, DOS attacks are already amplified and easily 
detectable, but the possibility for reaction is limited. 
The 
last 
is 
that 
although 
SNMPv3 
includes 
authentication, it has to be noted that the link to operations 
center presents another attack venue. The privileges that are 
given to management personnel are wide: software updates, 
installation of software modules, restart, power on/off, 
maneuvering in case of HAP airplanes, etc. Since the 
operations that are realized over the management interface 
are of great security impact, the damage that an attacker who 
successfully impersonates the network operations center 
could make is critical. 
 
B. Remarks on the construction of HAP IDS 
The first phase of detection in a NIDS is the packet 
"sniffing". While relatively simple for realization in a wired 
network, in wireless networks the NIDS system has to scan 
traffic at a set of frequencies. Each of the frequencies is 
scanned in specific intervals of time. Typically not the same 
time interval is devoted to scanning of all frequencies in the 
set, and there is usually a heuristic algorithm (sometimes 
based on fuzzy logic) applied to determine how long to scan 
each of the frequencies. The integration of IDS sensor 
software with the BS protocol stack software would provide 
for the simple method of monitoring of the communication 
between subscriber stations and the base station. The concept 
of integration can be similar to the use of filter hooks [9] and 
filtering platform callout drivers [10] in Microsoft Windows 
OS in packet filtering applications for wired networks. Fig 2 
presents the structure of HAP IDS/IPS at one BS, including 
the information flows.  
Average traffic load on HAP BS can be estimated in the 
following way. A traffic stream from one mobile user to the 
HAP BS can be modeled as 4IPP [13] (traffic model for 
IEEE 802.16.3) . Number of terrestrial users is 240-256 per  
cell in published simulations [14]. Thus, the total traffic on 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 2. Protocol stack of IPS in HAP 802.16 network. CM 
is correlation module. 
HAP BS coming from terrestrial users in one cell in average 
case can be modeled as 256 4IPP streams. The HAP IDS 
should be able to inspect such a stream, without losing 
packets. The 4IPP average rate is 3 pkts/unit-of-time. The 
bandwidth of SS-HAP link is 1 Mbps in simulations [15]. 
The packet size is 1500 Bytes. The packet rate is 
1000000/(1500*8), which is 83 packets per sec.  The 
parameters of the basic 4IPP model (see Table 1, the 4IPP 
Average Rate is calculated as a sum of IPP stream rates and 
equals to 3 pkts/unit-of-time) should be scaled by 83/3=27.8 
unit-of-time per sec. The resulting parameters of IPP streams 
for model of communication in HAP network are given in 
Table 2.   
 
TABLE 1. PARAMETERS OF IPP STREAMS IN BASIC 4IPP TRAFFIC MODEL 
 
Source #i 
λi 
IPP in ON state 
(pkts/unit-of-time) 
Averaged over 
both ON and 
OFF states 
(pkts/unit-of-
time) 
IPP#1 
2.679 
1.1480 
IPP#2 
1.698 
.7278 
IPP#3 
1.388 
.5949 
IPP#4 
1.234 
.5289 
 
TABLE 2. PARAMETERS OF IPP STREAMS IN HAP WIMAX TRAFFIC MODEL 
Source # 
Averaged over both 
ON and OFF states  
(pkts/sec) – for 1 SS 
Averaged over both 
ON and OFF states 
(pkts/sec) – for 256 
SS  
IPP#1 
31.91 
8168.96 
IPP#2 
20.23 
5178.88 
IPP#3 
16.54 
4234.24 
IPP#4 
14.7 
3763.2 
 
 
Since it aggregates events from several cells, in some 
cases, the correlation module can detect low volume DDOS 
attacks (at higher layers of protocol stack), that would 
otherwise (without the aggregation and correlation of alerts 
coming from different cells) pass unnoticed.  
In case of multi-HAP network, operation of HAP IDS 
systems belonging to specific HAP networks can be 
coordinated in centralized manner (from the network 
operations center on the ground), or those can cooperate in a 
distributed manner. The realization of such a cooperative 
system is outside the scope of this paper. 
Attacker location is an important feature in wireless 
security. Application of techniques such as triangulation for 
that purpose is outside the scope of this paper. 
C. Possible improvements 
Besides the aforementioned cooperation in case of multi-
HAP networks, there are two directions in which the 
proposed concept can be improved and/or extended. 
The first one is that the 802.16 network can be used in 
mesh mode. There are already some proposals for IDS 
systems for wireless mesh networks: OpenLIDS [2], 
WATCHERS, TIARA, CONFIDANT, MobIDS, RESANE, 
SCAN [3]. The change from PMP to mesh mode would 
require a substantial rework of the concept. 
The other direction is that having provided the detection 
functionality, the next step is the reaction feature (intrusion 
prevention). Such architecture is based on the use of Policy 
Enforcement Point engine (PEP) at the base station. It is 
often implemented as a firewall. In that case the functionality 
of the correlation module would be extended with the 
following function: dispatching of new alerts that are the 
results of correlation phase back to NIDS sensors. In order to 
achieve efficient use of communication and processing 
resources, the correlation module should be able to filter the 
alerts that it sends to sensors. There are strict limitations with 
respect to the weight of the load that can be placed in the 
HAP that imply the efficient use of processing resources. For 
that reason we propose that the coordination and correlation 
module is a lightweight topic-based publish/subscribe 
system. There is a publish/subscribe association between this 
module and PEP engines. In this association, the correlation 
module is the publisher and PEP engines are subscribers. We 
remark that in this design the PEP engines are collocated 
with sensors. 
The proposed system is a good platform for realization of 
the reaction feature, because the communication stream from 
the correlation module to the PEP engines, which carries 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

results of correlation phase, in the average case contains 
enough information for decisions on reaction.   
By implementing IDS/IPS as described, we allow for 
swift reaction in case of handovers of malicious subscriber 
stations. Once recognized as malicious, such a station can be 
disconnected and prevented from moving to the neighboring 
cell. This is especially of interest in overlapping areas, where 
mobile station can choose one of up to three cells (in average 
case) that it will use for communication. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presents an approach to securing of HAP 
networks by using intrusion detection systems. The protected 
network is a 802.16 network in point-to-multi point mode. 
The proposed system is a distributed network-based IDS 
system with a NIDS sensor in each cell. IDS system is 
collocated with the base station software. The BS is on board 
the HAP. IDS sensors monitor communications links 
between base station and subscriber stations. The backhaul 
link to ground station is monitored as well. The IDS is 
collocated with the base station device, on board the HAP 
vehicle.  
The system allows for detection of distributed DOS 
attacks in the HAP network. The paper describes the 
required modifications to the system in order to include 
reaction feature (intrusion prevention) in a straightforward 
manner. The correlation module in the extended system is 
the publish/subscribe server that publishes results of the 
correlation phase to the policy enforcement point engines in 
HAP cells. 
The system could be further developed to include support 
for cooperation of IDS/IPS systems in multi-HAP networks. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is a continuation of the research conducted in 
the scope of HAPCOS project (COST action 297). This work 
was partially supported by the Ministry of Education and 
Science of the Republic of Serbia under the project No. 
32031 and 44009, year 2011. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] IEEE Std 802.16™-2009, IEEE Standard for Local and 
metropolitan area networks, Part 16: Air Interface for 
Broadband Wireless Access Systems, IEEE-SA Standards 
Board, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc. 
[2] F. Hugelshofer, P. Smith, D. Hutchison, and N.J.P. Race, 
OpenLIDS: A Lightweight Intrusion Detection System for 
Wireless Mesh Networks, Mobicom 09, Beijing, China, 2009, 
pp. 309-320 
[3] T.M. Chen, G.S. Kuo, Z.P. Li, and G.M. Zhu, Intrusion 
Detection in Wireless Mesh Networks, chapter in Security in 
Wireless Mesh Networks, Auerbach Publications, 2008 
[4] M. 
Barbeau, 
J. 
Hall, 
and 
E. 
Kranakis, 
Detecting 
Impersonation Attacks in Future Wireless and Mobile 
Networks, Workshop on Secure Mobile Ad-hoc Networks and 
Sensors, MADNES 2005 
[5] U. Blumenthal and B. Wijnen, User-based Security Model 
(USM) for version 3 of the Simple Network Management 
Protocol (SNMPv3), RFC 3414, 2002, The Internet Society 
[6] D. Grace, M. Mohorcic, M.H.Capstick, M. Bobbio 
Pallavicini, and M. Fitch, "Integrating Users into the Wider 
Broadband Network via High Altitude Platforms", IEEE 
Wireless Communications, Vol. 12, No. 5, pp. 98-105, 
October 2005 
[7] T.C. Tozer and D. Grace, "High Altitude Platforms for 
Wireless 
Communications", 
IEE 
Electronics 
and 
Communications Engineering Jnl, Vol. 13,  No. 3, June 2001, 
pp. 127-137 
[8] Snort 
3.0 
Architecture 
Series 
Part 
1: 
Overview, 
http://securitysauce.blogspot.com/2007/11/snort-30-
architecture-series-part-1.html, retrieved: November, 2011. 
[9] Filter-Hook 
Drivers, 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/windows/hardware/ff546489%28v=vs.85%29.aspx, 
retrieved: November, 2011. 
[10] Introduction to Windows Filtering Platform Callout Drivers, 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ 
ff556954%28VS.85%29.aspx, retrieved: November, 2011. 
[11] Security of IEEE 802.16, Arkoudi-Vafea Aikaterini, Master 
Thesis, Department of computer and Systems Science, Royal 
Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2006 
[12] A. Deininger, S. Kiyomoto, J. Kurihara, and T. Tanaka, 
“Security Vulnerabilities and Solutions in Mobile WiMAX”, 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and 
Network Security, VOL.7 No.11, November 2007.  
[13] C. R. Baugh, 4IPP Traffic Model for IEEE 802.16.3, IEEE 
802.16.3c-00/51, 
[14] Floriano De Rango, Mauro Tropea, and Salvatore Marano, 
Integrated Services on High Altitude Platform: Receiver 
Driven Smart Selection of HAP-Geo Satellite Wireless 
Access Segment and Performance Evaluation, International 
Journal of Wireless Information Networks, Vol. 13, No. 1, 
January 2006, pp. 77-94, DOI: 10.1007/s10776-005-0020-z 
[15] C. E. Palazzi, C. Roseti, M. Luglio, M. Gerla, M. Y. Sanadidi, 
and J. Stepanek, Enhancing Transport Layer Capability in 
HAPS-Satellite Integrated Architecture, Wireless Personal 
Communications, Vol 32 Issue 3-4, February 2005
 
 
 
 
 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

