Expanding the Experience of Museum Visitors with
a Social Application on Facebook
Kingkarn Sookhanaphibarn∗ and Utaiwan Chatuporn†
∗School of Science and Technology, City Campus, Bangkok University
Rama IV Road, Klong-Toey, Bangkok, 10110 Thailand
Email: kingkarn.s@bu.ac.th
†Southeast Asian Ceramics Museum, Rangsit Campus, Bangkok University
Tambon Khlong-Nueng, Khlong-Luang District
Pathum-Thani Province 10120 Thailand
Email: utaiwan.c@bu.ac.th
Abstract— Since the early 20th century, museums and art
galleries have been responding to a changing, increasingly
diverse society, wherein a broader public is interested in culture
and/ or arts. They are adjusting their products or adopting
the existing technology to the needs of this changing society
in order to serve a larger part of the population and gain
revenues. With a burst of very popular social media, several
museums have utilized the social media such as Facebook,
Blog, Podcast, MySpace, and Flickr to communicate with
their visitors or interesting group of people. Many visitors will
learn new things and gain new experience for a single visit at
museum. However, there are a number of silent barriers against
the visitor experience, especially for art galleries. This paper
proposes a methodology for expanding the visitor experience.
Our methodology utilizes the existing social media such as
Facebook. We introduce a new application with design decision.
The preliminary results are its framework and the evaluation
method. We also present a case study on the Southeast Asian
Ceramics Museum (SEACM) at Bangkok University, Thailand.
By the interview with experts, our application is a new channel
to be able to enhance and expand the museum experience.
Keywords-
social
media;
user
networks;
user
experience;
digital museums; virtual gallery; art museums.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the early 20th century museums have already experienced
a shift from their historic mission of collecting, conservation,
and research to a role of education and interpretation to serve a
wider public. Museums are not longer purely seen as cultural
attractions, but also as leisure places. Visitors are not even
satisﬁed anymore with only products or services; they demand
experiences, as addressed by Pine and Gilmore [1]. The focus
of the visitors is thus not only directed on collections and
exhibitions anymore, but also on sociable, recreational and
participatory experiences [2]. Experiencing new things and
learning new things are up to 65% and 56% of the motives
for visiting the museum, respectively. But how do museums
in practice deal with the visitor in his search for experiences?
In this paper, the focus is not only for searching a technique
for expanding museum experience but also for managing
the after-effects of disasters. Nowadays, a number of natural
disasters have been slightly increasing year by year and these
are also the main threats against museums. When facing with
natural disasters, museums have had a policy for protecting
their collections safely on the moment. Unfortunately, the
damaged museums might be temporarily closed for restoration.
The following question is ”how can museums continue run
their museum missions, mainly focused on developing the
visitor experience, as well as keep in contact with their
member without annoying them?”
In order to place our research in the current academic
debate and to translate the ﬁndings into practice, the following
objectives are met:
• Examine the application of experience development for
art museums in literature,
• Investigate the need of art museums in aspect of devel-
oping the experience of visitors,
• Design our proposed application of experience develop-
ment, and
• Develop, install, and evaluate the proposed application.
In the primary stage, the contribution of this paper is to serve
the ﬁrst and third objectives in order to understand (1) a chang-
ing of museum mission, (2) deﬁnition of museum experiences,
and (3) the necessary of a new approach/application to meet
the museum mission. We also proposed our application on
social media as a solution to expand the museum experience,
especially the dimension on social context.
II. MUSEUM EXPERIENCE
A. Types of Experience
As addressed by Falk and Dierking [3], combination among
individual, group of people, places can develop the experience
of each museum visit. Three dimensions are the personal
context, the social context and the physical context. The
interaction of these three dimensions constitutes the way in
which a museum visit is perceived by every individual museum
visitor.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 1.
Concept of museum experience.
• Individual. The personal contexts involves a variety of
experiences and knowledge, including varying degrees of
experience and knowledge on the content and design of
the museum, the visitors interests, and the visitors moti-
vations and concerns. These factors together determine
what an individual visitor appreciates, what he wants
to do with the time available in the museum and what
experiences he seeks for self-fulﬁlment. Every single
museum visitor has different past experiences, related or
not related to museum visits, which have an inﬂuence on
the expectations and experiences in the museum [2].
• Group of people. The social context involves the interac-
tion with other people in the museum. Most people visit
museums in a group of friends or family and even people
who go alone have interaction with other museum visitors
or staff. The social interaction has a strong inﬂuence on
the behaviour of people. Parents with little children show
different behavioural pattern than a group of friends or
an elderly couple. Also, the crowdedness of the museum
is of great inﬂuence on the museum experience.
• Place. The physical context includes the architecture and
feel of the museum as well as the objects and artefacts.
Not only the placing of the artefacts, but also the size of
the rooms, marble or carpeted ﬂoor, the sent, the presence
of benches, a shop, a restaurant etcetera have a strong
inﬂuence on the experience and behaviour of visitors.
From the aforementioned dimensions, the other experience
types will be developed inside the visitors (as illustrated in
Figure 1), but the formulation is depend on the intensity of
each dimension. For example, the level of interaction among
visitors that can develop a social network of special interest
group for a particular museum. Increasing the degree of
interaction will extend the size of social network. This is one
of museum goals because the more shared knowledge and
interest, the more experience will be perceived. The other types
of experiences are listed below:
• Recreation; Visitors enjoy of free, relaxed, unstructured
time and activity playful and diversionary activity. They
can try out interactive devices, sit down for a meal,
shopping in a gift shop, etc.
• Sociability; Visitors meet with or participating with oth-
ers, look at and spend time together with others, take part
in shared, public activity.
• Learning Experience; Visitors gather and acquire infor-
mation, perceive new things and new patterns, exercise
curiosity and a sense of discovery.
• Aesthetic Experience; Visitors engage in sensory percep-
tions, especially visual and tactile, see objects with a view
toward their beauty, rather than what is moral or useful,
compare things and ﬁnd patterns.
• Celebrative Experience; Visitors observe and honor a
leader, event, group, or organization, share in historical
achievements.
• Enchanting Experience; Visitors encounter things that up-
lift the mind, imagination, and spirit, ﬁnd magic, delight,
fascination, and rapture in things and places.
B. Barrier of Developing Experience from Art Museums
Although museums almost all offer tangible objects, there
are enormous differences in collections and missions [2]. Most
museums have their own collection like SEACM, but there
are also museums that own no collection at all; these are
often childrens museums, science and technology centers and
history centers. The objects they posses have the function of
demonstrating science and technology. These museums inte-
grate on average more realistic of experience than museums
that own collections comprising valuable objects of art, nature
or history. The followings are reasons:
• Invaluable limited the visitor interaction. The value and
delicacy of the objects does not allow people touching
or coming close and often the objects can only be on
exposition in highly cultivated spaces, with the right
amount and sort of light, humidity and temperature. This
restricts the contexts in which the artwork can be placed
and the possibilities for interactivity.
• Individual preference. History and natural history muse-
ums, anthropological and ethnographic museums on the
other hand suffer less from this perception of tourists,
because they are seen as exhibiting parts of everyday
life of normal human beings in the past or present. Art
museums have therefore a more difﬁcult job attracting
audiences attracted by entertainment and experience such
as the culture-peripheral tourist. In addition developing
memorable experiences for arts museums is more compli-
cated, since the visitor relates less to the objects because
they are less obvious connected to everyday life.
Therefore, art museums therefore have an added role in
education, which can undermine, if not being outbalanced, the
total multifaceted experience.
III. SOUTHEAST ASIAN CERAMICS MUSEUM (SEACM)
A. Background
The Southeast Asian Ceramics Museum (SEACM) at
Bangkok University houses and preserved valuable collections
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 2.
the Southeast Asian Ceramics Museum (SEACM) at Bangkok University, Rangsit Campus, Thailand.
of ancient ceramics. SEACM established in 2002 is responsi-
ble for housing and preserving valuable collections of ancient
ceramics covered in Southeast Asia. Most of them were made
in Thailand or imported into Thailand in ancient times that
were prehistoric Thai pottery, dating from 2500BC to 0AD
years ago. The collection includes Khmer ceramics, mostly
from old kiln sites in the province of Buriram, and also some
from other countries such as Burma, China, and Vietnam.
B. Experiences Perceived from SEACM
The museum has even had the Shard archive and an
extensive library available for use by researchers, but we
observed that 70% of visitors often ask for interpretation of
displayed objects. Comparing with science museums, they are
developing their product in order to make it more attractive to
the new type of museum visitor that seeks a leisure experience.
Exhibition objects do not need interpretation. At most, they
need explanation, but usually, the hands-on interaction with
the object speaks for itself and increases participation of the
visitor.
C. Impact of Severe Flooding in 2011
The 2011 Flood of the Makong and Chao Phraya Rivers
spread through the provinces of Northern, Northeastern and
Central Thailand killed hundreds of people and affected the
lives of about three million people. Flooding persisted in some
areas until mid-January 2012, and resulted in a total of 815
deaths (with 3 missing) and 13.6 million people affected.
Sixty-ﬁve of Thailand’s 77 provinces were declared ﬂood
disaster zones, and over 20,000 square kilometers (7,700 sq
mi) of farmland was damaged.The disaster has been described
as ”the worst ﬂooding yet in terms of the amount of water and
people affected.”
The impact of this disaster to SEACM is not as serious
as happened to the World Heritage property like Ayuthaya.
For Ayuthaya, because of the loss of evidence, it will result
Figure 3. SEACM was seriously affected from the worst ﬂooding in Thailand
2011.
in incomplete integrity, and a restoration without sufﬁcient
budget and scientiﬁc support will certainly affect authenticity
of the monuments and the sites. For SEACM, the collections
are absolutely migrated to the safe place before the ﬂood but
the museum place itself was damaged of 100% as shown in
Figure 3. At present, the museum has been underconstruction
for renovation and the ﬁnishing takes many year.
IV. LITERATURE: APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPING
EXPERIENCES
A. Museums and Web 1.0 Technologies
Web-based museums have been proposed to improve preser-
vation of and access to cultural heritage [4]. Their examples
are Australian National Maritime Museum in Sydney that aims
at dynamic and innovative managing and exploring Australia’s
maritime heritage [5], Art gallery of Ontario that publishes the
museum content on-line [6] to help new citizens learn more
about their new home country through art. Another example
worth mentioning is Smithsonian Institution that is the world’s
largest museum complex and research organization composed
of 19 museums, 9 research centers, and the National Zoo.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

All museums under Smithsonian Institution found in [7] have
developed their digital museums where visitors of National
Portrait Gallery can search more than 80,000 portrait records
from the Catalog of American Portraits and new material is
added regularly, and automatically published to the Website
after being cataloged and validated.
Currently, the website is supposed to be developed for every
museum. This is because of the following characteristics as
mentioned in [4], [8]:
• Operation with reliability and availability
• Availability for anyone who can access through the
Internet
• Convenience for users who are willing to be collaborative
• Reduction of cost for housing and exhibiting artifacts
Marty [9] concluded that as museum information resources
become more technically complex, and the users of those
resources become more information literate, the needs and
expectations of visitors become increasingly sophisticated.
Users of museum resources are no longer satisﬁed with limited
access to information about museum collections, and many de-
sire twenty-four hour access to museum data, no matter where
these data are located, or how the data are organized. While
the ability to manipulate and manage information resources
has long been an important skill for museum professionals,
meeting these changing expectations can pose new challenges
for museum professionals. The coming of social media can be
a solution.
B. Emerging Web 2.0 or Social Media
Emerging of Web 2.0 (social media) has dramatically
changed the communication media of the world. With social
media, all participant can be both sender and receiver of
messages, which are news, information, knowledges, etc. It is
a term that describes web-based applications on which users
generate, share, and curate the content [10]. Over the last three
years, the sites, from blogs to YouTube to Wikipedia, have
transformed the ways that web users interact with content and
with each other on the web.
Since museums have had a strong desire to be welcoming
places, a use of social media can turn them into virtual com-
munity centers as their desire. Such as Facebook or Twitter,
everyone has a voice, and a vote. Curators and online visitors
can communicate, learning from one another. The engagement
of the social media with a museum organization requires some
protocols, applications, or systems to fulﬁll the museum needs.
An example of health care, Kamel Boulos and Wheeler [11]
offered a special-purposed application based on social media.
Their design is very promising and potentially ﬁt for purpose
in many health care applications.
C. On-Site Applications
Games are a way to entertain visitors in museums and to
support cooperation among museum visitors through games
[12]–[14]. For example, Dini et al. [15] introduced a multi-
players game in a museum. The game is to use the mobile
devices for individual game play, and the situated displays for
synchronized public views of shared game play; the individual
game play contributes to the shared game. A number of
applications with the same purpose are also addressed in [16],
[17].
Unlike a game, another application is called Artlinks devel-
oped by [18]. Artlinks is classiﬁed as an information visualiza-
tion tool with three goals: helping visitors make connections
to exhibits and other visitors by highlighting those visitors
who share their thoughts; encouraging visitors reﬂection on
the social and aspects of museum-going.
V. THE PROPOSED APPLICATION
We proposed an application for improving the social context
for museum visitors. Our application has an idea of migrating
the Artlinks [18] to social media as shown in Figure 4. This
application will be developed on the social media; without
loss of generalization, Facebook is chosen as a platform of
our application. Facebook have been the highest popular used
for social purpose since January 2009, and it had the registered
users of 900 million in April 2012 as reported in [19]. The
advantage of Facebook application is that we can exploit the
user information in Facebook; however, the information have
to be authorized by owners following the Facebook policy.
The feasible post-processing modules are below:
• Identifying their preference/interest. To analyze the ﬁrst-
registered users, the explicit questionnaire has to be used,
but it can burden user task and waste their time. Thus,
Facebook will provide some useful information (such as
their interest groups, member subscription, and previous
joined applications) about users. The further analysis on
these information can describe their preference.
• Supporting a reputation system. Essentially, the applica-
tion in social media requires a protocol for tracking and
scoring user activities. The more information about users,
the more accurate assessment of users’ comments/opinion
we can design and develop.
A. Features of the Application
The features of our application are mainly listed below,
and their graphic design and cross functions are shown in
Figures 5-7.
• Virtual gallery. Displaying the selected objects (i.e. most
of them are masterpieces) with their Flash format. That
means the objects are built with the Flash technology
containing of a series of photographs in several angle
views (top, bottom, 4-Sides).
• Item description. Holding a mouse over a particular object
will show its pop-up description (written by experts and
curators).
• Annotation for user opinion. With adopting the Wiki
concept, users can write their comments/opinions for each
displayed object.
• Links to users’ Facebook page. A social network of
museums can be built by gathering a number of existing
personal social networks.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 4.
Our proposed application for linking the displayed objects to a group of people who have the same interest with the following features: virtual
gallery, item description, user annotation, hyperlink to users’ Facebook pages, souvenir shop, and information visualization.
TABLE I
INTERVIEW WITH THREE CURATORS ABOUT THE MUSEUM EXPERIENCE
WHERE X MEANS NONE AGREED, ∆ MEANS SOME AGREED, AND O
MEANS ALL AGREED.
Museum experience
Art museum
Our application
Artlinks
[18]
Recreation
∆
O
O
Sociability
∆
O
X
Learning
O
O
O
Aesthetic
O
O
O
Celebrative
O
O
O
Enchanting
O
∆
O
TABLE II
SUMMARIZATION OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MUSEUM EXPERIENCE
AND OUR APPLICATION FEATURES.
Museum experience
Application features
Recreation
Virtual gallery, and souvenir shop
Sociability
Annotation for user opinion, and Links to users’
Facebook page
Learning
Virtual gallery, item description, and visualiza-
tion
Aesthetic
Virtual gallery
Celebrative
Annotation for user opinion, and visualization
Enchanting
Virtual gallery and visualization
• Souvenir shop. Similar to many real museums, visitors
are happy to have anything for their presence, memoriza-
tion, and fun.
• Visualization. Visualizing a network of people who have
the same opinions/comments can make an implicit link
from objects to people.
B. Desirability in the Expert Domain
After we designed the application, we did a desirability
research method for collecting visual design feedback from
domain experts. We have had an interview with three curators
about the museum experience that visitors are able to gain
it during their spent time at a real gallery, our application,
and Artlink. The interview results are summarized as shown
in Table I where the curators summarized that our application
features are able to develop the museum experience as shown
in Table II.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
Two main reasons of our proposed application on social
media are as follows. First, everyone in anywhere can access
whenever they are available. This feature of our application
is an alternative way for museums temporarily closed because
the museums must keep contact with their visitors. Also, the
experience of visitors can be expanded without visiting the real
place. Second, very-shy participants become less shy in social
media. Thus, they would like to share their opinions with other
people as well as to join museum activities in special events.
We can conclude that this paper has met the ﬁrst and second
objectives of our research project. First, we did the study of
the application of experience development for art museums
in the previous works. Second, we also ﬁnished the design
of our proposed application of experience development. The
remaining work is about the third objectives of the evaluation
part. We are developing this application for SEACM during
temporarily closing. Lastly, the evaluation will be conducted
on the real visitors including university students and cultural
tourists (excursion of school kids, foreigners).
REFERENCES
[1] B. Pine and J. Gilmore, “Welcome to the experience economy,” Harvard
Business Review, vol. 76, no. 4, pp. 97–105, 1998.
[2] N. Kotler and P. Kotler, “Can museums be all things to all people?:
Missions, goals, and marketing’s role,” Museum Management and Cu-
ratorship, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 271–287, 2000.
[3] J. Falk and L. Dierking, The museum experience. Howells House, 1992.
[4] K. Sookhanaphibarn and R. Thawonmas, “Digital museums in 3d virtual
environment,” in Handbook of Research on Methods and Techniques for
Studying Virtual Communities: Paradigms and Phenomena. IGI Global,
2011, pp. 713–730, web. 30 Aug. 2012.
[5] A. N. M. Museum, retrieved: December 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.anmm.gov.au/
[6] A. G. of Ontario, retrieved: December 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ago.net/
[7] Smithsonian,
retrieved:
December
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.si.edu/museums/
[8] R. Sabin, “Museums and their websites: An examination and assessment
of how museums are coping with the challenge of the world wide web,”
Journal of Conservation and Museum Studies, vol. 2, no. 0, 2011.
[9] P. Marty, “Museum websites and museum visitors: Digital museum
resources and their use,” Museum Management and Curatorship, vol. 23,
no. 1, pp. 81–99, 2008.
[10] N. Simon, “Discourse in the blogosphere: What museums can learn from
web 2.0,” Museums & Social Issues, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 257–274, 2007.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
(f)
Figure 5.
Application features: (a) virtual gallery, (b) item description, (c) user annotation, (d) souvenir shop, (e) hyperlink to users’ Facebook pages, and
(f) information visualization.
Figure 6.
Activity diagram between users and the application.
[11] M. Kamel Boulos and S. Wheeler, “The emerging web 2.0 social
software: an enabling suite of sociable technologies in health and health
care education,” Health Information & Libraries Journal, vol. 24, no. 1,
pp. 2–23, 2007.
[12] C. Dede, P. Whitehouse, and T. Brown-LBahy, “Designing and studying
learning experiences that use multiple interactive media to bridge
distance and time,” Current perspectives on applied information tech-
nologies, vol. 1, pp. 1–30, 2002.
[13] L. Vega, G. Ledezma, A. Hidalgo, E. Ruiz, O. Pinto, R. Quintero, and
L. Zepeda, “Basic elements on game design for interactive museum
exhibitions,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Posters.
ACM, 2010, p. 47.
[14] I. Li, A. Dey, and J. Forlizzi, “Using context to reveal factors that affect
physical activity,” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction
(TOCHI), vol. 19, no. 1, p. 7, 2012.
[15] R. Dini, F. Patern`o, and C. Santoro, “An environment to support multi-
user interaction and cooperation for improving museum visits through
games,” in Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Human
computer interaction with mobile devices and services.
ACM, 2007,
pp. 515–521.
[16] P. Lonsdale, C. Baber, M. Sharples, W. Byrne, T. Arvanitis, P. Brundell,
and R. Beale, “Context awareness for mobilearn: creating an engaging
learning experience in an art museum,” Mobilelearning anytimeevery-
where, p. 115, 2005.
[17] T. Miyashita, P. Meier, T. Tachikawa, S. Orlic, T. Eble, V. Scholz,
A. Gapel, O. Gerl, S. Arnaudov, and S. Lieberknecht, “An augmented
reality museum guide,” in Proceedings of the 7th IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality.
IEEE Computer
Society, 2008, pp. 103–106.
[18] D. Cosley, J. Lewenstein, A. Herman, J. Holloway, J. Baxter, S. Nomura,
K. Boehner, and G. Gay, “Artlinks: fostering social awareness and
reﬂection in museums,” in Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM,
2008, pp. 403–412.
[19] A. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! the challenges
and opportunities of social media,” Business horizons, vol. 53, no. 1,
pp. 59–68, 2010.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 7.
Cross functional diagram of the application.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

