Designing National Identity: 
An Organisational Perspective on Requirements for National Identity Management Systems 
Adrian Rahaman, Martina Angela Sasse 
Computer Science Department 
University College London 
London, United Kingdom 
a.sallehabrahaman@cs.ucl.ac.uk, a.sasse@cs.ucl.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract - Many National Identity Management Systems today 
are designed and implemented with little debate of the 
technologies and information required to fulfil their goals. This 
paper presents a theoretical framework detailing the 
organisational requirements that governments should consider 
to implement effective identity systems. Analysis is based on 
publicly available documentation on the implementation of 
National Identity Systems in the countries of Brunei, India, 
and the United Kingdom. The findings and the framework 
highlight the importance of clearly defining the purpose of the 
system, which has implications on the authenticity, uniqueness, 
and uses of identity; failure to consider these components is 
likely to lead to ineffective identity systems and policies. 
Keywords 
– 
identity; 
identity 
mangaement 
system; 
organisation; government; policy 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Identity is a valuable resource that shapes and defines 
social interactions [1] by reducing uncertainty and building 
trust between parties. Governments have traditionally 
provided identities for their citizens, and used them to 
manage the provision of services.  In an age of growing 
travel and migration, and facing threats such as illegal 
immigration, crime and terrorism, “many governments today 
are now trying to reassess their identity policies in light of 
technological changes” [2].  
Governments have tended to view National Identity 
Management Systems (N-IDMSs) technology as a silver 
bullet – or at least cornerstone – to tackling these problems, 
but fail to consider the complexity of delivering such 
systems [3]. In the UK, attempts to short-cut debate and 
deliver a system quickly led to adoption of a system that has 
now been scrapped [4]. Without proper consideration of 
purpose and operational requirements of the N-IDMS, it is 
unlikely they will deliver their stated goals. 
Convinced that requirements for a strong proof of 
identity means an increase in security, governments have not 
examined the use of identity beyond it. But personalised and 
customer/citizen-centric services mean that identity is no 
longer just a mechanism for individuals to access resources -
it has itself become a valuable resource being accessed by 
organisations to inform their decisions [5-7]. 
Still, most research on this topic focuses on identity as a 
security mechanism. For example, a very comprehensive 
model for governments’ transition to digital N-IDMSs [8] 
mainly describes its use for online authentication purposes; 
[9] developed an IDMS architecture that places identity as a 
layer below information resources. 
The research presented in this paper moves beyond the 
security perspective, viewing identity as a strategic resource. 
The aim of the study was to uncover organisational identity 
requirements, and their effects on the design and 
implementation of IDMSs (The term organisation as used 
within this document refers to the organisation that is 
implementing the IDMS).  
Section II below explains the methodology followed in 
this study. In Section III, we present our findings, and 
explore the processes of identity construction and identity 
use. Section IV highlights the importance of purpose, which 
then ties all the findings into a single framework. In Section 
V, we discuss the implications for future N-IDMSs: to meet 
their defined purpose, the key factors of authenticity, 
uniqueness, and the objectives of the relying partieshave to 
be clearly defined. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
Our research used a case study approach - a systematic 
analysis of the identity phenomenon in 3 different cases [10] 
of N-IDMS implementations in Brunei, India, and the United 
Kingdom. 
The data analysed on the UK and India N-IDMSs was 
publicly available system documentation published by the 
respective lead agencies (IPS and UIDIAI respectively); for 
the Brunei case study, interview sessions with key 
government officials were recorded and transcribed; 
interviews were conducted with: 
• 
3 employees from the lead agency (BruNIR) that 
deal with strategy and implementation of the system. 
• 
2 employees from a security organisation that works 
with the lead agency on the N-IDMS. 
• 
3 employees from a Relying Party that makes use of 
the N-IDMS as an authenticator 
• 
1 employee from a Relying Party that was seen as a 
prime candidate during the initial phases but is now 
considering launching its own IDMS system.  
The data was analysed using Grounded Theory, a method 
to develop theory that is grounded in data [11]; i.e., it does 
not start with a preconceived theory, but seeks to generate 
new theory through a systematic collection and analysis of 
data [12]. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

III. 
RESULTS 
Our analysis revealed that organisational identity 
requirements, and its eventual impacts on the final design of 
the system, can be divided into two main areas; identity 
creation and identity application. 
A. Identity creation 
When an identity system is first implemented, a new and 
unique context is created, within which identities need to be 
instantiated. It is within this newly created context that an 
organisation needs to ensure the correctness of identities 
being enrolled. This process is important because it affects 
the integrity of the identity, and has an impact on the type 
and amount of personal information being collected and 
stored.  
The challenge of the enrolment process it is that it 
involves 
the 
verification 
of 
unknown 
individuals. 
Organizations typically fall back on two main criteria when 
enrolling new identities: authenticity and uniqueness. 
1) Authenticity 
Authenticity describes the truthfulness of an identity 
created within the IDMS. It seeks to answer the question, is 
the individual who he says he is? Organisations typically 
ensure authenticity of an individual’s identity by verifying 
his/her biographical information against different sources. 
Organisations can vary the source of information by 
choosing between two different schemes: 
• 
Introducer-based schemes build on the concept of 
personal referrals - having an already enroled 
individual vouch for the authenticity of the 
individual who is attempting to enrol in the system. 
• 
Document-based schemes are designed around the 
use of available identification documents provided 
by other organisations (bank statements, utility bills, 
etc). Such schemes rely on third-party organisations 
confirming the authenticity of enrolling individuals. 
While an organisation can choose between the two 
sources of information, it is limited by the context of its 
implementation; the main contextual factors that influence 
the applicability of these schemes are universality and 
intimacy. 
a) Universality 
This concept captures how many members of the target 
population already possess widely accepted forms of identity 
documents. These are identities that individuals have 
established with third-party organisations with whom they 
have a trust relationship; examples of such organisations 
include banks, utilities, and municipalities that an individual 
has interacted with for a period of time.  
The degree of universality in the target population will 
affect an organisation’s ability to rely on a document-based 
scheme for authenticity. Specifically, having little to no 
universality would remove this option, because many 
individuals would not be able to provide the required 
documents. 
The case study of the Indian NIDMS provides an 
example of the problem arising from low universality. A 
large section of the population has been locked out of both 
public and private services; the weak identity infrastructure 
has resulted in a fragmented approach to the enrolment in 
current systems, placing large burdens on most of the poor 
population to prove themselves, and being denied access to 
basic services as a result. 
"...every time an individual tries to access a benefit or 
service, they must undergo a full cycle of identity 
verification. Different service providers also often have 
different requirements in the documents they demand, the 
forms that require filling out, and the information they 
collect on the individual. Such duplication of effort and 
identity silos increases overall costs of identification, and 
cause extreme inconvenience to the individual. This 
approach is especially unfair to India's poor and 
underprivileged residents, who usually lack identity 
documentation, and find it difficult to meet the costs of 
multiple verification processes." [13] 
Given the aim is to provide access to its poorer citizens, 
India cannot create an N-IDMS that relies on a document-
based scheme. Therefore, the UIDAI has chosen an 
introducer-based scheme, "where introducers authorized by 
the Registrar authenticate the identity and address of the 
resident" [14].  
In contrast, the abandoned UK N-IDMS was strongly 
motivated by prevention of criminal activities and illegal 
immigration. While the system documentation does state that 
the UK N-IDMS will make it easier to prove identity [15], 
UK citizens were not being denied services because of a lack 
of identity - most of the population had recognised forms of 
identity provided by third-party organisations. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Organisatons Identity Creation process - Authenticity  
The UK system took a document-based approach, 
requiring individuals who enrol for an identity to provide 
several different documents as proof for the authenticity of 
the claimed identity [16]. The government required that 
individuals provide documents that have some form of 
unique identifier such as passport numbers, driving license 
numbers, national insurance numbers and "any number of 
any designated document, which is held by him" [17]. This 
Biographical 
Information
Trust in 
source
Universality
Intimacy
Authenticity
determines
influenced by
affected by
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

creates an information net around the claimed identity, which 
the government can then use to ensure authenticity by 
verifying the individual’s personal information with the 
relevant third party organisations. 
b) Intimacy 
The concept of intimacy captures how much of the 
targeted population is already known to the organisation. 
High levels of intimacy imply that the organisation can have 
more confidence in an introducer-based scheme, because it 
can support a transitive trust arrangement that extends from 
known individuals to unknown ones.   
The effects of intimacy can be seen in the Bruneian 
context and its combined approach to ensuring authenticity, 
incorporating elements of both a document-based and 
introducer-based scheme. Running an identity system since 
1949 [18], the government has been enrolling identities of all 
individuals born and staying within the country, and thus 
have established a great deal of intimacy with its population. 
While individuals are required to provide their birth 
certificates as proof during enrolment, the government also 
records the identity numbers of the individual's parents. This 
in effect creates a hybrid document-introducer-based scheme 
where the authenticity of the individual is being proven with 
a minimal amount of documentary evidence, which is further 
supported by linkages to introducers that are already enrolled 
within the system.  
While India has an introducer-based scheme, the 
government’s choice in the matter is forced by unsatisfactory 
levels of universality. However, India now faces the problem 
that there is not enough intimacy to support introducers, as 
used in the Brunei case. Having never registered identities of 
past populations, the UIDAI in India cannot currently rely on 
parents as introducers to the system. Therefore, the 
government has devised a scheme to artificially boost 
intimacy through a set of defined trusted recognised 
introducers.  
Introducer and document-based schemes are not 
orthogonal. Both make use of transitive trust to ensure the 
authenticity of the claimed identity. The document-based 
scheme is basically an institutionalised version of the 
introducer-based scheme. At the centre of the document-
based scheme is the reliance on identity documents that have 
been produced by third-party institutions, which fulfil the 
role of introducer. In the end, the authenticity of the claimed 
identity is verified by a trusted third party. 
2) Uniqueness 
Apart from authenticity, organisations also need to 
consider uniqueness - that is to ensure that identity cannot be 
enrolled more than once into the identity database. 
Organisations’ desire for uniqueness is driven by concerns of 
identity fraud, where individuals might attempt to enrol 
multiple times, potentially using multiple personas, to gain 
extra benefits. Organisations typically attempt to tackle this 
issue of de-duplication through the use of biometric data 
[19]. 
Today, organisations can choose between various 
different biometric solutions; facial, fingerprint, and iris 
recognition being current solutions of choice. Organisation’s 
choice of biometric are influenced by 3 main criteria; 
obligations, performance, and population. 
a) Obligations 
The first hurdle an organisation faces when choosing a 
biometric technology are the obligations that it must conform 
to, such as international standards and current practices.  
International 
standards 
influence 
the 
choice 
of 
biometrics, especially if individuals’ identity is meant to be 
portable across different countries, organisations, or 
contexts. If, the organisation aims to achieve interoperability, 
this determines not only the type of biometric used, but also 
the format in which the data is stored. For example, the UK 
government defended its choice of fingerprints with the need 
to comply with standards published by International Civil 
Aviation Organisation (ICAO) [20]; however, the ICAO 
standards only proscribe how fingerprints should be 
implemented if they are used on such documents –  but do 
not proscribe the use of fingerprints itself [21].  
Similarly, although the UIDAI did not focus on ensuring 
compatibility with other countries, adhering to an accepted 
standard remained an issue, to help create a consistent and 
portable identity within India’s large borders. The report 
from the Indian Biometric Committee recommended the 
implementation of biometrics based on international 
standards (ISO 19794), stating that the "standards are widely 
accepted, and best embody previous experiences of the US 
and Europe with biometrics" [19]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Organisatons Identity Creation process - Uniqueness  
 
Organisations also face obligations around current 
practices that it, or other organisations that it might work 
with, have already implemented. The existence of current 
practices around the use of certain biometrics implies the 
availability of experience, expertise, and infrastructure 
around that particular biometric. Having such familiarity 
with a particular biometric can help to ease the 
Biometrical 
Informaiton
Population
Performance
Obligations
Uniqueness
affected by
determines
influenced by
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

implementation of a new identity system that makes use of 
the same biometric.  
In the UK context, this can be seen in the relationship 
between the Identity and Passport Service (IPS) and the 
Immigration and National Directorate (IND) [20]. Prior to 
the plans for an N-IDMS, the IND had already been 
processing, recording, and storing facial and fingerprint 
biometrics of foreigners for the purpose of UK visa 
applications. Thus, when the IPS finalised its plans for the N-
IDMS it chose to build on IND’s systems, directly storing 
fingerprints and facial biometrics on IND databases. In the 
Bruneian context, the biometrics deployed in the previous N-
IDMS was carried forward into the new, making use of 
fingerprints and facial photographs that they were already 
familiar with. 
b) Performance 
Aside from its obligations, organisations are also 
influenced by the performance of the various biometrics; 
these can be expressed in terms of accuracy and human 
interpretation.  
Accuracy captures the ability of the biometric 
technology to correctly match biometrics presented for 
verification against biometric templates that have been 
previously recorded. During enrolment, organisations 
typically want to prevent individuals from enrolling more 
than once. This is achieved by choosing biometrics that 
provides the required levels of accuracy. Failure to match 
comes in form of False Acceptance - an impostor being 
wrongly accepted against an enroled identity - and False 
Rejection, an enroled individual being rejected by the system 
[22] (Further discussion of these measures is outside this 
scope of this work). Organisations should also consider the 
ease of which the biometric can be circumvented. For 
example, Facial Biometrics is "considered a poor biometric 
for use in de-duplication", as an individual can easily avoid 
identification through "the use of a disguise, which will 
cause False Negatives in a screening" [19]. 
While the use of biometrics to ensure uniqueness is 
typically an automated process, a manual form of checking 
identity is required when a false rejection is encountered. 
Since the system is unable to accurately distinguish between 
two or more biometrics, some form of backup authentication 
is required to confirm or deny the false rejection. Therefore, 
having a biometric that enables quick manual checking 
becomes a necessity. Most biometric do not lend themselves 
easily to manual inspection. As a result, facial biometrics 
becomes attractive to organisations simply because it 
provides a backup option through human interpretation 
[19]. 
"We use AFIS, Automated Fingerprint Identification 
System. All the fingerprints captured will be processed with 
the fingerprint matching, and this is very useful when the 
citizen does registration of the card. This is to ensure that 
one citizen holds one card and number only. Those who 
register will go through the AFIS matching, and if it is OK, 
then we will do the registration. Otherwise there will be 
human intervention; a matching process, the system will list 
the possible candidates that match, but normally we go for a 
100% match. There is a possibility of 70, 80, 90 and 100% 
match by fingerprints. The system also makes use of facial 
image, from the entries identified by AFIS. So it’s easy for us 
to do the matching, we can even assign the matching tasks to 
the clerk, by looking at the facial image and the percentage. 
It is very straight forward and user friendly.” [23] 
c) Population 
An organisation’s performance considerations are in turn 
mediated by the population characteristics in 3 ways: size, 
compatibility, and geographic diversity. 
First of all, organisations need to consider the size of the 
target population. Large population sizes can negatively 
affect the accuracy of the biometric. The choice of the 10-
finger biometrics proposed in the UK and Indian scheme was 
made on those grounds. The Indian Biometric committee 
[19] established that "False Acceptance Rate is linearly 
proportional to gallery size"; using a 2 fingerprint scheme 
with a population size of 1.2 billion, the FAR was estimated 
to be 14%, which is well above the 1% mark that they 
required. Therefore, it was recommended to proceed with a 
10-fingerprint scheme, which was estimated to provide a 0% 
FAR, maintaining the uniqueness of individuals in the 
database. 
The second population characteristic is compatibility, 
which captures the suitability of the biometric for use on the 
targeted population. Compatability is commonly captured by 
tests demonstrating that accuracy is not affected by 
characteristics of the target population (e.g. skin tone); the 
lack of such studies was highlighted by the Indian Biometric 
committee [19].  
However, organisations must also consider other real 
world cultural compatability factors that are not captured by 
these tests. For example, the Indian Biometric Committee 
highlighted the use of Lawsonia Interims (Henna) by 
women, stating that it can prevent the accurate collection of 
fingerprints as "sensors may not properly capture fingerprint 
features." Another example is the large percentage of 
population in India who are "employed in manual labour", 
and thus provide "poor biometric samples", as their 
fingerprints have been worn away by the nature of their 
work. Because of these issues, iris is now seen to provide a 
better match for this population [19].  In Brunei, the BruNIR 
has encountered problems with the compatibility of 
fingerprints: 
“…only one, the taking of the fingerprint. Because they 
can get worn out, and those are very difficult to capture. We 
identified that since the beginning of the project, and we 
came up with a solution to make use of moisturizer. It helps, 
but that is the major problem” [23]. 
Geographic diversity deals with the dispersion of the 
targeted population across the nation. This can affect the 
accuracy of the biometric because of varying conditions 
under which the biometric data is collected and used, and 
because procedures may be used differently. When a 
population is spread across a large geographic area, the 
organisation is unlikely to be able to collect all the 
information on its own; it will likely adopt an accredited 
enrolment strategy, where authorised third parties collect 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

information on their behalf. UK and India are prime 
examples 
of 
third-party 
enrolment, 
using 
private 
organisations to enrol and capture individual biometrics. This 
can result in "several non-technical factors that can impact 
accuracy more significantly than technical accuracy 
improvement efforts, such as the lack of adherence to 
operational quality” [19]. 
B. Identity Application 
In addition to identity construction, the organisation is 
also concerned about the mechanism with which enrolled 
identities are accessed and used. There are four main 
dependent constructs that affect organisations identity access 
policies; relying parties, objectives, conditions, and 
accessibility. 
a) Relying parties 
At the most basic level, the organisation needs to specify 
the relying parties that require access to individuals’ identity. 
There are two main types of relying parties: organisational 
and individual. 
First of all, there are intra- or inter-organisational 
entities that require access to the identity. Intra-
organisational access is typically a requirement since the 
organisation needs to create and manage identities in the first 
place. But access to identities within the organisation can 
support other functions that the organisation needs to carry 
out. For example, the BruNIR is not only responsible for the 
distribution of the identity cards in the country, but also for 
the monitoring of identities across borders. Recent 
developments have meant that the Brunei identity card can 
now be used as a passport at land borders with Malaysia. 
Therefore, the BruNIR requires other forms of internal 
access to support these activities.  
This is not so in the Indian context, where the UIDAI 
was setup solely to handle the registration of identities. The 
main focus here lies on the inter-organisational access of 
identity. In its plans to introduce the identity system the 
UIDAI clearly established and discussed plans with several 
different third party organisations that include PDS, NREGS, 
as well as the general education and health provision 
systems.  
In the UK, the IPS has defined both intra-organisational 
use of its systems (identity cards as passports), as well as its 
inter-organisational aims by identifying various agencies, 
such as law enforcement agencies and the Department of 
Work and Pensions. The Bruneian context, on the other 
hand, has comparatively ill-defined inter-organisational 
obligations, only stating its intent of creating a multi-purpose 
smart card, which can be used by any third-party 
organization.  
Identity 
Access 
Policies
Accessibility
Conditions
Objective
Relying 
Parties
defines
determines
mediates
requires
 
 
Figure 3.  Organisations Identity Application requirements 
In addition to organisational reliance on identity, the 
organisation also needs to recognise the individual as a 
relying party who may be able access his own identity and 
personal information. This is especially the case in the UK 
scenario, where IPS has specified that individuals should be 
able to access all their information on the system, which is 
envisioned to eventually be an online service [15], [20], [24]; 
India and Brunei have not specified any mechanisms by 
which individuals can directly access or view their identity 
records. 
b) Objectives 
Each relying party that the organisation identifies will 
have its own separate set of objectives. These can be 
expressed in terms of enablement and proof.  
The use of identity to mediate the provision of services 
will always create a division between those who have access, 
and those who do not; identity systems are either primarily 
used to enable, or deny access. Whether the intention is to 
use identity to either enable or disable individuals is captured 
by the enablement construct. In India, the main intention of 
the relying parties is the enablement of poor citizens to 
access services that they have a right to, but currently do not 
find accessible. Additionally, Indian banks are focused on 
introducing new forms of mobile banking, thus enabling 
individuals to access new services that are to be developed.  
The primary objectives in the UK context are to 
preventing undesirable activity (benefit fraud, crime, illegal 
immigration, and terrorism). The Bruneian context has 
described a largely enabling use of identity, with its intention 
to support the introduction of new on-line services 
introduced by third parties.  
Proof describes the objective of the relying party in using 
individuals’ identity as a single proof of identity, or as a key 
that enables the tracking of an individual across multiple 
interactions or contexts. The Indian case provides an 
illustration of a high-linkage scenario, where all relying 
parties are advised to use individuals’ identity numbers as a 
foreign key to their own systems. It even suggests that 
relying parties make use of individuals’ identity internally, 
so as to keep track of employees. The Bruneian case makes 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

no such recommendations, nor enforces any rules to such 
linkages, resulting in a mixed approach between parties 
where certain relying parties make use of the identifier as an 
index to their records, while others merely use the identity as 
a proof. 
c) Conditions 
The organisation will need to identify the conditions 
under which the access to the identity will take place, and 
may thus affect access requirements; this can be expressed as 
risk level and timeliness. 
Risk level is a measure of the security sensitive nature of 
the information access. Information access that is done under 
high-risk conditions, such as that involving terrorism, would 
have greater access privileges, when compared to a low risk 
situation that has little implication for the country, 
organisation, or relying party.  
The importance of risk level in the development of the 
identity system and the information access policies is most 
evident in the UK scenario. While most access by third 
parties would be recorded, any access for the purpose of 
counter-terrorism would take place without consent, and 
would not be recorded [15], [20], [24]. 
The BruNIR has created an official channel, through 
which law enforcement can send a written request, with 
supporting reasons, to obtain information. The UIDAI has 
not specified any direct access to the information by third 
parties, but, its N-IDMS plans state that one unique identifier 
per individual would be useful for third parties to keep track 
of employees that might pose a risk of corruption - for 
example, to track inspection officials who come into contact 
with food that is given out to the poor [25], or the presence 
of doctors and teachers ensuring they are where they need to 
be [14]. 
In addition to risk level, the timeliness of information 
access is another factor to consider. Since one of the many 
cited benefits of an identity system is improving efficiency, it 
is not surprising that the need to access information quickly 
is an important factor.  
An example is the planned use of the UK N-IDMS for 
the purposes of Criminal Background Checks (CRB), which 
are required for persons applying for employment work in a 
range of sectors. Existing CRB procedures take a long time 
to verify individuals’ identity to check their CRB status, 
leading to a backlog of applications. It would be beneficial if 
the agency carrying out these background checks could 
verify applicants’ identity more quickly, and thus it was seen 
as a prime candidate for gaining some form of access to the 
identity system; “the time for issuing Criminal Records 
Bureau disclosures could be reduced from 4 weeks to 3 
days” (ID Card Benefits Overview). 
The UIDAI has also highlighted the time-sensitive nature 
of third parties, stressing the importance of addressing the 
application of current ration cards due to “prolonged delays 
in processing the application”, and the advantages in using 
the unique ID number in the distribution of rice grain [25].  
The Brunei N-IDMS has no specific examples regarding the 
timeliness of information, but improved efficiency was a 
main factor in the introduction of the smart card system, as it 
would allow the transfer of information in digital format 
reducing the overhead for filling in forms [23]. 
d) Accessibility 
Once the organisation has identified the relying parties 
their respective objectives, and the conditions under which 
they are operating, it can then go on to define the 
accessibility of the system to these parties. The access to the 
system can be described in terms of information set, 
localised, and direction. 
Information set describes the type and amount of 
identity information that the relying party will have access 
to. For the UK system, with its emphasis on national 
security, certain authorities would be able to gain access to 
all the personal information without individuals’ consent. 
The scenario in India is such that no relying party will have 
access to the personal information - the system will only 
confirm or deny the accuracy of personal information. . The 
BruNIR has stated that third-party organizations will not 
have any access to the database, and can only access the 
information that is visible on the card and stored on the smart 
chip. 
Localised refers to the spatial mode of access to the 
identity system: at one end of the spectrum, a check of 
identity can be limited to a local point, at which an individual 
physically presents the identity, and at the other end is the 
remote access of identity through a networked database from 
any number of parties. The Bruneian N-IDMS does not 
provide third parties with any remote access to their 
database; all the information and authentication functions 
that the relying party can access, is stored on the card itself. 
The raison d’etre of the Indian N-IDMS is remote 
authentication, so third parties have access across a network. 
The UK N-IDMS specified a range of access options 
including local options (such as visual authentication and 
local chip authentication), but also fingerprint authentication 
across a network. 
Meanwhile, the direction of information access describes 
the push or pull nature of identity access; this in turn defines 
the read (including authentication) and write capabilities of 
the relying party. The Indian N-IDMS does not provide 
relying parties with any ability write information to the 
database. The transactions are a pull of information, where 
the third party requests confirmation of identity. The UK N-
IDMS is able to record information about the third party 
access when performing authentication procedures. A new 
entry is created on the database recording the time and 
location of the authentication; this represents a combined 
push-pull operation, where information is read from and 
written to the identity database.  
The Bruneian N-IDMS does not provide any remote 
access, but law enforcement can send in a written request, 
which is a remote pull of information. However, third parties 
can store information onto the chip when required. This 
represents a local push of information onto the card, and 
therefore affects the overall information access policies that 
need to be set in place.  
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

IV. 
FIT FOR PURPOSE 
The previous sections have catalogued organisations’ 
options in the construction and use of identity – and the 
choice of options has to match the purposes for which the 
system is deployed. Who are the relying parties that require 
access, and what identity information does the system need 
to hold? To ensure that that the system being implemented 
will be fit for purpose, an organisation needs to tailor the 
identity construction to support the requirements of those 
purposes. 
 The Indian system, with is stated purpose of enabling 
access to services for the poor, was quick to identify welfare 
agencies as relying parties, and to ensure that individuals are 
able to enrol (by devising the appropriate authenticity 
requirements for a target population that suffers from both 
low universality and intimacy).  
In the UK, with the main purpose being the reduction of 
crime and terrorism, the organisation identified law 
enforcement agencies as a core relying party, as well as 
defining strict authenticity and uniqueness requirements that 
would support its security goals. 
In Brunei, the main aims of the system were firstly to 
modernise their current identity infrastructure, and secondly 
to create a multi-function digital identity infrastructure that 
could be used by various third parties (especially in the 
provision of e-government services). As of now, there has 
been relatively low uptake of the system by third parties. 
This investigation reveals that this due to the lack of 
specifying relevant third parties, and thus catering for their 
needs and requirements. However, recent efforts to engage 
with a relevant stake holders in neighbouring country of 
Malaysia has resulted in the use of the identity cards as 
digital passports [26]  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Using 
a 
case 
study 
approach, 
three 
different 
implementations of N-IDMS were examined and compared, 
has and this uncovered a set of choices that organisations can 
over identity construction and identity use processes. 
These choices must be made in line with the purpose of the 
IDMS  
The organisation’s requirements for identity construction 
will determine the amount and type of information that is 
collected and stored. The choice of biographical information 
is influenced by organisations’ authenticity requirements, 
which is further mediated by the universality of current 
identity documents, and the levels of intimacy of the 
organisation to the target population. The organisation’s 
uniqueness requirements influence the choice of biometric 
information; it is affected by the organisation’s obligations 
to which it must adhere, as well as the performance of the 
biometric, which must be considered within the real-world 
population parameters. 
The requirements for the use of identity will affect the 
identity access policies implemented. Beginning with the 
relying parties that need to access the system, the 
organisation must consider the various objectives of each 
party, as well as the conditions in which they operate. Only 
then will the organisation be able to specify accessibility of 
the system, and hence the identity access policies. 
It should also be noted that the purpose also has an 
influence over the authenticity/uniqueness requirements, and 
vice versa. Certain purposes might require different sets of 
information, and the type of information within the system 
will place limitations on the purpose of the system; for 
example, a system that provides proof of age only needs to 
collect individuals’ date of birth, whereas one designed to 
counter terrorism may require address information, and 
possibly audit trails of use.  
The findings of this study further the current 
understanding of factors that should be considered in the 
design and operation of NIDMS; the codification of the 
identity requirements into a framework can be used to aid 
discussions and critiques of IDMSs. For example, [27] state 
that attention should be paid to issues of purpose, population 
scope, data scope, and users of the data. In our framework, 
those elements are refined into more detailed concepts and 
the relationships between the various concepts are 
elaborated. Similarly, [3] describes a short-circuiting of 
identity debates through the use of international obligations, 
language ambiguity, technological focus, and expertise. Our 
framework addresses these concerns by explicitly listing the 
considerations, thus reducing ambiguity and short-circuiting, 
while also introducing non-technological decisions such as 
relying parties, and their unique purposes. 
The organisation’s uniqueness consideration provides 
another area of comparisons to current work in the field. 
Drawing from [28] recommendations when implementing 
biometric systems, organisations should not only pay 
attention to the False Acceptance and False Rejection rates 
of biometric technology, but also consider how well they 
match and population characteristics, and how easy they will 
be to present; these are all present in the framework as sub-
dimensions of the performance and environment constructs. 
Therefore, the framework here serves as a guide for 
organisations and system designers to build effective N-
IDMSs. It encourages focused debate, consideration, and 
definition of various critical components, ensuring that the 
identity information collected and the technology chosen are 
both fit for purpose, thus assisting in the implementation of 
successful identity systems. 
A limitation of our current research is its emphasis on 
biometric identifiers; all the systems in all 3 case studies 
depend on them. Not all IDMS use biometrics systems, 
which limits the generalisability of the uniqueness 
framework. Future research will need to address these 
concerns, and further develop the framework to be applicable 
to non-biometric implementations.  
Work will also need to be done to develop guidelines to 
effectively express requirements for uniqueness, authenticity 
and purpose; doing so will further help to increase 
communication in the field and encourage proper debate, 
while keeping the scope of the system concise and to the 
point. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Complete framework displaying organisational identity requirements
 
 
Biographical 
Information
Biometrical 
Informaiton
Population
Trust in 
source
Performance
Obligations
Universality
Intimacy
Authenticity
Identity 
Access 
Policies
Accessibility
Conditions
Objective
Relying 
Parties
Purpose
Uniqueness
identifies
defines
determines
mediates
requires
affected by
determines
influenced by
determines
influenced by
affected by
Identity Use
Identity Creation
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
A. Rahaman and M. A. Sasse, “A framework for the lived 
experience of identity,” Identity in the Information 
Society, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 605-638, 2011. 
[2] 
E. A. Whitley and G. Hosein, “Global identity policies 
and technology: do we understand the question?,” Global 
Policy, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 209-215, May. 2010. 
[3] 
E. A. Whitley and G. Hosein, Global challenges for 
identity policies. New York, USA: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2010. 
[4] 
BBC, “Identity cards scheme will be axed ‘within 100 
days’,” BBC News, no. 2002, 2010. 
[5] 
M. Meints, and H. Zwingelberg, "Identity Management 
Systems – recent developments," Deliverable 7.2, Future 
of Identity in the Digial Society, 2009. 
[6] 
J. Taylor, M. Lips, and J. Organ, “Information-intensive 
government and the layering and sorting of citizenship,” 
Public Money and Management, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 161-
164, Apr. 2007. 
[7] 
J. Taylor, M. Lips, and J. Organ, "Citizen identiﬁcation, 
surveillance and the quest for public service 
improvement: themes and issues," paper to the European 
Consortium of Political Research ‘Privacy and 
Information: Modes of Regulation' Joint Session Helsinki 
7-12 May 2007. 
[8] 
H. Kubicek, “Introduction: conceptual framework and 
research design for a comparative analysis of national eID 
Management Systems in selected European countries,” 
Identity in the Information Society, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 5-26, 
Apr. 2010. 
[9] 
P. White, “Identity Management Architecture: a new 
direction,” in 8th IEEE International Conference on 
Computer and Information Technology, 2008, pp. 408-
413. 
[10] 
B. L. Berg, "Qualitative research methods for the social 
sciences," Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2001. 
[11] 
K. Punch, Introduction to social research: quantitative and 
qualitative approaches. Thousand Oaks, California, Sage 
Publications, 1998. 
[12] 
J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, California, Sage 
Publications, 1990. 
[13] 
Unique Identification Authority of India, UIDAI strategy 
overview: creating a unique identity number for every 
resident in India. India: UIDAI, 2010. 
[14] 
Unique Identification Authority of India, Aadhaar 
handbook for registrars. India: UIDAI, 2010. 
[15] 
Identity and Passport Service, National Identity Service: 
delivery update 2009. London, England: Home Office, 
2009. 
[16] 
D. Blunkett, Identity Cards: the next steps. London, 
England: Home Office, 2003. 
[17] 
Identity Cards Act London, England: House of Lords, 
2006. 
[18] 
R. Yunos, “Immigration services through the ages,” 
Brunei Times, 01-Feb-2009. 
[19] 
Unique Identification Authority of India, Biometric 
design standards for UID applications. India: UIDAI, 
2009. 
[20] 
Identity and Passport Service, Strategic action plan for the 
National Identity Scheme. London, England: Home 
Office, 2006. 
[21] 
London School of Economics, The Identity Project: an 
assessment of the UK Identity Cards Bill and its 
implications. London, England: LSE, 2005. 
[22] 
J. Ashbourn, Practical biometrics: from aspiration to 
implementation. London, England: Springer, 2004. 
[23] 
A. Rahaman and B.I.N.R. Department, “Interview - 
BruNIR.” 2010. 
[24] 
Identity and Passport Service, National Identity Scheme 
Delivery Plan 2008: a response to consultation. London, 
England: Home Office, 2008. 
[25] 
Unique Identification Authority of India, Envisioning a 
role for Aadhaar in the Public Distribution System. India: 
UIDAI, 2010. 
[26] 
A. Razak, “Brunei, M’sia first in SEA to use IC as 
passport,” Brunei Times, 2007. 
[27] 
S. Kent and L. Millett, IDs? Not that easy: questions 
about nationwide Identity Systems. Washington, United 
States: National Academies Press, 2002. 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEMS ANALYSED AS PART OF THE STUDY 
 
 
Brunei 
India 
UK 
Population Size 
407, 000 
1, 170, 938, 000 
62, 218, 761 
Date Implemented  
2000 – today  
2010 – today  
2008 – 2010 (abolished) 
Purpose 
Multi-function smart card 
Support poor in accessing services 
Prevent terrorism, crime, benefit fraud, travel 
card 
Mandatory 
18 and above 
All citizens 
Voluntary (mandatory for high risk personnel; 
airport staff, etc.) 
Unique ID Number 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Identity Card 
Yes 
No  
Yes 
Smart Chip 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Centralised Database 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Authentication  
(Against Card) 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Authentication 
(Against Database) 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Record 
Authentications 
No 
No 
Yes (stored on Database) 
Information Read 
Third Parties can access 
biographical information on 
card and chip. 
Third parties can confirm information  
accuracy (yes/no response). 
Third parties can access biographical 
information on card and chip. 
 
Information can be pushed from the database 
to third parties.  
 
Security organisations can get access to all 
information on the database (through 
information commissioner). 
Information Write 
Third parties can to write to  
the smart card 
None 
Information can be pushed from third parties 
to the database. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

