Accessibility to Digital Society: Interaction for All 
Pilar Orero, Javier Serrano, Olga Soler, Anna Matamala, Judit Castella, Maria Teresa Soto Sanfiel, Anna 
Vilaro, Carme Mangiron 
 
Catalan Centre for Research in Ambient Intelligence and Accessibility, CAIAC 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, UAB 
Barcelona, Spain 
{pilar.orero, javier.serrano, olga.soler, anna.matamala, judit.castella, mariateresa.soto, 
anna.vilaro,carme.mangiron}@uab.cat 
 
Abstract— The project HBB4ALL  (Hybrid Broadband 
Broadcasting for All), which has just started, addresses a 
wide range of interactivity, interoperability and accessibility 
features for a multi-platform media environment – focusing 
on the hybrid broadcast-broadband TV (HbbTV) concept. 
 
Keywords: interoperability, accessibility, connectivity 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since access to information was officially declared by the 
United Nations a Human Right in 2003, much work has 
been carried out by stakeholders at many levels, but still, 
media access deployment in Europe is not equitable. 
Legislation, policy and regulations have been introduced 
and standards were drafted to assure e-inclusion. The 
Commission set up a legal framework in 2007 with the 
"European i2010 initiative on e-Inclusion - to be part of the 
information society"; this called on the ICT industry to 
work to help disabled people access digital TV and 
electronic communications products. It adopted the 
Audiovisual Media Services Directive in 2010 [1]. 
However, 
“content” 
processes 
(from 
conception, 
production, translation, exchange and archiving to 
distribution and use) are still complex procedures, both 
technologically and commercially. All access services (be 
them for the elderly or for people with disabilities) are 
language dependent. To turn the accessibility vision into 
reality, the active participation of multiple stakeholders is 
required in the value chain. HBB4ALL will address all 
relevant stakeholders and all components of the value 
chain. 
One of the prominent challenges of the coming years 
will be the multi-platform delivery of audio-visual content 
(anytime, anywhere, any device) [2], be it a broadcast or a 
(future) Internet (IP) TV service. Hybrid delivery 
platforms such as connected TVs and two-screen solutions 
will be ubiquitous. One aim is to automate, to the extent 
possible, the production of access services. Subtitling 
accounts for 0.2-0.5% of production budgets in large 
countries and up to 1% in small countries. While subtitles 
do not demand large data-rates for their transmission or 
retrieval audio description (AD) and audio subtitles (inter-
lingual subtitles) are more cost-incentive and require 
somewhat higher data rates. Offering visual signing is 
most demanding in terms of bandwidth and production 
costs whilst - on the other hand- the target audience is 
relatively small. So, the other aim must be to balance the 
provision of access services to audio visual content 
between broadcast delivery (satellite, cable and terrestrial 
networks) and Internet (IP) delivery. At the same time, 
care has to be taken of new technological possibilities 
offering new or improved access services for the end user. 
Everyone who needs a specific service should be able to 
use it and, to the extent possible, and customize it to his or 
her personal needs. 
The HBB4ALL project builds on HbbTV, as the major 
European standard, for converged services and looks at 
both the production and service sides. HbbTV 1.x devices 
are widely available in the market while HbbTV version 
2.0 is currently under development. HbbTV provides a 
straight-forward specification on how to combine 
broadcast 
and 
broadband 
content 
plus 
interactive 
applications. TV content can be enhanced with additional 
synchronised services in a personalised manner. For access 
services this opens an entirely new opportunity for users 
who may choose an access service delivered via their IP 
connection which then seamlessly integrates with the 
regular broadcast programme. 
The project will identify improvements to existing 
access services and ways of addressing the key technical, 
organisational and legal obstacles to the sustainable take-
up of these services throughout Europe. Both quality and 
quantity metrics will be addressed in a user-centric 
approach. The project will offer new insights from the 
fields of human machine interaction and social innovation, 
given the fact that a new interactive multimodal and 
multilanguage service will be offered. This paper will first 
describe the structure chosen for the project, with four 
pilots developed in parallel. Then, it will describe the 
methodology and research approaches for the tests 
regarding quality benchmarking and measurements.     
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The project is divided in four pilots. They will take 
place in a synchronic way, in the 36 months during the life 
of the project. Pilot 1 deals with Multi-Platform Subtitle 
Services. Across Europe, broadcasters are working to 
provide subtitles on multiple platforms for individuals who 
are deaf and hard-of-hearing, or do not have sufficient 
language skills to understand the content without textual 
support either in the original or foreign languages. The 
main challenge is to provide subtitles tailored to the 
specific needs of the end-users in terms of channels, 
platforms and consumption requirements. This requires a 
well-conceived production and distribution strategy that 
allows for the exchange of subtitles and their automatic re-
purposing producing quality and impact-driven access 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

services for multiple platforms. This pilot is a thematically 
clustered and cross-country, and is driven by three major 
factors:  
 In a converged world there is a demand for 
distributing subtitles through additional output 
channels while economic pressure prevails.  
 New technological options, fostered by the market 
penetration of IP-based services and of HbbTV as 
successful open standard for Connected and Hybrid 
TVs – allowing for improved individual rendering 
of subtitles through customisation by the user. 
 Technology has matured to allow for automated 
generation of subtitles which benefits broadcasters 
through cost reduction and productivity increase 
and viewers through an increase of subtitled 
programmes on offer.  
 
One of the new channels to be served by subtitles are 
VoD (Video on Demand), services which have become 
increasingly popular, given the growing penetration of 
HbbTV which has led to a multitude of catch up TV 
portals throughout Europe. Using the example of HbbTV 
such a service is technologically possible but simply not 
available up to now on connected TVs. For the current 
(2013) generation (version 1.*) of HbbTV-enabled devices 
there is no standardised implementation of features for a 
synchronisation of video with other data streams. Here, 
service 
providers 
need 
to 
implement 
JavaScript 
mechanisms requiring considerable processing power in 
the 
TV-device. 
Ultimately, 
this 
might 
lead 
to 
interoperability problems. The worst case scenario is that it 
would influence overall device behaviour. In HBB4ALL 
new and updated mechanisms for synchronising video and 
subtitles within an HbbTV-based player will be analysed 
and chosen for integration.  
A new trend is the automatic multilingual generation of 
subtitles. Real-time subtitling through automatic speech 
recognition and subtitle machine translation into other 
languages is starting to be employed to support 
professional multilingual subtitling and increase its 
productivity. Although the quality of the automatically 
generated subtitles is still far from professional without 
manual post-edition, subtitling automation functionalities 
could be very useful and desirable in a wide range of 
applications within the HbbTV paradigm. This pilot will 
make available advanced HbbTV automatic multilingual 
subtitling functionalities, building up on technology 
currently under development in the European SME-DCL 
SAVAS [3] and CIP-PSP SUMAT [4] projects. Its 
application will be tested in a newsroom use-case scenario 
where 
the 
feasibility 
of 
automatically 
generating 
multilingual subtitles of real-time news relevant at 
international level.  
Pilot 2 deals with alternative audio production and 
distribution. Given EU citizen mobility, TV content is not 
only seen by nationals, but also by large communities 
living away from home. There is also a need to broadcast 
same content in different languages synchronically (e.g., 
Swiss TV or Brussels TV) but the content is not the same 
across languages. Hence, having different languages for 
one programme is one of the major aims of the project. 
DVB (Digital Video Broadcasting) has the technical 
requirements 
for 
playing 
different 
audio 
tracks 
synchronised with one broadcast video. This is being done 
already e.g. for additional audio description or dual-
language provision at ARTE TV channel or the Catalan 
TV3.  
Since the upcoming specification of HbbTV 2.0 will 
offer a solution for synchronized IP and DVB reception, 
additional audio tracks can be also transmitted via IP to 
save bandwidth in the broadcast channel. This feature 
offers several possibilities within the scope of HBB4ALL. 
Transmitting additional language streams with HbbTV 2.0 
is one of the testing opportunities this pilot is aiming. 
Especially for hearing-impaired people the dialog 
intelligibility of TV audio signals is a key criterion. Due to 
various reasons, the intelligibility of current TV audio 
mixes is often assessed as insufficient by users, including 
elderly, non-native speakers as well as hearing-impaired 
people. Investigations of the UN show a continuous 
increasing average age in Europe for the next decades [5], 
so the percentage of hearing-impaired people will 
consequently also increase. Hence, another major objective 
of this pilot is to enhance the dialogue intelligibility, as it 
would be beneficial for these groups. HBB4ALL will offer 
users the possibility to adjust the dialogue intelligibility to 
personal preference and will transmit clean audio enhanced 
streams by exploiting HbbTV 2.0 features. For Web-only 
TV services such as VoD, more sophisticated personalised 
solutions will be demonstrated since modern browsers 
offer the full set of HTML5 functionalities. A third group 
benefiting from this pilot is people with vision disabilities. 
A common practice is to support these groups broadcasting 
an extra audio channel using DVB-T (Digital Video 
Broadcasting Terrestrial) facilities. The AD channel 
contains a description of the action mixed with the 
dialogue. This technique allows vision impaired users to 
follow what is going on in a far more effective way than 
by hearing the dialogue alone.  
Pilot 3 looks at automatic User Interaction (UI) 
adaptation and smart TV applications. During the last 
years digital TV as a media platform has increasingly 
turned from a simple receiver and presenter of broadcast 
signals to an interactive and personalised media terminal 
with access to traditional broadcast as well as web-based 
services. Actual TVs (Connected TV, Smart TV) already 
turn the TV into an application platform and service 
terminal. At the same time it is recognised that some user 
groups like elderly people with different kind of 
impairments still face problems when using those services. 
Approximately half of the elderly people over 55 suffer 
from some kind of functional limitations (vision, hearing, 
motor and/or cognitive). For these users, interaction, 
especially with PCs or other consumer electronics devices, 
is sometimes challenging. Often people have problems to 
connect their TV to the Internet, not to mention the barriers 
raised by digital menus and EPGs (Electronic Programme 
Guide). However, accessible ICT applications, e.g for 
social media, education, health monitoring, telemedicine, 
etc., could make a difference for their living quality. They 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

have the potential to enable or simplify participation and 
inclusion in their surrounding private and professional 
communities. The Digital TV industry is following 
different approaches for the deployment of such services. 
On one hand, there is HbbTV as a standardised application 
platform, which provides means to host broadcast channel 
oriented content and application services. On the other 
hand, most Smart TV manufacturers maintain their own 
proprietary application environments (e.g. app stores, 
middleware) on the device, as it is the case for Google 
Android 
or 
SAMSUNG’s 
Connected 
TV. 
These 
environments are often available in addition to broadcast 
and HbbTV services. Service providers that aim to target 
the elderly society using those application platforms would 
benefit largely from a solution that enables accessibility for 
such services. However, the availability of accessible or 
customised user interfaces, being capable to adapt to the 
specific needs and requirements of users with individual 
impairments is nowadays still very limited. There are 
numerous APIs available for various operating systems or 
application platforms (e.g. in Web browsers) that allow 
developers to provide accessibility features within their 
applications. Further there are of course many assistive 
devices and technologies available, especially for people 
with specific impairments (e.g. brail code rendering, screen 
readers, eye tracking, etc.). The key issue is that none of 
them offers features for automatic adaptation (and 
personalisation) of user interfaces. Moreover, the provision 
of accessible user interfaces is still expensive and risky for 
application developers, as they need special experience 
and effort for user tests. Many implementations simply 
neglect the needs of elderly people locking out a large 
portion of their potential users. The aim of this third pilot 
is to provide a web-based service that would allow the 
personalisation and adaptation of user interfaces for 
Connected TV services running on HbbTV 2.0 based 
platforms. The accessibility features of such a service will 
make use of the UI adaptation framework that was 
developed within the European project GUIDE (Gentle 
user interfaces for elderly people) [6]. GUIDE provides an 
open source software framework as well as design tools 
that support Smart TV service providers in efficiently 
integrating accessibility and personalisation features into 
their services considering especially the needs of elderly 
users with mild impairments, with features for HTML5 
such as the adaptation of font sizes and colour schemes. 
The targeted web-service will include functions for user 
management and profiling, a standard application that 
allows user testing and profile initialisation based on 
different accessibility tests as well as a UI adaptation 
service that gives feedback and recommendations to the 
SmartTV application how to adapt the UI rendering 
according to the need of the individual user. Service 
providers will be capable to easily include those UI 
adaptation features into their services using the API of the 
GUIDE framework.  
The last pilot is that related to sign language 
translation. Visual signing for audio visual media such as 
film and television was shown for the first time in 1929 as 
a means to make such content accessible to individuals 
whose mother tongue is a sign language and not an oral 
language. Users of sign language are often born deaf. In 
many European countries, there are constitutional and 
legal provisions to assure the provision of sign language 
for such citizens who, in numerical terms, account for less 
than 1% of the population.  
Over the last 3 decades, broadcasters have moved from 
a single platform (analogue terrestrial broadcasting) to 
multi-platform digital distribution. Signing on analogue 
TV has traditionally been an open service, with the sign 
language interpreter being located either in a small 
window at the bottom of the screen or on the right-hand 
side of a the screen, as shown in the photos in Figures 1 
and 2. 
 
          
 
Fig 1. Signing on RTP1, Portugal 
 
          
 
Fig 2. Signing on RTBF, Belgium 
 
User studies reported in the EU project DTV4ALL 
document [7] that the RTP solution (fig. 1) with the 
interpreter in a small window is not optimal, as the picture-
in-picture does not contain enough detail. Viewers of sign 
language prefer solutions like the one used by RTBF (fig. 
2) and many other broadcasters. Existing television 
audience research suggests that, with the noticeable 
exception of television in Portugal (where RTP has more 
than 4,000 hours of signing annually, also in prime-time), 
viewers who do not use sign language interpreting on TV 
often object to 'open signing' (the inclusion of a sign 
language interpreter in the television picture for all 
viewers).  While it is possible to offer a second channel, or 
a second video stream, with signing in the digital broadcast 
either as a fully-formatted video signal or as a 'widget' 
overlay, these are expensive as it requires additional 
transmission bandwidth –a least 2 megabit/second. Internet 
or integrated broadcasting (to the main TV screen or to a 
Second Screen) are thus cost-effective delivery options for 
closed signing (optional) services. For example, Sweden's 
TV4 has been delivering sign language interpretation via 
the internet since late 2011. On modern TV sets that also 
have an Internet browser, viewers can select this option on 
their TV sets. German public service broadcasters have 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

been looking to use HbbTV as a delivery mechanism for 
sign language interpretation. In the first instance, a fully-
formatted channel including the interpreter can be 
delivered via the Internet. The current release of HbbTV 
already supports this option, which would rarely call for 
more than 2-3,000 simultaneous streams in a given area 
covered by the broadcast signal. In the medium to long 
term, the aim is to use HbbTV 2.0 (which contains a good 
synchronization mechanism) to handle the presentation of 
a widget that is overlaid on top of the existing broadcast 
signal delivered via DVB, if the terminal hardware is 
supporting the parallel decoding of two video streams. 
There are correlations to captioning/subtitling, in that the 
HbbTV option would allow for a greater degree of viewer 
customization (determining the size and position of the 
interpreter on the screen). 
Broadcasters 
dependent 
on 
advertising 
express 
concerns that an obligation to offer signing would lead to a 
noticeable reduction in advertising revenue, since 
audiences 
dislike 
screen 
contamination 
with 
the 
interpreter. Offering closed signing (where the viewer can 
choose to see or not to see the interpreter) requires much 
more bandwidth than closed subtitles or audio description. 
Signing is important not only for mainstream programming 
and TV programming specifically for the signing 
communities in Europe and elsewhere but also emergency 
alerts on TV. Citizens need to be informed of risks of 
natural or man-made emergencies and told what action 
they should take. This issue is underscored in the 
forthcoming guidelines for signatories of the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities that 
specifically mentions metrics for television targeting deaf 
communities. 
Discussions on the Digital Dividend (the use to which 
radio frequency spectrum could be put following the 
transition from analogue transmission to more efficient, 
digital technologies) have not lead to bandwidth 
allocations in digital terrestrial broadcasting earmarked for 
signing. A solution to this challenge is becoming urgent, as 
the regulatory pressure to offer signing increases while 
bandwidth in broadcast networks becomes ever more 
costly. 
III. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
Being an ETSI standard, HbbTV is currently linked 
with the DVB TV system family but can, in principle, be 
used in conjunction with any digital TV service in the 
world. DVB is widely used throughout all continents. 
Sooner or later, all countries in the world will have 
completed their analogue-to-digital switch-over. As a 
consequence, the results of HBB4ALL will be of 
worldwide relevance and will, through standardisation 
bodies such as the ITU and ISO, also be publicised on a 
world-wide level. Given the impact in close fields such as 
eHealth and eEducation, for example, the results from this 
project will have important results and direct impact. On 
its basis, HBB4ALL is elaborating pertinent guidelines, 
guides of good practice, metrics, and recommendations 
and will initiate campaigns to promote the project results, 
and thus raise awareness not only on the necessity of 
access and interaction services but also on the technical 
solutions available with interoperability. For that purpose, 
all relevant stakeholders, from content providers to user 
associations, will be addressed.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The overall objective of HBB4ALL is to become a 
major platform/player in the e-Inclusion economy 
currently taking place, fostering the future market take-up 
of exiting innovations in conceiving universal accessibility 
tools and concepts to satisfy the diverse interests of all 
societal groups. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The HBB4ALL project is being developed by the Centre 
d'Accessibilitat i Intel·ligència Ambiental de Catalunya 
(CAIAC), at UAB, and it has been partially funded by 
FP7 CIP-ICT-PSP.2013.5.1 # 621014 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] http://ec.europa.eu/avpolicy/reg/index_en.htm 
[2] NEM Position Paper on Connected TV, December 2012 
http://www.neminitiative.org/fileadmin/documents/PositionPape
rs/NEM-PP-015.pdf [retrieved 16.11.2013] 
[3] http://www.sumat-project.eu/ [retrieved 16.11.2013] 
[4] http://www.fp7-savas.eu/ [retrieved 16.11.2013] 
[5] United Nations – Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, 
Population 
Division 
(2011). 
World 
Population 
Prospects: The 2010 Revision. 
[6] http://www.guide-project.eu/ [retrieved 16.11.2013] 
[7] http://www.psp-dtv4all.org/ [retrieved 16.11.2013] 
 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

