A Comprehensive Strategy Framework for e-Textbook in the Coming Digital 
Society for Learning 
 
Jen Wel Chen1,2, a, Dershing Luo1,3, b,Ching-Cha Hsieh1, c 
1Department of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
2Department of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University 
3Department of Information Management, 
China University of Science and Technology 
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
a jwchen@sce.pccu.edu.tw 
b luoder2008@gmail.com 
c cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
Chia-Ching Lu 
Institute for Information Industry  
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
gaty@iii.org.tw 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The Princeton University held a pilot experiment on 
the current e-reader using in the classroom. The classroom 
experience was worsened by using e-reader, unsurprisingly. 
Meanwhile her final report in 2010 shows some valuable 
suggestion for future e-book manufacturers. However, the 
success of a product locates not only on its advanced technique 
but also on its stakeholders and business model. Take the e-
book reader Kindle for example. Its success is largely owing to 
a specific position of “Reading” and online book sales. While 
during its marching to campus, it is obviously not valid any 
more. In this paper, we go through the research and practice of 
e-books recently as well as reflect the e-reader pilot at 
Princeton. We then propose a comprehensive strategy 
framework for e-Textbook that is composed of three 
dimensions: information goods, technology, and stakeholders. 
Tracing on the path of e-book reader, we march to e-Textbook. 
During this journey, we not only highlight solutions to the 
problems e-Textbooks will encounter, but also propose 
valuable business models for future e-Textbook. 
Keywords- e-book; e-Textbook; business mode;  e-Reader 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There has been already 42 years for the development of 
e-books since Alan Kay originally proposed the concept of 
Dynabook in 1968. Meanwhile, the researchers, enterprises, 
and governments have developed and promoted the 
applications of e-books in various concepts, ways, and 
techniques. Such situation presented the e-books fruitful 
definitions and facets [4, 8, 10]. 
There are several different facets for the e-books. For the 
content side, the e-books may be digitalized books, online 
database, CD-ROM. For the device side, the e-books may be 
portable device for storage contents or browsing information. 
Even simpler, e-books maybe the digital contents as usually 
recognized. In this way, the development approaches are 
various as follows:  content, composer, container, channel, 
and consultant [1]. Under different supports of projects, 
various technique development approaches come across their 
versatile requirements and user groups. 
Same as the above situations, scholars have different 
definitions in the context and popularity for the e-books. 
That is the reason why the research issues presented versatile 
facets and results. In this paper, we adopt a broader 
definition: the e-books are not only digital contents, but also 
the portable devices/ carriers, access interfaces, and system 
for information browsing and integrating. 
In 2007, the e-book reader, Kindle promoted by Amazon 
popularized the global e-books development and digital 
reading trend. The success is owing to the mechanism of 
online sale, digital reading techniques and hardware. The 
trend forced the other big electronic company, SONY, 
resumed its e-book development project. SONY promoted a 
new style e-book reader, and transformed its proprietary 
specification of e-book content into a general specification, 
e-PUB (short for electronic publication). In 2009, Barnes and 
Noble promoted e-book reader of its own brand, even she 
has already given up the sales of digital books long before in 
2003. Insta, a market research institute, predicts the global e-
book device shipments will raise from nearly one million in 
2008 to thirty million, that will be a market scale of eleven 
billion. The next target for digitalized will be the great 
population of textbooks. Forrester predicts the textbooks will 
be the greatest e-book reader market five years later. A 
recent published report “E-Textbooks in Higher Education” 
[16], it examines the lessons learned from the various 
implementations of e-textbooks on college campuses in the 
2009-2010 academic year and portends for the coming years. 
It also notes that the e-textbook is now in its important stage 
of learning curve. 
In 2009, the Princeton University held a pilot experiment 
on the current e-reader using in the classroom. The 
classroom experience was worsened by using e-reader, 
unsurprisingly. Meanwhile her final report in 2010 shows 
some valuable suggestion for future e-book manufacturers 
such as annotation tools, pagination, content organization, 
and in achieving a more natural “paper-like” user experience 
63
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

[18, 19]. We emphasize here that all the required techniques 
will be achieved by the manufactures soon. What left 
unsolved are the habits of stakeholders, especially the 
teachers and students. 
Reading is an important part of learning; however, it is 
not vice versa. Reading is not equal to learning. The textbook 
has its specific usage for learning. The textbook has its own 
characteristic use habits and application environments. Thus 
the development of e-textbook definitely needs a different 
position of e-book. Under current basis of e-book, we should 
develop learning related technique functions and usage 
process, provide suitable online platform as well. In this way, 
the learners and instructors may enjoy reading the e-book. 
Moreover, under the enabling of e-textbook, they may 
construct an environment for digital learning interaction, and 
reach the goal of e-learning. 
Contrary to the prosperity of e-book, let us take a look at 
the textbook market. Currently, in the United States, the 
publishers find great obstacles selling the online components 
of the textbook, due to the maturity of environment as well 
as the technology resistance of instructors. In addition, there 
should be a better pricing mechanism in balancing the huge 
cost of developing online components and the great burden 
of students. The vibrant second-hand textbook market may 
portray part of facets of the ecology. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 details the major problems in marching from e-
book to e-Textbook, nature of e-Textbook, the benefits of 
users and markets, and the requirements for its innovations. 
Section 3 proposes our comprehensive strategy framework 
from the perspective of information goods, technology, and 
stakeholders. Section 4 states the possible business models 
under this framework. Finally, conclusions and future 
applications are given in Section 5. 
II. 
MARCHING FROM E-BOOK TO E-TEXTBOOK 
The success of e-book cannot guarantee the success of e-
Textbook according to the characteristics of e-books stated 
above. In the developing of e-Textbook, we will face several 
major problems. We analysis with a systematic approach 
composed 
of 
three 
dimensions: 
information 
goods, 
technology, and students’ habits. Followed this, we detail the 
nature of e-Textbook and the requirements for its innovations. 
A.  The Problems Faced When Moving from E-book 
toward e-Textbook 
From the development process of e-book and the 
background of digitalized text textbook, we figure out six 
major problems for e-textbook from current studies [9, 12, 
15, 17]. (1)  learning vs. Reading, (2)  E-ink or i-Pad, (3)  
service vs. product, (4)  proprietary vs. Open, (5)  interface 
function, and (6)  cash flow mechanism. We detail them with 
a systematic approach that is composed of three dimensions: 
information goods, technology, and students’ habits. They 
are depicted in Table 1. 
 
 
 
TABLE 1  THE PROBLEMS FACED WHEN MOVING FROM E-BOOK TOWARD E-TEXTBOOK 
 
Perspective 
Option A 
Option B
Considerations
Information Goods
 
product 
pricing 
service
costs 
Single product or bundled services 
Reasonable, acceptable, comprises, sales, costs, 
services, for teachers. cash flow, stakeholders, 
needs 
Technology 
 
E-ink 
proprietary 
simple 
i-Pad
open 
flexibility 
usability, reading habits, interaction 
Market, communication, benefit to all 
Interface, Behaviour, learning processes, flows, 
flexibility 
Software, hardware
Students’ Habits 
 
reading 
learning
Interaction
Chapter or whole book, e-Publisher industry 
  
 
1) Problems Faced in the e-Textbook 
a) The Perspective of Information Goods 
(1)  Service or Product? 
We have to keep in mind that the big success of Kindle is 
not just because it is only a product. Besides the portable E-
ink display interface, it is also composed of Amazon’s online 
book ordering services. Through the use of network, it is 
empowered with the marketing, digitalized book, delivery of 
64
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

magazine and books, browser interface, connectivity to 
information, the online shelf of the platform enables every 
user have his own central storage spaces, the extensions of 
application and function enable every Kindle have its own e-
mail account to communicate the digital contents. Thus, 
when we face the promotion from e-book reader to e-
Textbook. We strongly posit that e-Textbook is just 
equivalent to the simple thinking of combining e-book and 
textbook digitalization [12]. 
We have to plan the function specification of e-Textbook 
properly. Moreover, we get to have an integration of product, 
service, and platform. Then we will have a way to success in 
promoting e-Textbook. 
(2)  Pricing 
The iPod and iTunes of Apple have changed not only the 
pricing thinking but the market of digital music. The related 
stakeholders of digital music have now acknowledged that 
USD$ 0.99 each song is a reasonable price for consumers to 
get. Amazon has gradually leading the price strategy, too. 
She sets the price level of USD$ 9.9 each digital book 
because of her leading place in online book sales and success 
of Kindle. However, there are still many comprises among 
teaching and learning, limitation of sales, high costs, and the 
services for teachers. 
Therefore, in the e-Textbook industry, the suitable cash 
flow mechanism must be well established. The stakeholders 
including authors, publisher, teachers, and students. They 
have to deal with the common pricing strategy to satisfy their 
needs. Through the clearing and cash flow mechanism, the 
reasonable price to get the digital textbook must be 
recognized by the stakeholders in getting not only the digital 
contents but also the paper version. 
b)  The Perspective of Technology 
(1)  E-ink or i-Pad  
We have to face the problem of use after the 
digitalization of books. Many researches show that it is the 
usability, which hinder reader to use the e-book [3, 6, 7, 12]. 
For the reading habits, [1] stated the readers prefer paper 
books because it is difficult in reading on the screen. The e-
book readers which use the reflective-like technique of E-ink 
electronic paper make themselves to be near to paper books. 
While the technique characteristic of low response of E-ink 
electronic paper also limit, e.g. it cannot scroll the digital 
contents or paging the contents. Besides, the better ability of 
interaction and information retrieval are what digitalized 
books should specially possess [14]. However, the iPad sales 
hit two million in April 2010 shows the opposite strength. 
 
(2)  Proprietary or open system 
The development of e-book shows a trend from 
proprietary to open system both on the software and 
hardware. In early development, the system specification 
goes proprietarily for reaching each own objective. However, 
it limited the development of whole e-book industry. On the 
contrary, facing the trend of open system, Amazon develops 
Kindle DX for popular file specifications as pdf of Adobe 
and Office of Microsoft. The same situation occurred in the 
pioneer electronic company, SONY. She abandoned her own 
e-book specification and engaged the common standard of e-
book content specification named e-PUB. Therefore, we 
should remember the lesson [9]. Open minds create more 
better developments for the industry. 
(3)  Interface Functions 
Current interface functions of e-book reader are 
positioned to reading. These may not be completely matched 
all the necessary functions in promoting e-book reader to 
textbooks. Instead of directly fitting the learning behaviour 
of paper textbook to the e-Textbook [9, 12], it is necessary to 
research and confirm the learning processes needed in the e-
Textbook. Such processes consist of interface, functions, and 
the flows. 
c)  The Perspective of Students’ Habits 
There are distinct human factors between the process of 
learning and reading. The study of campus e-book by [13] 
noted few people read the entire book. Most of the readers   
read only several chapters but not the whole book. The 
average time they spend on e-book is less than 20 minutes. 
From the teaching practice in the university, most of the 
teachers will choose some chapters as specified materials, 
and add some supplementary materials. Thus, the mechanism 
of e-Textbook should provide chapter by chapter instead of 
whole book.  
Reading is much about personal activity. However, 
besides the above activity, learning effects are much owing 
to the interactions among teacher, student, and peers. Hereby, 
the current e-book readers have to make great progress on 
the interaction functions in order to apply to domain of 
learning. 
In learning or textbook, the needs of chapter or whole 
book are diverse. This situation is quite different from in 
reading. The e-Publisher industry has begun to think a new 
pricing mechanism for chapter by chapter and a whole book. 
2)  Requirements for Consumers and Market 
Many studies reveal the requirements for consumers and 
market for current e-books. The largest survey in the use of 
e-book so far is the survey of MyiLibrary of JISC in England. 
After a survey of 22,437 users from more than 120 
universities, it showed that nearly 62 percent of students 
have already used e-books in their researches or instructions 
[13]. Reference [11] surveyed on Denver University showed 
that 51 percent of students do use the e-books, 56.6 percent 
of them read more than one chapter online but not printing 
out. More and more people use e-books because of saving 
printing fare and convenience [17]. The students use e-books 
three times of paper books [7]. The trend of e-book entering 
into campus for learning is obvious. As stated above, 
Forrester predicts the textbooks will be the greatest e-book 
reader market five years later. 
Although the trend is emerging, there is still great 
inconvenience in using e-books, which hinders the 
popularity and promotion. The major inconveniences 
encountered are subsequently ”not used to reading on the 
screen for a long time”, ”special devices needed or technical 
problems”, ”inferior quality”, ”hard to read and browse”, 
and ”lack of ability in searching local contents” [5, 6, 11, 15]. 
65
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

The above inconveniences show the requirements for 
users in the development of e-books. In moving to e-
Textbook, despite the digital contents, there must be 
convenient terminal reading devices, convenient operation, 
humanistic action flows, speed for information searching and 
interaction. To meet the needs of textbooks, there are some 
important requirements as follows: the total mechanism must 
be convenient and complete to support instruction, strategy 
of sales and Profit sharing to support whole book and 
chapter-by-chapter, function of printing on demand (POD), 
sales and service chain for click and mortar, an integrated 
platform for learning and logistics. 
B.  Nature of e-Textbook 
The e-Textbook is kind of technology–mediated learning 
by nature. The technology here is as mediation and 
communication for learning. For the mediation, as stated 
above, we have to fit the e-Textbook to the characteristics of 
learning. For the communication, learning is not independent 
activity but a community of practice. 
Learning also happens in the interaction among the 
teachers, students, and textbooks or auxiliary materials. Such 
situation is both un-substitute and un- duplicate. 
C.  Requirements for Innovations 
Currently the e-Textbook is on its way to innovations. 
We begin with the lessons learned from some company with 
vision. We then draw the future requirements for e-
Textbooks and finally explore the innovations for e-
Textbooks. We depict there is a spectrum moving from e-
book, e-book for learning, to e-Textbook. 
1) Lesson Learned from e-books 
O‘Reilly Media Group put her feet in the e-book market 
early in 1987. At that time, she boldly held the opinion of 
throwaway DRM (digital rights management) and multi 
channels simultaneously. The benefit today shows the value 
of such strategy. In O‘Reilly's opinion, publication being 
invisible is far terrible than being pirated. It can do more 
harm to the authors using the DRM to avoid pirates. 
Owing to the strategy of open to digital contents and 
value-added services, O‘Reilly Media enables her e-book 
users to own various versions for different kinds of terminal 
readers, to do multiple downloads, to enjoy the latest version 
all their life. Instead of limiting, she shows the strategy of 
open, multiple channels, and sharing. This strategy makes 
the publication ubiquitously. 
The lesson learned from O‘Reilly Media Group is 
valuable to the development of e-Textbooks. In the age of 
information explosion, publishers have to change their roles 
from information providers to services providers. The 
consumers do not pay for the contents but for the value. The 
value for the publishers is the knowledge rectification, 
arrangements, and mediation. Moreover, the information 
communication technologies (ICTs) provide the new value 
of ubiquitous and integrated services. This is the key to 
success for e-Textbook mechanism. 
Owing to the quick changing of time and knowledge, 
traditional time-wasting publishing cannot meet the quick 
updating for today. On the other side, this is just the niche for 
electronic publishing (e-Publishing) companies. They have 
to be a suitable mediator of knowledge communication. The 
textbooks are oriented for knowledge creation and learning. 
The need for knowledge communication is specially suitable 
and urgent for e-Publishing. The system for e-Textbook has 
to provide open shelf system, combination of current sales 
model, click and mortar in campus, continuous updating and 
supplements, service mechanism of Wiki and Web 2.0, and 
corresponding payment system. 
2)  Future Requirements for e-Textbooks 
We can derive future requirements for e-Textbooks from 
the imagination of future benefits for users. They are stated 
as follows. 
a)  The implementation of the concept of electronic 
bags 
Past experience of the electronic bags shows insufficient 
value-added application software, poverty of contents, 
unclear position of users, lack of team coordination, late for 
content rights, neglect of user habits, and lack of market 
education. Without regarding the electronic bags as a whole 
system can account for the failure. In this case, it is hard to 
integrate each component as well as comprehensive planning. 
The technique of e-Textbook plays an important part in 
the future implementation of the concept of electronic bags. 
b)  e-learning community of practice 
A well-planned system of e-Textbooks may fully utilize 
the connectivity of ICTs. Hence, such e-Textbook may 
connect people and information as well as integrate into the 
e-learning community of practice 
c)  New styles of e-Publishing industry 
The publishing industry may employ ICTs for 
transformation. Such transformation may add the value 
needed in the age of information explosion. The e-Publishing 
system enables a new style of flexibility of publishing, quick 
mediation ability, and instant communication speed. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
Following the backgrounds and requirements for 
innovations described in former two sections, we propose a 
comprehensive strategy framework for e-Textbook based on 
the concept of information goods, and stakeholders. The 
stages we concerned covers pre-class, in-class, and after 
class. In this way, we make the learning happen ubiquitously. 
They are depicted in Figure 1 and elaborated as follows. 
 
 
Levels
Items
Information 
Goods
Non open (e.g. DRM)/ open materials
Technology
OSPH 
(e.g. 
MID)
OSOH 
(anyone) 
PSPH 
(eg. 
Kindle) 
PSOH 
(e.g. 
NoteBook)
Stakeholders
Authors, Publishers, Teachers, Students
 
Figure 1.  The comprehensive strategy framework for e-Textbook 
 
66
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

A.  The Level of Information Goods (open/ non-open) 
As depicted in 1), in this level, we should consider not 
only the service or product, but the pricing mechanism. 
Through the lesson at Princeton, we may plan the function 
specification of e-Textbook properly. Moreover, we get to 
have an integration of product, service, and platform. Then 
we will have a way to success in promoting e-Textbook. 
Amazon has gradually leading the price strategy. She sets the 
price level of USD$ 9.9 each digital book because of her 
leading place in online book sales and success of Kindle. 
How 
can 
the 
related 
stakeholders 
of 
e-Textbook 
acknowledge a reasonable price for producers to take and for 
consumers to get. There are still many comprises among 
teaching and learning, limitation of sales, high costs, and the 
services for teachers. Through the clearing and cash flow 
mechanism, the reasonable price to get the digital textbook 
must be recognized by the stakeholders in getting not only 
the digital contents but also the paper version 
B.  The System for e-Textbook: Proprietary or Open 
System for Software (PS/OS) 
Except running on a proprietary system, the e-Textbook 
reader may be developed in the open operating system, e. g.  
Android platform. Reference [2] argued that e-learning 
should promote from application level to function level. The 
application level contains sharing, presentation and media of 
materials and quizzes with ICTs. However, the function level 
consists of recording of learning process, statistics, 
reservation, and evaluation in passive function; analysing 
learning status, detecting learning myth, guiding learning, 
implementing planned instructions, and test/ evaluation in 
active functions. 
Current e-book Readers do not emphasize the application 
and function level for e-learning. Even the Amazon Kindle 
has already provided a similar and basic Whispersync 
function for synchronization among multiple Kindles, it still 
lacks the learning records function, neither records learning 
status in order to analysis, no to mention the function of quiz 
or evaluation. 
On the other hand, the Living Lab is a user centered 
innovation in real life scenarios. William J. Mitchell from 
MIT developed it[20]. It is user-centric research methods in 
real life environments to identify and build prototypes, and to 
evaluate multiple solutions. By means of the concept of 
Living Lab, we will put key stakeholders to co-develop in 
this experiment; we may evaluate and verify whether the 
functions of e-Textbook readers in Android platform can 
satisfy the learning needs. 
For the platform and business mechanism, we also design 
an experiment of two classes in different schools. The 
consumer information and behaviour will be accumulated in 
the experiment. The results will validate the pricing strategy 
and institution. 
C.  The stakeholders in the e-Textbook industry 
The stakeholders including authors, publisher, teachers, 
and students. For the authors, a well developed environment 
encourages their fruitful contributions. Since e-Publishing is 
unavoidable, the publishers have to embrace and try to create 
even more opportunities than ever. The most hardest part 
will be the habits of teachers and students. The habits of 
learning and teaching are not easily changed in a short period 
of time. In this case, they may suffer before they befit from 
the e-Textbook. The learning community of practice may be 
one of the possible solutions. As stated above, learning is not 
only personal activity but also a group one. The e-Textbook 
we design should meet the needs for learning community of 
practice. There are group installing and monitoring for the 
group learning, sharing and collaborating supports of various 
kinds of instruction approaches and learning style. 
As the e-Textbook network platform, [14] stated that e-
book should possess the following functions: interaction, 
hyperlink, browsing, searching, and link to online services, 
moreover, continuous updating. Several functions are 
expected in the e-Textbook network platform. There are 
Sharing, Web 2.0 knowledge spread, accumulate, and 
creation as stated above. Just think about it, even there is a 
great success at Princeton this time, the e-Textbook may not 
be available in other campuses on account of the different 
situation. That means only when we can grasp the 
characteristics of the students, the e-Textbook can be 
successful. 
IV. 
THE BUSINESS MODEL 
Based on the above framework for e-Textbook, there are 
several business models. The business model stated here 
focuses the trend of e-books, considers most of the 
backgrounds and requirements depicted in Section 2. It aims 
to create an open and integrated e-Textbook system. We 
stated the technical components and management issues in 
the business model respectively in this section. 
As depicted in Figure 2, all the relations of the products 
and services are noted, the bones between them are the 
management issues to be handled. The technical components 
in the business model is four-fold: A. open, and sharing; B. 
personal services for authors, teachers, and learners; C. 
multiple channels of sales and cash flow; and D. the 
technologically ubiquitous learning environment. 
A.  Open and sharing 
For the open and sharing part, there are (1)  format 
transformation for e-book, (2)  services across book sales 
platform, (3)  shelving system, (4)  service of sales chain 
with click and mortar, (5)  supplementary materials of 
digitalized textbooks, and (6)  mechanism of Web 2.0 like 
Wiki. 
 
 
67
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
Figure 2.  The relations of the products and services for the e-Textbooks (the signs denote the developments of product, technology, or service are * for 
developed, + for  under developing, and - for will be developed in this project) 
 
 
B.  Personal services for authors, teachers, and learners 
In this part of personal services for authors, teachers, and 
learners, there are (1)  service of personal book store, (2)  
clearing and authorization chapter by chapter, (3)  service of 
POD authorization, (4)  push service, and (5)  personal 
service. 
C.  Multiple channels of sales and cash flow 
The multiple channels of sales and cash flow include: (1)  
sales of deposited encryption letter, (2)  sales interface of 
Easy card depositing, and (3)  module of cash flow. 
D.  The technologically ubiquitous learning environment 
As a technologically ubiquitous learning environment, 
there are (1)  records for learning activities, (2)  console shelf, 
(3) assignment uploading and quizzes, (4)  electronic folders, 
(5)  group, and (6)  console. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have stated the efforts need to be elaborated when 
moving from e-books to e-Textbook. We highlight open 
problems regarding the technology as well as the way of 
distribution. Again, we emphasize that the lesson learned 
from the pilot at Princeton is not enough. Simplified 
speaking, advanced in technology only is not enough. The 
comprehensive strategy framework may cover the requisite 
needs. The stages covered in our proposed architecture 
covers pre-class, in-class, and after class. In this way, the 
learning will happen ubiquitously. The contributions of this 
paper to the approach and practice in e-Textbook industry 
are three-fold: (1)  We go through the research and practice 
of e-books through a systematic survey framework, (2)   We 
not only highlight solutions to the problems e-Textbooks will 
encounter, but also propose a framework for e-Textbook. (3)  
We also illustrate with possible business models for e-
Textbook industry. At the end of this Section, we also give 
suggestions for the future study in e-Textbook. 
 
A.  Conclusions 
(1)  We go over the research and practice of e-books 
through a systematic survey framework of three dimensions: 
technology, stakeholders, and information goods. The results 
are noted in Table 1. Thus, we may have a complete 
comprehension starting from the e-books. 
(2)  Tracing on the path of e-book, we march to e-
Textbook. With a project of the real case of Publisher Lisa, 
the journey is now on its way. We highlight solutions to the 
problems e-Textbooks will encounter in Table 1. Through 
the holistic point of view, we regard e-Textbook not just a 
product but a system. Such system aims the learning 
activities and relates together all stakeholders in social, 
economics, institution. 
E ‐Textbook 
R eader in 
Android 
Platform
Technology 
S ystem for 
e‐Textbook
Integrated 
S ervices 
Platform
AS ‐IS
C oncept
Multiple 
C hannels of 
S ales and 
C ash Flow
Personal 
S ervices
(*) development 
techniques in Android 
platform
(‐) e‐PUB file transfering
(*) micro payments
(‐) encrypted 
transaction system
(‐) clear system
Digital 
C ontents
(*) DR M
(‐) Kiosk module
(‐) POD authorization
(‐) group
Learning 
Activity
(‐) learning records
(‐) console shelf
(‐) console
(‐) upload assignment
(‐) electronic folders
(‐) on‐shelf system
(*) online learning records
(‐) cloud shelf
(‐) click and mortar
(‐) Wiki
(+) intelligent keywords 
indexing
68
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

(3)  Besides the comprehensive strategy framework for e-
textbook depicted in Figure 1, we also illustrate with possible 
business models for e-Textbook as depicted in Figure 2. 
Figure 2 demonstrates all the related products and services 
with management issues through the proposed approach. 
B.  Future work 
There are still some further issues worthy to study. The 
framework we proposed may try to apply to diverse ways of 
technology-mediated learning. Other salient issues are the 
evaluation criteria for the technical system, the possible 
sources of technology/ services and patents, the searching 
and management of intellectual property. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is conducted under the Project Digital 
Convergence Service Open Platform of the Institute for 
Information Industry which is subsidized by the Ministry of 
Economy Affairs of the Republic of China 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Abdullah, N. and Gibb, F. (2008). Students' attitudes towards e-books 
in a Scottish higher education institute- part 1. Library Review, 57: 
593-605. 
[2] 
Alessi, S.M. and Trollip, S.R. (1991). Computer-based instruction: 
Methods and development (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall 
[3] 
Anuradha, K. and Usha, H. (2006). E-books access models: an 
analytical comparative study. The Electronic Library, 24: 662-679. 
[4] 
Borchers, J.O. 1999. Electronic books: Definition, genres, interaction 
design patterns.  In ACM CHI 1999, Electronic Book Workshop.  . 
Pittsburgh, PA.: Citeseer. 
[5] 
Carlock, D. and Perry, A. (2008). Exploring faculty experiences with 
e-books- a focus group. Library Hi Tech, 26: 244-254. 
[6] 
Chu, H. (2003). Electronic books: viewpoints from users and 
potential users. Library Hi Tech, 21: 340-346. 
[7] 
Croft, R. and Bedi, S. 2005. e-books for a distributed learning 
university: The Royal Roads University case. Journal of library 
administration, 41: 113-137. 
[8] 
Henke, H. (2001). Electronic books and ePublishing: a practical guide 
for authors: Springer Verlag. 
[9] 
Herther, N. (2005). The e-book industry today: a bumpy road 
becomes an evolutionary path to market maturity. The Electronic 
Library, 23: 45-53. 
[10] Lemken, B. (1999). Ebook: the missing link between paper and 
screen.  ACM CHI 1999, Electronic Book Workshop. Pittsburgh, PA.: 
Citeseer 
[11] Levine-Clark, M. (2006). Electronic Book Usage. portal: Libraries 
and the Academy, 6: 285-299. 
[12] McFall, R. (2005). Electronic textbooks that transform how textbooks 
are used. The Electronic Library, 23: 72-81. 
[13] Nicholas, D., Rowlands, I., Clark, D., Huntington, P., Jamali, H., and 
Olle, C. (2008). UK scholarly e-book usage: a landmark survey. 
London: Aslib., pp. 311-334. 
[14] Nielsen, J. (1998). Electronic books–a bad idea. Jakob Nielsen’s 
alertbox, 26. Retrieved  
[15] Shelburne, W. (2009). E-book usage in an academic library: User 
attitudes and behaviors. Library Collections, Acquisitions and 
Technical Services, 33: 59-72. 
[16] Simba Information (2010). E-Textbooks in Higher Education 2010-
2011. Simba Information. 
[17] Storch, J. (2009, February 6). Needed: A single electronic source for 
textbooks. The Chronicle of Higher Education, Retrieved from: 
http://chronicle.com/weekly/v55/i22/22a03201.htm on 2010/12/30 
[18] Princeton University (2010a). The E-reader pilot at Princeton. Final 
report, (long version). The Trustees of Princeton University. 
[19] Princeton University (2010b). The E-reader pilot at Princeton. Final 
report, (executive summary). The Trustees of Princeton University. 
[20] Schuurman, D., T. Evens and L. De Marez (2009). A living lab 
research approach for mobile TV, ACM. 
 
69
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

