Driving Service Agility: 
A longitudinal case in Yell 
 
Dr Sharm Manwani  
Henley Business School 
University of Reading 
UK 
sharm.manwani@henley.com 
Robert Carr 
Head of Information Services 
Yell 
Reading, UK 
 
 
Abstract. Organizations require effective service management 
in order to meet business service levels and reduce costs in the 
operation of information systems. There is a growing body of 
knowledge that describes the rationale and the outcome of 
these experiences. These cases indicate that the capabilities and 
processes of the organization are important factors in 
achieving success. Our review of the literature considers both 
the hard and soft factors such as service processes and trust in 
service partners. These factors are explored through a 
longitudinal case study designed to provide insights into how 
the environment sets the parameters for service management. 
The selected case analyses the organization changes to its 
service management approaches during a period of several 
years. Results are discussed from both practitioner and 
theoretical viewpoints with proposals for further research.  
 
Keywords-component; service management, frameworks, 
agility 
I. 
 SERVICE MANAGEMENT INTRODUCTION 
Services are becoming increasingly pervasive in 
organizations and society, driven partly by technologies 
exploiting the internet, mobile computing and enhanced 
security software (1). Information technology is also 
changing the nature of work in services organizations yet 
there are many challenges for IT service providers that make 
it difficult to gain trust from their customers. In the 
implementation stage, training and trials help to deliver a 
better service to customers; support needs to be maintained 
in the operational stage. This focus on service combined with 
building relationships is most likely to engender trust (2).  
A broader approach is required to effectively deliver the 
whole package of IT services to internal customers. There 
has been significant support for improving service processes, 
exemplified by the growing use of the ITIL (IT Infrastructure 
Library) framework which provides support for IT Service 
Management. ITIL version 2 distinguished between service 
delivery and support while version 3 has expanded the scope 
into a lifecycle approach that starts with the service strategy. 
In version 2, service delivery has a focus on the end user as 
the customer whereas service support considers the business 
organization as the customer covering issues such as finance 
and overall availability (3).  
Table 1 shows the target objectives of the processes 
within service delivery and support. 
 
Table 1: ITIL Version 2 (adapted by authors) 
 
Process 
Goal 
Service level mgt. 
Create and monitor service level 
agreements 
Financial 
management 
Budget and monitor the financial aspects 
Capacity 
management 
Match IT capacity  to agreed service levels 
 
IT Service 
continuity mgt 
Manage risks that impact IT services. 
 
Availability mgt. 
Define & monitor availability of IT 
services. 
Service desk 
Address user queries and issues 
Incident 
management 
Capture and monitor incidents to 
resolution 
Problem 
management 
Address underlying problems causing 
incidents 
Change 
management 
Manage approved changes to the service 
Release 
management 
Implement new releases of the system 
Configuration mgt. 
Track  components of the IT services 
 
One of the key service management decisions for an 
organization is how to source its capability. Three strategic 
intents can be articulated for appropriate sourcing: firstly 
improving the performance of IS, secondly exploiting IT 
assets and thirdly using IT to achieve better business results 
(4). A survey of organizations found over 30% cited cost 
savings as a reason for outsourcing, and nearly 20% wanted 
access to skills (5).  On the benefits side, over 10% cited 
service quality, and over 6% mentioned skills and knowledge 
as the areas with which they were most satisfied.  
Although key, this does not address the need for agility, 
defined as the ability to deal with fast business change (6). 
The core question addressed by this research is how to 
enhance service agility to satisfy business demands. Based 
on this question of service management, the next section 
proposes a research method and then describes key elements 
of the case prior to an evaluation discussion and conclusions.  
13
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
A. An Explorative Method and Longitudinal Case  
Our aim is to apply a longitudinal perspective as an aid to 
understanding the service agility approaches in an 
organization. Given the exploratory nature of this research, 
we selected a single case study to aim for a depth of 
understanding. 
 “The critical questions seem to be ones of information 
management strategy….one way of doing such managerial 
research is through case studies.  They allow multi-
disciplinary, integrative enquiry…Longitudinal case studies 
therefore could be valuable if theory development is in part 
making sense of firms’ actions.” (7) 
We believe that selecting an information-intensive 
organization as a case study supports this positioning of an 
integrative enquiry that provides a small step towards theory 
development.  
B. Selection of Yell as Subject Organisation 
The following description provides a historical view of 
Yell’s journey as an organization.  
‘Yell began life in 1966 as a 'Yellow Pages' section in the 
Brighton telephone directory. Yellow Pages, as part of BT, 
grew to become the UK's leading provider of classified 
directory advertising and associated services. In April 2000 
the Yellow Pages division of BT became Yell and in June 
2001 Yell was purchased from BT by a consortium of 
private equity investors. In July 2003 Yell was listed on the 
London Stock Exchange and became Yell Group plc. 
Although we are best known for our printed Yellow Pages 
directories, we offer an integrated portfolio of printed, online 
and phone-based products and services. The printed Yellow 
Pages directories, our Yell.com website and our operator-
assisted telephone information service 118 24 7, ensure 
people have access to the information they need whenever 
and wherever they want it, and provide advertisers with 
access to high quality sales leads. To find out more about our 
products and services, please see the Yell UK product pages. 
Whilst our company has been built on the strength of our 
brands, people are the heart of our business and as at March 
2009 we employed more than 5,300 people in the UK. From 
our head office in Reading, Sales head office in Slough and 
seven main offices in key locations, highly-trained, 
professional teams work to provide a world-class service to 
our advertisers and users throughout the country.’ (8) 
Given this strong business focus on providing a world-
class service, we consider that Yell is an ideal case for a 
service management study. Further, Yell’s Information 
Services (IS) group can be regarded as an exemplar by virtue 
of winning the Computing 2004 IT Department of the Year 
award (9) 
C. Data Sources 
Since this is a longitudinal case, we deem that the 
perspective of the second author is an important factor. The 
second author was a senior manager in the IT group 
throughout the period of the case study. This assists in 
generating deep insights through an action research 
perspective which collects data on business problems in an 
organization setting and helps to address the shortage of 
practitioner-focused research (10).  
The research has two main checkpoint periods. The 
historical information presented in this case relates to Yell’s 
winning submission for Computing’s IT Department of the 
Year award. Objective documented evidence was presented 
for this award that was independently assessed by 
experienced IT practitioner judges.  
During late 2009 and early 2010, the second author 
commissioned a Service Management review which was 
undertaken by the first author. 
The terms of reference covered the following scope (11). 
‘Yell operates in a competitive marketplace which with 
changing technologies is more uncertain than in previous 
years. In response, Yell is undertaking a major business 
transformation which has major implications for IS, both in 
terms of enabling key programmes and its internal operating 
model. This will require IS to be more agile in order to 
deliver tangible business benefits in a faster and more 
flexible manner. The review has the goal of evaluating the 
requirements of the path towards agility and the capability to 
meet these requirements.  The capability review will cover 
the hard and soft elements.’  
The second phase field research involved six interviews: 
three with senior IT service managers and three with 
business stakeholders of the IS groups. Alongside this there 
were three focus groups held with different teams in the IT 
service management groups. Additionally access was 
provided to key documents such as service level agreements 
and service performance reports. 
Three main questions were addressed by the research. 
1. 
What does agility mean for service delivery? 
2. 
What are the issues related to service agility?  
3. 
How can constraints be removed and agility 
improved? 
 
III. 
YELL’S SERVICE MANAGEMENT JOURNEY 
A. Periods of Change 
Yell’s market, business and IT challenges evolved during 
the first decade of the new millennium. In hindsight, we can 
identify two major periods that drive the key service 
management approaches and results 
B. Best-in-class processes: 2002-2007 
During this first period, Yell was operating in a buoyant 
marketplace. Hence it had the financial standing to make 
major investments in Yell’s infrastructure and processes. 
Yell’s submission for the Computing award confirmed this. 
‘IS provides the operations and CTI (computer-telephony 
integration) infrastructure for these on-line services, with 
best-in-class availability. Results did not happen overnight. 
Industry standard (ITIL) processes have evolved since 1998 
and IS is now rated best in class in service management. 
Processes underpin measurable and improved service level 
agreements. Yell’s commitment is emphasized by all senior 
IS managers gaining at least the Foundation Certificate.’  
14
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
77
49
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Base-O ne Score (% )
Yell
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Avg
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Organisations
Comparison with other Organisations
 
 
The results of this approach are exemplified by Figure 1 
which shows the top 20 ITIL performers based on audits 
conducted by an independent organization. 
 
Figure 1: Comparison of ITIL process capability 
 
The chart highlights that the Yell IS ITIL process rating 
of 77% was 13% higher than the next highest performer.  
Also 
included 
in 
the 
submission 
were 
service 
performance reports showing that operational availability 
was consistently close to 100%. While service management 
was not the only factor in Yell winning the prestigious IT 
Department award, it was certainly a major contributor. 
During the latter part of this period. the IS organization 
looked to improve service without increasing costs, moving 
towards an IS-Lite model. This was first proposed in a 
Gartner research report and promised greater IS agility and 
cost efficiency. Linked to this goal, Yell was able to leverage 
its mature processes when selecting outsourced partners. As 
a result, Yell significantly reduced their fixed costs moving 
to a larger proportion of variable costs. In summary, IS was 
able to achieve a consistently high performance due to the 
maturity of its processes in line with ITIL. This process 
competence was important in the next phase with greater 
demands for agility and cost reduction. 
  
C. Responding to Market Changes:  2008-2010 
During this second period, it became increasingly clear 
that Yell’s service management needed to respond to a 
changing marketplace. There was an evolution from a 
position where the printed book was central to the product 
proposition to one where the internet became a growing 
service offering.  
A key implication of this change was more challenging 
service pressures geared to meeting on-line service levels for 
customers. Critically, it involved moving from a stable and 
profitable print model to a very competitive new on-line 
model. This dual pressure for a more responsive service with 
lower cost investment necessitated a different approach, 
hence the focus of the review on service agility. The findings 
from this review follow. 
1) What does agility mean for service delivery? 
One definition of IT agility is the ability of a firm to 
adapt its IT capabilities to market changes (12). The 
interviews and workshops with IT service managers in Yell 
provided a variety of definitions for agility. At the basic 
level, it was seen as speed or reaction and quick delivery 
from Yell IS services to problems and new demands from 
internal and external customers.  
 
2) What were the issues with service agility?  
One key issue identified by the business stakeholders was 
how to measure service performance. Traditionally, this is 
supported through creating and monitoring service level 
agreements. These may be formal contracts in the case of 
external suppliers although this is not a substitute for 
effective relationships (13). 
The Service Level Agreements (SLAs) in Yell typically 
measured overall availability of the services over a period of 
time, such as a month. A few minutes downtime at the end of 
the month would mean that the service level was met, but 
when this happened at a critical financial month-end process, 
the impact was highly significant.  
The customer services manager made another point about 
measuring performance. She highlighted that having the 
system available for use was not enough if the response time 
was too slow or if the quality of data in the system was poor. 
This latter issue is potentially a major headache for IT 
service departments since data ownership can be unclear, and 
this was partly the case in Yell. It was also felt that tangible 
measures of performance did not address the perceptions of 
users about the responsiveness of the IT service personnel.  
  
3) How can agility be  improved? 
Through the interviews and the focus groups, three 
opportunity areas were identified: people, process and 
technology.  The people perspective included the use of 
flexible resources (servers, people, network etc) and 
processes to allow headroom to enable reaction to change. 
Flexibility is enhanced by having multi-skilled individuals, 
not operating in silos. Skills are not enough; people need to 
demonstrate the right sort of behaviors including a ‘can-do 
attitude.  
From a process perspective, this needs to apply across all 
the areas: the capturing and prioritization of demand, the 
scheduling and resourcing of work, and the evaluation of 
performance. Just as systems development has extended 
structured processes into agile processes, the same applies to 
service management. It is the appropriate mix of structured 
and agile that ensures effective service delivery. For 
example, pre-planned maintenance windows, where work 
can be slotted in, help to enable timely systems 
enhancements.  
It is also important to make best use of the technology to 
enhance agility. This might mean having hardware that 
provides room to increase transaction. However in today’s 
world the processing power is more likely to be outsourced 
and this was true in Yell with an exploration of the benefits 
of cloud computing.  
15
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Standardization is sometimes seen as the antithesis of 
agility since it limits the variety of available hardware and 
applications. However Yell’s service management head 
argued that having a standard platform made the addition of 
new applications and services much easier. A similar 
argument was put forward for simplifying technologies 
whenever possible. 
D. Rethinking Service Level Agreements (SLA) 
It was recognized by the Yell service management team 
that the existing SLA format was not designed to meet the 
customer perception of usability nor was it appropriate to 
encourage service agility. The document was several pages 
long partly because it repeated many of the core 
infrastructure service levels rather than focusing on the 
specific service. Furthermore it only had availability 
measures and did not highlight what needed to be done to 
improve the service. 
A new format was created as summarized in Table 2 
which contains sample data for one of the services. This 
distinguished clearly between a comprehensive but concise 
description of the service and an analysis of performance 
from a customer perspective for review with the business 
owner. 
 
Table 2: Revised service level agreement 
 
AREA 
GOAL/COMMENTS 
Description 
Provision of application to sell adverts 
Business Owner 
Telesales Manager  
IS Accountability 
Service Manager for Sales function 
Responsible Support 
Roles  
Servers & Network    Telephony.  BW.  
SAP & ORACLE.  System Delivery.  
Desktop Support. Application Support 
Key Customers 
Telesales 
Frequency/Trigger 
For Service 
Daily - BW data load to update the data 
store.  
Scope 
Aid Telesales to sell and renew ads with 
high customer responsiveness 
Impact Of Failure 
Unable to provide timely information to 
Telesales, resulting in loss of revenue 
Dependencies 
Shared core infrastructure 
Status & Plan 
Changing telesales requirements need to 
be captured 
Service Review 
Actions 
Worklist response times poor.  
Current Issues 
User interface needs to provide targeted 
information in a faster manner 
Metrics 
  
Availability 
Good availability 
Performance 
Acceptable response times 
Application Quality 
No major bugs 
Information Quality 
Issues with customer master data 
Responsiveness 
Telesales looking for quicker response to 
current problems 
This new format was welcomed both by the IT service 
managers and the key business stakeholders. It provided an 
insight into the core goals and issues, supporting a more 
agile approach to service changes. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In this section we reflect on the differences in the two 
periods and the insights to be gained from Yell’s approach to 
driving service agility. 
A. A ContextualApproach 
This paper presents a rich longitudinal case which, in the 
authors’ view, generates key insights into the importance of a 
contextual approach to service management. There is a 
tendency with current service management practices to 
assume that a greater focus on predictable processes is the 
direction that IT departments should aim target.  This is 
exemplified by the Capability Maturity Model which has 
five levels related to the process maturity of the IT 
organization (14). Further the use of generic service level 
measurements for availability often implies that a very high 
service is the ultimate target of an organization. 
 This traditional view was supported in our evaluation of 
the first period under review. Yell scored exceptionally high 
on both process and availability dimensions. It evidenced 
best-in-class ITIL processes and consistently high service 
levels in winning the IT Department of the Year Award. In 
this type of environment, the need is for IT professionals 
whose core competence is to understand and follow 
processes. Yell’s service team demonstrated this capability. 
However, the challenging market environment in the 
second period necessitated a different approach. The need for 
the business customers of IS was to respond quickly by 
delivering new products and services. In this context, best-in-
class but rather rigid processes and very high but expensive 
service levels were not the most appropriate way of meeting 
the business needs and building trust with internal and 
external customers. Recognizing this shift, Yell IS’s focus 
moved to more flexible and cost-effective service 
management. 
This 
had 
significant 
implications 
for 
measurements, processes and people. In effect, Yell targeted 
both time and range ability (12) with the aim to respond 
quicker but also provide a wider range targeted at the 
specific service needs.  
Furthermore, 
through 
the 
revised 
service 
level 
agreements, IS nominated service managers who were 
accountable both for the service and for client relationship 
management with the business owner. The revised SLA and 
the interviews with business stakeholders demonstrated that 
this approach was paying dividends. Our conclusion is that 
the dual perspective on improved service process and 
enhancing service relationships aligns with the service 
management theory on building trust, although we have 
applied it in a different context. The comparison of the two 
periods highlights the need for a contingent approach to 
service management, one that recognizes the different 
business environment. 
16
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

B. Practitioner Insights 
We propose three main practitioner insights from the 
research.  The measurement of a service is a point of much 
debate. From a customer perspective, service is seen to 
comprise the following measures: Availability, Performance, 
Application 
Quality, 
Information 
Quality 
and 
Responsiveness to Customers. We conclude that all of these 
areas need to be right in order to achieve customer 
satisfaction. Furthermore, the service has to be targeted to 
the business benefits of the organization by demonstrating 
how these are being realized or impacted by failure. 
The second insight is that historically, IS has typically 
looked inwards by addressing service problems that are 
linked to a technology component without considering the 
impact on related services and hence all of the customers of 
that service. In practice, accountability for delivery of 
customer facing and component services is shared between 
several IS departments. No single IS department has the end-
to-end responsibility or the line of sight for these services. 
Hence it is important to define what components constitute a 
services and who is accountable for each of the services.  
Furthermore, this service needs to be defined and focused on 
the end customer experience. 
Our third insight was that customer facing services could 
be categorized as Products, Public Facing Services, Business 
Processes and User Productivity. Each of these service 
groups has different characteristics hence they required 
tailored approaches to enhance services. Yell product 
services are for consumers such as Yell.com. Public-facing 
services are for customers and partners such as E-Channel. 
Business process services are for internal customer functions 
and rely on IT applications such as SAP R/3 and CRM. User 
productivity services are aimed at individuals and include 
email and personal devices. We found that it is generally 
easier to take an end-to-end view for user productivity 
services than it is for services that rely on a complex set of 
integrated applications. Therefore a tailored and contingent 
approach is needed. 
 
C. Limitations and Future Research 
Our goal was that the analysis should provide insights 
into service management approaches within a context of 
changing market pressures. The senior management role of 
the second author helps in gaining insights but increases the 
risk of a biased viewpoint. We believe, by using data from an 
award submission backed by documentary evidence, that this 
offsets the concern about potential bias in the first period 
covered by the research. In the second period, the 
combination of interviews and focus groups led to 
challenging debates and insights which provided diverse 
inputs to contrast with the views of the second author.  
Working with a single organization provides a depth but 
not a breadth of study. The authors therefore recommend 
further longitudinal research in other organizations to expand 
the data and provide a contrast to the experiences of Yell. In 
particular, we would welcome research into public sector and 
not-for-profit organizations to assess if similar patterns of 
market stimulus and service management response exist in 
both types of organizations. This should be extended to 
international settings. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] I.R. Bardhan, H Demirkan, P.K. Kannan, R.J. Kauffman and R. 
Sougstad, 
An 
Interdisciplinary 
Perspective 
on 
IT 
Services 
Management 
and 
Service 
Science 
Journal 
of 
Management 
Information Systems, Spring2010, vol. 26 issue 4, pp. 13-64  
[2] M.M. Montoya, A. P. Massey and V. Khatri,  Connecting IT Services 
Operations to Services Marketing Practices, Journal of Management 
Information Systems, Spring2010, Vol. 26 Issue 4, pp. 65-85  
[3] T. Wui-Ge; A. Cater –Stel and M. Toleman, Implementing IT Service 
Management: A Case Study Focusing On Critical Success Factors,  
Journal of Computer Information Systems, Winter2010, Vol. 50 Issue 
2, pp.1-12 
[4] Di Romualdo, A. and Gurbaxani, V. (1998), "Strategic intent for IT 
outsourcing", Sloan Management Review, Vol. 39 pp.67-80 
[5] Benn, I. and Pearcy J (2002). Strategic Outsourcing: Exploiting the 
Skills of Third Parties. London, MCA/Hodder & Stoughton: 
[6] Ren, M. and Lyytinen, K (2008) Building Enterprise Architecture 
Agility and Sustenance with SOA. By:. Communications of AIS, Vol. 
2008 Issue 22, p75-86 
[7] Earl M J and Feeny D F (1996), ‘Information Systems in global 
business: Evidence from European multinationals’, Information 
Management: The Organisational Dimension (editor M J Earl), 
Oxford University Press. 
[8] Yell website,  http://www.yellgroup.com/english/aboutyell, October 
2010 
[9] Yell website, http://www.yellgroup.com/english/media-pressreleases-
2004-yellinformationtechnologyteamwinstop, October 2004 
[10] DeLuca, D; Gallivan, M.J. and Kock, N. (2008) Furthering 
Information Systems Action Research: A Post-Positivist Synthesis of 
Four Dialectics, Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 
Vol. 9 Issue 2, pp 48-71 
[11] Yell internal document, Terms of Reference for Service Management 
Review 
[12] Sengupta, K  and Masini, A. (2008), IT agility: striking the right 
balance,  Business Strategy Review, Summer2008, Vol. 19 Issue 2, 
p42-48 
[13] Goo, J; Kishore, R; Rao, H. R.; Nam, K. (2009), The Role Of Service 
Level Agreements In Relational Management Of Information 
Technology Outsourcing: An Empirical Study MIS Quarterly, 
Mar2009, Vol. 33 Issue 1, p119-145, 
[14] Carnegie Mellon, Software Engineering Institute. Capability Maturity 
Model® for Software (SW-CMM®). Retrieved on August 18, 2010 
from: http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmm/ 
  
 
17
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

