Public Acceptance of Robots: Drivers and Barriers 
 
Valentina Polyakova  
Institute for Statistical Studies and Economics of Knowledge 
National Research University Higher School of Economics 
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: vpoliakova@hse.ru 
 
 
Abstract — Robots as companions, domestic assistants and 
nurses have great potential for the care of people who need 
assistance. At the same time in popular culture, technological 
progress is often represented as a threat to human 
distinctiveness. Studies demonstrate limited confidence of 
individuals in robotics and artificial intelligence. The author 
will consider how perceived risks and benefits, attitudes 
toward science and technology, social bonds and other 
individual socio-demographic characteristics influence on the 
public acceptance of robots.  
Keywords - public acceptance of technologies; robots; social 
attitudes; social bonds; trust; digitalization.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Technology is one of the main factors of socio-economic 
development [7] that produces various effects: robotization 
and 
digitalization 
of 
production 
and 
organizational 
processes, increase diversity of digital goods and services, 
growth of demand for digital skills [12]. The spread of 
robotics in industry, as well as in everyday life is bringing us 
closer to the future described in science fiction. People are 
increasingly relying on artificial intelligence to process large 
amounts of data, make decisions about the solvency of 
borrowers, select staff and choose the best couple on dating 
sites.  
Robots as companions, domestic assistants and nurses 
have great prospects for the care of people who need 
assistance (e.g., the elderly or sick people). At the same time 
studies demonstrate limited confidence in robotics and 
artificial 
intelligence 
[5][14]. 
In 
popular 
culture, 
technological progress is often represented as a threat to 
human distinctiveness [2][3]. The culturally ingrained fear of 
autonomous technologies has been called the "Frankenstein 
syndrome" [8]. A similar aspect is evident in the Uncanny 
valley effect of perception of technological objects, which 
was firstly described by Japanese robotics scientist and 
engineer Masahiro Mori [10][11]. The phenomenon implies 
that humans tend to dislike and detest robots and other 
objects that look or act roughly like humans (but not exactly 
like the real ones).  
It is worth noting that this effect is not universal and has 
gender and age variations. Moreover some studies support its 
existence [9], while others do not [16]. Perhaps if the place 
of technology in our lives and attitudes to it changed, this 
effect would also disappear.  
Thus, there is a certain paradox in public opinion. On one 
hand, the development of robotics and artificial intelligence 
is on the way to improving the capacity for self-learning and 
independent decision-making. On the other hand, people fear 
the autonomous technologies and are not ready to rely on 
them.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes research approach and the applied 
methods, as well as presents key results of the analysis. 
Section 3 summarizes the main outputs of this study,  
encompass the limitations of the study and possible avenues 
for future research. 
II. 
MAIN IDEA 
The purpose of this research is to analyze social attitudes 
toward the use of artificial intelligence and robots for various 
tasks and the factors that have an influence on the public 
acceptance of autonomous technologies. The model of this 
study is based on the conception of public acceptance of 
technologies that is defined as the readiness to use a 
technology to solve tasks assigned to it [1]. Factors 
influencing technology acceptance are defined at micro- and 
macro-level. In this research, we analyze the effects of 
micro-level factors, which includes the indicators of the 
perception of robotics and technologies in general and social 
characteristics of the user. Studies of technology perception 
highlight such determinants as perceived risks and benefits, 
level of knowledge, attitudes toward science and technology, 
trust, values, and other individual socio-demographic 
differences [6]. Attention to the risks posed by the diffusion 
of new technologies (in reality or in imagination) contributes 
to the rejection of innovation, while understanding the 
benefits/benefits of use reduces the level of anxiety about it 
[4][13]. 
Data was collected in December 2018 – January 2019 
during the 27th wave of the Russia longitudinal monitoring 
survey, which is a series of national representative surveys 
based on probabilistic stratified multistage territorial sample. 
The sample size is 7584 respondents aged 18-65. Method – 
face-to-face interviews. 
The public acceptance of robots was assessed through 
respondents’ estimations of 10 situations representing a robot 
in different roles. Situations were differentiated by the type 
of tasks (functional and social) and by the strength of 
influence 
on 
the 
user 
(assistance 
or 
dependence). 
Respondents were asked to rate the degree of perceived 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

comfort/discomfort in each of these situations on a four-point 
scale. The author used a binary logistic regression method to 
identify factors that influence robot acceptance in different 
situations. 
The results demonstrate that there is a same dualism in 
public opinion in Russia, as in other countries. Positive 
attitudes toward robots as are a good thing for society are 
paired with an expectation of threat from it (54% vs. 63%) 
and a corresponding low level of acceptance of robots as 
autonomous actor. The use of robots in functional-assisting 
role as domestic helpers or delivery drones is rather 
acceptable (66% and 62% of respondents feel comfortable 
about these situations). At the same time, most respondents 
are unready for a high degree of robot autonomy and agency, 
and are not disposed to delegate responsibility for their lives 
or the lives of family members (driverless car, the use of 
robots in elderly parents care and in surgery seem 
comfortable for 21%, 19% and 14% of respondents). 
According to the results of the regression, analysis 
general drivers of public acceptance of robots are confidence 
in one's own power and ability to influence the state of 
affairs, digital skills (as an indicator of digital adoption), 
engagement with science, positive attitudes to robots and 
belief in the robotization of human labor. General barriers to 
the public acceptance are science awareness and expectation 
of a threat from robots (lack of trust). 
In addition, some factors enhance or reduce attitudes to 
robots only in particular situations. For example, gender have 
an effect (negative) only on acceptance of robots for 
assistance at home and delivery. Significant generational 
differences in attitudes are observed only in relation to 
driverless car.  
Situation-specific predictors relate more to different 
aspects of well-being and personal characteristics. Health 
problems, selective trust in people and moderate loneliness 
contribute to a positive attitude toward the use of robots for 
assistance at home and delivery, while predisposition to trust 
most people and to value the spiritual aspects of life, 
exclusion from innovation consumption, living in low 
urbanized areas, an acknowledgement of the threat of human 
rights violations. Nevertheless, risks are not always 
negatively associated with the acceptance of robots. The 
effect depends on the type of risk and its specification. For 
example, understanding the risks of technology use by 
criminals has a positive effect on the attitude to robotic home 
assistants. 
A significant negative effect of sensitivity to change due 
to technological advances on the acceptance of robots has 
been detected only in relation to their use for elderly care and 
surgery. Additional barriers to the adoption of robots for 
elderly care are traditional family ties and religion. 
If the use of robots to care for the elderly is perceived in 
the context of social exclusion, robotic surgeon is too radical 
innovation in the eyes of the average person. Experience of 
innovation generation contributes to the acceptance of 
roboticization of surgery. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
Nowadays, the society accepts only the idea of 
automating (human-controlled) certain processes with digital 
technology, but is not ready for fully autonomous digital 
technology. In this context, social attitudes towards 
autonomous technologies can be seen as an indicator that 
reveals the depth of changes in public consciousness in the 
digitalization of the society. 
Technocentrism as characteristic of modern civilization 
is an important prerequisite in the formation of society's 
readiness for autonomous technologies.  At the same time, 
the determining role is played not so much by the "pro-
science" values of the population, as by the presence of an 
active interest in scientific and technological progress and 
involvement in the system of communications in this sphere.  
However, awareness of science news has the opposite 
effect - the development of critical reflection on the 
consequences of the introduction of new technologies in the 
conditions of growing consciousness and resistance to 
progress. 
Another important barrier to social integration of robots 
is the social bonds between people, trust, patterns and norms 
of relationships. Adherence to traditional family values of 
cohesion 
and 
mutual 
assistance, and 
having 
close 
relationships with other people are at odds with the idea of 
using robots to care for the elderly, as it is perceived as 
exclusion. 
The resolution of the paradox lies in the sociocultural 
field. The results of the study indicate that the transformation 
of the digital environment from alien to natural may be one 
of the signaling factors that contribute to a change in the 
perception of autonomous digital technologies. According to 
the data, people today still predominantly consider the digital 
environment as an artificial phenomenon, depriving the life 
of the sense of life or acting as a poor substitute. Such a 
worldview prevents the acceptance of the changing social 
role of robotics. Therefore, future studies need to estimate 
the influence of cultural values on acceptance of robots in 
different situation. In this research, we did not have direct 
questions on human values and used only proxy indicators of 
traditional family values and trust. 
More research is also needed to uncover the public 
perception of different types of social robots. In this survey, 
we used personalized situation (elderly parents care). 
Probably, impersonal examples of robots (e.g. elderly care in 
general or elderly care in nursing homes or in health care 
facilities) will provide other results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The article was prepared in the framework of a research 
grant funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher 
Education of the Russian Federation (grant ID: 075-15-2020-
928). 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

REFERENCES 
[1] A. Dillon, User Acceptance of Information Technology. In W. 
Karwowski (Ed.) Encyclopedia of Human Factors and 
Ergonomics. London: Taylor and Francis, 2001. 
[2] D. Dinello, Technophobia: science fiction visions of 
posthuman technology. University of Texas Press, 2005. 
[3] F. Ferrari, M. P. Paladino, and J. Jetten, “Blurring human–
machine distinctions: Anthropomorphic appearance in social 
robots as a threat to human distinctiveness,” International 
Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 8, №2, pp. 287-302, 2016. 
[4] G. Gaskell et al., “GM Foods and the Misperception of Risk 
Perception,” Risk Analysis, vol. 24, №1. 2004, pp. 185-194. 
[5] T. Gnambs and M. Appel, “Are robots becoming unpopular? 
Changes in attitudes towards autonomous robotic systems in 
Europe,” Computers in Human Behavior, № 93, pp. 53-61, 
2019. 
[6] N. Gupta, A. R. H. Fischer, and L. J. Frewer, “Socio-
psychological 
determinants 
of 
public 
acceptance 
of 
technologies: a review,” Public Understanding of Science, 
vol. 21, №. 7, pp. 782-795, 2012. 
[7] C. I. Jones and P. M. Romer, “The new Kaldor facts: ideas, 
institutions, population, and human capital,” American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 2, №. 1, pp. 224-
245, 2010. 
[8] F. Kaplan, “Who is afraid of the humanoid? Investigating 
cultural differences in the acceptance of robots,” International 
journal of humanoid robotics, vol. 1, № 03, pp. 465-480, 
2004. 
[9] W. J. Mitchell, Sr K. A. Szerszen, A. S. Lu, P. W. 
Schermerhorn, M. Scheutz and K. F. MacDorman, “A 
mismatch in the human realism of face and voice produces an 
uncanny valley,” i-Perception, vol. 2, №1, pp. 10-12, 2011. 
[10] M. Mori, “Bukimi no tani [the uncanny valley],” Energy, vol. 
7, pp. 33-35, 1970. 
[11] M. Mori, K. F. MacDorman, N. Kageki, “The uncanny valley [from 
the field],” Proc. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 19, 
№2, 2012, pp. 98-100, DOI: 10.1109/MRA.2012.2192811 
[12] OECD. Getting Skills Right: Skills for Jobs Indicators. Paris: 
OECD Publishing, 2017. 
[13] L. Sjoberg, “Policy Implications of Risk Perception Research: 
A Case of the Emperor's New Clothes,” Risk Management, 
vol. 4, № 2, pp. 11-20, 2002.  
[14] Special Eurobarometer 460. Attitudes towards the impact of 
digitization and automation on daily life. Office for Official 
Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 
2017. 
[15] M. Destephe, M. Brandao, T. Kishi, M. Zecca, K.Hashimoto, 
and A. Takanishi. “Walking in the uncanny valley: 
importance of the attractiveness on the acceptance of a robot 
as a working partner,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 6, pp. 1-
11, 2015. 
[16] J. C. Thompson, J. G. Trafton, P. McKnight, “The perception 
of humanness from the movements of synthetic agents,” 
Perception, 
vol. 
40, 
№6, 
pp. 
695-704, 
2011.
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

