Detection of Persuasion Campaigns on Twitter™ by SAX-VSM Technology 
Sergey Malinchik 
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Laboratories 
Cherry Hill, NJ 08002, USA 
sergey.b.malinchik@lmco.com 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present a novel approach for 
detection of persuasion campaigns in online social networks. 
We demonstrate that temporal evolution of different 
information cascades in social media display unique signatures 
of diffusion patterns which are indicators of different kinds of 
information spreads in underlying networks. We describe a 
progress of information diffusion through networks by 
multidimensional time series, representing temporal behavior 
of multiple cascade features and apply our SAX-VSM 
technique for classification of the time series. This approach 
allows us to distinguish two types of topics on Twitter™, 
promoted or advertisement campaigns and non-promoted or 
naturally trending topics. We show that the classification can 
be done without content analysis of topics, using only network 
topological features, statistics of users’ temporal activity within 
networks, and some metadata. Optimal selection of right 
information cascade features allows to achieve classification 
accuracy ~ 97%.    
Keywords – Twitter™; advertisement; persuasion detection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, more and more individuals are involved in 
social media activities, and the opinions of millions of people 
are significantly formed under the influence of information 
spread through social networks [1], [2], [3]. It is not 
surprising that the number of attempts trying to organize 
influencing campaigns is growing [4], [5], [6], [7]. 
Persuasion campaigns are targeting wide audience and 
deliver topics with special vision aimed at shifting beliefs 
and opinions of participants.    
Meme tracking, text mining and sentiment analysis tools 
become more powerful, but these tools perform only the 
easiest portions of the analysis process and are unable to 
distinguish between natural and artificially generated 
conversations, or between process of normal opinion 
exchange and invisible orchestrated work of influence. These 
tools will likely miss emerging persuasion campaigns.   
New efficient and effective techniques that facilitate to 
process in real time, large data streams and detect organized 
influencing in social media are in high demand.  
We present a new way of detecting persuasion campaigns 
by training a system to learn signatures of temporal evolution 
patterns of information cascades and perform detection at 
high accuracy without sophisticated content analysis.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section II provides 
background for our main hypothesis and SAX-VSM 
technique; Section III gives a short description of data 
acquisition and presents classification experiments; Section 
IV discusses relevant work, and, in Section V, we conclude 
and discuss future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Concept and Approach 
Our main hypothesis is that the detection of orchestrated 
persuasion and deception campaigns in social media can be 
done by monitoring temporal behavior of information 
cascades and analyzing patterns of their time-evolution (see 
Figure 1).   
 
 
Figure 1.  Illustartion of the “cascade signature” concept. 
Our approach can be formulated as follows: 
i. 
At each time step of the information cascade 
evolution, by measuring the multiple features of the 
underlying communication network, we represent 
the cascade at a given moment in time as a feature 
vector (point) in the multi-dimensional feature space 
(see Figures 1a and 1b).  
ii. 
By tracking the cascade feature vector, we monitor 
the evolution of cascade as a multi-dimensional time 
series or cascade trajectory. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

iii. 
We assume that cascade trajectories (multi-
dimensional time series) can represent the different 
classes 
of 
conversation 
patterns 
or 
cascade 
signatures (see Figure 1c) that occur in online social 
media. 
 
B. SAX-VSM Classification Algorithm  
Recently, we proposed a novel method for temporal data 
analysis and classification, called SAX-VSM [8], which is 
based on two existing techniques namely, SAX (Symbolic 
Aggregate approXimation) [9] and VSM (Vector Space 
Model) [11]. The SAX-VSM algorithm demonstrates a high 
accuracy performance, learns efficiently from a small 
training set, and has a low computational complexity. 
The first component of SAX-VSM is Symbolic 
Aggregate Approximation (SAX). The basic idea of SAX 
[9], [10], is to convert data into a discrete format, with a 
small alphabet size. To convert a time series into symbols, it 
is first z-normalized, and two steps of discretization are 
performed. First, a time series is transformed using 
Piecewise 
Aggregate 
Approximation 
(PAA). 
PAA 
approximates a time series by dividing it into equal-length 
segments and recording the mean value of the data points 
that fall within the segment. Next, to convert the PAA values 
to symbols, a user determines the breakpoints that divide the 
distribution space into Nalphabet equiprobable regions, where 
the alphabet size, Nalphabet, is specified by the user. The PAA 
coefficients can then be easily mapped to the symbols 
corresponding to the regions in which they reside. Fig. 2 
shows an example of a time series being converted to string 
baabccbc. It was shown that the general shape of the time 
series is still preserved, in spite of the enormous 
dimensionality reduction. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Visualization of the SAX dimensionality reduction technique 
(adopted from [9] ). A time series (red line) is discretized thirst by a PAA 
procedure (NPAA = 8) and then using predetermined breakpoints is mapped 
into the word “baabccbc” using an alphabet size of 3 (Nalphabet = 3). 
The second component of SAX-VSM technique is a 
well-known in Information Retrieval a Vector Space Model, 
VSM [11]. In order to build SAX words “vocabularies” of a 
long time series, we use a sliding window technique to 
convert a time series into the set of SAX words. By sliding a 
window across time series, extracting subsequences, 
converting them to SAX words, and placing these words into 
an unordered collection, we obtain the “Bag of Words” 
representation of the original time series (see Figure 3).  
Each row of the constructed matrix (Bag of Words) 
represents a SAX word and corresponding frequency of that 
word generated by the sliding window procedure.  
Following the common Information Retrieval workflow, 
we employ the TF*IDF weighting scheme for each element 
of this matrix in order to transform a frequency value into the 
weight coefficient. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Sliding window allows to extract time subsequences and SAX 
converts them into words. By placing all words into an unordered 
collection, the original time series is represented by single bag of words. 
The bag of words can be replaced by a single weight vector representing 
TF*IDF statistics. 
Similar to other classification techniques, SAX-VSM 
consists of two parts - the training phase and the 
classification procedure. An overview of the SAX-VSM 
algorithm (see [8] for details) is shown in Figure 4. In the 
training phase, all labeled time series from N training classes 
are transformed into symbolic representation, and the 
algorithm generates N TF*IDF weight vectors representing 
N training classes (see Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4.  An overview of SAX-VSM algorithm: (i) all labeled time series 
from each class are converted first into a single bag of words using SAX 
and by TF*IDF statistics into a weight vector representing individual 
training class; (ii) for classification, an unlabeled time series is converted 
into a term frequency vector and assigned to the class  whose TF*IDF 
weight vector yields a maximal cosine similarity value. 
In the classification phase, an unlabeled time series is 
converted into a term frequency vector and assigned to the 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

class whose TF*IDF weight vector has a maximal cosine 
similarity. 
Detailed analysis of SAX-VSM performance and 
comparison 
with 
other 
temporal 
data 
classification 
techniques is described in detail in our original paper [8]. 
The unique characteristics of SAX-VSM, such as high 
classification accuracy, learning efficiency and a low 
computational complexity suggested using SAX-VSM for 
the goal of current research.  
C. Application of SAX-VSM for Multidimensional Time 
Series 
Our SAX-VSM algorithm [8] can be extended easily to 
the 
multi-dimensional 
case. 
Each 
dimension 
of 
multidimensional time series (trajectory) is processed 
independently in terms of calculating corresponding Bags-
of-Words and TF*IDF weight vectors for each dimension. 
To compare two trajectories, A and B, cosine similarities 
along each dimension is calculated in the same way as it was 
done in one-dimensional case and then total similarity of the 
trajectories is estimated by combining similarities along all 
dimension : 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Data Acquisition and Feature Extraction     
A Twitter™ data collection and feature extraction 
procedure was performed by an Indiana University team and 
described in detail somewhere [12]. The process can be 
summarized as follows. Two different classes of trending 
topics on Twitter™ were identified for study, promoted 
topics or advertisement campaigns and naturally trending 
topics (definitions of trending [13] and promoted [14] topics 
can be found on Twitter™ site). Advertising campaigns on 
Twitter™ were chosen because they represent good example 
of persuasion in social media, appear on Twitter™ 
systematically and represent an ideal testing scenario since 
it’s possible to collect and label data automatically. 
Twitter™ data were obtained thru the so-called gardenhose, 
getting approximately 10% randomly chosen subset from the 
total Twitter™ data stream.  All trending hashtags appearing 
in the United States from January to April 2013 were 
recorded at regular 20 minutes interval and were 
automatically labeled by the system. The total number of 
promoted hashtags in the dataset collected by the system is 
76 (with ~ 300 thousands tweets) while the number of 
naturally trending topics is 853 (~ 6 million tweets). 
The time window of data collection was restricted from 7 
days prior to the trending time and 1 day after. This 
configuration allows to generate a time-series consisting of 
up to 432 data points before the trending time point, and 72 
points after that.   
For each time point, three classes of different features 
were accumulated. They are network-based category of 
features, user-based features, and event-time-intervals 
features. The network-based category of features includes 
number of nodes/edges, density of network, in/out degree 
and etc., with statistical distributions of these features. 
Examples of user-based features are user followers, friends, 
and favorites. Examples of event-time-intervals features are 
time interval between two consecutive tweets, retweets, and 
mentions. Aggregating all features from all three categories 
produces an overall number of 224 features. Detailed 
description of all these features generated by the system of 
Indiana University can be found in [12].  
B. Classification Experiments 
In our classification tests, we used a well-known Leave-
One-Out Cross-Validation (LOOCV) test in which the accu-
racy measures are obtained as follows. From the total set of 
samples (76 + 853 = 929), we take one for the test set, and 
use the remaining data for training. Applying multi-
dimensional version of SAX-VSM classifier, we compute 
the accuracy for the test sample. We repeat the same 
procedure for all 929 samples and compute the mean 
accuracy.  
There are three main challenges we have to address here: 
the first is the choice of data time window for analysis from 
available 8 days of data recording, the second is the choice of 
appropriate combination of retrieved features from total 
amount of 224, and the third is the choice of right parameters 
for SAX-VSM algorithm.     
Our findings and conclusions described below are based 
on the empirical exploration of the problem and do not 
provide, at least for now, a comprehensive conclusion 
regarding the best strategy of parameter values choice. 
Below we describe the guidance and intuition we used in the 
parameter search.    
 The data time window can be described by two 
parameters, the offset relative to the starting point of topic 
trending point and the width of the time window. The initial 
choice was dictated by the need to get maximum signal level 
and is the following: the offset is equal to zero and the width 
of the window is equal to 70 data points that approximately 
covers one day starting from the begining of trending phase. 
The SAX-VSM algorithm has three main parameters: 
data window width, PAA size and alphabet size. The later 
two parameters define approximation accuracy of SAX and 
their values are dictated by the specific profile shape of the 
time series (or its oscillation). The sliding window size 
defines the length of time series within the SAX compression 
procedure allowing to preserve the unique temporal sequence 
of oscillations of the time series. Our approach is based on 
many heuristic findings and guided by a trial-and-error 
strategy. As it was pointed out by authors of SAX [9], [10], 
sensitivity of SAX approximation to the choice of these 
parameters, both PAA and alphabet sizes, is not high and 
typical values of both PAA and alphabet sizes are within 4-8 
range. 
SAX-VSM parameter tuning was done manually by trial-
and-error strategy. In the first step of our empirical strategy, 
we identified a few simple features demonstrating strong 
signal for most data samples, like frequency of tweets, 
n
A B
sim
A B
sim
n
i
i



1
2)
,
(
, )
(
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

density of retweet network, hashtag degree mean. Using 
LOOCV as an evaluation criteria, we started experiments 
varying randomly all these three parameters. It was not 
difficult to find out that reasonable values for those 
parameters are the following:  Wwidth=70, NPPA=4 and 
Nalphabet= 5.    
The feature selection procedure was organized in the 
following way: we pipelined a Monte Carlo random search 
of feature combinations and LOOCV test. To reduce the 
search in potentially very large combinatorial space, we 
ranked individually all 224 features by their classification 
ability and then limited the search space by using only the 60 
top features. We achieved good results in classification 
quality, keeping only 12 features and randomly testing 
possible combinations of 12 from the top 60 available 
features. The best features found this way are arranged 
according to their descending ranks and shown in Table 1. 
Together they produce classification accuracy of 97%. 
Leaving the first best six features for classification reduces 
the accuracy only by 3% (accuracy ~ 94%) while leaving 
only top three features, namely, hashtagN_degree_skiwness, 
hashtagN_CC_min and tweeting frequency, still gives 
reasonably good accuracy of ~ 92%.  
It should be mentioned that the simple selection of the 
top 12 individually evaluated features does not produce the 
above quality level of accuracy. This is because many top 
features are significantly correlated and their combination 
does not improve their individual discrimination power but 
reduces accuracy by introducing additional noise. 
 
TABLE I.  
SET OF MOST DESCRIMINATIVE TWITTER™ FEATURES* 
 
*The features are arranged according to their descending ranks. 
 
     
To evaluate the performance of binary classifying 
systems like our SAX-VSM procedure, it is a common 
practice to calculate a Receiver Operating Characteristic 
(ROC), or ROC curve. By plotting the true positive rate vs. 
the false positive rate at various threshold settings and 
measuring the area under the ROC curve (AUC), we get 
another evaluation of classifier accuracy. In Figure 5, the 
plot of the ROC is shown for the case of 12 features included 
in Table 1. 
The encouraging results presented above indicate that the 
classification task of promoted and non-promoted topics can 
be done with a high accuracy at trending phase on Twitter™. 
But it would be more challenging to be able to predict a 
situation by labeling the topic as abnormal before it becomes 
trending and attracts a large audience.   
We performed a few experiments with the goal to 
achieve a reasonably good classification using the data from 
a time window located before trending point. To explore the 
possibility of early detection of promoted topics, we shifted 
the time window systematically forward as far as possible 
from the trend starting point while trying to reduce the width 
of the window. The limited number of experiments was done 
by varying these two parameters: location of time window 
and its width. It was not surprising that classification 
 
Figure 5.  The ROC curve for Twitter™ topic classification by SAX-VSM 
and  using combination of 12 most descriminative features included in the 
Table 1. The area under the ROC curve (AUC ROC) is indicated in the 
inset. 
accuracy dropped due to diminishing the signal quality. 
Nevertheless, after multiple tests we found that the best 
results can be achieved with a time window of 35 points 
wide, located 35 points (~ half day) before trending begins 
  Feature Name 
Description 
hashtagN_degree_skewness 
Skewness of degree distribution (hashtag network) 
hashtagN_CC_min 
Min. clustering coeff. (hashtag network) 
Frequency 
Volume of tweets 
mentionN_LCC_mean_shortest_path 
Mean shortest-path (LCC) of the mention network 
retweetN_density 
Density of the retweet network 
event_interval_mean 
Mean of distribution of tweets time intervals 
hashtagN_degree_entropy 
Entropy of degree distribution (hashtag network) 
event_retweet_interval_kurtosis 
Kurtosis of distribution of retweets time intervals 
user_favourites_count_min 
Min. of distribution of favorite tweets 
event_mention_interval_entropy 
Entropy of distribution of mentions time intervals 
event_mention_interval_std 
Std. dev. of distribution of mentions time intervals 
event_interval_skewness 
Skewness of distribution of tweets time intervals 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

(Wwidth=35, Woffset=35). The classification accuracy with this 
setting is approximately 82%. 
At this stage, it is beyond of the scope of our studies to 
perform 
exhaustive 
analysis 
of 
optimal 
SAX-VSM 
configuration, as well as to consider alternative classification 
approaches. A comparison of SAX-VSM with a few 
different classifiers can be found in our expanded report 
[12]). For now, the obtained results at least indicate that early 
detection can be done with a reasonable level of accuracy.   
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
To the best of our knowledge, the work is the first 
successful attempt at using temporal characteristics of user 
networks to detect orchestrated influence in online social 
networks.      
Several research studies were focused on the dynamics of 
information flow through online social networks [15], [16], 
[17], [18]. In social networks, the relationships and 
interactions within a group of individuals plays a 
fundamental role as a medium for the spread of ideas and 
influence among its members. The close relation between 
structure of social networks and spread of information has 
been observed in various studies, including modeling 
approaches [2], [19], [20], [21]. 
Temporal dynamics of information diffusion was reliably 
predicted by simple Linear Influence Model [20]. A model 
of epidemics spread on networks [21] was applied to 
characterize the spread of topics through the blogosphere 
[18]. Building systems that use models of the Blogosphere 
allow to recognize spam blogs, find opinions on topics, 
identify communities of interest, and detect influential 
bloggers [2].  
Temporal behavior of trending topics [22], [23] was 
explored in extensive studies where the entire Twitter™ site 
with 41.7 million user profiles, 4,262 trending topics, and 
106 million tweets, was crawled [1]. The trending topics by 
definition are the topics that are immediately popular, rather 
than topics that have been popular for a while. Analysis of 
retweets in trending topics reveals that any retweeted tweet is 
to reach an average of 1000 users no matter what the number 
of followers is of the original tweet. The chain of retweets 
grows almost instantly after the first retweet, which explains 
the fast diffusion of information. 
Prediction of trending topics on Twitter™ was done 
recently by a simple data-driven model [24], [25]. The 
algorithm analyzes the temporal trace of tweeting frequency 
for each topic and compares that trace to the one for every 
sample in the training set. Statistical resemblance of a test 
topic is calculated for all training examples and the 
combined weighting function suggests the likelihood that a 
new topic would trend. The algorithm predicts trending 
topics with the accuracy ~ 79% and about ~ 1.5 hour before 
they appear on Twitter™.  
A few studies explored the relationship of temporal 
dynamics of meme propagation and statistics of time 
intervals between social media events. A novel technique for 
detecting spam blogs or splogs, based on the observation that 
a blog is a dynamic and growing sequence of posts rather 
than a collection of individual pages, was developed in [26].    
The detection of splog is performed by using temporal and 
structural regularity of content, posting time and links. 
Ghosh et al. [27] showed that the analysis of retweeting 
activity only (distribution of event time intervals), without 
any knowledge of tweet content, allows for the identification 
of several different types of activity, including marketing 
campaigns, information dissemination, auto-tweeting, and 
spam. Lerman and Ghosh [15] showed that the patterns of 
information propagation strongly depend on the type of 
topic. 
Related to our work is also the study made on detection 
of astroturfing in social media [4], [5]. Astroturfing (false 
grassroots) 
campaigns 
are 
examples 
of 
deceptive 
orchestrated campaigns with a goal to promote some ideas 
by creating fake accounts, hiding identities and locations of 
users to give the impression of widespread support for their 
agenda. It was shown that certain network features and 
topological patterns are highly predictive of astroturfing [5].   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FEATURE WORKS  
In this paper, we presented a novel approach for 
detection of persuasion campaigns in online social networks.  
We demonstrated that without any content analysis of topics 
on Twitter™, by monitoring only temporal traces of 
topological characteristics of users’ networks with twitting 
temporal activity, it is possible to distinguish two types of 
topics on Twitter™, promoted or advertisement campaigns 
and non-promoted or naturally trending topics. We presented 
experimental 
results 
of 
applying 
our 
SAX-VSM 
classification technique of multidimensional time series to 
achieve high detection accuracy on Twitter™ data. Our 
results suggest that social streams can be monitored 
effectively almost in a real time and some abnormal activity 
can be detected by analyzing temporal evolution of social 
networks. 
For our future work, we consider undertaking a detailed 
analysis of factors affecting the accuracy of detection and 
time-prediction of influencing in social media and 
understand details of underlying processes.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Indiana University team 
who provided us with Twitter™ data and collaborated 
closely in the course of the project. Specifically, we are 
thankful to Onur Varol who worked on data acquisition and 
feature retrieval; and to Filippo Menczer, Alessandro 
Flammini and Emilio Ferrara for helpful discussions. Also 
we are thankful to Pavel Senin, PhD student of University of 
Hawaii, for very productive joint work on SAX-VSM 
technology and to Paul Biancaniello for discussion of the 
concept at early stage. This work is supported by DARPA 
grant W911NF-12-1-0037 / PO#1099798. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, “What is Twitter, a 
social network or a news media?,” Proc. 19th international 
conference on World Wide Web, ACM, 2010, pp. 591-600. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

[2] T. Finin et al., “The Information Ecology of Social Media and 
Online Communities,” AI Magazine, 2008, vol. 29, no 3, pp. 
77-92.  
[3] E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts, 
“Everyone's an in influencer: quantifying influence on 
Twitter,” Proc. fourth ACM international conference on Web 
search and data mining, ACM, 2011, pp. 65-74. 
[4] J. Ratkiewicz et al., “Detecting and tracking political abuse in 
social media,” Proc. 5th International AAAI Conference on 
Weblogs and Social Media, 2011. 
[5] J. Ratkiewicz et al., “Truthy: mapping the spread of astroturf 
in microblog streams,” Proc. 20th International Conference 
Companion on World Wide Web, ACM, 2011, pp. 249-252. 
[6] V. Qazvinian, E. Rosengren, D. R. Radev, and Q. Mei, 
“Rumor has it: Identifying misinformation in microblogs,”  
Proc. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language 
Processing, ACL, 2011, pp. 1589-1599. 
[7] C. Wagner, S. Mitter, C. Korner, and M. Strohmaier, “When 
social bots attack: Modeling susceptibility of users in online 
social networks,” Proc. 21th International Conference 
Companion on World Wide Web, 2012. 
[8] P. Senin and S. Malinchik, “SAX-VSM: Interpretable Time 
Series Classification Using SAX and Vector Space Model“, 
Proc. ICDM 2013, Dallas, Texas / December 7-10, 2013.  
[9] J. Lin, E. Keogh, S. Lonardi, and B. Chiu, “A symbolic 
representation of time series, with implications for streaming 
algorithms,” Proc. 8th ACM workshop on Research Issues in 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2013, pp. 2-11. 
[10] J. Lin, E. Keogh, L. Wei, and S. Lonardi, “Experiencing 
SAX: a novel symbolic representation of time series,” Proc. 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 15(2), 2007, pp. 107-
144. 
[11] G. Salton, A. Wong,  and C. S. Yang, “A vector space model 
for automatic indexing,” Communications of the ACM, 
18(11), 1975, pp. 613-620. 
[12] E. Ferrara, O. Varol, S. Malinchik, F. Menczer, and A.  
Flammini, “Toward detecting persuasion campaigns in social 
media,” Proc. 8th International AAAI Conference on Weblogs 
and Social Media, ICWSM’14,  2014 (under review).  
[13] https://support.twitter.com/articles/101125-faqs-about-twitter-
s-trends 
[14] https://support.twitter.com/articles/282142-what-are-
promoted-trends 
[15] K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, “Information contagion: An 
empirical study of the spread of news on Digg and Twitter 
social networks,” Proc.  ICWSM, 2010, pp. 90-97. 
[16] D. M. Romero, C. Tan, and J. Kleinberg, “On the interplay 
between social and topical structure,” Proc. 7th International 
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2013.  
[17] D. M. Romero, B. Meeder, and J. Kleinberg,  “Differences in 
the mechanics of information diffusion across topics: idioms, 
political hashtags, and complex contagion on twitter,” Proc. 
20th International Conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW'11), 2011, pp. 695-704. 
[18] D. Gruhl and D. Liben-Nowell, “Information diffusion 
through blogspace,” Proc. Int. World Wide Web Conference 
(WWW) , 2004, pp. 491– 501. 
[19] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and É. Tardos, “Maximizing the 
spread of influence through a social network,” Proc. 19th 
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD '03), 2003, pp. 137-146.  
[20] J. Yang and J. Leskovec, “Modeling Information Diffusion in 
Implicit Networks,” Proc. 2010 IEEE 10th International 
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 13-17 Dec., 2010, pp. 
599-608.  
[21] M. E. J. Newman, “Spread of epidemic disease on networks,” 
Physical Review E, 66(1), 2002, 016128. 
[22] C. Budak, D. Agrawal, and A. El Abbadi, “Structural trend 
analysis 
for 
online 
social 
networks,” 
Proc. 
VLDB 
Endowment, 4(10), 2011, pp. 646- 656. 
[23] J. Leskovec, L. Backstrom, and J. Kleinberg, “Meme-tracking 
and the dynamics of the news cycle,” Proc. 15th ACM 
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining, ACM, 2009, pp. 497-506.    
[24] S. Nikolov, “Trend or no trend: A novel nonparametric 
method for classifying time series,” PhD Thesis, MIT, 2012. 
[25] S. Nikolov and D. Shah, “A Nonparametric Method for Early 
Detection 
of 
Trending 
Topics,” 
MIT, 
2012, 
http://web.mit.edu/snikolov/Public/NikolovShahWIDS2012.p
df 
[26] Y. Lin, H. Sundaram, Y. Chi, J. Tatemura, and B. Tseng, 
“Detecting splogs via temporal dynamics using self-similarity 
analysis,” Proc. ACM Transactions on the Web (TWEB), 
2(1), 2008, pp. 1–35. 
[27] R. Ghosh, T. Surachawala, and K. Lerman, “Entropy-based 
classification of ’retweeting’ activity on twitter,”  Proc. KDD 
workshop on Social Network Analysis (SNA-KDD), 2011, 
pp.17-23. 
 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

