IoT Digital Enterprise Platform based on Cloud Metering and Big Data Services
Kalthoum Zaouali
National School of
Engineering of Tunis-ENIT
University Tunis El Manar
Tunis, Tunisia
e-mail:
zaoualikalthoum@gmail.com
Mohamed Lassaad Ammari
Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering
Laval University
Quebec, Canada
e-mail:
mlammari@gel.ulaval.ca
Amine Choueib
Chifco Company
Tunis, Tunisia
e-mail:
amine.chouaieb@chifco.com
Ridha Bouallegue
Innov’Com Laboratory
Higher School of Communication
Carthage University
Tunis, Tunisia
e-mail:
ridha.bouallegue@supcom.rnu.tn
Abstract—The use of Internet of Things (IoT) results in more
connected and smarter environments, while enabling energy
consumers and providers to reduce costs thanks to advanced
metering management. The demand of data trafﬁc has recently
grown as fast as the number of connected devices and smart-
meters. In order to meet the explosive growth of big-data,
new technologies are required to improve the existing metering
infrastructure. In this paper, we propose an open IoT digital
enterprise platform for smart-metering applications focused on
allowing open access to big-data and cloud services. We investi-
gate the main issues and challenges of smart-metering big-data
analytics as a free business service. Referring to some major
information technology architectures, we introduce our suggested
architecture that can help enterprises deploy their speciﬁc big-
data framework for smart objects, smart-meters, smart-homes,
smart-buildings, smart-factories, smart-cities or smart-grids. This
is done by adding smart-metering cloud services based on an
advanced metering infrastructure.
Keywords–Big-data; Cloud; Digital enterprise; IoT; Smart-
metering.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since software is the center of technology, the industrial
revolution ought to open up new horizons, dimensions, chal-
lenges, opportunities and business areas, thus freeing data and
beneﬁting from it. Companies attempt to cut costs and make
software an enabler for future success and for an industrial and
digital economic revolution [1].
We are still in the early stage of realizing the vastness of
customers’ requirements like the inﬁnity universe, the huge-
ness of data size, their deep knowledge and their streaming.
We aim to broaden the data dimension as an inﬁnite space
(data from varying sources) and to ensure the data management
coming from every physical signal, social media and satellite
[2]. Accordingly, our new challenge is to deal with such
a huge volume of knowledge available in digital platforms.
The data processing is no longer enough; it is necessary to
access this vast amount of data and transform the mining
of information in order to create new values for companies,
customers, societies, as well as the environment [3]. Therefore,
connecting people, indoor and outdoor with technology in real-
time helps customers conceive their business life and make
sense of its impact on the economy, the society and the
environment [4].
It is essential to draw customers’ attention to new services
they do not know and have not utilized yet and then ﬁt
them to their own objectives and requirements. For instance,
controlling the energy generation according to demand is a
major issue and a main objective of energy vendors [5]. The
target of the offered service is to help this speciﬁc customer
align an energy demand and supply it through a cloud-
based IoT platform offering the opportunities of networking,
processing and storing data, based on scalability, ﬂexibility,
and performance capabilities [6] [7].
Smart-meters data satisfy the basic aspects characterizing
big-data as volume, variety and velocity (3’V) [8]. The big-
data technology provides a real-time analysis and deals with
consuming smart-meters data correlated with weather infor-
mation and other readings of external behavior [9]. Using
big-data capabilities, we have to manage the huge amount of
data captured by smart-meters in frequent time periods. Hence,
advanced analytics allows companies to extract the available
information and knowledge from the massive volume of data
to gain new insights reinforcing their proactivity in taking
analytical actions. Smart-metering big-data management using
analytical algorithms may achieve substential values needed to
make decision for monitoring and prevention [10] [11]. A key
to decision-making improvement is the variety of data sources.
A manufacturing company hopes to improve maintenance
and ensure real-time supervision and predictive analytics for
factory productivity optimization and business and operation
visibility [12]. Our contribution is to propose an open IoT
digital enterprise platform for smart-metering applications
based on open standards to support and integrate different
devices and platforms in order to help energy markets to
bring solutions quickly. The advanced smart-metering systems
can be integrated with an IoT platform and big-data cloud
services ensuring advanced smart-meters data management
and analytics. Indeed, our suggested platform can optimize
the production factory capacity by predicting failures and
consumption based on the correlations between historical data
and real-time data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II discusses the background and issues of smart-metering big-
data management. In Section III, we mention some leading
big-data reference architectures. Our proposed IoT big-data
digital enterprise platform for smart-metering applications is
described in Section IV. Finally, conclusion and some future
work are drawn in Section V.
II.
BACKGROUND AND ISSUES OF SMART METERING
BIG-DATA MANAGEMENT
Several IoT standards and protocols have been elaborated
to construct IoT devices satisfying some requirements, such
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

as batteries’ power supply and limiting in-memory processing
capacity where there is no continuous power supply. Major IoT
systems offer private services that are exclusively allocated to
particular vendors [13]–[16]. In addition, some IoT systems
are unable to be extended or combined due to their limited
capabilities of sensing, memory storage, or analytics function-
alities [17]–[19]. The IoT protocols have to optimize these
constrains and to provide an open smart space infrastructure
connecting every type of vendors’ devices with a free access to
open data, open standards, and open cloud services [20]–[22].
Our challenge is to provide an open smart-metering big-data
system with a free access to open big-data and cloud services.
In [23], a green IoT platform was developed to demonstrate
the interest of open data and open Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) for a public IoT smart-city infrastructure
to maximize the Swedish society beneﬁts. A lot of busi-
ness applications are based on the IoT technology. Now, the
urgent requirements for enterprises are acquisition, storage
management, and processing the huge amount of heteroge-
neous data generated by large distributed sensor networks
[24] [25]. The IoT data in cloud platforms are characterized
by multi-source high heterogeneity data acquired from differ-
ent distributed sensors including structured, unstructured and
semi-structured data types. The communication between IoT
devices in a smart environment generates a massive volume
of real-time and stream data. As a consequence, its multi-
dimension processing in cloud needs a ﬂexible scalability of
storage, and compression schemes [26] [27]. Supported by
wireless sensor networks, the IoT, cloud computing, social
networks and smart engines, big-data systems can offer many
beneﬁts for business enterprises and societies by potentially
acquiring, storing, analyzing a huge amount of data. Big-data
can provide and implement an ecosystem of convergence and
collaboration based on various services across several ﬁelds,
networks and business processes and rules [28]–[31]. Cai et al.
[32] proposed a functional IoT framework based on big-data
storage systems in cloud computing and deﬁned the big-data
processing modules’ capabilities and challenges for several
industrial applications. This IoT storage system surfs cloud
platforms and tracks signiﬁcant information to enable any en-
terprise to assure inter-operation, intelligence and innovation.
Ahmad et al. [33] envisioned the basic role of integrating the
IoT with social networking to understand human behaviors
using big-data analytics based on the Hadoop ecosystem. The
authors suggested a system architecture for real-time big-data
processing and analytics consisting of IoT devices, social IoT
servers and applications. This social IoT system is able to
improve users’ behaviors by providing feedbacks sent as an
alert message. The human dynamics theory describes real-
time human behaviors in social areas offering an intelligent
environment.
Big-data offer the possibility to ﬁnd most similar users
who have similar interests and tastes utilizing an item-based
collaborative ﬁltering technique that calculates the similarity
between items and recommends the item which an active
user previously preferred. This technique has been successfully
applied in several IoT contexts to analyze IoT devices and
services and to exploit the relations between users, resources
and recommended tags. Mashal et al. [34] put forward a
hyper-graph model for an IoT service recommendation that
would facilitate the integration of IoT services that users
would expect. The recommendation problem was modeled as
a tripartite graph with hyper-edges among users, devices, and
services. The correlations between these three parties deﬁned
the heterogeneous relationships and behaviors in the IoT
service recommendation. To ensure open and secure services
in IoT scenarios with lower processing load and to remotely
conﬁgure ﬁne-grained access control policies, scalability and
ﬂexibility, Simone Cirani et al. [35] suggested an IoT-Oauth-
based-Authorization-Service (OAS) architecture targeting IoT
applications based on HTTP and on constrained application
protocol services to offer an open authorization framework
integrated using the OAS.
Several companies are competing for developing advanced
energy management solutions based on cloud platforms, smart-
metering technologies, and advanced analytics tools. The au-
thors in [36], provided an overview of the big-data background,
components and technologies including the Hadoop frame-
work, the data center, cloud computing and the IoT. Thus, the
advanced analytics techniques will play a crucial role in the
future smart-metering progress that will require efﬁciency in
stream data analytics, integrating advanced machine-learning
capabilities and the competence of decision-making techniques
[37].
However, there are major issues for the smart-meters big-
data management. The ﬁrst issue is the storage of the huge
”volume” of data. High availability is realized by ensuring
data reading and data writing anywhere, avoiding joins and
transactions, and tolerating redundancies, such as Hadoop
Distributed File Systems (HDFS), highly distributed databases
(NOSQL), and NewSQL databases. The second issue concerns
”velocity” and massive data processing. As a solution, it is
recommended to move processing to data using the in-memory
processing standard. The third big-data issue results in the
”variety” property of data collection from different sources,
formats and types that can provide homogenization and data
fusion. Different types of original data, such as smart-meters
measurement data, weather data, geographical information data
and marketing data, are collected and extracted from different
sources, such as connected smart- meters, Web applications,
relational back-end systems, data stream, social media and
other forms of data-sets in the cloud. Data should be extracted
and stored in distributed structures in memory waiting their
processing. A new structure of the NoSQL database is created
to manage the storage and retrieval of unstructured collected
data with various format extensions. The ”Spark” technology
is used for ”batch” and ”µ-batch” processing, ”storm” for
streaming processing, and schema-less ”NoSQL” databases
as a distributed platform for massive data storage based on
HDFS, using the Map-Reduce architectural pattern for parallel
calculation of large data-sets, which is a programming model
focusing on a simple hardware to perform complex jobs. Data
processing is divided in many small activities run in different
clusters and in the YARN framework for scheduling jobs and
managing cluster resources [38] [39].
Due to the big-data 3’V, it is necessary to devise a
new architecture for smart-meters big-data management with
new technology features according to new demands. Before
introducing our proposed architecture, let us investigate some
big-data reference architectures developed by the major IT
vendors.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

III.
BIG-DATA REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES
The construction of the proposed smart-metering big-data
analytics architecture is referred to various big-data reference
architectures deﬁned as consistent conceptual models. These
technical references can provide an understanding of big-data
structures, services and capabilities to explore our speciﬁc big-
data system interoperability, extendibility, and portability. We
will discuss surveyed big-data platforms, such as Microsoft,
Oracle, IBM and SAP to perceive the main components of a
big-data architecture.
A. IBM Big-Data Architecture
The process of big-data analytics starts with data discovery
and exploration. Data are ﬁgured from different sources to
incorporate and discover a new data value. The IBM big-data
platform [40] [41] allows indexing, searching and navigating
diverse sources of big-data represented in different formats
(structured, semi-structured, or unstructured). To generate the
accurate analytics applications, processing data and complex
analytics models are executed both to deprive replicated data
and to provide fast and multiple analytic iterations. For an ef-
fective analysis, a game-changing analytics platform provides
tools for the exploration, analysis, management and storage of
both structured and unstructured data. Real-time analysis can
offer the opportunity of analyzing data as it is being generated
insight to make decisions and actions before storing data on
physical disks. The volume of the data stream depends on the
dynamical variation in time. Therefore, the big-data platform
should be able to manage these increasing volumes of data
as well as to analyze data in motion. To consume efﬁciently
the big-data, the accelerators as tool sets and the library of
analytical packages are used to reduce the analytic cycle time
acquired to discover and process data, develop and deploy
models, and analyze and visualize results. The data manage-
ment is focused on data integration and governance including
data quality, security, life cycle management, and master data
management capabilities. These big-data requirements can be
managed by Hadoop (unstructured data), stream computing
(real time data), and data warehouse (structured data).
B. Microsoft Big-Data Architecture
The key components of the Microsoft big-data architecture
[42] are data sources, data transformation, data infrastruc-
ture, and data usage. Big-data are collected from various
sources classiﬁed by the 3’V big-data characteristics. Then,
independent functional blocks are implemented to ensure data
transformation and pre-processing, such as the collection block
to pile up data from different types and forms, the aggregation
block to aggregate collected data into a larger collection, the
matching block to enhance information about each object, and
the data mining block for both descriptive and predictive ana-
lytics. Transformed data are stocked in metadata to be utilized
by multiple data infrastructure services. Under development,
the results can be provided in various data usage formats,
granularity and under different security considerations.
C. SAP Big-Data Architecture
The SAP big-data reference architecture includes ingestion,
storage & processing, and consume components. Additional
components are also added to manage the data life cycle, the
infrastructure, security and data governance [43]. The SAP
High-speed Analytical Appliance (SAP HANA) platform pro-
vides several advantages, such as serving big-data features to
the business customers in order to improve their applications.
The ingestion key component of the SAP HANA platform
permits the acquisition of various data types (structured, semi-
structured, and unstructured data) from different sources (sen-
sors, relational back-end systems, data stream, social media,
etc.). For data processing and storage functions, the SAP big-
data platform investigates the potential between transactional
and analytical processing abolishing the computing time la-
tency by using in-memory computing and an engine for real-
time simulation and planning cycles. Other components, such
as graph engine and spatial or location data processing are
also integrated in the SAP big-data architecture. An integrated
Hadoop platform supports the treated data through a distributed
ﬁle system. The Hadoop real-time platform offers to users
efﬁcient data processing and storage as beneﬁts of real-time
processing. The consume component supports the analytics
functions, such as dashboards, reports, exploration, charting
and visualization, and applications including machine learning
and predictive and native HANA applications & services.
Within the SAP HANA platform, the infrastructure manage-
ment provides the security and life cycle management of
a data object using common services for data security and
governance.
D. Oracle Big-Data Architecture
The Oracle big-data reference architecture proposes an
incorporated big-data platform based on Hadoop and Ora-
cle NoSQL database technologies to acquire, process, and
analyze big-data using decision-making techniques. As an
infrastructure service component, the Oracle big-data architec-
ture suggests hardware, a network, connectivity, an operating
system, virtualization, storage, security, and management. Data
sources support the data streams, the NoSQL /Tag-values and
the relational and unstructured databases. The information-
provisioning component provides big-data processing includ-
ing information discovery, data conversion and massive un-
structured data and stream processing. The data warehouse and
the operational database are used to store processing data. The
information analysis component recovers the analytics appli-
cations as descriptive (reporting / dashboards) and predictive
analytics (statistical analysis, semantic analysis, data mining,
text mining, in-DB Map/Reduce and spatial) [44].
E. Discussion
Through the review of big-data architectures and the de-
scriptive Table
I, several components can identify big-data
system. As a result, we can consider three common ones.
The ﬁrst one is the big-data management and storage com-
ponent which investigates (i) structured, semi-structured and
unstructured data, (ii) volume, variety, velocity and variability,
and (iii) SQL and NoSQL and distributed ﬁle systems. The
second one is the big-data analytics and application interfaces
studying descriptive, predictive, spatial, real-time, interactive
and batch analytics, besides reporting and dashboards. The
third component is the big-data infrastructure as well as in-
memory data grids, operational databases, analytic databases,
relational databases, ﬂat ﬁles, content management systems
and horizontal scalable architectures. Other components can
support these three main components, namely the user usage,
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

landscape management, the modeling & life cycle manage-
ment, and the data governance as security, compliance, etc.
Our architecture is in fact based on these three components.
In addition to what is existing in big-data platforms, we have
integrated the cloud-based IoT big-data platform and the smart-
metering cloud services.
IV.
PROPOSED IOT BIG-DATA DIGITAL ENTERPRISE
PLATFORM
Our
integrated
architecture
is
built
to
involve
data
management and help IT organization to develop applications
that support digital transformations with analytic capabilities.
It helps to free IT data and to spend the majority of data
sources for more consumed operations. The proposed IoT
big-data digital enterprise platform, represented by Figure
1, allows the access to a leverage data in many ways, such
as digital data management, ﬂexible data management or
incorporated integration.
Smart-metering
cloud services
Proposed IoT
big-data digital
enterprise
platform
big-data
services
Advanced
metering
infrastructure
IoT
integration
platform
Stuctured
data;
Unstuctered
data; Exabyte
scale;
Distributed
ﬁle system
Figure 1. Proposed IoT big-data digital enterprise platform for
smart-metering applications
Indeed, our suggested platform permits data processing and
access to handle the huge amount of data collected by widely
deployed sensors, as well as a solution for the advanced smart-
meters to interact with the platform. For real-time data, such as
weather data, data from sensors and smart-meters, production
and consumption data, we propose to use external data storage
in an effort to measure energy consumption. With our solution,
we can increasingly manage the data from a variety of sources
that can be real-time data from databases which contain user
details, user energy consumption data, user equipment, weather
API or collected data from social media. The big challenge is
to take control of the data stream and to use it in more efﬁcient
ways. This can be realized through connectivity up in the space
with big-data.
In our architecture, we can ﬁlter and extract the data in
which we need in other tasks, like machine learning, and to
train and test our intelligent system. Also, we analyze the
collected data and clearly present it to facilitate understanding
our data content in charts and graphics formats in order to
support rapid and conﬁdent decisions. Our integrated IoT
big-data platform imports multi-store tables, which enables
new partition tables in memory or ﬁle systems. It is pos-
sible to move across the stores using big queries or in-
memory processing capabilities. The solution allows providers
or customers easy access to applications. The different cloud
services offered by our integrated platform are shown and
described in Figure 2 . This integrated platform consists of IoT
IoT ap-
plication
services
Connected objects, Connected
homes, Connected buildings,
Connected cities, Connected grids
Industry
appli-
cation
services
Product applications, Consulting &
Business Intelligence, Marketing
Machine
learning
services
Brand intelligence, Machine learning,
Recognition, Fraud detection,
Social media, Costumer services
Figure 2. Cloud-based IoT big-data platform services
applications services for connected objects, homes, buildings,
cities and grids in order to ensure industry application services
like product applications, consulting and business intelligence,
and marketing. The advanced analytics of these services is
done by integrating machine learning services, such as brand
intelligence, machine learning, recognition, fraud detection,
social media and customer services, so as to attribute new
values to big-data.
Figure
3 illustrates in detail our proposed IoT big-data
digital enterprise platform that ensures many functionalities:
•
Smart devices and gateways: To substantiate and
manage several connected devices and smart-meters
based on different communication protocols. The Ad-
vanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) uses various
networking models to manage and control the com-
munication with the smart-meters in the ﬁeld. The
AMI head end system involves software applications
and databases for smart-meters data acquisition and
storage. It promises real-time monitoring of the AMI
network of smart-meters. Furthermore, the AMI head
end system enables utilities to take advantage of the
accurate measurement devices available in the market
in order to measure customers’ energy consumption,
conﬁgure smart-meter parameters, and check these
smart devices via ﬁrmwares.
•
IoT integration platform: To apply analytics at the
edge and to enable low-latency decision making.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

TABLE I. BIG-DATA REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES
Big-data management
and storage components
Big-data analytics and
application interface components
Big-data infrastructure
components
Supporting components
IBM
architecture
* Data Integration
and Governance:
Data integration, Data quality,
Life cycle management,
Master data management;
* Accelerators;
* Hadoop;
* Stream computing;
* Data warehouse.
* IBM big-ata platform:
- Visualization and discovery:
Indexing, Searching, Navigation;
- Application development;
* Analytics applications:
- Business Intelligence /Reporting;
- Exploration/ Visualization;
- Industry applications;
- Functional applications;
- Content analytics
- Predictive analytics.
* IBM big-data platform:
- Systems management
* Data Integration and
Governance:
- Security
Microsoft
architecture
* Data Sources:
- Data Objects; Variety; Velocity; Volume;
* Data transformation:
- Collection; Aggregation; Matching.
- Data Minning:
Descriptive / Predictive.
* Data infrastructure:
- Conditioning
- Storage & Retrieval;
* Security;
* Management
*Data Usage:
- Network Operators / Telecom;
- Industries/Businesses;
- Government: Health &
Fin. Institution;
- Academia.
SAP
architecture
* SAP HANA in-memory:
- Transactional; Analytical; Graph; Spatial;
Text & Social media processing;
Extended storage; Planning and simulation;
* Hadoop Platform: Processing & storage;
* Modeling & Life cycle management.
* Analytics:
Exploration, Dashboards,
Reports, Charting, Visualization;
* Applications:
- Machine learning & predictive;
- Native HANA applications & services;
* Modeling & Life cycle management.
* SAP HANA platform:
- Data objects management;
- Data objects security.
- Landscape management;
- Modeling & Life cycle
management
- Data governance: Security;
Compliance; Audits.
Oracle
architecture
* Information provisioning:
- Data processing and discovery:
Information discovery; Conversion data;
Processing of massive unstructured
and streaming data;
- Operational database and data warehouse;
* Data sources:
Distributed ﬁle system;
Data streams; NoSQL/Tag-value;
Relational; Faceted unstructured;
Spatial/relational.
* Information analytics:
- Descriptive analytics:
Reporting; Dashboards;
- Predictive analytics:
Statistical analysis; Data minning;
In-DB Map-Reduce; Semantic analysis;
Text mining; Spatial
* Infrastructure services:
Hardware; Operating System;
Storage; Security; Network;
Connectivity; Virtualization;
Management.
•
Big-data management, advanced analytics & machine
learning: To enable deep business insights and busi-
ness intelligence by integrating IoT big-data process-
ing and advanced analytics utilizing machine learning
and business rules for decision making.
•
Big-data enterprise applications: To permit the integra-
tion with enterprise and IoT big-data analytics appli-
cations in order to ensure the development and deploy-
ment of enterprise applications with low complexity,
authorization, data security and data governance.
Our proposed architecture is based on open standards to
support and integrate different devices and platforms in order
to help energy markets to bring solutions quickly. Every
enterprise can freely select its IoT technology protocols. The
advanced smart-metering systems can be integrated with IoT
platform and big-data cloud services ensuring advanced smart-
meters data management and predictive analytics. The big-
data analytics can facilitate the integration and deployment of
various utility applications.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Big-data will be more and more a complex distributed
data environment with dynamic acquisition necessitating a
strong orchestration of the inter-process and its dependencies.
Software enablement for enterprises will make a sense of
big-data orchestration by providing not only an available
storage system but also to integrate the big-data analytics
in their concerning business framework. In this paper, we
have proposed an open IoT enterprise platform for smart-
metering applications focused on allowing an open access to
big-data and cloud services. This platform seems to be a digital
enterprise platform offering both speciﬁc services deployed in
the cloud and external open services offered by big-data to
improve and satisfy the customers’ requirements. Furthermore,
several issues, such as scalability, ﬂexibility, interoperability
and availability should be considered in this digital enterprise
platform. As a future work, we will study some aspects of our
proposed architecture, such as multi-vendor interoperability,
low cost, low power consumption and security, which require
considerable attention from energy communities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is part of a PhD thesis supported by “PASRI-
MOBIDOC” Project ﬁnanced by the EU, “Chifco” company,
“Innov’COM” laboratory, and National School of Engineering
of Tunis-ENIT.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Fang and et al., “An integrated system for regional environmental
monitoring and management based on internet of things,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 10, no. 2, May 2014, pp. 1596–
1605.
[2]
S. K. Sowe, T. Kimata, M. Dong, and K. Zettsu, “Managing heteroge-
neous sensor data on a big data platform: Iot services for data-intensive
science,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int. Computer Software and Applications
Conf. Workshops, Jul. 2014, pp. 295–300.
[3]
J. Yin, Y. Tang, W. Lo, and Z. Wu, “From big data to great services,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Congress Big Data (BigData Congress), Jun. 2016,
pp. 165–172.
[4]
Y. Nakamura and et al., “Novel heterogeneous computing platforms and
5g communications for iot applications,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf.
Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 2017, pp. 874–879.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 3. Detailed description of the suggested IoT big-data digital enterprise architecture based on smart-metering services
[5]
F. D. Garcia, F. P. Marafo, W. A. d. Souza, and L. C. P. d. Silva, “Power
metering: History and future trends,” in Proc. Ninth Annual IEEE Green
Technologies Conf. (GreenTech), Mar. 2017, pp. 26–33.
[6]
D. de la Bastida and F. J. Lin, “Openstack-based highly scalable
iot/M2M platforms,” in Proc. Physical and Social Computing (CP-
SCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData) 2017 IEEE Int. Conf. Internet
of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Jun. 2017, pp. 711–718.
[7]
N. Dalcekovi, S. Vukmirovi, I. Kovacevi, and J. Stankovski, “Providing
ﬂexible software as a service for smart grid by relying on big data
platforms,” in Proc. Computers and Communications (ISNCC) 2017
Int. Symp. Networks, May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[8]
J. Hu and A. V. Vasilakos, “Energy big data analytics and security:
Challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 7, no. 5,
2016, pp. 2423–2436.
[9]
X. Peng, M. Bessho, N. Koshizuka, and K. Sakamura, “Dcrdl: An
energy management rule deﬁnition language for context-based device
control in smart buildings,” in Proc. IECON 2015 - 41st Annual Conf.
of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Nov. 2015, pp. 000 279–
000 285.
[10]
S. Singh and A. Yassine, “Mining energy consumption behavior patterns
for households in smart grid,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics
in Computing, vol. PP, no. 99, 2017, p. 1.
[11]
T. Y. Ku, W. K. Park, and H. Choi, “Iot energy management platform
for microgrid,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Power and Energy Systems
(ICPES), Nov. 2017, pp. 106–110.
[12]
F. Tao and Q. Qi, “New it driven service-oriented smart manufactur-
ing: Framework and characteristics,” and Cybernetics: Systems IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, vol. PP, no. 99, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[13]
W. Dai and et al., “Tnguard: Securing iot oriented tenant networks based
on sdn,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, 2018, p. 1.
[14]
G.
Marques,
N.
Garcia,
and
N.
Pombo,
“A
survey
on
iot:
Architectures, elements, applications, qos, platforms and security
concepts,”
in
Advances
in
Mobile
Cloud
Computing
and
Big
Data in the 5G Era.
Springer, Jan. 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45145-9-5
[15]
J. Chin, V. Callaghan, and I. Lam, “Understanding and personalising
smart city services using machine learning, the internet-of-things and
big data,” in Proc. IEEE 26th Int. Symp. Industrial Electronics (ISIE),
Jun. 2017, pp. 2050–2055.
[16]
J. Tian, A. Chin, and M. Karg, “Digital services in the automotive
industry,” IT Professional, vol. 18, no. 5, Sep. 2016, pp. 4–6.
[17]
H. El-Sayed and et al., “Edge of things: The big picture on the
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

integration of edge, iot and the cloud in a distributed computing
environment,” IEEE Access, vol. PP, no. 99, 2017, p. 1.
[18]
D. Yuan, J. Jin, J. Grundy, and Y. Yang, “A framework for convergence
of cloud services and internet of things,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Conf.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), May
2015, pp. 349–354.
[19]
A. Zimmermann and et al., “Digital enterprise architecture - transfor-
mation for the internet of things,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Enterprise
Distributed Object Computing Workshop, Sep. 2015, pp. 130–138.
[20]
Y. Mehmood and et al., “Internet-of-things-based smart cities: Recent
advances and challenges,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55,
no. 9, 2017, pp. 16–24.
[21]
B. Levin, “Big data ecosystem reference architecture,” Microsoft Cor-
poration, 2013.
[22]
E. Biliri and et al., “Big data analytics in public safety and personal
security: Challenges and potential,” in Proc. Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC) 2017 Int. Conf. Engineering, Jun. 2017, pp. 1382–1386.
[23]
B. Ahlgren, M. Hidell, and E. C. H. Ngai, “Internet of things for
smart cities: Interoperability and open data,” IEEE Internet Computing,
vol. 20, no. 6, Nov. 2016, pp. 52–56.
[24]
S. Kubler and et al., “Open iot ecosystem for sporting event manage-
ment,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 7064–7079.
[25]
S. K. Sharma and X. Wang, “Live data analytics with collaborative edge
and cloud processing in wireless iot networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5,
2017, pp. 4621–4635.
[26]
W. Shi and S. Dustdar, “The promise of edge computing,” Computer,
vol. 49, no. 5, 2016, pp. 78–81.
[27]
L. Baresi, L. Mottola, and S. Dustdar, “Building software for the internet
of things.” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 19, no. 2, 2015, pp. 6–8.
[28]
W. Tan, Y. Fan, A. Ghoneim, M. A. Hossain, and S. Dustdar, “From
the service-oriented architecture to the web api economy,” IEEE Internet
Computing, vol. 20, no. 4, 2016, pp. 64–68.
[29]
C. Hochreiner, S. Schulte, S. Dustdar, and F. Lecue, “Elastic stream
processing for distributed environments,” IEEE Internet Computing,
vol. 19, no. 6, 2015, pp. 54–59.
[30]
X. Xu, Q. Z. Sheng, L.-J. Zhang, Y. Fan, and S. Dustdar, “From big
data to big service,” Computer, vol. 48, no. 7, 2015, pp. 80–83.
[31]
J. M. Schleicher, M. V¨ogler, S. Dustdar, and C. Inzinger, “Application
architecture for the internet of cities: Blueprints for future smart city
applications,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 20, no. 6, 2016, pp. 68–75.
[32]
H. Cai, B. Xu, L. Jiang, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Iot-based big data
storage systems in cloud computing: Perspectives and challenges,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, 2016, p. 1.
[33]
A. Ahmad, M. M. Rathore, A. Paul, and S. Rho, “Deﬁning human
behaviors using big data analytics in social internet of things,” in
Proc. IEEE 30th Int. Conf. Advanced Information Networking and
Applications (AINA), Mar. 2016, pp. 1101–1107.
[34]
I. Mashal, O. Alsaryrah, and T. Y. Chung, “Analysis of recommendation
algorithms for internet of things,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions and Networking Conf, Apr. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[35]
S. Cirani, M. Picone, P. Gonizzi, L. Veltri, and G. Ferrari, “Iot-oas: An
oauth-based authorization service architecture for secure services in iot
scenarios,” IEEE sensors journal, vol. 15, no. 2, 2015, pp. 1224–1234.
[36]
A. F. Mohammed, V. T. Humbe, and S. S. Chowhan, “A review of
big data environment and its related technologies,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Information Communication and Embedded Systems (ICICES), Feb.
2016, pp. 1–5.
[37]
D. Alahakoon and X. Yu, “Smart electricity meter data intelligence for
future energy systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 12,
no. 1, 2016, pp. 425–436.
[38]
Z. Asad, M. A. R. Chaudhry, and D. Malone, “Greener data exchange in
the cloud: A coding-based optimization for big data processing,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 5, 2016, pp.
1360–1377.
[39]
A.
Farahzadia,
P.
Shams,
J.
Rezazadeh,
and
R.
Farah-
bakhsh,
“Middleware
technologies
for
cloud
of
things
-
a
survey,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1705.00387,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.00387
[40]
P. O’Sullivan, G. Thompson, and A. Clifford, “Applying data models
to big data architectures,” IBM Journal of Research and Development,
vol. 58, no. 5/6, 2014, pp. 18–1.
[41]
P. J. Meaney and et al., “The ibm z13 memory subsystem for big data,”
IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 59, no. 4/5, 2015, pp.
4–1.
[42]
Y. Demchenko, C. Ngo, and P. Membrey, “Architecture framework and
components for the big data ecosystem,” Journal of System and Network
Engineering, 2013, pp. 1–31.
[43]
R. K. Chawda and G. Thakur, “Big data and advanced analytics tools,”
in Colossal Data Analysis and Networking (CDAN), Symposium on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–8.
[44]
J. P. Dijcks, “Oracle: Big data for the enterprise,” Oracle white paper,
2012, p. 16.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

