A Web-Based Platform Prototype to Enhance e-Participation and e-Transparency
in Local Government
Jose L. Cabrera-Guzman, Luis C. Villaverde-Hidalgo, Jorge R. Parra-Michel, Rafael Martínez-Peláez
Faculty of Information Technology
University of La Salle Bajio
León, México
e-mails: {jcg57968, lvh57920}@udelasalle.edu.mx, {jrparra, rmartinezp}@delasalle.edu.mx
Abstract— In the last years, the number of Internet users in
Mexico has increased, reducing the digital divide. As a
consequence, the government has developed many Web-based
applications and Web-based platforms to establish close
communication with the citizens based on e-government
policies. The e-government policies include the topics of
participation and transparency. However, the real impact of e-
government policies in society is low. For that reason, we
developed a Web-based platform prototype to enhance the
participation of citizens and promote the transparency of
government.
Keywords-
e-participation;
e-transparency;
open
government; society; Web-based application.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet has changed our world, providing the
possibility to create new ways of communication and
interaction with the environment. As a consequence, some
group of visionaries have developed new technologies,
called
electronic
services
or
e-services,
to
transform
business, government, life, and the global economy.
The most popular e-services are e-commerce, e-banking,
e-government, and e-learning due to the number of users or
adopters, and their economic impact and social benefits [1].
The first reference related to the concept of e-government
appeared in the seventies [2], where the government adopted
information technology to perform office automation easier
and faster. Twenty years later, e-government was defined by
the
Organisation
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development (OECD) as “the use of information and
communications technologies, and particularly the Internet,
to achieve better government” [3].
According to Grönlund [4], the definition provided by the
OECD makes sense from the society’s perception in terms of
usability and usefulness. For that reason, it is necessary the
participation of different types of stakeholders (business,
civil society, private sector, and universities) to achieve a
better government. In this way, a better government based on
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) must
offer citizen oriented applications [5], strategic management
and more accessible services.
Nevertheless, the meaning of e-government does not
incorporate public participation or citizen participation in the
decision making process at any level of the government [6].
In this new perspective called e-participation [4], the concept
of e-government should take into consideration an active
citizenship [6] where citizens share their ideas, knowledge,
and suggestions, using technology [6][7]. With citizen
participation, the examination of problems should lead to
policies based on real needs [8]. This means that government
and citizenship need to work together for the benefit of the
rest of society [6]-[8].
Although, e-participation reduces the bureaucracy and
enhances
communication
among
stakeholders,
e-
participation does not promote revealing data, information
and processes from the government to citizens. The action
where
the
government
shares
data,
information,
and
processes
to
citizens
is
known
as
transparency
[9].
According to Bertot et al. [10], transparency is essential to
democratic
participation
because
it
offers
trust
in
government and prevention of corruption, among other
essential
functions
in
society.
In
the
context
of
e-
government, transparency is called e-transparency [11]. The
e-transparency contributes to
the public administration
reform, law enforcement and social change to reduce
corruption [10].
The key contribution of this paper is the proposal of a
new Web-based platform to improve e-participation and e-
transparency to promote more collaboration among citizens.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we
present the main concepts related to the contribution. In
Section III, we describe the method used to develop our
proposal. In Section IV, we describe the key components of
our proposal. Finally, in Section V, we give our conclusions
and future work.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, we briefly explain the keynote concepts
which are necessary to know the context of the proposal.
A.
World Wide Web
One of the key components in the creation of e-services
is the World Wide Web (WWW) created by Tim Burners-
Lee in 1989 [12]. The first stage of the WWW is known as
reading-only or Web 1.0, and it is based on global hypertext
space, static HyperText Markup Language (HTML), client-
server architecture, and Web forms. Web 2.0, defined by
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Dale Dougherty, appeared in 2004 [12]. The second stage of
the WWW is based on Extensible Markup Language (XML),
Really Simple Syndication (RSS), peer-to-peer architecture,
and Web applications, known as reading-writing or Web 2.0
[12].
The main differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 are
the
flexibility
of
Web
design,
creative
reuse,
and
collaborative content creation. In other words, Web 2.0
provides the possibility of an interactive collaboration among
different people where they share experience, knowledge,
and lessons learned [12]. The most relevant technologies
created in this stage are blogs and social network sites by
means of users working together to share data, resolving
challenges and changing the world [13].
B.
Web-based Platform
A Web-based application is a system with application
components on the client-side which communicates with
application components in a Web server for data processing
based on the client-server architecture [14]. The data
processing is carried out by the server because it has more
resources than clients. Then, a Web-based platform is a
Web-site,
which
provides
two
or
more
Web-based
applications using different technologies [15]. In the context
of e-government, a Web-based platform must fulfil the
following requirements [15]:

Interoperability – The Web-based platform must be
accessible by any type of device using any type of
communication based on international standards.

Flexibility – The Web-based platform must be
accessible by any citizen from anywhere
and
anytime.

Inclusively – The Web-based platform must be
accessible by any citizen with or without physical
limitations.

Scalability – The Web-based platform must have
enough processing and storage capacity to process
each request from citizens.

Security – The Web-based platform must be based
on security standards to provide authentication,
confidentiality, integrity, and non-reputation in each
transaction between the government and citizens.
C.
Social Network Sites
A Social Network Site (SNS) is a Web-based service that
allows individuals to construct a public or semi-public
profile within a bounded system, articulate a list of other
users with whom they share a connection, and view and
traverse their list of connections and those made by others
within the system [16]. For those reasons, SNS have been
rapidly accepted by Internet users due to the possibility to
keep in touch with family, friends and others [16]. In this
scenario, Internet users have the option to share ideas,
comments, and feelings with others, without barriers of time
and space. Moreover, the messages published in SNS travel
through the cyberspace faster than traditional media [17].
In the context of e-government, SNS allows different
citizens to collaborate from any location via a virtual
community to exchange information, knowledge, problems,
and solutions without space and time limitations [13].
D.
Corruption in Mexico
Transparency International publishes every year the
corruption perceptions index. In the 2018 index, Mexico
appears in the 138th position among 180 countries with 28
points out of 100 possible points [18]. In January 2019, Pring
and Vrushi published the report “Tackling the crisis of
democracy, promoting rule of law and fighting corruption”
where
they
propose
the
following
actions
to
reduce
corruption
and
consolidate
democracy:
a)
provide
democratic checks and balances, b) bridge the gap between
laws
and
their
implementation,
c)
support
public
accountability, and d) press freedom [19].
More recently, Pring and Vrushi reported the citizens’
perceptions about corruption in Latin America & the
Caribbean,
where
they
found
that
people
think
that
corruption increased in the previous 12 months. In the
particular case of Mexico, 45% of the people think that
corruption has increased, and 90% of the people believe that
corruption in government is a big problem [20].
E.
Transparency
Transparency is not a new idea; it appeared around the
70s creating new laws and rules to share governmental
information with citizens. As a consequence, citizens can get
access
to
documents
from
government
and
non-
governmental organizations [21]. Nowadays, the concept of
transparency is linked to the concept of accountability to
provide legitimate reasons for the way the public sector
spends the budgets [22].
The information can be accessed in different ways,
including a Web-based platform [9]. For that reason, local
governments can take advantage of a Web-based platform to
make available information and accountability without a
specific request.
F.
Participation in Public Administration
Participation in the context of public administration is
known as collaborative governance, where citizens take part
in the strategic decisions as well as promote accountability
and responsiveness for the benefit of society. In this vision,
citizens
are
partners
of
the
government
to
enhance
democracy and efficient governance [22].
Governments
adopt
new
technologies
to
establish
communication
and
interaction
with
citizens.
The
e-
participation broadens the possibility for more citizens to be
heard and to collaborate with the government [22].
G.
Open Government
Open government is the consequence of transparency,
accountability, and participation activities. In this new
tendency, the public administration reveals documents using
a
public
repository
[23].
This
action
seems
to
be
unidirectional; however, technology gives the possibility to
create a bidirectional channel between government and
citizens, creating a knowledge society.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

The open government promotes the following activities
related to democracy: monitor government, create policies
and collaborate in developing new government services [24].
However, open government could be adopted by the
following factors [25]: a) cause is the action to improve
legitimacy and efficiency, b) constituents is the response to
society caused by conflicting interests, c) content is the
reaction to provide information as soon as possible, d)
control is the conviction to share information, and e) context
is related with the conditions of the environment.
III.
METHOD
A.
Problem Definition
According to the reports presented by Transparency
International in 2018 and 2019 [18]-[20], Mexico has several
problems of corruption which impacts all levels of society,
from the top to the bottom, affecting the quality of life of
more than one hundred millions Mexicans in terms of
education, health, inequality, poverty, social welfare, civil
and political rights.
Although the purposes of e-government, e-participation,
e-democracy, e-transparency, and open government sound
good, being useful in other countries, these do not work
correctly in Mexico. Mexico has adopted, integrated, and
transformed many processes and services to e-government
[26][27], in the last nineteen years, as well as created and
applied an open data policy since 2012, without reducing
corruption. Moreover, many of the Web-based applications
and
Web-based
platforms
created
by
the
Federal
Government and Local Governments do not incorporate
elements
to
establish
real
communication
between
authorities and people, leaving aside the participation of
citizens.
B.
Solution
In the State of Guanajuato, we can find some Web-based
applications, Web-based platforms and Mobile-applications
to connect citizens with the government; however, the
previous solutions have the following limitations:

Low incorporation of citizens in the definition of
state strategic planning development, making it more
inclusive.

Low
participation
of
citizens
in
strategic
management to resolve problems.

Poor or null notification of investment in public
works and infrastructure as a policy to inform about
the progress and total cost.
As a consequence, the government makes decisions
based on a limited vision, and, sometimes, the government
does not know the real necessities of citizens, carrying out an
inefficiency
distribution
of
resources
and
distrust
in
government.
For those reasons, we developed a Web-based platform
where any citizen has the option to publish a complaint, idea,
requirement, and solution related to the city of Leon
Guanajuato,
driving
collaborative
decision-making
and
promoting transparency.
C.
Considerations
In
recent
years,
information
and
communication
technologies have changed the way people connect with
people, companies interact with customers, and governments
interact with citizens. Under these circumstances, it is
common to request something, in both directions, to resolve
a problem, to create a new service, to validate an idea, or to
support an initiative that creates added value to society.
Our perception is based on the service delivery lifecycle
[23][28]. In the first stage, the government consults citizens
about public services and urban planning to define the state
development plan. The purpose of this stage is to collect data
from different points of view.
In the second stage, the government executes the
activities providing services and resolving problems with the
active
participation
of
citizens.
In
this
stage,
public
administration interacts with universities, non-governmental
organizations, and the private sector to collect the knowledge
from a different perspective, searching the best solution.
In the third stage, citizens can monitor the activities day-
to-day, creating a culture of transparency and accountability
in each action.
As a consequence, a technological solution needs to
include each stage to bring added value for public services
based on collaborative decisions and knowledge society.
IV.
PROTOTYPE
In this section, we describe the main components and key
functions of our proposal. The proposal is inspired by the
first citizen-driven system for local public service called
FixMyStreet.com [29].
We decided to develop a responsive Web-based platform
because it is accessible by mobile devices and computers (or
laptops) from anywhere and anytime. The prototype was
developed using .NET and ASP.NET core frameworks, and
MySQL as a DataBase Management System.
A.
Entities
The Web-based platform has the following entities:

Citizen – any person who lives in a city and has a
proposal for the local government.

Web-based platform – system managed for the
government to enhance interaction with citizens for
collecting relevant data.

Responsible – is a member of the local government.

System
administrator
–
verifies
the
correct
functionality of the Web-based platform, updates or
deletes proposals, and performs the maintenance of
the system.
B.
Database
The database contains nine tables that start with tbl, as a
rule (see Figure 1). The tblProblema table maintains the
records related to the proposal, such as ID_Problem (PK),
title, description, ID_status (FK), ID_Responsable (FK), and
email. This table is the core of the proposal because it
connects the other tables.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

The table which contains the location of the problem is
tblDireccion
and
it
contains
the
following
columns:
ID_Problem (FK), street, number, district, and reference.
This information is useful to identify the situation; however,
it could be possible to identify it using a geolocation API. In
the tblFoto table, the evidence of the problem is stored in
image format. In this particular case, the evidence is used to
provide a better explanation for any citizen and responsible.
Figure 1.
Design of the database.
The information related to each citizen is stored in
tblVotante table. In this case, the citizen submits her/his
Unique Population Registry Code or Personal ID code to the
Web-based platform. When the Web-based platform receives
the Personal ID code, it verifies its validity. This data is
required every time the citizen wants to vote for any
complaint, idea, requirement, and solution.
C.
Generate a Proposal
The Front-end of the Web-based platform has a menu in
the top right corner. The menu presents the option to create a
report (see Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Front-end of the Web-based platform.
After clicking the option to create a report, the Web form
appears (see Figure 3). The citizen fills in the Web form with
the
following
information:
title,
description,
location,
evidence, the area related to the report, and her/his email.
Figure 3.
Web form to create a report.
Then, the system administrator verifies the information
provided by the citizen. If the information is incorrect, the
system administrator sends an email to the citizen explaining
the mistake and giving him/her the possibility to update the
information. If the information is correct, the system
administrator accepts
and
publishes
the
report.
As
a
particular case, if the system administrator identifies double
reports, the duplicates are deleted.
D.
Voting for a Request
When a citizen wants to see the list of reports, she/he
needs to click on the options vote for a request located on the
menu. As a response, the Web-based platform shows the
entire request list, as shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Example of the list of citizen’s request.
If a citizen wants to know more about a specific report,
they need to click on the “see” button. The citizen can read
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

the information without changing or modifying anything,
keeping the integrity of the record. If the citizen wants to
give his/her vote to this report, the Web-based platform
requires the citizen’s Unique Population Registry Code or
Personal ID code. Finally, the citizen clicks the vote button
to submit the vote to the Web-based platform. The Personal
ID code is used to prevent double votes from a citizen,
providing trust and legitimacy to citizens.
E.
Request in Progress
Once the local government team receives a request from
the Web-based platform, they need to resolve the problem as
soon as possible because the Web-based platform counts the
days that have passed since the report was created. As a
result, citizens know the efficiency of local government
action. Figure 5 shows the number of days, or the elapsed
time, since the record was created.
Figure 5.
Example of the elapsed time in days.
In this way, the local government team can focus their
effort on solving real problems that affect many citizens and
avoiding the waste of time caused by the misassignments of
tasks.
F.
Request Made
After the local government team finalizes the request,
they need to publish the final status and the following files:
a) images related to the solution and b) PDF document with
the financial information (see Figure 6). The evidence is
public, promoting transparency and accountability as a social
culture.
Figure 6.
Example of transparency and accountability.
This process promotes the active participation of public
administration
in
transparency
and
accountability,
encouraging
the
transformation
towards
an
open
government. The information can be accessed and consulted
by
any
citizen
from
anywhere,
promoting
constant
monitoring in the government's work.
V.
CONCLUSION
In a country where corruption is part of everyday life, it
is
clear that public
administration
requires increasing
legitimization, efficiency, accountability, and transparency in
collaboration with citizens to define an inclusive state
development plan based on real requirements instead of
unnecessary or excessive expenses when the budget is
limited. One of the communication channels to collect data,
interact with citizens, evaluate results, and receive feedback
is a Web-based platform because it is a cheaper option than
traditional options. Moreover, the Web system promotes
bidirectional communication at any time. Also, the public
administration can publish different types of files as
evidence, giving more information to citizens. In this way,
citizens have more elements to know how the public
administration spends the budget and which are the entities
receiving federal contracts.
We have presented the prototype of a Web-based
platform whose purpose is promoting the collaboration
between citizens and local government to resolve real
problems for the benefit of society. The prototype requires
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

active participation from citizens to define the priority to
meet a request and to monitor the spending of time and
budget. We are evaluating the prototype among citizens in
the city of Leon Guanajuato, Mexico, in terms of usability
and perception.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the University of
La Salle Bajio in Leon, Mexico.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Révészová, J. Bucko, and P. Mihók, “Modelling of e-
services,” in Ambient Intelligence Perspective, vol. 1, IOS
Press, pp. 203-2010, 2009.
[2]
A. Grönlund and T. A. Horan, “Introducing e-gov: history,
definitions, and issues,”, Communications of the Association
for Information Systems, vol. 15, pp. 713-729, 2004.
[3]
OECD, “Implementing e-government in OECD countries:
experiences and challenges, OECD, pp. 1-9, 2008.
[4]
A. Grönlund, “Ten years of e-government: the ‘end of
history’ and new beginning,” Electronic government 2010.
Lecture Notes in Computer, vol. 6228, Springer, Berlin, pp.
13-24, 2010.
[5]
I. Ivan, B. Vintila, C. Ciurea, and M. Doinea, “The modern
development cycle of citizen oriented applications”, Studies
in Informatics and Control, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 263-270, 2009.
[6]
M. Joao Simoe, “Sociological reflections on e-government,”
The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society,
IARIA, pp. 29-34, 2012.
[7]
S. Kim and J. Lee, “E-participation, transparency, and trust in
local government,” Public Administration Review, vol. 72,
no. 6, pp. 819-828, 2012.
[8]
R. A. Irvin and J. Stansbury, “Citizen participation in decision
making: is it worth the effert?,” Public Administration
Review, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 55-65, 2004.
[9]
E. W. Welch and C. C. Hinnant, “Internet use, transparency,
and interactivity effects on trust in government,” 36th Annual
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1-7,
2003.
[10] J. C. Bertot, P. T. Jaeger, and J. M. Grimes, “Using ICTs to
create a culture of transparency: e-government and social
media as openness and anti-corrruption tools for societies,”
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 264-
271, 2010.
[11] F. Bannister and R. Connolly, “The trouble with transparency:
a critical review of openness in e-government,” Policy &
Internet, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-30, 2011.
[12] S. Aghaei, M. Ali Nematbakhsh, and H. Khosravi Farsani,
“Evolution of the world wide Web: from web 1.0 to web 4.0”,
International Journal of Web & Semantic Technology, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2012.
[13] S. Ae Chun, S. Shulman, R. Sandoval, and E. Hovy,
“Government 2.0: making connections between citizens, data
and government”, Information Polity, vol. 15, pp. 1-9, 2010.
[14] N.R. Dissanayake and G.K.A. Dias, “Web-based applications:
extending the general perspective of the service of web,” The
10th International Research Conference of KDU on Changing
Dynamics
in
the
Global
Environment:
challenges
and
opportunities, 2017.
[15] A. Kaliontzoglou, P. Sklavos, T. Karantjias, and D. Polemi,
“A secure e-government platform achitecture for small to
medium sized public organizations,” Electronic Commerce
Research and Applications, vol 4, no. 2, pp. 174-186, 2005.
[16] D. M. Boyd and N. B. Ellison, “Social network sites:
definition, history, and scholarship,” Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 210-230, 2007.
[17] P. Romero-Navarro, R. Martínez-Peláez, D. Toto-Jiménez, M.
H. Juárez-Pérez, and C. A. Ochoa-Ortiz, “Knowing the
tendency of an electoral candidate through facebook: a case
study in municipal election in Miahuatlán de Porfirio Díaz,
Oaxaca,” Programación Matemática y Software, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 8-16, 2016.
[18] Transparency International, “Corruption perceptions index
2018,” Transparency International, pp. 1-26, 2018.
[19] C. Pring and J. Vrushi, “Tackling the crisis of democracy,
promoting rule of law and fighting corruption,” Transparency
International, 2019.
[20] C. Pring and J. Vrushi, “Global corruption barometer: Latin
America & The Caribbean 2019,” Transparency International,
ISBN: 978-3-96076-126-6, 2019.
[21] C. Ball, “What is Transparency?,” Public Integrity, vol 11, no.
4, pp. 293-308, 2009.
[22] K. Soonhee and L. Jooho, “E-Participation, transparency, and
trust in local government,” Public Administration Review,
vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 819-828, 2012.
[23] L.
Schmidthuber,
D.
Hilgers,
T.
Gegenhuber,
and
S.
Etzelstorfer, “The emergence of local open government:
Determinants
of
citizen
participation
in
online
service
reporting,” Government Information Quarterly, vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 457-469, 2017.
[24] M. Gascó-Hernández, E. G. Martín, L Reggi, S. Pyo, and L F
Luna-Reyes, “Promoting the use of open government data:
Cases of training and engagement,” Government Information
Quarterly, vol 35, no. 2, pp. 233-242, 2018.
[25] E. Ruijer, F. Détienne, M. Baker, J. Groff, and A. J. Meijer,
“The
politics
of
open
government
data:
understanding
organizational responses to pressure for more transparency,”
American
Review
of
Public
Administration.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/027507401988
8065
[26] OECD, “Digital government in Mexico – The path towards a
sustainable and inclusive digital transformation,” OECD, pp.
1-5, 2018.
[27] UN, “E-government survey 2018 – Gearing e-government to
support transformation towards sustainable and resilient
societies,” United Nations, pp. 1-300, 2018.
[28] D. Linders, “From e-government to we-government: defining
a typology for citizen coproduction in the age of social
media,” Government Information Quarterly, vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 446-454, 2012.
S. F. King and P. Brown, “Fix my street or else: using the
internet to voice local public service concerns,” The First
International Conference on Theory and Pracice of Electronic
Governance (ICEGOV 2007), Dec 2007, pp. 72-80, ISBN:
978-1-59593-822-0.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

