Citizen -centric Smart City Planning for Africa: A Qualitative Case Study of Early 
Stage Co-creation of a Namibian Smart Community  
 
 
Virpi Oksman, 
 
 
 
VTT technology Centre of Finland, 
Tekniikankatu 1, Tampere, Finland  
e-mail: virpi.oksman@vtt.fi  
 
Mika Raunio, 
University of Tampere, 
Kanslerinrinne 1, Tampere, Finland 
e-mail: Mika.M.Raunio@staff.uta.fi 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper examines social and economic 
development of African urban areas using the Smart 
Community concept. Sub-Saharan African communities face an 
urgent need for affordable housing, new working and learning 
environments, and new technologies to support sustainable 
development. The paper provides insights to the main research 
questions: 1. How can citizen-centric engagement process for 
community development be enhanced in an African context?  
2. What kinds of information and communication technology 
(ICT) 
tools 
can 
support 
such 
processes?  
and 3. What is required for citizen-centric Smart Community 
development? We conducted a focus group study in 
Keetmanshoop, the Karas region in Southern Namibia. The 
main lesson learned focus on the need to develop a reliable ICT 
infrastructure along with affordable housing and feasible 
services.  
Keywords-Citizen-centric; Smart City; co-creation; virtual reality, 
Africa, developing economies.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In Sub-Saharan Africa, there is an urgent need for 
affordable housing, new working and learning environment 
and new digital services to support societal and economic 
development. The African population will continue its radical 
shift from rural to urban areas; in 2010 urban dwellers made 
up nearly 40 percent of the total population, and the 
estimation for 2030 is 50% and for 2060 65% [1]. The urban 
population of Namibia has been increasing from 28% in 1991 
to 33% in 2001 and to 42% in 2011. The evolution of the 
society requires public administrations to tackle many new 
challenges, 
including 
civic 
rights, 
gender 
equality, 
employment, mobility, digitalization, security, environment 
and many others. One of the main challenges in African 
governments is to develop more democratic and transparent 
societies without corruption. The widespread use of new 
technologies, such as social media and mobile services, has 
increased the demands for openness and transparency for 
public decision-making and administrations. There is a need 
to enhance the communication between citizens and 
government, and to increase public engagement and to help 
citizens stay informed about decisions.   
Urbanization in Africa tends to differ from the experiences 
acquired from other parts of the world. In Africa, 
urbanization 
is 
“decoupled 
from 
overall 
structural 
transformation of the economies”. According to a theory, 
urbanization is a process of transformation where economies 
evolve from rural agricultural economies towards industry- 
and service- based economies, and they simultaneously move 
from low-income to high-income societies [2]. However, in 
Africa urbanization seems to miss this link to development 
towards industrialization and higher income. Instead, 
urbanization in Africa frequently refers to “resettlement from 
the rural hinterlands, to rural market towns”. In fact, over 
70% of African populations live in towns with less than 100 
000 inhabitants, in sparsely populated small towns and along 
the road networks. There are only a few mega cities in Africa 
[3].  
However, Smart Cities are frequently linked to big cities 
and advanced technologies that improve the living conditions 
and foster economic growth in these highly populated and 
well-connected 
urban 
agglomerations. 
Slavova 
and 
Okwechime [3] emphasize the fact, that African urbanization 
provides some preconditions, which should be considered 
when the Smart City approach is used to foster the urban and 
economic development in Africa. They make a distinction 
between “hard” and “soft” qualities, or best-practices, as 
domains that Smart City approach provides for city planners 
and stakeholders, who may then select a combination that 
best fits for their city’s needs. Hard domain includes, for 
example, physical infrastructure like water resources, which 
can be used more efficiently with more innovative 
management solutions. Soft domain includes social issues 
that may be ameliorated, for instance, by provision of housing 
and social services with integrating such services with ICT. 
Also fostering of economic development through innovation 
and entrepreneurship may be considered as a soft approach. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Slavova and Okwechime [3] also point out different 
strategies needed for different agglomerations; mega-cities 
(over 5 million), medium cities (from 5 to 0,5 million) and 
small cities (less than 0,5 million) and other urban (less than 
0,3 million), that cannot be developed with similar agendas. 
To simplify, soft qualities – social and human oriented 
development – are likely to be emphasized in small towns and 
rural environments rather than technology and data driven 
solutions. Rather than “hard domains”, that are typical to big 
cities (e.g., physical infrastructure, urban density and 
congestion) more generic challenges of poor regions (e.g., 
slums and informal settlements) and especially qualities of 
“soft domain” (e.g., low quality and segregated social 
services, unemployment) are key elements to focus on in case 
of small towns [3]. It should be noticed, that in Namibia small 
towns, rather than cities are typical urban agglomerations. 
Event the biggest city, Windhoek, has less than million 
inhabitants. In our case town Keetmanshoop, there is only 
30 000 inhabitants approximately, although it is major urban 
agglomeration in southern Namibia, and locates close to 
South Africa, which is Namibia’s main trading partner. 
Therefore, “soft and human” solutions of Smart City 
approach are especially important in this case. Keetmanshoop 
also hosts different social and ethnic groups that have had 
conflicts in the recent history, which may influence the socio-
economic development in the context of urban development 
also in the future. Having these guidelines in mind, it is safe 
to conclude, that especially social and human aspects of 
Smart City approach are relevant for the development of 
communities in the case area. In addition, it is more 
appropriate to discuss Smart Communities than Smart Cities 
in this context, as maybe is the case in most areas in (Sub-
Saharan) Africa. Finally, due to decoupling of socio-
economic development and urbanization in Africa, it is even 
more important effort to apply approaches like “Smart City” 
in this context, in order to converge these processes in the 
immediate future.  
Widely acknowledged as the administrative capital of 
southern Namibia, Keetmanshoop attracts significant interest 
from private and public investors. Investment opportunities 
range from real estate, retail, solar energy, to logistics and 
hospitality. Some of the most significant projects on the 
horizon include the University of Namibia Campus, with 420 
upmarket residential plots and a 10 000 square meter retail 
centre. The Municipal Council values the importance of 
Private Public Partnerships aimed at delivering essential 
infrastructure and welcomes investors to tap into the 
opportunities.  
However, the development and building projects may face 
many challenges starting from the decision-making about the 
land, to transparency of the communication processes, getting 
raw materials and qualified professionals to work for the 
building sites. Our aim in this study was to examine the 
possibilities of co-creation approach in the context of 
building new affordable housing in the Keetmaanshop area. 
Moreover, user needs for local service infrastructure, public 
and private service development and business possibilities 
are also studied. In Smart City planning, the open innovation 
approach and new technologies are increasingly used to 
support stakeholder communication in urban planning. 
Advanced virtual reality (VR) models and tools, such as 
augmented reality (AR) and mixed reality (MR) can be used 
to visualize future urban plans. These kinds of  tools can 
significantly improve the understanding of what is being 
proposed and the potential impacts of different alternatives 
on landscape and living environment as it is shown earlier in 
quantitative studies with citizens as well [4]. Moreover, we 
were interested in to finding out how this kinds of tools would 
support the co-creation process in Africa. To understand the 
challenges of current housing situation, and citizens’ needs 
for Smart Community development, we conducted five focus 
groups in Keetmanshoop, the Karas region in Southern 
Namibia. 
This paper focuses on communities based development 
possibilities, to enhance socially inclusive bottom-up 
approach that harness the collective intelligence and 
creativity of communities. The paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes the concept of Smart Community. 
Section III presents the VR and MR tools for urban planning. 
Section IV explicates the focus group study. In Section V, we 
draw conclusions and define next steps of the research.  
 
II. 
SMART COMMUNITY OR SMART CITY? 
In European and in other industrialized countries contexts, 
there has been an intensive development work, projects and 
research on the concept of Smart City. The Smart City 
concept is often approached from a technology-oriented, 
systemic perspective that provides new technological 
solutions, big data and innovations to make the living 
environments smarter through the application of digital 
technologies [5]. Less attention, however, is given to societal 
aspects of the Smart City for instance smart governance, 
smart people, sense of community and social learning [6]. In 
addition, what seems to be largely missing is empirical 
insight into the extent to which different smart city aspects 
can be applied in different geographical or in decisively 
different cultural contexts [7]. In addition, less is discussed 
how to involve citizens and other stakeholders for the 
development processes with new digital tools for sustainable, 
long-term results.  
Why is the concept of Smart Communities relevant in the 
African societal contexts?  Smart Cities go hand in hand with 
smart communities and one is dependent on the other. Smart 
Cities need also smart citizens – the citizens who live and 
work in these cities need to participate in adoption and usage 
of new solutions, at least. Smart Community concept allows 
socially, economically, technically and environmentally 
sustainable solution for urban living and advanced digital 
service-ecosystem for health, wellbeing, and equity of 
citizens (see Figure 1). 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Elements of smart community as modified from [8][9]. 
 
In other words, Smart Community resembles Smart City 
approach 
that 
foster 
broad 
social, 
economic 
and 
environmental 
sustainability 
in 
urban 
development. 
However, Smart Community is application for smaller scale 
solutions and especially targeted for the less advanced 
regions, with more emphasis on social and economic 
sustainability (“smartness in people”) than on technology and 
digital solutions (“smartness in technology”), as is often the 
case in Smart City concepts [5][6][7][8][9]. The Smart 
Community approach aims to introduce an organized and 
systematic approach to community development that 
provides better living conditions for local people. The 
specific qualities that may be considered as benefits of Smart 
Community solution include emphasizing local value 
addition in the construction process, environmental 
sustainability and cultural and social advantages and long-
term sustainability. 
Smart management and communication technologies give 
citizens the opportunity to shape both the culture and the 
structure of cities. A successful governance of the 
accelerating urbanization in Africa is a key process in terms 
of a positive economic and social development of the 
continent. One of the major systemic challenges based on the 
observation is that the growth of cities will foster the 
economic development and growth in the continent, but the 
low quality of infrastructure and urban planning hinders the 
positive socioeconomic impacts of the processes. For 
example, Namibian cities act as nodes through which 
development 
occurs 
and 
the 
rapid 
urbanization 
simultaneously poses risks that affect sustainable livelihoods 
of people [10].  
 Hence, citizen participation and social capital are essential 
elements of Smart Community. In Social scientific research, 
the term ‘community’ may refer to both to communities that 
are location-based, whose social ties rely mainly on 
geographical proximity (such as neighborhoods) or modern 
communities that are rather formed around interests and skills 
(such as professional communities) than around locality [11]. 
Social scientific research has also recognized the concept of 
‘imagined communities’, understood as socially constructed 
community, imagined by the people who perceive themselves 
as a part of that group [12]. In addition, online and virtual 
communities have gained recently more and more attention.  
They have been defined as a combination of people, who 
have a shared purpose, and computer systems, to support and 
mediate social interaction and facilitate a sense of 
togetherness [13]. In this context, we are researching mostly 
local communities – although all kinds of modern 
communities, including imagined, online and virtual 
communities have impact on people’s sense of community.  
Citizen participation and social capital are essential 
elements of Smart Community. In Europe, governments have 
been launching ICT platforms to facilitate citizen 
participation for Smart City development. They allow 
different types of citizen participation, such as voting, rising 
public awareness and monitoring political processes. One of 
the main challenges of adopting advanced VR technologies, 
which are quite mature tested and capable in the Europe and 
in the industrialized world, in the African context, is the 
slowness of the internet connection. The average download 
speeds in Northern Europe are among the highest in the world 
(over 25 Megabits per second). In Namibia it is 7,5 -10 Mbps, 
which is higher than the average in African and Sub-Saharan 
African countries in general, but still low compared to the 
more digitalized areas of the world. 
Moreover, co-creation and co-design of urban public 
services support resilience building and acceptance of public 
urban services that support sustainability [14]. Co-creation 
has impact on experienced quality of living environment. Co-
design activities affect the experienced quality of a living 
environment, and diverse fields have recognized the 
relationship between the citizens’ sense of the place, social 
cohesion and public health outcomes [15][16][17]. 
III. 
VIRTUAL AND MIXED REALITY TOOLS FOR CO-
CREATION OF SMART COMMUNITIES 
Recently VR and MR tools have been created to involve 
citizens and other stakeholders contributing to urban 
planning. Traditionally, urban planning processes are 
regulated by the public legal service sector. However, legal 
requirements typically base on a top-down distribution of 
information, even if the perception among different 
stakeholders of, for example, the characteristics of urban 
attractiveness and livability may vary significantly. To make 
cities more inclusive, planning processes should be 
developed towards exchanging of ideas. Such processes 
could use computer-aided design, including VR and MR 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

modelling. Moreover, co-creation and co-design of urban 
public services support resilience building and acceptance of 
public urban services that support sustainability in the long 
run [14][15][16][17].  
Currently, in Africa, urban planning proposals are 
communicated to stakeholders and the public to a varying 
extent and by different means. Often only, a limited amount 
of stakeholders is well informed and new technologies, such 
as virtual models, are not widely used. However, statistic 
images and technical reports may be inadequate if a 
meaningful participation and convincing common vision is 
desired [18].  
MR models and applications have been increasingly piloted 
in various urban planning and renewal projects [19]. VR and 
MR technologies can provide users ubiquitous experience: 
need for information any time anywhere with their smart 
mobile devices. In addition to visualizing future city 
environments with VR and MR models, more recent extension 
of this technology allows citizens to comment and ask city 
planners questions considering the future plans. Mobile 
applications for instance, have been recently piloted for 
developing two-way communication between city governance 
and citizens. The piloted applications allow citizens and city 
officials to discuss local urban planning development issues 
[20]. 
A prototype of MR application supporting a range of 
devices for a collaborative multimodal interaction was 
developed by Wagner et al. [19] to enable a group of 
participants to create a vision of urban projects. The 
stakeholders and users involved in the urban planning project 
had various backgrounds ranging from local urban planning 
specialists to other stakeholders such as members of local 
commerce. MR visualizations proved useful in enriching the 
available representations and enhancing stakeholders’ 
understanding of urban situations. 3D visualizations, videos 
and sounds helped to express and co-construct their ideas. 
 Smartphones for urban planning have been piloted with 
citizens [20].  An augmented reality (AR) prototype system on 
smartphones was experienced as a useful tool for visualising 
proposed architectural designs [21].  
The mobile and MR and AR technology tools above 
described, have been applied in various parts of the world like 
in Europe and in New Zealand [19][21]. Consequently, we 
were interested in to finding out how these kinds of tools 
would support the co-creation process in Africa.  
One possible way to communicate Smart Community 
planning in the future was by using a virtual reality solution 
that was developed in order to visualize the planned residential 
area in Namibia. The system was developed by engineering 
firm A-insinöörit using virtual models by architecture firm 
Aihio Architects (Figure 2 and Figure 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Virtual reality models from the future housing area 
planned in Keetmanshoop, Namibia. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  A Virtual reality system with devices for demonstrating virtual 
reality solutions. 
 
The aim of the virtual reality model is to visualize the future 
residential area and to enhance the co-creation process with 
different stakeholders. The virtual model also aids in 
visualizing and choosing different material for houses and 
overall planning of the area. The system uses devices for 
demonstrating VR solutions such as AR and MR head 
mounted glasses (HMD) and their peripherals to produce a 
fully immersive simulation of the area. Furthermore, to create 
virtual worlds from a real world environment, special 
capturing devices are needed, for instance drones equipped 
with camera. Fully immersive simulations are able to provide 
very realistic user experiences by delivering a wide field of 
view and high resolutions.  
 
IV. 
A CASE STUDY - METHODS 
We conducted a focus group study in Keetmanshoop in 
February, 2017. The aim of the focus groups was to discuss 
and share ideas about living, planning of the future houses 
and environment in Namibia and Keetmanshoop with 
different stakeholders. After conducting the focus groups, we 
were able to present the findings and discuss them with 
Keetmanshoop Municipal Council and the decision-makers. 
The focus groups were selected from different social groups 
including: young people, families, mobile professionals, 
social and health workers and traditional community leaders. 
The groups were selected to provide different insights for the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

new area under development. Five separate focus groups 
were conducted with the following groups in Keetmanshoop: 
 
 Potential 
dwellers 
who 
are 
listed 
by 
the 
Keetmanshoop 
municipality 
and 
First 
Capital 
Housing Fund (8 persons) 
 UNAM final year students (8 persons) 
 UNAM faculty/Staff members (3 persons) 
 Social and community development workers (4 
persons) 
 Community leaders representing different parishes (4 
persons) 
 
 
Figure 4.  Five focus groups were conducted in Keetmanshop in Namibia. 
 
Because of the slow internet connections in the whole area, 
we could not use any internet-based VR visualization 
methods. Instead, we used different visual material to 
facilitate discussing such as photos, post-its and drawings 
(Figure 5).  
 
The focus group study was exploring the following topics:  
 
 Living and finance- how the dwellers perceive 
housing prices in Keetmanshoop and Namibia, 
and how does it impact on the participant’s 
future location?  
 Housing styles and alternatives  -   new solutions 
and materials in housing 
 Social and cultural sustainability of the 
neighborhood – safety, diversity and community 
building issues  
 Needed public and private services for Smart 
Community  
V. 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
In general, the need for development of wiFi network, as 
well as the need for affordable housing and feasible services 
was most highlighted in young people’s focus group. 
However, these themes came up  in all other focus groups as 
well. House may be smaller and cheaper at first, and as 
prosperity and family grows, it may be extended by building 
new rooms to the house. At the moment housing markets are 
not very dynamic, and houses are seldom sold by the 
individuals, but mostly by investors or contractors who have 
new housing projects.  
In the families focus group, it  was interpreted as a positive 
way to create areas with more various income levels to make 
housing markets more dynamic. People are ready to accept 
also less typical solutions, also partly  because for the many 
the situation or circumstances is that “you have to take what 
you got”, due to growing price level and low availability of 
houses. One suggestion was that the government and relevant 
authorities should offer more affordable options and venture 
cheaper building materials as most Namibians cannot afford 
the housing prices at the moment. However, some people also 
expect more expensive and unique solutions than standard 
houses; more spacious, two-storey houses and using quality 
materials for walls, doors etc. 
The families also expected more transparency about the 
housing situation. At the moment families do not know, and 
cannot check, what is their position in the municipality’s 
waiting list for a new apartment or a house. It may also be 
unclear, how one proceeds on the list, and why someone 
receives an invitation to see the house and some others do not. 
Support for local companies and constructors is seen as a 
good thing, but not at the expense of the quality: quality of 
houses is not always good and cracks to walls may come fast. 
Regarding sustainable energy solutions, already now for 
example solar panels are widely used for energy, so 
sustainable (solar) energy sources are not distinctive factor as 
such, but rather usual solution.   
The mobile professionals’ focus groups ephasized the 
wide awailability of different affordable services and quality 
housing. The mobile professionals, even though they had a 
job at the city were not planning to stay permanently at this 
stage. They emphasized the need for liveable service 
structures, including a wide range of public and private 
services. For instance libraries, schools, commercial services, 
day care with qualified people and good quality premises 
were seen as important. Many basic services, like car 
maintenance,  are still missing or too expensive in the rural 
areas, which is keeping professionals living in two locations 
simultaneously. 
The social workers and community leaders also pointed 
out the need for more healthy and safe recreational area 
choices like playgrounds, parks, gymn, libarary and sports 
clubs for kids and young people to keep youngsters out of 
bars.  
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND  FUTURE WORK 
The participatory urban planning processes and Smart City 
development are sensitive for different cultural and global 
contexts. The advanced virtual reality technologies may work 
well in the countries and areas with high WiFi speed, but 
these kind of technology-driven solutions may be less usable 
in rural regions with occasionally very slow internet access. 
Consequently, there is also a need for lightweight mobile 
solutions, which could function more securely in rural areas 
to involve more citizens in the co-creation process.  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

To enhance citizen-driven planning processes, more 
transparency and information sharing is need. Citizens in 
general were expecting more transparency to the urban 
planning and housing projects. In particular, simple online 
tools that would inform citizens about their position on the 
municipality’s waiting list for new apartment or house and 
would notify about the progress of the building project, 
would improve the communication between government and 
citizens.  
Different citizen groups such as young people, families 
and mobile professionals have different needs for Smart 
Community development. Typical standard house solution is 
not serving all groups and especially mobile professionals 
were emphasizing a wide variety of both public and private 
services. However, the most highlighted issue in the all 
groups was the need for affordable houses. At the moment 
housing markets are not very dynamic and cannot provide 
apartments for all.  
Our qualitative study is limited to one rural, but developing 
community in Namibia and as such, the results cannot be 
generalized to all African or Sub-Saharan countries, as the 
socio-economic situations might be quite different. In the 
next stages of the research, we are going to focus on 
developing frugal innovations, i.e., adapting local technology 
and locally designed and co-created solutions for engaging 
citizens in planning or developing in their living 
environments and service-ecosystem in Namibia. Moreover, 
other important questions to research further are: how local 
people can be engaged to participate in planning, what kind 
of feedback channels do people need and how should be the 
communication and the interaction in between the 
governance and citizens in urban planning be developed.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is part of SmartCom –project, which is funded by 
Business Finland, A-Insinöörit Ltd., Aihio Architects Ltd., 
Earth House Systems Ltd. and Sopimusvuori Ltd.  We would 
like to thank SmartCom –project partners for their co-
operation. In addition, we would like to thank Disney 
Andreas from University of Namibia for facilitating the focus 
groups with us.  
REFERENCES 
  
[1] African 
Development 
Bank. 
Annual 
report 
2011. 
https://www.afdb.org/en/knowledge/publications/annual-
report/annual-report-2011[retrieved 5.2. 2018] 
[2] P. C. Annez and R.M. Buckley, “Urbanization and growth: 
Setting the context,“ In M. Spence, P. C. Annez & R. M. 
Buckley (Eds.), Urbanization and growth. Commission on 
growth and development (pp. 1-45). Washington, DC: The 
World Bank, 2009.  
[3] M. Slavova and E. Okwechime,”African smart cities strategies 
for agenda 2063,” Africa Journal of Management, vol. 2, no. 2, 
pp. 210-229,  2016.  
[4] V. Oksman and M. Kulju, “Developing on-line illustrative and 
participatory tools for urban planning: towards open innovation 
and co-production through citizen engagement”,  International 
Journal of Service Technology Management, vol 23, no 5/6, 
pp. 2017, pp. 445-464.   
[5] P. Neirotti, et al., “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: 
Some stylised facts.” Cities, Vol. 38, pp. 25-36, 2014.  
[6] L. de Wijs, P.  Witte, and  D. de Klerk, “Smart City Trends 
and Ambitions” AGILE 2017, Wageningen, May, 2017. ISBN 
978-90-816960-7 -
4. https://agileonline.org/index.php/conference/proceedings/pr
oceedings-2017 [retrieved 5.2. 2018] 
[7] T.  Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with 
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions“ 
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital 
Government Research Conference: Digital Government 
Innovation in Challenging Times. dg.o '11,  2011, pp.  282-
291.  
[8] R. Giffinger, C. Fertner, H.  Kramar, R. Kalasek , N. Pichler-
Milanović, E. Meijers. “Smart cities, Ranking of European 
medium-sized cities”, Vienna: University of  Technology, 
2007. 
[9] R. G. Hollands, Will the real smart city please stand up? City, 
vol 
12, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
303-320, 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1080/13604810802479126. 
[10] N. Indongo, S. Angombe, and N. Nickanor, “Urbanisation in 
Namibia: Views from semi-formal and informal settlements. 
University of Namibia”, 2013.  
[11] D. McMillan and D. M. Chavis, “Sense of community: A 
definition and theory”, Journal of Community Theory, vol. 14, 
no. 1, pp. 6–23, 1986.  
[12] B.  Anderson, “Imagined Communities. Reflection of the 
Origin and Spread of Nationalism”, Verso: London & New 
York, 2006.  
[13] J. Preece and D. Maloney-Krichman, “Online Communities: 
Design, Theory, and Practice”,  Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 0, 2005.  
[14] M. Steen, M. Manschot, and N. De Koning, “Benefits of co-
design in service design projects.” International Journal of 
Design, vol.5, 2011, pp. 53-60. 
[15] D.F. Shanahan et al.  Toward improved public health outcomes 
from urban nature. American Journal of Public Health, vol. 
105, no. 3, pp. 470-7, 2015.  
[16] H. Frumkin, “Healthy Places: Exploring the Evidence: 
American Journal of Public Health., vol 93, no. 9, pp. 1451-
1456, Sept. 2003.  
[17] A. Grahn and P. Stigsdotter, “The relation between perceived 
sensory dimensions of urban green space and stress 
restoration”, Landscape and Urban Planning, vol. 94, pp. 264-
275, 201  
[18] J. D. Salter,  C. Campbell., M. Journey,  and S. R. J. Sheppard.  
The Digital Workshop: Exploring the Use of Interactive and 
Immersive Visualisation Tools in Participatory Planning.  
Journal of Environmental Management, vol 90, pp. 2090–
2101, 2009. 
[19] I. Wagner et al., “MR Tent: a place for constructing mixed 
realities in urban planning”, Proceedings of the fourth 
international conference on Communities and technologies, 
(C&T '09) May 2009,  pp. 185-194  
[20] T. P. Ertiö, “Participatory Apps for Urban Planning—Space for 
Improvement”,  Planning Practice and Research, vol. 30, no 3, 
pp. 303-321,  May 2015.  
[21] M. Allen, “Smart-phone augmented reality for public 
participation in urban planning”, Proceedings of the 23rd 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference, (OzCHI 
'11) Nov. 2011, pp. 11-20.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

