The Aggregator as a Trust Builder in a Renewable Energy System 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
Marius Rohde Johannessen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: marius.johannessen@usn.no 
Qian Meng 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail: qian.meng@usn.no 
 
 
Abstract—This paper focuses on the role of the aggregator as a 
trust builder in a smart grid with consumers and prosumers. An 
aggregator plays a new role in the energy market and represents 
a group of consumers and prosumers toward the market. The 
aggregator can negotiate prices and trade flexibility for its 
consumers and prosumers. Trading flexibility is vital to shave 
peaks in energy consumption. A survey among early adopters of 
renewable energy in households revealed a lack of trust in 
transferring control of electric vehicle charging, heating, and 
household appliances to an aggregator. The paper proposes 
measures to improve trust in the energy market, focusing on the 
aggregator role. Three categories of measures are suggested:  
regulatory, technical, and organizational, combined with a plain 
language policy.  
Keywords-smart grid; flexibility; trust; prosumer; aggregator; 
ecosystem; plain language. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
A prosumer is both a producer and a consumer. In the 
electricity market, a prosumer produces electric energy from 
renewable sources, such as solar panels. Excess energy can 
be sold to the grid. An aggregator plays a new role in the 
energy market and represents a group of consumers and 
prosumers toward the market. The aggregator can negotiate 
prices and trade flexibility for its consumers and prosumers. 
A recent survey by the authors among early adopters of 
smart home technologies and renewable energy production in 
households relieved a significant lack of trust in the energy 
market [1]. Trust has decreased even more as energy costs 
have soared throughout 2022. In Norway, the Facebook 
group demanding lower electricity prices has 620.000 
members, and the media presents new stories about the 
consequences of soaring prices every day. Polls show that 
government support is at an all-time low, and commentators 
go a long way in pointing to the energy crisis as a reason for 
this lack of support. It seems that trust is at an all-time low, 
at least where energy is concerned, yet trust is perhaps the 
most critical factor for conducting effective transactions and 
making things happen smoothly. A low level of trust in 
government and institutions increases the risk of direct action 
by citizens [2]. It is even said that trust is the key to 
understanding the dynamics of social relations, to the extent 
that it is often viewed as the glue that holds society together 
[3].  
The current energy crisis emphasizes the consequences of 
falling trust levels. The electricity market seems to be part of 
the problem since pricing mechanisms are complex and 
challenging to understand for the average citizen. For 
example, the algorithm "Euphemia" predicts future prices 
and is complicated and hard to explain. The whitepaper 
describing the algorithm's work is 53 pages long and very 
technical [4]. This complexity is likely part of why people 
distrust the energy market. When market experts talk to the 
media and try to explain why prices are high, explanations 
tend to vary between different factors, such as hydro basin 
water levels, the cost of natural gas or CO2, and this leads to 
confused public thinking that the real reason simply is that 
"someone" wants prices to remain high.  
Based on the above, it seems that communication, or 
rather a lack of clear communication, is part of the problem. 
We know from other fields, such as health, that plain and 
understandable communication is essential for trust [5].  
In this paper, we propose three classes of measures: 
regulatory, technical, and organizational, combined with a 
plain language policy to alleviate the current situation and 
contribute to a higher level of trust in energy market 
institutions, which can aid the transition towards green 
energy. The measures are shown in Fig. 1. 
Fig. 2 illustrates how traditional power grids transfer 
electricity from producers to consumers. The generated 
electricity by the power plants goes through the transmission 
network operated by the Transmission System Operator 
(TSO) and the regional network operated by the Distribution 
System Operator (DSO), then to the end user. The transfer is 
one-way; the end user must pay for electricity based on a 
tariff. 
 
Figure 1.  Measures to obtain trust 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 2.  Traditional power grid. 
With the development of renewable energy sources, 
consumers can produce electricity from solar panels, 
windmills, and geothermal power. This new role is often 
called prosumer. Smart grids enable a two-way energy 
transfer, allowing prosumers to produce and sell energy.  A 
smart meter records the amount of energy transferred in the 
power ecosystem.   
 
 
Figure 3.  Power grid with prosumers and aggregators. 
The aggregator is a separate entity representing several 
prosumers. An independent aggregator is defined in the EU 
Clean Energy Package (CEP) in Art. 2 (19) of the Directive 
(EU) 2019/944 [6] as "a market participant engaged in 
aggregation who is not affiliated to the customer's supplier." 
Aggregation is "a function performed by a natural or legal 
person who combines multiple customer loads or generated 
electricity for sale, purchase or auction in any electricity 
market." The traditional suppliers can provide aggregator 
services like demand response, but they haven't taken this 
responsibility since their main business is selling energy. 
Therefore, the role of independent aggregators has emerged 
[7][8].  
The aggregator may negotiate terms with consumers and 
prosumers and handle transactions internally between 
consumers and prosumers. The aggregator may also provide 
electricity storage and offer electricity storage as a service to 
customers without storage capability. The aggregator plays an 
essential role in achieving flexibility. Grid flexibility refers to 
the ability of a power system to maintain a balance between 
generation and load during uncertainty, resulting in increased 
grid efficiency, resiliency, and the integration of variable 
renewables into the grid [9]. The gain from such flexibility is 
savings for the prosumer since electricity is cheaper in off-
peak periods. Flexibility can postpone infrastructure upgrades 
and investments due to better grid utilization for the TSO and 
the DSO. 
The authors were part of the ERA-NET+ Smart-MLA 
project [10] that designed and developed a cloud-based 
aggregator solution to optimize demand response and increase 
grid flexibility for renewable energy usage. Smart-MLA 
aimed to raise consumer and community awareness of 
demand response aggregating mechanisms. The project 
created user-friendly interfaces accessible through web pages 
and web services, allowing consumers to configure, control 
and monitor their appliances. Aggregators could also access 
these web services to securely analyze, plan, and forecast 
energy consumption and generation without the need for own 
infrastructure. 
In the summer of 2021, the authors surveyed early 
adopters of home automation technology as part of the Smart-
MLA project. The respondents were approached using 
Norwegian Facebook groups relevant to smart homes.  The 
survey asked about demographic information, existing 
household installations, and the sentiments towards 
transferring control of electric vehicle charging, heating, and 
household appliances to an aggregator.  The survey was open 
for five days and attracted 209 respondents.  Fifty-two 
respondents used the opportunity to answer open-ended 
questions [1]. 
One clear result was a lack of trust in the energy market 
and its actors. Generally, the respondents expressed a low 
willingness 
to 
hand 
over 
control 
unless 
highly 
compensated.  A large majority were positive about flexibility 
but wanted to remain in control. 
One response was: "Energy companies will never be 
allowed to control anything in my house. With their hidden 
terms and conditions, they have repeatedly shown that they 
can't be trusted." 
 Another was: "The DSOs…have neglected to invest in the 
grid for the past 25 years while paying out hundreds of 
millions to shareholders. It's time they step up without shoving 
the [financial] burden onto consumers." 
 And a third was: "I don't trust them. What if something 
goes wrong?... and if the system is able to cut costs, that won't 
get back to consumers." 
These are three representative responses from the survey. 
There may be many reasons for the lack of trust, but the most 
important is a long-lasting competition with incomprehensible 
and incomparable terms. 
The results from the survey were the inspiration to 
investigate possible ways for aggregators to build trust with 
consumers and prosumers. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
discusses flexibility and trust, followed by Section III, 
proposing measures for prosumers to trust an aggregator. 
Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
FLEXIBILITY AND TRUST 
The electricity demand varies throughout the day. The 
price of electricity follows the demand. Shifting some of the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

load to periods with less demand is advantageous for all 
parties. The consumers will reduce their electricity bills, while 
the grid operator can delay investments in new grid 
infrastructure.  
Flexibility happens when consumers and prosumers offer 
to shift their loads. A single household will not contribute 
much, but if hundreds or thousands of consumers and 
prosumers provide flexibility, the impact will be high. The 
peaks will be shaved by shifting some load to periods with less 
demand. 
A flexible consumer or prosumer can decide to postpone 
consumption of energy, e.g., for electric car charging or 
heating, until the total demand for energy becomes lower.  The 
distribution system operator or an aggregator can handle 
flexibility. A typical example of flexibility is to render control 
of electric car charging, with the constraint that the car should 
be fully charged at 7 am in the morning. 
Flexibility depends on trust. A consumer or prosumer 
must trust that the aggregator or distribution system operator 
fulfills their obligations, e.g., that the car is fully charged at 7 
am. A consumer or prosumer that lacks trust will not transfer 
control to a not trustworthy entity. 
In the energy market, the aggregators, prosumers, and 
other actors must deal with the complexity of interacting with 
organizations and thus face the necessity to reduce this 
complexity before participating. According to the complexity 
reduction mechanism suggested by Luhmann [11], familiarity 
and trust address essential aspects of the complexity within 
organizations. Familiarity and information sharing inside 
organizations and crossing the organizations are fundamental 
for building trust. 
Piderit and Flowerday [12] observe two different views of 
trust: The first is based on confidence or risk in the 
predictability of the other party's actions, and in this instance, 
parties hedge themselves against uncertain events through 
guarantees, insurance, or law. The second view is based on 
confidence in the other party's goodwill, which relies on faith 
in the other party's integrity. 
The first view relies on regulations, while the second relies 
on the parties' relationship. 
During the work for the project SMART-MLA, the 
aggregators will plan and forecast the consumption and 
generation from the customers and prosumers (wind power, 
solar power) in a community. The aggregators and prosumers 
trust each other in the common concern for climate change, 
interest in new technologies, and environmental contribution. 
In contrast, the prosumers don't trust the aggregators for the 
issues of security of energy supply, immature technologies 
and business models, and expensive investments. The 
challenge is more prominent for renewable energy sources 
since photovoltaic and wind power must be produced instantly 
when sunshine or wind is present. The energy created from 
the sun and wind varies with weather conditions and is hence 
more challenging to integrate [13]. Therefore, strengthening 
the trust between the prosumers and the aggregators becomes 
a significant issue.  
III. 
MEASURES TO CREATE TRUST 
As we have demonstrated above, there is a strong link 
between grid flexibility and trust among aggregators, 
consumers, and prosumers. We propose to make efforts within 
the four categories below to build trust for the actors and 
reduce the risk of misbehavior: Regulatory measures, 
technical measures, and organizational transformations 
combined with a plain language policy. 
A. Regulatory Frameworks 
Without trusting others in the electric energy market, 
people would be confronted with the incomprehensible 
complexity of considering every possible eventuality of every 
person around before deciding what to do. Such complexity 
would be so overwhelming that, in many cases, people would 
refrain from acting. Trust is not the only complexity reduction 
method; rules are powerful techniques for reducing 
complexity. However, even when there are rules, trust is 
essential because there is no guarantee that other people will 
fully abide by them [14].  
Therefore, regulatory measures are one of the pillars of 
building trust so that participants behave within a specific 
framework 
and 
non-compliance 
can 
be 
punished. 
Parliamentary acts, government regulations, and the energy 
sector, through self-regulation, may establish regulatory 
measures. Regulatory measures, such as EU and Norwegian 
national regulations, may instruct the market actors to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
1) 
EU Energy Regulations  
According to the EU Clean Energy Package (CEP), 
Member States shall enable demand response through 
independent aggregation. Directive (EU) 2019/944 Art. 17 
contains the principles the national regulatory frameworks 
must respect [6]. Regulation (EU) 2019/943 Art. 59 1(e) states 
that a new network code can be developed in the area of 
demand response, including rules on aggregation, energy 
storage, and demand curtailment rules [15]. Network codes 
are typically used to harmonize the regulatory frameworks at 
the national level [16]. 
Under European frameworks, the energy participants have 
confidence in their clear expectations of what other actors will 
do, based on EU regulations and previous interactions. 
The regulations reduce the need for extensive 
negotiations, detail resolution, tight transaction control, etc. 
These EU regulations aim at long-term orientation, then 
increase the acceptance of interdependence and create 
commitment among energy actors. Furthermore, trust built on 
the common EU energy frameworks also reduces risk and 
transaction costs since these frameworks are essential in 
almost every contractual agreement. Therefore, EU energy 
regulations enable trust among the participants as well as the 
quality of business relationships. Without EU energy 
regulations, the lack of trust creates control-oriented and 
defensive communication that degrades communication and 
then cuts off the energy transaction across the countries. 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

2) 
Norwegian National Regulations  
The Norwegian electrical energy market opened for 
competition when the Energy Act entered into force in 1991 
[17]. The Norwegian Energy Regulatory Authority (NVE-
RME) ensures the regulatory activities. NVE-RME has played 
an active role as an energy market regulator in developing 
network regulation besides EU regulations, real market access 
for all customers, simplified supplier switching procedures, 
securing security and quality of supply, and efficient 
regulation of the energy system operation in Norway. In 2018, 
NVE suggested a mandatory structure for the grid tariff to 
incentivize lower peak loads [18].  
For the prosumers and other participants in the power 
market, official regulations can standardize contract terms, 
establish a common tariff structure, promote competition, and 
make it easier for customers to change electric power 
suppliers and connected services. According to the Norwegian 
official regulator NVE, all consumers have a right to produce 
and sell surplus electricity. The network companies are 
obliged to connect prosumers and receive their production. 
Prosumers feeding in less than 100 kW are not charged the 
fixed component for generation. Prosumers can choose their 
own electricity supplier that supplies their need for electricity 
and buy surplus electricity from the prosumer. In 2020 there 
were about 6 800 prosumers in Norway [19]. 
 
3) 
Self-regulation 
The energy sector can take responsibility through self-
regulation. In 2020, Renewables Norway [20] and 
Distriktsenergi established "Safe Energy Trading" to make the 
industry more transparent and customer friendly. The 
certification scheme allows energy companies to prove they 
follow best practices and commit themselves to improve 
customer relations. Self-regulation is a market-driven 
approach to tackle industry challenges and implement 
regulations by adjusting marketing and enhancing customer 
dialogue in line with requirements. 
B. Technical Measures 
Albinson, Balaji, and Chu [21] argue that technology can 
help build trust among stakeholders and create benefits for 
society.   They suggest four pillars of trust, shown in Table I.  
Their use of technology focuses on information handling. 
In the energy market context, two specific technologies may 
be particularly relevant: (1) Advanced Metering Systems 
(AMS) to give consumers and prosumers more insight into 
electricity use and production, and (2) Blockchain technology, 
sometimes referred to as Distributed Ledger Technology 
(DLT), which makes energy transactions unalterable and 
transparent through decentralization and cryptographic 
hashing. 
 
1) 
Advanced Metering System (AMS) 
For customers in the distribution grid, AMS with smart 
meters can offer the technology for new grid tariffs based on 
hourly metering consumption, which will incentivize the 
flexibility of consumers and prosumers. 
 
TABLE I.  
FOUR PILLARS OF TRUST [21] 
Transparency and accessibility 
• 
Enabling customers to easily evaluate the company 
and its offerings. 
• 
Making business terms, such as additional fees, 
privacy policies, and terms of service readily 
accessible and easily understandable. 
• 
Clarifying how self-learning algorithms operate. 
• 
Providing line of sight into supply chains. 
Ethics and responsibility 
• 
Ironing out complaints in a sensitive and timely 
manner. 
• 
Stopping misinformation in its tracks. 
• 
Encouraging inclusion with tools that test fairness and 
detect biases. 
• 
Implementing safeguards to promote stakeholder 
welfare along with digital controls that prevent 
unethical or inappropriate use of technology. 
Privacy and control 
• 
Putting control of personal data in users' hands. 
• 
Improving accuracy of consumer data. 
• 
Being frugal with personally identifiable information. 
Security and reliability 
• 
Verifying the identity of people claiming to be 
customers or providers to reduce impersonation and 
fraud. 
• 
Using automation and AI to reduce errors and fraud. 
• 
Proactively alerting users in the event of suspicious 
account activity. 
 
According to the Norwegian regulations, the smart meters 
should have standardized interfaces that allow for 
communication with external equipment; be able to connect 
different types of meters (e.g., gas, heat, water); secure data 
storage in cases of voltage outage; send and receive price 
information (from energy contracts and network tariffs) and 
signals for load control and earth fault detection [22].  
The smart meters are designed to meter the power flow in 
both directions, to and from the customer, enabling customers 
to invest in renewable energy sources to become prosumers. 
 
2) 
Blockchain Technology 
Transparency and accountability are essential for building 
trust. A blockchain allows the actors to store transaction data 
in an immutable, distributed ledger. Smart contracts that can 
be executed on the blockchain can replace intermediaries in 
the transaction process [23]. 
The Smart-MLA project developed a blockchain-based 
solution for handling settlements between an aggregator and 
its prosumers [24]. A private blockchain was chosen since the 
costs of registering a transaction on the blockchain was many 
times higher than the actual amount of the transaction. 
Smart contracts on the blockchain are self-executing when 
agreed conditions are met. It is possible to use smart contracts 
to set constraints on selling and buying prices. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

C. Organizational Transformations 
Ahmad and Huvila studied the relationship between 
organizational change and information sharing. They found 
that if organizational changes are perceived positively, trust 
between employees and in management will increase, which 
consequently will enhance information sharing [25]. We 
believe that trust between prosumers and aggregators will also 
increase if the organizational changes are perceived 
positively. 
More 
information 
sharing 
means 
more 
transparency.  
Trust can be seen as a cornerstone of work relationships 
and a key component of organizational effectiveness between 
the prosumers and aggregators. The "cooperative" model can 
be the organizational measure for the aggregator to build trust 
[26]. 
The International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) defines the 
term "cooperative" as "an autonomous association of persons 
united voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, 
and cultural needs and aspirations through jointly owned and 
democratically controlled enterprise" [27].  
ICA has set out the collaboration principles: self-help, 
self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity, and solidarity 
[27]. The company and the partner must also reflect four 
ethical values: honesty, openness, social responsibility, and 
caring for others. In addition, both parties need to be 
communication-based, multilevel, culturally rooted, and 
dynamic. In the smart grid ecosystem, the aggregators and 
prosumers must reflect these cooperative values when they 
want to build trust in each other [28]. Trust and sharing 
information will enhance each other's commitment and 
motivation to achieve grid flexibility. 
D. Plain Language 
Plain language initiatives emerged from the public sector's 
need to communicate better with citizens. Studies of public 
services found that many services and communications from 
the government were difficult for citizens to understand [29]. 
Language can be an instrument of inclusion but can also 
exclude, discriminate, and reinforce existing and unwanted 
power structures [30]. Plain language initiatives have sprung 
up to address this in several countries. Plain language is 
defined as "correct, clear and user-centered language in texts 
from government" [31]. It involves helping readers 
understand the text through the organization and structure, 
breaking up of complex information, simple language, and 
clear definitions of technical terms.  
As there is a clear connection between language, 
understanding and trust [5], we argue that using plain 
language is essential for the other three measures to have an 
effect. There are several approaches to developing plain 
language, and a plain language strategy should probably 
involve several of these. One example is readability indexes, 
algorithms that measure the readability of texts through word 
recognition, string lengths, etc. [32]. In addition, those 
responsible for communication with customers' need training 
in plain language writing techniques, such as guidelines for 
structuring text, and which words to choose for a given 
audience. 
There are several case studies on the effect of plain 
language, some of which are presented in [33], showing how 
different actors in the public sector have worked 
systematically and strategically to implement plain language 
in their communication with the outside world. These 
measures have led to fewer complaints and more satisfied 
service users simply because they understand the 
communication they receive. Given the confusion related to 
electricity pricing mentioned in the introduction, we argue 
that a plain language strategy from the actors in the energy 
market can be an essential factor in increasing trust.   
Further, in addition to the language in the form of words, 
visualization could also help explain complex issues and 
ideas in a business context [34]. Thus, we would also argue 
for using data-driven dashboards and visualizations to help 
users understand their energy bills and how prices are set. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper focuses on the lack of trust among consumers 
and prosumers in the energy market. The aggregator/prosumer 
model presented in Fig. 3 can become essential to the 
transition to renewable energy. Flexibility can help balance 
the grid and flatten demand curves at peak hours.  Trust is 
crucial for implementing flexibility, where an aggregator can 
take control over household consumption.  
A survey among early adopters of smart home technology 
shows that actors will meet strong barriers when getting 
consumers and prosumers on board. The lack of trust has been 
present since the deregulation of the Norwegian power market 
in 1971. The common opinion is that energy actors are more 
interested in earning money than creating the best situation for 
consumers and prosumers. Several measures need to be put in 
place to gain the trust of consumers and prosumers.  We point 
to four essential pillars of trust: regulatory measures, technical 
measures, and organizational transformations combined with 
adopting a plain language policy. These measures may help 
build the necessary trust to make flexibility work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Manu Net scheme Grant 
number MNET20/NMCS-3779 and funded through the 
Research Council of Norway Grant number 322500 with the 
project title "Cloud-based analysis and diagnosis platform for 
photovoltaic (PV) prosumers." 
 REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Johannessen, L. Berntzen, Q. Meng, B. Vesin, T. Brekke, 
and I. Laur, "User Sentiments Towards  Smart Grid Flexibility 
- A survey of early adopters' attitude towards allowing third 
parties to control electricity use in households" 14th 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and 
Personalized 
Mechanisms, 
Technologies 
and 
Services 
(CENTRIC), IARIA, pp. 41-46, 2021. 
[2] M. Kaase, "Interpersonal trust, political trust and non-
institutionalised political participation in Western Europe," 
West European Politics, vol. 22(3), pp. 1–21, 1999. 
[3] O. Schilke, M. Reimann, and K. S. Cook, "Trust in Social 
Relations," Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 47, pp. 239-259, 
2021. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[4] Nordpool Group. Euphemia public description. Single price 
coupling 
algorithm. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/globalassets/download-
center/single-day-ahead-coupling/euphemia-public-
description.pdf 2023.03.01 
[5] P. A. Paprica, K. McGrail, and M. J. Schull, Plain language 
about health data is essential for transparency and trust. The 
Conversation. October 10th 2019 [Online]. Available from: 
https://theconversation.com/plain-language-about-health-data-
is-essential-for-transparency-and-trust-123319, 2023.03.01. 
[6] European Commission. Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on 
common rules for the internal market for electricity and 
amending directive 2012/27/EU. [Online]. Available from: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/944 2023.03.01. 
[7] R. Bray and B. Woodman, "Barriers to independent 
aggregators in Europe," EPG Working Paper 1901, 2019. 
[8] S. Burger, J.P. Chaves-ávila, C. Batlle, and I. Pérez-Arriaga, 
"The Value of Aggregators in Electricity Systems," Renewable 
Sustainable Energy Review, vol. 77, pp. 395–405, 2017.  
[9] Cleantech Group. Smart Grid Flexibility Markets – Entering 
an Era of Localization. April 14th, 2020. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.cleantech.com/smart-grid-flexibility-
markets-entering-an-era-of-localization/ 2023.03.01. 
[10] Smart-MLA Consortium. Project fact sheet. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://smart-mla.stimasoft.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/02/ERANetSES_SMART_MLA.docx 
2023.03.01 
[11] N. Luhman, Trust and Power, Wiley, 2017. 
[12] R. Piderit and S. Flowerday, "The risk relationship between 
trust and information sharing in automotive supply chains," 
World Congress on Internet Security (WorldCIS 2014), IEEE, 
pp. 80-85, 2014 
[13] C. Skar, S. Jaehnert, A. Tomasgard, K.T. Midthun, and M. 
Fodstad, "Norway's role as a flexibility provider in a renewable 
Europe", Centre for Sustainable Energy Studies (CenSES), 
2013. 
[14] F.  Fukuyama, Trust: the social virtues and the creation of 
prosperity. New York: The Free Press, 1995. 
[15] European Commission. Regulation (EU) 2019/943 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on the 
internal market for electricity. [Online]. Available from: 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2019/943 2023.03.01 
[16] T. Schittekatte, V. Deschamps, and L. Meeus, "The regulatory 
framework for independent aggregators", EUI Working Paper 
RSC 2021/53, the European University Institute, May 2021 
[17] Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and Energy. Act no. 50 of 29 
June 1990: Act relating to the generation, conversion, 
transmission, trading, distribution and use of energy etc. (The 
Energy Act). [Online]. Available from: https://www.climate-
laws.org/geographies/norway/laws/the-energy-act-no-50-of-
1990 2023.03.01. 
[18] NVE. Høring - forslag til endringer i forskrift om kontroll av 
nettvirksomhet – tariffer 2018. (Hearing – proposal for changes 
in regulations on control of network activities – tariffs 2018)  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nve.no/om-
nve/regelverk/forskriftsendringer-pa-horing/horingforslag-til-
endringer-i-forskrift-om-kontroll-av-nettvirksomhet-tariffer-
avsluttet/ 2023.03.01 
[19] T. Langset and H. H. Nielsen. RME Rapport Nr. 6/2021 – 
National Report 2021. Norwegian Energy Regulatory 
Authority 
(NVE-RME). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://publikasjoner.nve.no/rme_rapport/2021/rme_rapport20
21_06.pdf 2023.03.01. 
[20] Fornybar Norge. 24 strømleverandører sertifisert for Trygg 
strømhandel. (24 energy providers certified for Safe electricity 
trading) 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.energinorge.no/nyheter/2021/24-
stromleverandorer-sertifisert-for-trygg-stromhandel/ 
2023.03.01. 
[21] N. Albinson, S. Balaji, and Y. Chu, "Building digital trust: 
Technology can lead the way," Deloitte Insights, 2019. 
[Online]. Available from: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/63
20_Building-digital-trust/DI_Building-digital-trust.pdf 
2023.03.01 
[22] Olje- og energidepartementet. Forskrift om måling, avregning, 
fakturering av nett tjenester og elektrisk energi, nettselskapets 
nøytralitet mv. 1999 (Regulations on measurement, settlement, 
invoicing of network services and electrical energy, neutrality 
of the network company, etc. 1999) ( [Online] Available from: 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/SF/forskrift/1999-03-11-301 
2023.03.01 
[23] M. Lotfi, C. Monteiro, M. Shafie-khah, and J. P. S. Catalão, 
"Transition toward blockchain-based electricity trading 
markets," in Blockchain-based Smart Grids, M. Shafie-khah, 
Ed. Academic Press, pp. 43-59, 2020. 
[24] Q. Meng, L. Berntzen, B. Vesin, M. R. Johannessen, S. Opera, 
and A. Bara, "Blockchain Applications in Smart Grid – A 
Review and a Case Study" 18th European, Mediterranean, and 
Middle Eastern Conference on Information Systems (EMCIS), 
Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing 437, 
Springer, pp. 130-149, 2022. 
[25] F. Ahmad and I. Huvila "Organizational changes, trust and 
information sharing: an empirical study", Aslib Journal of 
Information Management, Vol. 71(5), pp. 677-692. 2019. 
[26] UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, A Guide 
to Mutual Ownership Models. November 2011. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/31678/11-1401-guide-
mutual-ownership-models.pdf 2023.03.01. 
[27] International Cooperative Alliance, Cooperative identity, 
values 
& 
principles. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ica.coop/en/cooperatives/cooperative-identity 
2023.01.03 
[28] K. D. Paine. Guidelines for Measuring Trust in 
Organizations. Institute for Public Relations [Online]. 
Available from: https://instituteforpr.org/guidelines-for-
measuring-trust-in-organizations-2/, 2023.03. 
[29] B. Lutz, "Plain Language: An Important Basis of E-Democracy 
and Open Government",  Proceedings Conference for E-
democracy and Open Government, (CEDEM) 2016, Danube 
University: Krems, Austria, 2016. 
[30] S. K. Sonntag and L. Cardinal, "State traditions and Language 
Regimes: Conceptualizing Language Policy Choices," in State 
Traditions and Language regimes, S.K. Sonntag and L. 
Cardinal, Eds. McGill-Queen's University Press: Montreal & 
Kingston, pp. 3-28, 2015. 
[31] M. Kvarenes, T. Reksten, I. Stranger-Thorsen, and L Aarønæs, 
"Klar, men aldri ferdig. En praktisk veileder i klarspråksarbeid,  
(Ready, but never finished. A practical guide in plain language 
work),” Språkrådet, 2011. 
[32] M. Shardlow, "A survey of automated text simplification," 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and 
Applications, Special Issue on Natural Language Processing, 
pp. 58-70, 2014. 
[33] M. R. Johannessen, L.  Berntzen, and A. Ødegård, "A review 
of the Norwegian plain language policy," Proceedings 16th IFIP 
WG 8.5 International Conference on Electronic Government 
(EGOV), pp. 187-198,  Springer, Cham., 2017.  
[34] H. Haapio and T. D. Barton, "Business-friendly contracting: 
how simplification and visualization can help bring it to 
practice, "Liquid Legal, pp. 371-396, Springer, Cham., 2017. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

