Overcoming the Risks of the Perimeter-based Security
with Strong Federated Identiﬁcation Mechanisms
Wellington Silva de Souza
Prog. de P´os-Grad. em Eng. El´etrica e de Computac¸˜ao
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal/RN, Brazil
Email: wellsouz@gmail.com
Sergio Vianna Fialho
Prog. de P´os-Grad. em Eng. El´etrica e de Computac¸˜ao
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte
Natal/RN, Brazil
Email: ﬁalho@pop-rn.rnp.br
Abstract—Nowadays, corporate networks appear completely
unprepared to deal with threats from new technologies of com-
munication, risk behavior of users, interoperability with third-
party systems and outsourcing. The perimeter-based traditional
security approach (model of the “castle and the moat”) hinders
the development of enterprise systems and creates the delusion
of protection in both administrators and users. To overcome
these threats, a new data-safety oriented paradigm called
‘deperimeterisation’ appeared in the last decade. However, it
depends on an effective federated identity mechanism to reach
the goal of a borderless network. The main contribution of this
work is to ﬁll this gap with a proposal of a strong federated
identiﬁcation mechanism, based on the SAML protocol and
smart-cards.
Keywords-network
security;
de-perimeterisation;
federated
identity; smart-cards; SAML.
I. INTRODUCTION
The revolution brought by the ICT (Information and Com-
munication Technology) to modern society carries within it
a set of new threats enterprise networks are not prepared
to face, creating resistance in adopting new tecnologies,
like Wi-Fi, peer-to-peer, cloud computing, outsourcing and
home-ofﬁce.
Such resistance stems from the traditional “Rings of
Trust” [1] approach of security, adopted in the corporate
world, shown in Figure 1. In this approach, security is
viewed as a protection effort that must be centered in the
division of layers (rings), focusing especially in the upper
strata.
In this model, the protection of information is “guar-
anteed” through a physical/logical perimeter that separates
the enterprise network (internal network) of the Internet
(external network). According to [2], the term “castle and
moat” is thus commonly used in analogy to traditional
defense mechanisms in computer networks: ﬁrewall, proxy,
IDS (Intrusion Detection System), IPS (Intrusion Prevention
System).
This view of security, however, is inadequate to deal with
threats from the current context in which corporate networks
are in. Maintaining this model hinders development of
enterprise systems and creates the delusion of protection in
both administrators and users. So, a new approach of security
is necessary in nowadays corporate networks.
In Section II, the risks of maintaining a perimeter-
based security will be presented. Section III shows the
de-perimeterisation paradigm, its goals and lacks. Section
IV presents a proposal of a strong federated identiﬁcation
mechanism, aimed to ﬁll one of the lacks of the de-
perimeterisation paradigm, being the main contribution of
this work. Section V shows the implementation aspects of
the mechanism and the results obtained. Finally, Section
VI deﬁnes the conclusion obtained from the work and will
present the correlated future work.
Figure 1.
Conventional “Rings of Trust” Model of Security [1].
II. RISKS OF THE PERIMETER-BASED SECURITY
According to [3], after the 16th century, the castle began
to decline as a defense, mainly due to the invention and
development of heavy guns and mortars. Today, likewise,
perimeter-based security systems face new threats for which
they are not prepared:
1) Mobile conectivity: Smartphones and 3G/4G modems
are becoming common belongings. Nothing prevents an
employee from connecting them in the ofﬁce computer to
access content blocked by the enterprise security policy.
2) Wi-Fi hotspots: If there isn’t a security protection at
the link layer of the network (like IEEE 802.1X [4]) Wi-Fi
access points can be connected to the network, providing
internal network access to “wardrivers”. The same threat
occurs when using deprecated security protocols (WEP,
for instance) or in the leakage of the shared password
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

in the WPA/WPA2 (if ‘personal’ mode is used instead of
‘enterprise’, RADIUS-based).
3) Using VPN to bypass network security policy: Soft-
ware like OpenVPN
TM [5] enables the user to establish a
connection with a remote point over the network perimeter,
bypassing it, like shown in Figure 2. Also, these software can
perform encryption and HTTP encapsulation, masquerading
their trafﬁc like a regular HTTPs connection.
Figure 2.
Bypassing Security Policy through VPN [6].
4) Malware: Malware can also perform encryption and
HTTP encapsulation. A trojan, for instance, can estabilish
a connection to a bot-net, delivering full-control of the host
to the attacker. The trafﬁc can also be encrypted, hiding it
from detection of the network administrator.
5) BYOD: The BYOD (“Bring Your Own Device”) [7]
trend will presents a new defy to corporations in the next
years. Nowadays, it is increasing the number of personal
gadgets (smartphones, tablets, notebooks) connected to the
corporate network. Generally, these devices are outside the
scope of the enterprise conﬁguration management, needing
speciﬁc rules to be in compliance with the corporate security
policy.
6) Mobility of the information: Even if the perimeter
were perfect, it assumes that all assets remain inside. How-
ever, with the use of laptops, smartphones and pen-drives,
valuable information leaves the organization all the time,
in a totally unprotected way, bypassing both physical and
electronic perimeter.
III. DE-PERIMETERISATION
In order to deal with the risks ignored by perimeter-based
security, a new approach began to be investigated in the last
decade. In this approach the security is brought close to the
data, which are, ultimately, what we want to protect.
Figure 3 outlines the ‘De-perimeterised’ [1] model of
security, which can be compared to the ‘Rings of Trust’
model showed in Figure 1. In the conventional model each
ring establishes a perimeter that protects the interior of what
is around them, providing communication from the “secure”
to the “insecure”. On the other hand, in the de-perimeterised
model data is considered independent of context and does
not depend on the application, operating system or network
to remain safe.
It this in this scope emerges, based on studies of the
Jericho Forum [8], a new vision of network security, cen-
tered in the concept of de-perimeterisation: it breaks up
the traditional view of the network as a ﬁnite space, with
interior and exterior sides and a perimeter separating them.
According to the Jericho Forum, modern computer networks
face a so wide variety of threats that the only reliable
security strategy is to protect the information itself, rather
than the network or the rest of the ICT infrastructure of the
organization.
Figure 3.
De-perimeterised Model of Security [1].
A. The “four-phases” toward de-perimeterisation
According to the Jericho Forum, all organizations must
go through four stages to reach the point where they can
develop their business processes safely in a completely de-
perimeterised environment:
• Phase 1: Start leaving the perimeter. The ﬁrst step of
de-perimeterisation is making web applications leave
the border of the corporate network, approaching peo-
ple who will use them.
• Phase 2: Relaxing the perimeter. At this stage, one
abandons claim to increasingly strengthen the perime-
ter, focusing on the availability of transport schemes of
encrypted data and authenticated access to organization
internal data.
• Phase 3: The perimeter ceases to exist. At this point,
the encryption has already reached the data level and
an authentication mechanism is already implemented
in the connection level - thus eliminating the need for
perimeters.
• Phase 4: Communication without borders. Business
processes are already operating in a totally de-
perimeterised environment. Data presents global se-
curity properties, which are directly handled in the
endpoints. Mechanisms for identity management, au-
thentication and authorization are distributed through a
network of federated trust.
B. Missing items to accomplish a borderless network
Despite of being an interesting proposal to improve secu-
rity in nowadays computer networks, the de-perimeterisation
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

paradigm lacks most of the parts needed to accomplish its
four phases. Mechanisms such as authentication at data level
and federated identity management are still in the conceptual
universe.
Phases ‘1’ (start leaving the perimeter) and ‘2’ (relaxing
the perimeter) could be immediately applied, if systems
were equipped with an effective validation tool for identity
checking. This is one of the items present on stage ‘4’
(communication without borders), which states the need
for mechanisms of federated identity, authentication and
authorization. Only then stage ‘3’ (the perimeter ceases to
exist) could commence.
We
conclude,
therefore,
that
the
path
to
de-
perimeterisation necessarily involves the adoption of a
safe and efﬁcient mechanism for federated identity, which
is studied in the following.
IV. A STRONG FEDERATED IDENTIFICATION
MECHANISM
A. Opting for smart-cards
Remote user authentication using smart cards is a good
solution for many e-based applications [9]. Comparing dif-
ferent authentication mechanisms used for Internetbanking
[10], smart-cards based on a PKI infrastructure (X509 certiﬁ-
cates) earned the highest evaluation in the security category
(along with SIM chips), although they present less economic
and convenient features when compared to other traditional
methods (user/password pairwise, for instance).
Considering the corporate world, smart-cards could easily
be adopted. In fact, many companies are replacing traditional
name tags with smart-cards, providing a value-added badge
- their adoption, thus, wouldn’t create a considerable eco-
nomic impact. Unlike the Internetbanking enviroment, the
use of smart-cards could be extremely convenient, given
that porting id-badges is a common practice in the corporate
environment (often a rule of the company).
B. Using SAML to provide federated identiﬁcation
The SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language) [11] is
a XML-based framework designated to provide mechanisms
of authentication and authorization. It deﬁnes an open data
format for creating and exchanging security information
between online partners.
For the purposes of this work, SAML was chosen as it
enables SSO (Single-Sign-On) and the separation between
the authentication process and the service access, deliver-
ing federated identiﬁcation in a WebService manner. Also,
SAML is a recommended standard in the e-PING [12], the
ofﬁcial brazilian interoperability pattern for e-government.
As stated by SAML, three participants take place in the
authentication/authorization process:
• Subject: the entity to be authenticated. It can be a
person, a computer, an organization. Also known as
‘principal’.
• IdP: the Identity Provider, which performs the au-
thentication process and generate assertions about the
‘principal’. It is the asserting party.
• SP: the Service Provider, the system which the ‘prin-
cipal’ intends to access. In the SAML context it acts
as the relying party, consuming assertions generated
by the IdP. One SP can rely and trust in different
and independent IdPs, thus creating a federated identity
network surrounding that service.
The UML (Uniﬁed Modeling Language) sequence dia-
gram of the federated identiﬁcation mechanism proposed is
shown in Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Sequence Diagram of SAML Federated Single-Sign-On.
C. The Logon Process
As shown in Figure 4, the logon process acts apart the
entire SAML SSO process. The SAML framework does not
deﬁnes per se a speciﬁc implementation for the credential
validation of the principal, as it depends on speciﬁc envi-
roment issues (legal restrictions, institutional requirements,
users database, directory model, and others).
Figure 5 shows the UML sequence diagram of the logon
process for SAML identiﬁcation through smart-cards.
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS
The proposed federated identiﬁcation mechanism was
implemented in Java language, through a combination of
an applet and a servlet.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 5.
Sequence Diagram of Smart-Card Logon Process.
Since the operation with smart-cards needs communi-
cation with PKCS#11 libraries in the local computer ﬁle
system, a signed applet was designed to interface with
the user and his smart-card. The servlet, by his turn, is
responsible for dealing with the SAML protocol. This design
increases performance and security, because reduce the size
of the applet (speeding up the loading process) and protects
the IdP private key (stored on the server running the servlet),
used to sign the SAML assertions.
The applet is loaded when an application compatible with
SAML (SP) redirects the browser to the identiﬁcation mech-
anism (IdP), carrying a <samlp:AuthnRequest> element in
the URL (steps 2 and 3 of Figure 4). After initialization, the
applet performs the logon process (Figure 5), asking for the
user certiﬁcate and PIN code to access the cryptographic
functions on the smart-card. The applet loads the “User
Alternative Names” (present in the user certiﬁcate) and send
then to the servlet.
The servlet, by his turn, receives the “User Alternative
Names” and creates a signed <samlp:Response> element,
which contains an SAML assertion with the user attributes.
The browser is redirected to the application assertion con-
sumer, which validates the <samlp:Response> and creates
a SSO Token, allowing access to the service.
A. Tests
The mechanism was tested with third party tools and
implementations of the SAML protocol. For tracking the
SAML messages, it was used the SAMLTracer [13], a plugin
for the Mozilla Firefox browser.
To validate the IdP feature of the mechanism, two
SP reference implementations were used: SimpleSAMLphp
[14] and TestShibTwo [15]. In both cases, the proposed
federated identiﬁcation mechanism sucessfully was able
to receive and process the <samlp:AuthnRequest> from
the SP, perform the user authentication, and generate the
<samlp:Response>, which was validated by the application
assertion consumer.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work presented the problems of the traditional
perimeter-based security view, exploring the risks of main-
taining this approach in a corporate environment. It was
shown that a new paradigm, called de-perimeterisation, has
been studied in recent years, and is designed to deal with
problems ignored by the perimeterised security model. How-
ever, this new approach of security lacks certain parts to be
implemented, especially a safe and effective mechanism for
federated identity. For this goal, a proposal was presented,
using the SAML framework and smart cards, being the main
contribution of this work.
This proposal was implemented using Java language,
through a combination of an applet and a servlet. This design
aimed to improve perfomance and security to the developed
mechanism.
It was performed a set of tests using third party reference
implementantions of service providers (SP), proving the
effectiveness of the mechanism.
As future work, it is intended to apply the the proposed
authentication architecture in a real corporate network, ac-
complishing phases ‘1’ and ‘2’ of the de-perimeterisation
process.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Fritsch, “No borders - de-perimeterization and life after
the ﬁrewall,” Linux Magazine, vol. 89, no. 1, pp. 60–63, Jan.
2008.
[2] “O
que
´e
um
ﬁrewall?”
One
Linea
Tele-
com,
Tech.
Rep.,
Nov.
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.onelinea.com.br/pdfs/bto-ﬁrewall.pdf
[3] C.
Freudenrich,
“How
castles
work,”
How
Stuff
Works,
Tech.
Rep.,
Aug.
2012.
[On-
line]. Available: http://history.howstuffworks.com/historical-
ﬁgures/castle7.htm
[4] T. Jeffree, N. Jarvis, M. Seaman, L. Bell, A. Chambers,
M. Cochran et al., 802.1X - Port-Based Network Access
Control, IEEE-SA Standards Board, 3 Park Avenue, New
York, NY 10016-5997, USA, Feb. 2010.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

[5] “Openvpn - open source vpn,” OpenVPN Technologies, Inc,
Tech. Rep., Aug. 2012. [Online]. Available: http://openvpn.net
[6] “Yourfreedom
-
bypass
ﬁrewalls
and
proxies,
stay
anonymous,” YourFreedom, Tech. Rep., Aug. 2012. [Online].
Available: https://www.your-freedom.net/
[7] R. G. S. Junior, E. P. Souza, and A. C. A. Nascimento, “De-
saﬁos para a universalizac¸˜ao do uso de certiﬁcados digitais
no contexto da icp-brasil,” in CertForum, Florian´opolis, SC,
Brazil, Sep. 2012, in press.
[8] “Jericho
Forum’s
homepage,”
The
Open
Group,
Tech.
Rep.,
Aug.
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.opengroup.org/getinvolved/forums/jericho
[9] R. Ramasamy and A. P. Muniyandi, “An efﬁcient password
authentication scheme for smart card,” in International Jour-
nal of Network Security, vol. 14, no. 3, May 2012, pp. 180–
186.
[10] R. S. Guimar˜aes, “An´alise comparativa de sistemas de
autenticac¸˜ao utilizados em internetbanking,” Master’s thesis,
Instituto de Pesquisas Tecnol´ogicas do Estado de S˜ao Paulo,
S˜ao Paulo, SP, Brazil, 2006.
[11] N. Ragouzis, J. Hughes, R. Philpott, E. Maler, H. Lockhart,
T. Wisniewski, S. Cantor, and P. Mishra, Security Assertion
Markup Language (SAML) V2.0 Technical Overview, OASIS
Committee Draft, Mar. 2008.
[12] H. Correia, J. Rodrigues, and P. M. da Costa, e-PING
- Padr˜oes de Interoperabilidade de Governo Eletrˆonico,
Comitˆe Executivo de Governo Eletrˆonico, Nov. 2011.
[13] O.
Morken,
“Saml
tracer
::
Add-ons
for
ﬁre-
fox,”
Tech.
Rep.,
Nov.
2012.
[Online].
Available:
https://addons.mozilla.org/ﬁrefox/addon/saml-tracer
[14] “Simplesamlphp,” Tech. Rep., Nov. 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://simplesamlphp.org
[15] “Testshib two,” Internet2, Tech. Rep., Nov. 2012. [Online].
Available: https://www.testshib.org
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

