Secure Communication System for Emergency Services in Network Congestion
Scenarios
Alexandra Rivero-Garc´ıa, Iv´an Santos-Gonz´alez, Candelaria Hern´andez Goya, Pino Caballero-Gil
Department of Computer Engineering
University of La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain
Email: {ariverog, jsantosg, mchgoya, pcaballe}@ull.edu.es
Abstract—Every day different events, with different risk levels,
take place in cities. Emergency services are responsible for the
safety of citizens and communication between emergency staff
is one of the main requirements for their correct coordination
and operation. A problem arises when large numbers of people
are located in a particular area, which could produce saturation
in traditional network infrastructures. This paper presents a
low-cost model of communication to be used in this scenario.
The communication system described includes an ID-Based
Signcryption scheme (IBSC) that works considering the location
and the public identiﬁcation of emergency service workers in
order to provide integrity, conﬁdentiality, authentication and non-
repudiation in a single step and in an efﬁcient way.
Index Terms—Identity Based Signcryption (IBSC); mHealth;
Mobile devices; Android; Communications
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper presents a low-cost model for communication in
scenarios where network congestion is produced by massive
access of users involved in emergency situations. This is a
predictive scheme based on the establishment of a second
communication channel that does not rely on the cloud.
The objective is to provide a suitable way of communication
for emergency services (police, ﬁreﬁghters, medical staff, etc.)
in case of events where speciﬁc alerts or activities requiring
their participation (ﬂood risk, protest march, a concert, a
ﬁre, etc.) take place. Usually, the ﬁrst step is the assignment
of different emergency service workers to speciﬁc areas to
preserve the civil security. Figure 1 presents as an example the
geolocation of three simultaneous events: a cultural event with
large ﬂow of people in green, a protest march in orange and an
area with high risk of ﬂood in blue. When an event is declared,
different types of emergency service workers must be assigned
to that zone. In the proposed system, the assignation of service
workers is also used to generate and pre-share information
among them. That is why a generic event chat, in which
workers can participate via mobile phone, is included. In the
event that congestion is detected in the network, the emergency
mode is declared. In this speciﬁc mode, the communications
will be made directly, in a peer-to-peer mode through their
smartphones and without additional tools.
A second goal in this paper, is to guarantee the security
of the shared data, thus an ID-Based Signcryption scheme
Fig. 1. Geolocation of events.
(IBSC) based on the location and the public identiﬁcations
of emergency service workers is used. With this cryptosystem
all the shared messages will be signed and encrypted.
The majority of the communications that are currently de-
veloped within the emergency sections are carried out by radio
frequency. In the proposal, communication is done through
two different technologies using smartphones: Bluetooth Low
Energy (BLE) [1] and via Wi-Fi Direct [2]. The features
described below will be taken into account to choose the alter-
native. When possible the channel created by Wi-Fi Direct, due
to its higher rate of speed and its greater range, will be used.
Bluetooth Low Energy has a transmission rate of 25 Mbps
and Wi-Fi Direct has a transmission rate of 250 Mbps. The
maximum range of Bluetooth Low Energy Communication is
60 meters, while Wi-Fi Direct has a range of 200 meters. In the
same range of Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi Aware improves the performance
of Wi-Fi Direct. Wi-Fi Aware [3] is only available for the
latest version of Android [4] and as a preview mode.
The structure of the article is described below. Section
II includes a short review of publications that justify the
novelty and adequacy of the proposed system. Section III
deals, on the one hand, with the fundamentals of Identity-
Based Cryptography since the proposal uses it to guarantee
conﬁdentiality, integrity and authenticity of the transferred
information, and on the other hand deals with a presentation
of a system overview. Section IV deals with the details of
the communication scheme and its formal description. Some
of the more common attacks in communication models are
analyzed in V. Section VI ends the paper summarizing the
main conclusions and contributions of the proposal.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

II. RELATED WORK
Generally, communications currently deployed/used for
emergency are carried out by radio frequency. It is a poor
solution, because workers only can share audio in a speciﬁc
frequency, effective grouping and sharing media data are
not allowed. Multiple solutions based on Wi-Fi Direct and
smartphones has been proposed like in [5] where there is
an explanation of the potential of Wi-Fi Direct in the imple-
mentation of mobile P2P systems. This work includes some
examples of the use of Wi-Fi Direct to share text messages,
to disseminate information, etc. They use a middle-ware for
P2P networking to distribute hash tables to search for peers. In
[6], authors explain the possibility of generating opportunistic
networks over Wi-Fi Direct by studying the latency at the link
layer. It is an extension of [7], where multiple groups were
generated. This work presents real measurements that conﬁrm
the Wi-Fi Direct’s suitability for peer-to-peer systems.
There is something in common in all these systems, no se-
curity elements are proposed. Our approach differs from others
in that it takes into account the distribution, assignation and
location of human resources in multiple events. Furthermore,
information security is addresed throughout the development
of the proposed system. In [8], the authors propose the
use of Wi-Fi Direct as an alternative communication system
for emergency situations, but not for communication among
emergency services. The main objective of the application
developed there is to share the geolocation of people when
they are isolated, without signal and in difﬁculties.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
In this section, some tools are described to understand how
the proposed system works. On the one hand, a cryptographic
primitive is presented, which is used in the communication
system and is based on identities. On the other hand, some
mathematical tools are described to understand the security of
the cryptographic scheme used.
A. Preliminaries
Identity based signcryption. In Identity Based Cryptosys-
tems, the main objective is the use any string as a valid public
key. These schemes often use as identiﬁers: email address,
social security numbers, personal identiﬁers, etc. This kind of
cryptosystem avoid problems related to certiﬁcates in public
key infrastructure. Based on this idea some modiﬁcations
appeared such us the Identity Based Signcryption where the
main objective is to obtain a composition of an encryption
scheme with a signature scheme.
Bilinear Groups. Two cycling groups (G, +) and (GT, ·)
of the same prime order q are considered. P is a generator of
G and there is a bilinear map paring ˆe : G × G → GT which
satisﬁes following conditions: Bilinear, ∀P, Q ∈ G and ∀a, b ∈
Z, ˆe(aP, bQ) = ˆe(P, Q)ab. Non-degenerate, ∃P1, P2 ∈ G that
ˆe(P1, P2) ̸= 1. This means if P is generator of G, then ˆe(P, P)
is a generator of GT. Computability, there exists an algorithm
to compute ˆe(P, Q), ∀P, Q ∈ G [9].
Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem. Considering
the cyclic group {σ, G, 2G, 3G, ...} for any point G on a an
elliptic curve. k is an integer where the operation kG is called
a scalar multiplication. The Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm
Problem is based on ﬁnding k given points kG and G.
B. Overview of the system
This paper presents an alternative communications system
for emergency services through mobile phones in different
scenarios. In order to prevent network congestion, users have
to share some public information when the emergency mode is
activated. This information is user’s ID and it is shared through
BLE using beacon mode (see Figure 2) to identify each partic-
ipant. Every person has a list of identiﬁers (IDs) corresponding
to nearby people. When an emergency service worker ﬁnds a
peer sharing an ID, he/she stores this identiﬁcation. Later on,
IDs may be used to peer-to-peer communications.
Fig. 2. Sharing identiﬁers through beacon mode.
The system supports two different communication modes:
peer-to-peer and broadcast. In the ﬁrst mode, two people can
exchange information directly and bilaterally. In the broadcast
mode, everyone in the affected area may receive the notiﬁ-
cation and by simply clicking on it, they can chat to help
his/her colleague. Emergency staff can share text, images,
audio and even videos. Security of the shared data is crucial
in the proposed system. Thus, in both communication modes
an ID-Based Signcryption scheme (IBSC) is used. In order
to participate in the communications, each emergency service
worker assigned to an area/event must also have some infor-
mation. Firstly, from the central system, events are generated.
Afterwards, the controller must assign different types of staff
to that zone. Speciﬁc information that allows staff participation
into the chat system is also provided, (see Figure 3).
Fig. 3. Central system web application.
A unique identiﬁer randomly generated is assigned to each
event as well as the information for its geolocation. This
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

geolocation is generated based on the focus of the event, and
to prevent the generation of multiple events a range of some
mills refer the same event. When a member of the emergency
staff is assigned to an event, the system generates speciﬁc
credentials and the keys to share data. Users may get their
own location, peers’s location and the area of the event from
the mobile application, (see Figure 4).
Fig. 4. Mobile application.
IV. EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION SCHEME
As mentioned in the previous section, an ID-Based Signa-
ture scheme is used. This approach offers the advantage of
simplifying management by not having to deﬁne a public key
infrastructure. This kind of scheme was chosen due to its low
computational complexity, efﬁciency in terms of memory and
its usability. Emergency service staff can share information
with only one person in peer-to-peer mode through an ID-
Based Signcryption and with multiple users in broadcast mode
through an ID-Based Multi-Receiver Signcryption Scheme. In
the proposed scheme, the central server supports the Private
Key Generator (PKG). It is a crucial part of the proposal, be-
cause it is the service in charge of generating emergency staff
private keys. The signcryption scheme used is a combination
between the ID-Based Signcryption Scheme proposed in [10]
and an ID-Based Signcryption Scheme for Multiple Receivers
[11]. Below, some mathematical basic elements and notation
used in the system description are presented. Several hash
functions are also needed: H1 : {0, 1}∗ → G∗, H2 : {0, 1}∗ →
Z∗
q, H3 : Z∗
q → {0, 1}n, H4 : {0, 1}n → {0, 1}|m|, H5 :
G × G × {0, 1}n × Z∗
q × Z∗
q × ... × Z∗
q → Z∗
q , where n is the
size of the message. x
r←− S stands for an element x randomly
selected from a set S, x ← y denotes the assignation of the
value y to x and || is used for concatenation. The steps needed
for the signcryption scheme are the following:
SETUP: In this ﬁrst step, server initializes the parameters
in order to generate its own keys: master public key (mpk)
and master secret key (msk). To achieve it, some private data
is necessary: k ∈ Z to generate a prime q based on it, two
groups G and GT of order q and a bilinear pairing map ˆe :
G × G → GT are selected. Next, P ∈ G is randomly selected
and all the hash functions are also deﬁned. Finally, server keys
are generated msk
r← Z∗
q and mpk ← msk · P.
MASTER EXTRACT: In this step, the staff identiﬁcation is
carried out. Public key QID ∈ G is generated through a hash
function applied on the ID, QID ← H1(ID). Private key
SID, used for communications with the server SID ∈ G, is
calculated taking into account the msk, SID ← msk · QID.
Note that key exchange between server and the staff is done
using the stream cipher SNOW3G under the session key
obtained through an Elliptic Curve Difﬁe-Hellman (ECDH).
EVENT EXTRACT: This step is required when a user is
assigned to a new event. Each of the events generated has an
unique identiﬁer, IDe
r← Z∗
q and some location coordinates,
lat and lon. In this step, the public key to this event QIDe ∈ G
is generated as: QIDe ← H1(ID||IDe||lat||lon). Then, the
secret key to this event SIDe ← msk · QIDe.
EVENT SINGLE SIGNCRYPTION: All the messages m ∈
{0, 1}n will be encrypted and signed. The receiver’s public
key is generated taking into account his/her identiﬁcation
and the pre-shared data (IDe, lat and lon): QIDeb
←
H1(IDb||IDe||lat||lon). Then, some operations are developed
giving as result σ (a t-uple of three components: c, T, U). T is
generated as x
r← Z∗
q and T ← x·P. Then the signature using
sender’s private key (SIDea) is in U. It is obtained as follows
r ← H2(T||m), W ← x · mpk and U ← r · SIDea + W.
Finally the encrypted message is in c, and it is generated as
shown below y ← ˆe(W, QIDeb), k ← H3(y), c ← k ⊕ m.
EVENT BROADCAST SIGNCRYPTION: In the broadcast
mode there are n receivers, so the sender is identiﬁed by
IDea and the receivers by IDe1, IDe2, ..., IDen. All the
broadcast messages m ∈ {0, 1}n will be encrypted and
signed. The sender’s public key is generated as bellows:
QIDea ← H1(IDa||IDe||lat||lon). Then some operations
are developed giving as result σ (a t-uple of components:
c, T, U, V, W, X, a0, ...an − 1), then the sender selects some
random numbers r
r← Z∗
q, r′
r← Z∗
q, s
r← Z∗
q and p
r← Z∗
q and
then, it operates T ← r · QIDea, U ← r · P, X ← r′ · T,
J ← r′ · mpk. The receivers’ public keys are generated
taking into account all the identiﬁcations ID1, ID2, ..., IDn,
as follows: f(x) = Qn
i=0(x − vi) + p(modq) = a0 + a1x +
... + an−1xn−1 + xn with Qei ← H1(IDi||IDe||lat||lon),
yi ← ˆe(Qi, J) and vi ← H2(yi). Then it calculates V ←
s·H(p), the key k as k ← H(s) and the encrypted message c
as c ← k ⊕ m. Finally an authenticator h is generated as h ←
H5(c, X, U, V, a0, a1, ..., an−1) and W ← (r′ + h)r · SIDa.
EVENT SINGLE UNSIGNCRYPTION: First of all the
sender’s
public
key
is
generated
taking
into
account
IDea
and
the
pre-shared
information
as
QIDa
←
H1(IDea||IDe||lat||lone). Then σ is parse as (c, T, U). If
everything is right, the message m ∈ {0, 1}n is returned.
Otherwise, if there are some problems in the signature or
in the encryption of m, ⊥ is returned. The veriﬁcation is
: ˆe(U, P) == ˆe(QIDea, mpk)r · ˆe(T, mpk) Thus, the user
calculates y ← ˆe(SIDeb, T), k ← y, m ← k ⊕ c and
r ← H2(T||m).
MULTIPLE
RECEIVER
UNSIGNCRYPTION:
In
this
step, two veriﬁcations are carried out but ﬁrst of all
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

σ is parse as c, T, U, V, W, X, a0, ...an − 1 and h
←
H5(c, X, U, V, a0, a1, ..., an−1). The ﬁrst veriﬁcation is the
public veriﬁcation to check that the ciphertext is valid:
ˆe(W, P) == ˆe(X + hT, mpk) Otherwise, the ciphertext has
been damaged or it is invalid and ⊥ is returned. The second
veriﬁcation is: ˆe(W, Qei) == ˆe(X + hT, SIDei) It is to
check if IDi is one of the receivers chosen by the sender
and the ciphertext is valid. Otherwise, the receiver shall quit
the decryption process and ⊥ is returned. To generate the
message some operations are generated: yi ← ˆe(SIDeb, U),
vi ← H2(yi), p ← f(vi), s ← V ⊕ H3(p), k ← H4(s) and
m ← k ⊕ c.
V. PROTOTYPE ANALYSIS
A system prototype has been developed. It includes a web
application and a mobile application to improve commu-
nication between emergency services in extreme situations.
Security is one of the priorities that is why the system provides
protection against different attacks. On the one hand, Denial
of Service (DoS) attacks related to make multiple requests
are restricted because only requests associated with a number
of legitimate members of emergency services take effect. On
the other hand, the typically “Man in the Middle” attack
which conveys a successful authentication to the server with
a legitimate identiﬁer is very improbable, because once the
corresponding user private key is assigned to the server further
requests of this kind will be not attended. Impersonation will
be easily detectable since the number of members who can
make requests to the server is limited to those who are working
at the time of the request.
An analysis of efﬁciency related to the technologies cover-
age, their range and their transmission efﬁciency was devel-
oped. A beta prototype has been also implemented with Wi-Fi
Aware but in the preview mode of the technology. An Android
application has been developed to share information between
users. The implementation of the security has been developed
with the generation of some random events on a map and with
the assignation of users to events manually.
Note that the proposed prototype does not need a commu-
nication with the PKG, but just for the initialization where the
generation of keys is performed in the Event Extract step.
Afterwards, users can share messages with their own keys
and with the pre-shared information related to the event. This
eliminates the problem of saturated communication networks
because an alternative scheme has been displayed with direct
communications that do not need a central server.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper a low-cost communication model has been
presented as an alternative communication system for sit-
uations where network congestion was detected. The tool
has been proposed like a combination of a web application,
that manages all the emergency services and events, and
a mobile application with an ubiquitous Wi-Fi Direct chat.
Communication security was based on the use of a public key
cryptosystem and BLE in beacon mode. Emergency services
were able to know, with the mobile application, where the
event was located and where they must deployed, as well as
peers location. The system generated automatically the pre-
shared data depending on the event to which the worker has
been assigned; the main objective was that emergency workers
was able to share information among them when different
events saturate the network. The prototype has been developed
like an emergency support tool to contact peers through a
chat. An ID-Based Signcryption has been used to protect
integrity, conﬁdentiality, authentication and non-repudiation in
the communications. Speciﬁcally, emergency service shared
information with only one person in peer-to-peer mode and
with multiple users in broadcast mode.
As future work, more functionalities will be added to the
server, such as statistics, private chats based on roles, etc.
The improvement of communication technologies is a must. A
beta prototype has been implemented with Wi-Fi Aware that
is available only in Android 8 and in the preview mode of
the technology. The addition of LTE-Direct depends on the
Native Development Kit (NDK), because right now this code
is private.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research
supported
by
TESIS2015010102,
TESIS-
2015010106 and by the Spanish Ministry of Economy
and
Competitiveness,
the
European
FEDER
Fund,
and
the
CajaCanarias
Foundation,
under
Projects
TEC2014-
54110-R, RTC-2014-1648-8, MTM2015-69138-REDT and
DIG02-INSITU.
REFERENCES
[1] N. K. Gupta, Inside Bluetooth low energy.
Artech House, 2016.
[2] W. Shen, B. Yin, X. Cao, L. X. Cai, and Y. Cheng, “Secure device-to-
device communications over wiﬁ direct,” IEEE Network, vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 4–9, 2016.
[3] B. N. Schilit, A. LaMarca, G. Borriello, W. G. Griswold, D. McDonald,
E. Lazowska, A. Balachandran, J. Hong, and V. Iverson, “Challenge:
Ubiquitous location-aware computing and the place lab initiative,” in
Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Wireless mobile
applications and services on WLAN hotspots.
ACM, 2003, pp. 29–35.
[4] O. Android, “Android,” Retrieved February, vol. 24, p. 2011, 2011.
[5] R. Motta and J. Pasquale, “Wireless p2p: Problem or opportunity?”
in Proceedings of the Second IARIA Conference on Advances in P2P
Systems, 2010, pp. 32–37.
[6] M. Conti, F. Delmastro, G. Minutiello, and R. Paris, “Experimenting
opportunistic networks with wiﬁ direct,” in Wireless Days (WD), 2013
IFIP.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[7] D. Camps-Mur, A. Garcia-Saavedra, and P. Serrano, “Device-to-device
communications with wi-ﬁ direct: overview and experimentation,” IEEE
wireless communications, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 96–104, 2013.
[8] I.
Santos-Gonz´alez,
A.
Rivero-Garc´ıa,
P.
Caballero-Gil,
and
C. Hern´andez-Goya, “Alternative communication system for emergency
situations.” in WEBIST (2), 2014, pp. 397–402.
[9] J. Groth and A. Sahai, “Efﬁcient non-interactive proof systems for
bilinear groups,” Advances in Cryptology–EUROCRYPT 2008, pp. 415–
432, 2008.
[10] J. Malone-Lee, “Identity-based signcryption.” IACR Cryptology ePrint
Archive, vol. 2002, p. 98, 2002.
[11] S. S. D. Selvi, S. S. Vivek, R. Srinivasan, and P. R. Chan-
drasekaran, “An efﬁcient identity-based signcryption scheme for mul-
tiple receivers,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2008/341, 2008,
https://eprint.iacr.org/2008/341.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

