   
Extracting Occupational Therapy Concepts  
to Develop Domain Ontology  
 
Ahlam F. Sawsaa, Joan Lu, Christopher Newman,  
School of Computing & Engineering  
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield UK 
{a.sawsaa; J.lu; c.d.newman}@hud.ac.uk 
Helen Ribchester 
School of Health Science  
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield UK 
H.Ribchester@hud.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— Recently, unstructured data on the World Wide 
Web has generated significant interest in the extraction of text, 
emails, web pages, reports and research papers in their raw 
form. Far more interestingly, extracting information from a 
specific domain using distributed corpora from the World 
Wide Web is a vital step towards creating corpus annotation. 
This paper describes a method of annotation, based on 
Occupational Therapy (OT) concepts, to build domain 
ontology using Natural Language Programming (NLP) 
technology.  We used Java Annotation Patterns Engine 
(JAPE) grammar to support regular expression matching and 
thus annotate OT concepts using a GATE developer tool. This 
speeds up the time-consuming development of the ontology, 
which is important for experts in the domain facing time 
constraints and high workloads. The rules provide significant 
results: the pattern matching of OT concepts based on the 
lookup list produced 403 correct concepts and the accuracy 
was generally higher. Using NLP technique is a good approach 
to reducing the domain expert’s work, and the results can be 
evaluated. 
Keywords-Ontology; 
Information 
extracting; 
Regular 
expression; Natural Language Programming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The semantic web offers semantic annotations that 
describe web resources explicitly. These annotations are 
based on ontologies that represent domain knowledge 
through defining concepts and the semantic relations 
between those concepts. It requires standards of machine-
processable representations of ontology. The standards for 
this purpose, such as Resource Description Framework 
(RDF) [7], Web Ontology Language (OWL) [5], have been 
defined by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [13]. 
Consequently, ontology is a foundation that is central to the 
growth of the semantic web that provides a common 
knowledge for correspondence and communication among 
heterogeneous systems. Furthermore, it is useful for different 
applications to share information among heterogeneous data 
resources [1].  
 
Recently, Information Extracting (IE) has received 
significant interest due to the number of web pages emerging 
on the internet containing unstructured data. Because of the 
amount of information available on the internet, it is 
necessary to have a tool for extracting it. Many specialists in 
the field of IE have worked to find suitable tools, such as 
Wrappers, that classify interesting data and map them onto 
appropriate formats such as XML or relational database. 
Furthermore, some HTML-aware tools are based on 
inheriting the structural features of documents so as to 
extract the data. Natural Language Programming (NLP) is a 
technique used by many tools to extract the data in natural 
language documents. Tools like GATE use techniques such 
as a part-of-speech tagging, filtering, or lexical semantic 
tagging 
to 
link 
relevant 
information, 
and 
identify 
relationships among phrases and sentence elements within 
text [4]. Each of these tools has advantages and 
disadvantages. A comparative analysis of the existing tools 
for data extraction is needed to assess their capabilities. This 
is done in the next section.  
 
In this paper, first, we provide a brief background to IE 
tools to justify why we feel the NLP technique should be 
used to speed up the building of an Ontology of 
Occupational Therapy (OTO). To extract concepts in the 
field, we used CREOLE plug-ins from GATE in the IE 
system. We also show how the JAPE grammar has been 
implemented by detailing the rules we use to annotate IS 
concepts. The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, 
we discuss the background of ontology and IE. In Section 3, 
we discuss the methods used to develop domain ontology of 
OT and extracting OT concepts, to show how they were 
constructed. In Section 4, is the implementation that shows 
how the domain knowledge is acquired for creating the 
corpus, Gazetteer, and how the JAPE rule [16] is 
implemented. Our discussion and evaluation is in Section 5. 
Finally, in Section 6, we draw conclusions and make 
suggestions for future work.  
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Domain ontology 
It is a shared belief that ontology receives a lot of 
recognition from various research fields. Although there are 
some well-known domain ontologies, such as CYC, the 
Standardized Nomenclature for Medicine (SNOMED, a 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

clinical terminology) [8], Toronto Virtual Enterprise 
(TOVE) [10], and the GENE ontology (GO) [5], study of 
the ontology area is still immature and improvements are 
needed  [9].  
 
   Occupational Therapy (OT) is a treatment using certain 
activities 
to 
improve 
physical, 
mental 
and 
social 
performance. The main objective of the treatment is 
development of the individual’s personal autonomy, both 
social and professional. The therapist is one of a multi-
disciplinary team to work with a stroke patient, for 
example. 
 
   OT has a big problem with a language; it needs a formal 
language to identify certain concepts in the field, to make 
communication easer between therapists and between 
people and machines. “Occupational therapists seem to 
have difficulty finding appropriate words with which to 
think about and express the nature and purpose of their 
practice” [10]. 
 
      Although many attempts have been made to find a full 
agreement on specific concepts in the area, the problem still 
remains to identify the key concepts and their relationships.  
However, ontology in a specific domain provides concepts 
and the relationships between these concepts.  Furthermore, 
it offers sharing vocabularies in a consistent mode. More 
crucially, in natural language, therapists use different 
meanings for one concept, for instance “occupation, 
function”. If you looked at the Oxford dictionary you might 
find more than one definition. 
 
      Ontology specifies a formal definition to avoid 
vagueness and ambiguity, to decide the exact meaning.  If 
you looked in the Oxford Dictionary for the meaning of 
occupation you will find many definitions; at the same time, 
many therapists, social and health staff, use different words 
and phrases to define occupation, such as daily activities, 
everyday life, persons of any age, individual and 
sociocultural value, leisure and so on; so ontology provides 
a single definition to make communication more effective. 
B. Information Extracting IE 
A number of studies have shown that applications of IE 
can be used to annotate documents that are written in 
natural language.  
 
     Certainly, the growing number of IE tools that can be 
used to annotate concepts, such as SHOE, Annota, 
Annozilla, MnM, Ontomat, COHSE, Melita, and GATE, 
makes it easy to process machine-readable text [14]. A 
comparison of these tools shows that they provide distinct 
methods of IE [1, 13], as illustrated in Table 1.  
 
 
      Table 1 shows that there are many tools such as SHOE, 
Annota Annozilla and KIM ontotext providing  automatic 
annotation of extracted text from mark-up languages such 
as RDF OWL HTML, XHTML,  written by different 
languages, e.g., Java and C. In comparing GATE developer 
with these tools, GATE provides semi-automatic and 
automatic annotations in easy to use ways, similar to the 
MnM ontology editor. GATE can extract text from different 
formats such as XML, HTML, XHTML, emails and PDF 
files, while MnM annotates HTML formats only.  
 
      Basically, the annotation of IS concepts is based on the 
GATE developer, which is an architecture tool for text 
engineering. It is a free open source tool developed by a 
team at the University of Sheffield, starting in the early 
1990s [4]. The first version was released in 1995, the 
second one was in 2002, while the most recent in 2010.  
 
      GATE can run on any platform and supports JAVA 5.0. 
It has also been developed and tested on Linux, Windows 
and Mac OS X. It has a user interface to enable user editing 
and visualization and quick application development. 
Furthermore, it provides support for manual annotation, 
semi-automatic and semantic annotation as well as ontology 
management. Moreover, GATE uses CREOLE plug-ins as 
objects for language engineering. All of these are packaged 
as Java Archives and XML configuration data [4]. 
     
     GATE is a tool used to take unseen texts and convert 
them into a fixed format such as XML or HTML. This data 
can then be displayed for users or stored in a database for 
analysis. Before talking about GATE in more detail, we 
should clarify the difference between Information Retrieval 
(IR) and IE [3]. IE helps the user to extract information 
from a huge amount of text for the purpose of fact analysis. 
IR is just pulling out documents containing relevant 
information according to a key word search. IE can identify 
queries in a structural way and provides knowledge at a 
deeper level, while IR uses a normal queries engine which 
makes it hard to gain accurate answers, and provides 
knowledge at the standard level. 
 
      Consider an enquiry such as ‘which UK airports are 
currently closed due to severe weather conditions?’ Or, 
where an event took place and who it involved, such as 
where was Gordon Brown’s last visit as prime minister [2, 
14]. 
 
      IR would just provide a webpage containing the relevant 
information and the user would then need to search that 
webpage using various terms or concepts to analyse the 
information. IE, on the other hand, provides specific 
information about the enquiry; even if the information is not  
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

                                                           TABLE 1. INFORMATION EXTRACTING TOOLS 
     
accurate, but you can only back up the correct information 
[11]. IE has been used for applications such as text mining, 
semantic annotation, question answering, opinion mining, 
decision support, rich information retrieval and exploration.  
GATE has a comprehensive set of plug-ins, including 
Alignment, 
ANNIE, 
Annotation_Merging, 
Copy_Annots_Between_Docs, 
Gazetteer_LKB, 
Gazetteer_Ontology_Based, 
Information_Retrieval, 
Keyphrase_Extraction_Algorithm, 
Language_Identification, Ontology_Tools, and WordNet. 
 
     GATE is based on ANNIE, which is a new IE system 
with core processing resources [4]. ANNIE relies on a finite 
state algorithm and JAPE grammar, and combines 
Tokenisor, which divide the text into simple tokens such as 
words, numbers, punctuation, Sentence Splitter, which 
splits the text into sentences, and abbreviations of gazetteer 
list helps distinguish between sentences. The POS tagger, 
Name entity tagger, and JAPE transducer uses JAPE 
grammar to produce entities, Orthomatcher (co-references),  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to match rules to identify the relations between names 
already found by the POS tagger. The Gazetteer is a list 
presenting a set of names, terms, etc. to identify entities 
based on the list. Among these modules, we used 
Tokenisor, 
Sentence 
splitter, 
Gazetteer, 
and 
JAPE 
transducer [7]. 
 
   GATE includes automatic and semi-automatic semantic 
annotation as well as manual annotation, which enables the 
user to create their own annotations. As a result, the GATE 
developer can be used to extract terms and concepts from a 
specific text effectively and efficiently. For this work, we 
annotate OT concepts from literature to be formalized into 
OTO ontology code.  
 
III. 
METHODS EMPLOYED 
Our method of creating OTO ontology is as follows:  
A. Specifications 
A. A1 Identify goals, strategy and boundary of the 
ontology. It is necessary to identify the domain interest and 
scope from the initial stage of the development process. It 
helps to construct the conceptualization of the domain. In 
Tools 
Type 
Degree 
of 
automation 
Based on 
Ease of use 
Language 
written in 
Advantages 
& 
Disadvantages 
SHOE 
Knowledge 
annotation 
Automatic 
 
+ 
Java 
Allows users to mark up 
pages in SHOE, guided 
by ontologies or URL 
Annota 
Annotation 
schema W3C 
Automatic 
RDF 
mark-up 
XML,XHTML,CSS 
&Xpointer  
+ 
 
C 
Available 
for 
Windows, 
Unix 
and 
MAC 
Does not support IE; like 
an 
ontology 
server; 
makes 
annotation 
publicly available 
Annozilla 
Email 
annotation 
Automatic 
Mozilla 
++ 
 
- 
MnM 
Ontology editor 
Semi-automatic 
& automatic 
HTML 
+ 
 
Similar to Melita 
Ontomat 
 
Automatic 
OWL 
++ 
 
Used 
to 
create 
and 
maintain ontologies; uses 
OtoBroker as server 
COHSE 
Integration 
of 
text-processing 
components  
Automatic 
DAML+OIL 
+ 
RDF 
Uses ontology server to 
mark 
up 
pages 
in 
DAML+OIL and reuse as 
RDF 
Melita 
Annotation 
interface 
Semi-automatic 
Extensible 
mark-up 
language, Java, HTML 
++ 
 
To retrieve structure and 
semi-structured 
annotations 
KIM 
ontotext 
Semantic 
annotation 
platform 
Automatic 
RDF 
++ 
 
Semantic 
annotation, 
indexing, and retrieval of 
unstructured and semi-
structured content. 
GATE 
Annotation tool 
Semi-automatic 
& automatic 
XML, 
HTML, 
XHTML, emails 
+++ 
JAVA 
version 5 
Comprises an architecture 
and framework. Based on 
NLP group 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Analysis 
process 
Upload to 
GATE 
Framework 
Transfers to 
XML 
Running 
ANNIE  
Corpus 
Annotation of concepts & evaluation 
Documents of 
Occupational Therapy 
 
this stage there are many questions that need to be answered 
as recommended by Uschold and Grüninger, which are 
similar to the competency questions. These questions put 
together the resources that cover the ontology’s objects, 
purposes, scope and granularity 
 
• 
What are the general characteristics of OTO 
ontology? To answer this question we should 
describe the content of the ontology including: 
taxonomic organization, the kind of concepts it 
will cover at top-level division, internal structure 
of the concept. 
• 
What is the scope of the domain - will it cover the 
general domain or be specific?  
• 
What is the purpose of OTO ontology?  
• 
Identify targeted users, applications and functional 
requirements.  
• 
Choose knowledge acquisition method and tool 
• 
Choose tool to create the ontology 
A.A.2 Knowledge acquisition  
Before creating the ontology, we had to collect the OT 
concepts for the domain model. Our approach consisted of 
annotating these concepts based on the JAPE grammar, 
using the GATE software. The annotation process began 
by: 
- Creating a corpus of documents and a Gazetteer of OT, 
with JAPE rules used to extract OT concepts. GATE 
provides facilities for loading corpora for annotation from a 
URL or uploading from a file. The process generally started 
as follows: 
 
We compiled OT knowledge from different resources 
and various publications. 
 
 
We analysed the data to ensure it covered the 
whole field. 
 
We transferred the information resources into an 
XML file to form the corpus. 
 
We uploaded the corpus into the GATE software 
so as to start running ANNIE. 
 
We annotated the concepts based on JAPE 
grammar, which is run within ANNIE. 
 
Testing and evaluation. As illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Figure 1.  Annotation workflow 
 
 
B.   Conceptualisation 
This stage starts by: 
 
 
Creating a glossary of terms to identify which 
terms need to be included in the ontology; the 
glossary includes the term names, synonyms, 
acronyms, and descriptions of each term.  
 
Building concept classification.  
 
Building the data dictionary to identify the 
concepts with their meaning, instance, class 
attributes, and their relations. 
 
In the data dictionary, the instances attributes 
should be described in more detail, and class 
attributes also need to be described. 
C. Formalisation: 
    The ontology needs to be formalized by transferring 
the conceptual model into a formal model and to be  
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

coded using the chosen knowledge representation 
languages and tools, such as OWL and Protégé [6]. 
D. Evaluation:  ontology needs to be assessed, so its 
contents need to tested and verified to satisfy the real 
world that needs to be modeled. 
E. Documentation: facilitates the reusability of the 
ontology design. Figure 2 depicts the method of OT 
developing the ontology. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Method of constructing OTO ontology 
 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
1. Identifies the main goal of the OTO ontology which is 
seeking for providing information for therapists that helps 
them to:   
- 
Provide valuable information about the patients. 
- 
Provide information on daily service and activities. 
- 
Enables effective occupational performance. 
2.  Knowledge acquisition started by: 
 
 Creating the corpus. It has 300 files in the XML 
format, containing text relevant to the IS field. 
 
Creating the IS Gazetteer: This is a list of OT 
terms that have to be identified as Major Type, 
Minor Type, etc. For example: 
 
 
Productivity: major type= concept 
Personal Care: minor type= term 
Activities: major type= concept 
• 
Next we use JAPE rules:  
Using JAPE rules allows us to extract concepts and 
identify tokens that contain the concepts in the correct 
order, and then look up the concepts in the Gazetteer. 
JAPE rules create a phase based on Java for creating 
specific grammar. Each JAPE rule consists of Left-
Hand-Side (LHS) that contains the pattern that must be 
matched and Right-Hand-Side (RHS) that details the 
annotations that are to be created [4]. 
          
 The JAPE grammar was used to support regular 
expression matching, as this is how annotation is achieved 
in GATE. Annotation can also be carried out using other 
CREOLE plug-ins such as Gazetteer, for which it is 
necessary to create a list of concepts to be annotated. By 
clicking on the ANNIE Gazetteer, all the lists appear, 
including the OT list, as shown in Figure 3. The sub-list 
presents the main concepts, such as Action, Task, 
Interactions, social role and Developmental. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Screenshot of OT Gazetteer 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

• 
The next step was uploading the corpus to the 
application framework using the JAPE grammar 
and Gazetteer to match and annotate concepts 
from the corpus.  
 
• 
NLP technique used to extract OT concepts: 
 
 We present an automatic extraction method based on 
ANNIE using a JAPE grammar that extracts concepts 
from XML files and HTML text. Our JAPE rule extracts 
concepts as follows: the first entity detected is 
Information service {Type=Token, start=867, end=837, 
id=4210, majorType=concept} labelled as Occupational 
Therapy.concept. 
 
Phase: one 
Input: Lookup Token 
Options: control = applet 
 
Rule: concept1 
Priority: 20 
( 
({Token.string == "occupational"}) 
{Token.string == "therapy"} 
({Lookup. major Type == "concept"})  
) : occupational 
--> 
: occupational. concept = {Rule=concept1} 
       In these rules, we specify a string of text {Token.string 
== } that must be matched, specifying the attributes of the 
annotation by using operators such as “==”, and then 
annotating the entities according to the correct labels. 
Furthermore, using a control field such as all, applet, brill 
gives the right results.  The next example shows how regular 
expressions could be annotated as showing concepts related 
to (Therapy) metacharacter(dot, *, [ ], | ),  {Token.string == 
"therap (ies)"}. 
 
3. Creating Glossary:  
    All terms were gathered along with the relevant 
information to be described in the glossary. We collect the 
terms from the point of view of occupational practice and 
therapists, see Table 2. 
 
TABLE 2.  GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
  
 
4. Building concept classification:  
     In this stage, we followed the Top-down strategy to 
construct the high level of concepts of the ontology. The 
top- down method helps in creating the basic relations 
between concepts. The ontogical hierarchy is developed 
based on the main components of the domain knowledge 
such as:  
 
- Occupational Therapy Components 
- Therapist 
- Client= patient 
- Individuals 
- Groups 
- Organisation 
- Therapy 
- Therapy Action 
- Referral or reason for contact 
- Information gathering 
- Initial assessment 
- Problem Formulation 
- Goal setting 
- Action Planning 
- Treatment Implementation 
- Ongoing Assessment 
- Evaluation 
- Outcome Measurement 
- Therapy Method 
- Performance Area 
- Activities of Daily Living 
- Working and productive Activates 
- Play Activities 
- Performance Components 
- Sensorimotor Component 
- Cognitive Integration  
- Psychosocial Skills and Psychosocial   
 Components 
- Performance Contexts 
-Temporal Aspects 
- Environmental Aspects 
- Action 
- Internal influence 
- Philosophy 
- Beliefs 
- Values 
- Ethics 
- Goals 
- Key Concepts 
- Skills 
- Responsibilities 
 
 
 - External Influence 
- Personal Experience  
- Education 
- Academic trends  
- Social and culture environment  
- Social context 
- Working Context 
- Historical 
 
However, 
to 
attend 
to 
specific 
problems 
the 
relationships should be identified that provide more precise 
details; in OTO ontology, many taxonomic relationships 
Occupation 
Role 
Ability 
Occupational mapping 
Routine 
Activity 
Occupational performance 
Setting 
Assessment 
Occupational components 
Skills 
Autonomy 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

have been built, e.g., Is-A, hasA. Also, some relations 
among concepts are non-taxonomic relations used to 
present within the relation concept. 
    
        Therapists should have professional beliefs and values, 
about the nature of people, the nature of health, and beliefs 
about the nature and purpose of OT. OT ontology provides 
clear relationships between Clients, whether individual, 
group or organisation, each of which has to be influenced 
by internal and external factors.  
 
      Meanwhile, everyone has a history, experience, 
language, social and culture, physical, thoughts, beliefs, 
values, aspirations, needs, problems, interest, and abilities. 
More relationships are depicted in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  Figure 4.  Relationships in OTO ontology 
 
        In the formal model of OTO ontology that covers the 
whole domain, the main classes are categorised based on 
fundamental considerations about the role concepts in the 
area. The Ontology is implemented by organising concepts 
according to is-A, part- of and hasA relations with axioms.  
 
     That gives specific definitions of these concepts. A 
fragment of the ontology is presented in Figures 5 and 6. 
 
 
 
               Figure 5.  OTO ontology in Protégé  
 
 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Figure 6.  OTO ontology in Protégé 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION 
The OTO ontology is based on IE techniques for 
extracting the main concepts in the domain. Our extraction 
of OT concepts using JAPE grammar and regular expression 
based on the GATE developer for automated IE provides 
significant results. The main idea behind using JAPE and 
regular expression is to identify OT terminology as tokens, 
for example Occupational Therapy, Activity and daily 
living, from a large text. The term identification relies on 
Legitimate Tools for OT 
OT knowledge base 
Goals & desired 
outcome  
Professional understanding OT‘s domain 
concern  
Professional Beliefs & 
Values 
Professional 
Tasks 
Occupation 
Therapist 
Focus Attention On 
Has A 
Activities 
Skills 
Role, responsibility & 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

looking up a list of OT terms from the Gazetteer. For 
example, we could look up collecting information, analysis 
of information, interpreting information or Social norms, 
social expectation, cultural norm, cultural expectation. These 
concepts can be collected to be the main component of the 
OT glossary and to structure in semi-formal hierarchy before 
creating the computational model of the OTO ontology. 
  
We extracted the OT concepts from a corpus of 300 
documents, obtained specifically for this purpose. We ran 
the ANNIE application, using document reset, Tokenisor, 
sentence Splitter, Gazetteer, POS tagger, JAPE transducer 
and Orthomatcher. The annotation set that appeared in the 
display panel, and the concepts are highlighted in the 
annotation default; each annotation has a different colour 
after running ANNIE and highlighting the matching 
concepts. The results show that our approach successfully 
annotates concepts. We recalled 541 of the Occupation 
concept, 275 of the Therapy concept and 35 of the Habit 
concept. Each annotation starts from a specific point and 
ends at a different point based on how many tokens it has. 
The Occupation concept starts at point (557) and ends at 
(566), while the Therapy concept starts at (624) and ends at 
(636), with its features {major Type=concept}. 
 
In this study, the data were evaluated based on 
evaluation metrics for precision, recall and the F-measure, 
which is common metrics in IR field that defined as 
follows:  
 	

  1
2 	

     
 	

  1
2 

     
																   		
∗!
"#	!                   (4)   
                                                                     
The statistics of the corpus show that the pattern 
matching of OT concepts based on the lookup OT list was 
403, correct concepts and accuracy were generally higher, 
and there were no partially correct results (0), or missing 
false positives, as illustrated in figure 7  
 
Figure 7.  The Accuracy results 
        The OTO ontology model represents OT therapist 
searching needs, and has potential to help social studies 
researchers find primary sources. The OTO ontology 
followed 
Methontology 
[17] 
ontology 
methodology 
engineering as a general framework to construct the 
ontology model, and it was evaluated based on ontology 
quality criteria to ensure its clarity and completeness. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUREWORK 
A. Achievement 
 The development of OTO ontology is a stage towards 
creating a sharable and reusable OT system. Ontology is a 
formal model for therapists and social staff organising 
vision in the information hyperspace of the domain 
knowledge. This paper has described a method using NLP 
techniques to extract concepts for the purpose of developing 
OTO ontology. Furthermore, the development of the IE 
system should save time and effort in labelling the most 
common concepts. In total, we extracted 664 concepts that 
are classes of the OT, and 650 subclasses making up the 
main components of the ontology skeleton. The IE 
technique can be applied to many different formats, such as 
XML, HTML documents, URLs or emails. 
 
B. Future work 
 
Ontology is at the heart of the semantic web. It defines 
concepts and relations that make global interoperability possible. 
In future work, we plan to enhance more concepts to develop 
OTO, to be applied in specific applications to solve specific 
problems related to the OT domain.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  H. Alberto, A. Berthier, S. Altigran, and  S. Juliana,  “A 
brief survey of web data extraction tools” SIGMOD 
Record. 
Vol. 
31, 
2002, 
pp. 
84-93, 
doi:10.1145/565117.565137.   
http://annotation.semanticweb.org/tools/ [Retrieved: Jan, 
2013]. 
[2]    C. Chang, M. Kayed,  M. Girgis,  and K. Shaala,  “A 
Survey of Web Information Extraction Systems”. IEEE 
Transaction on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 
Vol.18, 2000, pp. 1411-1428, doi: 10.1109/TKDE.2006. 
[3] 
 V. Crescenzi, and G. Mecca,  “Automatic Information 
Extraction from Large Websites”. Journal of the ACM, 
Vol. 51,  2004, pp. 731–779. 
[4] 
GATE, “Developing Language Processing Components 
with 
GATE 
Version 
6“ 
(a 
User 
Guide). 
http://gate.ac.uk/sale/tao/splitch13.html#x18-32300013,  
2010,  pp.112-12, [Retrieved: Jan, 2013]. 
[5]    D. Gasevic, V. Devedzic, and D. Djuric, “Model driven 
architecture and ontology development”.  Berlin, 
Springer. 2006,  P.315. 
[6]      M. Horridge,  and P. Patel-Schneider,  “OWL 2 Web   
Ontology    Language Manchester Syntax”,   
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-manchester-syntax/ , 2009,  
pp.01-09[Retrieved: Feb, 2013].          
[7]  S. Handschuh, and S. Staab,  “Authoring and Annotation 
of Web Pages in CREAM”. Proceedings of the 11th 
International World Wide Web Conference, WWW 
2002, 
Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
USA., 
2002, 
pp.10-
24.http://siegfriedandschuh.net/-   
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

pub/2002/aa_cream_www2002.pdf, 
[Retrieved: 
Jan, 
2013]. 
[8]    T. Jepsen,  “Just what is an ontology”. IEEE computer 
society, Vol.11, 2009,  pp.11-23. 
[9]     O.  Lassila, and R. Swick,  “Resource Description    
Framework (RDF) Model and Syntax Specification”,   
Cambridge W3C Recommendation 22 February 1999,  
World Wide Web Consortium, pp. 01-11.  
http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdfsyntax/. [Retrieved: Jan, 
2013] 
[10]     E. Laboratory,  “ TOVE Ontology Project” . University 
of 
Toronto: 
Toronto, 
2011,   
 
http://www.eil.utoronto.ca/enterprise-
modelling/tove/, [Retrieved: Feb, 2013]. 
[11]   M. Moens,  Information   Extraction: algorithms    and 
prospects in   a retrieval context,   Springer, 2006, p. 243 
[12]   A. Sawsaa  and J. Lu,  “Ontocop: A  Virtual Community 
of Practice to Create  Ontology of Information science”.                            
International Conference on Internet   Computing 
(ICOMP'10), Las Vegas, USA,  2010, pp. 250-259. 
[13]   A. Sawsaa  and J. Lu,  “Ontology of Information    
Science Based On OWL for the Semantic Web”. In:     
International 
Arab 
Conference 
on 
Information   
Technology (ACIT'2010). University of Garyounis:  
                Benghazi, Libya, 2010, pp.145-161. 
[14]   R. Srihari, and W. Li,  “Information Extraction 
Supported Question Answering”. In Proceedings of   the 
Eighth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC-8). Ft.  
Belvoir 
Defense 
Technical 
Information 
Center       
http://www.dtic.mil/cgi-  
bin/GetTRDoc?AD=ADA460042&Location=U2&doc=
GetTRDoc.pdf , 2002, pp.310-319 [Retrieved: Jan, 
2013]. 
[15]   Semantic Web,  “ Semantic Web Activity Statement 
W3C”, 
http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/Activity, 
2005, 
pp:11-14                 [Retrieved: Feb, 2013]. 
[16]  D. Thakker, T. Osman, and P. Lakin,  “JAPE Grammar 
Tutorial” 
. 
http://gate.ac.uk/sale/thakker-jape-
tutorial/GATE%20JAPE%20manual., 
2009, 
pp.1-38 
[Reteived: Feb, 2013]. 
[17]   M. Fernandez-Lopez,  A. Gomez-Perez,  and N. Juristo, 
“ Methontology : From Ontological Art Towards 
Ontological Engineering. Proceedings of the AAAI97 
Spring Symposium Series on Ontological Engineering, , 
1997, pp;33-40. 
 
 
 
  
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

