Reverse Commerce 
Adding Information System Support for Customer-centric Market Coordination 
 
Robert Neumann, Konstantina Georgieva,  
Reiner Dumke 
Department of Distributed Systems 
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg 
39106 Magdeburg, Germany 
{robneuma, ina, dumke}@ivs.cs.ovgu.de 
Andreas Schmietendorf 
Berlin School of Economics and Law 
Fachbereich II 
10245 Berlin, Germany 
andreas.schmietendorf@hwr-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract—While it is sometimes hard for individuals to find all 
suppliers in a market in order to be able to determine the one 
with the lowest price for a product or service, they pay often 
more than necessary. There might have been another cheaper 
supplier, which –due to the opaqueness of the market- they 
have not found. Furthermore, if suppliers for a product or 
service are scarce, individuals tend to accept lower service 
quality, because they are happy to have found after all the item 
of their desire. If consumers were able to simply announce 
their demand on a global level where implicitly all suppliers 
were integrated, they could leave the process of investigating 
the market and negotiating prices completely to the suppliers. 
In this article, we are going to provide a formal model that 
describes 
a 
consumer-centric 
approach 
for 
market 
coordination and leverages the support of information systems. 
Keywords-Electronic 
Commerce; 
market 
coordination; 
efficiency; electronic markets; fixed pricing; dynamic pricing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the Internet era, electronic commerce (e-commerce) 
plays an important role for both consumers as well as 
suppliers. E-commerce enables individuals to procure goods 
and services from their computers at home. Suppliers on the 
other hand benefit from a distribution channel that is cheap 
and very close to the customer. The number of internet users 
has increased considerably since the mid-1990s. At the same 
time, the revenue that is generated by internet-based e-
commerce has increased steadily and keeps increasing [1].  
While the development of e-commerce and its 
technological change are remarkable, the fundamental way 
of how e-commerce is conducted has not changed at all. 
Generally spoken, if consumers use the e-commerce channel 
for fulfilling their demand, they browse through a number of 
websites of suppliers that offer the product or service and 
decide for one. Though tools, such as product search engines, 
kept improving thus providing even richer experiences to the 
consumer, our contemporary understanding of e-commerce 
is still very supplier-biased.  
Especially, the information phase of an e-commerce 
transaction is marked by a high level of pro-activity on the 
consumer side [2]. After consumers have realized that they 
have a demand for something, they need to investigate the 
market, browse through websites of potential suppliers, 
negotiate the price and finally decide on a supplier they want 
to bargain with. The suppliers on the other hand want to keep 
the market just transparent enough to still being visible to the 
consumer, but too opaque for the consumer to be able to find 
other, maybe even cheaper suppliers that offer better service.  
The outcomes of such market constellation are manifold, 
though we tend to not often recall them to our mind. While it 
is sometimes difficult for us to find all suppliers in a market 
in order to be able to determine the best offer, we pay more 
than necessary as there might have been another cheaper 
supplier, which we have not found. Furthermore, if suppliers 
for a product or service are scarce, we tend to accept lower 
service quality as we are happy to have found the item of our 
desire at all. 
If consumers were able to simply announce their demand 
on a global level where implicitly all suppliers were 
integrated, they could leave the process of investigating the 
market and negotiating prices completely to the suppliers. 
This way, they would avoid spending time on drilling 
through the opaqueness of markets and at the same time 
receive a number of bids from all suppliers that could 
potentially deliver the desired product or service. Their task 
would simply be to choose the supplier that offers the lowest 
bid. Thereby, consumers in such kind of markets would 
benefit from lower prices and eventually even better service. 
Throughout this article, we will refer to the traditional 
way of e-commerce conduct as “Forward Commerce”. 
Contrarily, we will introduce a model that emphasizes 
customer-centric market coordination and refer to it as 
“Reverse Commerce”. We will provide a conceptual 
framework that underlines the essence of Reverse 
Commerce. Furthermore, we will emphasize the role of 
information systems and show how they build the 
technological backbone of Reverse Commerce. Finally, we 
will detail economical implications and discuss the potential 
of Reverse Commerce to positively affect both the overall 
service quality as well as the total welfare of an economy.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The fundamental idea behind Reverse Commerce is not 
new. Dynamic price making as well as price making through 
24
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

bidding are mechanisms that are well known from virtual or 
real marketplaces that support auctioning. Reverse Pricing 
and Reverse Auctioning [3] are concepts that can be found 
on very specific and mostly B2B-only trading platforms, but 
that are not yet generally accepted among end-consumers.  
While reversed market coordination allows for much 
higher dynamicity and fluctuation of prices and quantities 
traded, it also seems to be capable of much more accurately 
capturing and exhibiting short-term perceptions, moods and 
feelings of market participants. Fixed pricing [4], contrarily, 
due to its very nature aims at flattening out the fluctuations 
that exist in dynamic pricing, thereby making the market 
more reliable, stable and anticipatable.  
As we will discuss later, however, reliability and stability 
in fixed pricing are traded for welfare. The reason for that 
can be comprehended by taking a look at the border cases 
that exist in fixed pricing. Though consumers and suppliers 
exist that would agree on a bargain below the fixed price, 
there is no way for both to communicate this to each other. 
Consequently, certain consumers cannot fulfill their demands 
while certain suppliers cannot make profit. The overall 
economy misses out on welfare. 
Even though dynamic price making promises certain 
benefits for both consumers as well as suppliers (compared 
to fixed pricing it is “Pareto optimal” [5]), end-consumer 
markets are still dominated by fixed price systems. Sufficient 
examples exist, however, that dynamic price making works 
fine in end-consumer markets (e.g. eBay, stock markets) 
bringing up the question of why it has not yet gained wider 
acceptance. 
Throughout the remainder of this article, we will 
combine the two concepts dynamic pricing with RFQ 
(request for quotation) [6]. We will emphasize how new 
technology can help with expanding the field of application 
of those concepts into end-consumer markets, thereby 
referring to the overall effort as Reverse Commerce. 
III. 
MARKET COORDINATION 
In this article, we propose Reverse Commerce as an 
alternative to the traditional way of business conduct and 
refer to the status quo as “Forward Commerce”. Based on 
[7], we define a market M as: 
 
M = (Σ ∪ Γ ∪ ∆, RM)  
 
(1) 
 
Thereby, ∑ = {σ1, …, σn} is the set of involved suppliers, 
Γ = {γ1, …, γm} is the set of consumers, ∆ = {δ1, …, δk} is 
the set of available items in this context and RM summarizes 
the relation between all participants in the market above. 
Furthermore, an electronic market MeB can be defined as: 
 
MeB = (ΣeB ∪ ΓeB ∪ ∆eB, RM
eB),  
 
(2) 
  
 
 
whereby ΣeB ⊆ Σ, ΓeB ⊆ Γ , ∆eB ⊆ ∆ and RM
eB ⊆ RM. 
Note that some σi are not part of the electronic market MeB. 
Otherwise, this could also infer that some σi
eB are not part of 
∑. In this case, ΣeB  ⊃ Σ , which is a phenomenon that 
corresponds well with recent trends, but will not be 
considered throughout this article. Though we are aware of 
differences existing between M and MeB, throughout the 
remainder of this article we are going to neglect them and 
will use MeB as synonym for M, ΣeB as synonym for Σ, ∆eB 
as synonym for ∆ and σi
eB as synonym for σi. 
In order to describe certain aspects of M, we need to 
refine our perspective on Σ , Γ  and ∆  and provide more 
detail. Therefore, we define σ  = {identσ, presentationσ, 
reputationσ, {δσ}}, δ = {identδ , priceδ} and γ = {identγ, 
motivationγ, {δγ}}. 
IV. 
  FORWARD COMMERCE 
The contemporary understanding of how consumers find 
the product they are looking for and the supplier they want to 
bargain with has grown with the evolution of the human 
being as a very static and manifested pattern. If an individual 
is searching for a new item it wants to buy, this pattern is 
best described through the following process [2]: 
 
1) 
Individual experiences need for an item δi 
2) 
Individual starts investigating the price (priceδ) of  
the item by visiting various suppliers (Σ)  
3) 
Individual decides for the supplier σi that it  
personally likes best (influenced by price,  
reputation, etc.) 
4) 
Individual enters bargain with supplier σi and  
obtains the item in exchange for a liability or  
funds 
 
The above process is marked by a very strong proactivity 
of the consumer towards the bargain. What that means is that 
regarding the supply side, all the supplier usually needs to do 
is offering and advertizing the item that s/he wants to sell. 
The rest of the engagement is covered by actions of the 
consumer. The consumer investigates on products and 
suppliers (in-store, on the internet or in magazines). The 
consumer contacts the supplier and/or visits shops. 
Eventually, the consumer negotiates the price with the 
supplier, since it is in the immediate interest of the consumer 
to yield a lower price.  
In essence, in Forward Commerce the consumer γ, when 
searching for a product δγ, is influenced by the supplier’s 
product presentation and his reputation. The three 
components δγ, presentationσ and priceδ get projected onto a 
supplier σ in the market who can deliver the product. Finally, 
the supplier σ -depending on the price of the product and the 
consumer’s motivation- decides, whether to sell δ to the 
consumer or not. 
 
γ ⟹ (δγ, presentationσ, reputationσ) ⟹ σ  
σ ⟹ (δσ, motivationγ,  priceδ) ⟹ δ  
(3) 
25
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

V. 
REVERSE COMMERCE
The concept of Reverse Commerce proposes that in order 
to find the item δγ as well as the supplier 
wants to bargain with, all the individual needs to do is 
announce or “advertise” its interest in the item. Suppliers that 
are able to deliver the requested item receive a note about a 
new bargaining opportunity. They apply at the consumer for 
a bargain by providing a quote at which they are willing to 
sell the item. The consumer decides from the list of suppliers 
that have applied for a bargain for a favorite supplier. The 
payment is completed and the item delivered. The Reverse 
Commerce process is listed below [2]: 
 
1) 
Individual experiences need for an item
2) 
Individual posts a request the item
3) 
Suppliers Σ apply for a bargain with the 
         γ by providing a quote 
4) 
Individual enters bargain with chosen supplier 
and obtains the item in exchange for a liability or 
funds 
 
From a consumer’s point of view, the concept of Reverse 
Commerce would allow for a totally new consumer 
experience. Individuals who wanted to buy an item 
need to spend time on investigating items and suppliers 
anymore, but would rather simply announce that they have a 
demand that is to be fulfilled. The remaining actions would 
lie on the side of those suppliers that could potentially fulfill 
the demand.  
In contrast to Forward Commerce, in R
the consumer solely decides for a product 
decision making he leaves the supplier 
decision for a product δγ is driven by 
motivation to buy the product (motivation
product’s price (priceδ). The three components
motivationγ and priceδ get projected onto the product 
Afterwards, the consumer gets automatically assigned the 
best feasible supplier influenced by his presentation and his 
reputation. 
 
 γ ⟹ (δγ , motivationγ,  priceδ
δ ⟹ (δσ, presentationσ, reputation
 
 
 
 
 
VI. 
OPAQUENESS MARGINS
The key benefit of Reverse Commerce is that consumers 
do not need to understand the market behind the items they 
are interested in anymore in order to be able to 
offer. While suppliers are competing against each other, 
consumers benefit from this competition by picking the 
supplier that offers the best deal. They leave the price 
making and negotiation as it occurs in Forward Commerce to 
the competing suppliers. 
Contrary to Forward Commerce, Reverse Commerce 
implicitly ensures that the consumer finds the supplier that 
offers the best price. This is because in Reverse Commerce 
only the supplier that offers the best deal out of all suppliers 
OMMERCE 
The concept of Reverse Commerce proposes that in order 
as well as the supplier σ the consumer 
wants to bargain with, all the individual needs to do is 
its interest in the item. Suppliers that 
are able to deliver the requested item receive a note about a 
new bargaining opportunity. They apply at the consumer for 
a bargain by providing a quote at which they are willing to 
es from the list of suppliers 
favorite supplier. The 
payment is completed and the item delivered. The Reverse 
Individual experiences need for an item δi 
item δi 
apply for a bargain with the consumer  
Individual enters bargain with chosen supplier σ   
and obtains the item in exchange for a liability or  
From a consumer’s point of view, the concept of Reverse 
Commerce would allow for a totally new consumer 
experience. Individuals who wanted to buy an item do not 
items and suppliers 
anymore, but would rather simply announce that they have a 
demand that is to be fulfilled. The remaining actions would 
lie on the side of those suppliers that could potentially fulfill 
In contrast to Forward Commerce, in Reverse Commerce 
solely decides for a product while in his 
leaves the supplier completely out. The 
is driven by the consumer’s 
motivationγ) as well as the 
hree components δγ, 
get projected onto the product δ. 
Afterwards, the consumer gets automatically assigned the 
best feasible supplier influenced by his presentation and his 
δ) ⟹ δ  
reputationσ) ⟹ σ  
 
 
(4) 
ARGINS 
The key benefit of Reverse Commerce is that consumers 
do not need to understand the market behind the items they 
are interested in anymore in order to be able to find the best 
offer. While suppliers are competing against each other, 
consumers benefit from this competition by picking the 
supplier that offers the best deal. They leave the price 
making and negotiation as it occurs in Forward Commerce to 
Contrary to Forward Commerce, Reverse Commerce 
implicitly ensures that the consumer finds the supplier that 
offers the best price. This is because in Reverse Commerce 
that offers the best deal out of all suppliers 
that exist in the market will enter
consumer. This is not to be taken for granted as normally in 
Forward Commerce the cost for the consumer to fully 
explore the market and reveal all suppliers within is very 
high. As in Reverse Commerce the consume
“pulls” the offers out of the market, all 
potentially fulfill a demand 
offer as their bid competes with the bid of other competitors.
In Forward Commerce, the responsibility of finding th
best deal lies with the consumer. Depending on how well 
s/he investigates the market, the consumer will find the 
supplier that offers the lowest bid. Thereby, it is very likely 
that the consumer -no matter how intensively s/he 
investigates the market- will not find the lowest bid. In many 
cases, the market opaqueness is simply too high as there 
might be a huge number of suppliers that are spread across a 
large geographic area and not easy to 
of the market will finally compel the con
search and employ an individual search
consumer will choose a supplier that in accordance with the 
applied heuristic offers the lowest bid.
the consumer chooses the average bid as depicted in 
1. 
 
Figure 1. Best heuristic bid in 
While the search heuristic allows the consumer to yield 
relatively good results (the average case)
the opaqueness of the market, the consumer will likely not 
find the best possible bid. In this case, the consumer will pay 
a price for the item that is by 
lowest bid available in the overall
will from now on refer to this 
The opaqueness margin is the margin the supplier mak
with the consumer not having found the lowest bid available 
in the market. Thereby, it is important to note that the 
supplier can only realize the opaqueness margin because the 
market is not completely transparent to the consumer. On the 
other side, the opaqueness of markets equips suppliers with a 
certain advantage in terms of bargaining power. Baileys and 
Bakos have referred in their fundamental work on
markets to this phenomenon as “bargaining asymmetry”
While markets aim at aggregating buyer demand in order to 
achieve economies of scale to reduce supplier
will enter the bargain with the 
This is not to be taken for granted as normally in 
Forward Commerce the cost for the consumer to fully 
explore the market and reveal all suppliers within is very 
high. As in Reverse Commerce the consumer more or less 
“pulls” the offers out of the market, all suppliers that could 
potentially fulfill a demand will implicitly provide the best 
offer as their bid competes with the bid of other competitors. 
In Forward Commerce, the responsibility of finding the 
best deal lies with the consumer. Depending on how well 
s/he investigates the market, the consumer will find the 
supplier that offers the lowest bid. Thereby, it is very likely 
no matter how intensively s/he 
ll not find the lowest bid. In many 
cases, the market opaqueness is simply too high as there 
might be a huge number of suppliers that are spread across a 
large geographic area and not easy to locate. The opaqueness 
of the market will finally compel the consumer to restrict his 
n individual search heuristic. The 
will choose a supplier that in accordance with the 
applied heuristic offers the lowest bid. In the average case 
chooses the average bid as depicted in Figure 
 
est heuristic bid in Forward Commerce. 
While the search heuristic allows the consumer to yield 
(the average case) when dealing with 
the opaqueness of the market, the consumer will likely not 
find the best possible bid. In this case, the consumer will pay 
a price for the item that is by a “margin” higher than the 
overall market (see Figure 1). We 
will from now on refer to this margin as opaqueness margin. 
The opaqueness margin is the margin the supplier makes 
with the consumer not having found the lowest bid available 
Thereby, it is important to note that the 
the opaqueness margin because the 
market is not completely transparent to the consumer. On the 
opaqueness of markets equips suppliers with a 
certain advantage in terms of bargaining power. Baileys and 
referred in their fundamental work on electronic 
markets to this phenomenon as “bargaining asymmetry” [8]. 
While markets aim at aggregating buyer demand in order to 
achieve economies of scale to reduce supplier-biased 
26
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

bargaining asymmetry, markets that function in line with 
traditional Forward Commerce will hardly be able to 
completely abandon the opaqueness margin and thus remove 
the supplier-biased bargaining asymmetry.   
VII. CONCEPTUAL BASICS OF REVERSE COMMERCE 
In the following, we are going to provide a theoretical 
framework that outlines the conceptual difference between 
Forward and Reverse Commerce and points out the 
significance of the concept that underlies the opaqueness 
margin. 
Let δ be the item an individual is looking for in order to 
fulfill a demand. Let µ be the determinator function that an 
individual employs when choosing a supplier to bargain with 
from a set of multiple suppliers. Let furthermore φ be the 
search heuristic an individual follows when searching for 
suppliers in a market which is not completely transparent and 
σ be the supplier the individual finally decides to bargain 
with. Let Σδ be the wholeness of suppliers that exist in an 
opaque market and that could potentially deliver the desired 
item δ. Let Σδ
NC  be the wholeness of suppliers that exist 
within an opaque market and that due to the heuristic φ that 
was employed by the consumer to search the market, were 
not found and could not be considered. Finally, let OM be 
the opaqueness margin. 
 
Reverse Commerce variables: 
 
 
δ: desired item 
 
Σδ:  suppliers who can deliver δ 
 
Σδ = ⋃
Σδ
i
n
i=1
 
 
Σδ
NC: suppliers not considered by consumer 
 
φ: individual search heuristic 
 
 
µ: determinator function that chooses 
   
supplier to bargain with 
 
 
σ:chosen supplier  
 
OM: opaqueness margin 
 
with:  
 
φ: γ ⟹ δγ , motivationγ,  priceδ ⟹ δ 
µ: δ ⟹ (δσ, presentationσ, reputationσ) T σ 
 
In traditional Forward Commerce, the supplier σ, which 
the individual determines, can be expressed as a function µ 
of Σδ, the individual search heuristic φ and the desired item 
δ. Thereby, Σδ  represents the suppliers which exist in the 
opaque market (M) and which can deliver δ. 
 
σ = µΣδ, φ, δ = µφΣδ,δ = µ(φΣδ) 
(5) 
 
The number of suppliers the consumer found in the 
opaque market after having employed the search heuristic φ 
can be expressed as |φΣδ|. Accordingly, the total number of 
suppliers that exist in the opaque market and that could 
potentially deliver the item δ can be expressed as |Σδ|. If the 
quotient of both the number of suppliers the consumer found 
and the total number of suppliers in the market is smaller 
than 1, this implies that the consumer –due to the heuristic 
search- did not find all suppliers who could potentially 
deliver the desired item δ. 
 
|φΣδ|
|Σδ|
 < 1 → not all suppliers were found 
(6) 
 
The set of suppliers that –due to the heuristic search- 
were not considered by the consumer for a bargain is 
represented by Σδ
NC . Thereby, Σδ
NC  is simply the 
quantitative difference between the total of suppliers in the 
market and the set of suppliers the consumer found after 
having applied φ to Σδ. 
 
 Σδ
NC = Σδ ∖  φ(Σδ) 
(7) 
 
If there is a supplier in Σδ
NC, which the consumer does 
not know about, but which, if hypothetically chosen by the 
consumer, offered a better bargain than the best supplier 
within the set of suppliers the individual had to choose from 
after the heuristic was applied (φΣδ), then the opaqueness 
margin OM is larger than zero. In this case, the chosen 
supplier σ  made a margin with the market being not 
completely transparent. 
 
 µΣδ
NC ≻ µφΣδ → OM > 0 
(8) 
 
In case of Reverse Commerce, above argumentation 
would look fundamentally different. One difference in 
Reverse Commerce lies in σRC being chosen from the total of 
suppliers in the Reverse Commerce market. The individual 
heuristic in Reverse Commerce (φRC) implicitly yields the 
wholeness of suppliers to the consumer. In Reverse 
Commerce, φ makes all suppliers in the market visible to 
the consumer as all suppliers that would potentially want to 
bargain with the consumer themselves receive a notification 
from the market that a new bargaining chance exists. 
Suppliers automatically start providing the consumer with 
offers while readjusting their bids when competing with 
other suppliers’ bids. The consumer merely needs to pick the 
lowest bid. 
 
 φRCΣδ = Σδ 
(9) 
 
Consequentially, the supplier which the consumer 
chooses from the set of suppliers it gained after having 
employed 
the 
heuristic φRCΣδ  is 
determined 
by 
µ φRCΣδ  or in other words µ(Σδ) . Thereby, the best 
supplier, which the consumer chooses from φRCΣδ, is also 
27
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

the best supplier which the consumer would hypothetically 
choose from Σδ, if the market was completely transparent to 
him. This results into the opaqueness margin OM being zero. 
 
σRC = µ φRCΣδ  = µ(Σδ) → OM = 0 
(10) 
 
Finally, the quotient of |φΣδ| and |Σδ| equals one, as 
no supplier exists that could not be found and taken into 
consideration by the consumer. 
 
|φRCΣδ|
|Σδ|
 = 1 
(11) 
 
The consumer has found the supplier that offered the best 
deal without actively searching for it. 
VIII. INFORMATION SYSTEM SUPPORT 
While the above conceptual framework has outlined that 
customer-centric market coordination as it occurs in Reverse 
Commerce eliminates opaqueness margins, we are now 
going to detail how information systems can support large 
scale Reverse Commerce scenarios.  
One essential requirement for Reverse Commerce to 
function properly is that both consumers and suppliers are 
given a medium via which they can communicate. In case of 
Forward Commerce, consumers are utilizing search engines 
in order to find the supplier they want to bargain with. In 
many cases, however, the search results are fuzzy, as neither 
the consumer was able to exactly describe what s/he was 
looking for, nor did all the suppliers appear in the search 
results. Even though price search engines specialized on 
increasing the response quality of queries that were placed 
by consumers, the accuracy of the returned results is still not 
very high. While easy queries already yield good results, 
more complicated queries that contain several restrictions on 
the product the consumer is looking for still fail in returning 
precise offers. With respect to an ongoing automation of 
matching consumer demand with bids posted by suppliers in 
Reverse Commerce, it is essential to increase the accuracy of 
query results.  
In Forward Commerce, we do not see that the customer 
is provided with a “simplified and pleasing interaction” [9] 
that allows for an instantaneous gathering of product 
information. We believe that this is because of the 
shortcomings of the general approach of matching queries 
posted on web search engines with offers posted by 
suppliers, maybe even on their private website. No matter 
how smart the algorithms that search engines employ, they 
will always try to match poorly structured queries with 
poorly structured offers placed on the worldwide web. In 
order for Reverse Commerce to function properly, this 
concept needs to be able to rely upon high query accuracy. 
In order to underline our argumentation above, let us 
assume the following theoretical example. Given a query Q 
that consists of n components c1..cn: 
 
Q  {c1, c2, c3, …, cn} 
(12) 
 
This query is provided (most likely as a string) to a 
search engine E that returns a result R consisting of the 
components c1..cm. 
 
 R  {c1, c2, c4, …, cm} 
(13) 
 
Thereby, the search engine E projects the query Q onto 
the result R. 
 
 E: Q → R 
(14) 
 
Intentionally, the user of the search engine would expect 
Q to be equal to R, as he expects the search engine to return 
accurate results. In this case, subtracting R from Q would 
yield an empty set ∅. Furthermore, m would equal n. 
 
Q ∖ R  ∅ 
(15) 
 
In most cases, however, due to search engines operating 
upon both weakly structured queries as well as weakly 
structured product descriptions, Q and R will be different. 
 
Q ∖ R ! ∅ 
(16) 
 
This could indicate that either R does not contain all 
components of Q or it contains more components than Q as 
m would be different from n. The reason for the distortion 
that exists between Q and R is the poor structure of the query 
as well as the product description. Our approach towards a 
solution to the above problem includes strongly structured 
queries on the consumer side as well as strongly structured 
product descriptions on the supply side. Our approach aims 
at ensuring that Q ∖ R always yields ∅. 
In an earlier work, we have talked about Organic Product 
Catalogs (OPCs) [10] that aim at providing suppliers with a 
centralized, cloud-based and low-cost platform on the 
internet to describe and maintain their products and expose 
them to the worldwide web. We have designed the 
architecture of our OPC as in Figure 2.  
Figure 2 provides two perspectives on a cloud-hosted 
OPC. In the horizontal perspective, based on the cloud 
platform, the tenant layer ensures that each participant has 
access to an own customized content area. The actual EPC 
distinguishes 
and 
individually 
manages 
the 
product 
descriptions for each client separately and thus provides full 
support for multitenancy. Furthermore, the OPC provides a 
general purpose product description language (PDL) that can 
be used to describe the products and services of each tenant. 
28
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Figure 2. Cloud stack of an OPC.
In most cases, however, tenants will use templates that 
were created by other tenants earlier for describing their 
products [10] [11]. Finally, the bottom
OPC centrally stores all product descriptions that a tenant is 
maintaining. The vertical perspective (or the per
perspective) visualizes that on each layer in the horizontal 
perspective, tenants are provided with their own customized 
(multitenant) experience. 
The general purpose product description language serves 
as basis for the definition of products and services of any 
kind. Thereby, it is important to note that the PDL aims at 
being universal. What that means is that the PDL is capable 
of modeling any product or service, no matter how trivial or 
complicated it is. One fundamental assumption we make in 
order to correspond with the universality requirement says 
that every product or service can be expressed as a list of 
hierarchically ordered attributes.  
While our PDL can be considered as an XML dialect, it 
adds structure and with that machine readability to the 
product description. In accordance with our organic product 
catalog approach, we want to achieve the same structured 
machine readability regarding the queries that are posted by 
the consumer. The only way to achieve this is to equip the 
consumer with a possibility to express his demand in a 
standardized way. Regardless of how we will obtain the 
standardized query from the consumer (in the most trivial 
case s/he will write XML), once we have transformed the 
query into a machine-readable format, we will be able to run 
it on our organic product catalog.  
The accuracy of the query result depends on the level of 
detail the consumer has provided in his query description. If 
a one hundred percent matching of the query w
product descriptions is possible, the consumer will get 
immediate response from the system and with that an 
immediate quote. If the matching is only partially successful, 
because the consumer specified characteristics in his product 
that no product available in the product catalog has, suppliers 
would receive a notification from the system that they could 
potentially fulfill a demand, but need to customize their 
offers. In addition to that, suppliers could update their 
quotes, if they were outbid by competitors who posted lower 
 
. Cloud stack of an OPC. 
In most cases, however, tenants will use templates that 
were created by other tenants earlier for describing their 
. Finally, the bottom-most layer of our 
OPC centrally stores all product descriptions that a tenant is 
ng. The vertical perspective (or the per-tenant 
perspective) visualizes that on each layer in the horizontal 
perspective, tenants are provided with their own customized 
The general purpose product description language serves 
sis for the definition of products and services of any 
kind. Thereby, it is important to note that the PDL aims at 
being universal. What that means is that the PDL is capable 
of modeling any product or service, no matter how trivial or 
ne fundamental assumption we make in 
order to correspond with the universality requirement says 
that every product or service can be expressed as a list of 
While our PDL can be considered as an XML dialect, it 
ture and with that machine readability to the 
product description. In accordance with our organic product 
catalog approach, we want to achieve the same structured 
machine readability regarding the queries that are posted by 
hieve this is to equip the 
consumer with a possibility to express his demand in a 
standardized way. Regardless of how we will obtain the 
standardized query from the consumer (in the most trivial 
case s/he will write XML), once we have transformed the 
readable format, we will be able to run 
The accuracy of the query result depends on the level of 
detail the consumer has provided in his query description. If 
a one hundred percent matching of the query with existing 
product descriptions is possible, the consumer will get 
immediate response from the system and with that an 
immediate quote. If the matching is only partially successful, 
because the consumer specified characteristics in his product 
oduct available in the product catalog has, suppliers 
would receive a notification from the system that they could 
potentially fulfill a demand, but need to customize their 
offers. In addition to that, suppliers could update their 
id by competitors who posted lower 
bids. Of course, the outbid competitors could again update 
their bids, so that eventually the price of the final quote 
would be determined dynamically. In any case, the consumer 
would receive the lowest bid available in t
IX. 
TOWARDS A REVERSE 
As we have indicated earlier, in order to function 
properly, structured queries are necessary. 
process flow for how Reverse Commerce transactions could 
conceptually look.  
The consumer begins with a web
in order to determine the type of product s/he is looking for 
(1). S/he enters the search string similar to wha
from web-based search engines and submits it to the server. 
(2) If templates for the query are available, the consumer will 
proceed with customizing the query template while adding 
query components (1..n) to his query (Q). In addition to 
substituting template placeholders with concrete values, new 
components, which are not part of the original template, can 
also be added. Once the query was constructed, it is 
submitted in (3) and applied to the organic product catalog 
(OPC). As there can be multi
query, the OPC returns a list of found products 
(R)- to the consumer (4). After the consumer has chosen his 
favored product (5), suppliers that could potentially deliver 
the product start placing bids on the p
manually or automatically. Finally, once the consumer 
believes s/he has received sufficient quotes, s/he can decide 
for a supplier and the process concludes (7). 
 
Figure 3.  Process model for designing 
X. 
ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF 
Since in Reverse Commerce, the opaqueness margin is 
implicitly abandoned while ensuring that the consumer 
receives the lowest bid without any meaningful action on his 
side, this could have significant economic consequences. We 
are now going to show how Reverse Commerce
markets could eventually even impact the welfare of a 
society.  
In order to understand the concept of welfare, we will 
quickly review the match making proces
markets. According to Figure 
meets demand is represented by the tuple E = (market 
bids. Of course, the outbid competitors could again update 
their bids, so that eventually the price of the final quote 
would be determined dynamically. In any case, the consumer 
would receive the lowest bid available in the market. 
EVERSE COMMERCE PROCESS MODEL 
As we have indicated earlier, in order to function 
properly, structured queries are necessary. Figure 3 features a 
process flow for how Reverse Commerce transactions could 
The consumer begins with a web-based keyword search 
in order to determine the type of product s/he is looking for 
(1). S/he enters the search string similar to what is known 
based search engines and submits it to the server. 
(2) If templates for the query are available, the consumer will 
proceed with customizing the query template while adding 
query components (1..n) to his query (Q). In addition to 
uting template placeholders with concrete values, new 
components, which are not part of the original template, can 
also be added. Once the query was constructed, it is 
submitted in (3) and applied to the organic product catalog 
(OPC). As there can be multiple products matching the same 
query, the OPC returns a list of found products -the result set 
to the consumer (4). After the consumer has chosen his 
favored product (5), suppliers that could potentially deliver 
the product start placing bids on the price (6), either 
manually or automatically. Finally, once the consumer 
believes s/he has received sufficient quotes, s/he can decide 
for a supplier and the process concludes (7).  
 
.  Process model for designing structured queries based on an OPC. 
MPLICATIONS OF REVERSE COMMERCE 
Since in Reverse Commerce, the opaqueness margin is 
implicitly abandoned while ensuring that the consumer 
receives the lowest bid without any meaningful action on his 
could have significant economic consequences. We 
are now going to show how Reverse Commerce-driven 
markets could eventually even impact the welfare of a 
In order to understand the concept of welfare, we will 
quickly review the match making process as it occurs in 
Figure 4, the point where supply 
meets demand is represented by the tuple E = (market 
29
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

clearing quantity, market clearing price), whereby E is the 
market clearing equilibrium [12]. Figure 
depicts that, if the supply tilts to the right, the supply hits the 
demand at a lower angle, thus resulting into a lower market 
clearing price and a larger market clearing quantity.
 
Figure 4.  Market Coordination [12]
According to [13], welfare is defined as the aggregation 
of the utility of single individuals or groups. Graphically 
seen, welfare can be expressed as the triangle between the 
demand and the supply function (see Figure 
 
Figure 5.  Graphical representation of welfare
In accordance with Figure 4, by lowering the prices and 
thus tilting the supply function to the right, the area of the 
triangle between demand and supply increases. At the same 
time, a larger triangle means a higher welfare
 
Figure 6.  Increasing welfare by reducing prices
Since we earlier stated that Reverse Commerce implicitly 
yields the lowest bid for the consumer, 
Commerce demand function meets the supply function with 
the maximum possible right tilt. As the area of the triangle 
that determines the welfare exclusively depends on the tilt 
t clearing price), whereby E is the 
Figure 4 furthermore 
depicts that, if the supply tilts to the right, the supply hits the 
demand at a lower angle, thus resulting into a lower market 
clearing price and a larger market clearing quantity.  
 
[12] [13]. 
welfare is defined as the aggregation 
of the utility of single individuals or groups. Graphically 
lfare can be expressed as the triangle between the 
Figure 5). 
 
representation of welfare [13]. 
, by lowering the prices and 
thus tilting the supply function to the right, the area of the 
triangle between demand and supply increases. At the same 
time, a larger triangle means a higher welfare (see Figure 6).  
 
.  Increasing welfare by reducing prices [13]. 
Since we earlier stated that Reverse Commerce implicitly 
yields the lowest bid for the consumer, the Reverse 
Commerce demand function meets the supply function with 
t tilt. As the area of the triangle 
that determines the welfare exclusively depends on the tilt 
angle, the smaller the inclination of the supply, the higher is 
the welfare. While in Forward Commerce the consumer’s 
demand function could as well meet steeper
functions, the welfare is not implicitly maxed out, as it is the 
case in Reverse Commerce. 
It is important to note that the welfare argumentation 
above is not exclusively applicable to Reverse Commerce.
is a phenomenon of electronic markets in g
electronic markets typically show lower transaction costs of 
business transactions as compared to traditional markets
[14], the consumers benefit from lower prices. This, 
however, does still not imply that consumers always find the 
bid with the minimum possible price. Solely the concepts 
and structures of Reverse Commerce ensure that consumers 
always find the lowest possible bid, which m
demand meets the supply function 
XI. 
INTRINSIC 
At this point, we would like to discuss another economic 
implication of Reverse Commerce. With Intrinsic Service 
Quality (ISQ) we refer to the service quality which 
customers experience when interacting with vendors or 
suppliers. Even though there is no un
quality, the general contemporary understanding is that 
quality means “meeting or exceeding customer expectations” 
[15]. The ISQ describes our attempt towards the definition of 
a concept that measures the quality of service which 
customers experience when interacting with vendors or 
suppliers. 
In Forward Commerce, due to the opaqueness margins, 
which suppliers make with their customers, there is no 
immediate need for suppliers to guarantee a high level of 
service quality to their customers. This is because in Forward 
Commerce suppliers are often
bargain because they offer the best service, but because they 
allegedly offer the lowest bid. In Reverse Commerce, 
however, the consumer implicitly assumes that every 
supplier who wants to bargain with the consumer already 
offers the lowest bid possible. 
As we have shown earlier, in Reverse Commerce prices 
would eventually converge against the lowest bid available 
in the market as no consumer would voluntarily pay more 
than necessary. The only way for suppliers to distinguish
their offers from competitors in Reverse Commerce is by 
excelling in the way they deal with their customers. By 
offering an intrinsic service quality to the consumer that is 
better than the competitors’ ISQ, suppliers will convince 
consumers to enter a bargain with them. 
the conceptual difference of the ISQ in Forward Commerce 
and Reverse Commerce respectively.
As in fully supplier-biased markets consumers will 
encounter severe problems with finding alternative suppliers 
(e.g., monopoly), the bargaining power for products or 
services is more or less to a 100% with the supplier. 
Accordingly, the supplier can decide about prices and wit
this about the opaqueness margin OM s/he wants to make. 
Furthermore, there exists no incentive for the supplier to 
offer a high service quality (ISQ 
angle, the smaller the inclination of the supply, the higher is 
in Forward Commerce the consumer’s 
demand function could as well meet steeper supply 
functions, the welfare is not implicitly maxed out, as it is the 
t is important to note that the welfare argumentation 
applicable to Reverse Commerce. It 
is a phenomenon of electronic markets in general. While 
electronic markets typically show lower transaction costs of 
business transactions as compared to traditional markets 
ers benefit from lower prices. This, 
however, does still not imply that consumers always find the 
bid with the minimum possible price. Solely the concepts 
and structures of Reverse Commerce ensure that consumers 
always find the lowest possible bid, which means that their 
demand meets the supply function with the flattest slope.  
NTRINSIC SERVICE QUALITY  
At this point, we would like to discuss another economic 
implication of Reverse Commerce. With Intrinsic Service 
Quality (ISQ) we refer to the service quality which 
customers experience when interacting with vendors or 
suppliers. Even though there is no universal definition of 
quality, the general contemporary understanding is that 
quality means “meeting or exceeding customer expectations” 
ISQ describes our attempt towards the definition of 
a concept that measures the quality of service which 
customers experience when interacting with vendors or 
In Forward Commerce, due to the opaqueness margins, 
which suppliers make with their customers, there is no 
immediate need for suppliers to guarantee a high level of 
service quality to their customers. This is because in Forward 
Commerce suppliers are often not chosen by consumers for a 
bargain because they offer the best service, but because they 
allegedly offer the lowest bid. In Reverse Commerce, 
however, the consumer implicitly assumes that every 
supplier who wants to bargain with the consumer already 
fers the lowest bid possible.  
As we have shown earlier, in Reverse Commerce prices 
would eventually converge against the lowest bid available 
in the market as no consumer would voluntarily pay more 
than necessary. The only way for suppliers to distinguish 
their offers from competitors in Reverse Commerce is by 
excelling in the way they deal with their customers. By 
offering an intrinsic service quality to the consumer that is 
better than the competitors’ ISQ, suppliers will convince 
rgain with them. Figure 7 visualizes 
the conceptual difference of the ISQ in Forward Commerce 
and Reverse Commerce respectively.  
biased markets consumers will 
encounter severe problems with finding alternative suppliers 
monopoly), the bargaining power for products or 
services is more or less to a 100% with the supplier. 
Accordingly, the supplier can decide about prices and with 
this about the opaqueness margin OM s/he wants to make. 
Furthermore, there exists no incentive for the supplier to 
offer a high service quality (ISQ  0%) as from the 
30
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

consumer’s point of view he is the only supplier to deliver 
the item.  
 
 
Figure 7.  ISQ in Forward Commerce vs. Reverse Commerce. 
In a fully consumer-biased market as it can appear in 
Reverse Commerce, the market would be totally transparent 
to the consumer. The consumer would implicitly know about 
all alternative suppliers in the market as those would “apply” 
at him for a bargain with their bid. As those suppliers that are 
not able to provide bids on the same price level as the 
cheapest bid in the long run would vanish from the market, 
there would be no opaqueness margin to make any longer 
(OM  0%). On the contrary, if all suppliers offer the same 
low bid, the only way of distinguishing themselves from 
competitors is by offering a better service quality (ISQ  
100%). 
XII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we have introduced the concept of Reverse 
Commerce and have opposed it to the traditional way of e-
commerce market coordination. We have described in a 
formal model how Reverse Commerce could support 
customer-centric market coordination by reducing prices on 
products and services while at the same time improving 
service quality. We have furthermore detailed that Reverse 
Commerce can only function properly, if it is supported by 
information systems.  
For this reason, our team has already started developing a 
prototype of the first Reverse Commerce-enabled electronic 
marketplace. Due to our Reverse Commerce marketplace 
eventually becoming subject to a comparatively high load, 
we have decided to leverage the power of the Cloud 
Computing [16] paradigm and implement the marketplace as 
a cloud-based application. Concerning the cloud platform, 
we have decided for Microsoft’s Windows Azure, since the 
available tools as well as the infrastructure seem to be highly 
effective.  
Once we put our first functioning prototype of a Reverse 
Commerce marketplace online, we hope to be able to soon 
gather data on consumer behavior and the acceptance by 
consumers as well as suppliers. If Reverse Commerce turned 
out to be the new way of e-commerce conduct, consumers 
could soon relax and lay back watching how the prices on 
their requests keep dropping with every new bid that was 
posted by a supplier. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Fritz, W. 2004. Internet-Marketing und Electronic Commerce. 
Gabler Verlag. Wiesbaden, Germany. 
[2] Neumann, R. 2010. The EBF Application Foundation: An 
Approach towards the Design of an E-Commerce Framework 
for Small and Medium Enterprises. Lambert Academic Press. 
Saarbrücken, Germany. 
[3] Beall, S., Carter, C., Carter, P., Germer, T., Hendrick, T., Jap, 
S., Kaufmann, L., Maciejewski, D., Monczka, R., and 
Peterson, K. 2003. The Role of Reverse Auctions in Strategic 
Sourcing. CAPS Research Report. CAPS Research. Tempe, 
USA. 
[4] Clark, W. 2010.  Fixed price contracts = more risks for 
contractors. Business Research Services, Inc. Hampton, USA. 
[5] Brickley, J., Zimmerman, J. L., and Smith, C. W. 2008. 
Managerial Economics and Organizational Architecture. 
McGraw Hill. New York, USA. 
[6] Phillips, J. 2008. Procurement Management in Project 
Management - Taking Out a Contract. PM Hut. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.pmhut.com/procurement-management-
in-project-management-taking-out-a-contract [Accessed: Dec. 
30, 2010].  
[7] Skyttner, L. 2005. General Systems Theory – Problems, 
Perspectives, Practice. World Scientific Publ. New Jersey, 
USA. 
[8] Bailey, J. P. and Bakos, Y.1997. An exploratory study of the 
emerging role of electronic intermediaries. International 
Journal of Electronic Commerce Volume 1 Number 3, 
Armonk, USA, pp. 7-20. 
[9] Rajput, W. E. 2000. E-Commerce Systems Architecture and 
Applications. Artec House. Boston, USA. 
[10] Neumann, R., Schmietendorf, A., and Dumke, R. 2010. 
Cloud-based Organic Product Catalogs – A Highly Pervasive 
E-Business Approach for Micro Enterprises. Proceedings of 
the 2010 International Conference on e-Learning, e-Business, 
Enterprise Information Systems, and e-Government, Las 
Vegas, USA, pp. 123-129. 
[11] Neumann, R., Schmietendorf, A., and Dumke, R. 2010. 
Organic Product Catalogs - Towards an Architecture for 
Cloud-based Micro Enterprise E-Commerce. IEEE Cloud 
2010 - The 3rd International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, Miami, USA, pp. 530-531. 
[12] Samuelson, P. and Nordhaus, W. 2009. Economics. McGraw-
Hill/Irwin. New York, USA. 
[13] Varian, H. R. 2009. Intermediate Microeconomics: A Modern 
Approach. W. W. Norton & Company. New York City, USA. 
[14] Bichler, M. 2001. The Future of e-Markets: Multidimensional 
Market 
Mechanisms. 
Cambridge 
University 
Press. 
Cambridge, UK. 
[15] Sower, V. E. 2010. Essentials of Quality with Cases and 
Experiential Exercises. Wiley. Hoboken, USA. 
[16] Armbrust, M., Fox, A., Griffith, R., Joseph, A., Katz, R., 
Konwinski, A., Lee, G., Patterson, D., Rabkin, A., Stoica, I., 
and Zaharia, M. 2009. Above the clouds: A Berkley view of 
cloud computing. University of California. Berkley, USA. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.google.de/#hl=en&source= 
hp&q=Above+the+clouds%3A+A+Berkley+view+of+cloud+
computing.+&rlz=1R2SKPT_deDE409&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&o
q=&gs_rfai=&fp=22b1b139f61051cd [Accessed: Dec. 30, 
2010]. 
31
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

