A Comparative Study of Cross-Cultural 
Awareness using Place Oriented Internet Radio 
 
Ayaka Ito 
Graduate School of Media and Governance 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Japan 
e-mail: ayk@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
Katsuhiko Ogawa 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Japan 
e-mail: ogw@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Japan is accepting a number of foreign visitors in 
the trend of cultural diversity; hence, building mutual 
understanding with who has different cultural background 
becomes essential nowadays. To provide opportunities for 
international visitors to grasp better idea about Japanese 
culture, we proposed Internet radio CCR (Cross-Cultural 
Radio), which offers place oriented contents including local’s 
talk and international listener’s comments. Sequentially, an 
original measurement CCUS (Cross-Cultural Understanding 
Scale) was used to evaluate participants’ level of cultural 
awareness, through the fieldwork experiment conducted in 
Tokyo. A comparative study was designed for Japanese and 
international participants. The experimental result illustrates 
that CCR is effective in all dimensions of cross-cultural 
awareness for international participants, whereas some 
Japanese participants showed lower CCUS score improvement 
than internationals. This paper intends to clarify that CCR is 
more effective for international visitors than Japanese, because 
of their cultural awareness in the face of “otherness”. 
 
Keywords— comparative study; place orientation; Internet 
radio; cross-cultural awareness; fieldwork; evaluation. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
General knowledge of the host culture such as language 
or values and attitude toward the host culture and its 
members has been consistently posited to play an important 
role in influencing effective communication across cultures 
[1]. Like Damasio [2], who claimed that “culture is a 
regulator of human life and identity,” scholars have 
attempted to conceptualize their understanding of culture. 
Although historically it has been regarded as mono-
lingual/cultural country, with a drastic increase of foreign 
visitors [3], Japan is no exception to appreciate cultural 
diversity. We have to be aware that all foreigners are unique 
individuals, and we should not generalize them by 
nationality, race, and religion. Foreigners are visiting Japan 
for several purposes, such as sightseeing, studying abroad or 
working. Likewise, depending on their cultural backgrounds, 
problems they encounter as well as their interests to explore 
greatly vary, and there will never be a solution applicable 
for everyone. To propose a way to support foreign 
individuals, creating new media to provide them the 
opportunities to know Japanese culture at a deeper level is 
meaningful from a cross-cultural viewpoint. 
Related literature (Yoon [4] and Bramwell [5]) has 
demonstrated that the effect of motivation and satisfaction is 
prominent in the decision of tourists to re-visit places.  Osti 
[6] and Pike [7] also pointed out the eagerness of tourists’ 
revisiting in relation to the characteristics of specific places, 
such as sporting event destinations. In terms of information 
system, Nakatani [8] and Masuda [9] suggested a 
recommendation system for tourists, which provides 
customized tour information depending on user’s need, 
including using smartphone applications. However, there is 
almost no research of using Internet radio specifically as a 
tool for raising cross-cultural awareness in Japan, until Ito 
[10] suggested web-based platform focused on international 
visitor’s behaviors while sightseeing. In this paper, we 
stretch the concept of previously proposed place oriented 
Internet radio CCR (Cross-Cultural Radio), which helps 
foreigners to recognize Japan from a cross-cultural 
perspective. CCR provides several types of contents, 
including information from popular tour guidebook, local 
people’s interview, listener’s impression and comments of 
other contents. In addition, we conducted several evaluation 
experiments in Tokyo to measure the effectiveness of CCR, 
using criteria called CCUS (Cross-Cultural Understanding 
Scale), which was also suggested by Ito [11].  
The crucial aim of this paper is to analyze the cultural 
exchange amongst individual experiment participants 
through the observation of their behaviors, by conducting 
comparative research for internationals and Japanese. 
The paper structure is explained as follows: First, Section 
II describes a design process of CCR including its concept 
and system configuration, as well as specific contents 
architecture. Section III gives a complete set of evaluation 
experiments conducted in Tokyo for international and 
Japanese participants. Section IV digs the result into a 
further behavioral analysis as a comparative study. Lastly, 
the conclusion and future works are mentioned in Section V. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

II. 
DESIGN OF CROSS-CULTURAL RADIO 
A. Concept 
The above-mentioned previous research, particularly 
Nakatani and Masuda’s recommender system for tourists, is 
designed for usage in a specific place. However, the 
information they provide to listeners only focuses on 
tourists’ preferences and does not include the cultural 
perspective of the host country, which promotes cross-
cultural understanding amongst international listeners.  
Regarding the type of information available, visual 
material, such as detailed information on smartphones, 
contributes to a certain extent to obtaining a general idea 
about a place. Nevertheless, aural information is far superior 
to visual information to induce listener’s flexibility, by 
allowing them to stretch their imagination regarding what 
they have heard. Furthermore, aural information can provide 
direct interaction with the place, including local people’s 
stories or comments from other visitors. This may also be a 
trigger to increase international listeners’ understanding of 
Japanese culture. 
For these reasons, we choose place oriented Internet 
radio CCR, which Ito has suggested to examine its 
effectiveness as a sound-focused media. In terms of 
comparative study, we critically analyze the experimental 
result with international and Japanese participants. The 
detailed concept is originally focused on international 
listeners and is shown in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Concept of Cross-Cultural Radio “CCR” 
CCR works in three steps. The first step consists in 
content design for different listeners. The second step is the 
listening process, which various listeners engage in. The 
third step is obtaining feedback from listeners, plus revision 
of the content. To maximize the influence of content, the 
preferred target of CCR is international visitors who are 
staying in Japan for a relatively long period of time, from a 
few months to years, rather than just for a couple of days.  
The reason of selecting target users is that presumably they 
are choosing Japan as destinations because they are having 
stronger aspirations of exploring its culture more than short-
term visitors.  
 
B. System 
Previous research [12]-[14] has shown that an acceptable 
duration of content should be approximately 1 to 1 and a half 
minutes. Several companies produce audio guide players, 
supporting the delivery of such content as described above. 
Once contents in the form of audio clips are prepared, 
they are stored in the website and linked to clickable icons 
using JavaScript code. When the listener clicks on an icon, 
the associated audio clip is played. The website can be 
accessed [15] or using the QR code shown in Figure 5.  
Three types of content are available, such as guidebook 
(audio clips from the famous tour guidebook), the locals 
(stories or tips from local people), and visitors (feedback 
from the listener to be shared with other visitors).  
 
1) Selecting Location 
As CCR is designed for various listeners from different 
cultural backgrounds, the selection of the place, where the 
content is mapped, is also important. In this research, 
Asakusa, one of the most famous and popular tourist spots 
in Tokyo was chosen. The reason is that Asakusa has a rich 
cultural heritage, such as Japanese traditional temples or 
shrines, as well as dining venues and souvenir shops that 
attract many tourists. Besides Asakusa is located in the heart 
of Tokyo and has great accessibility, which enables us to 
conduct fieldwork effortlessly. 
 
2) Content “Guidebook” 
For guidebook content, several tips of accommodation, 
introduction of restaurants and explanation of famous 
architecture or sightseeing object were picked from Lonely 
Planet Tokyo [16] and recorded using voice synthesis 
software (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of guidebook content 
3) Content “Locals” 
For locals content, a couple of interviews with locals 
were conducted in Japanese and stories related to their daily 
lives in Asakusa were selected. Each story was translated 
into English and supplementary explanation about cultural 
activity was added if needed (Figure 3).  
 “Needle funeral” 
In Senso-ji temple’s western garden Awashimado Hall 
stands, home to an unusual ceremony: the needle 
funeral. Annually on 8th February, dozens of kimono 
women gather with monks to perform lasting rites for 
broken or old sewing needles. Kimono fabric makers 
and seamstresses express their thanks to the needles by 
sticking them in a block of soft tofu. Needle funeral 
reflects ancient animistic Shintoism beliefs, and also 
marks the end of New Year celebrations. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
Figure 3.  Example of locals content 
4) Contents “Visitors” 
After the listeners listened to either guidebook or locals 
content, they have free discussion about comparison with 
their own culture. Listener’s conversation is recorded and 
added to the previous two types of contents (Fig. 4). 
Therefore, this type of content encloses the real voice of 
listeners, both spoken in English or Japanese. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of visitors content 
III. 
EVALUATION EXPERIMENT 
A. Method 
Fieldwork was conducted for 11 international and 5 
Japanese visitors as CCR listeners, using the same scheme 
to explore how the cycle of CCR works as a set of 
evaluation experiment. In order to observe various cultural 
exchanges, we tried to select participants who have diverse 
cultural backgrounds, as well as their length of stay in Japan. 
Fieldwork details and participants’ attributes are below 
(Table 1).  
TABLE I.  
FIELDWORK DETAILS AND PARTICIPANTS’ ATTRIBUTES 
Nationality / 
Code (xx) 
Participants’ Attributes 
Age 
Sex 
Date / Time 
China 
 (CH1) 
25 
F 
February 1st, 2016 / 16:30 – 18:00 
China 
 (CH2) 
24 
F 
February 1st, 2016 / 16:30 – 18:00 
Uzbekistan 
 (UZ) 
22 
M 
February 1st, 2016 / 14:00 – 16:00 
China  
(CH3) 
28 
F 
March 14th, 2016 / 11:00 – 13:00 
China  
(CH4) 
28 
F 
March 14th, 2016 / 11:00 – 13:00 
Russia 
 (RU1) 
28 
M 
March 19th, 2016 / 13:30 – 15:30 
Taiwan  
(TW1) 
20 
F 
March 19th, 2016 / 16:00 – 17:30 
Malaysia 
 (ML) 
23 
F 
March 20th, 2016 / 16:00 – 18:00 
Russia  
(RU2) 
27 
F 
June 11th, 2016 / 15:00 – 17:00 
Taiwan 
 (TW2) 
27 
M 
June 26th, 2016 / 11:00 – 13:00 
Vietnam 
(VN) 
22 
M 
August 5th, 2016 / 14:00 – 16:00 
Japan 
(JP1) 
22 
F 
October 15th, 2016 / 12:00 – 14:00 
Japan 
(JP2) 
20 
F 
October 15th, 2016 / 12:00 – 14:00 
Japan 
(JP3) 
22 
F 
October 22nd, 2016 / 10:00 – 12:00 
Japan 
(JP4) 
20 
M 
October 24th, 2016 / 16:00 – 18:00 
Japan 
(JP5) 
21 
M 
October 24th, 2016 / 16:00 – 18:00 
However, 
as 
for 
internationals, 
the 
nationality 
distribution is leaning toward Asian countries, which 
appropriately reflects recent international visitors arrival 
ratio in Japan [17]. 
B. Measurement CCUS 
To validate the credibility of CCR, an evaluation process 
with appropriate criteria is essential. Since CCR has a 
unique concept, inventing a new and suitable measurement 
tool is more realistic rather than using conventional criteria 
“Ninja Dojo” 
Not so many people know there is a small size 
amusement park called Hanayashiki in the heart of 
Tokyo. Here is the story from locals who work in 
Hanayashiki as a promotion staff. 
“We opened Ninja Dojo, where visitors can experience 
to be a ninja about 1 hour. The entrance is separated 
from the amusement park, so you don’t have to purchase 
a park ticket to get in. Around 30% of visitors here are 
foreigners, and ninja is very popular amongst them. 
Since it’s just an hour, it is even possible to put into 
small group tour.” (translated in English, original talk is 
spoken in Japanese) 
Hanayashiki recently started Ninja Dojo, where you can 
meet real ninja and experience their principles, as well 
as special martial arts techniques. The interactive tour 
takes about an hour is available, hence amongst group of 
international tourists this cultural activity is becoming 
popular options for tour package. 
“Asakusa Jinja” 
The proximity of Shintō shrine Asakusa Jinja, behind 
Senso-ji temple to the northeast, testifies to the 
coexistence of Japan’s two major religions. Asakusa 
Jinja was built in honor of the brothers who discovered 
the Can-non statue, and is renowned as a fine example of 
an architectural style. It’s also the epicenter of one of 
Tokyo’s most important festivals, May’s San-ja Matsuri, 
a three-day extravaganza of costumed parades, 100 or so 
lurching portable shrines what we call Mikoshi, and 
stripped to the waist Yakuza, kind of Japanese mafia 
sporting remarkable tattoos. 
How did other tourists feel about the story? Listen to 
them, they are from England and the United States. 
“I was just wondering if there are monks there, because 
monks usually try to be in some kind of solitude. Well, 
this is very busy.” 
“We really don't have a specific religion, even though 
it's Buddhism, or Buddhist, not many people practice it, 
as people like in the States, as they are like Christianity 
or specific religion, right?”  
“Hmm.”  
“Japanese are very spiritual, but they are not that 
religious, if that makes sense.”  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
Before 
After 
without localization. Related literature about measurement 
design and cross-cultural adjustment are demonstrated by 
Benson [18], Cui & Awa [19] and Yellen [20] and many 
other scholars. Sequentially, ten dimensions of cross-
cultural understanding have been determined in previous 
Ito’s research, which are mobility, food/diet, flexibility, 
knowledge, language skills, interaction, awareness of 
cultural difference, nonverbal communication, respect, and 
relationship. Since we are conducting a comparative study, 
some dimensions hold different implication depending on 
the participants. For instance, to internationals “interaction” 
means the nature and frequency of interactions with host 
country (Japanese) individuals, whereas to Japanese 
participant that involves one’s ability to initiate interaction 
toward any other nationalities, as well as the extent of one’s 
eagerness to communicate with international people, 
regardless of their language ability. 
C. Instruction 
First, a sheet of paper was distributed to the participants 
as an experiment instruction. The route of fieldwork and 
accessible QR code to the website are printed, and they were 
asked to walk and listen to the content mapped into the route 
in the numeric order (Figure 5).  
Figure 5.  Evaluation experiment scenario  
Before they started walking, they filled in the self-
evaluation form about their current level of cultural 
understanding, which CCUS 10 dimensions are explained. 
We observed and took pictures of participants while they are 
walking, and asked questions to participants for each 
content such as “what did you think about the place or 
object, which is explained in the content?” or “do you have 
any implication or comments compared to your home 
culture?” (see Figure 6).  For Japanese participants, we 
prepared guidebook contents spoken in Japanese. 
 
Figure 6.  Participants engaging in the evaluation experiment in Asakusa 
 Fieldwork was done either in English or Japanese, 
depending on participant’s language ability. Conversation 
and route of their walk were recorded (Figure 7) and after 
they listened to all content, they answered the CCUS form 
again.  
Figure 7.  Fieldwork route of participants (excerpts) 
D. Result 
Figure 8 shows the average score of 11 international 
participants, and Figure 9 shows 5 Japanese participants for 
each dimension. The green line shows the results prior to the 
test and the orange line shows the results after the test was 
finished.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  11 international participants’ average CCUS score 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  5 Japanese participants’ average CCUS score 
As shown in Figure 8, CCR has enriched most aspects of 
dimensions for 11 international participants. On the other 
hand, the score improvement of 5 Japanese participants does 
not seem as much as that of internationals. In addition, 
Japanese participants recorded much lower score for 
“Interaction” overall, compared to internationals. 
By calculating the area surrounded by green and orange 
lines, international participants have improved 26% for 
overall scores. Japanese participants have improved 9%. 
IV. 
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF                      
PARTICIPANTS’ BEHAVIOR 
Brislin [21] points out that the general approach 
applicable to all comparative studies is the plausible rival 
hypothesis analysis which forces the research to examine 
each and every potential explanation for any data set. In 
terms of CCR evaluation experiment, the number of 
participants for the is only 16, therefore conducting 
additional analysis focused on participant’s behavior is more 
important than discussing their average performance. We 
chose 4 participants specifically (ML and RU2 for 
internationals, and JP2 and JP5 for Japanese) as a 
comparative study samples. 
A. Participant ML (Figure 10)  
 
Figure 10.  Participant ML’s CCUS score 
ML is a full-time university student and has been living 
in Japan for approximately 3 years. Although she speaks 
fluent Japanese, the fieldwork was conducted in English, as 
it is still the language she can comfortably communicate 
with. After she listened to the local’s talk about the history 
of theme park Hanayashiki (refer Figure 3), she found a 
statue of panda close to the entrance gate. She took a 
brochure there, read its founding story and learned initially 
it was established as a botanical garden (Hanayashiki 
literally means “flower-mansion”) then re-opened as a zoo 
before World War II. She said even though she is interested 
in watching panda, so far she never had a chance to see one. 
Presumably, her 3-year stay in Japan made her to recognize 
herself as a proper resident rather than a temporary visitor, 
and she might have a mindset of locals more than before. 
She commented, “I think an audio guide is a lot more 
interesting than a book, and I also think the local’s opinions 
are more valuable than a tourists.” By listening to the local’s 
story, she cultivated the respect and sympathy toward locals, 
which is demonstrated as an improvement of dimension 
“Respect” as shown in Figure 10. 
  
B. Participant RU2 (Figure 11) 
 
Figure 11.  Participant RU2’s CCUS score 
RU2 is a visiting fellow researcher who has been in 
Japan around 2 months, and is supposed to stay few years 
more. This stay is not her first time though: she once visited 
Jap an about a decade ago for an exchange program, when 
she was a high school student. After she listened to visitor’s 
comment about range of tourists who are gathering in front 
of Senso-ji temple, she recalled her first visit and explained 
her current stay in Japan. “Compared to my previous stay, it 
(current stay) is totally changed. I can see their normal life 
like other Japanese people, because I visit not only tourist 
attractions (but also local places). For me it’s much more 
interesting than visiting touristy place like Asakusa. I want 
to see the way of people living here, and compare to the life 
in my country.” As she said she is rather interested in 
knowing daily life setting of Japan not from a temporary 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

tourist, but from the local’s viewpoint. Her mindset 
certainly has changed compared to her first stay, and now 
she recognizes herself as a Japan resident, not as a 
temporary visitor. To make sure whether the contents 
listening experience has directly contributed to her self-
recognition needs more exploration, however her comment 
above would not be irrelevant to her score improvement of 
“Relationship” (with local people in this context), 
“Nonverbal communication” and “Awareness of cultural 
difference” as shown in Figure 11. 
  
C. Participant JP2 (Figure 12) 
JP2 has spent her life mostly in western area of Japan 
(Tokyo is considered to be in eastern area), and came Tokyo 
when she becomes a university student. She is in Tokyo for 
2 years now, and has few opportunities of visiting Asakusa 
so far.  
 
Figure 12.  Participant JP2’s CCUS score 
Through the fieldwork, her overall impression of 
Asakusa stroll was “very enjoyable” according to her 
comment. She is from Himeji city, a middle-sized city in the 
west that is known for Himeji Castle, regarded as the most 
visited and the finest surviving Japanese castle. She has 
lived in a walking distance from the UNESCO World 
Heritage registered site [22], and knows how is being a local 
surrounded by full of tourists from the world. She 
continuously compared the city of Himeji to Asakusa, and 
explained what she feels something in common with 
Asakusa locals. “Asakusa has Senso-ji, Himeji has Himeji 
Castle. It must be something memorable for tourists, but for 
me it is nothing special. It is always there, and I can even 
see it from my house window. But it doesn’t mean Himeji 
locals are underestimating the Castle, it just resides in our 
daily life and we are not particularly paying attention to it.” 
As a local person in touristy place, she self-evaluated 
“Interaction” quite low score compared to other dimensions. 
However, this might be reflecting her reserved personality 
well (she was describing herself as very shy and easily get 
nervous when she encounters with foreigners). To the 
contrary, as shown in Figure 12 she enhanced “Relationship” 
well, possibly because she recognized her mindset as a local 
by Asakusa local’s talk, and felt sympathy.  
 
D. Participant JP5 (Figure 13) 
JP5 was born and raised in Tokyo. Since he went to high 
school in Asakusa, the area has always been a familiar place 
to him. 
 
Figure 13.  Participant JP5’s CCUS score 
After he listened to the content about the statues beside 
Senso-ji’s entrance gate, he pointed out there are two 
signboards there written in English to explain the gate 
specifically. He noticed the tone of writing was slightly 
different, one signboard focused on general information 
such as size, materials and contributors of establishment, 
while the other explained its history in detail, including the 
interaction with locals. He found that the former was built 
by ward office, therefore only official information matters. 
On the other hand, the latter was built by Senso-ji, which 
shows they care about its founding story focused on people. 
Looking at the crowd around the gate taking pictures, he 
said he is a bit sorry that not so many international visitors 
seem to pay attention to the signboard, even if they have a 
chance to know its deeper history right there. 
He told the impression of the fieldwork as “a good 
experience”, and said “I came Asakusa countless times since 
high school, maybe that’s why I can look over the 
surroundings and therefore pay attention to something else 
from myself, like other internationals’ behavior, or just 
simply other cultures.”  
According to Zarate [23], the notion of culture occupies 
a central position within the field of human and social 
sciences as a whole. Culture is simultaneous action and a 
state of being, while the representation of “otherness” forms 
part of the development of individuality.  What JP5 implies 
here is about the encounter with the “other” internationals, 
and his self-awareness was brought by his experience as a 
Tokyo local who is already familiar to Asakusa. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Mobility 
Food/Diet 
Flexibility 
Knowledge 
Language 
skills 
Interaction 
Awareness of 
cultural 
difference 
Nonverbal 
communication 
Respect 
Relationship 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

V. 
DISCUSSION 
From both international and Japanese participants’ 
episodes found in behavioral analysis, we assume CCR 
listening experience contributes to listeners’ awareness of 
cultural aspects to some extent, through the interaction 
between users. Furthermore, based on the episodes explored, 
possibly we can relate the 10 CCUS dimensions into four 
categories of recognition (Figure 14). Hence, observing the 
CCUS score distribution enables us to roughly categorize 
each participant’s mode of cultural awareness for these four 
types; recognition of difference between others, recognition 
about oneself, recognition about Japanese culture itself, or 
not particularly recognize anything (Not applicable to 
previous three). This time we observed 11 international and 
5 Japanese participants. Adding more participants will 
validate the effectiveness of this categorization. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Contribution of CCR listening experience 
ML enhanced the dimension “Respect” and “Mobility” at 
the same level, and thought opinions of local people are 
more valuable than tourists. She got to know the way of 
thinking of Japanese local in her 3-year stay in Japan and 
recognized some part of Japanese culture through real 
conversation. The reason she enhanced “Mobility” is 
unknown, and further background exploration is needed, 
possibly in the form of follow-up interview. 
Although RU2’s enhancement of “Food and Diet” is still 
unknown, she improved many dimensions such as 
interaction, nonverbal communication and awareness of 
cultural difference. Her inclination to assimilate Japanese 
locals encouraged her to compare and associate Japanese 
lifestyle with her Russian background. 
Compared to internationals, Japanese participants did not 
necessarily enhance all dimensions. For instance, JP2’s 
“Awareness of cultural difference” has actually decreased, 
and JP5’s overall score distribution seems a little fluctuated 
after the fieldwork.  
These results might be explained by the difference of 
mindset toward Japanese culture depending on their 
nationalities. Holliday [24] points out the recognition 
toward others would not necessarily occur in the culturally 
homogeneous setting, however in the face of “otherness” or 
being surrounded by something (or someone) different from 
themselves, people tend to realize their cultural identity and 
thus raise self-awareness. The overall result of CCUS 
distribution gap between internationals and Japanese 
supports this argument. In this sense, CCR can be more 
influential to international listeners than Japanese, because 
place oriented contents of CCR are designed focusing on 
Japanese cultural implication and therefore leave stronger 
impression of “difference” or “otherness” to internationals. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDIES 
In this paper, place oriented Internet radio called CCR, 
which provides three types of content, “Guidebook”, 
“Locals” and “Visitors” which give listeners ideas about 
cultural aspects of Japan was explained. To get a profound 
indication from users and to scale the effectiveness of this 
media, we used CCUS as criteria specifically designed by 
Ito to measure the level of cross-cultural awareness.  
According to the overall result of evaluation experiment 
conducted in Tokyo for 11 international and 5 Japanese 
participants, CCR has reasonably contributed to the 
enhancement 
of 
all 
dimensions 
for 
internationals; 
nevertheless some Japanese participants decreased the 
scores. As for average CCUS score, Japanese also showed 
much smaller improvement than internationals. This is 
because international participants are surrounded by 
Japanese cultural implication via place oriented contents, 
and therefore they could easily conceptualize the concept of 
“otherness” 
than 
Japanese 
participants 
from 
their 
conversation or other interaction with locals.  
For the future work, adding the number of participants 
for evaluation experiment is needed, not only internationals 
but also Japanese to backup the argument of comparative 
study. By adding participants, we will be able to find more 
clues focused on individual context, which explain the 
contribution of CCR listening experience toward each 
participants at a deeper level.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Wiseman, M. Hammer, H. Nishida, “Predictors of 
Intercultural Communication Competence” International 
Journal of Intercultural Relations, vol. 13(3), 1989, pp.349-
370. 
[2] R. Damasio, “Self comes to mind: Constructing the concious 
mind” New York, Pantheon, 2010. 
[3] Japanese Ministry of Justice. http://www.moj.go.jp/ENGLISH
/index.html. [retrieved: February 5, 2017] 
[4] Y. Yoon, and M. Uysal, “An examination of the effects of 
motivation and satisfaction on destination loyalty - a 
structural model” Tourism Management, 2005, vol. 26(1), 
pp.45-56. 
[5] B. Bramwell, “User satisfaction and product development in 
urban tourism” Tourism Management, 1998, vol. 19(1), pp. 
35-47. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[6] L. Osti, M. Disegna, J. Brida, “Repeat visits and intentions to 
revisit a sporting event and its nearby destinations” Journal of 
Vacation Marketing, 2012, vol. 18(1), pp.31-42. 
[7] S. Pike, S. Murdy, I. Lings, “Visitor Relationship Orientation 
of Destination Marketing Organizations” Journal of Travel 
Research, 2011, vol. 50(4) pp. 443-453. 
[8] Y. Nakatani, and K. Ichikawa, “Tourist Navigation System 
that Induces Accidental Encounter” Human Interface Society, 
2012, vol. 12(4), pp.439-449. 
[9] M. Masuda, T. Izumi, Y. Nakatani, “A system that promotes 
repeat tourists by making sightseeing unfinished” Human 
Interface Society, 2012, vol. 14(3), pp.259-270. 
[10] A. Ito, and K. Ogawa, “‘Re:Radio’, The Place Oriented 
Internet Radio to Enhance the Cross-Cultural Understanding 
in Japan” Human Computer Interaction International, 2015, 
Posters Extended Abstracts, pp.78-84. 
[11] A. Ito, and K. Ogawa, “The Behavioral Analysis for Cross-
Cultural Understandings Using Place Oriented Internet Radio” 
Cross-Cultural Design, 2016, pp.217-228. 
[12] M. Hatala, and R. Wakkary, “Ontology-based user modeling 
in an augumented audio reality system for museums” User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 2005, vol. 15(3), 
pp.339-380. 
[13] S. Bodker, “Through the interface: a human activity approach 
to user interface design” Malwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc, 1990. 
[14] D. Dean, “Museum exhibition: theory and practice” London, 
Routledge, 1994. 
[15] Cross-Cultural Radio. http://web.sfc.keio.ac.jp/~ayk/ccr/map.
php. [retrieved: February 5, 2017] 
[16] T. Hornyak, and R. Milner, “Lonely Planet Tokyo (Travel 
Guide) 9th Edition”, NY: Lonely Planet, 2012. 
[17] Japan National Tourism Organization. http://www.jnto.go.jp/j
pn/news/press_releases/pdf/20160119_1.pdf. [retrieved: Febr-
uary 5, 2017] 
[18] P. Benson, “Measuring cross-cultural adjustment: the problem 
of crieria” International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 
1978, vol. 2(1), pp.21–37. 
[19] G. Cui, and N. Awa, “Measuring intercultural effectiveness: 
an integrative approach,” International Journal of Intercultural 
Relations, 1992, vol. 16, pp.311–328. 
[20] T. 
Yellen, 
“The 
cross-cultural 
interaction 
inventory: 
development of overseas criterion measures and items that 
differentiate between successful and unsuccessful adjusters” 
National Technical Information Service, 1975, vol. 3, pp.1-19. 
[21] R. Brislin, “Comparative research methodology: cross-
cultural studies” International Journal of Psychology, 1976, 
vol. 11(3), pp. 215-229. 
[22] Himeji-jo, UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved on 
December 30th 2016 from: http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/661  
[23] G. Zarate, “Representations of the concept of otherness in 
advertising and cultural mediation” Strasbourg, Council of 
Europe, 2004. 
[24] A. Holliday, “Small cultures” Applied Linguistics, 1999, vol. 
20(2), pp. 237-264. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

