Unknown Territories 
The strategy of social media usage by law enforcement agencies
Azi Lev-On 
School of Communication 
Ariel University 
Israel 
e-mail: Azilevon@gmail.com 
Gal Yavetz 
Department of Information Science 
Bar-Ilan University 
Ramat-Gan, Israel 
e-mail: Gal.javetz@gmail.com 
Abstract— The article explores the perceptions of senior police 
officers concerning the place of social media in the current 
media ecology, and the desired mode of operation of the police 
within them. The study demonstrates that the different forms 
of social media are perceived as significant arenas in the 
contemporary media landscape, which are "here to stay" and 
the police has a "duty of presence" in them. Still, this presence 
should focus primarily on information-providing and image-
enhancing 
activities, 
avoiding 
"confrontations" 
about 
contested issues. 
Keywords- Social Media; Police; Public Administration. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
New media, especially social media, enable government 
agencies to communicate with citizens and disseminate 
information fast and directly, recruit people and organize 
collective actions. Such uses may have implications for the 
character 
of 
relationships 
between 
citizens 
and 
governments, as well as for how citizens perceive 
government agencies' image.  
One of the public institutions that are constantly in 
contact with citizens is the police. The main research 
question in this paper is how senior police officers perceive 
the use and impact of online social media. For this purpose, 
15 semi-structured interviews were conducted with police 
officers in the rank of Major General and above, who 
finished their service in the Israeli police from 2006 
onwards. 
The Findings demonstrate that the interviewees recognize 
online social media as a centerpiece of the contemporary 
media landscape, with significant possibility to impact the 
image of the police. According to the interviewees, the 
police 
digital 
strategy 
should 
focus 
primarily 
on 
information-providing 
and 
image-enhancing 
activities, 
while avoiding confrontations on contested issues.
Section II of the paper presents the theoretical background 
and research literature on the adoption and use of social 
media by public agencies, especially law enforcement 
agencies such as police, and the advantages and implications 
of using such environments. Section III presents the main 
research goals and questions. Section IV presents the 
method. Section V reviews the preliminary findings. 
Sections VI concludes the paper. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Social media are becoming important intermediaries 
between public institutions and citizens [1]. The usage of 
social media by public institutions may enable them to 
disseminate and receive information quickly and efficiently, 
recruit people for various purposes, interact more closely 
with the public, and possibly improve decision-making and 
problem-solving processes [2]. Still, public institutions are 
often known for their rigid hierarchical structures and 
bureaucratic red tape, and less for their excellence in service 
provision and adaptation to new technologies [3]. Hence, no 
wonder they are considered late and limited adopters of new 
and, particularly, social media.  
The use of social media by the police, like its usage by 
other public institutions, can have many advantages. 
Information can be sent quickly to many people without 
mediation, such as information on missing persons [4]. 
Information can also be efficiently received from people and 
organizations, including complaints against the police or 
against private individuals, or information on crimes and 
suspects [4][5]. Social media can also assist in mobilizing the 
public and enable public participation in planning processes. 
These uses can significantly improve the work of the police, 
improve its contact with the public, and also contribute to its 
image [6]. But while significant literature addresses the 
usage of social media by the police, there are very few 
studies that address the perceptions of decision-makers in the 
police about the place of social media in the current media 
ecology, and the desired mode of their operation. 
III.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
1. How do senior police officers perceive social media? Is it 
a passing phenomenon or a permanent component of the 
current media ecology? 
2. According to the senior officials' perception, what should 
the goals of the police activity on social media be? 
IV.
METHODOLGY
   In order to answer the research questions, semi-structured 
interviews were conducted with policemen from the rank of 
Major General and above, who finished their service in the 
police from 2006 onwards. This study only deals with senior 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

police officers, due to their broader and more in-depth 
perspective on the organization's needs and the factors 
influencing the police-citizen relationship. The officers were 
selected based on their year of retirement. Since Facebook 
(the main social platform in Israel) has only been open to the 
public since 2006, only the policemen who served in the 
police this year onwards dealt with the question of relations 
between the police, social media and citizens. 
  15 senior police officers were interviewed. Most of the 
interviews were conducted in person, in a location chosen by 
the interviewees. In only a few cases where there were 
technical difficulties or unwillingness of the interviewees to 
hold a face-to-face meeting, telephone interviews were 
conducted. The interviews were semi-structured, consisting of 
15 questions and lasting between 40 minutes and 2 hours. 
Interviews were used to present the phenomenon through the 
participants' perceptions and their own words [7]. The 
interviews were recorded and transcribed. A thematic 
categorical division of these transcriptions was performed, in 
order to identify, evaluate and report prominent themes [8]. 
V.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
 Many of the interviewees made it clear that in their 
opinion, social media activity should be an important and 
strategic goal for the organization, and that more resources 
should be invested in it. Interviewee I-1 declared that social 
media are significant tools for building public trust: 
"Improving service to the citizenry is critical for your ability 
to generate trust, and we should definitely use the new media 
platform [for this purpose]" 
  Interviewee I-6 described social media as important sources 
of information for the police to convey to citizens: 
"The police is disseminating all kinds of messages on 
Facebook, and we have to do this systematically and 
correctly. Both extract information and disseminate 
information..." 
This kind of two-way communication and information 
streams require investment and proper resources, as 
interviewee I-6 said: 
  "It cannot be that there is a social conversation on social 
media and the police are not involved, the organization has 
to invest in it. Investing means getting more people, teams, 
standards and enacting new policies.” 
  Despite the statements about the importance of police 
activity on social media, most respondents expressed 
reservations about bi-directional and dialogical behavior, and 
believed that the activity should mainly be with an emphasis 
on providing information and positions [9] rather than 
conducting conversations with the public. They argue that 
brief and practical responses are sufficient without waiting 
for a response from the public or addressing such responses 
further.  
Interviewee I-5 argues that it is desirable for the police to 
respond to such public concerns but only briefly and only in 
its page: 
  "You cannot run after anyone who posts something in any 
Facebook group about you. Maybe in some exceptional 
cases an official police representative, needs to intervene in 
the discussion, and provide a link and tell everyone, 'Guys, 
come on read the facts'".
  However, most of the interviewees did not see even such a 
minimal response as useful. For example, Interviewee I-9 
does not see the need to participate in any discussion with 
the public about police matters: 
  "I would present the position of the police in a very solid 
and precise manner and let time do its work. I would not 
participate in the conversation itself…. This discourse will 
exhaust itself sooner or later, and the fact that we react and 
participate in this discourse, that is the fuel for the fire." 
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
  The paper studies perceptions of senior police officers 
about the place and usage of online social media, in the 
contemporary media ecology. Findings show that the 
interviewees recognize online social media as a centerpiece 
of the contemporary media landscape, with significant 
consequences in terms of the abilities to send and receive 
information, which can impact the image of the police. At 
the same time, there is a clear concern about the possible 
fallbacks of entering long conversation with citizens, where 
officers prefer a minimal response approach in such cases.  
Future studies can examine the perceptions of senior 
decision-makers in other public organizations regarding 
online social media, and also investigate the 'customers' side: 
What are the citizens' perceptions of this activity, and how 
exposure to it influences opinions and attitudes towards the 
police. 
REFERENCES
[1] R. Sandoval-Almazan and J. R. Gil-Garcia, ‘Are government 
internet portals evolving towards more interaction, participation, 
and collaboration? Revisiting the rhetoric of e-government among 
municipalities’, Gov. Inf. Q., vol. 29, pp. S72–S81, Jan. 2012. 
[2] G. F. Khan, B. Swar, and S. K. Lee, ‘Social Media Risks and 
Benefits: A Public Sector Perspective’, Soc. Sci. Comput. Rev., 
vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 606–627, Oct. 2014. 
[3] O. Serrat, ‘Social Media and the Public Sector’, in Knowledge 
Solutions, Singapore: Springer Singapore, 2017, pp. 925–935. 
[4] Ministry of Public Security, ‘Social Media and an Interactive 
Police Force – Police 2.0’, 2012. 
[5] A. Meijer and M. Thaens, ‘Social media strategies: 
Understanding the differences between North American police 
departments’, Gov. Inf. Q., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 343–350, Oct. 2013. 
[6] J. Crump, ‘What Are the Police Doing on Twitter? Social 
Media, the Police and the Public’, Policy Internet, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 
1–27, Jan. 2011. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[7]  A. Shkedi, Words that try to touch: Qualitative research theory 
and practice. Tel-Aviv: Ramot, 2003. 
[8] V. Braun and V. Clarke, ‘Using thematic analysis in 
psychology’, Qual. Res. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 2006. 
[9] I. Mergel, ‘Social media adoption and resulting tactics in the 
U.S. federal government’, Gov. Inf. Q., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 123–
130, Apr. 2013. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

