Mobile Application Developed According to Accessibility Design Guidelines
Felipe Luna Tersi
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas – São Paulo, Brazil
email: felipe.luna.tersi@gmail.com
Ilana de Almeida Souza Concilio
Eldorado Research Institute
Campinas – São Paulo, Brazil
email: ilana.concilio@eldorado.org.br
Abstract—Despite the existing accessibility technologies, mobile
applications are not being developed accordingly or are not
even minimally using these resources. People with disabilities
end up having difficulty or even are unable to use applications
that in principle would serve as something to make everyone's
life easier, becoming a serious problem that deserves attention.
For this purpose, an iOS application was developed correctly
addressing the implementation of tools for accessibility to all
users. This paper shows the development process of an iOS
application (Palpite
Olímpico)
following
two accessibility
guidelines with the aim of promoting inclusion of blind people
and users with low vision and/or visual processing disorders.
Keywords-mobile applications; iOS; accessibility; guidelines.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile devices have become part of people's daily lives
and applications are being developed with the intention of
promoting a better quality of life for their users. According
to the Enders Analysis Institute [1], while the number of
users grows exponentially, so does the number of people
with difficulties who also use these technologies to access
information and facilitate communication.
However,
the
development of accessible applications does not keep pace
with the improvement of devices’ technology, becoming
inaccessible to people with disabilities. Kane et al. [2] say
that, despite the accessibility tools available in them, there is
still a lack of adequacy of technologies focused on people
with disabilities, making it difficult to use these devices and
consequently their applications.
Hammel and Magasi [3] emphasize that the accessibility
of mobile communication does not mean simply keeping
users connected with other people; it also means offering
them more security and autonomy, aiming to be socially
independent and an integral part of society.
According to a report by the United Nations [4], it was
registered that there are more than 1 billion people living
with some type of disability in the world. The World Health
Organization (WHO) [5] estimates that 39 million are
affected by blindness and that 246 million suffer of moderate
or severe loss of vision. Given this information, focusing on
developing accessibility resources for these users becomes
relevant, allowing them to use technology in their daily life.
With this motivation in mind, this paper shows the
development of a mobile application for iOS according to
accessibility design guidelines, aiming to meet the needs of
these people who have visual disabilities. With more
efficient interactions, it should bring them autonomy and
make them independent on third parties for their use.
Palpite Olímpico is a mobile application developed for
the 2020 Olympics, to allow to guess the matches of each
game in the competition. This application presents a calendar
containing all games matches, so the user would search for
the match of his favorite sport and category and guess which
country would win the selected match. According to the
correct answers, the user would accumulate points and rise in
the ranking among other users.
This paper outline is as follows. Section II describes the
accessibility guidelines to help the development of accessible
mobile applications. Section III shows the methodology used
in the presented project and the results are described in
Section IV. In Section V, we describe some preliminary user
tests, followed by the conclusions in Section VI.
II.
MOBILE ACCESSIBILITY AND DESIGN GUIDELINES
Accessibility of mobile devices refers to the ability to
interact properly with the operating system of the devices
(Android, iOS, Windows Phone, among others). To ensure
that visually impaired people interact properly with mobile
devices, there are a number of accessibility tools available in
the operating systems of these devices, such as a screen
reader, magnifier and contrast control [6].
There are some accessibility standards available in order
to guide the development of applications accessible to users
with special needs.
A.
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) was
developed by the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium - the
main standardization organization on the World Wide Web)
[7]. It aims to provide guidance to create accessible content
in a standardized way for the web for people with special
needs. It does not specifically address mobile applications,
but the principles and success criteria outlined in WCAG is
relevant to mobile apps [8].
WCAG consists of four principles [7]:

Perceptible: Information and interface components
must be presented to users so that they can perceive
them. The idea is to provide text information for
non-text content, such as images and buttons;

Operable:
Interface
components
and
navigation
should allow users to use them without difficulty.
For example, providing keyboard access to all
functionalities to include users that do not use mouse
for interaction;

Understandable: The information and the interface
must be understood by all users. For example, all
text should be readable and understandable and the
interaction should be intuitive and predictable;
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society


Robust: Content needs to be robust enough to be
concisely interpreted by a variety of user tools,
including assistive technologies.
For each principle, there are a number of secondary
recommendations that indicate how to address the primary
ones. In total, 61 standards make up the normative part of the
WCAG and three levels of compliance can be achieved if
they are met [7]:

Level A: It is the minimum level of criteria met in
general accessibility barriers, but does not guarantee
a highly accessible application;

Level AA: Meeting the requirements at this level
already guarantees a very accessible application for
most users and use of most technologies;

Level AAA: It is the most rigorous criterion to be
reached, as it has already passed through level A
and AA. At this moment, it is necessary to refine
the technologies for very specific situations of
accessibility, unique cases and unfortunately few
applications apply criteria at level AAA.
B.
Human Interface Guideline
Developed by Apple [9], the Human Interface Guideline
(HIG) is a guideline that offers a series of recommendations,
in order to improve the user experience through more
intuitive, didactic and consistent interfaces. It was created to
enrich the development of applications for all Apple mobile
devices.
In the HIG, there is the Accessibility section, which
addresses the four main categories of disabilities: visual
impairment, hearing loss, physical and motor disabilities,
literacy and learning disabilities [9].
The
first
categorized
disability,
visual
impairment,
comprises blindness, color-blindness, all forms of vision loss
and situations that make viewing the screen uncomfortable
or difficult to read. For these users, Apple offers VoiceOver,
a tool that translates all information present in the interface
in speech; color inversion to change how content is
displayed; font size configuration that allows users to set the
size of the text; screen zoom that enlarges the screen and a
feature that uses the device’s camera as a magnifying glass.
The second category of disability is hearing loss. In those
cases, there are alternatives to aural interaction, such as
closed captions, visual and haptic notifications and typing for
Siri.
People with physical and motor disabilities fall into the
third category, which impacts the ability to hold or
manipulate devices. These people are provided with features,
such as Switch Control integrating devices adaptable to the
iPhone, iPad, Mac and Apple TV. Users may use Siri to
control the devices and applications using their own voice
and also Assistive Touch that facilitates the interaction
through standard gestures.
The fourth category falls under the issue of literacy and
learning disabilities, comprising difficulty in speaking and
reading, managing complex things and staying focused. In
order to reduce cognitive load and support these users, the
operating systems provides features such as Speak Screen -
the system reads a text for the user; Typing Feedback - while
typing, user receives feedback as well as speak text
corrections and word suggestions; and Safari Reader
-
isolating text without distractions, such as advertisements.
III. METHODOLOGY
For the development of this project, the Challenge Based
Learning (CBL) methodology was used. This methodology
helps
finding
solutions
to
real
problems,
in
a
fully
collaborative way, regardless of the area and situation of the
problem, it consists of three different interconnected phases
and each one presents unique activities to raise questions and
information that would gather essential data for the future
solution of a problem [9]. All these phases are documented
and reflected at each stage of the process (Figure 1): Engage,
Investigate and Act. CBL is a circular process, that is, it does
not have a middle and an end; all research can come and go
during its phases [10].
Figure 1. Challenge Based Learning Processes.
The first phase is Engage and, at this moment, it is
necessary to choose a large area of activity known as Big
Idea. In the project described in this paper, the area was
"Accessibility". Next, a more specific problem is chosen - an
essential question which would be the focus of research and
from this problem, it should follow to a concrete challenge.
As the objective of this work, the challenge was "To develop
a mobile application that could meet most of the disabilities
and needs of users with accessibility features".
In the second phase called Investigate, based on the
challenge, a series of questions were raised that would help
understanding the problem and would be fundamental to find
an optimal solution to it. They are known as Guiding
Questions and some of them were: "What guidelines to study
to use as a basis for the development of this application?",
"What accessibility resources can we focus on in the study
and development that will bring greater value to users?",
"How to correctly apply these resources and technologies?".
After researching and answering all of the questions, it was
possible to understand more about both guidelines of Human
Interface Guideline and WCAG.
Finally, the Act phase is precisely the implementation of
the solution defined as a result of the investigation phase.
The solution consisted of the development of Palpite
Olímpico, an iOS application for guessing the matches of
each game in the Olympics. It is important to highlight that
the focus of this challenge was not the development of the
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

mobile app, but the creation of an accessible application. For
this purpose, the proposed solution should support Voice
Over, Dynamic Type and Color technologies Contrast
Checker.
After developing the solution, some preliminary tests
were carried out with two representatives of the target
audience: one with Cataracts disease and another with color
blindness.
IV. RESULTS
This paper presents the beta version of Palpite Olímpico,
an accessible iOS application, developed in a period of just
two weeks, following each phase of the CBL methodology.
The proposal was to develop an accessible and inclusive
application according to accessibility guidelines (WCAG and
Apple’s HIG).
For this purpose, it was decided to implement Voice
Over to allow autonomous navigation by blind people;
Dynamic Type for the ones with low vision to have better
readability in all elements of the application; and Color
Contrast for people who are color blind and have low vision
to have a better contrast of the colors in the application.
It is important to emphasize that, although all of these
features are offered by Apple’s devices natively in their
operating system, only few apps support them. For them to
work
correctly,
it
is
necessary
to
implement
them
programmatically and adapt the applications accordingly.
The Dynamic Type tool was implemented throughout the
application and when enabled, the font size of the text in the
app must adapt to the size and weight specified in the device
settings. As previously said, to work correctly in mobile
applications, this feature must be manually implemented.
With the necessary adaptations for the app, it should
accommodate larger fonts dynamically, keeping the text
legible and clear when enlarged and also making it bold.
Figure 2 (a) and (b) shows the support of Dynamic Type.
In Figure 2(a), it is possible to see Palpite Olímpico’s home
screen without the feature enabled, with a calendar at the top
showing five days a week and below a collection of sports
with three sports per row. Figure 2(b) presents the home
screen with the Dynamic Type enabled at its maximum size.
It can be noted that the distribution of the elements change,
the calendar now shows only three days, and the sports
categories are arranged in only one column instead of three.
It was all developed to provide better readability of the
information on the screen by people with visual impairment
or loss of vision.
Regarding the colors chosen for the app, contrasting
colors were selected in relation to the background, to better
identify the elements. It was also provided a feature for users
with color blindness to choose the color palette to be applied
according to their type of color blindness.
To confirm the effectiveness of the color contrast,
WCAG's Color Contrast Checker tool was used to calculate
the contrast ratio between foreground and background
elements. It also evaluates the font color of a text or icon and
the color of the background element and Palpite Olímpico
obtained the AAA level classification. It reached the most
rigorous criterion and with the most refinement possible, in
all
the
colors
of
the
system,
guaranteeing
an
ideal
accessibility, for color blind people and people with low
vision.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Palpite Olimpico screens: a) Home screen of the application
without Dynamic Type; b) Home screen with Dynamic Type enabled.
The Voice Over feature was also implemented, helping
blind users to navigate the entire application. It allows
navigability through touch providing an audio description to
guide the interaction. The user may swipe left or right to
navigate and double-click to select items. Every time Voice
Over is activated, a black rectangle appears around the
element the user interacts with, that also may help users with
low vision to navigate.
All audio narrated by Voice Over was edited by a
Pronunciation
Editor,
allowing
to
create
phonetics
corresponding to the subject, providing tips on how to
interact with the selected element, describing images, texts
and button actions. It is important to create good labels and
image descriptions in order to provide a better experience to
blind users while navigating through a mobile application.
V. PRELIMINARY TESTS
To prove the efficiency of the accessibility tools
developed in this project, two usability tests were carried out.
The first test performed was with Bruno Nogueira, a 56 years
old man with Cataract disease. Cataracts are eye lesions that
make the lens opaque and leave the vision blurred, as if there
was a mist before the eyes. It causes difficulties in activities
such as reading, driving, sewing and even walking due to
vision difficulty [11]. Bruno stated that he often stops using
his cell phone because he can not see almost anything on the
screen.
The test consisted of three steps. The first step was
asking him to try to use the application Palpite Olímpico
with the standard font size of the operating system. The user
could not see anything, just a blurry screen and he was
unable to distinguish what was really being shown. In the
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

second step, the largest font size that comes standard in the
system was activated. At this moment, the user started to
distinguish some texts and icons, but he was not sure what
was written or what the icons represented. In the third step,
Dynamic Type was applied in its largest font size and the
user stated that he could read everything and also distinguish
the icons, as he was using glasses and a magnifying glass.
For this user, the color tone was also beneficial because his
disease also affected the brightness of the colors. Bruno also
stated that “it would be incredible if every application could
place fonts of this size, because I often need to use the cell
phones, but there is no one near me to help and I end up
being dependent on others”.
The second usability test was carried out with Guilherme
Caiola, a 24 years old young man with the condition of color
blindness which is a vision disorder that interferes with color
perception. This condition can be of three types and, in this
case, he has deuteranopia, which is the absence or decrease
in green cones sensitive to medium-length waves. So, instead
of green colors, he sees shades of brown [12]. In this test,
Guilherme should browse the application Palpite Olímpico
with the standard colors and it was clear that it was possible
for him to see and understand everything. Guilherme pointed
out the contrast between the texts and the images, thus
confirming that the use of color contrast at the AAA level
actually worked. He stated that “it would be very interesting
if all applications were designed with the contrast of colors,
because it is impossible for me to read and understand the
interface otherwise”.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The design of applications with accessibility does not
keep pace with technological innovations. It may cause
people with disabilities to end up once again suffering from
the lack of efficiency of the applications, which in principle
should bring them autonomy.
This work presents the development process of an iOS
mobile application (Palpite Olímpico) concerning some
accessibility features such as: Voice Over for blind people to
be able to browse autonomously; Dynamic Type for users
with low vision making font size adapt to the size set in the
device; and the Color Contrast Checker at AAA level, to
provide better experience for color blind and low vision
users, enabling the correct choice of colors.
While developing this app, it was noticed that it is a
really difficult and thorough process so that all accessibility
features and tools have an efficiency and safety during their
use. It is often necessary to make adjustments to the layout
and even the navigation flow.
One of the biggest lessons while working in this project
was learned during the usability test. Before this stage, the
thought was that people who needed accessibility resources
were people who had already been born with some type of
disease or were used to their conditions. In fact, accessibility
must be a concern for everyone, because at any moment a
disability or illness can arise, and these resources may be
needed.
All mobile developers should be aware of the importance
to focus on accessibility because it also includes those who
do not have difficulties, but at one time or another they may
need it. It is a totally social cause that deserves attention.
As next steps, it is expected to carry out tests with a
larger sample of users, to effectively prove the relevance of
using accessibility guidelines in the design of mobile
applications. It is also necessary to test the efficiency of the
Voice Over feature and prove that it allows navigation
autonomously and without error for this type of user.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors of this paper would like to thank the
Eldorado Research Institute and all the instructors and
colleagues of Apple Developer Academy for the support of
this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
Institute Enders Analysis, “The mobile explosion” [Online].
Available from: http://www.endersanalysis.com/. 2020.10.21.
[2]
S. K. Kane, J. O. Wobbrock, and R. E. Ladner, “Usable
Gestures for Blind People: Understanding Preference and
Performance” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA,
pp. 413–422, 2011.
[3]
J. Hammel and S. Magasi, “What does participation means?
An insider perspective from people with disabilities” Disabil.
Rehabil. 30(19), pp. 1445–1460, 2008.
[4]
ONU, “Realization of the Sustainable Development Goals by,
for and with persons with disabilities” UN Flagship Report on
Disability and Development, 2018. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/wp-content/
uploads/sites/15/2018/12/UN-Flagship-Report-Disability.pdf
2020.10.21.
[5]
OMS, “WHO says there are 39 million blind people in the
world”,
2018.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://nacoesunidas.org/oms-afirma-que-existem-39-milhoes-
de-cegos-no-mundo/ 2020.10.21.
[6]
B. Leporini, M. C. Buzzi, and M. Buzzi, “Interacting with
Mobile Devices via VoiceOver: Usability and Accessibility
Issues”. In Proceedings of the 24th Australian Computer-
Human Interaction Conference, New York, NY, USA, pp.
339–348, 2012.
[7]
WCAG, “Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG)
2.0”
https://www.w3.org/Translations/WCAG20-pt-br/
2020.10.21.
[8]
J. Avila, “What Accessibility Standards Apply to Mobile
Applications? Level Access”, 2013. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.levelaccess.com/what-accessibility-standards-
apply-to-mobile-phone-applications/ 2020.10.21.
[9]
Human
Interface
Guideline,
“Accessibility”.
[Online].
Available from: https://developer.apple.com/design/human-
interface-guidelines/accessibility/overview/introduction/
2020.10.21.
[10] M. Nichols, K. Cator, and M. Torres, “Challenge Based
Learner User Guide”. Redwood City, CA: Digital Promise,
2016.
[11] BRASCRS, "What is Cataract?”, 2020. [Online]. Available
from:
https://brascrs.com.br/publico/o-que-e-catarata/
2020.10.21.
[12] M. H. Varella, “Color Blindness”, 2020 [Online]. Available
from:
https://drauziovarella.uol.com.br/doencas-e-sintomas/
daltonismo/ 2020.10.21.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

