Online Banking Fraud Detection Based on Local and Global Behavior 
 
 
Stephan Kovach 
Laboratory of Computer Architecture and Networks 
Department of Computer and Digital System 
Engineering, Polytechnic School of São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil 
skovach@larc.usp.br 
Wilson Vicente Ruggiero 
Laboratory of Computer Architecture and Networks 
Department of Computer and Digital System 
Engineering, Polytechnic School of São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil  
wilson@larc.usp.br
 
 
Abstract – This paper presents a fraud detection system 
proposed for online banking that is based on local and global 
observations of users’ behavior. Differential analysis is used to 
obtain local evidence of fraud where a significant deviation 
from normal behavior indicates a potential fraud. This 
evidence is strengthened or weakened by the user’s global 
behavior. In this case, the evidence of fraud is based on the 
number of accesses performed by the user and by a probability 
value that varies over time. The Dempster’s rule of 
combination is applied to these evidences for final suspicion 
score of fraud. Our main contribution is a fraud detection 
method based on effective identification of devices used to 
access the accounts and assessing the likelihood of being a 
fraud by tracking the number of different accounts accessed by 
each device.  
Keywords- differential analysis; local and global behavior; 
device identification; Dempster-Shafer theory 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fraud prevention describes the security measures to 
avoid unauthorized individuals from initiating transactions 
on an account for which they are not authorized [1]. In spite 
of many advanced mechanisms available for fraud 
prevention for online banking applications, it can fail. Fraud 
detection consists in identifying such unauthorized activity 
once the fraud prevention has failed. In practice, fraud 
detection must be used continuously, since the system is 
unaware that fraud prevention has failed [1]. Among the 
approaches used by fraudsters, phishing is one of the most 
common forms for stealing account details for authentication 
from the customers. Social engineering is the most common 
method used in phishing. Social engineering usually comes 
in the form of e-mails trying to convince users to open 
attachments or by directing them to some fraudulent site, and 
most of the time it is so well designed that many costumers 
are led to informing their account details.  
This paper presents a framework, and the corresponding 
system, for online banking fraud detection in real time. It 
uses two complementary approaches for fraud detection. In 
the differential analysis approach, the account usage 
patterns are monitored and compared with the history of its 
usage, which represent the user’s normal behavior. Any 
significant deviation from the normal behavior indicates a 
potential fraud [2]. 
In the global analysis approach, each device is 
monitored and classified as legitimate or fraudulent with 
certain probability based on global information. This is 
based on three assumptions. First, it is assumed that each 
device used for online banking has a single identification. 
The second assumption is based on the fact that the 
probability of a transaction being a fraud increases with the 
number of accounts accessed by the same source that 
requested the current transaction. The third assumption 
comes from the fact that the only way to know that a fraud 
has been perpetrated is when the customer reports it.  
The major contribution of this paper is the finding, by 
empirical analysis of a real-world transaction dataset, that 
the effective identification of access devices and monitoring 
the number of different accounts accessed by each device is 
a very promising supplement for other methods in detecting 
fraudulent behavior in online banking applications.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an 
overview of related work on fraud detection. Section 3 
describes some characteristics of online banking frauds. 
Section 4 details the proposed fraud detection system. 
Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are few published works about fraud detection 
within the domain of online banking applications. This is 
most likely due to the privacy, the secrecy and the 
commercial interests concerning this domain, rather the 
absence of research [3]. Therefore, due to the limited 
exchange of ideas, the development of new fraud detection 
methods in the banking area is difficult. Most published 
work is related to the domain of credit card, computer 
intrusion and mobile communication. Some relevant works 
on fraud detection are reviewed next.  
Credit card frauds- Most of the works on preventing and 
detecting credit card fraud were carried out with special 
emphasis on data mining and neural networks. Aleskerov, 
Freisleben and Rao [4] describe a neural network based 
database mining system in which a neural network is trained 
with the past data of a particular customer and the current 
spending patterns is processed to detect possible anomalies. 
However, Bolton and Hand [5] proposed a detection 
technique in which break point analysis is used to identify 
changes in spending behavior. 
166
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Computer intrusion- Intrusion detection approaches in 
computers is broadly classified into two categories based on 
a model of intrusions: misuse and anomaly detection. Misuse 
detection attempts to recognize the attacks of previously 
observed intrusions in the form of a pattern or a signature 
and then monitors such occurrence. Anomaly detection tries 
to establish a historical normal profile for each user, and then 
uses sufficiently large deviation from the profile to indicate 
possible intrusions [6]. Denning [7] presents a statistical 
model for real-time intrusion detection based in anomaly 
detection. Ghosh and Schwrtzbard [8] describe an approach 
that employs artificial neural networks used for both 
anomaly and misuse detection. 
Mobile communication frauds - Fraud in communication 
networks refers to the illegal access to the network and the 
use of its services. Cortes and Pregibon [9] define statistical 
summaries, denominated signatures, of users over two time 
windows, namely, current and historical, respectively. The 
current network activity is compared with the historical 
activity for any deviation. Fawcett and Provost [10] present 
rule-based methods and neural networks for detecting 
fraudulent calls based on profiling subscriber behavior.     
In all domains above mentioned, fraudsters tends to adapt 
to new prevention and detection measures. In the same way, 
legitimate users may gradually change their behavior over a 
longer period of time. Therefore, fraud detection techniques 
need to be adaptive and to evolve over time in order to avoid 
false alarms. Models can be updated at fixed time points or 
continuously over time [9][10]. 
Panigrahi, Kundu, Sural, and Majumdar [11] describe a 
framework for fraud detection in mobile communication 
networks using rule-based deviation method. The main point 
of this paper is the detailed description of the use of 
Dempster-Shafer theory in order to combine the evidences of 
fraud given by two rules. 
The system proposed in this paper combines three 
different approaches: (1) differential analysis using statistical 
models in order to detect local evidence of fraud; (2) an 
innovative approach using a probabilistic model for 
evaluating the likelihood of a transaction being a fraud based 
on its global behavior; and (3) Dempster-Shafer theory for 
combining evidences of fraud.   
 
III. 
ONLINE BANKING FRAUD CHARACTERISTICS 
An 
empirical 
analysis 
performed 
on 
real-world 
transactions datasets revealed that most of frauds had the 
following behavior characteristics: 
 
Large number of different accounts accessed by a 
single fraudster;  
 
Transactions involving small values in many 
accounts; 
 
More payment transactions than usual in a single 
account; 
 
Increased number of password failures before the 
occurrence of frauds.  
While the latter two characteristics can be detected by 
differential analysis using local attributes, the first two 
characteristics need information about similar attacks in 
other accounts. The fraud detection system described in the 
next section takes these characteristics into account. 
 
 
Figure 1. The general architecture of the system 
 
IV. 
THE FRAUD DETECTION SYSTEM 
The general architecture of the proposed fraud detector 
is illustrated in Fig. 1. In this architecture, each access 
device from which transactions are performed is supposed 
to have an identity. These identities are used along with a 
set of counters to monitor the number of different accounts 
accessed by each device. The system uses two independent 
approaches for detecting frauds: a differential analysis 
approach that detects significant changes in transaction 
patterns in individual accounts, and a global analysis 
approach that uses the set of counters to detect unusual 
number of accounts accessed by a single device. The fraud 
evidences determined by the two approaches are then 
combined in order to determine an overall score that may 
trigger an alarm depending on a prefixed threshold. The 
main issues of the architecture are discussed in the next 
subsections. 
A. Device Identification 
The proposed fraud detection technique has as a core 
concept, the notion of access device identity.  
In the domain of online banking, where accesses are 
made through the Internet, the identification of source 
devices based in IP address only is difficult since it can 
change over time. In the proposed approach, the 
identification of the access device is made by a component 
that must be downloaded and installed in the client device. 
This component generates a fingerprint of the access device 
and sends it to the bank site as part of each transaction data. 
The fingerprint is calculated by applying a cryptographic 
function on the hardware and software information, as the 
processor and the operating system serial numbers, MAC 
address, and some configuration details. 
The implementation details of the component are out of 
the scope of this paper. It assumes that the component is 
implemented with three main requirements: 
1. It generates a different fingerprint for each different 
access device; 
167
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

2. It introduces some randomness during the fingerprint 
generation in order to difficult its spoofing by other 
devices; 
3. It informs the new fingerprint whenever the 
configuration of the device changes. 
Actually the proposed system is based on the component 
that is already being used by the actual online banking 
system.  
B. Global Behavior and the Monitor 
The observation of the user's global behavior plays a 
major role in the fraud detection system proposed herein. 
An example of global behavior that may evidence a fraud is 
the large number of different accounts accessed by a single 
device. Another example is the occurrence of login fails 
over many accounts using a single trial password. A set of 
counters are used in order to verify the global behavior of 
the users. As shown in Fig. 1, the monitor accounts for 
updating these counters at each incoming transaction. 
C. Differential Analysis 
In the differential analysis approach, an incoming 
transaction is examined against a set of profiles that 
characterize the normal usage pattern of a legitimate 
customer. If the current usage pattern deviates significantly 
from the customer’s average usage pattern, it may indicate a 
potential fraud. In order to calculate this deviation, two 
buffers are used in such a way that all transactions 
submitted in the current session enter the first buffer. The 
second buffer keeps a certain number of most recent 
transactions. The transactions in the first and second buffer 
are used to calculate the current usage pattern and the 
customer’s average usage pattern, respectively.  Then, the 
deviation is calculated using a statistical method the result 
of which is a probabilistic value that gives a degree of belief 
in the evidence of fraud. If this session is classified as 
legitimate, all the transactions of the first buffer are inserted 
in the second buffer and the oldest transactions are removed 
from it [12].  
Some of the profiles monitored by this module are 
described below: 
 
Payment transaction frequency. This profile is 
monitored in order to detect the sudden increase of 
payment transactions, which is unusual to legitimate 
a user. 
 
Password failures. The measure of password 
failures at login time is compared against a fixed 
limit that is determined from prior observations. 
This profile is useful for detecting attempted break-
ins [7].  
 
Login frequency. Profiles for login frequencies by 
day and time are monitored to detect fraudsters who 
try to log into an unauthorized account during a 
period of time when the legitimate user is not 
expected to be using the account [7].  
D. Global Analysis 
The purpose of the global analysis module is for 
strengthening or weakening the evidence of a fraud 
determined by the differential analysis module. It is 
performed by evaluating a new evidence of fraud based on 
global observation of the user’s device behavior. The 
evidence of fraud, given by a probability, is determined by 
means of three lists: Black List, White List and Suspect List. 
The Black List contains the identity of devices associated to 
transactions that have already been classified as fraudulent. 
The White List contains the identities of the devices, as well 
as the account numbers accessed by them, associated to 
transactions classified as legitimate. The Suspect List 
contains the identities of devices the transactions of which 
have not yet been classified. The assignment of the devices 
to one of those lists and the determination of its fraud 
probability score are driven by rules described as follows: 
For each incoming transaction, 
 
If the current device is in the Black List, then the 
fraud probability is assigned to one meaning that the 
transaction is fraudulent with a high level of 
evidence; 
 
If the current device and the account number 
accessed by it are in the White List, then the fraud 
probability is assigned to zero denoting that the 
transaction is legitimate with high level of evidence. 
Note that the device identity may be associated with 
one or more accounts in the White List. This is the 
case in which a single user has many accounts;  
 
If the current device is neither in the Black List nor 
in the White List, then the device identity and the 
accessed account number are included in the 
Suspect List. While in this list, the fraud probability 
of this transaction is determined by an exponentially 
decaying function described in the next section.  
  
E. The Suspect List and the Exponentially Decaying 
Function 
 If the incoming transaction device is inserted in the 
Suspect List, it will remain there until explicitly classified as 
fraudulent or legitimate, when the associated device identity 
and account number are inserted in the Black or White List, 
respectively. The idea behind this rule comes from the fact 
that a given transaction can only be assured as fraudulent by 
the customer himself/herself.  
If no fraud is reported until the end of a prefixed period 
of time, nothing can be said about the trustiness of this 
device. In this case, the device will be moved to the White 
List since it is more likely to be legitimate based on the 
analysis made on real-world transactions dataset. However, a 
flag is set indicating that this device was moved to the White 
List at the end of predefined period of time and not explicitly 
classified as legitimate. This flag is used by the fraud analyst 
if a fraud performed from this device is detected later. Since 
the device had been moved to the White List, the next 
transactions performed by this device will be regarded as 
legitimate by this module.  
The elapsed time since the occurrence of a fraud and its 
detection by the customer can take more than a month.  
According to the information from analysts of a real banking 
institution, there are some cases in which it takes up to two 
168
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

month to be reported by the customer. The reason for this 
delay is due to the fact that many fraudulent transactions go 
unnoticed 
since 
the 
values 
involved 
in 
individual 
transactions are usually very small. 
When a device is included in the Suspect List, an initial 
value is assigned to the fraud probability. This value is 
calculated by an exponentially decaying function that 
depends on the number of different accounts that were 
accessed by this device the transactions of which have not 
yet been classified. If a fraud on any of these accounts is 
reported by the customer, the associated device identity will 
be moved to the Black List.  
The exponentially decaying function was chosen due to 
the fact that most of the frauds are reported as soon as they 
were committed and very few at the end of some period of 
time, for example, two months later. In other words, the 
probability of being a fraud is higher at the beginning of a 
transaction, decaying at a fast rate along the time.   
The exponentially decaying function is expressed as 
 
                                    P(t) = Pmax . e-t                             (1) 
where, 
Pmax is the maximum probability value assigned to the 
device when it is included in the list. It depends on the 
number of different accounts accessed by the device (N), 
since the probability of being a fraud increases with this 
number.  For the initial trial, Pmax was chosen as being equal 
to N/10 for 1 < N < 8, and 0.9 for N > 9. The maximum 
value of 0.9 was chosen since 1.0 is reserved for assured 
fraudulent devices, i.e., included in the Black List. 
 is calculated such that at the end of the period (tend), 
the probability value reaches an arbitrary low value. 
Assuming tend = 60 days and P(tend) = 0.01, then 
 
 = - (1/60).ln(0.01/Pmax)                      (2) 
 
Fig. 2 shows the exponentially decaying curves for each 
value of N. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2. Exponentially decaying curves 
 
The dashed line in Fig. 3 shows an example of the 
probability values assigned to a device that varies over the 
time. Note that when the number of accounts accessed by it 
increases, the probability value jumps to its correspondig 
maximum value. 
 
     
  
 
 
Figure 3. The fraud probability under exponential decaying function 
 
 
F. Dempster-Shafer Combiner 
This module uses the Dempster-Shafer theory to 
combine the evidences of fraud estimated by differential and 
global analysis modules and computes the overall suspicion 
score of a transaction.  
The Dempster-Shafer (D-S) theory is a mathematical 
theory of evidence that provides a formal framework for 
combining sources of evidence [13]. 
 The main difference between the D-S theory and the 
probability theory is that the former allows the explicit 
representation of uncertainty. The other difference is that the 
D-S theory requires no knowledge of prior probabilities. 
The D-S framework is based on a view that hypotheses 
can be regarded as a subset of a given set of mutually 
exclusive and exhaustive possibilities named a frame of 
discernment [13]. For the fraud detection domain, the frame 
of discernment  is consisted by two mutually exclusive 
values, given as:  = {fraud, -fraud}. The set of all possible 
hypotheses of  corresponds to all subsets of  including 
itself, denoted by 2. In the case of fraud, the power set is 
consisted by three possible hypotheses: {fraud}, {-fraud} 
and  = {fraud,-fraud} (denoting the uncertainty). 
A probability number m(h) between 0 and 1, expressing 
an estimative of confidence or belief, is assigned to a 
hypothesis h. This number is called basic probability 
assignment (bpa) or mass. In our system, the probabilistic 
values computed by the local and global analysis modules 
are applied to basic probability assignments. 
Two functions are defined in the D-S theory in order to 
express uncertainty: Belief function (Bel) and Plausibility 
function (Pls) 
 
 
169
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Belief function (Bel) is the total belief committed to a 
hypothesis. It sums the mass of all non-empty subsets of the 
hypothesis and the mass of hypothesis itself. 
Plausibility function (Pls) takes into account all the 
masses assigned to a hypothesis and those that can be 
plausibly transferred to it in the light of new information 
[13]. It defines the maximum belief that can be committed 
to a hypothesis. 
Belief and Plausibility functions are related as follow: 
Pl(H) = 1 - Bel(-H); 
U(H) = Pl(H) - Bel(H). 
where, Bel(-H) means disbelief of H, i.e., belief that 
refutes the hypothesis H; and U(H) means uncertainty of H. 
Bel(H) and Pls(H) represents the upper and lower 
bounds in the evidence of hypothesis H.  
The Dempster’s rule of combination gives a function for 
evaluating an overall score from two evidences.  Given two 
basic probability assignment of evidences m1(h) and m2(h), 
they may be combined into a third basic probability 
assignment m3(h) by the expression below: 
 
 
where, the symbol  denotes orthogonal sum. 
This rule can be used for combining basic probability 
assignment of all features monitored by the local and global 
analysis modules and then obtaining overall summary 
values for each module. These summary values from both 
modules are then combined to provide the final suspicion 
score [14]. Based on this score, a transaction on a given 
account can be detected as fraudulent, legitimate or 
suspicious. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have introduced a novel approach for 
fraud detection in online banking transactions by using 
global counters and an effective identification of access 
devices. The idea behind this approach comes from the fact 
that fraud suspicion in a transaction increases with the 
number of accounts accessed from the same source. The 
effective identification of devices is made by a component 
that is downloaded and installed in each device during its 
first access to the bank. A monitor counts the number of 
different accounts accessed by each device. These counters 
are then used by the global analysis module that estimates 
the likelihood of a transaction being a fraud. The paper 
describes the details of how this likelihood is evaluated. A 
differential analysis is also performed on each transaction 
against a set of customer profiles. This approach is based on 
the proposition in which any significant deviation from the 
normal behavior indicates an evidence of fraud. The 
Dempster’s rule combines the resulting fraud evidences 
from global and differential analysis to calculate the overall 
suspicion score of each transaction.   
The proposed system is very promising in detecting 
fraudulent transactions in online banking applications with 
low rate of false alarms. 
The benefit of this approach comes from the fact that 
most of fraudsters do not attack a single account, but many 
accounts from a single device. Therefore, the simple 
observation of a device’s global behavior, such as the 
number of different accounts that has been accessed by it, 
can bring more evidences rather than just applying complex 
statistical methods on its local parameters. 
Currently, the system is in its final stage of 
development. It is being validated and its parameters 
adjusted using a real-world transaction dataset. 
Among the directions for future work we are regarding 
the development of a simulator that produces different 
patterns of legitimate and fraudulent transactions in any 
proportion and randomness in order to evaluate the best 
threshold values for low rate of false alarms, and the study 
of new algorithms and probabilistic functions for global 
analysis.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. J. Bolton and D. J. Hand, “Statistical fraud detection: A review”. 
Statistical Science. Vol. 17, No. 3, 2002, pp 235-255.  
[2] U. Murad and G. Pinkas, “Unsupervised profiling for identifying 
superimposed fraud”, in Proceedings of the 3rd European Conference 
on Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 1999, pp. 
251-266 
[3] K. N. Karsen and T. G. Killingberg, “Profile based intrusion detection 
for Internet banking systems”, Master Thesis, Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology, Norway, 2008 
[4] E. Aleskerov, B. Freisleben, and B. Rao, “CARDWATCH: A neural 
network based database mining system for credit card fraud 
detection”, in Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering. 
Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE, 1997, pp 220- 226. IEEE, Piscataway, 
NJ. 
[5] R. J. Bolton and D. J. Hand, “Unsupervised profiling methods for 
fraud detection”, in Conference on Credit Scoring and Credit Control 
7”, Edinburgh, UK, 5-7 Sept., 2001. 
[6] Y. Kou, C.T. Lu, S. Sirwonqattana, and Y.P. Huanq, “Survey of fraud 
detection techniques”, in Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 
749-754. 
[7] D. E. Denning. “An intrusion detection model”. IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, 13:222-232, February 1987. 
[8] A. K. Ghosh and A. Schwartzbaxd. “A study in using neural networks 
for anomaly and misuse detection”, in Proceedings of the 8th 
USENIX Security Symposium, 1999. 
[9] C. Cortes and D. Pregibon, “Signature-based methods for data 
streams,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 
167-182, 2001. 
[10] T. Fawcett and F. Provost, “Adaptive fraud detection”, Data Mining 
and Knowledge Discovery Journal, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Vol. 1, No. 3, 1997, pp. 291-316. 
[11] S. Panigrahi, A. Kundu, S. Sural, and A. K Majumbar, “Use of 
Dempster-Shafer theory and Bayesian inferencing for fraud detection 
in communication networks”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Spring Berlin/ Heidelberg, Vol. 4586, , 2007, p.446-460. 
[12] P. Burge and J. Shawe-Taylor, “Detecting cellular fraud using 
adaptive prototypes”, Proceedings of the AAAI-97 Workshop and AI 
Approaches to Fault Detection and Risk Management. Mento Park, 
CA: AAAI Press, 1997,  pp. 9-13. 
170
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

[13] Y. Wang, H. Yang, X. Wang, and R. Zhang, “Distributed Intrusion 
detections Based on data fusion method.”, in Proceedings of the 5th 
World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, 2004, pp. 
4331–4334.  
[14] Q. Chen and U. Aickelin, “Anomaly detection using the Dempster-
Shafer method,” in Proc. of the 2006 International Conference on 
Data Mining, DMIN 2006, 2006, pp. 232–240. 
 
171
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

