Open Source Biomedical Engineering for Sustainability in African Healthcare:
Combining Academic Excellence with Innovation
Carmelo De Maria∗†‡
Email: carmelo.demaria@centropiaggio.unipi.it
Daniele Mazzei∗‡
Email: mazzei@di.unipi.it
Arti Ahluwalia∗†
Email: arti.ahluwalia@centropiaggio.unipi.it
∗Research Center E. Piaggio, University of Pisa, Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, 56126, Pisa, Italy
†Department of Ingegneria dell’Informazione, University of Pisa, Via G. Caruso 16, 56126, Pisa, Italy; ‡FabLab Pisa, [1]
Abstract—Accessible quality healthcare is one of the biggest
problems in Africa and other developing countries. This is
not only due to the unavailability of resources, but also to
the absence of a structured formative process for the design
and management of healthcare facilities. Biomedical engineers
are known to be the link between technology and medical
practice, which is a pillar of healthcare systems in developed
countries. In this paper, the Open Source for BioMedical
Engineering (OS4BME) project and its kick off summer school
are presented. The OS4BME project aims to develop a new
generation of biomedical engineers, able to exploit emerging
technologies generated by the recent “Makers” revolution.
During the one week summer school, students from various
sub-Saharan countries have been introduced to these new design,
development and sharing paradigms. Students worked together
identifying new possible simple biomedical devices, which could
help in daily clinical practice. A cheap and easy-to-use neonatal
monitoring device was chosen as a Crowd design project. The
OS4BME Baby Monitor was designed and assembled by the
students during the one week summer school, demonstrating the
creative potential of the new generation of biomedical engineers
empowered with the paradigms of crowdsourcing and rapid
prototyping.
Keywords-Biomedical Engineering; Open Source; Open Hardware;
Crowdsourcing; Africa.
I.
INTRODUCTION
While the pillars of healthcare are certainly doctors, clini-
cians and nurses, at least in the developed world, biomedical
engineers are widely recognised as being the cornerstone of
any medical facility with high technology diagnostic and ther-
apeutic equipment and devices. The scarcity of accessible qual-
ity healthcare in Africa is inextricably linked not only with the
lack of resources, but also with the lack of adequately trained
biomedical engineers [2]. Excluding South Africa, apart from
few singular initiatives (in Nigeria and Ghana), no university
in sub-Saharan Africa offers a fully-ﬂedged Biomedical En-
gineering graduate and post-graduate programme [3]. While
several reasons can be identiﬁed, certainly the most important
is the absence of a clear common understanding of BioMedical
Engineering (BME) as a ﬁeld of study both in higher education
as well as in the medical sector. While there are a number
of technical level clinical and biomedical engineering courses
scattered through sub-Saharan Africa, their quality and content
are often questionable [4]. Moreover, medical equipment does
not have common standards or operating protocols; indeed
in most developed countries, hospitals and clinics have very
expensive maintenance contracts with manufacturers who train
their own specialized technicians [3]. As a result, the medical
device industry in Africa is largely absent and there is an over
reliance on foreign companies to repair and design biomedical
instrumentation, and resolve technical problems. Very often
developed countries donate machines to African hospitals and
clinics. While this is an honourable act, the machines usually
end up being abandoned when they stop working due to lack
of maintenance [5], [6].
The experience of one of the authors in the ASIALINK
project, “Development of Core Competencies in the areas
of Biomedical and Clinical Engineering in the Philippines
and Indonesia 2005-2008” [7], [8] has shown us that long
term and sustainable improvements can only come through
i) recognition on the part of policy makers, of the importance
of on loco trained experts capable of managing and repairing
biomedical equipment and ii) development of expert skills
through individualized programmes that cater to the speciﬁc
social, cultural and technological needs of a region. These are
the two keys to a sustainable and efﬁcient health care system.
However, the world has completely changed with respect to
2006, when the ASIALINK project was considered a landmark
in South East Asia. The continuous connectivity with tablets,
mobile phones, the rapid dissemination of social networks,
and the access to free e-learning [9], makes teaching easier
and harder at the same time, because of the huge amount of
available information.
The world of BME is also changing, here again thanks to
various communities that live and discuss on the web. While,
a couple of years ago, the development of biomedical devices
was essentially linked to companies and universities, now the
ﬁrst examples of open source biomedical devices, such as
the Gammasoft Open electrocardiogram and the Smartpulse
oximeter are beginning to appear [10], [11]. Although these
instruments are not accurate or safe enough to be inserted in
the clinical routine, their use can probably save a life more
than a damaged, unused (e.g., for high cost) or useless (e.g.,
because no one knows how to operate) Magnetic Resonance
Imaging machine.
Indeed, as The Economist [12] points out in an insightful
laymans overview of this burgeoning ﬁeld, software-reliant
devices have also brought on new types of potential risks for
patients. The article underlines the difﬁculty of exposing spe-
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

ciﬁc problems with these products, given that medical software
(and hardware) is proprietary and patent-protected, thus veiled
in secrecy [13]. The open-source approach could, in theory,
make it easier to ﬁx, or even avoid, dangerous ﬂaws before
they hurt or kill hundreds or thousands of patients. Despite this
virtual revolution the mainstream academic community in most
countries, developed or not, remains largely ignorant of the
potential of open source software, hardware and prototyping.
This is particularly evident in Africa - we refer in this paper to
sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa - where tradition
and hierarchy play a strong role at all levels, more so in
academia. The authors are of the opinion that academia, and
speciﬁcally biomedical engineers in higher education, must
embrace these new tools, and pass on the message that an
Open Source product, developed by a community, without a
multinational brand is not equal to un-reliable.
Indeed, today, thanks to crowdthinking and crowdsourcing,
the design of several products has an intrinsic revision process,
thanks to the community, which has become an active player,
and no longer a passive element. The community is the best
analyst in terms of quality, reliability and feasibility. While this
philosophy is now well accepted in the “software” world, there
is still an unjustiﬁed unbelief in open “hardware”, because
many people are anchored to the consolidated production
process, in which product development is affected by high
costs due to the inﬂexibility of fabrication processes (e.g.,
injection molding). As described in the seminal work of Chris
Anderson “In the next industrial revolution, atoms are the new
bits” [14], [15] 3D printing (later described in the text) is
giving everyone, companies, makers, and inventors, the tools
that were the exclusive prerogative of a few companies less
than ten years ago.
A note of caution however; the freedom given by the Web,
and by the possibility to share, fork and re-implement projects,
which characterises the Open Source Software, Electronic,
and Hardware world, has one major drawback: organizing
information (schematics, blueprints) is the boring part that is
not always pursued in a passion-driven and self assembled
community. In the context of BME however, this latter aspect is
critical for ensuring safety and efﬁcacy of biomedical devices,
and must go hand in hand with the adoption of open resources
for medical applications.
We present here a position paper on the beneﬁts and
use of Open Source tools and platforms in BME speciﬁcally
in Africa, which needs to jump on the fastest, cheapest and
greenest wagon to growth and self-sufﬁciency in healthcare.
The adoption of these new methods of creating and thinking
needs to be coupled with open standards and regulations for
medical device safety. We thus argue that the new virtual
sharing mentality should be wholeheartedly embraced, val-
orised and overseen by African universities through a common
Open Source for Biomedical Engineering platform (OS4BME)
rendering the development, and maintenance of medical equip-
ment accessible to the African continent.
After a discussion on the potential of Crowdthinking (II)
and BME in an African context (III), we describe the OS4BME
project and its kick-start initiative in Nairobi in 2013 (IV).
II.
CROWDSOURCING AND CROWDTHINKING PLATFORMS
Currently, there are several resource sharing platforms
available on the internet. Their use is spreading throughout
the developed World, starting from Europe and the US. The
growing accessibility of these platforms, like any shared
common resource, has resulted in the generation of huge
amounts of garbage. Sifting the useless from the useful is
a monumental task and requires experience in design and
engineering as well as some skills in negotiating the now
cluttered internet of things. More importantly, at present, there
are no speciﬁc engines or platforms focused on the sharing
of biomedical instrumentation and devices. This is because,
by their very nature, biomedical devices possess stringent
performance requirements to comply with regulatory standards
to ensure patient safety.
In the past few years, various studies on social episte-
mology and group judgment aggregation have been published
[16], [17] demonstrating both theoretically and practically the
superior heuristic value of collective, non expert, knowledge
compared to individual or small group assessment, based on
consolidated rules and expectations. In 2006, Jeff Howe coined
the Crowdsourcing Neologism in a futuristic article in Wired
magazine [18]. Publishing of a neologism related to society
cooperation in a magazine instead of in a traditional journal
paper is a clear indication of how this new ﬁeld is driven by
a sort of creative talent of the community leading to tangible
products for business and non-proﬁt purposes [19].
Crowdthinking platforms are becoming important tools
for design and development of new products. Platforms like
Wikipedia, Thingiverse, Instructables allow the generation of
information that spans from text documents to complex designs
and blueprints. Nowadays, various web based communities
[20] have an active role in crowd-development and crowd-
thinking and also various FabLabs (Fabrication Laboratories)
[1] are being born with the aim of bring technology to the
people, empowering the creative process with the possibility
of building real, physical objects.
In the BME context, we still need a level of supervision,
to control the quality and to guarantee the respect of safety
standards. By virtue of their access to the brains of the future,
universities are the right (and perhaps the only) institutions
to properly teach instruments for crowd-“doing”, while giving
due importance to concepts, such as ethics, standards and regu-
lations. However, although the latter is at least brieﬂy outlined
in university courses, the former sometimes is unknown even
to the most brilliant professors.
We deﬁne the Crowd, with a capital “C”, as groups of
individuals trained and assisted by institutions of technical
and higher education, to design, innovate and build together
through sharing. As such, the Crowd can and should consist
of healthcare providers as well as engineers and technicians.
If properly guided by standards and regulations, guaranteed
by universities as the organ for control, certiﬁcation, knowl-
edge and learning, the Crowd is an enabling system for the
design and development of medical devices. In addition, the
Crowd philosophy can be extended to production processes so
fostering local economic growth. In fact, the new methods of
production now accessible to all do not require the delocaliza-
tion of manufacture somewhere else.
III.
CONTEXTUALIZATION
A. Biomedical Engineering for Africa Today
As Nkuma-Udah et al. point out [3], there are few African
universities which offer BME courses. The few that do are
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

based on curricula which were designed for Western uni-
versities over 20 years ago and which place undue empha-
sis on niche subjects like MicroElectroMechanical Systems
(MEMs) and cell engineering and less on the learning of new,
hard technology and equipment management, maintenance
and repair [21]. Evidence from the ASIALINK project has
demonstrated the value of developing expert skills through
individualized programmes that cater to the speciﬁc social,
cultural and technological needs of a region. While we are
not advocating a revolution in BME teaching here, we are
strongly in favour of the upgrading of curricula based on
solid engineering principles (as outlined by Linsenmeier [22])
with new courses, new technology and new ways of thinking
and problem solving, speciﬁcally adapted to the needs of
countries with few resources. This approach is similar to
that proposed by Tzavaras et al. [23] on computer enhanced
education laboratories. Fusing the crowd design philosophy
with the Biomedical Engineer’s objective of improving hu-
man healthcare requires that patient safety and efﬁcacy be
the paramount concern and also the motivating force behind
Crowd driven innovative biomedical device design. Biomedical
devices must be designed with safety and efﬁcacy in mind, and
they should adhere to regulatory standards (albeit most of the
countries in the region of interest have no regulatory authority
for biomedical devices). Thus, the Crowd not only needs to
be empowered with the technological know-how, but also be
given the means to intelligently scan and ﬁlter the internet for
useful open source materials without being overwhelmed by
the choice available. To do so requires fundamental knowl-
edge on biomedical devices, ergonomics, engineering and
human physiology: this multidisciplinarity cries out for Crowd.
Leaving aside large diagnostic and imaging equipment and
prosthetic implants, the vast majority of biomedical devices
have a large turnover and no one company monopolizes the
market. They are also extremely diverse: examples are plasters,
thermometers, hospital beds, sphygomanometers, etc. In this
arena, there is huge scope for Crowd driven improvements
and innovation.
B. Social Context
We are fully aware that although professors, students and
technicians maybe very enthusiastic with the idea of open
source and Crowd driven biomedical device design, some
Ministries of Health, or some powerful economic and other
interest groups in developing countries could to be linked
to major device manufacturers and therefore can block or
hinder our initiative because their interests are threatened. For
this reason, part of our project is also focused on creating
awareness-raising activities and workshops targeting policy-
makers, e.g., representatives of the Ministries of Health and
Education. Through the help of our funders we will develop
advocacy campaigns for the recognition of the importance
and relevance of biomedical and clinical engineering in the
health care system for creating and managing a sustainable
high technology health care system which does not rely on
foreign economic aid. Indeed, our aim is to give the universities
the tools, guide them through the platform and then let them
research the best social conditions (at state level, society level,
and so on) to turn the implementation of the project into a
success. In fact, we are extremely sensitive about the issue of
not imposing our ideas and cultural values on the People of
Africa.
Figure 1.
Schematic of the OS4BME work ﬂow.
IV.
TEACHING THE CROWD PHILOSOPHY IN THE BME
CONTEXT
What we advocate therefore is giving biomedical engineers
in sub-Saharan Africa, through their universities, the tools and
knowhow in order to design, develop and maintain their own
equipment based on the new open hardware and open source
revolution, which is happening before our eyes. To achieve this
ambitious goal, we outline three main objectives:
•
the development of human resources in higher educa-
tion in Biomedical Engineering in Africa,
•
the creation of the OS4BME infrastructure, a sharing,
making and repository platform based on the cus-
tomization and integration of already available web
tools,
•
the making of a new genre of Biomedical Engineer
in Africa equipped with the capacity to exploit and
develop innovative designs on the OS4BME platform
and of discriminate use of web based and open source
resources.
Setting up the OS4BME platform requires the creation of
a professional BME working group, versed in the regulatory
aspects of biomedical safety and standards, which is able to
assess, vet and categorize projects, designs or blueprints and
then make them available through the platform open repository.
The philosophy is summarised in Figure 1.
A. Identiﬁcation of Tools for Crowd Design
The identiﬁcation of the most suitable instruments and
classroom management and organization is the ﬁrst step to
demonstrate the potential of open source in the BME context.
We targeted three main areas of teaching, necessary to give a
shape, a brain and to share the ideas:
1) Rapid prototyping: The term Rapid Prototyping (RP)
indicates a group of technologies that allows the automatic
realization of physical models based on design data using a
computer. RP processes belong to the generative (or additive)
production processes. In contrast to abrasive (or subtractive)
processes, such as lathing, milling, drilling, grinding, eroding,
and so forth in which the form is shaped by removing material,
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

in rapid prototyping the component is formed by joining
volume elements. In general, RP techniques follow a Computer
Aided Design/Computer Aided Manufacturing (CAD/CAM)
approach. The object is designed using a computer (CAD)
which then sends the instructions to the machine to obtain
the desired shape (CAM), fabricated layer by layer. For the
implementation of the RP principle several fundamentally dif-
ferent physical processes are suitable, as photopolymerisation,
conglutination of granules or powders by additional binders,
extrusion of incipiently or completely melted solid materials
[24], [25].
RP was originally conceived as a way to make one-off
prototypes, but as the technology spreads more things will
printed as ﬁnished goods [26].
Although 3D printing is not competitive for mass pro-
duction (millions of parts), it is perfect in ﬁelds where the
customization of products is important: because the expense of
making tools no longer ﬁgures in the equation, the economics
of mass production will give way to mass customisation. Parts
will then be made in production runs not of a million or
even of a few thousand, but of one. Thus, 3D-printed products
will continue to creep into the medical, dental and aerospace
industries where customers are willing to pay a premium for
custom products. In industries that are not built on “markets
of one”, 3D printing will help product designers accelerate
the design process. 3D printers would also be invaluable in
remote areas [27]. Thanks to the various Do-It-Yourself (DIY)
communities, several models of Open 3D printers are now
available on the Web. One of the most famous is the RepRap
community [28] built around the ideas of Adrian Bowyer. He
imagined a printer that can print its own parts, and hence
through a process of self replication is able to spread this
technology throughout the population. All the parts of this
type of printer (there are several versions) are open source.
The electronics is based on Arduino (see the next section), the
software is open source and produces standard G-code ﬁles.
Designs can be shared and any unprinted parts of the machine
are easy to ﬁnd in any DIY shop. Although, the quality of 3D
printed parts made by a RepRap is not high, we believe it is
the right starting point to teach the potential of 3D printing
to newcomers. The design and printing process is completely
transparent so that each step of the complex procedure is easy
to follow and replicate.
2) Electronic Prototyping Systems: Until about ten years
ago, electronic system design and development was a ﬁeld
accessible only to skilled users, such as engineers, technicians,
physicists, etc. Each time an electronic control system was
required in a project, the design process had to necessarily
include the choice of microcontroller, of a communication
system, of a power source, etc. This choice was then bind-
ing for the selection of further components, interfaces and
programming software. In 2005, in Ivrea (Italy) a team of
designers created Arduino [29], a tiny board onto which a
microcontroller was mounted together with all the necessary
circuits and peripherals required for powering, communication
and expansion. A revolution had begun: electronic control
systems were not the bottleneck of prototyping anymore. With
Arduino, even users without electronics and programming
skills could integrate and electronic control system in their
own project pushing the limits of complex system design
and prototyping. The key factor of the Arduino platform is
not only the board but also the easy-to-use programming
Figure 2. Group photo from OS4BME class, hosted by the innovator Summer
School, in the Kenyatta University conference center.
environment, which allows unskilled users to program through
a very intuitive C like programming language. These two
factors allowed the birth of a huge user community which
empowered the Arduino world through the sharing of code,
libraries and projects with open source license. The availability
of a pre-made piece of code allowed people to focus their
designs on the development of functional and challenging parts
using other projects and codes as inputs for their own designs.
3) Content Management and Sharing platforms: As high-
lighted previously, the fast growing DIY community leaves
several interesting projects to languish without documentation
or with missing parts because a new, more interesting idea
was released. Indeed, one of the most challenging aspects of
cooperation in design and development is the organization
and sharing of information and content. However, thanks
to the revolution introduced by the blogging phenomenon,
nowadays there are various free and open source Content
Management Systems (CMS), which allow an easy and in-
tuitive co-production of documents. These systems have been
demonstrated to be useful even for the documentation of en-
gineering and technical projects. MediaWiki [30] in particular
is the core engine of the most famous web based encyclopedia
Wikipedia. With MediaWiki or similar engines it is possible
to create hypertexts made of a huge number of cross-linked
pages allowing the creation of very detailed documentations
and designs. MediaWiki is designed for the creation of text
based documents with embedded pictures and table. Graphics
and templates are very minimal allowing users to focus on the
real content, which is a core feature of a concurrent design.
B. OS4BME Class
To kick start the initiative and to demonstrate the potential
of a regulated open source design and prototyping platform
to academics and regulators/decision makers, we proposed a
short term intensive course. The course was implemented in
August 2013 in Nairobi, Kenya. Our aim was to introduce the
OS4BME concept to the African Engineering community and
thus create a small working group who will be involved in the
set-up of the new platform. To fulﬁl this objective, the course
was focused on the design of a biomedical device from ﬁrst
principles, its assembly and testing and discussion of regula-
tory issues in device development. The OS4BME course was
hosted by the Innovators Summer School held at the Kenyatta
University Conference Center, Kenya and took place from the
12th – 16th of August 2013. The Innovators Summer School
is an initiative of United Nation Economic Commission for
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Africa (UNECA [31]), and is aimed at fostering the economic
development of Africa by powering the higher education of
the African students. The key player in the initiative is the
African Biomedical Engineering Consortium (ABEC [32]), a
consortium of African universities with the common mission
of bringing excellence to BME in Africa. Over 48 students,
technicians and lecturers from the ABEC universities: Kenyatta
University (Kenya), University of Nairobi (Kenya), University
of Eldoret (Kenya), Addis Ababa University (Ethiopia), Mak-
erere University (Uganda), Kyambogo University (Uganda),
Mbarara University (Uganda), University of Malawi (Malawi),
Muhimbili University of Health and Allied Sciences (Tanza-
nia), and University of PISA (Italy) attended the course (Figure
2).
After introductory lessons to explain the aim of the course,
and some preliminary basics on RP Hardware, software,
electronics, and safety regulations; hands-on sessions were
provided, giving the students the opportunity to learn by
doing. Following the spirit of the course, the free and open
CAD/CAM software programs (FreeCAD [33], Slic3r [34],
and Pronterface [35]) were adopted to introduce the design
approach for 3D printing. For the electronics part, the Arduino
platform was selected, for both price, ease of use and ﬂexi-
bility. All documentation was reported using Mediawiki. The
keystone of the course was represented by the brainstorming
coordinated by the authors with the help of Dr. Molyneux,
a pediatrician from the University of Malawi, to understand
the problems of a pediatric department in an African hospital
context.
The discussion was centred on the respiratory problems of
new born premature babies and the monitoring of breathing
and body temperature. The aim was to design and build a
low cost device, for monitoring respiratory movements and
temperature, able to shake the cot to resuscitate the normal
breathing of the baby when it stops, and equipped with a sound
and light alarm to call a nurse to the cot. The implementation
of these features was established together with students, after
the brainstorming session. The discussion was focused not only
on the functional aspects of the devices, but also on their cost,
feasibility safety and reliability, giving the right direction to
the project from its start.
After the deﬁnition of design speciﬁcations, students and
attendees were divided into four thematic groups, on the basis
of their previously indicated preferences: 1) mechanical design;
2) electronic design; 3) Software design; 4) Standard and
regulation identiﬁcation, and documentation. The subdivision
in groups was fundamental in order to keep everyone involved
in something they enjoyed: creativity is fed by passion and
enthusiasm, boredom kills innovation.
The proposed approach led to the design and fabrication
of an open source and low cost baby monitor (Figure 3) in the
space of 3 days. The monitor was composed of three modules:
•
the elastic band, to monitor the temperature and the
breath of the baby;
•
a vibrating box, activated when the baby stops breath-
ing for more than 15 seconds;
•
a control unit, with a LCD display, 3 LEDs, sound
alarms and all the control boards.
Students were encouraged to refer to ISO standards, such
as IEC ISO 80601-2-56, with the aim of using these documents
to help their work rather than a constraint.
Figure 3.
Some moments during the OS4BME class: preliminary test of the
device.
At the end of the course an evaluation survey was con-
ducted by the funders. Over 81% of participants expressed
extreme satisfaction in the course, although a good proportion
(46%) of them could have beneﬁted from more time and
previous knowledge on electronics, CAD and programming. In
fact, only one participant had previously been exposed to open
source technology. There was also interest in the regulatory
aspects and standards in medical devices. As the participants
were from different backgrounds, many had very little idea
what medical devices are and the critical importance of safety
issues in such devices. The action thus served to bring home
the importance of this aspect during the design of instruments
for BME.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The objective was to develop and nurture resource sharing
and technological self-competency through the establishment
of a virtual platform containing ideas, blueprints, FAQs and
safety regulations for creating new, competitively priced and
innovative biomedical devices. We envisage an OS4BME
platform managed, regulated and monitored through an aca-
demic led pan-African organization, assigned with the task of
collecting, classifying, vetting and disseminating information
and know-how on the design and development of biomedical
devices and instrumentation. In the long term, the sharing of
ideas and designs should become the norm, allowing continu-
ous user-driven improvements in healthcare.
A summer school was organized to kick off these ideas,
with the aim to create a cohesive working group on which
built the platform. The response from students, professors
and technicians involved in the school was enthusiastic. It
was crucial for participants to play an active role in the
identiﬁcation of the problem, selection of components, design,
assembling and testing of the device and in the discussion of
regulatory issues in the development of the device. Participants
were able to gain a hands-on introduction to electronic system
design and programming. All teaching materials, including
course documentation, the baby monitor design blueprints are
available online for the community to take on and develop
further. The 3D printer and all components are now hosted at
Kenyatta University’s Faculty of Engineering.
Accordingly to the funders’ survey the course was an
undoubted success. Most students and staff were unaware of
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

the existence of tools, such as Arduino, FreeCad, Slic3r, Media
Wiki, etc., let alone the power and implications of open source
design and prototyping. The experience was instrumental in
bringing this knowledge to the participants, and their keen
interest throughout, particularly on 3D printing was apparent.
Although there are several resource sharing platforms avail-
able as well as several courses on RP, digital design and
embedded electronics, none of these is dedicated to biomedical
devices. This is because biomedical devices must be designed
ﬁrst and foremost with patient safety and efﬁcacy in mind.
The OS4BME infrastructure, managed by the new genre of
biomedical engineers, can be the tool to address this challenge,
and its implementation is our objective in the next few years.
The ﬁrst cornerstone of this project was an intensive course, the
ﬁrst of its kind, held in Nairobi addressed safety, ergonomics,
biomedical device design, and RP in an integrated manner.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the UNECA, particularly
Dr. Victor Konde for supporting the OS4BME project and
ﬁnancing the summer school. The authors would also like
to thank Kenyatta University and in particular Prof. Martin
Nzomo and Dr. Daniel Oyoo for the logistic and the local
organization of the event. The OS4BME project and the related
summer school activities are documented and reported on the
ABEC website [32]. Dr. Molyneux was an important source
of guidance throughout the summer school. The authors would
like to thank also the University of Pisa and the FabLab Pisa
for supporting the preparation and organization of the summer
school. Part of the electronic material used for the course
and for the development of the Baby Monitor was donated
by Arduino [29] and the OS4BME experience was reported
on their ofﬁcial blog [36]. Finally the authors would like to
thank Eng. Giorgio Mattei, Eng. Serena Giusti and Alejandro
Callara for their excellent work in supporting and tutoring the
OS4BME summer school student groups during the course.
REFERENCES
[1]
[Online].
Available:
http://www.fablabpisa.org
[retrieved:
January,
2014]
[2]
S. Mullally, Clinical Engineering Effectiveness in Developing World
Hospitals, ser. Canadian theses.
Library and Archives Canada =
Biblioth`eque et Archives Canada, 2008.
[3]
K. Nkuma-Udah and E. Mazi, Developing Biomedical Engineering in
Africa: A case for Nigeria.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 14,
pp. 3828–3831.
[4]
UNESCO Science Report 2010, Second revised ed.
United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, Paris, France, 2010.
[5]
A.
Jones.
Medical
equipment
donated
to
developing
nations
usually
ends
up
on
the
junk
heap.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article.cfm?id=
medical-equipment-donated-developing-nations-junk-heap
[retrieved:
January, 2014]
[6]
K. H. Courage. Medical technology donations often fail to help. [On-
line]. Available: http://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/observations/2012/
08/01/medical-technology-donations-often-fail-to-help/ [retrieved: Jan-
uary, 2014]
[7]
A. D. Ahluwalia, “Lessons from asia: Implementing higher education
in biomedical engineering for improvement of the healthcare system,”
in AfricaHI 2012 - The 2nd IASTED African Conference on Health
Informatics, Gaborone, Botswana, 2012.
[8]
J. Webster, “Strengthening bme in southeast asia [around the world],”
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 26, no. 1,
2007, pp. 10–10.
[9]
[Online]. Available: http://www.instructables.com [retrieved: January,
2014]
[10]
[Online]. Available: http://www.gammacardiosoft.it/openecg/ [retrieved:
January, 2014]
[11]
[Online]. Available: http://smartmaker.org/wiki/Projects:smARtPULSE
[retrieved: January, 2014]
[12]
Open-source medical devices: When code can kill or cure. [Online].
Available: http://www.economist.com/node/21556098 [retrieved: June,
2014]
[13]
Z. Bliznakov, G. Mitalas, and N. Pallikarakis, Analysis and Classiﬁ-
cation of Medical Device Recalls.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007,
vol. 14, pp. 3782–3785.
[14]
C. Anderson. In the next industrial revolution, atoms are the new
bits. [Online]. Available: http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/01/ff
newrevolution/ [retrieved: January, 2014]
[15]
——, Makers: the new industrial revolution.
Random House, 2012.
[16]
J. Surowiecki, The wisdom of crowds.
Random House Digital, Inc.,
2005.
[17]
A. Doan, R. Ramakrishnan, and A. Y. Halevy, “Crowdsourcing systems
on the world-wide web,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 4,
2011, pp. 86–96.
[18]
J. Howe. The rise of crowdsourcing. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html [retrieved: January,
2014]
[19]
G. Fantoni, R. Apreda, D. Gabelloni, and G. Montelisciani, “You solve,
i learn: A novel approach to e-learning in collaborative crowdsourcing,”
in Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE), 2012 18th Interna-
tional ICE Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–10.
[20]
[Online].
Available:
http://www.leaninglab.org
[retrieved:
January,
2014]
[21]
T. R. Harris, J. D. Bransford, and S. P. Brophy, “Roles for learning sci-
ences and learning technologies in biomedical engineering education: A
review of recent advances,” Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2002, pp. 29–48.
[22]
R. Linsenmeier, “What makes a biomedical engineer?” Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 4, 2003, pp. 32–38.
[23]
A. Tzavaras, N. Kontodimopoulos, E. Monoyiou, I. Kalatzis, N. Pil-
iouras, I. Trapezanidis, D. Cavouras, and E. Ventouras, “Upgrading un-
dergraduate biomedical engineering laboratory training,” in Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, 2005. IEEE-EMBS 2005. 27th Annual
International Conference of the, 2005, pp. 353–356.
[24]
A. Gebhardt, Rapid prototyping.
Hanser Verlag, 2003.
[25]
C. K. Chua, K. F. Leong, and C. C. S. Lim, Rapid prototyping:
principles and applications.
World Scientiﬁc, 2010.
[26]
B. Berman, “3-d printing: The new industrial revolution,” Business
Horizons, vol. 55, no. 2, 2012, pp. 155 – 162.
[27]
R. N. Beyers, A. S. Blignaut, and L. Mophuti, “Mobile fablabs: Local
and rural innovation in south africa,” in Proceedings of World Confer-
ence on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia and Telecommunications
2012, T. Amiel and B. Wilson, Eds.
Denver, Colorado, USA: AACE,
June 2012, pp. 112–122.
[28]
[Online]. Available: http://www.reprap.org [retrieved: January, 2014]
[29]
[Online]. Available: http://www.arduino.cc [retrieved: January, 2014]
[30]
[Online].
Available:
http://www.mediawiki.org
[retrieved:
January,
2014]
[31]
[Online]. Available: http://www.uneca.org [retrieved: January, 2014]
[32]
[Online].
Available:
http://www.abecafrica.org
[retrieved:
January,
2014]
[33]
[Online]. Available: http://www.freecad.org [retrieved: January, 2014]
[34]
[Online]. Available: http://www.slic3r.org [retrieved: January, 2014]
[35]
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/kliment/Printrun
[retrieved:
January, 2014]
[36]
[Online].
Available:
http://blog.arduino.cc/2013/10/10/
a-baby-monitor-goes-open-source/ [retrieved: January, 2014]
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

