SSEDIC: Building a Thematic Network for
European eID
Victoriano Giralt
Central ICT Services
University of M´alaga
M´alaga, Spain
e-mail: victoriano@uma.es
Hugo Kerschot
IS Practice
Brussels, Belgium
e-mail: hugo.kerschot@is-practice.eu
Jon Shamah
EJ Consultants
Harrow, United Kingdom
e-mail: jshamah@ejconsultants.co.uk
Abstract—Digital Identity is a critical element for a digital
society as proposed by the Digital Agenda for Europe. The
width and breadth of the subject makes it mean different things
in different sectors, even to different projects funded by the
European Commission. Thus, having a network that provides
a platform for all the stakeholders of electronic identity to
work together and collaborate to prepare the agenda for a
proposed Single European Digital Identity Community, is of
prime importance to the achievement of said goals. The network,
SSEDIC, is working on identifying the actions and the timetable
for the Digital Agenda and the successful launch of the European
Large Scale Action and European Innovation Partnerships, as
well as to provide a multi stakeholder planning resource to assist
its implementation. A ﬁrst batch of deliverables will be presented
to the European Commission at the end of February 2012 and
then made available to the public. This paper will present the
SSEDIC expert network as it is now, what has been done to build
the network and the accomplishments of its ﬁrst year. But, the
most important aim of this paper is to increase awareness about
SSEDIC and reach out to some valuable contributors that had
not yet been identiﬁed to get them involved in the network.
Keywords-Electronic Identity; Single European Digital Commu-
nity; Digital Agenda for Europe.
I. INTRODUCTION
Every European digital [1] (by 2020) this is the ambitious
goal set by Commissioner Neelie Kroes for the Digital Agenda
for Europe (DAE)[2]. In order to achieve this goal, a single
European digital community is needed, and the DAE (Digital
Agenda for Europe) sixteen key actions [3] show how it could
be achieved. Also, the DAE calls for stakeholder involvement
to reach the goals.
Key action 16 in the Digital Agenda for Europe [3] proposes
a Single Digital Identity Community and scoping that is
the purpose of SSEDIC. The network has built a platform
where stakeholders can identify the actions and the timetable
for their resolutions to result in the successful launch of
the European Large Scale Action and European Innovation
Partnerships (ELSA/EIP). This cannot happen out of thin air,
thus SSEDIC [8] is building upon the ELSA/EIP thematic
consultations carried out by the ELSA/EIP eIDM (Electronic
IDentity Management) Expert Working Group [4] and today’s
Large Scale Pilots (LSPs) such as, but not limited to, STORK
[5], PEPPOL [6] or SPOCS [7].
The SSEDIC thematic network [8], during its ﬁrst year
in existence, has established a series of stakeholder groups
in sectors outlined in the ELSA/EIP report [4]. Each of
the groups will consider, through further consultations, the
political, economic, social, technical, legal and environmental
aspects of a single European digital community.
This network is built gathering experts from 35 partners and
an initial group of associated partners. The former provide 67
experts in electronic identity (eID) who are picked for their
knowledge of the eID or stakeholder domain rather than just as
representatives of organisations. This has been a fundamental
criterion for partners to ensure that the views and consultations
are of the highest value and relevance to this highly important
thematic. The later can grow as much as wanted and one of
the main aims of the present paper is to increase the visibility
of SSEDIC in as much pertinent communities as possible,
because the ambition of this network is to build a community
of high level European and international experts up to 2013
and, if possible, beyond.
A stakeholder is deﬁned as any group or individual that
can affect or is affected by the achievement of SSEDIC [8]
objectives. They often have differing interests and may put
conﬂicting pressures on the project. The consortium needs to
attend to a rich variety of claims and interests of stakeholder
groups in the industry, yet at all times needs to proﬁle a
coherent identity of the project to each and every one of
these groups. A wide range of persons and groups exist
with differing legitimate interests in SSEDIC. Recognising
and addressing their needs and interests will in turn enhance
the performance of the project, ensure that it is aligned with
market realities, and secure its continued acceptance.
Additionally an overarching and integrated view of the
accumulated results and inputs from the various stakeholder
sectors will be taken in order to build an overview and
impact assessment of a single European digital community
on the overall European Community and also on individual
EU Member States.
The high level outcome of the SSEDIC thematic network [8]
is to provide a wide ranging and valuable consultation-based
resource and consensus which will enable the European Com-
mission to understand the roadmap that must be addressed
within the ELSA/EIP programme to progress Europe’s single
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

digital community vision as outlined by the DAE [2] across
each and every sector of the European Community. And this
output is intended to be a thought-through and widely agreed
blueprint for step-by-step actions which can feed directly into
the future ELSA/EIP-programme and drive that programme
towards a successful conclusion delivering a European digital
identity community.
In order to have real impact on society, the SSEDIC the-
matic network [8] is not intended to be an academic exercise,
it is an action plan with a roadmap for the DAE for the
coming decade. As such, SSEDIC results need to reﬂect a
transformational shift in the way everyone in the European
community will think, behave, transact and indeed live in the
coming years. The vision to be established by SSEDIC can
be a beacon to the rest of the world, demonstrating how the
efﬁciency of a digital community can be translated into cultural
and economic leadership. Although the vision will need to be
technology led, it cannot be technology targeted; rather, the
vision should integrate goals derived from stakeholder sector
needs and beneﬁts and within a holistic framework of actions.
The present paper will describe the SSEDIC thematic net-
work background and work methodology, that has lead to
a ﬁrst batch of deliverables that will seed the ﬁnal results
expected by the end of 2013.
II. BACKGROUND
In 2009, the European Large Scale Actions consultations
commenced the description of a Single European Digital Com-
munity. A number of SSEDIC partners made contributions via
the ELSA/EIP eIDM Expert Working Group, which resulted
in the ELSA/EIP report [4]. This consultation described an
interoperable network of independent but regulated Identity
Service Providers, many possibly Public-Private partnerships,
which would make an eID (not National eID) available to each
citizen within each Member State, while retaining full freedom
of choice for the individual.
SSEDIC partners include representatives of member states
with a National eID infrastructure as well as countries with
alternative eID models.
SSEDIC partners include experts and organisations that
have participated in the eID initiatives of Norway, Denmark,
Austria, Italy, Belgium and Germany. Also, SSEDIC keeps
contact with the eGov subgroup via the Commission, in order
to assess eGovernment policy and in particular eID policies
of the Member States.
The Large Scale Pilots such as STORK [5], SPOCs [5],
epSOS [10], PEPPOL [6] and other projects are critical
to the success of the Single European Digital Community.
The technology and standards being evolved will form the
cornerstones for interoperability, not only for cross-border use
cases, but also to establish and cement trustworthy relations
between Identity Service Providers in the same countries.
Many of these projects could not join SSEDIC as full partners
themselves, but are contributing as observers with strong
inputs to the consultations, thus providing an opportunity to
ensure the continuity and sustainability of their key outputs.
On the other hand, many of the contributors to these projects
are SSEDIC partners, thus there is strong involvement of the
coordinators of the LSPs in the SSEDIC Network and overlap
of many members. This will ensure that full mutual beneﬁt
is realised and the standards, components and demonstrator
experience can be incorporated into the consultative outcomes.
As SSEDIC progresses, contacts with other EU projects in all
sectors will be fostered.
The Higher Education sector is a special case as they already
have electronic identity infrastructures in production across
Europe and beyond, that connect research and educational
institutions both inside Member States and inside and outside
the Union. Three partners of project SEMIRAMIS [11], that
deals with eID supporting the movement of students inside the
European Higher Education Area [12], are SSEDIC partners.
Other partners connect SSEDIC to experts networks in Europe
dealing with eID federations in research and education.
STORK [5] is essentially a proof of concept of techni-
cal interoperability, but the project has established the basic
building blocks of the infrastructure that will ensure eID
interoperability at European level, including common code
for an architecture and interoperability platform which will
be released under EUPL. These building blocks address other
dimensions beyond technical interoperability, such as multilat-
eral trust mechanisms, framework for security assessment of
national infrastructural components, harmonisation of Quality
Authentication Assurance mechanisms, etc. Additionally, the
pilots that the project have set-up, and which make use of the
above mentioned infrastructure, have a strong potential beyond
the project time frame. SSEDIC will use as basis the studies,
technology overviews, and prototypes on new and upcoming
technologies produced in STORK for the consultations with
the experts groups. SSEDIC has a strong link to STORK
through six common partners. These strong relationships will
result in additional beneﬁts and allow for making suggestions
as to how to exploit the achievements of STORK and its pilots
into the future.
III. WORK PLAN AND METHODS
There is a communication plan supported by an action
plan, that cover the 36 months duration of the project, to use
and disseminate knowledge at different levels. The main areas
addressed by the plan are:
• promoting the SSEDIC thematic network identity and
results within the network and beyond;
• sharing general knowledge, speciﬁc information and doc-
uments through open source collaborative tools;
• organising meetings, seminars and workshops in different
formats for the use of the entire thematic network team,
using traditional as well as innovative techniques;
• continuously integrating the SSEDIC thematic network
knowledge in partners dissemination channels
A. PESTLE
The aggregation and organisation of the consultation data
will be based on PESTLE, which stands for:
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

• Political
• Economic
• Sociological
• Technological
• Legal
• Environmental
PESTLE analysis is an audit of an organisation’s environ-
mental inﬂuences with the purpose of using this information to
guide strategic decision-making. A PESTLE analysis is a use-
ful tool for understanding the big picture of the environment
in which any organisation is operating [13].
All consultation work will take into account these six
aspects, where relevant.
The PESTLE analysis will allow for the production of time
lines with speciﬁc actions to be carried out in each of the six
aspects.
B. Activities
SSEDIC has established a series of stakeholder groups in
sectors contributing to the EIP. Each of the groups considers,
through further consultations, the political, economic, social,
technical, legal and environmental aspects of a single European
digital community. This groups are formed off the experts
from the 35 partners plus experts from associated partners,
which number should grow by accretion over the 36 months
lifespan of the project. Each stakeholder work programme
consists of brainstorming workshops, strategy papers and
joint meetings with more general sector organisations to gain
a fuller understanding of the requirements and prerequisite
actions for delivery of the vision in that sector. Hard data will
be built to consider the impact and opportunities of the single
European digital community in the short, medium and long
term.
C. Work Packages
SSEDIC has organised the consultation at 3 levels and each
of these levels has a dedicated work package:
1) Stakeholders Sector Consultation
2) Technology and Infrastructure Consultation
3) Business Model and Regulations Consultation
plus three global work packages dedicated to coordination,
dissemination and outcome management.
The materials produced by the three consultation work
packages will be merged by the outcomes management one
and used for dissemination.
The stakeholders sector consultation, due to the large num-
ber of stakeholders sectors, has required these to be formed
into 6 groupings described in Figure 1.
The consultation on technology and infrastructure is split
into natural areas of interest:
• Security
• Privacy and Ethics
• Enrolment
• Identity Models
– Nonrepudiation
– Interoperability
– Identity Service Provision
– Authentication
• High Level Architecture
– Standards
– Integration
– Resilience
– EU projects
• Accessibility
– Credentials
– Accessibility
• Operations
– Regulations
– Monitoring
– Quality of Service
The Business Model and Regulatory consultation is consid-
ering business models, revenue models, and regulatory regimes
needed to establish a successful vision. It is looking in depth at
the ELSA/EIP Thematic consultation [4] and further expand-
ing these business aspects. It is also looking at Member State
issues, interoperability and also cross stakeholder beneﬁts.
This work pack age overlaps many stakeholder and technology
issues such as privacy, ethics and standards.
D. Tools
The ambition of the SSEDIC thematic network, is to build
a community of high level European and international experts.
This community is being built via virtual tools such as a ded-
icated online workspace and online conferences as well as via
real live events integrated in the EEMA (European association
for eIdentity and security) [9] conference programme and other
major European events.
Our strength is the quality of our network individuals, not
just their afﬁliate organisations. Each of the experts is picked
for their knowledge of the eID or stakeholder domain rather
than just as representatives of organisations. This has been
a fundamental criterion for partners to ensure that the views
and consultations are of the highest value and relevance to this
highly important thematic project.
The network is composed by four groups of partners who
check and balance each other in their different sectors:
• Industry: who have strong contacts in the private sector
• Public sector: with access to government and local agen-
cies and stakeholders
• Academic partners: with critical reﬂections on industry
services and public sector requirements and interests such
as Erasmus students.
• Small and medium sized consultancies: who have strong
inﬂuence across all domains.
As much dedication and knowledge as persons can dedicate
to the SSEDIC network, there is a clear need for technological
tools to support them. Thus, SSEDIC has established a main
dissemination web site, http://www.eid-ssedic.eu/ with both
public and private areas for document and information sharing
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Government
Society
Business
Leisure
Finance
Transport
eParticipation
eHealth
Telecommunications
Media
Banking
Automotive
eJustice
eInclusion
Manufacturing
Culture/Arts
Insurance
Aviation
Law enforcement
Emergency Services
eCommerce
Sports
Intermediation
Shipping
Regulation authorities
Environment
FMCG/Retail
Adult content
Internet payment
Border control
Education
Food-chain
eGaming
Mobile payment
Local authorities
NGO’s
Agriculture & Fisheries
Social Networks
eConsumer
Figure 1.
Stakeholders Sectors Grouping
and download. Final results will be published in this web site
when available.
A second technological tool is an online social network
and community building one provided by one of the SSEDIC
partners, located at http://ssedic.syncsphere.com/. This tool is
used for discussions on the consultation process and allows
the network experts to share knowledge and opinions.
The third big technological tool is the on-line surveying one,
that has allowed the network to carry out a ﬁrst survey on eID
gathering input from 211 experts on the matter.
Of course, other tools such as email or teleconferencing are
also being used to coordinate the experts network.
Non technological tools like publications and presentations
in relevant events are also being used for the dissemination
and outreach of the SSEDIC thematic network.
E. Barriers
The SSEDIC thematic network identiﬁed four barriers that
could hinder its efforts and prepared mitigation actions:
1) Lack of response from stakeholders
A large, and increasing, number of experts minimises
this risk
2) Non-representative opinions
Minimised by carefully monitoring each sector
3) Lack of funds for in-depth citizen consultation
Mitigated by the use of online surveying tools
4) Contrary interests of stakeholders
Mitigated by already existing consensus for the need of
a common vision of eID and the wide involvement of
stakeholders in SSEDIC
IV. PROJECT FIRST YEAR
The project ofﬁcially started on December 15th 2010 with
the SSEDIC kick-off meeting. The main aims of this ﬁrst year
the project have been to:
• Introduce the project to all stakeholders;
• Make stakeholders aware of basic information regarding
the SSEDIC project
• Inform stakeholders of the portal as an information re-
source
• Help promote the project in conferences and other events
• Initiate interaction with stakeholders and receive feedback
and reactions about the project that will be used in media
relations and in designing the dissemination plan
• Promote participation of institutions and organisations
through the Project Forums and surveys in the portal
• Focus from the start on establishing a favourable reputa-
tion for the project and consortium
• Proﬁle a coherent identity of the project to each and every
one of the stakeholder groups
V. RESULTS
It must be emphasised that SSEDIC is a thematic network
for consultation and is not mandated to make decisions on
technologies. However it is envisaged that technical recom-
mendations and statements of Best Practice will be agreed
and presented among the ﬁnal outcomes.
A. Expected Final Outcomes
SSEDIC [8] ﬁnal outcomes should enable the European
Commission to instigate measures to allow Member States
fulﬁl the vision.
1
SSEDIC will create for each Stakeholder Sector
an electronically retrievable resource, containing the
main consultations, consensus and impacts. This
should enable the entire European Community to
conduct actions that will ultimately contribute to or
beneﬁt from the Single European Digital Identity
Community.
2
SSEDIC will create, at the technical level, an elec-
tronically retrievable road map of critical actions,
milestones and time lines. This road map will outline
how to achieve the vision of the Single European
Digital Identity Community.
3
SSEDIC will create a combined topological mapping
of all the Stakeholder and Technical Sectors, which
will be integrated into this single high level road map.
This mapping will ensure that role/responsibility di-
visions and expectations are clear to all stakeholders.
4
SSEDIC will create a combined impact assessment
summary, across all the Stakeholder and Technical
Sectors integrating all business and regulatory issues.
B. Achieved Results
Over its ﬁrst year of existence, the SSEDIC thematic
network has already been able to produce some good qual-
ity deliverables with interesting information, relevant. These
materials will be available on the main dissemination web
site, http://www.eid-ssedic.eu/, once they are presented to the
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

European Commission. We are not authorised to reveal the
contents until this presentation has occurred. The results will
be available under a Creative Commons license in order to
achieve as high an impact as possible.
Many of the partners have done presentations in sector
events as well as in institutional meetings like the Euro
Parliament or the International Telecommunications Union,
and events organised by network partner EEMA [9].
Each of the relevant work packages have produced a report
with information of the activities and consultations that have
been carried out in their area, interim reports and conclusions,
calls for action and future activities.
211 eID experts all over Europe where surveyed on items
about
• The impact (or not) of eID in a professional environment
• Their policy views on different aspects of eID
• The adoption of the eID technology in a business envi-
ronment
• Possible future business and governance models on eID
infrastructure
• Security and privacy aspects of eID
The results of this survey have already been processed and
transformed into a report that will also be presented to the
European Commission at the end of February 2012 and the
made publicly available at the SSEDIC main dissemination
web site, http://www.eid-ssedic.eu/.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The network start has not been an easy one because it is
difﬁcult to coordinate such a big and heterogeneous group
of people as busy as ﬁeld experts. But, the willingness of this
same group of people to collaborate towards a common vision
of eID in Europe, and beyond, has been key to a successful
start.
Work is already progressing as predicted and the ﬁrst results
have seen the light, though not yet, as the writing of the present
paper, general availability.
There are clear deﬁnitions for further work during the two
remaining years of the project into 2013 and ways to improve
what has already been done such as:
• More sector reports
• Surveys focused on different sectors
• Increase the level of discussion
• A big eID event involving all interested parties, stake-
holders and LSPs
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The present paper is not in any way personal work, it is
just a recount of the work done by the SSEDIC thematic
network consortium partners for winning a bid and to set
up the project, and the work of all partners, consortium and
associate, and other contributors to the consultations who have
given excellent input to the results achieved so far. Of course,
the authors would like to thank all of these people and also
those LSPs and CIPs that have paved the way for our network
to be a need.
REFERENCES
[1] N.
Kroes,
Every
European
Digital,
Neelie
Kroes
Blog,
URL:
http://blogs.ec.europa.eu/neelie-kroes/every-european-digital/ retrieved:
November 21st, 2011.
[2] European
Commission,
Digital
Agenda
for
Europe,
URL:
http://ec.europa.eu/information society/digital-agenda/index en.htm
retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[3] European Commission, Digital Agenda for Europe: key initiatives, URL:
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/10/200
&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
retrieved:
November 21st, 2011.
[4] ELSA Thematic Working Group on Electronic Identity Infrastructure,
European Large Scale bridging Action (ELSA/EIP): Electronic Identity
Management Infrastructure for trust worthy services, European Com-
mission, Directorate-General for Information Society and Media, URL:
http://ec.europa.eu/information society/activities/egovernment/docs/studies/els
a eid thematic report ﬁnal.pdf retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[5] STORK
project,
Secure
idenTity
acrOss
boRders
linKed,
URL:
http://www.eid-stork.eu/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[6] PEPPOL project, Pan-European Public Procurement OnLine, URL:
http://www.peppol.eu/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[7] SPOCS project, Simple Procedures Online for Cross- Border Services,
URL: http://www.eu-spocs.eu/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[8] SSEDIC project, SSEDIC: Building a Thematic Network for European
eID, URL: http://www.eid-ssedic.eu/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[9] EEMA, European Association for eIdentity and Security, URL:
http://www.eema.org/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[10] epSOS project, Smart Open Services for European Patients, URL:
http://www.epsos.eu/ retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[11] SEMIRAMIS project, Secure Management of Information across multi-
ple Stakeholders, URL: http://www.semiramis-cip.eu/ retrieved: Novem-
ber 21st, 2011.
[12] EHEA, European Higher Education Area, URL: http://www.ehea.info/
retrieved: November 21st, 2011.
[13] F.J. Aguilar, Scanning the business environment. Macmillan, New York,
1967.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

