Long-Term Risks of IoT Devices: The Case of the Smart Fridge
Erik Buchmanna,b
a Dept. of Computer Science, Leipzig University, Germany
b Center for Scalable Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence Dresden/Leipzig, Germany
Email: buchmann@informatik.uni-leipzig.de
Abstract—Replacing conventional devices with smart ones
has many advantages, e.g., a seamless integration of physical
objects into the user’s digital environment or improved modes of
use. However, if a conventional device is replaced by a smart
device, its IT components can cause risks, that shorten the
life of the device. Such risks stem from different life cycles of
embedded soft- and hardware, libraries and protocols used, and
the IT ecosystem required. This is problematic, because many
conventional household appliances, say, a fridge or TV, have a
much longer life span than typical IT equipment. In this paper,
we use a systematic approach to identify long-term risks for the
operational life span of a smart fridge. In particular, we identify
8 different use cases of three typical smart fridges, e.g., cooling
or managing ”best before” dates. We model the IT ecosystem
needed to run these use cases, and we inspect each asset in
this ecosystem for potential long-term risks. We found that even
cooling, the most basic use case, is at risk in the long run. This
is because the setting cooling parameters may depend on parts
of the IT ecosystem that are not under the user’s control. On
the other hand, we did not find any risk that may lead to harm
of the category ”threatening”. Our findings on the smart fridge
can be generalized to other smart devices easily.
Keywords—Internet of Things; Security; Risk Management
I. INTRODUCTION
Advances in hard- and software have led to the trend
to add sensors, computational resources and communication
interfaces to traditional consumer products, and to connect
them over the Internet to cloud services where an artificial in-
telligence approach interprets voice commands or enhance user
experience. Together, such smart devices form the Internet of
Things (IoT) [1]. In many cases, smart devices stem from non-
smart predecessors. For example, a modern smart refrigerator
looks and feels much like a classic non-smart refrigerator with
some extras, e.g., remote control and expiration management
for perishable foods.
Smart devices allow consumers to create smart homes with
devices that can be controlled remotely via smartphone, adapt
to the user’s habits, and provide convenient services locally or
on the Internet. However, media provide evidence that smart
devices might come with operational risks that occur well
after the time of purchase. With a familiar non-smart device
in mind, customers may not expect risks like Examples 1-3,
when choosing a smart device.
Example 1: The software of a smart device may have an
operational life-span that is much shorter than the life-span of
its hardware [2]. For example, without regular functional and
security updates, a smart TV soon becomes useless [3].
Example 2: Smart devices may be tied to a cloud service.
For example, after a third-party service provider ceased its
business, tens of thousands smart Internet radios became non-
functional [4] without warning in advance.
Example 3: Changes in the legislation may prohibit the
use of smart devices after years of operation. In Germany, for
example, a child’s smart toy [5] has been forbidden as a spying
tool, three years after it had been introduced to the market,
because it was not visible that the toy sends voice recordings
into the cloud.
In order to make smart devices accessible for risk manage-
ment, a comprehensive catalog of potential risks is required.
It is challenging to find a research method that delivers such
a catalog. For example, the results of a study [6] depend on
the insights of the study participants.
In this paper, we use smart fridges as a use case to compile
a comprehensive set of long-term risks that are (a) specific for
the smart fridge, i.e., do not exist for conventional fridges, and
(b) may materialize years after the fridge has been purchased.
We define our problem statement as follows:
Which specific risks for the continued long-term use of
a smart fridge may appear after purchase, but cannot be
expected from a conventional fridge?
We call a fridge a “smart fridge”, if it contains computa-
tional capabilities and data links, which are not essential for
the primary function ”cooling food products”. By “long-term”,
we refer to an operational life of >10 years, which can be
expected from a fridge’s hardware [7]. Intuitively, this may be
the expectation of a customer replacing a broken fridge.
In this paper, we adapt our research method from [8] to
methodically derive such long-term risks for a smart fridge
in a domestic environment. We have identified compliance
risks resulting from changing local, national or international
rules, economic risks from future business decisions of the
organizations involved, and operational risks considering the
technical perspective of operating a smart fridge together with
its IT ecosystem for more than 10 years. Due to our methodical
approach, we consider our set of risks to be complete for this
application scenario. We think that it can be easily adapted to
similar scenarios.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section II, we briefly
review related work. In Section III, we sketch our approach to
identify long-term risks of smart fridges. In Section IV, we use
this approach to obtain our set of risks. Section V concludes.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Router
Smart Fridge
End-User Device
Embedded Dev.
Embedded Dev.
Smart Phone
Environmental 
Sensors
Environmental 
Sensors
Camera
Camera
Network Interface
Network Interface
Network Interface
Operating System
Operating System
Operating System
Apps, Plugins etc.
Apps, Plugins etc.
Internet
External Dev.
Cloud Service
3rd Party Services
Home Network
Figure 1. IT Architecture
II. RELATED WORK
This section summarizes methods, standards and findings
related to our work. Design science research [9] is a method
to design an artefact from a knowledge base, and evaluate and
improve it in several rounds. Each round is divided into three
cycles: The relevance cycle specifies and refines the use cases
needed to construct the artefact and evaluate its applicability.
The rigor cycle builds a knowledge base from literature and
experience that is needed to evaluate the novelty and the
research contribution of the artefact. The central design cycle
iterates between building and evaluating the artefact, based on
information from the other cycles.
The BSI-Standard 200-3 [10] is based on IT-Grundschutz.
It defines a process that allows organizations to assess their
information security risks. In particular, the standard describes
how to identify, classify, consolidate, assess and treat risks.
Our concern is risk identification. In this respect, the standard
distinguishes risks that arise from elementary threats, e.g., fire,
theft, misconfiguration or manipulation, and specific threats
from specific use cases. The risk identification starts with the
modelling of the use cases. The risk catalog is then compiled
from the consolidated risks of the individual IT assets, which
are part of the model.
Advances in technology call for risk analyses before
adoption. However, risk analyses typically use a descriptive
research approach, focus on the current situation and/or have
a narrow perspective, e.g., on current IT security or return
on investment. For example, [11] reviews vulnerabilities of
smart devices in the consumer market. The risk assessment
approach in [12] considers the management of risk over the
past two years, but does not project into the future, e.g., when
security breaches remain untreated for a discontinued product.
A study [6] provides a holistic view on future IoT risks,
but a standardized questionnaire cannot provide a complete
overview on future risks. In consequence, existing approaches
that deal with IoT risks during the operational life of the
device [13] [14] do not consider that vendors may loose
interest in supporting discontinued products, or that it will
be hard to find experts to maintain outdated technology. [2]
uses threat models to assess risks due to discontinued services,
breaking updates, trade conflicts, etc., but it remains unclear if
this risk assessment is exhaustive for the devices in question.
In [8], we have defined a research method to identify long-term
risks that are specific for smart devices. Because this method
is fundamental for our paper, we will explain it in more detail
in the next section.
The long-term preservation of digital goods has been
extensively discussed [15] in the past years. The risks for
digital content [16] overlap with the risks of using an outdated
smart device in a modern environment. Examples are media
obsolescence and format obsolescence [16], i.e., the digital
object cannot be read with current devices due new media or
new formats. Security properties have been established with
protocols that are insecure now [17]. Digital objects, such as
dynamic web pages [18] or computer games [19], require a
complex execution environment.
III. HOW TO IDENTIFY LONG-TERM IOT RISKS
In this section, we briefly describe our research method,
which we have developed in [8]. Our method adapts BSI-
Standard 200-3 [10] so that it creates the knowledge base and
designs a risk catalog that fits into relevance and design cycle
of Design Science Research [9]. We use research literature to
foster the rigor cycle.
For this paper, we have extended two aspects of [8]: We
explicitly refer to an operational scenario (in our case: a
domestic environment) to assess the extent of potential harms
and damages. Furthermore, we do not add assets to our
infrastructure model that do not add specific risks for the smart
device in question, e.g., the Internet router or the electricity
supplier. In particular, we use the following steps:
1) Select typical devices and identify the use cases for these
devices in a given scenario. Model its IT infrastructure.
2) Determine under which conditions each asset in this
infrastructure operates as intended by the use cases.
3) Append this condition to the risk set, if it is not present
at purchase and doesn’t exist for non-smart devices.
4) Assess the harm the risks could cause, and consolidate
risks that are identical for multiple assets.
5) Back up each individual risk by literature.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

IV. LONG-TERM RISKS OF A SMART FRIDGE
In this section, we apply our research method from Sec-
tion III to identify a comprehensive set of long-term risks
associated with smart fridges.
Operational scenario: We base our analysis on a domestic
environment, where the fridge stores perishable food that
needs cooling and has a limited economic value. The user of
the fridge values the user experience more than privacy and
likes to use all technical possibilities of the digital services
offered by the smart fridge. The user can be expected to detect
spoiled food, but does not possess the IT-security knowledge
needed to detect cyber attacks on the smart fridge. Figure 1
illustrates the IT architecture for this scenario.
A. Device Selection and Use Cases
According to Step 1 of our research method, we select three
typical devices from the category ”Smart Fridge”:
1) Bosch KGN36HI32
2) Samsung RF27T5501SG
3) LG GSX960NEAZ
The Bosch KGN36HI32 can be controlled via the Bosch
Home Connect platform, which connects to Amazon Alexa
and other voice assistants and sends temperature alarms to
the user’s smartphone. It is equipped with internal cam-
eras, that monitor the cooled food products. The Samsung
RF27T5501SG provides similar technical features as the
Bosch fridge, but uses the Samsung product family: It contains
a Samsung Family Hub and connects to a voice assistant called
Bixby. In addition, it provides a large LCD screen with apps
and Internet access via WLAN, and an ice dispenser. The LG
GSX960NEAZ provides the smallest set of smart features: It
only controls fridge parameters and functions, such as defrost
and alerts, via LG smartphone app. But it does not contain
cameras, smart home hubs or LCD screens.
TABLE I. CATEGORIES OF USE CASES
Id
Name
Description
U1
Cooling
Storing and cooling food products.
U2
Monitoring
Monitoring the food storage via camera.
U3
Management
Managing food expiration and shopping lists.
U4
Shopping
Replenish food storage.
U5
Multimedia
Playing music, TV streams, Internet access.
U6
Remote
Remote control of cooling and alarms.
U7
Apps
Other apps, e.g., for searching wine temperatures.
U8
Updates
Functional upgrades or security updates.
To obtain typical use cases for smart fridges, we have
browsed the manuals and web pages of our selected devices.
Table I lists all use cases we have identified. Cooling (U1)
is the traditional use of a fridge. Monitoring (U2), manage-
ment (U3), shopping (U4) and remote control (U6) refer to
typical domestic requirements, which are now enhanced by
digital services. Smartphone apps control cooling parameters
and various alarms (opening, temperature, humidity), look
inside the fridge via cameras, and might also identify food
products that are used up or are close to its expiration date.
If the smart fridge is part of a larger smart-home solution, it
typically serves as a multimedia (U5) hub to deliver audio
and video streams to connected devices. Some smart fridges
allow further apps (U7), e.g., to manage recipes, to search for
optimal wine temperatures or to browse the Internet. Updates
(U8) are important to maintain the security and functionality
of the smart fridge during its operational life.
B. IT Infrastructure Model
TABLE II. CATEGORIES OF DEVICES
Id
Name
Description
A1
Smart Fridge
The smart fridge.
A2
End-User Dev.
Smartphone (WLAN), TV, smart speaker, etc.
A3
Cloud
Digital fridge services on the Internet.
A4
3rd Party Serv.
Digital smart home services on the Internet.
A5
External Dev.
Smartphone (LTE) or tablet (LTE).
Table II lists all categories of devices or appliances needed
to run the use-cases U1-U8. The smart fridge (A1) contains
an embedded computing device with network interface and
operating system. It may or may not also contain further
plugins and apps, e.g. a web browser. Some smart fridges are
equipped with internal cameras that monitor the stored food
products. Any smart fridge we are aware makes use of sensors
to monitor parameters, such as temperature and moisture. Both
end-user device (A2) and external device (A5) are used to
control any smart, digital service the fridge offers. Respective
devices include laptops, smartphones, tablets, smart TVs or
smart speakers. The difference between A2 and A5 is that
the external device connects via LTE, i.e., it uses a network
connection that leaves the home WLAN. Thus, we need to
model it separately. A3 refers to a cloud service that is bundled
with the smart fridge, and provides services tailored to the
fridge. For example, Bosch KGN36HI32 connects to Bosch
Home Connect. In contrast, A4 means any other 3rd-party
service, e.g., a smart-home system, a voice assistant or a
content-delivery network from a third-party cloud. Since our
focus is on the smart fridge, we leave aside the router.
TABLE III. CATEGORIES OF DATA
Id
Name
Description
D1
Sensor data
Video, audio, temperature, power consumption.
D2
App data
Data from apps installed on the smart fridge.
D3
Metadata
Timestamps, soft- and hardware versions.
D4
Configuration
Parameters, credentials, certificates.
D5
Telemetry
Device behavior, log information.
D6
Op. System
Software libs, updates, operating system data.
Use cases U1-U8 require the smart fridge to manage and
share 6 categories of data with devices A1-A5, as shown in
Table III. Sensor data (D1) includes any information delivered
by internal sensors of the fridge, e.g., video streams from an
internal camera or the temperature in the wine compartment.
App data (D2) refers to data managed by the various kinds
of apps executed on the smart fridge. Examples are the
user’s shopping lists, multimedia data from external parties or
expiration dates. Metadata (D3) is any information produced
by the operation of smart services. Examples include version
numbers, timestamps or patch levels of software libraries.
Configuration (D4) data stores parameters about how the use
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

cases should work. This means cooling parameters as well
as WLAN credentials or HTTPS certificates. Telemetry (D5)
means any information that is typically part of the log file
of the smart fridge, e.g., internal errors, defrost times, power
outage, and the like. Operating System (D6) refers to the
program code of the operating system and its apps, updates,
patches, libraries, etc.
TABLE IV. CATEGORIES OF ORGANIZATIONS
Id
Name
Description
O1
User
The user of the smart fridge.
O2
Vendor
The manufacturer of the smart fridge.
O3
Cloud Provider
The operator of the cloud service.
O4
3rd Party Provider
External cloud service providers.
O5
Other 3rd Parties
Other services.
The devices are operated by different parties, as shown in
Table IV. Since our problem definition focuses on specific
risks for a smart fridge, we leave aside the parties that might
cause generic risks. Such parties are the Internet provider, the
LTE provider or the electricity supplier. Large companies, such
as LG, have their own cloud infrastructure and cloud services,
like voice assistants used by the smart fridge. Thus, O2 and
O3 can be the same organization.
TABLE V. CATEGORIES OF NETWORK CONNECTIONS
Id
Devices
Int.
Pers.
Description
C1
A1-A2
✓
✓
smart fridge – end-user device
C2
A2-A3
✗
✓
end-user device – cloud
C3
A1-A3
✗
✓
smart fridge – cloud
C4
A3-A4
✗
✓
cloud – 3rd party cloud
C5
A1-A5
✗
✓
smart fridge – external device
Table V contains all categories of network connections we
need to consider. Note that all connections are bi-directional.
Column ”Int.” indicates that a connection transfers data within
the home WLAN. ”Pers.” means that a connection might
transfer data related to the activities or habits of a person.
TABLE VI. ASSET MATRIX
U. C.
Data
Devices
Connections
Orga.
U1
D1, D3-D5
A1
O1
U2
D1-D4
A1, A2, A5
C1, C5
O1
U3
D2-D4
A1-A3, A5
C1-C3, C5
O1, O3
U4
D2-D4
A1, A2, A4, A5
C1, C4, C5
O1, O4
U5
D2-D4
A1-A5
C1-C5
O1, O4
U6
D1-D5
A1-A3, A5
C1-C3, C5
O1, O3
U7
D1-D5
A1-A5
C1-C5
O1, O3-O5
U8
D2-D6
A1, A3
C3
O2
After having defined the categories of use cases, devices,
data, organizations and network connections we need to con-
sider, we can define an asset matrix (cf. Table VI). The asset
matrix tells which use case is tied to which IT asset. U1
(Cooling) is the only use case that does not need network
connections, other devices or other organizations. All other
use cases depend on an operational IT ecosystem.
C. Potential Harms and Damages
Table I allows us to devise four categories of potential harm,
as shown in Table VII. The categories are in line with [20].
Potentially, a smart fridge may produce threatening physical
or financial damages, e.g., from spoiled food or a violation of
legal regulations. Negligible harm could be a brief interruption
or malfunction of digital or cooling services.
TABLE VII. CATEGORIES OF POTENTIAL HARM
Category
Examples
negligible
Food spoils a bit earlier, digital services are unavail-
able for a short time, isolated false alarms.
limited
Fridge contents spoils, services are unavailable for
some time, many false alarms.
substantial
Permanent unavailability of digital services or cool-
ing results in a total economic loss, privacy issues.
threatening
High fines from violation of the law results in private
insolvency, severe sickness from food poisoning.
From Table VII we can derive the protection needs of
the data. In Table VIII, we have analyzed if an interruption,
interception, modification or fabrication of data has an impact
on integrity, availability or confidentiality. If this impact can
produce negligible or limited harm, the protection need is
normal. If it can be substantial, the protection need is high. If
the harm can be threatening, the protection need is very high.
TABLE VIII. PROTECTION NEEDS
Data
Integrity
Availability
Confidentiality
D1
normal
normal
high
D2
normal
normal
high
D3
normal
normal
high
D4
high
high
high
D5
normal
normal
high
D6
high
high
high
D1–D5 might allow to infer personal information, e.g.,
eating habits, preferred foods, the daily routine or if the user
is sick or on vacation. Thus, D1–D5 have ”high” protection
needs for confidentiality. The security of the user’s network
and the functionality of the fridge depend on D4 and D6. A
misconfiguration, a disclosure of passwords, a manipulated OS
update or an attacker knowing the patch-level of the software
might result in a substantial harm (cf. Table VII). Thus, D4 and
D6 have the protection need ”high” for all three dimensions. In
our domestic setting, a threatening harm is highly improbable,
and we do not assign the protection need ”very high”. This
may be different in other scenarios, e.g., if a hospital uses the
smart fridge to cool medications.
The protection needs are inherited from the data to each IT
asset managing the data, as listed in the asset matrix Table VI.
The maximum principle requires that an asset is assigned with
the highest protection need of all data it uses. For example,
the vendor’s cloud (A3) is part of the use case ”Update” (U8),
which includes data of the operation system (D6) with the
protection need ”high” for the protection dimensions integrity,
availability and confidentiality. Thus, even if A3 handles less
sensible data (D1 and D2), the protection need of A3 is ”high”
for each protection dimension.
From the asset matrix it follows that any device, network
connection and organization need to maintain a ”high” level
of protection for each dimension, because either D4 or D6 is
part of any use case. As consequence from the asset matrix,
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE IX. LONG-TERM COMPLIANCE RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Privacy
O2-O5
A2-A5
C2-C5
Changing legislation, new codes of conduct, etc. impose limitations on the
exchange of personal data with certain countries or parties [21].
Global Rules
O2-O5
A2-A4
C2-C4
New trade restrictions, sanctions, technology bans etc. restrict the use of an
asset from certain countries or parties [22].
Local Rules
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Local regulations, e.g., from environmental protection, consumer protection or
electromagnetic compatibility, restrict the use of an asset [23].
Expiration
O2-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Disagreements to common compliance standards, expired certifications or
approvals, non-renewed audits, etc., render the involved asset untrusted [24].
Concealment
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Unknown characteristics at time of purchase disallow the further use of an
asset, e.g., if it turns out that a build-in camera falls under espionage acts [5].
TABLE X. LONG-TERM ECONOMIC RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Degradation
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C4
The service quality of an asset might be reduced, e.g., to nudge customers into
new services by delaying updates or reducing performance of old services [25].
Licensing
O2-O5
A1, A3, A4
C2-C4
The revenue model might change. For example, an organization might switch
its services to a pay-per-use model for an asset [26].
Discontinuation
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C5
One of the parties involved discontinues its service or makes it unattractive to
use it from an economic point of view [27].
Liabilities
O2-O5
A3, A4
C2-C5
One of the parties involved discontinues its business, and its contractual
liabilities become void at once [28].
TABLE XI. LONG-TERM OPERATIONAL RISKS
Risk
Orga.
Devices
Connections
Description
Inflexibility
O1-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
Due to missing functional updates, it becomes challenging to connect an asset
to recent services or devices [29].
Unreliability
O2-O5
A1-A5
C1-C5
The service level in terms of reliability, throughput, etc. of the asset degrades,
e.g., due to reduced support for legacy products [30].
Unmaintainability
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Due to the use of outdated interfaces and closed-source components it becomes
difficult to find manuals, experts or spare parts to that maintain the asset [31].
Insecurity
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Without security updates and by using out-of-date security protocols, the asset
cannot be operated any more [30].
Defectiveness
O2
A1
C1, C3, C5
Modernizations in the IT ecosystem make technical debts of an asset visible,
e.g., if a network protocol uses bits that were reserved for future use [32].
it is problematic to use a smart fridge as a multimedia hub
in a smart home as well. Because the fridge runs services
with ”high” protection needs, the much less sensitive media-
playback service must be secured at level ”high” as well.
D. Long-Term Risks
After having identified the potential harms and the assets in
our IT ecosystem that need special protection, we can compile
IT-security risks. In order to obtain a comprehensive set of
risks, we inspect each asset (organization, device, connection)
in isolation, and we look for reasons why, at some point in the
future, the asset in question will no longer operate as it did at
the time of purchase. Recall that we are specifically interested
in long-term risks of the smart fridge. Thus, in line with Step 3
of our research method, we filter out any potential risk that
(a) is apparent at the time of purchase, or (b) is identical for
a traditional fridge and a smart fridge. For example, we do
not consider risks, such as the smart fridge is delivered with a
pre-installed virus in its operating system, or the cooling unit
fails after some time.
The resulting set of risks is long and repetitive, because
some risks materialize across different assets. For example,
licensing risks due to changing revenue models can affect
many assets and network connections at some time in the
future, and occur at multiple organizations. For this reason,
we need Step 4 of our research method to consolidate risks.
Tables IX-XI show our consolidated set of long-term risks
for 8 use cases for smart fridges. To our surprise, many of
those risks are identical to the risks, which we had exemplarily
identified for a single artefact (the network connection between
a smart device and a cloud server) in [8]. This confirms the
reproducibility of our research method.
We have structured our set of risks into three groups:
Long-term compliance risks are produced by changing local,
national or international rules and standards. Risks from this
group mean that using the smart fridge may violate regulatory
requirements in the future, even if it has fully complied with
them at the time of purchase. Long-term economic risks are
the result of future business decisions of the organizations
involved. Seven of the identified use cases require a complex
IT ecosystem, as shown in our asset matrix (Table VI). If an
organization ceases operation or moves to a different revenue
model in the future, the remaining IT ecosystem may no longer
able to support all use cases in an economic manner. This
also includes a pay-per-security-update model. Finally, long-
term operational risks consider the technical perspective
of operating a smart fridge together with its IT ecosystem
for more than 10 years. Operational risks include technical
challenges when trying to connect an outdated device to a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

new one, and maintenance issues due to missing experts and
spare parts for the IT ecosystem needed.
The tables only specify risks that impede a smart fridge,
even if the same risk may be also associated with other devices
in our IT ecosystem. For example, risk ”Unmaintainability” is
listed for device A1 (the fridge itself) and organization O2 (the
fridge’s vendor), although the same risk exists for any other
IT asset that is used for a decade or more.
Note that even ”cooling” (U1), the most basic use case, is at
risk in the long run. A smart fridge may have a reduced control
panel. Such fridges depend on the use case ”remote” (U6),
which needs an Internet connection to the vendor’s cloud and
a smartphone app. For example, the Samsung RF27T5501SG
requires the user to download the ”SmartThings” app and
register for the Samsung cloud with a personalized account.
V. CONCLUSION
When non-smart devices are replaced by smart ones, the
integrated IT components generate new risks, that may limit
the operational life-span of the smart device unexpectedly.
Such risks originate from different life cycles of digital and
physical objects, from changing legislation, from future busi-
ness decisions by the parties involved and from the technical
complexity of the IT ecosystem needed.
In this paper, we have compiled a catalog of long-term risks
for smart fridges. Our catalog consists of risks, which might
materialize years after the purchase. The risks are specific to
the smart device, i.e., we have omitted any traditional risk
that also exists for conventional fridges. Because we have
used a well-structured research method, we think that our risk
catalog is exhaustive for compliance risks, economic risks and
operational risks. Our risk catalog can be adapted to many use
cases and smart devices that use a similar IT architecture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Badr Aldin Saada for his outstanding
help and support with our risk analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, pp. 2787–2805, 2010.
[2] P. Zdankin, M. Waltereit, V. Matkovic, and T. Weis, “Towards Longevity
of Smart Home Systems,” in International Conference on Pervasive
Computing and Communications Workshops, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[3] B.
Schoon,
“Android
tv
needs
better
standards
for
long-
term
updates
and
support,”
https://9to5google.com/2019/08/29/
android-tv-long-term-updates-support/, 2019, retrieved: March, 2023.
[4] Frontier Nuvola Support, “Why did the service change on the 7th
may
2019?”
https://srsupport.frontier-nuvola.net/portal/en/kb/articles/
service-change, 2019, retrieved: 2020-06-10.
[5] V.
Gabrielle,
“It
sees
you
when
you’re
sleeping:
A
clash
of
privacy
and
play,”
https://www.governing.com/security/
it-sees-you-when-youre-sleeping-a-clash-of-privacy-and-play,
2022,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[6] L. M. Tanczer, I. Steenmans, M. Elsden, J. Blackstock, and M. Carr,
“Emerging risks in the iot ecosystem: Who’s afraid of the big bad smart
fridge?” in Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT-
2018, 2018, pp. 1–9.
[7] Statista, “Average life expectancy of major household appliances
in
2011
and
2022,”
https://www.statista.com/statistics/220020/
average-life-expectancy-of-major-household-appliances,
2023,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[8] E. Buchmann and A. Hartmann, “Identifying long-term risks of the in-
ternet of things,” in 14th International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous
Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM’20), 2020.
[9] A. Hevner and S. Chatterjee, “Design science research in information
systems,” in Design research in information systems.
Springer, 2010,
pp. 9–22.
[10] Bundesamt
f¨ur
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
“BSI
Standard
200-3:
Risk
Analysis
based
on
IT
Grundschutz,”
https://www.bsi.bund.de, 2017, retrieved: March, 2023.
[11] T. Alladi, V. Chamola, B. Sikdar, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Consumer
iot: Security vulnerability case studies and solutions,” IEEE Consumer
Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 17–25, 2020.
[12] M. Aydos, Y. Vural, and A. Tekerek, “Assessing risks and threats
with layered approach to internet of things security,” Measurement and
Control, vol. 52, no. 5-6, pp. 338–353, 2019.
[13] O. Garcia-Morchon, R. Rietman, S. Sharma, L. Tolhuizen, and J. L.
Torre-Arce, “A comprehensive and lightweight security architecture to
secure the IoT throughout the lifecycle of a device based on HIMMO,”
in Symposium on Algorithms and Experiments for Wireless Sensor
Networks, 2015, pp. 112–128.
[14] J. L. Hern´andez-Ramos, J. B. Bernab´e, and A. Skarmeta, “Army:
architecture for a secure and privacy-aware lifecycle of smart objects
in the internet of my things,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54,
no. 9, pp. 28–35, 2016.
[15] Digital Preservation Coalition, “Digital preservation handbook,” https:
//www.dpconline.org/handbook, 2015, retrieved: March, 2023.
[16] S. Vermaaten, B. Lavoie, and P. Caplan, “Identifying threats to suc-
cessful digital preservation: the spot model for risk assessment,” D-lib
Magazine, vol. 18, no. 9/10, pp. 1–21, 2012.
[17] H. M. Gladney, “Trustworthy 100-year digital objects: Evidence after
every witness is dead,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 406–436, 2004.
[18] G. Truman, “Web archiving environmental scan: Harvard library report,”
Digital Access to Scholarship at Harvard, 2016.
[19] J.
Andersen,
“Where
games
go
to
sleep:
the
game
preservation
crisis,”
https://www.gamedeveloper.com/business/
where-games-go-to-sleep-the-game-preservation-crisis-part-1,
2011,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[20] Bundesamt f¨ur Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, “BSI-Standard
200-2, IT-Grundschutz Methodology,” https://www.bsi.bund.de, 2017,
retrieved: March, 2023.
[21] K. McCullagh, “Brexit: potential trade and data implications for digital
and fintech industries,” International Data Privacy Law, vol. 7, no. 1,
p. 3, 2017.
[22] C. Ziye and L. Bin, “China-US High-Tech Competition, Trade Conflict
and Development Rights,” China Economist, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 66–73,
2020.
[23] Council of the European Union, “Directive 2012/27/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council on energy efficiency, amending Directives
2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and
2006/32/EC,” Document 02012L0027-20210101, 2021.
[24] Y. T. Mak, S. Carr, and J. Needham, “Differences in strategy, quality
management practices and performance reporting systems between ISO
accredited and non-ISO accredited companies,” Management Accounting
Research, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 383–403, 1996.
[25] D. A. Lyons, “Net neutrality and nondiscrimination norms in telecom-
munications,” Arizona Law Review, vol. 54, p. 1029, 2013.
[26] M. A. Cusumano, “The changing software business: Moving from
products to services,” Computer, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 20–27, 2008.
[27] M. A. Lemley and T. Simcoe, “How essential are standard-essential
patents,” Cornell Law Review, vol. 104, p. 607, 2018.
[28] A. Schwartz, “Products liability, corporate structure, and bankruptcy:
toxic substances and the remote risk relationship,” Journal of Legal
Studies, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 689–736, 1985.
[29] P. Mutchler, Y. Safaei, A. Doup´e, and J. Mitchell, “Target fragmentation
in android apps,” in IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. IEEE, 2016,
pp. 204–213.
[30] B. Ford, “Icebergs in the clouds: the other risks of cloud computing,”
in Hot Topics in Cloud Computing, 2012, pp. 2–2.
[31] L. M. D. Ferreira, A. Arantes, and C. Silva, “Discontinued products,” in
Conference on Operations Research and Enterprise Systems, 2017, pp.
210–223.
[32] P. Kruchten, R. L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, “Technical debt: From metaphor
to theory and practice,” IEEE Software, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 18–21, 2012.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

