The Creation of a Standardized Citizen Health Vocabulary 
A Linked Open Data and Semantic Web example 
Martijn Hartog 
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands 
m.w.hartog@hhs.nl 
Bert Mulder
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands
a.w.mulder@hhs.nl 
Abstract–The urgency behind this research is twofold. Firstly, 
the on-going development of an aging society could 
potentially lead to a 40% workforce reduction in the Dutch 
public sector, and with insufficient financing in the 
healthcare sector requires a participatory society in which 
citizens will need to start taking more responsibility 
regarding their healthcare. Secondly, we also live in an 
information society, which keeps developing itself. This 
brings new and innovative digital opportunities and 
information 
services, 
which 
potentially 
makes 
a 
participatory society viable. Yet, the development of such 
opportunities also brings new design requirements since 
systems world and life-world are converging. Based on an 
explorative study one of the requirements appeared the 
creation of clear conditions regarding the comprehensibility, 
usability and integration of such information technologies. 
More specifically, this would mean creating digitally 
accessible and usable terminologies in order for citizens and 
governmental bodies and professionals to work together for 
the quality of life. For healthcare this would mean creating 
so-called a citizen/consumer health vocabulary, a machine-
readable standardized list of terms which links ´lay-
language´ 
and 
the 
standard 
terms 
of 
professional 
terminologies. 
Keywords-participatory society; health; vocabularies; 
Linked Open Data; semantic web.
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Citizen health vocabularies are created to try to 
overcome the communication gap between patients and 
professionals, as the daily life-world of citizens is vastly 
different from the systems-world of professionals. 
Professionals use technical terms whilst citizens use lay-
language (their own “technical terms”). During face-to-
face communication, it is often possible to ask for an 
explanation of the technical terms used by professionals. 
However, online this is usually not an option. Online 
information is formatted in a “one-size-fits-all” package, 
based on the knowledge and opinions presented. If the 
patient lacks the means of understanding of technical 
terms this could lead to faulty associations or 
misinterpretations [1].  
 
Smith interprets the obstacle described above from 
two viewpoints, on the one hand there are patients who 
have difficulty understanding medical terminology and on 
the other hand, information systems designed specially to 
recognize, understand and process medical technical 
terms, have difficulty interpreting lay-language, since 
patients are generally not involved in the creation of 
(medical) 
terminology 
[5], 
whilst 
Dutch 
citizens 
themselves indicate that they'd like to be more informed 
about and more in control of their own medical records 
[6]. 
 
The advancement of technology in recent years, like 
Open Data, Linked Data and the Semantic Web has 
allowed us to have access to any information, anywhere, 
at any given time and make connections with other 
information / data for more adequate information and 
analysis. Large (amounts of) databases, websites, digital 
books, et cetera are all searchable with only a few actions 
needed.
 
Most of our searches are performed by known search 
engines, yet we don’t always get the best results/results 
we are looking for. Health is an important issue and if 
necessary citizens want and need qualitative results. A 
search result may fall short partly because the query is too 
vague or because the wrong search terms were used. 
Almost everyone wants to find information that is 
complete, relevant and reliable in order to rightly 
participate in realizing the quality of life for themselves 
and their environment [7].  
 
The digital communication between citizens and 
professionals has not been optimal up to now. Not 
professionally trained citizens may find difficulty in 
reading and understanding medical documents on the 
Internet and other medical information coming from 
healthcare professionals. At the same time, there are care-
related computer programs, applications, designed to 
handle only medical terminologies, which have difficulty 
interpreting expressions of citizens and accompanied care 
intentions.
 
The aim of this research is to explore the possibilities 
of citizen vocabularies and a possible design of a Dutch 
citizen health vocabulary in combination with semantic 
web technologies. On the base of the approach were two 
main aspects. One was an explorative and inventory 
research of current International initiatives of consumer 
health vocabularies, among others: the American open 
access, collaborative (OAC) consumer/citizen health 
vocabulary (CHV) [1][2] and the Italian Consumer 
Medical Vocabulary (ICMV) [3][4]. The other was a 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

conceptual study enriching patient friendly terms linked to 
SNOMED terms with the National competence Centre for 
standardization and eHealth (Nictiz) and the Dutch 
Patients and Consumer Federation (NPCF).  
 
In Section 3, we provide more context for the Dutch 
initiative and situation which created an urgency for this 
research. In Section 4, we reflect on the possibilities for a 
semantic citizen health vocabulary. In the last section we 
conclude with some discussion points we intend to 
continue upon in the research project. 
II. CONTEXT 
 
Before we explicate the possibilities for a citizen 
health vocabulary it is of importance to elaborate on the 
specific Dutch context in which the research was 
developed. In the following paragraphs we will emphasize 
on the development and different design requirements of 
digital citizens and the main challenges if the ‘systems 
world’ and the ‘life world’ converge in order to realize 
and manage functionality and participation. 
A.
The Dutch context 
 
Close to 100% of the population is connected to the 
Internet and more than 50% of them have access to 
broadband with speeds that are the highest in European 
benchmark studies. All people up to 75 years of age use 
the Internet regularly, mostly daily. Adoption of 
technology is pervasive, with many intensive users of 
Twitter and LinkedIn, the most web shops and the most 
online therapies per capita worldwide.  
 
At the same time the Dutch society is confronted with 
the transformation of the healthcare and welfare sectors, 
and moving towards a participatory society where citizens 
need to take care of themselves more than they have been 
used to. That transformation is partly due to financial 
reasons, but partly the consequence of demographics with 
the effects of an aging society (larger percentage of older 
people) with a smaller percentage of younger people [8]. 
The Dutch Ministry of Internal Affairs and Kingdom 
Relations predict that those compounded developments 
will cause a 40% reduction of employees in government 
by 2022 [9][10].  
B.
Digital citizens 
 
Citizens use digital means to take responsibility for the 
safety and quality of life in their environment. They may 
make reports digitally, develop ideas together digitally 
how to deal best with situations, decide using digital 
systems and organize the activities involved in 
maintaining quality and safety in their neighborhood or 
village. Their digital community systems are connected to 
all other stakeholders that might be involved in safety and 
quality of life – they may inform or alarm others to take 
action.  
 
Citizens in neighborhoods, towns, cities and regions 
have access to actual and recent data about safety and 
quality of life of their environment, integrated, analyzed 
and presented in an understandable way. The use of ICT 
by citizens in their daily life is fundamentally different 
from that of professionals: that creates very specific 
requirements for a digital society. The structural use of 
digital solutions by citizens means the shift from the 
‘systems world’ of professionals to the ‘life world’ of 
people in their day-to-day lives and environment. 
 
That citizens will become a dominant factor in the 
next phase of the information society is the expected next 
step in its development. Technology has become personal, 
prices have come down, communication is effortless 
which 
results 
in 
the 
development 
of 
integrated 
information infrastructures now centered around the 
citizen. This may sound self-evident but it is a new 
development without prior history. We actually have very 
little notion of the specific requirements that citizens have 
in their personal lives, even though we have spent years 
optimizing the usability of individual applications. But 
that is no longer sufficient and we need to direct our 
attention to the broader infrastructure supporting a digital 
nation, where people digitally coordinate their lives, work 
and activities together in smaller and larger groups. This 
development is characterized by three new challenges that 
set it apart from professional information infrastructures 
[8][9].  
C.
Main challenges 
 
Quality – people speak their own language. In our own 
lives we speak our own language. We may suffer from a 
stroke but not call it CVA (‘Cerebro Vascular Accident’) 
or TIA (‘Transient Ischaemic Attack’). We talk about 
money and not ‘liquidity’. People use their own language, 
where professionals need more precise terminology to do 
their work. For digital solutions to work for citizens, they 
need to speak the language of people. For health providers 
in a country that will mean that they - in order to 
communicate 
consistently 
and 
interoperable 
with 
consumers - should use a standardized consumer/citizen 
health vocabulary in order to realize understandable and 
usable information [11]. 
 
Complexity – diversity requires integration. The 
growing diversity of digital solutions in the household 
creates technical challenges, data inconsistencies and 
information overload. Products and services may be 
designed to work effectively for a single user, but often 
not to interoperate with the products and services of other 
providers. Healthcare apps generally don’t integrate their 
data with other apps. Government services provide 
individual services, often not integrated or providing a 
comprehensive 
overview 
of 
all 
interactions 
with 
government. 
 
Scale – networks require effective solutions. People 
live and grow in groups and networks. That is why 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

citizens need to be supported and empowered at a 
different scale than the individual. Digital solutions need 
to be effective at the level of groups, neighborhoods, 
towns, cities, regions and society. Their data need to be 
interchangeable and consistent and their services scalable 
and understandable at every level. 
 
By misinformation, patients can for example: 
misjudge their symptoms, take their medication wrong 
and could be inadequate to individually maintain a certain 
level of quality of life for themselves and others. Citizens 
and health care providers (and other sectors) may 
experience inadequate digital communication as a 
problem. But the problem at the moment is mainly present 
in western countries where there is an aging population, 
an increase in the use of ICT and less capacities for face-
to-face 
communication, 
with 
healthcare 
providers/professionals. 
III. HEALTH VOCABULARY AND SEMANTIC WEB: 
LESSONS LEARNED 
 
A semantic citizen health vocabulary (CHV) could 
lead to better understanding of health related issues and 
more efficient communication of these health related 
issues to, with and between patients. Moreover, such a 
vocabulary could also help to enhance search engines and 
could form the basis for automatic knowledge and advice 
[8][9]. As Smith and Wicks mention “consumers have 
gained increased access online to the literature of 
healthcare professionals, they have also formed their own 
powerful communities of expertise, and so the very notion 
of “expertise” has undergone expansion” [12].  There are 
numerous examples of online platforms in which citizens 
are able to share questions and answers related to shared 
interests and illnesses, like ‘PatientsLikeMe’. A CHV 
extends further: 
•
Recording and standardizing citizen terminology. 
•
Connecting terminology with systems-world. 
•
Referring to extra information or explanations. 
•
Adding qualities. 
•
Better disclosure and optimizing search results. 
•
Realizing automatic processing by machines. 
 
Much like creating thesauri or ontologies, CHVs 
include phases as connecting terminology, structuring 
accordingly 
using 
SKOS 
(Simple 
Knowledge 
Organization System) and RDF (Resource Description 
Framework) 
enabling 
standardized 
exchange 
of 
information and data. Afterwards, a CHV ontology 
structurally classifies categories, classes, subclasses, 
instances, individuals, properties creating ‘concepts’ that 
are machine-readable and interchangeable. In this way, 
knowledge domains can be mapped and qualities are 
defined, which in turn creates the possibilities to defining 
relations, 
characteristics 
and 
meaning 
of 
concepts/terminology [13] from a citizens’ point of view.  
 
SNOWMED for instance contains a systemically 
organized computer processable collection of medical 
terms (codes, terms, synonyms and definitions) merely 
used in clinical documentation and reporting, and doesn’t 
match communicating or integrating in services towards 
citizens. 
 
A possible function of a CHV is increasing the 
comprehensibility of medical information. An integrated 
CHV would increase the comprehensibility of for 
example electronic health records and personal health 
records, 
by 
linking 
patient-friendly 
terms 
with 
professional terms, as done with the International 
initiatives. Much like translation applications which are 
currently build upon CHV’s [2].  
 
Another possibility/function of a CHV is supporting 
the patient by providing the right words for describing 
their medical history, editing and reading their personal 
health records and during online consultations. The 
implementation of a CHV in personal health records 
ensures that such records are easily understood by the 
patient. Which in turn gives the patient a betters 
understanding of, and control over his/her own health. A 
personal health record is only useful for the patient, 
provided that the health information and associated tools 
are understandable and can form a base for action [4]. 
 
There are multiple ways to give shape to the concept 
of CHV. In essence, it’s about patient-friendly terms 
being “linked” to their professional counterparts. This 
means nothing more than an organized list of data in a 
machine-readable open file format. Such CHV’s are 
freely available and can be used by computer applications 
(e.g., search engines and translation applications). Once 
the patient-friendly terms are collected, this option would 
be relatively easy to develop. CHV’s open a world of 
possibilities, connecting them using semantic web 
technologies/linked open data. The added value of linked 
open data is the ability of machine-readability and usage 
combining other linked open datasets. It becomes possible 
to query extensively more data and adding uniform 
resource identifiers (URI’s), unique names, to entities will 
optimize 
search 
results 
and 
eventually 
enriches 
knowledge and analysis.  
IV. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
The development of a CHV is based on research 
which contains the information needs of the citizens and 
connecting them digitally with professional information. 
The 
challenge 
is 
to 
study/research 
how 
people 
communicate 
with 
each 
other 
in 
their 
own 
circles/environment, to capture the most common used 
terms, and then connect these terms with professional 
standards. Additionally, patient-friendly terms have to be 
sufficiently consistent: “The feasibility of developing 
useful CHVs relies on the fundamental question about the 
stability of lay health language. That is, are the health-
related forms, concepts, and relationships familiar to and 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

used by citizens sufficiently consistent to allow for the 
development of a useful vocabulary?” [1].  
 
A Dutch CHV would ideally make more extensive use 
of semantic web technologies. Moreover, it should 
include more focus on qualitative applicability in order to 
generate patient-friendly terms, allowing to generate 
relations between these terms and with the professional 
terms. Based on the explorative study of International 
initiatives it is very important that citizens and patients are 
actively involved in the creation and attribution of 
terminology for a CHV [14].  
 
As the resources for developing or translating 
professional terms are quite restricted an interactive 
process with a strong co-creation component could help 
intensify a truly patient-friendly consumer health 
vocabulary and will ensure the general applicability and 
sustainability of the vocabulary (Figure 1). 
Figure 1. Process patient-friendly citizen health vocabulary 
 
A healthcare vocabulary would give patients more 
control and possibilities for active participation with 
ensuring they are equipped and empowered for their 
quality of life. The design and development process of a 
digital environment for the collection, validation, linking 
of terms and relations can start directly. At the same time 
a further exploration of the realistic future possibilities of 
semantic web technologies is needed. More specifically, 
how a short term semantic CHV could be developed and 
enable automatic knowledge and advice (intelligent 
agents) in the near future [15]. After this is completed 
validation is required by domain professionals on the used 
technology, patient-friendly collection and standards. 
After a testing phase the CHV could be published and 
managed. Lastly, the integration in products and services 
will follow. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
This study on which the paper is build is part of an 
ongoing larger and broader exploration within the 
multiannual 
research 
and 
development 
programs 
‘Government of the Future’ and specifically the National 
program ‘Citizen Information Management’, of the 
eSociety Institute of The Hague University with the 
Municipality of The Hague, the Province of South-
Holland and VNG/KING (Quality Institute Dutch 
Municipalities), 
focusing 
on 
the 
possibilities 
to 
structurally engage and equip a participatory society in 
Public Administration and healthcare/welfare.
REFERENCES 
[1]
Q. T. Zeng and T. Tse, “Exploring and developing 
consumer health vocabularies” Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 24-29, 
2006 
[2]
Q. T. Zeng, S. Goryachev, H. Kim, A. Keselman and D. 
Rosendale, “Making texts in electronic health records 
comprehensible to consumers: a prototype translator” 
Annual Symposium Proceedings, American Medical 
Informatics Association, pp. 846, 2007 
[3]
E. Cardillo, “A Lexi-ontological Resource for Consumer 
Healthcare: The Italian Consumer Medical 
Vocabulary” Doctoral dissertation, University of Trento, 
2011 
[4]
E. Cardillo, “Medical terminologies for patients”, 2015 
[5]
C. A. Smith, “Consumer language, patient language, and 
thesauri: a review of the literature” Journal of the Medical 
Library Association, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 135, 2011 
[6]
Nictiz and Nivel, “eHealth-monitor”, 2015 
[7]
P. Becker, “Organize your information: Working with 
thesauri, taxonomies, tags and topics (in Dutch: Organiseer 
je informatie: Aan de slag met thesauri, taxonomieën, tags 
en topics)”, Leidschendam: Biblion, 2010 
[8]
B. Mulder and M. Hartog, “Digital Citizens | Digital 
Nations: the next agenda”, The Hague, 2015 
[9]
Dutch Ministry of Internal Affairs and Kingdom Relations, 
“The Great Departure (in Dutch: De Grote Uittocht)”, 2010 
[10] Dutch Ministry of Internal Affairs and Kingdom Relations, 
“The Great Exit revised (in Dutch: De Grote Uittocht 
herzien)”, 2013 
[11] Nictiz and Nivel, “eHealth-monitor”, 2016
[12] C. A. Smith and P. J. Wicks, “PatientsLikeMe: Consumer 
health vocabulary as a folksonomy” Annual Symposium 
Proceedings, American Medical Informatics Association, 
pp. 682, 2008 
[13] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness, “Ontology Development 
101: A guide to creating your first ontology”, 2008 
[14] N. Oudshoorn and A. Somers, “Constructing the digital 
patient: Patient organizations and the development of health 
websites” Information, Community & Society, vol. 9, no. 5, 
pp. 657-675, 2006 
[15] J. Fowler and E. Rodd, “The Ultra-Intelligent Electronic 
Agent is Coming”, 2012 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

