 
 
 
Emerging Smart World: Technologies, Concerns and Challenges 
 
Shaftab Ahmed1, Tamim Ahmed Khan2 
Department of Software Engineering 
 Bahria University, Islamabad, Pakistan 
1email: shaftab_2010@yahoo.com, 2 email: tamim@bahria.edu.pk  
Abstract – The penetration of smart solutions for ICT industry 
has revolutionized the outlook of modern society. Technology is 
in access of humans regardless of their knowledge and expertise 
level and beyond the social barriers. Advances in mobile 
communications and web engineering tools have given rise to a 
new social setup called Smart world. The smart cities support 
layered architecture abstracting the physical spaces and devices 
into virtual domains interconnected through ubiquitous 
infrastructure for information sharing and response systems. 
Social networking has been a widely accepted platform for 
communication and information sharing. The information 
regarding human behavior, requirements, likes and dislikes etc., 
collected through such networks, can be used for statistical 
analysis and taking intelligent marketing decisions by analysts 
and planners. Internet of Things has been the result of wireless 
sensor networks and intelligent devices. Big data analytics is 
needed to handle huge amount of data being generated 
continuously. The smart city projects have been intelligently 
designed to extract and present information to users through 
internet. While these new developments are interesting they pose 
a host of new challenges. Being human centric, the sensitivity 
and the concerns regarding information propagation and usage 
have to be carefully handled. We propose services architecture 
for a ubiquitous smart city built on SOA and cloud computing 
paradigms. The virtualization by core, essential and extended 
service layers will be used to address the issues like security, 
flexible 
information 
management, 
multi-tenant/ 
multi-
dimensional activities, ubiquitous data analysis and presentation 
for users in normal and emergency situations. 
Keywords- Internet of Things; Internet of Everything; Service 
Oriented Architecture; Ubiquitous city; Home Area Network; 
Service Level Agreement  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Historically, the cities and urbanization of human 
population was a result of innovative solutions to carry out 
business, cultural, social, economic or technical activities. For 
example, rail, roads, trains, automobiles, etc., facilitated 
communities to flourish in big cities. The driving force in the 
society today is ICT, having an important role in everyday life 
for 
education, 
business, 
leisure 
time, 
healthcare, 
entertainment, etc. The innovative growth in technologies has 
moved the data centers from physical to virtual cloud domain 
and human interactivity has become boundless due to social 
media and web based activities. We have smart phones, 
PDAS, all time available services and smart solutions which 
have affected our daily activities in all Sections of society. 
The concept of global village has engulfed entire society 
into a virtual reality. As a natural consequence of these 
developments, smart cities a new vision is rapidly emerging. It 
is a human centric concept starting with an interface device 
connecting to a large domain of electronically accessible 
information useful for interactive decision-making / planning 
for daily routine to any specialized and data / computation 
centric professional requirement. The driving forces for smart 
city development are: 
 
Resource conservation and optimization  
 
Peak demand management 
 
Public safety and emergency services 
 
Smart transport system 
 
Smart parking system 
 
Traffic intelligence sharing and management 
 
E-tolling for seam less revenue collection  
A smart city can be visualized into a layered architecture 
where physical spaces, buildings, enterprises, transport 
utilities etc., are abstracted into city systems layer through ICT 
infrastructure [1]. The multidisciplinary and multi domain 
connectivity over the internet is used for information sharing, 
analyzing and decision support systems. The concept of 
Internet of Things (IOT) coupled with wide adoption of web 
technologies by communities of users [2] has led to smart 
solutions manageable through remote connectivity. Internet of 
Everything (IOE) is the new concept of future development. 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) has helped in making 
city systems ubiquitous and pervasive [3]. Smart homes are 
equipped with intelligent electronic and web aware systems to 
handle routine matters along with emergency situations. The 
smart city data contains a variety of information which has to 
be maintained in big repositories accessible through searching 
and browsing tools. The service model for systems involved 
requires features of discovery, security and service 
engagement through a service level agreement (SLA) [4].  
World Health Organization (WHO) reported that half of 
world population is residing in cities or urban areas. The cities 
are rapidly becoming crowded and projections show that 60% 
of world population will be residing in urban areas in 2030 
expected to rise to 70% in the year 2050 [1]. The metropolitan 
managers and municipalities are trying to overhaul their 
systems for every walk of life to meet the challenges and 
demands of an intelligent world. Various technologies 
available in ICT domain are being used for this etc., while 
portable solutions through mobile devices provide fast and 
easy access; big data analytics [5] are being developed to 
intelligently service user requests through cloud services [6]. 
The 
proposed 
solutions 
provide 
anytime 
anywhere 
connectivity for voice video and text processing. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
Urban mashups combine various data and technologies to 
enable smart city projects for transport, health, sanitation, 
tourism, etc. The innovators customize these solutions to meet 
local cultural and geographical needs of a community [7]. 
Many model city authorities are releasing open data for 
interaction with individuals, community organizations and 
businesses. For this purpose, APIs are developed to enable 
technologists and developers to interact with open databases 
[8]. Initially, they are focusing on machine-readable access to 
static data held by city authorities. To make the systems 
interactive, transactional APIs are expected to come into play 
soon. Such APIs will require the properties like atomicity, 
consistency, isolation and durability (ACID). 
In Section 2 we review the related work, followed by 
technologies and foundations of a smart city in Section 3. The 
challenges faced by developers are discussed in Section 4. The 
technical vision of the smart city project for Islamabad, capital 
of Pakistan, has been presented in Section 5. We conclude the 
paper in Section 6 emphasizing the requirement of regulation 
and forensic data management in smart city project.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Digital cities have evolved with the growth of web 
applications, broadband networks and information systems 
providing the knowledge base. The urban environments are 
highly demanding hence the evolution of smart city concept 
has become the rapidly developing need of human society. 
The Home Area Networks (HAN) are common in many cities 
[9]. They provide all time connectivity and management 
capability while at home or from a remote location. While it 
is a luxury for normal citizens it is a big advantage for the 
aging or handicapped citizens to manage their day to day 
activities without full time support. Most of them have server 
based connectivity to the data centers, which pose problems 
of scalability and interoperability. It is more appropriate to 
use Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) and Internet 
connectivity through WiFi or WiMax support [10].  
Smart grid concept is based on three layers of activities, 
i.e. infrastructure, communications and applications [11]. The 
metering of various utilities is done through smart meters and 
grids. Service Oriented Architectures [12] are evolving to 
take intelligent decisions autonomously to feed the smart 
grids. Such solutions are scalable and interoperable due to 
intermediate software layers to provide flexibility in 
implementation of services across hardware and software 
platforms. These services can be used to integrate 
applications with low development costs. The ubiquitous 
networking and internet enabled devices have promoted 
developers to provide smart solutions for our day to day 
activities [13]. Hence, a new name U-cities is often used for 
smart cities [14]. These services require interoperability, 
scalability, extendibility and seamless mobility features. 
However a number of concerns are yet to be addressed; for 
example, vulnerability of software services is critical. Some of 
the weak areas in software deployment may pose serious 
security problems in smart city projects [15]. A few of these 
issues are as under: 
 
Wide exposure of community systems in smart city 
projects may be a source of malicious activities  
 
Lack of exhaustive security testing of software 
components by all the participants 
 
Lack of emergency response team to handle problems  
Intelligent devices can communicate freely generating large 
amount of data in the wake of new technologies under the 
Internet of things (IOT) concept [2]. The variation in data 
collected and its presentation requires multi modal handling 
through intelligent data presentation services [16]. The data is 
aggregated, processed for knowledge and event extraction 
before forwarding to other federating active nodes 
III. 
FOUNDATIONS OF A SMART CITY 
A smart city is composed of systems deployed with 
multiple technologies in hardware and software. The 
ubiquitous availability of information is expected to improve 
quality of life by providing knowledge-based data collection 
and presentation through various devices ranging from cell 
phone, tablet to laptop [17].  
A smart city is capable of monitoring and managing 
critical resource parameters through ubiquitous services. 
These parameters may be related to physical domains like 
airports, bridges, roads, railway stations, subways, sea ports, 
etc. The aim is to optimize resource utilization, increase 
efficiency and security [18] [19]. Beside normal operation, 
disaster management aspects along with service delivery 
form an important component of a smart city [20]. The 
software architecture and enabling technologies for smart city 
projects discussed in various research papers and reports 
referred have been used to form conceptual outlay presented 
in Figures 1-3. For this purpose we propose to use agent 
based model using SOA and ubiquitous cloud services. 
 
Figure 1.  
Smart City concept 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Functional layout of smart city systems and components 
 The availability of smart phones and network aware devices 
has changed the outlook of human society substantially. To 
lay the foundation of a smart city ubiquitous data 
management is a core concept. Data is dynamically collected 
through wireless sensors, meters, personal devices, etc. [21]. 
Success of a smart city architecture hinges on sustainability 
under various internal and external factors. The citizens are 
connected through social networks who share knowledge of 
common interest [22]. They form digital communities which 
eventually lead to the smart city concept. Some of the 
requirements of a smart city are [23] [24]: 
a) Development of broadband infrastructure to provide 
integrated solutions 
b) Deployment 
of 
embedded 
systems 
for 
data 
acquisition from smart sensors, activators, etc. 
c) Continuous, real time data propagation, management 
and issuing alerts when required 
d) Web based and 
social network applications 
providing collaborative data collection and sharing 
e) Intelligent sharing of resources and self-decision 
making capability 
Innovative smart home and office management techniques 
have been used for lights, fans, air-conditioning along with 
finger print sensors, smart windows, doors, etc. [25]. Home 
security systems including urgent response in case of fire or 
medical emergency are the basic community requirements of 
modern living [26]. The complexity of human behavior in 
various cross Sections of population require smart solutions 
which range from intellectuals, workers, children at schools 
and citizens requiring medical care [27]. Some aged persons 
require continuous monitoring and healthcare remotely 
managed from the caring hospital through smart sensors and 
ubiquitous connectivity. Some of the inputs required for this 
purpose include: 
 
Network infrastructure  
 
Information propagation 
 
Data management and privacy 
 
Collective intelligence 
 
Interoperability 
 
System safety 
The 
infrastructure 
requires 
sensor 
networks, 
mobile 
communications, digital imaging devices and cameras, 
remote 
monitoring 
and 
servicing, 
replacement 
of 
conventional hardware with innovative new generation of 
smart devices [28] [29]. 
IV. SMART CITIES AND THE CHALLENGES 
Digital 
systems 
and 
Information 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) are being extensively used in the 
enterprise systems today. These systems have been 
implemented using different platforms using different data 
types and structures. The biggest challenge for developers of 
smart city is to provide a platform from where these systems 
can be seamlessly accessed. Distributed object oriented 
technologies like CORBA, J2EE, COM / DCOM verses 
Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) are the two main 
approaches to lay the framework for a smart city. The loose 
coupling between participating systems under SOA is 
significant because it allows their interaction without the 
consideration of software platform and its physical location. 
SOA has much higher efficiency in integration of information 
systems hence it is the most favored technology used in the 
smart cities projects like Berlin, Boston, Toronto, New York 
and Dubai. 
Smart cities combine ICT and Web 2.0 technologies to 
allow interaction in the society which are above the closed 
city management domains. Innovative solutions are being 
designed to improve sustainability and quality of life. The 
fast moving social systems and job commitment bind the 
humans to regular schedules with little flexibility. In this 
situation social networking has brought human society in 
closer ties and social engagement, often termed as digital 
society. However, lack of awareness among participating 
communities regarding security, social issues and potential 
misuse of information by intruders pose serious problems. 
For example using e-Healthcare services may require a 
patient to provide his personal information beyond the basic 
identity leading to a number of problems. Firstly the user may 
not be aware of the vulnerability of information and secondly 
the service provider may mismanage or expose it to other 
parties leading to security issues. To handle such situations 
regulatory procedures have to be carefully designed. 
The basic issues to be considered for smart city are energy 
consumption, waste management, pollution, control urban 
traffic congestion, security, social integration and healthcare 
especially for elderly population. In the modern cities where 
the population concentration is increasing, the disaster and 
emergency handling has assumed great importance [33]. 
Smart city concept has caught the eye of developers and 
solution providers and a number of big cities are investing a 
lot to build smart systems. The ICT experts are working hard 
to provide widely acceptable solutions to the following 
issues: 
 
Smart city should provide ubiquitous services 
through sustainable, trustworthy and secure model  
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
A wide agreement on commercial and service 
invocation procedures is required 
 
To overcome institutional resistance particularly in 
current bureaucratic city management systems [31]. 
 
User friendly discovery, identification and use of 
services 
 
Interoperability of services with possibility of reuse, 
combining into new services and creating mashups 
[32] 
 
Information management with suitable measures to 
avoid misuse [33]. 
 
Customer 
privacy 
management 
with 
suitable 
forensic data [36] 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems are the 
requirement for building a viable smart city. Figure 3 shows 
service layers of a smart city using a model ERP system. 
 
Figure 3.  
Service layers of a smart city to model an ERP system 
The data management in various factions like vehicle 
registration, 
resident’s 
registration, 
Electronic 
Patient 
Records (EPR) in hospitals /clinics are not easily accessible 
with a single window operation [34] [35]. Instead they 
require institutional verification to access sharable resources. 
Some methods have to be evolved through a Certificate 
Authority (CA) at city level to allow access to sharable 
resources through one level of authentication. So that the 
smart solutions do not end up with unnecessary delays 
defeating the purpose of smart solutions. At the same time it 
is important that suitable forensic data should be generated so 
that the information misuse may be avoided [36]. 
V. 
AGENT BASED MODELLING OF A SMART CITY 
Service 
oriented 
architecture 
provides 
location 
independence, mobility, scalability and efficient integration 
of services model. The SOA uses a registry through which 
the services are offered to the clients under a policy. 
Ubiquitous intelligent services architecture for smart cities is 
built using agent based modeling techniques feeding the 
federated and abstracted cloud servers [3]. The web based 
Service Oriented Architecture is used to knit the dynamic 
requirements of clients with the dynamic databases. In a 
smart city agent-based modeling methodology is used to 
simulate behavior of people, business, weather, traffic, etc., 
Agents exhibit features like autonomy, heterogeneity, 
reactive or proactive behavior. They enjoy bounded 
rationality, instructiveness, mobility and capability to adapt to 
dynamic variations of data, environments along with taking 
suitable decisions under a policy. Development strategy for 
smart city project components using SOA is presented as 
under. We conclude the Section with a smart city model 
proposed   
A. Requirements of a smart city 
The smart city projects are being built by using ICT and 
Web 2.0 tools. Some of the requirements for purpose are: 
 
Information mobility 
 
Knowledge sharing and sustainable life cycle 
 
Collaboration between participating systems.  
B. Smart City Data Flow model 
Typical data flow model in a U-city can be visualized as 
under: 
 
Registry management for services offered 
 
Data acquisition, analysis and presentation  
 
Data sharing through interactive tools 
 
Data archiving and security management 
 
Data transport across various domains 
 
Data collection and aggregation 
 
Data acquisition classification and recording 
C. Technologies available Cloud and SOA 
NIST has defined Cloud computing as a model to enable 
ubiquitous, convenient, on demand network access to 
shared resource pool that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released 
with 
minimum 
overheads 
[37]. 
The 
virtualization of resources has led to the IaaS, PaaS, SaaS 
etc., as the building blocks. SOA is based on enterprise 
system approach, the benefits offered include: 
 
Language neutral integration 
 
Component reuse 
 
Organizational agility 
 
Layered system approach for system integration, i.e., 
abstraction, loose coupling, encapsulation through 
clear / unambiguous interface specifications 
While both the Cloud and SOA approaches have an 
overlap they are different in many ways for example: 
 
SOA 
is 
fundamentally 
enterprise 
integration 
technique making system integration easier 
 
SOA offers language neutral software layers 
 
Cloud computing covers the entire stack of hardware 
through presentation layer. SOA is often used for 
software services within cloud framework 
 
Cloud computing offers many IT functions as 
commodities and are less costly 
 
SOA can be pursued independently or concurrently 
with cloud to complement each other   
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
D. SOA for a model smart city - Our Proposal  
We propose a service based smart city architecture; the 
services are classified into core, essential and extended 
services. Our proposal is shown in Figure 4. A smart city 
must provide healthcare services in a manner that data 
regarding all major infirmaries and hospitals with specialties 
is available online. Any city council registered person can 
visit a doctor online by booking an appointment and getting 
his medical advice. He can also arrange an appointment and 
physically visit the doctors in case physical examination / 
assistance is required. In the prior case, general practitioner 
(GP) can order prescribed medicine for the patient, which 
gets delivered automatically.  
 
Figure 4.  Proposed service based smart city model 
We propose education services such that the users, i.e., the 
habitants can find out catchment areas, consult teachers and 
view progress of their children online, see which of the 
schools are doing better. This would pose a requirement on 
the city council of smart city to provide such interfaces for 
healthcare and education services. Moreover, council would 
also require managing basic amenities of life such as 
electricity, water management and providing an interface 
where the users would be able to make use of such services. 
We propose a component based architecture in such a way 
that a mobile interface as well as a web interface is provided 
through responsive web system that interacts with services 
that are launched. A block diagram is shown in Figure 5.  
Once core services are provided in a smart city application, 
essential services including traffic management, complaints 
and waste management will be considered. The travelers can 
find out, which traffic routes are facing congestion at a 
certain time? Similarly traffic may be managed avoiding 
places of congestion in an automated manner. Another aspect 
of this service is to provide interface for geo-tagging where 
incidents could be automatically reported.  Complaints 
management would also be supported in a manner that an 
automatic complaint registered is to be provided with a 
comprehensive tracking system. This system would also 
provide task management system such that the remedy 
providing sectors can view the complaint, take action and log 
their results.  
 
Figure 5.  Component-based architecture of proposed services 
Finally, a set of services called extended services include 
security provision with the help of monitoring through 
cameras. The system would allow the users to log issues and 
see what safety measures are there in all parts of the smart 
city. We also propose a set of revenue services, which allow 
payment of utility bills such system and service providers use 
same frontend. This set also includes interfaces for social 
services such as hiring of taxis, booking of places in hotels 
etc. Our proposal would also provide a set of services where 
users would also be able to choose from a range of services. 
Figure 6 shows a conceptual view of the ubiquitous services 
architecture for a model Smart city. 
 
Figure 6.  Smart city model with ubiquitous services  architecture 
We plan to develop a prototype of smart city project for 
Islamabad, Pakistan to exploit the initiatives taken for IT 
infrastructure of the country. Some of the Sections we will 
cover initially include: 
 
Healthcare 
Service 
Education 
Service 
Basic 
amenities 
Service  
… 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
e-Government 
 
e-Healthcare 
 
e-Utility services and revenue collection 
 
e-Disaster management 
 
e-Education  
 
e-Traffic management 
 
e-Municipal management and civic services  
 A mobile application ISPAK will be developed to access 
the smart city, Islamabad through an internet aware device. 
The session will start with city information and important 
announcements. For example a request for blood donation 
may be displayed to catch immediate attention. 
Our approach is to develop a software framework at Bahria 
University, to demonstrate the functionality and then proceed 
for full scope development. For this purpose the government 
departments and software developers will be invited to 
deliberate SLA to provide inputs for data sharing and 
aggregation, security, availability and other important issues. 
On the technology side we will use the SOA and ubiquitous 
cloud services as shown in Figure 6.        
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The implementations of smart city projects have energy 
saving in operational and capital investment. The SOA will 
support management and maintenance of city systems and 
activities in a widely acceptable perspective. To have a good 
impact of smart solutions the system integration in service-
oriented architecture will allow information access and secure 
data exchange with forensic data bypassing the legacy 
protocols. The smart city projects are expected to increase 
productivity as the human interactivity with them has become 
ubiquitous and boundless. They are accessible through 
mobile applications available on mobile devices as well as 
through conventional Internet access through LANs.  
The issue of integrating ICT solutions for technical and 
non-technical communities of users across various live 
activities is of prime importance in a smart city project. The 
privacy and regulatory mechanisms required in various 
factions may be significantly different. For example 
healthcare, smart grid or traffic management may have very 
different logistics to handle. Hence, bureaucratic, privacy and 
regulatory challenges for disparate services to be presented to 
various communities in service oriented architecture has to be 
addressed to meet the expectations of end users.    
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Chourabi, T. Nam, S. Walker, J. Ramon, G. Garcia, S. Mellouli, K. 
Nahon, H. Scholl, “Understanding Smart Cities: An Integrative 
Framework”, 45th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences 2012 
[2] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswamia, “Internet of 
Things (IoT): A Vision, Architectural Elements, and Future Directions” 
Future Generation Computer Systems, Volume 29, Issue 7, September 
2013, Pages 1645–1660, doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010 
[3] S. Hashemi and S. Hashemi “A Novel Service Oriented Architecture 
For Integration of Information Systems In Electronic City”, 
International journal of scientific & technology research volume 1, 
issue 11, december 2012 ISSN 2277-86166 IJSTR 2012 www.ijstr.org 
[4] P. Wieder and J. Butler, “Service Level Agreements for Cloud 
Computing”, ISBN 978-1-4614-1, e-ISBN 978-1-4614-1, DOI 
10.1007/978-1-4614-1, Springer New York, USA, 2011 
[5] I. Ibrahem, N. Anaur, A. Ghani, and E. Ahmed, “The role of big data in 
smart city”, International Journal of Information Management, May 
2016, DOI: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.002 
[6] C. Sagawa, H. Yoshida, R. Take, and J. Shimada, “Cloud computing 
based 0n service oriented platform”, Fujitsu Sci. Tech. J., Vol. 45, No. 
3, pp 283-289 July 2009 
[7] R. Florida, “Cities and creative class”, City and Community, March 
2003 American Socialogical association  
[8] Orchestrating infrastructure for sustainable Smart Cities, International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) ISBN 978-2-8322-1833-4 
[9] S. Verma and N. Gupta, “Microcontroller-based Wireless Heart Rate 
Telemonitor for Home Care”, IOSR Journal of Engineering (IOSRJEN) 
ISSN: 2250-3021 Volume 2, Issue 7, pp 25-31, July 2012, 
www.iosrjen.org,  
[10] A Milenkovie, C Otto, and E Jonanov, “Wireless Sensor Networks for 
Personal Health Monitoring issues and implemenation”, Electrical 
Engineering Department, University of Alabama n Huntsville Elsevier 
2006 
[11] R. Lin, “The Smart Grid: A World of Emerging Technologies Analysis 
of Home Area Networks”, The Wharton School, University of 
Pennsylvania  Mack center for technological innovation, July 2011 
[12] L. Ngo, "Service-oriented architecture for home networks”, TKK T-
110.5190 Seminar on Internetworking 2007-3-4/5 Helsinki University 
of Technology, Finland 
[13] S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities, How cities can 
lead the way into a prosperous and sustainable future”, IBM Global 
Business Services GBE03227-USEN-00, 2009 
[14] L. Anthopoulos and P. Fitsilis, “From Digital to Ubiquitous Cities: 
Defining a Common Architecture for Urban Development”, vol. 00, no. 
, pp 301-306, 2010, doi:10.1109/IE.2010.61  
[15] C. Cerrudo, “ An Emerging US (and World) Threat: Cities Wide Open 
to Cyber Attacks”, IOActive Labs 2015 
[16] Cyber-Physical Systems: Situation Analysis of Current Trends, 
Technologies, and Challenges , Energetics Inc. for NIST National 
Institute of Standards and technology March 2012 
[17] C. Baker et al, “Wireless Sensor Networks for Home Health Care”, 
21st International Conference on Advanced Information Networking 
and Applications Workshops, California 2007 (AINAW'07) IEEE 
Computer Society 
[18] B. Bajracharya, D. Cattell, and I. Khanjanasthiti, “Challenges and 
Opportunities to Develop a Smart City: A Case Study of Gold Coast 
Australia”, Proceedings REAL CORP 2014 Tagungsband 21-23 May 
2014,Vienna, Austria. http://www.corp.at ISBN: 978-3-9503110-7-5 
[19] Smart Cities and Infrastructure, UNCTAD report by United Nations 
Commission on Science and Technology for Development, Inter-
sessional Panel 2015-2016 11-13 January 2016 Budapest, Hungary  
[20] J. Lee, S. Baik, and C. Lee, “Building an Integrated Service 
Management Platform for Ubiquitous Ecological Cities”, Computer, 
vol. 44, no. , pp 56-63, June 2011, doi:10.1109/MC.2011.131 
[21] M. Batty, K. Axhausen, F. Giannotti, A. Pozdnoukhov, A. Bazzani, M. 
Wachowicz, G. Ouzounis, and Y. Portugali, “Smart cities of the 
future”, Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 214, 481–518 (2012) DOI: 
10.1140/epjst/e2012-01703-3  
[22] Science, technology and innovation for sustainable urbanization, 
United Nations conference on trade and development (UNCTAD)  
Report No. 10 UNCTAD/DTL/STICT/2014/2 
[23] T. Nam and T. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with Dimensions of  
Technology”, Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Conference 
on Digital Government Research pp 282-29, ACM 978-1-4503-0762-
8/11/061(2011) 
[24] M. Al-hader, A. Rodzi, “The smart city infrastructure development & 
monitoring”, Theoretical and Empirical Researches in Urban 
Management (TERUM) Page 87-94 
[25] D. Toppeta, “The Smart City vision: How Innovation and ICT can 
build smart, liveable, sustainable cities”, The Innovation Knowledge 
Foundation (IThink) Report 005/2010 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
[26] A. Patil and R. Patil, “A Review: Smart Home System and Extension to 
Smart Buildings with Security Feature”, International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Electrical Electronics and Instrumentation 
Engineering Vol. 5, Issue 3, DOI:10.15662/IJAREEIE.2016.0503029 
pp 1375-1378, March 2016 
[27] B. Hamed, “Design & Implementation of Smart House Control Using 
LabVIEW”, International Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering 
(IJSCE) ISSN: 2231-2307, Volume-1, Issue-6, January 2012 
[28] M. Al-Hader, A. Rodzi, A. Sharif, and N. Ahmad, “Smart City 
Components 
Architecture2009 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computational Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation, IEEE 978-0-
7695-3795-5/09, DOI 10.1109/CSSim.2009.34 
[29] A. Crooks, “Exploring cities using agent-based models and gis”, ISSN 
1467-1298 Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis University College 
London, www.casa.ucl.ac.uk 
[30] Z. Alazawi, O. Alani, M. Abdljabar, S. Altowaijri, R. Mehmood, “ A 
Smart 
Disaster 
Management 
System 
for 
Future 
Cities”, 
WiMobCity’14, 
August 
11, 
2014, 
Philadelphia,USA. 
doi.org/10.1145/2633661.2633670 
[31] Z. Ebrahim and Z. Irani, “E-government adoption: architecture and 
barriers” Business Process Management Journal, Vol. 11 Iss 5 pp  589–
611, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14637150510619902, 
Information 
Systems Evaluation and Integration Network Group, Brunel University, 
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UK 
[32] D. Dell’Aglio, I. Celino, and E. Valle, “Urban Mash-ups”, ISBN: 978-
3-642-36402-0 (Print) 978-3-642-36403-7 (Online) 2013 
[33] D. Dey, “India's Smart Cities Mission: The Beginning of Corporate 
Takeover of the Nation State”, Frontier Weekly, November 24, 2015, 
doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2693468 
[34] Smart Cities Mission Statement & Guidelines Government of India 
Ministry of Urban Development (June, 2015) 
[35] I. Prasad, “Smart Grid Technology: Application and Control”, 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics 
and Instrumentation Engineering Vol. 3, Issue 5, pp 9533-9542, May 
2014 
[36] M. Taufik, R. Mahmod , A. Ghani, M. Abdullah, and A.  Sultan, 
“Advances in Computer Forensics IJCSNS International Journal of 
Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.8 No.2, Feb. 2008 215 
[37] S. Kuwari and S. Wolthusen, “ Forensic tracking and mobility 
prediction in vehicular networks”, Advances in Digital Forensics VI 
Sixth IFIP WG 11.9 International Conference on Digital Forensics, 
Hong Kong, China, January 4-6, 2010, ISBN: 978-3-642-15505-5 
(Print) 978-3-642-15506-2 (Online) 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

