Mobile Instant Messaging and User Interface Design - Different Age Groups, 
Different Requirements? 
A survey of Indonesian users 
Olga Levina 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Management 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
levina@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract—Instant Messaging (IM) is an increasingly popular 
form of communication in which two or more people exchange 
text-based multi-media messages in real time. However, as a 
result of aging, users have different needs and requirements 
towards the design of the communication application. This 
paper examines the preferences of users of different ages 
towards the User Interface (UI) design of Mobile Instant 
Massage (MIM) applications, i.e., instant message applications 
that can operate on smartphones. An online survey data about 
users' preferences towards the UI of this application type, 
limited to Indonesian users, was obtained. The results indicate 
that for some UI elements, both age groups showed the same 
preferences, while other requirements were significantly 
different. This paper aims to give a better understanding of the 
interface of the MIM application preferred by its users 
according to their age and thus inform application designers 
and product owners.  
Keywords: application requirements; usbality; user interface; 
age-based requirements; socially-aware information systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 With more than 3.5 billion smartphone users worldwide, 
their considerable proportion is constituted of so-called non-
generic users such as children, older people and users with 
impairments. Hence, many applications and devices that are 
designed to cater to these users already exist. User Interface 
(UI) design is one of the most important aspects when 
developing a mobile device application, as the success of an 
application mainly relies on its usability and User 
eXperience (UX).  
Instant Messaging (IM) can be seen as one of the first 
manifestations of digital communication technologies, which 
can reasonably be used as a substitute for real-life human 
interaction [1]. Being a text-based form of communication 
between two or more people exchanging text messages in 
real time, it can also provide asynchronous communication. 
Increasingly, it can be enriched with other forms of media 
such as pictures, videos, or audio files. For interpersonal 
exchanges, using instant messaging apps is associated with 
decreased feelings of loneliness for both young adults [2] 
and older users [3][4]. 
However, as a result of aging, adults have different needs 
and requirements for the design of communication 
applications compared with young people [5][6]. Current IM 
applications often design interfaces according to the needs of 
young people [7]. Based on these observations, this paper 
examines the user preferences of different age groups 
towards the User Interface (UI) design of Mobile Instant 
Massage 
(MIM) 
applications, 
i.e., 
instant 
message 
applications that can operate on smartphones. 
An online survey was conducted. The user preferences 
analyzed in this paper will focus on two interfaces of the 
MIM application, namely, the message list and the 
messaging interface. The survey was distributed to 
Indonesian users. Sespiani and Ernungtyas [4] outlined a 
technological gap in Indonesia between age groups, as well 
as the difficulty in adapting to novel technologies for elderly 
Indonesian users. The results of the online survey indicate 
that for some UI elements, both age groups showed the same 
preferences, while other requirements were significantly 
different. This short paper aims to provide a better 
understanding of the interface of MIM applications preferred 
by its users, specifically Indonesian users. These insights are 
useful for designers, developers, and product managers of 
mobile messaging applications. 
The paper is structured as follows: First, the current 
research on age-related UI preferences is described in section 
2. The research method and results of the online survey are 
presented in sections 3 and 4 respectively. A discussion of 
the findings and further research directions are outlined in 
section 5. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
IM is an internet service that allows users to 
communicate via text-based short massages directly in real 
time 
[8], 
while 
also 
allowing 
for 
asynchronous 
communication. In addition, IM allows users to share all 
types of messages, including video, sound, streaming 
content, web links, documents, and images [8][9]. The 
interface of IM is therefore focused on creating messages 
and displaying received massage, i.e., messaging and 
message list interface. A messaging interface is a UI where 
messages can be created and sent, as well as read and a voice 
over IP call can be associated.  
The message list interface, mentioned as the main section 
of the IM application by Caro-Álvaro et al. [10], is where the 
feature chat management takes place. Furthermore, here 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

received messages can be displayed, new messages can be 
created, individual or group messages can be pinned, among 
other functionalities. Given the focus on short, informal, 
unlimited, one-to many and many-to-many chat modes [9], 
as well as the charge-free [11] communication mode, IM 
applications are widely spread among smart phone users.  
With the increase of user requirements and usage of 
mobile devices the number of UI guidelines also increases. 
Differences in UI requirements between different age groups 
have been abundantly discussed in research, e.g., in [12], 
[13]. Older users have been shown to exhibit difficulty 
understanding a series of tasks or actions in application 
menus designed for mobile applications [5]. Age-related 
aspects also lead to different UI interactions between the age 
groups [6]. Krayz et al. [7] showed UI mostly focuses 
specifically on the needs and recommendations of younger 
users to attract them. Hence, users frustrated with technology 
or who have difficulty learning technology will not be able to 
interact richly with the MIM application, thus often 
becoming dissatisfied with these applications [14]. 
Several age- related issues with UI design, as well as the 
potential solutions have been already discussed in research. 
Faisal et al. [15] show that the button design for mobile 
phones is unsuitable for the elderly, i.e. the buttons in the UI 
are too small. Similarly, many older users consider the 
positioning of the letters on the mobile keyboard as too 
dense, which exhibits a high error rate for text input [5]. 
Research by Kiat and Chen [9] shows that elderly users 
found the icons confusing and hard to identify. However, the 
choice of icons is not trivial as users from different 
demographics and cultures may interpret the same icon 
differently.  The authors also state that that some older users 
have issues understanding the flow of existing MIM 
applications. Ahmad et al. [16] state that if it is confusing for 
older people to use the app, i.e., the application provides too 
many features, they become reluctant to use it. 
Following these research insights, this paper explores the 
requirements for MIM messaging interface between different 
age groups using an online survey distributed among 
Indonesian users. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
In developing countries, such as Indonesia, older 
population is experiencing technological leaps [3]. As the 
average welfare increases, the availability of better 
infrastructure and increasingly affordable technology for 
people in Indonesia is also rising. Even though digital 
technology has become increasingly affordable, elder users 
in Indonesia have experienced a wide technological gap [4]. 
Due to a lack of skills and knowledge of technology, the 
motivation of older users to grapple with the understanding 
of IT is moderate. Thus, a further gap in technology 
understanding and user competence between older and 
younger generations is persistent [3]. 
Hence, the research question here is: What are the 
preferences of the younger users, those aged 20-30 years, 
and older users, those aged 50-60 years, toward the message 
list interface of an IM application? Specifically, to:  
 
 
a. create a new message, 
b. mark an individual or group message, and 
c. see online-status information. 
 
To answer this question, an online survey was created 
based 
on 
the 
results 
of 
usability 
research 
and 
recommendations described above. The survey included text-
based questions, as well as A/B-test images to better 
understand the usability requirements. The online survey was 
designed using Google Forms and consists of four sections. 
The first section surveys for the demographics of the 
respondents. Also, some geographical data such as place of 
residence was gathered, as MIM preferences often depend on 
the region [11].  The second section collects the experience 
of the respondents on using the MIM applications.  
The last two sections of the survey consist of questions 
that could summarize the respondent’s preferences for the UI 
of MIM applications. Thus, they have three subsections that 
address each subitem of the research question. The first 
subsection collects the requirements for the preference for 
the button to create a new message (see Figure 1). Two types 
of floating action buttons were suggested (buttons A and B), 
as well as button C following the suggestion by Barros et al. 
[17], to add text on an icon button to increase the 
understanding of users towards the function of the feature. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Selection of “create new message” buttons 
Then, the respondents are asked to choose an icon to pin 
or mark an individual or group message as a favorite. The 
first option is a pin icon, according to the function “pin a 
message,” the second option is a star icon. The last option is 
the bookmark icon. 
Finally, the requirements regarding the message list 
interface are surveyed. The focus is to find the respondents’ 
preferences in viewing the online status of their contacts. 
Ogar et al. [14] stated that viewing the online status of the 
user’s contacts is a concept of social presence.  
First, the importance of the online status visibility is 
questioned. Then, the respondents are asked whether they 
would like to have the contact’s online status available on the 
message list interface. This question collects the responses 
through a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from “strongly 
dislike” to “strongly like”. Next, the participants are asked 
about how helpful it was to see people’s online status on the 
message list interface (Figure 2). 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 2.  Overview of potential message interfaces for MIM 
The different possibilities of the indication of the online 
status are visible in Figure 2. The left and right screen show 
the status in the message overview, while the screen in the 
middle provides the status information in the dedicated chat. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A total of 150 Indonesian MIM users participate in the 
online survey. Among the respondents, 75 users are aged 20-
30 years old (group A) and 75 users are in the age group of 
50 and 60 years old (group B). From the results obtained, 66 
respondents identified themselves as male, and 84 as female. 
The countries where the respondents live vary, although the 
majority (112 out of 150 respondents) live in Indonesia. 
Others live in Germany, Australia, United States of America, 
and Canada. Regarding the type of the operation system on 
their mobile device used by respondents, 72 respondents use 
Android and 78 use iOS- based devices. 
A total of 149 survey participants stated that they use 
WhatsApp as their MIM. The second most used application 
by the respondents is Line, with 29 people, 25 respondents 
used Telegram, and 20 people used Facebook Messenger to 
communicate. When asked how self-explanatory the features 
in the MIM were, most of the features were rated as self-
explanatory (see Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3.  Understanding of the MIM features  
Hence, the most self-explanatory feature is sending 
messages, while the feature that is the least self-explanatory 
is “pin messages”. 
When asked to rate the need for a user manual on a scale 
from 1 ”not at all” to 5 “very much needed”, the responses of 
different age groups varied significantly. With an average 
2.44 for older users (group B) an average of 1.70 for young 
users (group A), group B was more likely to have an 
additional explanation of the application and its functions. 
To assess UI preferences a 5 point Likert scale was used 
with 1= “very dissatisfied” to 5 = “very satisfied” with a 
specific feature or option. The position of the floating button 
on the top bar of the MIM application to create new 
messages was equally satisfactory for both age groups. 
Group A showed an average satisfaction of 3.96 and group B 
of 3.92. Significant differences between the button 
preferences for the function “create new message” (see 
Figure 1) were also visible: group B prefers button B, with 
an average of 2.01, while group A (younger users) are not 
clear for the preference between button A or B with an 
average of 1.75. 
In addition, for the function of marking the message as 
favorite, group B preferred the start, while group A preferred 
a pin. Both age groups have similar preferences for the 
visibility of the online status of their contacts, with the 
average importance rated as 3.24 for younger users and 3.45 
for older users. 
Nevertheless, the importance of where the online status 
of contacts is displayed differs among age groups. The 
visibility of the online status in the message list is 
significantly more important for older users (group B) with 
an average importance of 3.52 than for younger users, with 
an average of 3.04. 
Both age groups find it equally helpful to see online 
status in the message list interface, with an average of 3.55 
(group A) and 3.63 (group B). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This research analyzed the UI requirements for MIM 
applications depending on the age of the users. An online 
survey was conducted, with 150 responses to answer the 
question about the preferences of the younger users and older 
users toward the message list interface of an IM application. 
The analysis of the results showed that for some UI 
elements, both age groups had the same preferences, while 
other features were met with different preferences. 
Regarding the preferences for the button to create a new 
message in the message list interface, younger and older 
users preferred the button at the top bar over the floating 
action button. Each age group had different opinions on the 
type of button used for this feature. Button A was equally 
preferred by both age groups, while button B (chat bubble) 
and button C (text marker) were more preferred by younger 
and older users respectively. In terms of the function of 
marking a message as favorite, both age groups prefer to 
place the option to do that besides the swiped chat. However, 
each age group has a different icon choice that suits them 
better. Younger users like the pin icon better, whereas older 
users find the star icon more suitable. Finally, regarding 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

seeing people’s online status in the message list interface, 
more of the older users liked and found it helpful to have the 
online status in the message interface.  
This analysis provided some insights into the usability 
factors that can help design user-friendly and efficient user 
interfaces for MIM in different age groups. These insights 
can be used by product owners and application developers to 
adopt their products to the aging population and minimize 
the inconveniences experienced by older users. 
 
Acknowledgements: This research was based on data 
collected by Jennifer Surjanto. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. A. Bardi and M. F. Brady, “Why shy people use instant 
messaging: Loneliness and other motives,” Comput. Human Behav., 
vol. 
26, 
no. 
6, 
pp. 
1722–1726, 
Nov. 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1016/J.CHB.2010.06.021. 
[2] E. Fumagalli, M. B. Dolmatzian, and L. J. Shrum, “Centennials, 
FOMO, and Loneliness: An Investigation of the Impact of Social 
Networking and Messaging/VoIP Apps Usage During the Initial 
Stage of the Coronavirus Pandemic,” Front. Psychol., vol. 12, p. 211, 
Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3389/FPSYG.2021.620739/BIBTEX. 
[3] Restyandito, Febryandi, K. A. Nugraha, and D. Sebastian, “Mobile 
Social Media Interface Design for Elderly in Indonesia,” 2020, pp. 
79–85. 
[4] K. A. Sespiani and N. F. Ernungtyas, “Connecting Elderly and Digital 
Devices: a Literature Review of User Interface Studies for Indonesian 
Elders,” J. Soc. Media, vol. 6, no. 1, 2022. 
[5] C. Dodd, R. Athauda, and M. T. P. Adam, “Designing user interfaces 
for the elderly: A systematic literature review,” 2017, Accessed: Mar. 
06, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://aisel.aisnet.org/acis2017/61/. 
[6] K. Chirayus and A. Nanthaamornphong, “A Systematic Mapping 
Review: Mobile User Interface Design Guidelines for the Elderly 
with Cognitive Impairments,” in 2019 23rd International Computer 
Science and Engineering Conference (ICSEC), Oct. 2019, pp. 35–42, 
doi: 10.1109/ICSEC47112.2019.8974698. 
[7] K. Krayz Allah, N. A. Ismail, and M. Almgerbi, “Designing web 
search UI for the elderly community: a systematic literature review,” 
J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput., Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1007/s12652-
020-02772-8. 
[8] R. Bridgewater and M. Cole, Instant Messaging Reference: A 
Practical Guide. Elsevier Science, 2008. 
[9] B. W. Kiat and W. Chen, “Mobile Instant Messaging for the Elderly,” 
Procedia 
Comput. 
Sci., 
vol. 
67, 
pp. 
28–37, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.246. 
[10] S. Caro‐Álvaro, E. García‐López, A. García‐Cabot, L. De‐Marcos, 
and A. Domínguez‐Díaz, “Applying usability recommendations when 
developing mobile instant messaging applications,” IET Softw., vol. 
16, no. 1, pp. 73–93, Feb. 2022, doi: 10.1049/sfw2.12039. 
[11] H.-Y. Wang, “A Review of Instant Messaging and Mobile Messaging 
Applications,” Int. J. Econ. Financ. Manag. Sci., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 13, 
2019, doi: 10.11648/j.ijefm.20190701.13. 
[12] S. Sharma, “Age Based User Interface In Mobile Operating System,” 
Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng. Appl., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 177–184, May 2012, 
doi: 10.5121/ijcsea.2012.2215. 
[13] J. J. Chang, N. S. Hildayah binti Zahari, and Y. H. Chew, “The 
Design of Social Media Mobile Application Interface for the 
Elderly,” in 2018 IEEE Conference on Open Systems (ICOS), Nov. 
2018, pp. 104–108, doi: 10.1109/ICOS.2018.8632701. 
[14] S. O. Ogara, C. E. Koh, and V. R. Prybutok, “Investigating factors 
affecting social presence and user satisfaction with Mobile Instant 
Messaging,” Comput. Human Behav., vol. 36, pp. 453–459, Jul. 2014, 
doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2014.03.064. 
[15] M. Faisal, N. Romli, and M. Faiz Mohamed Yusof, “Design for 
Elderly Friendly: Mobile Phone Application and Design that Suitable 
for Elderly,” Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 28–31, Jun. 
2014, doi: 10.5120/16576-6261. 
[16] B. 
Ahmad, 
I. 
Richardson, 
and 
S. 
Beecham, 
“Usability 
Recommendations for Designers of Smartphone Applications for 
Older Adults: An Empirical Study,” in Software Usability, 
IntechOpen, 2022. 
[17] A. C. de Barros, R. Leitão, and J. Ribeiro, “Design and Evaluation of 
a Mobile User Interface for Older Adults: Navigation, Interaction and 
Visual Design Recommendations,” Procedia Comput. Sci., vol. 27, 
pp. 
369–378, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2014.02.041.
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

