Strategy for a National Digital Society 
Integral approach equipping digital citizens 
 
 
Bert Mulder 
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands 
a.w.mulder@hhs.nl 
 
Martijn Hartog 
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands 
m.w.hartog@hhs.nl 
Abstract– In The Netherlands, an increasing number of 
projects give experimental form to structural participation 
of citizens in the design and implementation of local 
governance and social programs at the local level. The focus 
on a compact government and diminishing numbers of 
employees in healthcare and welfare create a participatory 
society in which citizens become increasingly dependent on 
digital services. But as of yet, there is no widespread 
adoption and broad I(C)T infrastructural support equipping 
digital 
citizens 
in 
their 
participatory 
efforts. 
The 
participatory society requires citizens to make decisions, 
coordinate 
activities 
and 
perform 
tasks 
benefitting 
individual and social quality of life. This idea outlines a 
conceptual design approach identifying and researching a 
national 
information 
architecture 
and 
infrastructure 
supporting and equipping digital citizens in the participatory 
society of The Netherlands. 
 
 
Keywords-participatory society; digital citizens; 
architecture; infrastructures; digitization.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Dutch national government acknowledges the 
general challenges and capacities citizens face in an 
information society. They recognize the importance of 
digital information on which citizens depend maintaining 
the quality of life, individually and collectively as a 
society. But they still ignore the possible benefits of a 
consistent information architecture that fits the citizens’ 
new participatory role.  
 
When many citizens become more active and equal 
partners of governmental organizations, they influence 
and change the dynamics, role and responsibilities of 
stakeholders in the policy process. Supporting such 
developments on a national scale requires a new approach 
to information quality and its ability to answer the 
requirements of such new policy processes. It poses a new 
challenge for the Dutch government. 
 
The large-scale use of IT by citizens for health, 
welfare, safety and governance underpins the quality of 
life on a national scale [1][2]. Ongoing structural adoption 
creates an integrated digital society that consists of digital 
citizens in digital households and requires us to rethink 
technology, data, information, products and services as 
seen from the personal environment of citizens.  
 
II. DIGITAL CITIZENS 
 
Increasing adoption and intensifying use of ICT by 
citizens will result in a convergence of digital services on 
their households (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Convergence of services on the individual household. 
 
 
Citizens that organize their health, governance and 
public safety individually do so collaborating with other 
individuals 
and 
organizations. 
Intensifying 
such 
collaborative 
use 
that 
binds 
together 
different 
stakeholders by exchanging data and information creates a 
cohesive digital infrastructure. This development shows 
that the development of a digital society is entering a new 
phase that, beyond individual applications, depends on the 
quality of an ecology of infrastructures, data and services 
supported by the right regulation, financial retribution and 
market dynamics. Where these services are a basic 
requirement for quality of life in society (such as health, 
governance, education and safety) they will require active 
support from governments and other stakeholders because 
its requirements are currently not available. 
 
Citizens will become increasingly dependent on use 
and quality of the IT infrastructure in their neighborhoods, 
towns, regions and society. This development will focus 
attention on citizens as a key driver in the creation of a 
digital society and with that they become a factor of 
national importance [3].  
 
A. Staying healthy – digitally  
 
Digital citizens will support their health digitally: they 
monitor their quality of life and vital health readings, get 
digital feedback, advice and diagnosis, determine their 
needs for care, organize their healthcare and welfare 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

processes with their social network and volunteers, 
determine the quality and efficiency of their care process 
and handle finances. The amount of health data individual 
patients collect in their home environment is larger than 
the data that professionals have about them. This personal 
data will be enriched by publicly available data on the 
quality of health and illness at the neighborhood, city, 
regional and national level. From their personal digital 
environment, they communicate with the different 
professionals that treat them. To facilitate these activities 
citizens, use a wide variety of applications, products and 
services that may be personalized to their needs.  
 
The Dutch Patients and Consumers Federation 
(NPCF) [4] and the Dutch Council for Health and Care 
[5] propose, in two different reports, that patients will get 
their own storage for health-related data. Professional 
organizations such as hospitals, general practitioners and 
pharmacies already have their own administrative systems 
(EPDs or Electronic Patient Data).  
 
This 
development 
departs 
from 
professional 
organizations 
organizing 
information 
for 
their 
professionals 
where 
citizens 
are 
participants 
in 
professionals’ structures and processes. Now the digital 
infrastructure around patients themselves develops a 
complexity that requires its own structured storage. It is 
the first proposal that acknowledges that citizens digitally 
‘grow up’ and proposes they the informal ‘life world’ of 
citizens be digitally integrated in the formal ‘systems 
world’ of professionals. 
 
B. Living together – digitally  
 
Citizens use digital means to take responsibility for the 
safety and quality of life in their environment [6]. Today 
they use Whatsapp groups to share neighborhood 
observations or develop ideas together in communities 
supporting the collection, development and planning of 
collective ambition. Other cities of neighborhoods use 
participatory budgeting to collective develop ideas and 
their 
execution. 
Such 
digital 
community 
systems 
increasingly connect different stakeholders that may be 
involved in safety and quality of life – and inform or 
alarm others to act.  
 
In the coming years, such solutions will develop 
further. Citizens in neighborhoods, towns, cities and 
regions will have access to actual and recent data about 
safety and quality of life of their environment, integrated, 
analyzed and presented in an understandable way. Their 
personal systems – such as cameras for surveillance – 
may, when needed, be integrated in networks of 
professional organizations.  
 
When such services are used structurally and 
strategically cities will need to support the digital life of 
their citizens. Not only do they need to build up the 
necessary infrastructure, but also provide the essential 
information that support the quality of life of their citizens 
and enables them to know what to do, why to do it, how 
to do it and when to do it. They need to facilitate the 
communication 
between 
individual 
citizens 
and 
coordinate activities at the level of their neighborhood, 
city and region. Organizing and providing such 
information 
requires 
an 
integrated 
information 
infrastructure in domains that govern quality of life, such 
as public health, public safety and security and public 
governance. To conceptualize and organize such an 
infrastructure requires an integrated approach – a strategy 
for a digital society at the national level.  
 
III. INTEGRAL AND MUTLIDISCIPLINAIRY 
 
Citizens are uninterested in organizing information 
management at levels above their own. It is also not their 
responsibility. 
It 
is 
governments 
that 
carry 
the 
responsibility for citizens’ and societies’ quality of life. In 
line with the development described above ‘information 
management for citizens’ will become a requirement for 
the societies’ quality of life. 
 
Currently no party in society has responsibility for 
citizens’ 
information 
management. 
Healthcare 
organizations take care of their own data, as do suppliers, 
insurance companies, the police and insurance companies. 
Currently governments take responsibility for their own 
information management. In the coming years, they will 
become increasingly interested in the quality of the 
information infrastructure of and for citizens. It is in this 
vain that we address the concept of ‘citizen information 
management’.  
 
It is information management that acknowledges the 
specific qualities and challenges that citizens in their own 
informal and personal lifeworld encounter today and will 
develop in the coming years. Citizens are ‘professionals at 
being citizens’: they use their own language, think and 
argument in their own way, do things for their own 
reasons. Those needs are fundamentally different than 
those of professionals and require their own angle at 
information managements [7]. 
 
 
Further developing this concept we propose a coherent 
digital society information architecture - infrastructure, 
technology, (open) data, services and users. Developing 
this at a national scale creates three challenges: a new 
quality, a new scale and a new complexity of an 
infrastructure shared by all citizens of The Netherlands. 
• 
The new challenge on quality is that of the 
personal environment of citizens: informal and 
not professional, emotional and not formal, 
incidental and not structural, all with an own 
quality of understanding and reasoning. 
• 
The new challenge on scale is the challenge to 
create a consistent environment across networks 
on the different levels of the individual, the 
household, 
groups, 
neighborhoods, 
cities, 
regions and countries. 
• 
The new challenge on complexity is organization 
the exploding diversity of digital services for all 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

different 
stakeholders, 
such 
as 
individual 
patients, their medical professionals and the 
healthcare organizations they work with. 
 
Together these challenges create a wicked problem: 
none of the current stakeholders is able to solve them or is 
responsible for that. All current players create solutions 
optimizing their own activities. To enable interoperability 
previously ‘the market’ would slowly develop the 
standards necessary for interoperability or usability, such 
as the IP standards for internet traffic, the standards for 
smart 
home 
infrastructures 
or 
the 
standards 
for 
communication in the healthcare sector. It is a feeble 
process, often taking decades to develop working 
standards and sometimes overdeveloping them to the 
point if becoming unproductive. However, because 
quality of life in society is a responsibility of the 
government they may be seen as a stakeholder that might 
play the role of a catalyst. 
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
 
With the ongoing development of e-health, e-
government and e-democracy and the increasing broad 
and structural adoption of the Internet we foresee that the 
use of digital tools will result in a coherent layer of digital 
solutions and services at the national level that support 
citizens and their collaboration among themselves and 
with professionals. Citizens’ strategic and structural use 
of ICT will be driving the development of uniform 
national information architecture.  That will consist of a 
consistent and cohesive ecology of infrastructures, data, 
services, users, regulation and financing and will have the 
specific requirements of digital citizens and their 
households as its vantage point [8][9].  The new and 
different character of this national infrastructure stems 
from the challenges on the quality, complexity and scale 
of an information environment centered on citizens. 
 
One of the first domains this development shows is 
healthcare. Given the current restructuring of the 
healthcare and welfare in The Netherlands, the national 
government is urged to assess the value of an integral 
vision on the necessity, opportunities and challenges of a 
more comprehensive national architecture for a digital 
society. Describing developments in terms of a national 
infrastructure not only makes it possible see new 
challenges, but also to identify new markets and services 
and create inspiration for developers and organizations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Dutch School of Public Administration, “Open data, Open 
consequences (in Dutch: Open data, Open gevolgen)”, The 
hague, 2012 
[2] European  Commission, “Digital Economy and Society 
index, Digital Agenda For Europe: A Europe 2020 
Initiative”. 
Available 
from: 
http://digital-agenda-
data.eu/datasets/desi/visualizations 2016.10.14 
[3] Scientific Council of Government Policy, “iOverheid”, 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam: University Press, 2011 
[4] The Dutch Patients and Consumers Federation, “The 
Personal healthcare dossier (in Dutch: Het persoonlijk 
gezondheidsdossier: De visie van patiëntenfederatie NPCF, 
2013 
[5] Council for Health and Care , “Patients information (in 
Dutch: Patiënteninformatie)”, The Hague, 2014 
[6] Rathenau Instituut, “Improving humans in cultural, political 
and technological perspective (in Dutch: Mens van de 
toekomst – mens zonder toekomst: Mensverbetering in 
cultureel, politiek en technologsch perspectief)”, The Hague, 
2009 
[7] Dutch Ministry of Interior and Kingdom Relations, “The do-
democracy (in Dutch: De doe-democratie, kabinetsnota ter 
stimulering van een vitale samenleving)”, The Hague, 2013 
[8] Court of Audit, “Trend report Open Data (in Dutch: 
Trendrapport Open Data”, 2015  
[9] Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport, “e-Health and 
healthcare 
improvement 
(in 
Dutch: 
e-Health 
en 
zorgverbetering”. 
Available 
from: 
www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten-en-
publicaties/kamerstukken/ 2014/07/02/ kamerbrief-over-e-
health-en-zorgverbetering.html 2016.10.14 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

