Reentry ID: Helping Rehabilitated Citizens Regain
Their Government Issued Identification
Navid Shaghaghi, Ju Young Park, Jay Kanakiya, Martin Rios-Cardenas, Connor Azzarello, and Colleen Chien
The Paper Prisons Initiative and the Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent Computing (EPIC) Research Laboratory
Departments of Mathematics & Computer Science (MCS) of the College of Arts & Sciences,
Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) of the School of Engineering, and
Information Systems & Analytics (ISA) of the School of Business, and the School of Law
Santa Clara University, Santa Clara, California, USA
Email: {nshaghaghi, jpark11, jkanakiya, mrioscardenas, cazzarello, cchien}@scu.edu
Max Calcoen
Head-Royce School, Oakland, California, USA
Email: maximilianc2024@headroyce.org
Abstract—With the largest prison population in the world, the
United States releases more than 650,000 individuals from prison
every year. A significant hurdle encountered by many released
individuals is that their state issued identification documents such
as driver licenses have expired while they were in prison and
the process of obtaining identification has significantly changed
due to the advents of technologies such as the internet and
smartphones. While various Checklists, Guides, and ID programs
around the country have attempted to address this issue by
disseminating information about the steps needed to obtain
a government issued ID, they have proven to be either too
rudimentary to be useful or too complex to navigate. Hence, this
paper reports on the development of the Reentry ID tool at Santa
Clara University (SCU), which helps guide users through the
process of finding all the information they need for obtaining their
state identification cards. As part of doing so, the tool warehouses
various lists of all eligible proof of identity and residency
documents accepted for applying for state identifications, such
as driver’s licenses, by each of the 50 US states’ Department of
Motor Vehicles (DMV), into a single database.
Keywords—Criminal Justice Reform, Digital Society, Govern-
ment Identification, Legal Technology, Paper Prisons, Web Appli-
cation
I. INTRODUCTION
With the largest prison population in the world, the United
States releases more than 650,000 individuals from prison per
year as reported by the United States Department of Justice
[1]. In order for these newly released individuals to reintegrate
into their communities, they need housing, jobs, and maybe
the ability to drive. All these activities require the possession
of some form of government issued identification, such as a
driver’s license, which many recently released inmates do not
possess due to it, for example, having expired while they were
incarcerated. This issue was exacerbated by the COVID-19
pandemic when a significant increase in releases occurred for
low-level or non-violent offenders in order to slow the spread
of the virus within the United States’ prison system. This
abrupt release of inmates caused logistical issues regarding
reintegration into society. Although inmates may be released
along with their prison ID card and release papers, many
states do not allow the use of these documents to easily
procure state issued identification that allows them to become a
productive member of society again. The lack of a government
ID - or the “ID Gap” - is however not a problem limited to
reentry populations: it is estimated that 11% of Americans
do not have government issued ID [2] and that the problem
disproportionately impacts African American individuals [3].
To make matters worse, government agencies are severely
understaffed due to chronic budget cuts and, at the time of this
writing, the COVID-19 pandemic. This has further impacted
people’s ability to simply walk into a Department of Motored
Vehicles (DMV) office to be guided through the process by
a staff member. Hence, many released inmates may need to
apply for identification through the web. Thus, the recently
released inmates may be once again pushed to the margins of
society if they do not possess the technology or knowledge
to effectively navigate the internet. Furthermore, bureaucratic
websites are sometimes prohibitively complicated, especially
for a person that may have been in prison since before websites
were a mainstream consumer technology. For this reason, the
criminal advocacy group cut50 approached Santa Clara Uni-
versity’s Paper Prisons Initiative team to assist in developing
a web application to make the procurement of government
issued ID’s accessible to recently released inmates.
The main challenge in developing such a tool is to imple-
ment efficient yet simple methodology for guiding users to
properly navigate through the process of getting an ID. Thus
the tool was developed as a short questionnaire that intelli-
gently adapts to previously answered questions and navigates
the user to the most relevant agency’s relevant web page to
initiate the process for receiving their most necessary article of
identification, which is a state issued ID or driver’s license for
most people. This necessitated the collection and databasing
of massive amounts of complex information from bureaucratic
websites as well as the paraphrasing of their terminology using
accessible everyday language. The development underwent
multiple iterations, and at the end of each iteration, user testing
was conducted. The user testing was, however, limited due to
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

the tool’s specific target users.
Section II analyzes other attempts to provide technical
guidance for getting an ID and section III explains the develop-
ment process and technical methodology used in building the
Reentry ID tool. Sections IV reports user testing results and
updates made to the tool in relation to the user feedback. And
lastly, Sections V and VI provide future steps for improving
the tool and some concluding remarks, respectively.
II. RELATED WORK
Many advocacy groups have developed different tools to
help reentry court planners with their work.
A. Basic Checklists
One type of tool reentry planners use is a checklist to see
what a released offender may need right after their release
[4]. These checklists include questions related to identification,
benefits and finances, health care, housing, and personal care.
Although these checklists give a general idea of what a reentry
court planner should focus on, it’s not tailored towards a state
and thus, the planner needs to gather more data based on their
region.
B. Detailed Guides
Although the checklists give a general idea of what a re-
leased individual needs, they’re not helpful when the released
individuals are left on their own without any reentry program’s
support [5]. For these individuals, detailed self-study guides
of all sorts have been developed. However, even though a
detailed guide is a great way to help the released individuals
sort out their plans after prison and get on the right track,
they tend to either be too general and thus lack answers to
questions for particular states, or are too detailed and try to
answer many of the questions the released individuals may
have, all at once before the individuals even know they may
have said questions. Stated more directly, they tend to either
be too scant on details to be truly useful, or too overwhelming
and complicated for some individuals to go through and utilize.
C. ID Programs
California’s Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation
offers a CAL-ID program that provides certain state prisoners
with a valid California state ID card for free, and its informa-
tive web page lists the required documents to prove eligibility
for the program [6]. In order to enroll in the program, one must
have their Social Security Number, an issued identification
card or driver’s license from the DMV within the previous 10
years, and an address with a zip code. This, however, requires
those who do not have the required documents to have to
go through other processes for getting each of the required
documents first. Hence, one who does not already have an
expired identification card or driver’s license from the DMV
faces another hurdle to getting a valid California state ID.
Even with the numerous details and information available,
all the aforementioned are only useful for reentry program
staff and court planners to use as reference. Many of the
released individuals may find the guides, instructions, and
whole process too overwhelming and difficult to understand
and undertake especially if they cannot find an answer to their
question in a few relatively simple steps. Therefore, the need
for a unified tool which can direct users to where they can
find the latest details for each step regardless of their state of
residency, can not be further apparent.
III. REENTRY ID
In collaboration with Dream Corps’ #Cut50 initiative, an
initiative to cut prison population and crime by 50 percent
in the next 10 years [7], a team of Santa Clara University
graduate, undergraduate, and law Students prototyped a simple
proof of concept website during Santa Clara University Law
School’s 2019 Second Chances Empathy Hackathon [8]. In
order to transform the prototype into a live tool which can be
confidently used by released individuals or their advocates,
over the years since, the work was continued by the Web
and Tools subteam of the Paper Prisons Initiative, which has
experience in developing humanitarian tools such as a tool for
narrowing the Second Chance Gap [9] in support of released
rehabilitated individuals. Several iterations of the tool were
created and user tested until the current optimal solution which
is available live on the Paper Prisons Initiative’s website [10]
was reached.
As any web application, the tool consists of a frontend and
backend infrastructure as detailed below.
A. Frontend
The frontend was built into a designated page of the
Paper Prisons Initiative’s website with the same styling and
aesthetics. It consists of two views: one for users seeking
information on how to obtain their IDs and another for
Admins to perform maintenance and updates without having
to interact with the programming of the tool directly. Both
consist of questionnaires designed using Survey.js [11] which
uses familiar form elements such as check-boxes, Drop-down
menus, and sliders.
1) User View: The questionnaire was placed lower in the
page as to encourage the user to read the description first and
get a better understanding of the tool before proceeding. Figure
1 shows what the user sees before proceeding with the survey.
Figure 2 shows the first question in the tool which asks the
user about the type of identification (Passport, Social Security
Card, or State ID / Driver’s License) they are looking for.
Based on the document they choose, they either get a link to
a government website or are directed further down the decision
process. If the user selects ”State ID / Driver’s License” as the
document they’re looking for, after selecting a state they must
determine all the necessary documents they will need to take
with them to the DMV for getting their State ID or Driver’s
License. The documents fall within three categories:
• Proof of Identity: a document that proves the holder of
the document is a citizen (natural or naturalized) of the
United States of America or a legal alien residing within
the United States.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 1. Reentry ID tool overview and start page
Fig. 2. Reentry ID tool’s first question
• Social Security Number: a de facto national identifica-
tion nine-digit number issued to United States citizens,
permanent residents, and temporary (working) residents
for taxation and other purposes.
• Proof of Residency: a document proving that the holder
of the document lives and receives their mail at an address
within the state they are trying to get a State ID or
Driver’s License in.
Reentry ID helps with this step by listing all of the doc-
uments the DMV will accept in the user’s selected state for
each of the said categories. Figure 3, shows the selections for
the state of California, as an example. Reentry ID retrieves and
renders these accurate and up to date lists from its manually
and carefully populated backend database. The user selects
the approved Proof of Identity document(s) they posses, a
”Yes” or ”No” for the possession of a document with their
social security number, and the approved Proof of Residency
document(s) they possess, and then click the ”Next” button.
Based on the answers provided by the user, their results
page may vary as depicted in figures 4 and 5. Figure 4
displays the successful navigation to the link for the user to
get their document at their corresponding government office.
From here, the user can either click the link and navigate to
the said site and/or email the link to their email address so they
can retain it for later usage. However, if the link provided is
broken, the user can report it by clicking a button under the
horizontal line at the bottom of the result page, as can also be
seen in Figure 4. Administrators will be notified via email to
review the link and update it as necessary.
Figure 5 displays a sample of an unsuccessful navigation
to the needed link due to the user missing needed documents
along with a list of what documents they can get to satisfy
Fig. 3.
Documents that qualify as Proof of Identity and Residency for
obtaining a State ID or Driver’s License in the State of California as seen
in the Reentry ID tool
Fig. 4. Success page with link to get the State ID / Driver’s License, option
to send link to email, and report button for any issues encountered
that step and continue with this process.
It should be noted that the Reenty ID tool does not collect
any personally identifiable data nor stores any answers given
by the user that are used for navigating the decision tree. Since
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 5.
Failure page with information about the qualifying document(s)
the user needs to gather in order to successfully apply for and obtain their
corresponding State Identification card or Driver’s License
the tool dose not store session details either, it is expected that
the users complete the survey in one session. Hence, if they
exit or reload the website, they will need to start over.
2) Admin Panel: As state-wise rules change frequently, the
data on the various government websites are updated. Some
times these updates include the modification of the URLs
for a particular resource on the website. Due to this, such
links in the database may no longer be valid and thus need
to be updated. For this purpose, the tool includes a separate
panel for administrators to view and change any broken links.
Administrators will receive an email notification to review
reported broken or no longer accurate links which they will
handle via this panel as depicted in the example in Figure 6.
Fig. 6. Reentry ID Admin Panel
3) Technology: In order to deliver all the content, The
frontend utilizes HTML [12], CSS [13], JavaScript [14] , and
SurveyJS [11] - a JavaScript library for easy development of
surveys.
B. Backend
The backend consists of a Flask server application [15] and
MySQL [16] database hosted on the Paper Prisons Initiative’s
server and managed via a CPanel [17] instance - which is a
web hosting platform containing a collection of automation
tools that help simplify the hosting process. The Flask ap-
plication uses an Apache server [18] to actively listen and
respond to the HTTP requests from REST APIs defined in
python, to serve client-side requests as well as interact with
the database. The input data from the user is sent to the server
using a POST request. These REST APIs help process the data
and find relevant resources that are to be sent as a response.
The resources and links are then fetched from the MySQL
database and sent as a JSON [19] response to the client’s web
browser for visualization. Lastly, a PHPMailer [20] is used on
the result page to send the retrieved link to the user’s email
address as well as to report broken links to the admin(s).
IV. USER TESTING RESULTS
User testing was conducted with various groups, which
included people who were either recently released from prison
or who work closely or in-relation with low-level or nonviolent
offenders.
1) Specificity: While testing an early version of the Reentry
ID tool, users noted the intuitiveness and simplicity of the
tool but commented on the lack of specificity in rendering
results. This was due to the fact that originally, the tool would
only recognize a Social Security card and U.S. passport as
acceptable prerequisite proof-of-identity documents for getting
a state ID or Driver’s license. The users pointed out that:
(i) Getting a Passport for the purpose of providing a proof
of identity to DMV is neither an affordable nor timely
option for many individuals, and that they usually utilize
other inexpensive options.
(ii) Even if getting a U.S. passport is an affordable option
for some users, the first version of the tool would not
provide appropriate guidance to those individuals who are
not eligible to get a U.S. passport since there will be users
who do not have U.S. birth/naturalization certificates,
who are refugees, or who have green cards only.
Based on that feedback, in order to make the tool comprehen-
sive enough to provide guidance for various groups of users,
lists of all eligible proof of identity documents as recognized
by each state’s DMV were manually collected from each
state’s DMV website and properly databased. The tool was
then updated to render all possible options for proof of identity
approved by a user’s selected state rather than social security
card and passport only. Moreover, lists of state-specific eligible
documents for proof-of-residency were also collected for all
50 states and added to the tool.
2) Accessibility: Accessibility of the tool was also tested
against the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2
standards and the minim requirements of the WCAG stan-
dards was implemented within the tool in order to ensure its
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

inclusiveness. Reentry ID is now a one stop guide for anyone
before applying for a state ID or Driver’s license.
V. WORK IN PROGRESS AND FUTURE STEPS
A. Dynamic approach
Reentry ID’s database is currently maintained manually. A
dynamic scraper is currently under development by the team
to regularly retrieve and update the database via the latest
requirements and information from each state’s DMV website.
This is however, a long and arduous task due to a lack of
uniformity among the 50 states’ DMV websites. Which means
that a different scraper will have to be built for each site. The
scrapers will need to be scheduled to run automatically at set
intervals to ensure that the database includes the latest data
for each state.
B. More user testing
As the research team partners with more related advocacy
organizations, more user testing will become necessary to
ensure that the easiest and most suitable user experience is
provided for the actual users of the tool. It is important to note
that conventional best practices for web application design
are not sufficient here due to a segment of the actual users
having been away from technology for decades and perhaps
even before the use of the internet, let alone web applications,
was common practice.
VI. CONCLUSION
The Reentry ID tool is a first of its kind tool for assisting
released rehabilitated individuals to begin their journey into
reassimilating into society. This research recognizes long
standing user problems in navigating through overwhelming
information and complicated processes of getting an id at
bureaucratic websites. Thus the tool is implemented to pro-
vide simplified guidance to help users receive all necessary
information for getting an ID in one place. As such, the
development utilized easy to build, use, and maintain web
technologies and draws immense power from the centralization
of the various rules as well as lists of all eligible proof of
identity and residency documents utilized by each of the 50 US
states, into a single database. The development of Reentry ID
was only possible because of the countless hours of research
and databasing of these resources. After multiple iterations
and corresponding user testing, the tool has been updated to
deliver all necessary information in an easily accessible format
and everyday language.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A very special thanks is in order for Zoe Panagopoulos from
cut50 for her vision of the tool and guidance of the project.
Thanks to many past team members Sara Sepasian, Gina
Montarano, Reece Carolan, Lucas Negritto, Franklin Wang,
Oliver Ni, and Riley Kong who helped prototype the first
iteration of the Reentry ID tool, called First Step ID at the
time, with special assistance from Amir Jabbari, Nikki Pope,
and Antonio Reza at the Santa Clara University Law School’s
Second Chances Empathy Hackathon. Thanks to past team
member Darshan Bhansali who helped transform the early
prototype into a work in progress software. And thanks to
past team members Emma Schechter and Justin Li for helping
research, gather, compile, and database lists of all eligible
proof of identity and residency documents for all 50 states.
Thanks are also due to all the testers whom are too numerous
to thank by name here but whom without, the verification of
the validity, usability, and accessibility of the tool would not
have been possible. And lastly many thanks are due to the
Santa Clara University’s Law school and Frugal Innovation
Hub as well as the departments of Mathematics & Computer
Science of the College of Arts and Sciences, Computer Science
& Engineering of the School of Engineering, and Information
Systems & Analytics of the School of Business for their
continued support of the Reentry ID tool’s development at
the Ethical, Pragmatic, and Intelligent Computing (EPIC)
Laboratory as part of the Paper Prisons Initiative.
REFERENCES
[1] United
States
Department
of
Justice,
“Prison-
ers
and
prisoner
re-entry.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.justice.gov/archive/fbci/progmenu reentry.html
[2] S.
Horwitz,
“Getting
a
photo
id
so
you
can
vote
is
easy.
unless
you’re
poor,
black,
latino
or
elderly,”
2016.
[Online].
Available: https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/courts law/getting-
a-photo-id-so-you-can-vote-is-easy-unless-youre-poor-black-latino-or-
elderly/2016/05/23/8d5474ec-20f0-11e6-8690-f14ca9de2972 story.html
[3] U. S. G. A. Office, “Issues related to state voter identification laws.”
[Online]. Available: https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-14-634.pdf
[4] D. Boar and C. Walter, “Reentry court tool kit.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.courtinnovation.org/sites/default/files/documents/reentry
toolkit.pdf
[5] cut50
and
Root&Rebound,
“First
step
to
second
chances:
A
guide for people leaving federal prison under the first step act.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.rootandrebound.org/resources/first-
step-to-second-chances
[6] C. D. of Corrections Rehabilitation, “California identification card pro-
gram.” [Online]. Available: https://www.cdcr.ca.gov/rehabilitation/calid
[7] D. Cops”, “cut50.” [Online]. Available: www.cut50.org
[8] P. P. Initiative”, “Second chances and empathy hackathons,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://paperprisons.org/hackathons.html
[9] N. Shaghaghi, Z. Huang, H. S. Bathala, C. Azzarello, A. Chen, and C. V.
Chien, “A tool for narrowing the second chance gap,” in International
Conference on Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment.
Springer, 2020, pp. 165–174.
[10] P.
P.
Initiative”,
“Id
tool,”
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://paperprisons.org/id
[11] D.
B.
O ¨U,
“Surveyjs
library
overview.”
[Online].
Available:
https://surveyjs.io/Documentation/Library
[12] WHATWG,
“Html:
Living
standard.”
[Online].
Available:
https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/introduction.htmlintroduction
[13] W3C,
“Cascading
style
sheets.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.w3.org/Style/CSS
[14] MDN,
“Javascript.”
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript
[15] Pallets,
“Flask
documentation.”
[Online].
Available:
https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.0.x/
[16] O.
Corporation,
“What
is
mysql?”
[Online].
Available:
https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/what-is-mysql.html
[17] cPanel, “cpanel.” [Online]. Available: https://cpanel.net
[18] T. A. S. Foundation, “Apache http server project.” [Online]. Available:
https://httpd.apache.org
[19] “Introducing
json.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.json.org/json-
en.html
[20] “phpmailer.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/PHPMailer
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

