Understanding the cultural dimension on the Web homepage preferences and visual 
exploration
Jérôme Dinet1 
Robin Vivian1  
 
Kevin La Mantia1 
Munéo Kitajima2 
David Bertolo1 
 
1University of Lorraine, Metz, France. E-mail: {firstname.name}@univ-lorraine.fr 
2Nagoaka University of Technology, Japan. E-mail: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Abstract— In an experimental study conducted with thirty-two 
French and Japanese users, we investigated the impact of 
culture (i.e., cultural cognitive style) on users’ preferences and 
their visual exploration of homepages with two different 
designs: French-ness and Japan-ness design. Two main results 
have been obtained: (1) Even if homepages are culturally 
designed, preferences of the user is not related to this culture-
centered design; (2) The visual exploration of homepages is 
subordinate to the culture of the user, i.e. is not really related 
to the design. 
Keywords- 
visual 
exploration; 
culture; 
consumer; 
preference; design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the early 1990s, many studies have focused on the 
influence of culture on the design of Websites and Webpages 
[1, 2, 25], giving rise to a current design focuses on culture 
[5, 6, 7, 8, 34]. In parallel, recent studies have focused on the 
impact of the culture of users and consumers about their 
perceptions and behaviours during online information 
searching [9] [10] [36]. All these studies emphasize the 
importance of the relationship between culture and usability 
in Web design and Web use, i.e. culturability (culture + 
usability; [1]). 
In this paper, we focus on the two culturally determined 
cognitive styles (analytic style vs. holistic style) on 
preferences and visual explorations of homepages by 
users/consumers recruited from two different cultures (Japan 
vs. French). 
II. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE HOMEPAGE AND ITS 
CULTURE-CENTERED DESIGN 
According to Nielsen [26], “Corporate homepages are the 
most valuable real estate in the world” because homepage 
determines the first impression at the consumer and then 
determines, in part, the future behavior of that consumer. 
It is essentially the homepage of the Website where a 
user arrives prompting said user to enter or not in that site [7, 
19, 20] (Figure 1), especially if it is an unknown site. This 
explains why the design and the design of homepages are of 
primary interest in e-commerce. Indeed, one of the issues for 
businesses is that the user remains long enough on the home 
page of their site to make them want to enter 
 
Figure 1.  The importance of first impression in the process of online information searching, according to Kim & Fesenmaier [19]. 
A research team at Microsoft Research has recently 
proposed a mathematical model explaining dropout 
behavior of users [21]. After analyzing the behavior of 
thousands of users over 200,000 websites, the team 
determined that the time spent by an individual on a 
Webpage followed the Weibull distribution. According to 
this Weibull distribution, the probability that an individual 
leaves a Webpage decreases as time increases that 
individual remains on said Webpage. And it appears that 
the first 10 seconds are crucial [20, 25]. 
In other words, if an individual stays longer than 10 
seconds on the homepage of a Website, then the 
probability that the individual enters and explores this 
Website increase significantly because the user’s attention 
has been captured and “hung”. Then we understand the 
issues related to the homepages of Websites since these 
homepages, which will determine the behavior of the 
individual: to enter into the Website, or to leave 
immediately. 
According to Nielsen [26], the average percentage of 
pixels used for each category on homepages is the 
following:  
• 
Operating system and browser overhead: 19%  
• 
Navigation: 20%  
• 
Content of interest to users: 20%  
• 
Advertisements: 2%  
• 
Self-promotions (ads for the site’s own stuff): 9%  
• 
Welcome, logo, tagline, and other site identifications: 
5%  
• 
Filler (useless stock art, such as “smiling ladies"): 5%  
• 
Unused: 20%  
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Nielsen [26, 27, 28] assumes that this distribution of 
these different types of information on homepages is 
universal. But it appears that, for a given company, 
homepages are very different among culture of designers 
and/or intended end-users. And some recent studies [7] 
[34] confirmed that the allocation of the different types of 
information is different among the version (French vs. 
Japan). In other words, homepages are culturally designed 
(Figure 2 shows an example). 
But, what is the real impact of this culture-centered 
Web homepage design on users’ preferences and their 
visual exploration among the culture of these users? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Japan (on the left) and the French (on the right) homepages of the Honda company©: An example of a culture-centered design.
III. 
COGNITIVE STYLE AND INFORMATION BEHAVIOUR 
The concept of “cognitive style” was developed in the 
late 1970s to explain the inter-individual differences in task 
selection, retention and retrieval of information [14, 15]. 
Cognitive style is defined as an individual adopts the 
approach to explore, analyze and organize their environment 
[32]. This cognitive style thus influences the individual 
strategies of analysis and exploration, including visual 
exploration. 
Several studies have shown that cognitive style was 
essentially linked to the culture of the individual [3, 22, 23, 
29, 30, 31, 32, 34]. Traditionally, the impact of culture is 
considered from the standpoint of theoretical work 
developed by Hofstede [17], considering only the behavioral 
level. But recently, Faiola and his collaborators [11, 12, 13] 
have suggested that culture could have an impact on 
cognitive processes on the one hand, designers of Websites 
and on the other hand, users and consumers of these 
Websites. In other words, culture does not express only in 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

terms of behavior: Culture would influence processes and 
cognitive strategies, creative Web design and use. 
Indeed, Faiola & Matei [13] have confirmed that 
cognitive styles determined the conception and design 
Webpages. But these authors also showed that users within 
the same cognitive style that designers of Websites were 
most effective. In their study conducted with 171 American 
and Chinese individuals, participants were asked to find 
answers to factual questions in two versions of a Website: A 
site designed by Chinese developers and a site designed by 
U.S. developers. The results showed that the performance of 
individuals (i.e., time taken to find the right answers) were 
directly related to the culture of the designer. More precisely, 
the performance was better when there was concordance 
between the culture of the user-participant (American vs. 
Chinese) and the culture of the developer-designer (U.S. vs. 
Chinese). This result was interpreted as evidence of the 
existence and impact of cognitive styles [13]: If a user of a 
given culture (and therefore, with a specific cognitive style) 
is “better” in a task involving a Website designed by a 
designer from the same culture, it is because the cognitive 
styles of these two individuals are identical. 
As mentioned previously, cognitive style exploration of 
its environment depends directly on its culture, the analytic 
style and holistic style resulting in a large number of studies 
[23, 24, 29, 30, 31, 33]. The analytical style is characterized 
by a detachment of the object from its context, a tendency to 
focus on the attributes of the object, in order to assign it into 
categories, and production of inferences based in part on the 
contextualization of the content structure. The holistic style 
is characterized by orientation in the context or field as a 
whole, including attention to relations between the focal 
object and the field, a preference to explain or predict events 
based on these relationships, and an emphasis on the 
importance of change, recognition and identification, and the 
need for multiple perspectives. In other words, individuals 
with an analytical style tend to perceive an object regardless 
of the scene in which the object is and tend to assign objects 
to categories: they are more field independent. In contrast, 
individuals with a holistic style tend to perceive the scene as 
a whole, comes to perceive the context and scope as a whole. 
They tend to focus on the relationships between objects and 
the field: they are more field dependent. Studies show that 
the analytical style is mainly present in Western (USA, 
Western Europe) while the holistic style is mainly present in 
populations of the Far East (China, Japan, Korea) [23, 24, 
29, 30, 31]. 
In an experiment, we investigated the impact of this 
holistic-analytic cognitive style on the Web homepage 
preferences and visual exploration for individuals recruited 
in two different cultures. 
IV. EXPERIMENT 
In an experimental study conducted with thirty-two 
French and Japanese users, we investigated the impact of 
culture (i.e., cultural cognitive style) on their preferences and 
their visual exploration of different homepages issued and 
translated from the two cultures (France vs. Japan). 
A. 
Participants 
The sample consisted of seventeen French students (14 
males and 3 females; mean age = 22.3 years) and fifteen 
Japanese students (12 males and 3 females; mean age = 22.3 
years). All were students in Master degree in physics and 
mathematics. All of participating students self-reported that 
they, on average, used the Web more than 15 hours per week 
for academic and commercial purposes. 
B. 
Independent variables 
In our experiment, two independent variables were 
manipulated: 
• 
The culture of the participants, with two modalities: 
French (FR) vs. Japanese (JP); 
• 
The culture-centered design of homepages, with two 
modalities: French-ness (FR) vs. Japan-ness (JP). 
C. 
Dependent variables (data collected) 
In our experiment, the following data were collected: 
• 
Preferences: After experiment, participants were asked 
to indicate their preferences between the two versions 
of homepages (French-ness vs. Japan-ness) for the two 
prototypes of Websites; 
• 
Visual exploration: The viewing patterns were used to 
determine the way that participants read and scanned 
the homepages (Japan-ness vs. French-ness). According 
to Dong & Lee [9], five different viewing patterns can 
be distinguished:  
o 
“0” Shape: Eye movement is similar to drawing a 
“0” on the homepage; 
o 
“5” Shape: Eye movement is similar to drawing a 
“5” on the homepage; 
o 
“N” Shape: Eyes move down one column and 
then move over to another column; 
o 
“Z” Shape: Eyes pass over columns first and then 
move down the homepage; 
o 
“X” Shape: Eyes move diagonally across the 
homepage and scan it with random jumps. 
D. 
Material 
In this experiment, specific homepages and Websites 
have been created. More precisely, two versions of 
homepages (Japan-ness vs. French-ness) are designed for 
two prototypes of Websites (a Website to purchase computer 
equipment and a Website to find an internship). These two 
versions of homepage have been elaborated on the basis of 
data obtained with a previous ergonomics inspection (author, 
2012). In other words, the average percentage of pixels used 
for each category on homepages is different between the two 
versions (Japan-ness vs. French-ness). 
Moreover, participants viewed all these versions 
(presented in random order) on Tobii T120©. So, scanpaths 
and visual explorations of users were recorded in real time. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Finally, each participant was asked to complete two 
questionnaires before to search for information in the 
different Websites and to give their preferences: 
• 
a questionnaire to collect socio-demographic data and 
the uses of the Web (frequency of use, nature of uses, 
etc.). The Web experience questionnaire was adapted 
from Thatcher and Greyling [35] and measures 
technical expertise with the Web based on the self-
reported breadth and depth of exposure; 
• 
the Analytic-Holistic Scale (AHS) elaborated by Choi, 
Koo & Choi [4] to determine the cognitive style of 
individuals. This questionnaire, a Likert-type scale 
(from 1 to 7), consists of 24 items assessing four 
dimensions related to cognitive style: causality, 
attitudes vis-à-vis the contradictions, change perception, 
and attentional focus. 
E. 
Task and procedure 
Each participant was individually asked to consult 
different prototypes of homepages (prototype A: a site to 
purchase computer equipment; Prototype B: a site to find an 
internship) before to give his/her opinion about these 
different versions. Consultation time was free. The order of 
presentation of the different prototypes and topics was 
counterbalanced. 
Then, each participant was asked to complete a 
questionnaire to collect socio-demographic data and the uses 
of the Web [35] and the Analytic-Holistic Scale (AHS; [4]) 
to determine the cognitive style of individuals. 
V. RESULTS 
First, according to previous data obtained by a lot of 
researchers [3] [29] [30] [31] [32], our results obtained with 
the Analytic-Holistic Scale (AHS) confirmed that our 
French users hold an analytic approach whereas Japanese 
users hold a holistic approach (mean score for French users 
= 5.10 vs. mean score for Japanese users = 2.9; p<.005). 
Second, as Table 1 shows, there is no impact of culture 
of users on their design preferences between the two 
versions of homepages (French-ness vs. Japan-ness). 
Whatever the Website (A and B), the number of French 
users preferring French-ness and Japan-ness homepages is 
substantially equivalent. In the same way, the number of 
Japanese users preferring French-ness and Japan-ness 
homepages is substantially equivalent, whatever the Website 
(A and B). 
 
TABLE I.  
PREFERENCES OF FRENCH AND JAPANESE USERS FOR EACH 
PROTOTYPE (A AND B) 
 
 
Third, visual exploration of homepage is essentially 
influenced by the culture of users, and is not really 
influenced by the design of the homepage. As Table 2 
shows: 
• 
The “0” shape (red dots in Figures 5 and 6) is the most 
frequent viewing pattern used by French users to 
explore the homepages whatever the design (64.7% for 
the French-ness design and 52.9% for the Japan-ness 
design); 
• The “5” shape (black dots in Figures 5 and 6) is the 
most frequent viewing pattern used by Japanese users 
to explore the homepages whatever the structure (60% 
for the French-ness design and 66.6% for the Japan-
ness design). 
 
Figure 5. The “0” shape viewing pattern used by French users (red 
dots) and the “5” shape viewing pattern used by Japanese users 
(black dots) to scan the homepage a French-ness design. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 6. The “0” shape viewing pattern used by French users (red 
dots) and the “5” shape viewing pattern used by Japanese users 
(black dots) to scan the homepage a Japan-ness design. 
 
TABLE II.  
VIEWING PATTERNS OF EXPLORATION OF HOMEPAGES (“0”, 
“5”, “N”, “Z”, “X”) FOR FRENCH AND JAPANESE USERS FOR EACH DESIGN 
(FRENCH-NESS VS. JAPAN-NESS) 
 
 
In other words, visual exploration used to read and to 
scan a Web homepage is culturally determined for our 
French and Japanese users. Thus, the visual exploration 
used by a user/consumer is dependent to his/her culture and 
is not dependent to the design of the Web homepage. More 
precisely, our experiment tends to show that the cognitive 
style (holistic vs. analytic) linked to the culture of the 
individual is a major factor to explain the visual exploration 
of homepages. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The two main results obtained in our study are the 
following: 
• 
Even if homepages are culturally designed, preferences 
of the user is not necessary related to this culture-
centered design; 
• 
The visual exploration of homepages is subordinate to 
the culture of the user (and not related to the design). 
From an ergonomics point of view, the results of our 
study have mainly shown that cognitive differences at the 
design level exist in the form of cultural styles that are 
perceptible to users/consumers. In accordance with other 
recent studies [13], although the purpose of our study was 
not to provide Web design recommendations per se, the 
results strongly suggest that awareness of cultural cognitive 
style is necessary for the improvement of online 
communication. 
Building upon this research, we foresee future work that 
will better inform Website designers about how to respond to 
implicit thinking patterns of cross-cultural users. From a 
theoretical point of view, our experiment supports the view 
that culture is expressed and influences the cognitive 
processes of visual scanning, and not just behavior [11, 12, 
13]. The growth of electronic commerce, in particular 
business-to-consumer, has been explosive during the last few 
years. Until recently, the Web community has been a 
dominated western-oriented society, with the design of Web 
sites reflecting that homogenous audience. But our results 
indicate that preferences and visual exploration of 
homepages differences exist between the cultural groups. So, 
if development of a “Universal” Website and homepages that 
appeals to all audiences and encourages increased visits and 
transactions is perhaps the “holy grail” of developers, 
creation of a single universally appealing global site does not 
appear feasible given the differences between some 
cultures/consumers, and that a preferable strategy might be 
to instead create culturally and consumer specific sites. In 
summary, the differences in culture plus the rapid expansion 
of the Web throughout the globe indicate that the current 
homogenous Website blueprint should change. 
A user’s preference and visual exploration with/of a 
homepage could affect the first impression, i.e. propensity to 
enter into that Website and ultimately initiate transactions 
with that business [20] [25]. So understanding culture-based 
perceptions of Internet users and their behaviors could serve 
to improve a Website to such an extent that it might also 
improve the competitive position of the business itself. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Barber, W., & Badre, A. “Culturability: The Merging of 
Culture and Usability”, 1998, Retrieved February 16, 2013 
from 
http://research.microsoft.com/en-
us/um/people/marycz/hfweb98/barber/ 
[2] Chau, P.Y.K, Cole, M., Massey, A.P., Montoya-Weiss, M., & 
O’Keefe, R.M. “Cultural differences in the online behavior of 
consumers”,. 
Communications 
of 
the 
ACM 
CACM 
Homepage archive, 2002, pp. 10-15. 
[3] Chen, S. Y., & Ford, N.J. Modelling user navigation 
behaviours in a hypermedia-based learning system: An 
individual differences approach. International Journal of 
Knowledge Organization, vol. 25, n°3, 1998, pp. 67–78. 
[4] Choi, I. Koo, M. & Choi, J.A. “Individual Differences in 
Analytic Versus Holistic Thinking”,. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 5 (2007), 691-705. 
[5] Cole, M., & O’Keefe, R.M. “Concep,tualizing the dynamics 
of globalisation and culture in electronic commerce”, Journal 
of Global Information Technology Management, vol. 3, n°4, 
2000, pp. 4-17. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

[6] Cyr, D., & Trevor-Smith, H. “Localization of Web design: An 
empirical comparison of German, Japanese, and U.S. website 
characteristics”, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, vol. 55, n°13, 2004, pp. 
1-10. 
[7] Cyr, D., Kindra, G.S. & Dash, S. “Web site design, trust, 
satisfaction and e-loyalty: the Indian experience”, Online 
Information Review, vol. 32, n°6, 2008. 
[8] Cyr, D., Bonanni, B., Bowes, J., & Ilsever, J. “Beyond Trust: 
Website Design Preferences Across Cultures”, Journal of 
Global Information Management, vol. 13, n°4, 2005, pp. 24-
52. 
[9] Dong, Y., Lee, K. P. “A cross-cultural comparative study of 
users’ perceptions of a webpage: With a focus on the 
cognitive styles of Chinese, Koreans and Americans”, 
International Journal of Design, vol. 2, n°2, 2008, pp. 19-30. 
[10] Evers, V. & Day, D. “The role of culture in interface 
acceptance”, In Howard, Hammond, and Lindegaard (Eds.). 
Human Computer Interaction, INTERACT’97, Chapman and 
Hall, London, 1997. 
[11] Faiola, A. “A visualization pilot study for hypermedia: 
Developing cross-cultural user profiles for new media 
interfaces”, The Journal of Educational Multimedia and 
Hypermedia, vol. 11, n°1, 2002, pp. 51-71. 
[12] Faiola, A. “The second psychology of Vygotsky and Luria: 
Cross-cultural web design from a cognitive perspective”, 
Proceedings of the International Scientific and Technical 
Conference and Russian School of Young Scientists and 
Specialists: System Problems of Quality, Mathematical 
Modeling and Information Technologies, 2004, Sochi, Russia, 
Part 2. 
[13] Faiola, A., and Matei, S. A. “Cultural cognitive style and web 
design: Beyond a behavioral inquiry into computer-mediated 
communication”, 
Journal 
of 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication, vol. 11, n°1, 2005, Retrieved February 16, 
2013 from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue1/faiola.html 
[14] Ford, N., Wood, F., & Walsh, C. Cognitive styles and 
searching. Online and CDROM Review, 18, 2 (1994), 79-86. 
[15] Goldstein, K. M., & Blackman, S. Cognitive Style, New 
York, Wiley, 1976. 
[16] Hall, E. T. “Beyond Culture”, Random House, New-York, 
1976. 
[17] Hofstede, G. “Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind”, McGraw-Hill, London, 1991. 
[18] Isozaki, A. “Japan-ness in architecture”, MIT Press, London, 
2011. 
[19] Karanam, S. “A Cognitive Model of Web-Navigation based 
on Semantic Information from Pictures”, Thesis submitted in 
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the award of Degree 
of Doctor of Philosophy in Computer Science, Cognitive 
Science 
Lab, 
International 
Institute 
of 
Information 
Technology-Hyderabad, April 2011. 
[20] Kim, H., & Fesenmaier, D. R. “The Persuasive Architecture 
of Destination Websites: The Effect on First Impressions”, 
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism, 
vol. 6, 2007, pp. 25-266. 
[21] Liu, C., White, R.W., & Dumais, S. “Understanding Web 
Browsing Behaviors through Weibull Analysis of Dwell 
Time”, 33rd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR 
2010), Geneva, Switzerland, July 2010, pp. 379-386. 
[22] Lucy, J. A. “Grammatical Categories and Cognition: A Case 
Study of the Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis”, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, New York, 1992. 
[23] Luria, A. R. “Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and Social 
Foundations”, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 
1976. 
[24] Markus, H.R. and Kitayama, S. “Culture and the self: 
Implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation”, 
Psychological Review, vol. 20, 1991, pp. 568–579. 
[25] Masuda, T., Ellsworth, P. C., Mesquita, B., Leu, J., Shigehito, 
T., & van de Veerdonk, E. “Placing the face in context: 
Cultural differences in the perception of facial emotion”, 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 94, 2008, 
pp. 365–381. 
[26] Nielsen, J. “Homepage Real Estate Allocation”, 2003 
Retrieved 
February 
16, 
2013 
from 
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20030210.html. 
[27] Nielsen, J. (Ed.). “Designing User Interfaces for International 
Use: Advances in Human Factors and Ergonomics”, New 
York, Elsevier Science Ltd, 1990. 
[28] Nielsen, J. “Designing Web Usability: The Practice of 
Simplicity”, New Riders Publishing, Indianapolis, IN, 1999. 
[29] Nisbett, R.E. “The Geography of Thought: How Asians and 
Westerners Think Differently and Why”, The Free Press, 
2003. 
[30] Nisbett, R.E., & Miyamoto, Y. “The influence of culture: 
holistic versus analytic perception”, TRENDS in Cognitive 
Sciences, vol. 9, n°10, 2005, pp. 467-473. 
[31] Nisbett, R. E., & Norenzayan, A. “Culture and cognition”, In 
H. Pashler & D. L. Medin (Eds.), Stevens' Handbook of 
Experimental Psychology: Vol. 2: Cognition (3rd ed., pp. 
561-597), John Wiley & Sons, New-York, 2002. 
[32] Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. “Culture 
and systems of thought: Holistic vs. analytic cognition”, 
Psychological Review, vol. 8, 2001, pp. 291-310. 
[33] Riding, R., & Rayner, S. G. “Cognitive Styles and Learning 
Strategies”, David Fulton, London, 1998. 
[34] Shen, S., Woolley, M. & Prior, S. “Towards culture-centred 
design”, Interacting with Computers, vol. 18, n4, 2006, pp. 
820-852. 
[35] Thatcher, A., & Greyling, M. “The use and meaning of the 
‘computer experience’ variable”, In P. A. Scott & R. S. 
Bridger 
(Eds.), 
Global 
ergonomics 
(pp. 
541–546), 
Amsterdam, Elsevier Science Publishers, 1998. 
[36] Wood, F., Ford, N., Miller, D., Sobczyk, G., & Duffin, R. 
“Information skills, searching behaviour and cognitive styles 
for student-centered learning: A computer-assisted learning 
approach”, Journal of Information Science, vol. 22, n°2, 1996, 
pp. 79–92. 
 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

