Automated Organizational Network Analysis for Enterprise 2.0 
 
Hady Abi-Nader 
School of Systems Engineering 
University of Reading 
Reading, UK 
h.abinader@reading.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Social Networking Sites have recently become a 
mainstream communications technology for many people 
around the world. Major IT vendors are releasing social 
software designed for use in a business/commercial context. 
These 
Enterprise 
2.0 
technologies 
have 
impressive 
collaboration and information sharing functionality, but so far 
they do not have any organizational network analysis (ONA) 
features that reveal any patterns of connectivity within 
business units. This paper shows the impact of organizational 
network 
analysis 
techniques 
and 
social 
networks 
on 
organizational performance, we also give an overview on 
current enterprise social software, and most importantly, we 
highlight how Enterprise 2.0 can help automate an 
organizational network analysis. 
Keywords - enterprise social software; enterprise 2.0; social 
network analysis; web 2.0; organizational network analysis; ona. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Social capital and innovation are nowadays regarded as 
one of the main competitive advantages of an organization, a 
factor that helps succeed in a highly competitive market and 
overcome tough economic conditions. Social capital depends 
on social interaction. In recent years, social network sites 
like Facebook and MySpace have been booming with 
popularity. These Web 2.0 technologies are now coming in 
packages specially designed for enterprises as major vendors 
(IBM, Oracle, Microsoft) are releasing social business 
software. This phenomenon is described as Enterprise 2.0 
In today’s knowledge-intensive organizations, most work 
of importance is heavily reliant on informal networks of 
employees 
within 
organizations. 
However, 
most 
organizations do not know how to effectively analyze this 
informal structure in ways that can have a positive impact on 
organizational performance.[1] Apart from implementing a 
collaborative 
technology 
in 
the 
workplace, 
many 
organizations are not taking any concrete actions to support 
these networks. [2] 
A Social Network is a joint combination of actors and 
relations. [3] Social Network Analysis displays relationships 
as graphs, with nodes representing individuals, and edges 
representing interactions types. The degree and type of 
interactions may be represented by the lengths and widths of 
nodes and edges. Even though there are many tools to help 
perform a social network analysis for an organization, the 
information used to perform the analysis is almost always 
gathered manually through different ways such as 
observation, 
recording 
of 
activities, 
and/or 
long 
questionnaires to employees, interviews and diaries. 
Incorrect reporting might happen when participants record 
their own activities, and different interactions with other 
employees may not be remembered equally as well. [4]  
This process can become extremely complex, time-
consuming, and costly when applied on large organizations, 
moreover reliability of the results can be questioned because 
of the complex nature of this process.  
The aim of this paper is to show an existing gap in order 
to help to bridge the wealth of information in organizations 
that has recently become accessible by enterprise social 
software with the social network analysis techniques in use. 
In this field, some work has been done on automated social 
network analysis technologies on interactions by email 
messages, files, instant text messages, network activities, etc. 
[5] but it seems that no work yet focuses on automating the 
process of organizational network analysis based on the data 
in enterprise social software, which is the focus of this paper.  
The next section will show an overview on current 
Enterprise Social Software on the market and their different 
features. Section III will introduce Organizational Network 
Analysis and what it involves. Finally, Section IV will show 
the further research intended on this topic.  
II. 
ENTERPRISE SOCIAL SOFTWARE 
Small and large enterprises are always looking for tools 
to bring their employees closer together, even for workers 
located in the same place, they are often part of multiple 
projects which require attention and time management, thus 
the need for web-based collaboration. [11] 
Social Network Sites offer many features from forming 
communities and creating blogs, to sharing photos and 
videos and organizing events. These technologies are now 
coming in packages specially designed for large enterprises. 
[12] As compared to Facebook that “helps you connect and 
share with the people in your life”, the following tools keep 
the employees in touch with their colleagues and the projects 
to get work done.  
The most popular Enterprise Social Software on the 
market is Jive’s Social Business Software previously known 
as ClearSpace.  In addition to Profiles, which is the main 
social networking feature, Jive has an Analytics Module 
which tracks user activities and offers some statistics. 
Information can be easily exported to other formats and tools 
such as Microsoft Excel and Microsoft Access. An Insight 
130
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Module reports on user engagement and sentiment extracted 
from user-generated content. [15] [16] 
IBM Lotus Connections is the closest product to Jive’s 
[14]. Lotus Connections wraps many social networking 
technologies into one package. It has discussion forums, 
blogs, bookmarks, and a homepage allowing a customized 
overview of the user's social network: A list of colleagues’ 
profiles, new entries in the Wikis, latest blogs, popular 
bookmarks, and new activities. [17] 
Socialtext is a platform that allows organizations of all 
sizes to collaborate using social networking features. It has 
collaborative weblogs to facilitate internal communication 
and a social messaging service for micro-sharing among a 
group of colleagues to share brief messages like on Twitter, 
messaging is in near real-time and kept to short messages of 
140 characters to encourage briefness. [18] 
Microsoft is also on the Enterprise 2.0 market through 
SharePoint. In SharePoint, Microsoft focuses on function 
over user-friendliness. SharePoint has some collaborative 
tools such as blogs, wikis, and message boards along with 
other features such as share calendars, task lists, etc. 
Components are not very well connected to others. [11] 
Microsoft added the social networking functions as features 
of its already-existing product rather than make a separate 
package. [12] Team Sites are a collaboration tool in 
SharePoint that offers groups some capabilities such as 
document libraries, lists, group calendaring, tasks, contacts, 
and announcements. Other features include the common 
Blogs, Wikis, and Discussions forums. [19] 
Oracle has introduced new features to its Oracle Beehive 
enterprise-collaboration platform. The product now includes 
team workspaces and instant messaging, Web and voice 
conferencing, as well as the standard email, calendar, and 
other features. [13] Other major Enterprise Social Software 
include SuiteTwo and Salesforce.  
 
A. Summary of functionalities 
With the increased usage of Enterprise 2.0 software in 
organizations, it is expected that in the future employees 
might start to rely more and more on these collaborative 
technologies to collaborate more than email.  
 
The Enterprise 2.0 tools previously mentioned encourage 
collaboration, save companies a considerable amount of 
time, and have many revolutionary features that capture the 
essence of Web 2.0 in all its ways. However, they do not 
offer a network insight or reveal any patterns of connectivity 
in a network, thus not benefiting from the dynamic and 
immense amount of information available in them.  
The limitations of all existing enterprise software are that 
none of them contains a social network analysis module 
integrated in them.  
Many of these have available source code, and support 
plug-ins, while others offer the option to export data to Excel 
or Access such as Jive SBS, or have an API such as IBM 
Connections, will be useful in the future for adding a tool for 
network analysis.  
III. 
ORGANIZATIONAL NETWORK ANALYSIS 
Based on the incredible amount of media coverage, many 
people might believe that social networks are a recent 
discovery – a phenomena resulting from consumer 
participation in web sites such as MySpace, LinkedIn and 
Facebook.[7] However, social network analysis has been an 
interdisciplinary field/multidisciplinary method from the 
very beginning. [3] Network analysis can be traced to three 
or four disciplines: Psychology, Anthropology, Sociology, 
and Mathematics.  
Social network analysis is the mapping and measuring of 
relationships 
and 
flows 
between 
people, 
groups, 
organizations, computers, URLs, and other connected 
information/knowledge entities. [8] The two main elements 
of any social network are actors and relations. Their 
combination jointly constitutes a social network. [3]   
According to Knoke (2008), an actor may be an 
individual person or collectivities such as informal groups 
and formal organizations. Common examples of individual 
actors include employees in a corporate work team, or high 
school students attending a graduation. Collective actors 
might be firms competing in an industry, or political parties 
holding seats in a parliament. [3] 
A relation is generally defined as a specific kind of 
contact, connection, or tie between a pair of actors, or dyad. 
Relations may be either directed, where one actor initiates 
and the second actor receives (e.g., advising), or non-
directed, where mutuality occurs (e.g., conversion). A 
relation is not an attribute of one actor but a joint property 
that exists only as long as both actors maintain their 
association.  
Organizational network analysis (ONA) can provide a 
deep inner view into the workings of an organization, a 
powerful means of making invisible patterns of information 
flow and collaboration in strategically important groups 
visible.[21] Even in small, contained groups, executives are 
often surprised by patterns of collaboration that are quite 
different from their beliefs and from the formal organization 
chart. [2]  
There are a lot of research and work done in this area and 
still carried out. Cross and Parker are among the researchers 
leading in the field of Organizational Network Analysis are 
Cross and Parker. Rob Cross has been researching the area of 
applying social network analysis ideas to business issues and 
has worked with over 200 leading organizations on a variety 
of solutions including innovation, revenue growth, cost 
containment and talent management. Their work describes a 
full methodology to conduct an organizational social 
analysis, the highlight the process that transforms a formal 
organizational chart (Figure 1) into an information one 
revealed by SNA (Figure 2).  
    
131
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

  
Figure 1.  Formal Organizational Chart [20] 
 
Conducting a Social Network Analysis manually 
involves the following steps of identifying a strategically 
important group, assessing meaningful and actionable 
relationships such as relationships that reveal collaboration, 
rigidity, or supportiveness in a network, then conducting a 
survey, and then analyze the results.   
 
 
Figure 2.  Informal Organizational Chart as revealed by Social Network 
Analysis [20] 
 
Among the many revelations that were a result of the 
analysis in the example chart obtained in Figure 2 is that 
many of the senior people had become too-removed from the 
groups day-to-day operations, and this helped turn what 
could have been a difficult confrontation with a particular 
executive into constructive discussion that led the person to 
commit more time to the group.  [20] Another point emerged 
was the role that Cole played, being the point of contact 
between different groups on the network and central for the 
information flow. The social network analysis revealed the 
extent the entire network was reliant on Cole, if Cole leaves 
his job, this would have a significant impact on the 
organization [20]. 
Organizational Network Analysis may be suitable in 
supporting mergers, partnerships, and large-scale change in 
companies where it may highlight the information flow and 
knowledge transfer. Similarly, it may be useful for 
developing communities of practice within an organization 
as the process may identify the key members of the 
community and assess the strength of connectivity within a 
community, along with other situations such as improving 
strategic decision making and promoting innovation [2]. 
IV. 
FURTHER RESEARCH 
Network analysis can be very helpful in revealing 
patterns of connectivity in specific functions, divisions, or 
business units. [2] By going through the features of the main 
Enterprise 2.0 packages on the market, we saw the lack of 
the social analysis component in these enterprise software, 
hence the need to more research in this area to benefit from 
the abundant data that becomes available as a result of using 
these packages in organizations.  
In the further research in this area, a tool will be 
developed to get social FOAF data from an organization’s 
social software, and analyze it applying organizational 
network analysis techniques to automatically discover 
patterns of connectivity and the informal structure of the 
organizational chart as inferred from the interaction of 
employees on the social software. The automated analysis 
will remove the high cost and the complexity of conducting 
an ONA manually through interviews, surveys, without the 
data in social software.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Cross, R., A. Parker, and L. Sasson, Networks in the Knowledge 
Economy. 1st Edition ed. 2003: Oxford University Press, USA. 368. 
[2] Cross, R. and A. Parker, The Hidden Power of Social Networks: 
Understanding How Work Really Gets Done in Organizations. 2004: 
Harvard Business School Press. 
[3] Knoke, D. and S. Yang, Social Network Analysis. 2nd Edition ed. 
Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences. 2008: SAGE 
Publications. 144. 
[4] Mayfield, A., What is social media? 2007, iCrossing. 
[5] Korba, L., et al. Automated Social Network Analysis for 
Collaborative Work. in Proceedings of the Third International 
Conference on Cooperative Design, Visualization and Engineering 
(CDVE). 2006. Palma de Mallorca, Spain. 
[6] Gibson, O., Internet means end for media barons, says Murdoch, in 
The Guardian. 2006. 
[7] Gotta, M. Analysis Of Social Networks: Telling Old Stories In New 
Ways. 
 
2008 
3 
April 
2008. 
Available 
from: 
http://mikeg.typepad.com/perceptions/2008/04/analysis-of-soc.html 
(accessed 25 September 2010). 
[8] Krebs, V. Social Network Analysis, A Brief Introduction.  2008; 
Available from: http://www.orgnet.com/sna.html (accessed 25 
September 2010). 
132
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

[9] Rowe, R., et al. Automated social hierarchy detection through email 
network analysis. in International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining. 2007. San Jose, California: ACM. 
[10] Creamer, G., et al. Segmentation and Automated Social Hierarchy 
Detection through Email Network Analysis. in Advances in Web 
Mining and Web Usage Analysis: 9th International Workshop on 
Knowledge Discovery on the Web, WebKDD 2007, and 1st 
International Workshop on Social Networks Analysis, SNA-KDD 
2007. Revised papers. 2009: Springer-Verlag. 
[11] Harris, J. Jive’s Clearspace Brings Collaboration and Social Tools To 
Enterprises. 
 
7 
April 
2008; 
Available 
from: 
http://webworkerdaily.com/2008/04/07/jives-clearspace-brings-
collaboration-and-social-tools-to-enterprises/ (accessed 26 September 
2010). 
[12] Hamm, S., IBM’s Social Networking Push, in BusinessWeek. 2007. 
[13] Kolakowski, 
N. 
Oracle 
Beehive 
Platform 
Offering 
Social 
Networking, Collaboration Tools.  4 May 2009; Available from: 
http://www.eweek.com/c/a/Messaging-and-Collaboration/Oracle-
Beehive-Platform-Offering-Social-Networking-Collaboration-Tools-
387441/ (accessed 26 September 2010) . 
[14] Hersh, D. Another Clearspace Competitor: Lotus Connections.  24 
January 
2007; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.jivesoftware.com/jivespace/community/jivetalks/blog/200
7/01/24/another-clearspace-competitor-lotus-connections 
(accessed 
22 August 2010) . 
[15] Jive SBS. Available from: http://www.jivesoftware.com/products 
(accessed 26 September 2010). 
[16] Jive introduces SBS 3.0.  10 March 2009 Available from: 
http://www.kmworld.com/Articles/News/Industry-Watch/Jive-
introduces-SBS-3.0--52984.aspx (accessed 25 September 2010). 
[17] Lotus 
Connections. 
Available 
from: 
http://www-
01.ibm.com/software/lotus/products/connections/(accessed 22 August 
2010). 
[18] Socialtext: 
Products 
& 
Services. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.socialtext.com/products/(accessed 22 August 2010). 
[19] Microsoft 
SharePoint 
- 
Social 
Capabilities.Available 
from: 
http://sharepoint.microsoft.com/en-
us/product/capabilities/Pages/default.aspx (accessed 30 September 
2010). 
[20] Cross, R., A. Parker, Prusak L., and Borgatti S, Knowing What We 
Know: Supporting Knowledge Creation and Sharing in Social 
Networks. 2001: Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 30, No. 2, pp. 100–
120. 
[21] Cross, R. Introduction to Organizational Network Analysis; Available 
from: http://www.robcross.org/network_ona.htm (accessed 22 August 
2010). 
133
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

