Economic View of Internet Freedom Issue  
Rasim Alguliev 
Department of information society problems 
Institute of Information Technology of ANAS  
Baku, Azerbaijan 
rasim@science.az 
Farhad Yusifov 
Department of information society problems 
Institute of Information Technology of ANAS  
Baku, Azerbaijan 
farhadyusifov@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—In the present research, we examine the relationship 
between the Internet freedom and various social, political and 
especially economic factors, as they affect the Internet growth. 
The results show a strong relationship between a country’s 
GDP and Internet penetration. In general, the hypothesis 
which predicts that the higher a country’s GDP per capita, the 
more likely that it has Internet access and freedom, is 
supported. 
Keywords-Internet freedom; information environment; GDP; 
information security.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Considering international experience, while researching 
philosophy of freedom, it is clear that Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP) per capita is much higher in countries with 
greater economic freedom [1][2][3]. More precisely, people 
have more economical freedom in the countries with high 
GDP. Per capita GDP is the value of all final goods and 
service produced within a country for domestic use and 
reserve, and it is considered as one of the main indicators of 
living standards of the country’s population. Generally, 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) policy 
of the country determines the basis of information freedom 
of the country. Information asymmetry problem existing on 
the Internet is viewed as one of the issues with a complex 
solution and deficiencies in this field are currently becoming 
more intensified.  
In the research we examined, the relationship between 
the Internet development and various social, political and 
especially economic factors, as they affect the Internet 
growth. The results show that the Internet penetration is 
related 
to 
a 
country’s 
wealth, 
per 
capita 
GDP, 
telecommunication infrastructure, urbanization and stability 
of the government. 
Some views on information freedom are investigated and 
factors affecting Internet Freedom are analyzed and given 
correlation between volume of per capita GDP and number 
of Internet users. 
II. 
SOME VIEWS ON INFORMATION FREEDOM  
ICT and government policy of the country determine the 
quantity (and quality) of Information freedom. Although 
people’s information freedom is declared as proclamatory, 
objective and subjective solution methods for its solution 
must be found in each country. This is directly connected to 
economic condition, regional position, political views, etc., 
of the country. For example, based on the statistical 
indicators, Internet access speed at 1Mb/sec per capita is 
considered as minimum for providing people’s information 
freedom in Finland [4][5].  
Information asymmetry problem existing on the Internet 
worldwide is viewed as one of the issues with a complex 
solution for provision of freedoms. High price factor of 
Internet can limit the people’s ability to obtain information. 
In other words, people with Internet access can obtain more 
superior knowledge. Logically, it can cause formation of 
notions such as information monopoly, information 
dictatorship, information imperialism, etc.  
Provision of freedoms, unwritten rules in existing 
environment, chaos, anarchy etc. can logically lead to 
formation of environment for prosperity of all kinds of 
crime. One of the most important issues for this stage is 
formation and development of information society.  
Information environment – is such an environment, 
where information is created, stored, processed and 
transmitted. All forms of information exchange existing in 
the society are executed, and provide for existence and 
operation of the society as a single social organism. In 
general, information environment can be demonstrated as 
three integrants: 
 
Languages reflecting all forms of information on 
information relations occurring in the country; 
 
Content-volume, meaning and value (importance) of 
information; 
 
Information-communication infrastructure forming 
the material basis of information exchange. 
It must be noted that, characteristics of contents and 
information-communication 
infrastructures 
define 
the 
information space of the country in total, as a whole.  
The notion of information environment can concern the 
society as a whole, as well as any of its activity spheres. It 
can be noted that, information environment of science or its 
different fields (economy, culture and other information 
environments) can be discussed as information environment 
of the world, country, region and city.    
Development of information environment in different 
countries happens irregularly within time and space, and 
depends of development level of the country. In modern 
society, information environment mainly has a network 
structure. The main connection form among points of 
information environments is Internet and it provides the 
technical means of information connection of one subject 
with another. From this standpoint, the Internet freedom 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

problem is encountered as a component of freedoms 
provision and lately, existing problem has become more 
intensified. Development of legal basis of Internet is 
demonstrated as one of the relevant issues. Naturally, 
processes occurring in Internet environment cannot be 
regulated with existing laws. Freedoms of the users can be 
discussed based on the normative-legal basis to be created. 
III. 
FACTORS AFFECTING INTERNET FREEDOM 
Generally, there are objective and subjective factors 
affecting 
Internet 
freedom 
[6][7][8][9]. 
Absence 
of 
information resources in accordance with national standards, 
non-conduction of audit, absence of feedback mechanisms, 
and disinterestedness of the government in development of 
Internet can be sited as examples. Installation of different 
filters, analyzers within the borders of the country, total 
control of relations of users with Internet, limitation of 
access to web-sites and social networks are among the 
factors affecting Internet freedom.  
Another important issue is the evident exaggeration of 
energy security problem of Internet lately. Thus, energy 
security problem, which is considered as one of main 
components of information security of the society, must be 
kept in focus constantly. As energy security is not a domestic 
issue of the government, it must be considered that, shut-
down of a server located in a certain country limits the 
access possibility to existing information resources from 
other countries.  
Artificial increase of Internet use prices, non-satisfactory 
services provided to the users by the providers, absence of 
formation of normal competition environment, etc., can be 
sited among factors affecting Internet freedom in developing 
countries [8][9][10][11]. 
In general, requirement of maximum Internet freedom in 
countries with poorly developing economy does not reflect 
existing reality.  From this standpoint, a system of indicators 
characterizing the economic potential of the country must be 
developed considering economical potential of the country. 
For example, countries can be classified and divided in 
classes by regions, based on per capita Internet speed in the 
country. Surely, this evaluation is connected to a certain 
period. Because with passage of time, economic conditions 
of the countries change, to be more precise, Internet 
capabilities change. Thus, geographical landscape of Internet 
freedom in world countries, and regions can be obtained. 
IV. 
CORRELATION BETWEEN VOLUME OF PER CAPITA 
GDP AND NUMBER OF INTERNET USERS 
Slow development of information technologies, and 
limited or no Internet access opportunities in developing 
countries are justified by a number of reasons: 
 
Low level of income limits the Internet access and in 
general, use of capabilities of modern technologies 
by population and companies.  
 
Absence of the desired level of infrastructure in 
cities and territories, as well as low number (density) 
of potential consumers leads to further increasing 
expenses on development of infrastructure; 
 
Poor development of infrastructure and very limited 
access opportunities to them results in high prices of 
Internet access; 
 
Low level of literacy of population, non-sufficient 
level of computer knowledge; 
 
Unformed or non-existent normative-legal base. 
According to the research, economic indicators of the 
country and difference among them are regarded as one of 
the most evident factors [10][11][12][13]. Volume of per 
capita GDP determines the capabilities of citizens and 
companies as potential consumers on the Internet market. 
Share of Internet users among population increases as these 
indicators increase. Besides, there are relevantly more 
Internet users in countries with high or very high GDP per 
capita. We can distinctly see this tendency as we look at the 
correlation (in Fig.1) between GDP volume per capita and 
ratio of Internet users (Iusers) and the base population (P) in 
Azerbaijan in 2002-2010 years [14]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Correlation between GDP volume per capita and ratio of 
Internet users (Iusers) and the base population (P) in The Republic of 
Azerbaijan in 2002-2010 years. 
The results show a strong relationship between a 
country’s GDP and Internet penetration. Developed countries 
tend to boast a higher Internet penetration rate than poor 
countries. In other words, countries with low GDP per capita 
are all on the low end of the Internet penetration rate. In 
generally, hypothesis which predicts that the higher a 
country’s GDP per capita, the more likely that it has Internet 
access, is supported. In this case, to a certain extent, Internet 
development is more likely to be affected by economic 
factors rather than social and political factors. 
In other words, GDP per capita is considered as one of 
the main indicators of living standards of country’s 
population. If the volume of GDP per capita is high, then 
population of that country has more economic freedom. 
Provision of economic freedom means capability to access 
Internet, and in this case, we can talk about provision of 
Internet freedom. It must be noted that, the factors affecting 
Internet development process are not of linear character. 
Effect of economic factors is formed at a certain 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

chronological stage or depending on a sequence of different 
effects. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Volume of per capita GDP is accepted as one of the main 
indicators of living standards of a country’s population. 
Volume of per capita GDP determines the potential 
consumer capabilities of citizens on Internet market. Increase 
of these indicators leads to increase of Internet users’ share 
among population. This suggests that provision of Internet 
freedom depends on economical factors and conduction of 
researches in this field is necessary. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. B. Kim, “Advancing Freedom: The Path to Greater 
Development and Progress,” www.heritage.org, [retrieved: 
January, 2014]. 
[2] J. Gwartney, R. Lawson, and J. Hall, 2012 Index of Economic 
Freedom, www.heritage.org, [retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[3] J. Gwartney, R. Lawson, and J. Hall, Economic Freedom of the 
World: 2013 Annual Report, www.freetheworld.com,  [retrieved: 
February, 2014]. 
[4] Broadband now a legal right in Finland, www.itu.int, [retrieved: 
February, 2014]. 
[5] Making broadband available to everyone. The national plan of 
action to improve the infrastructure of the information society, 
www.lvm.fi, [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[6] D.V. Zakharchenko, “Internet-technologies as development 
factor of infrastructure of modern economy,” Economy and 
Management, 
no. 
5, 
vol. 
78, 
2011, 
pp 
122-125. 
http://ecsocman.hse.ru, [retrieved: February, 2014].  
[7] T.V. Maksiyanova, “Influence of Internet-economy of GDP of 
Russia”, 2012, http://vernadsky.tstu.ru, [retrieved: January, 
2014]. 
[8] L. Andres, D. Cuberes, M. Diouf, and T. Serebrinsky, “The 
diffusion 
of 
the 
Internet: 
A 
cross-country 
analysis,” 
Telecommunications Policy, no. 34, vol. 5-6, 2010, pp. 323-340. 
[9] H. Xiaoming and C. S. Kay, “Factors affecting Internet 
development: An Asian survey,” First Monday, vol. 9, no. 2, 
2004, http://firstmonday.org, [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[10] S. Johnson, J. A. Robinson, and P. Yared, Income and 
Democracy, 2008, www0.gsb.columbia.edu, [retrieved: January, 
2014]. 
[11] Freedom on the Net 2013, A Global assessment of Internet and 
Digital media, Full Report, www.freedomhouse.org,  [retrieved: 
January, 2014]. 
[12] S. Amiri, and B. Reif, “Internet Penetration and its Correlation to 
Gross Domestic Product: An Analysis of the Nordic Countries, 
International Journal of Business”, Humanities and Technology, 
no. 2, vol. 3, 2013, pp. 50-60. 
[13] Internet World Stats: Countries with Highest Internet Penetration 
Rates, http://www.internetworldstats.com/top25.htm, [retrieved: 
February, 2014]. 
[14] Country profile statistics, www.indexmundi.com, [retrieved: 
February, 2014]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

