Active Learning in the Museum 
Using Technology to Enhance Learning 
Lasse Berntzen 
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
School of Business, University College of Southeast Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
 
 
Abstract—This short paper describes a recent development of 
an app for use by young student museum visitors. The idea is 
built on the concept of active learning where students are 
encouraged to actively engage themselves in the learning 
process. The app allows students to take photos, make notes, 
make sound recordings and retrieve online information. All 
collected information is sent to a server. The students can 
download the information and make it into a final report from 
the visit. 
Keywords-active learning; lean startup;museum; app. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A museum is a place where objects are stored, preserved 
and exhibited. The objects are regarded as part of our 
cultural heritage. To promote understanding and experience, 
some museums use interaction and technology to make visits 
more interesting. Still, many museums mainly consist of 
static exhibitions. Visitors walk around and look at objects 
on display. Schools use museums as an alternative arena of 
learning. The challenge is to include the museum in the 
learning process in a way that enhances learning [1]. 
University College of Southeast Norway has for some 
time collaborated with local museums to experiment with 
technological solutions to enhance visitor experience. The 
first project was an augmented reality application focusing 
on deportation of Jews during the Second World War. The 
second project is described here: A smartphone/tablet app for 
active learning in the museum. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
introduces active learning, and a model for active learning in 
museums. Section III describes the active learning app. 
Section IV discusses how data from the app can be used to 
enhance the experience from visiting the museum. Section V 
presents results from testing the prototype. The last section 
discusses other application areas, and ideas for further 
development. 
II. 
ACTIVE LEARNING 
According to Weltman [2], active learning is a method of 
learning in which students are actively or experientially 
involved in the learning process. To learn, students must do 
more than just listen: They must read, write, discuss, or be 
engaged in solving problems [3]. Active learning often 
involves learning by doing. Creekmore and Deaton [4] argue 
that learning retention rates from active learning are much 
higher than from passive learning. The best learning 
retention rates is made when students are teaching their 
fellow students. If students are required to present their 
findings in front of the class after visiting the museum, the 
learning outcome may be improved. 
A. A Model for Active Learning 
As part of the project we made a model for active 
learning. The students collect information in the field (e.g., 
in the museum), which is later used for reflection. Instead of 
using a traditional paper notebook, the students use a mobile 
device with camera (phone or tablet). The technology 
provides new opportunities to capture information by taking 
photos, recording voice, writing notes and retrieving online 
information. 
After collecting information, the students can reflect 
upon their (recorded) observations. This includes asking 
themselves questions and finding answers. The reflection is 
important for learning. The result is documented through a 
report or presentation made by the students, not from scratch, 
but from the collected data, enhanced with the results of the 
reflection.  
The museum visit is reiterated and not forgotten. 
 
Figure 1.  Model for Active Learning 
The process is visualized in Figure 1. The students come 
to the museum, and walk around exhibitions making notes 
and collecting data with their mobile devices. Back in the 
classroom they reflect upon the data they collected, and 
make the report or presentation. 
III. 
THE ACTIVE LEARNING APP 
The information is collected by mobile devices (phones 
or tablets). This simplifies the data collection itself, but also 
provides opportunities to upload the data to a server. The 
students can then download the data and embed the data into 
their report or presentation. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

As part of the project, we developed an Android app as a 
“proof-of-concept” prototype. The prototype was tested by 
real users (junior high school students) in real situations 
(visiting an exhibition). The feedback from the users was 
used to improve the prototype.  
We followed the methodology developed by Eric Ries in 
his book “Lean Startup Methodology” [5]. His methodology 
uses a “Build-Measure-Learn” loop to iteratively improve a 
product. The “Build-Measure-Learn” loop is shown in 
Figure 2. 
The first step of the methodology is to develop what is 
called a minimum viable product (MVP). The MVP is a 
prototype with enough functionality to enable a full turn of 
the “Build-Measure-Learn” loop.  
 
Figure 2.  The “Build-Measure-Learn” loop 
The “Build-Measure-Learn” loop starts with some ideas 
about the products. These ideas are developed into a product 
or a service. Users are asked for feedback. The data is used 
to learn from the users, which brings new ideas on the table. 
 
The prototype was developed through two iterations with 
real users (students).  
A. Functionality 
The initial idea was to include four actions initiated by 
the user (student): 
• 
Retrieving information about an object 
• 
Adding text 
• 
Adding audio 
• 
Adding a photo 
 
All actions upload collected data to a server, where the 
students can access the data after returning to their homes or 
school. 
Figure 3 shows the main user interface of the app, 
consisting of four large buttons with both icons and texts to 
invoke the four different functions described above. 
 
Figure 3.  Main user interface 
The captions are in Norwegian. The upper left button is 
used to take notes, the upper right button is used to make a 
sound recording, the lower left button is used to retrieve 
information, and the right left button is used to take a photo. 
(The text may look small, but this screenshot was made on a tablet, 
not a phone) 
 
1) Retrieving information 
Beacon 
technology 
[6] 
consists 
of 
small 
radio 
transmitters (beacons) sending messages at regular intervals. 
The range of the radio transmitters is very short, and can be 
adjusted. When close enough, the app detects the beacon and 
retrieves the message. Each message contains an identifier, 
which identifies the physical transmitter. This identifier can 
be used by the app to access a service providing information 
about an object. In our prototype, we associated the 
identifiers with links to web pages describing the individual 
objects. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
Figure 4.  Two types of beacons 
Figure 4 shows a couple of beacons. The one on the left 
includes a battery and can operate for months without 
recharging. The one on the right does not have its own power 
supply, but can be placed in an USB-charger. 
 
2) Adding text 
The beacons provide the possibility to retrieve online 
information about an object. This information is not 
complete, and does not capture the perceptions and feelings 
of the user. Therefore, the possibility to add notes is an 
important function. Standard text input functions are used, 
and in some smartphones and tablets, this also allows the use 
of handwriting with a stylus. 
 
3) Adding audio 
Audio is a complement to textual input. In many 
situations, it is easier to just talk to the smartphone or tablet 
instead of using the built-in keyboard. But audio also 
provides the unique opportunity to capture sounds emitted by 
objects. This can be engines, live animals or music 
instruments. 
 
4) Adding photo 
Adding a photo gives the opportunity to capture visual 
impressions. The value of a photo cannot be underestimated, 
as it captures details that may not be covered by a textual 
description. 
B. Login 
It was also necessary to include an authentication 
mechanism. Security is not a major concern, but it is 
necessary to make a connection between the collected data 
and the user to provide access to the data at a later stage. One 
of the important ideas in our project is to use the collected 
data for a report or presentation after returning from the 
museum. The prototype provides two different kinds of 
authentication. The traditional method uses a login name and 
a password. First time users need to register and select a 
username and password. For this kind of app, most users will 
be first time users, and the registration procedure will be an 
obstacle. The alternative method uses Facebook credentials 
to log in. Facebook provides an application program 
interface (API) to authenticate users. In this case, users do 
not have to go through a registration procedure. 
Junior high school students testing the app showed a 
clear preference for using Facebook credentials, since they 
already have Facebook accounts. The registration procedure 
was reported as more cumbersome. 
IV. 
FROM APP TO SERVER 
Captured data is uploaded to a server. Figures 5 and 6 
shows two examples of the user interface. The screen in 
Figure 5 is used for text input, and the one in Figure 6 for 
audio input. Both screens include buttons to upload content.  
The prototype stores audio and photos as files in the file 
system, and stores links to these files and text in a database. 
The database is good for storing structured data in an 
efficient way, and connects the user id with the content 
belonging to the user.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Text entry screen 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Voice recording screen 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

V. 
TESTING 
The final prototype was tested by a group of nine junior 
high school students, four girls and five boys. Their ages 
were from thirteen to fifteen. All had their own mobile 
phones (skills). All were Facebook users. 
We used a Likert-scale from 1 to 6, where 1 is the lowest 
and 6 is the highest value. When asked if the functions 
(buttons) were easy to understand, they all answered 5 or 6. 
They were also asked about how easy it was to use each 
function. Again, all answered 5 or 6 for notes, photos, sound, 
and using beacons. They also answered 5 or 6 for button size 
and text size. The only question that did not receive only 5 or 
6 was the use of colors. One of the respondents gave a 4 for 
the use of color. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PLANS 
The app itself has been tested with real users in real 
situations. Improvements were done during an iterative 
design process.  
Even if our prototype app was made with museum 
visitors in mind, it can be used for a broad range of 
applications. When students are doing field-work, it can be 
used 
to 
document 
what 
is 
happening, 
and later be refined into some written record of the event. 
This approach can be applied to any learning experience, 
e.g., a car mechanic or a carpenter; the app can help capture 
data that can later be transformed into knowledge. All of 
these are learning cycles that consist of information 
collection, processing, reflection and conceptualization. In 
many ways, it substitutes the traditional notebook with a 
more powerful instrument that also allows capturing visual 
images and sound. 
 
A future version will incorporate ideas from gamification 
to further encourage students to do more work during their 
visit. Students will be rewarded when they perform activities, 
by getting badges or stars. This information may be shared 
with other students through pop-up messages. 
On the server side, it is possible to embed the data 
directly into a document or presentation. Both Microsoft 
Word and Microsoft Powerpoint have application program 
interfaces (API´s) that allow an external program to create 
documents or presentations, and then fill in content. In this 
way, the students are relieved of the task of inserting the data 
themselves, and can spend more time on editing the result. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author wants to thank his students: Inger Rostad 
Horn, Marielle Lorentzen, and Elin Sørlie for their 
contribution in developing the Android prototype described 
above. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Hein, G. ”Learning in the Museum”, Routledge, 1998 
[2] Weltman, D. ”A Comparison of Traditional and Active 
Learning Methods: An Empirical Investigation Utilizing a 
Linear Mixed Model”, PhD Thesis, The University of Texas 
at Arlington, 2007 
[3] Bonwell, C. and Eison, J. ”Active Learning: Creating 
Excitement in the Classroom”, AEHEERIC Higher Education 
Report No.1. Jossey-Bass, Washington, DC, 1991 
[4] Creekmore, J. and Deaton S. The Active Learnicg Classroom. 
Strategies for Practical Educators. New Forums Press, 2015 
[5] Ries, E. “The Lean Startup”, Penguin, 2001 
[6] Statler, S. ”Beacon Technologies”, Apress, 2016 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

