Addressing the Urban-Town-Rural Divide: The Digital Town Readiness Assessment
Framework
Theo Lynn
Irish Institute of Digital Business,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: theo.lynn@dcu.ie
Pierangelo Rosati
Irish Institute of Digital Business,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: pierangelo.rosati@dcu.ie
Grace Fox
Irish Institute of Digital Business,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: grace.fox@dcu.ie
Declan Curran
DCU Business School,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: declan.curran@dcu.ie
Colm O’Gorman
DCU Business School,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: colm.ogorman@dcu.ie
Edel Conway
Irish Institute of Digital Business,
Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland.
Email: edel.conway@dcu.ie
Abstract—Economic growth, job creation, better public services,
and improved quality of life are just some of the beneﬁts from the
digital transformation of society. Policymakers worldwide are not
only investing in the infrastructure to deliver this digital future
but measurement and benchmarking to assess digital progress.
These benchmarks are, for the most part, national benchmarks
heavily inﬂuenced by broadband connectivity and an increasing
focus on cities and metropolises. Against the backdrop of global
urbanisation, towns outside the functional urban area of cities
are in danger of both being depopulated and disconnected. This
paper proposes a deﬁnition for a digital town and outlines eight
rationales for digital towns. Based on these rationales and a
review of existing benchmarking frameworks for digitisation,
we present a framework for measuring digital readiness at a
town level. The framework can be used by local stakeholders
and regional and national policymakers to understand digital
town readiness and digital competitiveness; compare a town
against selected national and international benchmarks; and
stimulate stakeholder engagement on digital strategies for town
development.
Keywords–Rural Development; Digital Town; Smart Cities;
Smart Towns; Government Policy; Framework.
I. INTRODUCTION
“The Digital Society” is the latest sobriquet in a long
list for a society whose social structures and activities, to a
greater or lesser extent, are organised around digital infor-
mation networks that connect people, processes, things, data
and networks [1]. There is near-universal agreement that, at
a national level, progress towards such digitisation and the
societal and economic consequences are beneﬁcial. As such,
policymakers have invested heavily in Information and Com-
munication Technologies (ICTs) to support digital agendas. To
assess and benchmark performance and progress, a wide range
of country-level and city-level indices have been developed
and introduced by international organisations, industry bodies,
ﬁrms, and academics.
Concurrent with the introduction and evolution of the dig-
ital society, there has been a signiﬁcant rise in the proportion
of the population that live in cities, from 37% in 1975 to 48%
today [2]. This urbanisation has been driven by city expansion,
city densiﬁcation, and rural migration driven by economic
opportunities and higher quality of life [2][3]. While the larger
population results in an agglomeration of resources that attract
economic activity, government investment, and opportunities
for socio-cultural and political participation, greater population
density has an adverse impact on sustainable development [2].
In an effort to reduce pollution and crime, limit exposure
to natural hazards, transition to a low-carbon economy, and
more recently curb the spread of infectious diseases such as
COVID19, there has been an increased focus on the use of
ICTs at a city level, so-called “smart city” technologies. Given
the level of investment in smart cities, it is unsurprising that
smart city indices have emerged including the Horizon 2020-
funded CITYkeys indicators for smart city projects and smart
cities, and the more recent IMD Smart City Index.
The term “digital divide”, in reality, refers to two inter-
related digital divides - (i) divides resulting from inequalities
in the technological infrastructure required to support digital
connectivity, and (ii) socio-economic digital divides [4]. These
aspects have been explored in the urban-rural context for over
two decades [4]–[6]. A substantial number of studies from
around the world suggest this divide exists due to inadequate
infrastructure [4][7][8], however more recent studies in highly
digitised countries such as South Korea and Australia suggest
that the digital divide extends to a difference in use by and
perceived beneﬁts for rural users [9][10]. In addition to broad-
band availability and geographic remoteness, suitability and
social exclusion are also factors that have been cited as barriers
to digital adoption and use in rural areas [8]–[10]. These
inter-related factors may not be capable of being addressed
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

by the market or government intervention alone, particularly
where geographic conditions make broadband deployment
commercially infeasible or unattractive. Community-led multi-
stakeholder initiatives have been suggested as a solution to
the urban-rural digital divide, however such initiatives need
to overcome access to technical expertise, volunteerism, and
funding arrangements, as well as geographical conditions, to
ensure success [7].
While national and global deﬁnitions tend to agree on
what cities are, national deﬁnitions tend to disagree on the
classiﬁcation of towns, semi-dense areas and rural areas [2].
This deﬁnitional ambiguity reduces comparability at all levels
- international, national, regional, city, town, and other levels -
and does not recognise fundamental differences in governance.
While countries and cities have both policy making and
investment capabilities, towns and rural areas may not, or
if they do so, such capabilities are limited. This has been
recently addressed by the European Union, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the
International Labour Ofﬁce (ILO), the OECD, UN-Habitat and
the World Bank by the introduction of two new deﬁnitions, the
degree of urbanisation and the Functional Urban Area (FUA)
which proposes three classes instead of the traditional two -
(i) cities; (ii) Towns and Semi-dense Areas (TSA); and iii)
rural areas [2]. With the adoption of these deﬁnitions, new
research is required to explore whether these categorisations
provide new insights and identify a need for renovation of
existing theories, measurement frameworks, and interventions
that delineate between cities, towns and semi-dense areas, and
rural areas so that the efﬁcacy of digital policy and investment
can be assessed and compared for these important and discrete
parts of society. This paper presents preliminary work on a
digital readiness framework to support towns (outside FUAs)
and semi-dense areas in the assessment of digital readiness,
benchmarking against national and international indicators, and
the development of multi-stakeholder digitisation strategies.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Next,
we discuss the rationales for digital towns and propose a def-
inition of a digital town based on extant literature. In Section
3, we review existing national and smart city frameworks for
assessing digital performance and progress. We then brieﬂy
present the Digital Town Readiness Assessment Framework in
Section 4. The paper concludes with a discussion of the current
status of the project.
II. DEFINING AND RATIONALISING DIGITAL TOWNS
While there is extensive literature on smart cities, there is a
paucity of research on the digital transformation of towns [11].
This can be partly explained by the attractiveness of cities to
researchers and policymakers as a focal topic due to their size,
impact and proﬁle. This is not the only reason. A number of
researchers and projects have focussed on smart towns [11].
While the term smart city focuses attention on cities, it does not
necessarily preclude other urban areas, including towns, that
use smart city technology and data to optimise the operation
and services in that area [12]. Notwithstanding this, while
towns face similar issues to cities albeit at a smaller scale,
they have a number of local contextual challenges including
availability of infrastructure services, geographic remoteness,
smaller population sizes, amongst others [13][14]. In this
paper, we do not focus on the quality of smartness as this
derives from the use of (i) near-real-time data obtained from
physical and virtual sensors; (ii) the interconnection between
different services and technologies within the urban area; (iii)
the intelligence from the analysis of the data, and the process of
visualising it; and (iv) the optimisation of operations resulting
from this analysis [12]. Instead, we focus on digital as a
quality as we are interested in the transformations triggered
by widespread adoption of digital technologies that generate,
process, share and transfer information, in all aspects of life.
In addition, and as previously discussed, towns, until
recently, were inconsistently classiﬁed as urban or rural thus
preventing international comparisons. These factors are evident
even in the limited literature on digital towns. For example,
Aveiro in Portugal pioneered a “digital town programme”
in the late nineties [15]. At the time, it had a population
of over 75,000 people and today is an urban agglomeration
with a population of over 120,000. Similarly, Fujisawa, a
prominent Japanese smart town project is an urban area with
a population of over 420,000 people [16]. At the other end
of the scale, researchers and projects have focussed on smart
and digital villages [17]–[19]. Again, deﬁnitional consistencies
abound. The Digitale Doerfer project in Germany includes
Billerbeck with a population of 450 people and Bodenheim
with a population of over 20,000 [20]. In arriving at a usable
deﬁnition of a Digital Town, we must recognise and account
for the increasing expansion of cities and accommodate the
new higher resolution OECD deﬁnitions, while also recognis-
ing existing perspectives on digital towns, and both general
and local contextual rationales for digital adoption and use at
a town level. As mentioned earlier, the OECD has adopted
two deﬁnitions - the degree of urbanisation and the FUA.
The degree of urbanisation reﬂects an urban-rural continuum
and proposes three classes (i) cities; (ii) TSAs; and iii) rural
areas [2]. The FUA recognises that cities are metropolitan
areas comprising the city itself and surrounding areas that are
connected to the city in terms of labour market interactions
(commuting zones) [21]. These deﬁnitions provide new in-
sights in to population change. As discussed, population share
in cities has increased to 48% with a corresponding drop in
towns and semi-dense areas, and rural areas. However, overall
population growth has meant that the population has increased
in all area classiﬁcations. More importantly, research by the
OECD on 111 countries suggest that social and economic op-
portunities follow an urban gradient including life satisfaction,
income premia, employment opportunities, economic mobility,
educational attainment, internet and mobile access and use, and
the provision of public services [2]. Consequently, we focus
on towns and semi-dense areas outside of the FUA of cities,
and exclude low density rural areas. As such and to enable
future comparability, we adopt the deﬁnition of town as per
the revised OECD [2] deﬁnition:
1)
Cities consist of contiguous grid cells that have a
density of at least 1,500 inhabitants per km2 and are
at least 50% built up with a a population of at least
50,000.
2)
Towns and semi-dense areas consist of contiguous
grid cells with a density of at least 300 inhabitants
per km2, are at least 3% built up, and have a total
population of at least 5,000.
3)
Rural areas are cells that do not belong to a city or a
town and semi-dense area, and for the most part have
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

a density below 300 inhabitants per km2.
Based on analysis of existing community network and digi-
tal town projects, we identify at least eight rationales for digital
towns that can be organised along a socio-economic spectrum -
Social, Accessibility, Vocational, Sustainability, Quality of Ser-
vice, Catalytic, Economic - and an over-riding Opportunistic
rationale. The Social Rationale recognises that towns are part
of a wider Digital Society and digital technologies help towns
and their residents participate and function more fully in such
a Digital Society [15][22][23]. In many instances, this revolves
around the provision of online platforms where stakeholders
can share and consume information, services, and transact
through marketplaces [20][24]. The Accessibility and Voca-
tional Rationales also relate to participation in society. The
former posits that the adoption and use of digital technologies
can increase accessibility to services and opportunities to those
who may be disadvantaged or vulnerable in society [15], while
the latter assumes that digital technologies help town residents
prepare to work in a Digital Society [19][22]. This includes
embedding digital technologies in educational institutions, the
provision of education and training on digital technologies and
related topics, and the overall digital competencies for the
entire community [22][23]. For example, Aveiro had a speciﬁc
focus on training and providing employment opportunities for
citizens with special needs in their digital town programme
[15]. Unsurprisingly, environmental sustainability is a common
rationale for digital town projects. Here, the adoption and use
of digital technologies is seen as a means for towns to reduce
adverse environmental impacts and build a resilient habitat for
existing and future residents [16][19][25][26].
A number of digital town objectives can be categorised
under a Quality of Service Rationale. This rationale assumes
that digital technologies may increase the range, quality and
efﬁciency of service delivery whether public services including
health services, commercial services, or community services
[15][23][27]. A common theme in digital town projects is that
role of digital technologies as a catalyst of other innovations
from all parts of the community [11][15][23] (Catalytic Ratio-
nale). Indeed, in the case of Parthenay, a speciﬁc objective of
the digital town programme was to explore whether citizens
were capable of co-inventing services with the public and com-
mercial sponsors [23]. Many digital agenda and digital town
initiatives are driven, at some level, by an Economic Rationale.
This rationale posits that the availability, quality (including
broadband speed), adoption and use of digital technologies
may attract greater economic growth and employment to a
town [23]. This includes increased tourism and retail activity
in addition to potentially attracting digital industry investment
and teleworkers [27]. For example, in the German Digital Do-
erfer project, the platform includes a service for ordering and
delivering local products and services [20]. Finally, although
somewhat implicitly, digital towns appear to be motivated by
an Opportunistic Rationale in that the adoption and use of
digital technologies can differentiate a town from other towns
and may make it a more attractive place to live, work or visit,
or competitive from an economic and investment perspective,
when compared to other towns. This rationale has a dual
purpose in that towns not only seek to attract new residents,
workers and visitors to the town but retain existing residents
and mitigate the risk of depopulation [24].
These rationales are reﬂected in three prevailing perspec-
tives found in the literature which we label as infrastructure-
centric, service-centric, and community-centric. The Infras-
tructure perspective of a digital town emphasises the local
availability and appropriation of ICT infrastructure as a pre-
requisite for the connection of a town as a node in a na-
tional/global network. The Service perspective emphasises the
provision of local information services for citizen’s everyday
lives and visitors. Finally, the community perspective empha-
sises platforms for communities of interest to support work in a
geographical and information space where users can interact,
sharing knowledge, experience and mutual interests [23]. In
reality, a digital town is all of these things. Consequently, we
deﬁne a digital town as a geographic and information space
that adopts and integrates information and communication
technologies in all aspects of town life.
III. MEASURING DIGITAL READINESS
The emergence of frameworks for assessing digital adop-
tion and use emerged in the mid-nineties with the emergence of
the World Wide Web and wider use of the Internet by the gen-
eral public [28]. Unsurprisingly, given that telecommunications
connectivity is a key enabling technology in the digital value
chain, research and measurement frameworks initially empha-
sised the availability, quality, adoption and use of broadband
as a key digital indicator [28]. For example, the International
Telecommunications Union (ITU) ICT Development Index
(IDI) seeks to assess country-level progress towards becoming
an information society by measuring the level, evolution, and
differences over time of ICT developments in countries and the
experience of those countries relative to other countries [29].
First developed in 2008 and revised in 2018, IDI comprises
three sub-indices - ICT Access (infrastructure availability and
access), ICT Use (level of ICT usage and intensity), and ICT
Skills (capabilities of the citizens) comprising 14 indicators in
total [29]. ICT Access and ICT Use each have a weighting of
40%, the ICT skills sub-index has a weighting of 20%; discrete
indicators within each sub-indices have equal weightings [29].
While commonly referenced, this index places a signiﬁcant
emphasis on Internet, and speciﬁc broadband and mobile con-
nectivity, and is relatively simplistic. For example, ICT skills
indicators primarily relate to enrollment in schools with only
one indicator on speciﬁc ICT skills. Other than education, it
does not delineate between different actors in a given country.
In the last decade, frameworks have expanded to reﬂect the
wider transformative impact of digital technologies on society
at different levels - country, city, and to a lesser extent towns
and other rural areas. These include the European Union (EU)
Digital Economy and Society (DESI) Index, the Digital Capital
Index, the Digital Evolution Index, and the Digital Ecosystem
Development Index, to name but a few. DESI [30] is a
composite index designed for monitoring and benchmarking
the digital competitiveness of EU Member States in digital
competitiveness. DESI [31][32] measures performance across
ﬁve dimensions:
1)
Connectivity: the deployment of broadband infras-
tructure and its quality i.e., broadband take-up, ﬁxed
broadband coverage, mobile broadband and broad-
band prices;
2)
Human Capital: the Internet user and advanced skills
needed to take advantage of the possibilities offered
by a digital society;
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 1. Structure of the Digital Ecosystem Index [28]
3)
Citizen use of Internet and online transactions: the
variety of activities performed by citizens already
online;
4)
Business digitisation and e-commerce: the digitisa-
tion of businesses and development of the online sales
channel;
5)
Digital public services: the digitisation of public
services. It should be noted that DESI 2020 does
not include ehealth as part of the Digital Public
Services report as no new data was reported in [33].
It is unclear whether this is a consequence of the
COVID19 pandemic or not.
Since 2018, an international version of DESI (I-DESI) was
produced comparing the 28 countries in the EU with 17 non-
EU countries [32]. DESI is based on data regularly collected by
EU member states however in some cases, for example rural
data, this may be based on aggregating a number of towns,
semi-dense and sparsely populated rural areas based on the
Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS). NUTS
is a geocode standard for referencing the subdivisions of a
country for statistical purposes. It aggregates towns and regions
at a resolution level that may not be useful for town-level
strategic planning.
Similar to DESI, the Digital Capital Index (DCI) focuses
speciﬁcally on the digital evolution of a population. In the
context of the DCI, digital capital is deﬁned as an accumulation
of both digital competencies and digital technologies (or
digital access). The former seeks to measure the individual
abilities of citizens based on the European Digital Competence
Framework for Citizens i.e., information and data literacy,
communication and collaboration, digital content creation,
safety, and problem solving. The latter, digital access, includes
indicators on the access to digital equipment, connectivity
(quality and place), historical time spent online, and support
and training. While not speciﬁcally focusing on towns or rural
areas, Ragnedda, Ruiu and Addeo [34] ﬁnd that urban users
are more likely to have higher digital capital than rural users.
The Digital Evolution Index (DEvI), introduced in 2015,
is an attempt to assess the progress and benchmark country-
level progress towards a digital economy [35]. In the DEvI, the
competitiveness of a country’s digital economy is a function of
two factors - (i) its current state of digitisation based on four
drivers (supply conditions, demand conditions, institutional
environment, and innovation and change) comprising between
99 and 170 indicators, and (ii) its pace of digitisation (momen-
tum) over time measured by the growth rate of a country’s
digitisation score over a ten-year period (2008—2017) [36].
Based on these two factors, digital progress can be categorised
as (a) rapidly advancing, (b) steadily advancing, (c) slow
moving, and (d) declining [36]. Similar to the DEvI, Katz and
Callorda developed the Digital Ecosystem Index (DEcI) [28]
to address limitations in country-level frameworks that overly
focussed on telecommunications infrastructure or a subset of
an economy. The DEcI comprises 64 indicators organised in
to eight pillars as per Figure 1.
More recently, there has been an effort to assess the
state and evolution of digital progress at a city level. These
efforts are largely in the smart city domain and as such
often conﬂate both digital and environmental sustainability
themes. The Smart City Index (SCI) assesses the adoption of
smart technologies in a given city. SCI comprises two pillars,
Structures and Technology, and each pillar is evaluated from
ﬁve perspectives - health and safety, mobility, activities, oppor-
tunities, and governance. For comparison purposes, cities are
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

also categorised against four groups based on the UN Human
Development Index (HDI) score of the economy they are part
of, and are ultimately given a rating for each pillar and overall,
an overall ranking. Similarly, the EU-funded CITYkeys project
propose a benchmarking framework, indicators, and associated
data collection procedures for monitoring and benchmark-
ing smart city solutions across European cities [37]. The
CITYkeys smart city indicator framework is organised around
ﬁve themes:
1)
People - health, safety, access to services, education,
diversity and social cohesion, quality of housing and
the built environment;
2)
Planet - energy and mitigation, materials, water and
land, climate resilience, pollution and waste, ecosys-
tem;
3)
Prosperity - employment, equity, green economy,
economic performance, innovation, attractiveness and
competitiveness;
4)
Governance - organisation, community involvement,
multi-level governance; and
5)
Propagation - scalability and replicability [37].
CITYkeys is the basis for the ETSI technical speciﬁcation
for standardised key performance indicators for sustainable
digital multiservice cities [38].
As can be seen from the aforementioned indicators, many
of the indicators are not within the control of local commu-
nities or municipal authorities at a town-level. Furthermore,
the discussion of smart cities and related technologies is
often conﬂated or combined with environmental sustainability
and associated outcomes. Additionally, where indicators might
be relevant, data may not easily be available or required at
regional or national levels and therefore are not collected or
easily accessible for town stakeholders. While we could not
ﬁnd robust town-level indicators for digital readiness, those
we identiﬁed, for example Kalinka et al. [39], are designed
for sustainable local area planning rather than digitisation
purposes.
IV. THE DIGITAL TOWN READINESS FRAMEWORK
The Digital Town Readiness Assessment framework was
developed by the Irish Institute of Digital Business and the IE
Domain Registry, the Irish national registry for “.ie” domains,
to support stakeholders in towns outside FUAs to rapidly and
cost-effectively:
•
Understand current digital town readiness and digital
competitiveness;
•
Compare a town against national and international
benchmarks; and,
•
Stimulate stakeholder engagement on digitisation.
Based on desk research of existing frameworks for mea-
suring digital adoption and use and consultation with stake-
holders in target areas, an initial framework was developed.
The framework comprises eight dimensions as per Figure
2, namely Connectivity, Digital Citizen, Digital Education,
Digital Civil Society, Digital Business, Digital Public Services,
Digital Tourism, and Horizontal Integration.
A. Connectivity
Based on extant indices and literature, we include a con-
nectivity dimension with nine sub-dimensions relating to the
deployment, quality, adoption and use of broadband. Firstly,
we include two sub-dimensions relating to the availability
of documented plans for both ﬁxed and mobile broadband
connectivity for the town. Secondly, in line with DESI [30], we
include ﬁve sub-dimensions relating to equal access to ﬁxed,
mobile, wireless, and next generation access technologies in
the town. As per [28], we assume greater competition between
broadband and mobile phone services will result in lower
prices to access these services as well as higher quality of
service. Consequently, we include local competition levels
between telecommunications service providers as a factor.
Literature suggests that municipal and free public Wi-Fi access
contribute to economic growth [40][41], promoting tourism
[42][43], social inclusion [44][45], public safety [45]–[47],
and improved public services [43][48]. Similarly, a number
of commentators have emphasised the need for local economic
policy to focus on encouraging teleworking in rural areas [49]–
[51]. As such, we include two sub-dimensions relating to the
availability of free public Wi-Fi and public Internet access in
public and co-working spaces in the town.
B. Digital Citizen
The Digital Citizen dimension focuses on the compe-
tence and usage of digital technologies by citizens in a
town. Again, we include two sub-dimensions relating to the
availability of documented town-level plans for increasing
digital competencies and usage by citizens in the town. To
allow country-level and international comparability, we adopt
and expand the sub-dimensions and indicators used in DESI
and the European Commission Digital Skills Indicators. This
includes the number and complexity of activities involving
digital technologies including the Internet, as well as the
availability of more advanced skills and development, and use
of internet services, e-commerce, digital public services, and
health and care services. Again, reﬂecting recent emphasis in
scholarly literature and policy, we include a sub-dimension for
teleworking, freelancing and other sharing economy work.
C. Digital Education
It is increasingly accepted that digital technologies and
related affordances can directly change the nature of teaching
and learning; this is particularly poignant against the backdrop
of the COVID19 pandemic. The Digital Education dimensions
relates to the support for use and sophistication of digital tech-
nology in education and the provision of training and education
in digital technologies for all levels. Extant general digitisation
measurement frameworks either focus nearly exclusively on
Internet access and computer availability in schools as in DEcI
[28] or, as per DESI [30], do not include digital adoption and
usage in education at all. There are numerous benchmarking
studies on ICT adoption by education which primarily focus
on schools and higher education. These include reports and
studies by the UNESCO Institute for Statistics [52], European
Schoolnet [53], and more recently the European Commission’s
DG CONNECT [54]. As digital adoption and use are heavily
inﬂuenced by the experience and skills of the user population,
and older citizens may not have had the same opportunity to
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 2. The eight dimensions of the Digital Town Readiness Framework
acquire these skills, we include the availability of documented
plans at both a town-level and institution-level for digital
skills provision and integration for all levels of education
and age levels. As such we include all education providers
including pre-school, primary, post-primary, and other digital
skills education providers including training provided by com-
munity organisations, local, regional and national agencies,
and commercial organisations. To aid comparability, we adopt
and extend sub-dimensions from extant benchmarks for ICT
in Education including access to and use of digital technolo-
gies, digital activities and digital conﬁdence of educators and
students, ICT-related professional development for educators,
and the availability of digital policies, strategies, and plans at
town and institutional levels.
D. Digital Civil Society
Digital Civil Society refers to the use and sophistication
of digital technologies by Voluntary and Community Sector
Organisations (VSCOs) in a town. These include charities,
sports and social clubs, political parties etc. While there are
indices to measure digital social innovation, for example the
DSI Index [55], these indices typically focus speciﬁcally on
innovation or social entrepreneurship ecosystems rather than
the use of digital technology more generally by civil society,
and speciﬁcally VSCOs, in their day to day activities. Again,
such indices are often at a country- or city-level. VSCOs are
rarely included in the mainstream digital indices. Similar to the
literature in the commercial domain, extant literature suggests
that digital technologies can transform VSCOs’ organisational
capacity and stakeholder engagement [56][57]. Like commer-
cial organisations, VSCOs can generate value and exploit
the same opportunities digital technologies present including
cost savings, process efﬁciencies, new revenue generation, and
improved quality of service [56]–[58]. Notwithstanding this,
extant literature suggests that digital adoption by VSCOs is
limited [59], with a substantial focus on the use of digital
technologies for communication [57][59]–[61]. We include
similar sub-dimensions as those for businesses adapted for
the VSCO context in our framework e.g., the range of digital
technologies used by VSCOs and their use of e-commerce.
In 2019, more than half of charities (52%) surveyed in the
UK didn’t have a digital strategy. As such, we include a
sub-dimension on the availability of a documented plan for
towns and individual VSCOs on the use of digital technologies.
Research has suggested digital adoption by VSCOs has been
hindered by digital experience and skills [56][57][60][61] and
that this has been especially damaging during the COVID19
pandemic [61]. Consequently, we include sub-dimensions on
the conﬁdence of VSCO ofﬁcers and their completion of digital
skills training in the previous two years.
E. Digital Business
It is widely accepted that the adoption and use of digital
technologies by business can generate business value and
improve competitiveness. So-called third platform technologies
- cloud computing, Big Data analytics, social media and mobile
technologies - can create new revenue generation opportunities
through e-commerce, introduce new business models and faster
time to market, reduce costs, generate and provide faster time
to insight, and enable intelligent infrastructure [62]. This can
often be accomplished with lower upfront investment, reduced
risk, and improved organisational agility and efﬁciency [63]–
[66]. The positive impact of broadband and ICT infrastructure,
websites, e-commerce, social media, CRM, and other digital
business technologies on small-to-medium sized businesses
is well established [67]. However, a digital divide between
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

urban and rural SMEs is also noted in the literature [67]. In
line with DESI [30], the Digital Business dimension relates
to the use and sophistication of digital technology use by
local businesses. We include two sub-dimensions related to
the availability of a documented plan to increase use of digital
technologies by businesses in the town and the prevalence
of ﬁrm-level plans for digital business. As per DESI [30],
we include sub-dimensions on business digitisation and e-
commerce but also the availability of digital equipment and
next generation technologies e.g. blockchain, the Internet of
Things, 3D Printing etc. We expand the indicators on business
digitation to include indicators for data protection, website
security, and international business readiness. To capture the
human capital dimension, we include sub-dimensions on em-
ployee conﬁdence in their digital competences, and the recency
of digital skills training.
F. Digital Public Services
Similar to DESI [30], we deﬁne digital public services
as the use and sophistication of digital technology by local
government and health services, and the availability of local
open data.
1) E-government
E-government is commonly deﬁned as “the use of IT
to enable and improve the efﬁciency with which government
services are provided to citizens, employees, businesses and
agencies” [68]. There is an extensive literature both on the
measurement of the maturity of e-government [69] and re-
latedly the performance assessment of e-government projects
[70]. Most e-government maturity models do not focus on local
government and town-level e-government which often includes
inherited national and regional e-government systems, as well
as local initiatives. In their review of performance assessment
frameworks for e-government projects, Singh et al. [70] note
the importance of placing the citizen at the centre of e-
government performance assessment. In particular, the note the
prevalence of user satisfaction, and speciﬁcally ease of use and
usefulness in e-government performance assessment. In our
assessment of e-government readiness, we take citizen-centric
approach largely following Belanger and Hiller’s ﬁve-level
maturity framework i.e., (i) information, (ii) two-way commu-
nication, (iii) transaction, (iv) integration, and (v) participation
[71]. In addition, we include both mobile and desktop usability
as an indicator of readiness. For comparability, we use similar
indicators to DESI [30].
2) eHealth
eHealth can be deﬁned as “the use of Information and
Communication Technologies (ICT) across the whole range of
healthcare functions” [72]. eHealth comprises a wide range of
applications that can beneﬁt citizens, healthcare professionals
and organisations, and public authorities by improving medical
practices, simplifying the prescription of diagnostic proce-
dures, producing alerts and reminders, and reducing errors
[73]–[76]. At a macro level, studies suggest that eHealth can
result in signiﬁcant cost savings and improved service quality
[77]. In rural communities, local doctors play a central role
in facilitating access to, and delivery of, care [78][79] as they
represent the main point of contact between the healthcare
system and citizens. As such, they are in the position to gather
important information which would constitute the basis of an
IT-enabled integrated healthcare system [80]. For this reason,
the EU, prior to 2020, mostly focused on the adoption of
eHealth services such as e-Prescribing and data exchange by
GPs when it comes to measuring the digitisation of health-
care across different countries [81]. However, other actors
like pharmacies and specialised doctors (e.g., physiotherapists,
orthodontists, etc.) may also play a critical role in fostering the
adoption of eHealth services within communities [82]–[84]. As
DESI, at least up to 2019, only recorded the eHealth adoption
rate by GPs, this may lead to a partial picture of the current
status of eHealth. To address this we expand eHealth indicators
to include all medical practitioners and related actors.
3) Open Data
Open data is commonly deﬁned as “data that can be
freely used, shared and built-on by anyone, anywhere, for any
purpose” [85]. Open Government Data (OGD) is speciﬁcally
concerned with making public sector information freely avail-
able in open formats and ways that enable public access and
facilitate exploitation [86]. Open data is heralded as means
of delivering a wide range of political and social, economic,
and operational and technical beneﬁts [87]. Claims about OGD
are equally effusive. For example, the EU impact assessment
on the reuse of Public Sector Information (PSI) suggests PSI
has the potential to achieve 1.7 billion in cost savings through
better policy making, generate up to 52 billion in economic
value, as well as bridging the gap between government and
citizens in terms of information, and, in general, leading to
increased social inclusion and empowerment, civic participa-
tion, and improved personal decision-making capabilities [88].
Due to the nascency of the OGD movement, there is limited
evidence to support these claims however OGD remains an
indicator in country-level digital indices including DESI [30].
With this in mind, we include an open data component that
seeks to uncover evidence of local government availability of
an open data plan, a systematic approach to collecting and
publishing town level open data on local and/or national open
data portals.
G. Digital Tourism
The travel and tourism industry has been at the front line
of both digital disruption and transformation [89]. Tourism
is a major contributor to rural economies and has long been
seen as a counter-measure to the decline of traditional agrarian
industries [90]. Digital Tourism is the use and sophistication
of digital technology to attract tourists and deliver a distinctive
experience. Typically, tourism is not addressed discretely from
other industry sectors. However, given the idiosyncrasies of
digital disruption to travel and tourism, its emphasis in rural
economic development literature and policies, and the oppor-
tunities for digitisation both of tourism businesses and desti-
nations, we include digital tourism as a discrete dimension.
In line with other dimensions, we include the availability of
a tourism plan for the town with speciﬁc digital aspects. For
comparability, we adapt the sub-dimensions used for digital
businesses above for the tourism sector including indicators
relating to tourism-speciﬁc technologies including booking
engines and reviews. We include a dimension relating to the
availability of information online relating to local events and
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

popular tourism destination sites, and a separate dimension
relating to the availability of a dedicated website for the town
and the quality of the information, features and functionality of
that site. Smart tourism involves the use of digital technologies
to create more intelligent, meaningful and sustainable connec-
tions between tourists and the destinations [91]. It includes
digital signage and wayﬁnders, augmented and virtual reality
integration, digital kiosks, amongst other technologies that
are embedded and accessible in the public realm of a town.
Consequently, we include smart tourism as a sub-dimension in
the framework. Research has suggested that availability of free
public Wi-Fi contributes to tourism promotion, [42][43] we
include this as an additional sub-dimension at the destination
site level.
H. Horizontal Integration
Reﬂecting the experience of existing digital town initiatives
[7], we take the position that digital towns require a broad con-
cept of community governance that, as per Leach and Percy-
Smith [92], involves multi-agency working and self-organising
networks that cut across organisational and stakeholder bound-
aries. In the Digital Town Readiness Framework, horizontal
integration relates to the degree of coordination across the
town on digitisation, both ofﬂine and online, including the
availability of a platform for citizens to interact, share knowl-
edge, experiences and mutual interests. In this way the sub-
dimensions reﬂect the the UK Department of the Environment,
Transport and the Regions deﬁnition of community strategy
[93] in that we seek to identify and assess the existence
of a governance mechanism, e.g., a Digital Town Working
Group, a shared digital vision and documented strategy for
the town and its inclusion in municipal and regional plans,
and arrangements for monitoring progress of the plan against
targets. Furthermore, recognising the role online town-based
portals and platforms play in digital town initiatives [15][23],
we assess the availability and quality of an online platform for
stakeholders to interact, share knowledge and mutual interests.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper recognises the need to differentiate between
digital policy interventions and planning for cities, towns
outside of the functional urban area of cities, and rural areas.
We propose a deﬁnition of a digital town and outline eight
rationales for digital towns. Based on a review of extant
literature, and digital benchmarking frameworks and indices,
we present an initial framework for assessing the digital
readiness of towns based eight dimensions. The framework was
designed to address the need for community-based planning
and to provide a tool for understanding the status of digital
readiness in a town, comparing towns against domestic and
international benchmarks, and stimulating multi-stakeholder
engagement on digitisation. At the time of writing, an easy-
to-use checklist for self-assessment has been developed for
use by towns, and a process and enabling workﬂow has been
developed for a more comprehensive assessment. The latter
includes two versions, a rapid and full assessment. The rapid
assessment has been piloted in ﬁve towns in Ireland reﬂecting
different regional contexts and population trends. Furthermore,
data was collected both pre- and post-COVID19 to enable an
assessment of the short-term impact of the COVID19 pandemic
on digital adoption and use in those towns. Further work is
required on the weighting of dimensions, sub-dimensions and
indicators before wider rollout.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially funded by IE Domain Registry
(IEDR) and by the Irish Institute of Digital Business.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Lynn, P. Rosati, and P. T. Endo, “Toward the intelligent internet of
everything: Observations on multidisciplinary challenges in intelligent
systems research,” in Coloquio Doctorados: Tecnolog´ıa, Ciencia y
Cultura: una visi´on global, 2018.
[2]
OECD and European Union, “A new perspective on urbanisation,” 2020.
[3]
M. Lerch et al., “Urban and rural fertility transitions in the developing
world: a cohort perspective,” Max Planck Institute for Demographic
Research, Rostock, Germany, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[4]
L. Philip, C. Cottrill, J. Farrington, F. Williams, and F. Ashmore, “The
digital divide: Patterns, policy and scenarios for connecting the ‘ﬁnal
few’in rural communities across great britain,” Journal of Rural Studies,
vol. 54, 2017, pp. 386–398.
[5]
D. B. Hindman, “The rural-urban digital divide,” Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 3, 2000, pp. 549–560.
[6]
L. Townsend, A. Sathiaseelan, G. Fairhurst, and C. Wallace, “Enhanced
broadband access as a solution to the social and economic problems of
the rural digital divide,” Local Economy, vol. 28, no. 6, 2013, pp. 580–
595.
[7]
F. H. Ashmore, J. H. Farrington, and S. Skerratt, “Superfast broadband
and rural community resilience: Examining the rural need for speed,”
Scottish Geographical Journal, vol. 131, no. 3-4, 2015, pp. 265–278.
[8]
M. Afshar Ali, K. Alam, and B. Taylor, “Do social exclusion and
remoteness explain the digital divide in australia? evidence from a
panel data estimation approach,” Economics of Innovation and New
Technology, 2019, pp. 1–17.
[9]
S. Park and G. Kim, “Same access, different uses, and the persistent
digital divide between urban and rural internet users.”
TPRC, 2015.
[10]
S. Park, “Digital inequalities in rural australia: A double jeopardy of
remoteness and social exclusion,” Journal of Rural Studies, vol. 54,
2017, pp. 399–407.
[11]
S. Hosseini, L. Frank, G. Fridgen, and S. Heger, “Do not forget about
smart towns,” Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 60,
no. 3, 2018, pp. 243–257.
[12]
C. Harrison et al., “Foundations for smarter cities,” IBM Journal of
research and development, vol. 54, no. 4, 2010, pp. 1–16.
[13]
S. Hess, M. Naab, M. Trapp, D. Magin, and S. Braun, “The importance
of mobile software ecosystems in smart rural areas,” in 2015 2nd ACM
International Conference on Mobile Software Engineering and Systems.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 164–165.
[14]
P. Neirotti, A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano, and F. Scorrano,
“Current trends in smart city initiatives: Some stylised facts,” Cities,
vol. 38, 2014, pp. 25–36.
[15]
N. P. da Rocha, “Aveiro—digital town,” in Advances in Digital Gov-
ernment.
Springer, 2002, pp. 305–314.
[16]
M. Sakurai and J. Kokuryo, “Fujisawa sustainable smart town: Pana-
sonic’s challenge in building a sustainable society,” Communications of
the Association for Information Systems, vol. 42, no. 1, 2018, p. 19.
[17]
M. Trapp and S. Hess, “Digitale d¨orfer,” in Biologische Transformation.
Springer, 2019, pp. 371–387.
[18]
A. Visvizi and M. D. Lytras, “It’s not a fad: Smart cities and smart
villages research in european and global contexts,” 2018.
[19]
European Network for Rural Devlopment, “Smart villages - revitalising
rural services,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://enrd.ec.europa.eu/
sites/enrd/ﬁles/enrd publications/publi-enrd-rr-26-2018-en.pdf
[20]
Digitale Doerfer. Die digitalen doerfer. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.digitale-doerfer.de/die-digitalen-doerfer/ (2020)
[21]
L. Dijkstra, H. Poelman, and P. Veneri, “The eu-oecd deﬁnition of a
functional urban area,” 2019.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[22]
H. McQuillan, “Ennis information age town: Virtuality rooted in real-
ity,” in Kyoto Workshop on Digital Cities. Springer, 2001, pp. 139–151.
[23]
K. Herv´e-Van Driessche, “Parthenay, the digital town: myth or reality?”
Telematics and Informatics, vol. 18, no. 1, 2001, pp. 5–15.
[24]
V. Zavratnik, A. Kos, and E. Stojmenova Duh, “Smart villages: Com-
prehensive review of initiatives and practices,” Sustainability, vol. 10,
no. 7, 2018, p. 2559.
[25]
M. Ghosal, A. Bobade, and P. Verma, “A quadcopter based environment
health monitoring system for smart cities,” in 2018 2nd International
Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI).
IEEE,
2018, pp. 1423–1426.
[26]
H. N. Hsieh, C. Y. Hou, and P. C. Chia, “A study of smart town de-
velopment strategies,” in 2011 International Conference on Multimedia
Technology.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 6684–6689.
[27]
J. Wichmann, M. Wißotzki, and K. Sandkuhl, “Toward a smart town:
Digital innovation and transformation process in a public sector envi-
ronment,” in Human Centred Intelligent Systems. Springer, pp. 89–99.
[28]
R. Katz and F. Callorda, “The economic contribution of broadband,
digitization and ict regulation,” International Telecommunication Union,
published in Switzerland, Geneva, 2018.
[29]
International Telecommunications Union, “The ICT Development Index
(IDI) methodology, indicators and deﬁnitions (as of February 2019),”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/
Documents/statistics/ITU ICT\%20Development\%20Index.pdf
[30]
Digital
Economy
and
Skills
Unit,
“The
digital
economy
and
society index (desi),” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/desi
[31]
——, “The digital economy and society index 2020 - thematic chap-
ters,” 2020.
[32]
P. Foley, D. Sutton, I. Wiseman, L. Green, and J. Moore, “International
digital economy and society index 2018,” Publications Ofﬁce of the
European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
[33]
Digital Economy and Skills Unit, “Desi 2020 - digital economy
and
society
index
(desi)
2020
questions
and
answers,”
2020.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/
en/qanda\ 20\ 1022
[34]
M. Ragnedda, M. L. Ruiu, and F. Addeo, “Measuring digital capital:
An empirical investigation,” new media & society, vol. 22, no. 5, 2020,
pp. 793–816.
[35]
B. Chakravorti, C. Tunnard, and R. S. Chaturvedi, “Where the digital
economy is moving the fastest,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 19,
2015, pp. 102–101.
[36]
B. Chakravorti and R. S. Chaturvedi, “Digital planet 2017: How
competitiveness and trust in digital economies vary across the world,”
The Fletcher School, Tufts University, vol. 70, 2017, p. 70.
[37]
P. Bosch, S. Jongeneel, V. Rovers, H.-M. Neumann, M. Airaksinen,
and A. Huovila, “Citykeys indicators for smart city projects and smart
cities,” CITYkeys report, 2017.
[38]
ETSI, “Access, terminals, transmission and multiplexing (ATTM),”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi\ ts/103400\
103499/10346301/01.02.01\ 60/ts\ 10346301v010201p.pdf
[39]
M. Kalinka, S. Geipele, E. Pudzis, A. Lazdins, U. Krutova, and
J. Holms, “Indicators for the smart development of villages and neigh-
bourhoods in baltic sea coastal areas,” Sustainability, vol. 12, no. 13,
2020, p. 5293.
[40]
G. S. Yovanof and G. N. Hazapis, “An architectural framework and
enabling wireless technologies for digital cities & intelligent urban
environments,” Wireless personal communications, vol. 49, no. 3, 2009,
pp. 445–463.
[41]
F. Bar and H. Galperin, “Geeks, bureaucrats and cowboys: Deploying
internet infrastructure, the wireless way,” The Network Society From
Knowledge to Policy, 2005, p. 269.
[42]
A. Picco-Schwendener, “Social dimensions of public large-scale wi-ﬁ
networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universit`a della Svizzera italiana, 2018.
[43]
P. Ballon, L. Van Audenhove, M. Poel, and T. Staelens, “Business
models for wireless city networks in the eu and the us: Public inputs
and public leverage,” in Telecommunication markets.
Springer, 2009,
pp. 325–340.
[44]
C. A. Middleton, “A framework for investigating the value of public
wireless networks.”
TPRC, 2007.
[45]
K. A. Chesley, “The future of municipal wireless in the united states
and europe,” Available at SSRN 1408808, 2009.
[46]
A. H. Tapia and J. A. Ortiz, “Keeping promises: Municipal communities
struggle to fulﬁll promises to narrow the digital divide with municipal
community wireless networks,” The Journal of Community Informatics,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2008.
[47]
A. H. Tapia, L. Kvasny, and J. A. Ortiz, “A critical discourse analysis
of three us municipal wireless network initiatives for enhancing social
inclusion,” Telematics and Informatics, vol. 28, no. 3, 2011, pp. 215–
226.
[48]
T. Heer, R. Hummen, N. Viol, H. Wirtz, S. G¨otz, and K. Wehrle,
“Collaborative municipal wi-ﬁ networks-challenges and opportunities,”
in 2010 8th IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops). IEEE, 2010, pp.
588–593.
[49]
B. Moriset, “Developing the digital economy in france’s rural regions:
A new era for telecenters?” in Association of American Geographers
Annual Meeting, 2010.
[50]
M. Meyn, “Digitalization and its impact on life in rural areas: Exploring
the two sides of the atlantic: Usa and germany,” in Smart Village
Technology.
Springer, 2020, pp. 99–116.
[51]
R. Gallardo, Responsive countryside: The digital age and rural commu-
nities.
Mississippi State University Extension, 2016.
[52]
UNESCO Institute for Statistics, “Guide to measuring information and
communication technologies (ICT) in education,” 2008.
[53]
P. Wastiau, R. Blamire, C. Kearney, V. Quittre, E. Van de Gaer, and
C. Monseur, “The use of ict in education: a survey of schools in e
urope,” European Journal of Education, vol. 48, no. 1, 2013, pp. 11–
27.
[54]
Deloitte
and
IPSOS
MORI,
“2nd
survey
of
schools:
ICT
in
education,”
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/2nd-survey-schools-ict-education#:∼:
text=or%20analytical%20thinking.-,The%20results%20of%20the%
202nd%20Survey%20of%20Schools%3A%20ICT,coding%20or%
20programming%20at%20school.
[55]
J. Bone, C. Cretu, and M. Stokes, “A theoretical framework for the dsi
index,” Brussels, Belgium: European Commission, 2018.
[56]
J. O’Grady and P. Roberts, “The digital transformation of irish non-
proﬁt organisations.” in AICS, 2019, pp. 388–399.
[57]
P. Ehnold, E. Faß, D. Steinbach, and T. Schlesinger, “Digitalization in
organized sport–usage of digital instruments in voluntary sports clubs
depending on club’s goals and organizational capacity,” Sport, Business
and Management: An International Journal, 2020.
[58]
T. Walker, S. Esmene, L. Colebrooke, C. Leyshon, and M. Leyshon,
“Digital possibilities and social mission in the voluntary sector: the
case of a community transport organisation in the uk,” Voluntary Sector
Review, vol. 11, no. 1, 2020, pp. 59–77.
[59]
N. Dufft and P. Kreutter, “Digitization in non-proﬁt organizations:
strategy, culture and competencies in digital change,” in future-oriented
foundation management.
springer, 2018, pp. 105–115.
[60]
Z. Amar and L. Clough, “Charity skills report 2019,” 2019.
[61]
——, “Charity skills report 2020,” 2020.
[62]
F. Gens, “The 3rd platform: Enabling digital transformation. usa: Idc,”
2013.
[63]
M. Armbrust et al., “A view of cloud computing,” Communications of
the ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, 2010, pp. 50–58.
[64]
S. Marston, Z. Li, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Zhang, and A. Ghalsasi,
“Cloud computing—the business perspective,” Decision support sys-
tems, vol. 51, no. 1, 2011, pp. 176–189.
[65]
T. Leimbach et al., “Potential and impacts of cloud computing services
and social network websites,” Publication of Science and Technology
Options Assessment, 2014.
[66]
T. Lynn, J. G. Mooney, P. Rosati, and G. Fox, “Measuring the business
value of cloud computing,” 2020.
[67]
W. Richmond, S. Rader, and C. Lanier, “The “digital divide” for rural
small businesses,” Journal of Research in Marketing and Entrepreneur-
ship, 2017.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[68]
F. B´elanger and L. Carter, “Digitizing government interactions with con-
stituents: an historical review of e-government research in information
systems,” Journal of the Association for information Systems, vol. 13,
no. 5, 2012, p. 1.
[69]
F. Iannacci, A. P. Seepma, C. De Blok, and A. Resca, “Reappraising
maturity models in e-government research: The trajectory-turning point
theory,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 28, no. 3,
2019, pp. 310–329.
[70]
H. Singh, P. Grover, A. K. Kar, and P. V. Ilavarasan, “Review of perfor-
mance assessment frameworks of e-government projects,” Transforming
Government: People, Process and Policy, 2020.
[71]
F. Belanger and J. S. Hiller, “A framework for e-government: privacy
implications,” Business Process Management Journal, vol. 12, no. 1,
2006, p. 48.
[72]
European Union Directorate-General for the Environment, Reclaiming
city streets for people: chaos or quality of life?
Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial
Publications of the European Communities, 2004.
[73]
R. Bodell, H. D. Covvey, and C. Fader, “Achieving a” therapeutic dose”
of it.” in Medinfo, 2004, pp. 1348–1351.
[74]
C. Delpierre, L. Cuzin, J. Fillaux, M. Alvarez, P. Massip, and T. Lang,
“A systematic review of computer-based patient record systems and
quality of care: more randomized clinical trials or a broader approach?”
International Journal for Quality in Health Care, vol. 16, no. 5, 2004,
pp. 407–416.
[75]
R. Kaushal et al., “Return on investment for a computerized physician
order entry system,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association, vol. 13, no. 3, 2006, pp. 261–266.
[76]
J. Øvretveit, T. Scott, T. G. Rundall, S. M. Shortell, and M. Brommels,
“Implementation of electronic medical records in hospitals: two case
studies,” Health Policy, vol. 84, no. 2-3, 2007, pp. 181–190.
[77]
C. Hackett, K. Brennan, H. S. Fowler, and C. Leaver, “Valuing citizen
access to digital health services: applied value-based outcomes in the
canadian context and tools for modernizing health systems,” Journal of
medical Internet research, vol. 21, no. 6, 2019, p. e12277.
[78]
R. Atun, “What are the advantages and the disadvantages of restruc-
turing a health system to be more focused on primary care services,”
WHO, 2004.
[79]
J. Macinko, B. Starﬁeld, and L. Shi, “The contribution of primary
care systems to health outcomes within organization for economic
cooperation and development (oecd) countries, 1970–1998,” Health
services research, vol. 38, no. 3, 2003, pp. 831–865.
[80]
C. Codagnone and F. Lupia˜nez-Villanueva, “Benchmarking deployment
of ehealth among general practitioners-ﬁnal report,” European Union.
Luxembourg. Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union: European
Commission. Directorate-General of Communications Networks. Con-
tent & Technology, vol. 114, 2013.
[81]
Digital Economy and Skills Unit, “Desi 2019 - digital public
services,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/
dae/document.cfm?doc\ id=59975
[82]
J. Gregorio, T. L. Ferreira, A. Cavaco, M. M. da Silva, C. Lovis, and
L. V. Lap˜ao, “Community pharmacies and ehealth services: barriers and
opportunities for real primary healthcare integration,” in Proceedings of
the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical
Systems.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 393–396.
[83]
S. Vorrink, C. Huisman, H. Kort, T. Troosters, and J.-W. Lammers,
“Perceptions of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and their physiotherapists regarding the use of an ehealth intervention,”
JMIR human factors, vol. 4, no. 3, 2017, p. e20.
[84]
D. Baines et al., “A scoping review of the quality and the design of
evaluations of mobile health, telehealth, smart pump and monitoring
technologies performed in a pharmacy-related setting,” Frontiers in
Pharmacology, vol. 9, 2018, p. 678.
[85]
L. James, “Deﬁning open data: Open knowledge foundation blog,”
2013.
[86]
E. Kalampokis, E. Tambouris, and K. Tarabanis, “A classiﬁcation
scheme for open government data: towards linking decentralised data,”
International Journal of Web Engineering and Technology, vol. 6, no. 3,
2011, pp. 266–285.
[87]
M. Janssen, Y. Charalabidis, and A. Zuiderwijk, “Beneﬁts, adoption
barriers and myths of open data and open government,” Information
systems management, vol. 29, no. 4, 2012, pp. 258–268.
[88]
European
Commission,
“Impact
assessment
accompanying
the
document - proposal for a directive of the european parliament
and of the council on the re-use of public sector information,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?
doc id=51644
[89]
B. Weinelt and J. Moavenzadeh, “Digital transformation initiative:
Aviation, travel and tourism industry,” in Geneva, Switzerland: World
Economic Forum, 2017.
[90]
R. Sharpley and A. Vass, “Tourism, farming and diversiﬁcation: An
attitudinal study,” Tourism management, vol. 27, no. 5, 2006, pp. 1040–
1052.
[91]
J. G. Molz, Travel connections: Tourism, technology, and togetherness
in a mobile world.
Routledge, 2012.
[92]
R. Leach and J. Percy-Smith, Local governance in Britain.
Palgrave,
2001.
[93]
Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions, “Preparing
community strategies: Government guidance to local authorities,” 2000.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

