A Novel Smart Grid Device Location Mapping
Technique
Jim Shima
Qualcomm
Denvor, CO USA
Email: jshima@comcast.net
Stan McClellan
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, TX USA
Email: stan.mcclellan@txstate.edu
Wuxu Peng
Department of Computer Science
Texas State University
San Marcos, TX USA
Email: wuxu@txstate.edu
Abstract—We propose a technique to accurately and quickly
determine and resolve the geo-spatial and logical location of grid-
resident devices. The technique compare downstream current
proﬁles (DCP) with the superposition of current proﬁles at the
substation (UCP) in the grid. Since small amounts of noise
current and perturbations will show up at the substation due
to active devices on the grid, the electrical location of each
meter can be determined by comparing passive line data from
the meter location (DCP) against all the substation feeder lines
(UCP). The signiﬁcance of this approach is that it is passive
and efﬁcient as it does not require additional hardware or
communication signals to be introduced to grid infrastructure.
The technique can be integrated into current grid systems and
implemented using existing smart meter data acquisition facilities
and computer/software processing at the utility’s datacenter.
Index Terms—Grid, Smart Grid, Grid Devices, Device Loca-
tion, Geo-Spatial/Physical Location, Electrical/Schematic Loca-
tion, Device Location Detection, Disturbances
I. INTRODUCTION
Electric power distribution networks (”the grid”) are a crit-
ical and integrated part of modern society. Recent advances in
telecommunications and Internet technologies are transform-
ing traditional power distribution grid to smart grid, where
electric meters can be read and reading sent to a datacenter
and operations of the grid can be monitored and controlled in
real time through grid control centers [1].
Location information of devices in the grid is critically
important [2]. Deﬁning and detecting the location of a device
in the grid is a fundamentally important capability of the grid.
This capability would seem to be obvious or simple given
modern technologies of global positioning (GPS), network-
based tracking of computer systems, and so on. However,
location in the grid has at least two independent compo-
nents: (a) geo-spatial or physical location, and (b) electrical
or schematic location. Interestingly, the data which is used
to deﬁne these components in the grid may be difﬁcult to
accurately determine, and effective correlation between the
components may be difﬁcult to achieve. For example, even
in today’s Smart Grid [1], utility companies are unable to
deﬁnitively map a device such as a smart meter, to an exact
electrical location in the distribution grid. Further, the geo-
spatial location of grid-resident devices (which can be resolved
via GPS, etc.) may not accurately reﬂect their electrical
location. Conventional devices downstream from a substation
are deployed in a ﬁxed location, on a speciﬁc feeder, lateral,
and phase. However, deviations between the initial design of
the system (as-designed), the initial deployment of the system
(as-built), and the present conﬁguration of the system (as-
modiﬁed) often create ambiguities between the geo-spatial and
electrical location of particular grid-resident devices.
These ambiguities are problematic, and can be difﬁcult to
resolve without signiﬁcant manual intervention and expense.
Up to date, immediately validated knowledge of the feeder,
lateral, and phase for grid-resident devices can provide es-
sential feedback to the utility company regarding important
grid attributes, such as the aggregate loading of speciﬁc
circuits or phases, the location and health of sub-circuits and
devices, and the presence or absence of load activity. This
type of information may become increasingly important as
large, mobile source/load devices such as electric vehicles are
introduced to the Smart Grid.
Therefore, a technology which could provide automatic
reconciliation between physical location and electrical location
of grid-resident devices, and in doing so create an accurate,
constantly updated map of the grid, would be extremely
valuable to electric utilities. This paper describes an approach
to accurately and quickly determining and resolving the geo-
spatial and logical location of grid-resident devices. The
signiﬁcance of this approach is that it is passive because it
does not require additional hardware or communication signals
to be introduced to grid infrastructure. The technique can
be implemented using existing smart meter data acquisition
facilities and computer/software processing at the utility’s
datacenter [3], [4], [5].
The rest of the this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II we discuss smart meters and issues in grid mapping.
We argue that the current grid mapping schemes are inad-
equate. We review and discuss some fundamentals of smart
meters and grid mappings in Section III. We present some
critical observations and discuss some important properties
and requirements of grid mapping. The core of the paper,
an architecture for mapping device locations passively and
intelligently, is presented in Section IV. We show how to
obtain device location accurately in the presence of noise and
disturbances. Summary and concluding remarks are given in
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 1. Grid: Generation, Transmission, and Distribution of Electric Power
Section V.
II. SMART METERS AND GRID MAPPING
Smart meters are fundamental components of smart grids.
From the utility’s perspective, smart meters allow for remote
billing and automatic, network-based retrieval of electrical me-
ter data. This type of Automated Meter Infrastructure (AMI)
is more economical than periodic manual reading of electric
meters. However, smart meters typically rely on a wireless
network to transport meter data to a central location. The
use of such extrinsic networks results in signiﬁcant ambiguity
between the physical location of the meter and its electrical
location (i.e. feeder, lateral, phase).
The reconciliation between a device’s geo-spatial location
and its electrical location can be referred to as its grid location.
The geo and electrical location of each meter may have been
logged during installation, resulting in a static or as-built
map of the grid. However, the upstream electrical connections
are often changed during outages or seasonal load balanc-
ing, destroying important information regarding actual grid
connectivity, and resulting in an as-modiﬁed conﬁguration.
Furthermore, older or manual logs of equipment location and
circuit architecture may have been inaccurate, resulting in
differences between the as-designed and as-built perspectives.
Clearly, this situation may have been exacerbated by the
realities of several subsequent as-modiﬁed conditions.
Additionally, in the present model of system management
for the distribution grid, service failures are determined pri-
marily via customer feedback (i.e. phone calls from customers
reporting outages.) Utility technicians must then search for
the area where the problem occurred by correlating customer
feedback with sometimes outdated or otherwise inaccurate
schematics of the local grid. If electric service providers had
a way to automatically resolve the geo and electrical location
of every device on their grid, it would allow them to maintain
a constantly up-to-date grid map without manual intervention,
and even in the face of multiple changes in downstream
devices or grid architecture. For example, the installation of
new meters would automatically refresh the grid map via
communication with the central ofﬁce, or the re-connection
of upstream links after an outage would be automatically rec-
onciled in the centrally-located grid map. In a more complete
instantiation of this automated mapping capability, additional
communication systems, such as smart transformers, voltage
regulators, and the like, could also augment the grid map via
targeted or scheduled updates.
An electrical map of the grid requires knowledge of the
speciﬁc feeder, lateral, and electrical phase where the de-
vice resides. For example, as shown in Figure 1, feeders
are typically 3-phase, medium-voltage links (13-30kV) which
begin at the substation bus and traverse several miles of
local distribution territory. In rural settings, feeders can be
50 miles in length and may service hundreds of loads. In
urban settings, feeders may be 5-10 miles in length, and may
service several thousand loads. Lateral lines branch off from
a feeder at downstream locations, and may be 3-phase or
1-phase links which terminate in a distribution transformer.
Distribution transformers typically service 3-10 loads, where
a load may be a residence or business with an electrical meter.
Electrical service to a residence is typically a single-phase link
taken from the 3-phase feeder which began at the substation
servicing the residence. Clearly, the feeder, lateral, and phase
data for a particular load or device are dependent on the
actual physical construction of the distribution network at any
point in time. Thus, correlation between physical & electrical
activity at the substation and physical & electrical activity at
the load is a critical factor in the grid mapping process.
III. PROBLEMS AND OBSERVATIONS
A substation is a distribution point for medium voltage
(MV) electrical service which has been converted from a
high voltage (HV) transmission/generating plant. The MV is
distributed over the local distribution grid, and converted to
low voltage (LV) at the endpoints. The LV power is used in
households, commercial buildings, etc. This network architec-
ture is illustrated for reference in Figure 1. In the ﬁgure, the
distribution grid is shown by the green line segments. Note
that a single substation, shown by the junction between blue
and green segments, may actually service a distribution grid
composed of several thousand loads of various sizes.
A. Distribution Grid
The distribution grid is a complex, time-varying system.
The spectra of voltage, current, and impedance all change
in real time based on load and activity proﬁles [6]. As a
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 2.
Example of signal anomalies in the electric distribution grid. This
ﬁgure shows the time and frequency (magnitude) representation of the turn-
on current transient of a television set. The highlighted signal in the spectral
plot(bottom) is the anomaly, which due to system characteristics is recursively
replicated at 120Hz spacings.
result, the signal environment of the LV power line is very
dirty. It contains a large voltage at the fundamental frequency
(50Hz in Europe, etc. or 60Hz in the U.S.) as well as odd
and even harmonics of this frequency. The LV system also
contains non-stationary noise from other connected loads and
sources. For example, large electric motors create anomalies at
collections of frequencies related to their angular velocity, or
large appliances create correlated noise bursts during speciﬁc
operational events. An example of such a noise burst is shown
Figure 2, which shows the turn-on current transient of a
television set, as seen from the electric meter. In the ﬁgure,
time-based and frequency-based artifacts are clearly evident
for several seconds as the power supply of the appliance boots
up and the system begins operation.
B. Disturbances
Figure 3 contains an alternative perspective of the turn-on
transient of the television set. In this ﬁgure, a spectrogram
is used to jointly analyze time and frequency anomalies. In
the bottom section of the ﬁgure (a spectrogram), the spectrum
of the unﬁltered current signal is shown on the vertical axis
between 0 Hz and 2000 Hz, and the signal evolves over time
along the horizontal axis for roughly 13 seconds. The time-
domain perspective of the signal is shown in the top section.
During this 13-second period, the TV set was turned on ( 0
sec), allowed to stabilize (2-10 sec), and then turned off ( 11
sec). The bottom section of the ﬁgure clearly shows stable
even-harmonic features during the time that the TV is on and
the lack of these same features during the time that the TV
is off. Referring to Figure 2, the instantaneous spectral shape
of the features is evident (and highlighted) as two closely-
spaced peaks near 120 Hz and
25 dB down from the 60
Hz fundamental and 3rd harmonic. A collection of speciﬁc
features of the time envelope and spectral envelope of these
anomalies is tantamount to a digital ﬁngerprint of the power
supply for the TV system.
In the case of the TV power supply, the even harmonics
contain a clearly recognizable and stable pattern which is noted
on in Figure 3 by Artifact 1. In addition to Artifact 1, the TV
current transient exhibits multiple temporal frequency artifacts,
the most prominent of which is a downward-sweeping chirp
near the beginning of the excitation period. This feature is
labeled Artifact 2. Each of these artifacts contains consistent
and easily recognizable features. Further, since the turn-on
transient is created by the inrush of current while the system’s
power supply boots up and engages other system components,
the features of this current disturbance travel backwards along
the power line, toward the substation. In the process, the signal
features can be easily acquired, extracted, compressed, and
transmitted to the service provider’s datacenter for analysis
and comparison with attenuated and obscured current distur-
bances which are acquired at the substation or other upstream
location.
C. Meter Reading and Data Collection
Contemporary deployments of Smart Grid systems collect
electricity usage from the consumer’s meter and pass that
information to a datacenter owned by the service provider or
utility [3]. The network system which collects and transports
this utilization data is commonly called an AMR/AMI system
(automatic meter reading/advanced metering infrastructure)
[7]. A generic architecture of an AMR/AMI system is shown
in Figure 4. Data collected from the meters may be transmitted
via one or more data networks, using unlicensed wireless
spectrum (e.g. WiFi, RF aggregators, etc.), licensed wireless
spectrum (e.g. cellular telephony), or some form of wired
network (e.g. private ﬁber optic links, conventional power line
communications, etc.). In this paradigm, the physical location
of the meter is assumed to stay constant after installation,
and the electrical location of the meter is derived from static
logs and schematic drawings, which can be incomplete or
inaccurate (as previously described).
Regardless of the data communications mechanisms for
AMR/AMI data, it has been shown that current disturbances
which occur downstream from the substation (e.g. at the meter)
can be detected upstream at the substation. For example, the
TV data of Figure 3 and Figure 4 was collected upstream
of the actual location of the system. This upstream ﬂow of
electrical current allows a unique signal, originating from a
given meter, to be easily detected at the serving substation.
Of course, only signals with frequency content which passes
through all the transformers on the feeder are detectable, since
higher frequencies are ﬁltered out by the inherent low-pass
nature of large series inductors, such as transformers.
For instance, the TV data in Figure 4 is dominated by low-
frequency features or artifacts, such as the odd harmonics
at multiples of 120Hz (Artifact 1) and the chirp (Artifact
2) which contains signiﬁcant activity and amplitude below
1000 Hz. At the substation, HV is converted to MV through
step-down transformers that lower the voltage but increase
the current. As electrical power is distributed through the
feeders and to the loads, downstream distribution transformers
reduce the voltage from several thousand volts to several
hundred volts. This process maintains constant power, and as
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 3. Time-domain plot and spectrogram of TV turn-on current transient, with artifacts.
a result downstream current must increase. Looking at this
system backwards from the endpoint (smart meter) toward
the substation, disturbances in the LV-side current that ﬂows
upstream must be reduced by the aggregate turns-ratio of
the intervening transformers on the feeder. This situation
is described graphically in Figure 5. This physical reality
causes the distribution grid to behave as a very stable and
predictable current attenuator for current disturbances which
ﬂow upstream, or from the meter toward the substation. For
example, a substation that operates at an MV of 38.4kV and
delivers 120V to the consumer has an effective turns-ratio of
1:320. So, a current disturbance created at the meter would
show up at the substation with amplitude of approximately 3%
(1/320th) of its initial value, assuming no other losses. Thus, a
current disturbance with amplitude of 10A at the meter will be
detectable at the substation with amplitude of approximately
31mA. In this fashion, recognizable features of all current
perturbations in the distribution grid propagate towards the
substation. Of course, this propagation is subject to additional
noise in the system and the native attenuation characteristic
of the distribution transformers. This phenomenon is true
for current signals which are purposefully injected (such as
communication signals), and it is true for current disturbances
which are caused natively or accidentally by all other grid-
resident devices.
In the above example, 97% attenuation of a signal appears
to be quite problematic. However, studies have shown that
even low-level signals with recognizable features are readily
detectable at the substation. In fact, current disturbances with
attenuation over 99% of the initial amplitude can be detected
at the substation. The frequency content of the disturbance is
important, as there is a time-varying window of frequencies
on every distribution grid which are amenable to good trans-
mission. For example, low-frequency signals (below 400Hz)
are swamped by the low-order power line harmonics and reso-
nances from lumped reactive elements on the line, and higher
frequency signals (above 3000Hz) are often ﬁltered out by
the aggregate low-pass effect of power transformers and other
system characteristics. However, current disturbances with
frequency content between 200Hz and 3000Hz are transported
directly and predictably towards to substation bus, through
intervening distribution transformers, and in spite of additive
or time-variant noise due to other grid-resident devices.
IV. PASSIVE AND EFFICIENT LOCATION MAPPING
Current disturbances which are detected at the substation
can be used in conjunction with features of current distur-
bances observed at the meter (or other endpoint) to determine
the ”electrical location” of grid-resident devices. The correla-
tion/coherence of signals and/or signal characteristics at both
points produces a unique feature set which can be used to
determine which feeder, phase, and lateral to which the device
is attached. When this information is used in conjunction with
geo-spatial information from the set of meters which initially
detected the disturbance, the grid location, which includes
electrical and spatial location of the device that caused the
disturbance, can be extracted. This feature set approach is valid
because all the devices on the grid create a super signal that
is highly dependent on their locations. Thus, the direct path
from the meter location to the substation must produce the best
correlation of signals. Crosstalk signals from feeder to feeder,
or phase to phase lines, will experience phase and time shifts
due to the extra electrical length and additional transformer
couplings (on the high side)
this phenomenon reduces the
effective correlation between the signals, and emphasizes the
correct electrical location of the device. The fact that the line
fundamental is 120-degrees out of phase on each per-phase
link means that the feature correlation task can also be viewed
as a best-ﬁt classiﬁcation problem over a time-varying channel.
Consider a substation with 4 feeders distributing electricity to
a neighborhood as shown in Figure 6:
At the substation, current transformers (CT) are installed
to measure the current signals present on each feeder. These
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Consumption (LV) 
Data aggregator 
Central office/billing 
AMR 
Cell/GSM/CDMA 
Power generation 
Transmission (HV) 
Distribution (MV) 
RF link 
Fig. 4. Typical AMI backhaul architecture via cellular network.
LV 
MV 
Substation 
Fig. 5. Current attenuation in the distribution grid.
current waveforms (or upstream current proﬁles, UCP) are
sampled, time-stamped, and stored in a computer present
at the substation or the service provider’s datacenter. At
each smart meter, the local current signal (or downstream
current proﬁle, DCP) is sampled, time-stamped, processed,
and transmitted along with the AMR/AMI meter data to the
utility datacenter. The computer containing the UCPs also
receives the DCPs from each meter. By aligning time stamps
on the DCP and UCP data, the substation computer can
compare all permutations of feeder and phase between the
UCPs and DCPs. The resulting best match between DCP
and UCP is ﬂagged as the actual feeder/phase where the
endpoint meter is located. Mathematically, this can be viewed
as a maximization computation over a set of signal features,
and is a common processing task for signal comparisons.
For example, automatic target recognition systems use similar
processing to extract speciﬁc target locations from audio/video
data via a known feature vector for each target of interest.
A brute-force implementation of the approach described
above includes high-sampling-rate acquisition of DCP signals
and transmission of uncompressed DCP signals to an upstream
location for comparison with multiple UCPs. This processing
clearly establishes an estimate for presence/absence of the
downstream device (represented by its DCP) in the aggregated
current proﬁles of several feeders (the UCPs). Unfortunately,
high-rate acquisition and transmission of DCP data from
multiple meters is not feasible using conventional AMR/AMI
network infrastructure.
For example, assuming a 20kHz sampling rate at the meter
with 16-bit resolution per-sample, the uncompressed band-
width required for transmission of each DCP would exceed
320kbps. This data bandwidth can’t be supported within ex-
isting remote metering infrastructure networks, particularly if
thousands of meters were attempting to transmit usage data in
addition to DCP proﬁles. As a result, to perform the described
grid mapping operation using DCP data, some form of (lossy)
compression of the DCP prior to transmission and processing
at the upstream location is a critical notion. The compres-
sion or feature extraction operation on DCP data (which is
subject to the upstream ﬁdelity criteria) is implicit in the pro-
posed system architecture because of limited data transmission
bandwidth between downstream and upstream locations. The
techniques for data compression, the ﬁdelity criteria, and the
upstream operations for estimation of device presence/absence,
along with processing for geo-spatial and network-architecture
indicators are the subjects of this paper and future work.
Clearly, an operation which involved cross-correlation and
time-coherence between a speciﬁc, uncompressed DCP and
multiple UCPs is a valid approach to the problem. However,
the compression methods or feature extraction methods which
must be implemented at the downstream meters to preserve
transmission bandwidth while simultaneously preserving rec-
ognizable features of the DCP are critical technologies.
The processing of the DCP prior to transmission is essen-
tially a data compression or feature extraction operation. This
operation must produce a set of features or compressed data
which, when processed by upstream devices and compared
with UCP data, produces clear indications of the presence
or absence of a downstream device. The end-to-end system
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Transformer 
Substation 
Bus bar 
Feeder 1 
Feeder 2
Feeder 3 
Feeder 4 
3φ 
Feeder 1, phase A 
Computer 
Feeder 3, phase C 
Feeder 4, phase B 
AMR 
Fig. 6. Current attenuation in the distribution grid.
concept is very similar to feature extraction techniques which
are used on ﬁngerprint data. A reduced-ﬁdelity representation
of a ﬁngerprint is captured, extracted, and stored. Then, the
feature vector which uniquely identiﬁes the ﬁngerprint is
compared to high-ﬁdelity versions of a candidate ﬁngerprint
to create an indication of matching or similarity.
In the context of grid mapping and detection of current
disturbances, techniques for DCP processing (or feature ex-
traction) may include lossless data compression (e.g. LZW),
transform coding (e.g. DCT/KLT), or other dimensionality
reduction (e.g. ARMA, signal space techniques) followed
by lossy compression, including scalar/vector quantization
or signal space representations optimizing a weighted time-
domain or frequency-domain ﬁdelity criterion. This concept
is important in allowing the upstream system to consume
DCP data from all meters without exceeding system trans-
mission capacity or interfering with bandwidth dedicated for
AMR/AMI links. Thus, some feature extraction using raw
sampled DCP data is necessary at the meter to reduce the
size of the DCP data set to be transmitted.
However, these compression/extraction operations must re-
tain important information in the signal for the mapping
operation to succeed. Transport of the encoded, compressed,
feature-extracted DCP data can be performed in-band using
power line communications techniques which are intrinsic
to grid infrastructure, or it can be performed out-of-band
using communications infrastructure which is extrinsic to grid
infrastructure. As a result, this technique does not require
communication via the power line (from the meter to the
substation). As such, no large ampliﬁers or coupling circuits
are needed inside the smart meter itself. In fact most, if not all,
of the required circuitry is already available inside a revenue-
grade meter. In the simplest implementation, the DCP detected
at the meter is sampled, processed for compression or feature
extraction, and packaged for upstream transmission as part of
the AMR/AMI meter data.
The DCP data from each meter can be aggregated at the
utility central ofﬁce or datacenter where the AMR/AMI data
is received. In this fashion, computer hardware/software in
the datacenter can analyze the UCP & DCP data and estimate
each meter’s grid location. The estimated grid location data is
then stored in the utility’s database updating their electrical
grid map. A side beneﬁt of this approach is that electrical
mapping is done at a very slow rate. It only needs to happen
once, and then periodic updates can happen much later. The
DCP data can trickle out over the AMR/AMI wireless link for
later analysis & registration using UCP information. Further,
location errors due to DCP data snapshots can easily be
corrected over time by keeping statistics on all computed
locations and maximizing a likelihood function for meter or
device location updates. In some cases, current disturbances
detected at the meter and the substation feeder may be
different, and the grid location computed/estimated for speciﬁc
meters may be anomalous. However, errors in calculations will
automatically be corrected as additional DCP & UCP data is
collected and analyzed. Over time, an accurate grid location of
each device will naturally emerge from the periodic mapping
computations. This approach lends itself to a self-organizing
network topology. Performing advanced system-level analysis
such as power outage detection, power theft, power quality,
or the like would require faster updates of the DCP data,
and repeated comparisons with UCP data. In these cases, data
compression or sub-sampled DCP data sets could mitigate any
wireless capacity issue in a mesh network or other capacity-
limited AMR/AMI system.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We presented a novel method to accurately and intelli-
gently map device locations in a smart grid. The novelty
of this approach is the comparison of downstream current
proﬁles (DCP) with the superposition of current proﬁles at
the substation (UCP). Since small amounts of noise current
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

and perturbations will show up at the substation due to active
devices on the grid, the electrical location of each meter can
be determined by comparing passive line data from the meter
location (DCP) against all the substation feeder lines (UCP).
Grid characteristics are constantly changing, producing mul-
tivariate non-stationary noise in the signal space of the grid. As
a result, classic approaches involving channel models based on
linear systems are futile and inefﬁcient. Our method mitigates
those issues by performing temporal comparisons of data at
both points in the grid DCP and UCP. Feature extraction or
compression of the sampled data at the meter or downstream
location is important to reduce the size of the transmitted
DCP. This allows the method to scale easily, given that it must
service a large number of meters (and other devices) connected
to each substation. GPS data from each smart meter is already
available to assist in the reconciliation of geo-spatial location
with electrical location.
We believe that the proposed technique will be a valuable
addition to the grid. A patent based on the core idea of this
paper was ﬁled recently [8].
REFERENCES
[1] “Smart
grid,”
https://energy.gov/oe/services/technology-
development/smart-grid, accessed: 2015,2016.
[2] E. Khan, B. Adebisi, and B. Honary, “Location based security for smart
grid applications,” Energy Procedia, vol. 42, pp. 299–307, 2013.
[3] X. Fang, S. Misra, G. Xue, and D. Yang, “Smart grid - the new and
improved power grid: A survey,” in IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials, vol. 14, 2012, pp. 944–980.
[4] A. R. Sallam and O. P. Malik, Electric Distribution Systems.
IEEE
Computer Society, 2011.
[5] S. Kaplan, “Smart grid. electrical power transmission: Background and
policy issues,” in The Capital.Net, Government Series, 2009, pp. 1–42.
[6] “Suppression of interference in power and communications signals,” US
Patent 20160049988 A1, 2012.
[7] “AMR vs AMI,” http://www.elp.com/articles/powergrid international/print/volume-
13/issue-10/features/amr-vs-ami.html, accessed: 2014,2015,2017.
[8] “Location mapping of grid devices using features of passively-observed
current disturbances,” US Patent WO2015120141 A1, 2015.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

