Handover Optimization in WiMAX Vehicular Communications 
 
Mihai Constantinescu, Eugen Borcoci 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
emails: mihai.constantinescu@elcom.pub.ro 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract—The WiMAX communications for vehicular is a 
topic of significant interest for research and industry 
communities, on both V2V (vehicle–to-vehicle) and V2I 
(vehicle-to-infrastructure) situations. This paper presents 
results of an experimental study, simulation based, directed to 
determine multi-dimensional regions where different lower 
layers parameters have influence on the overall handover 
performance in mobility scenarios, related to WiMAX V2I 
communications. The simulations results are consolidated in 
multi-dimensional graphs, named decision spaces. Based on 
them, optimal parameter sets can be provided by the network 
operator to vehicular mobile station, to guide its adaptation of 
the major WiMAX parameters to its speed and network 
topology and to help the handover decision.  
Keywords-WIMAX vehicular communications; antenna 
gain; scanning; handover; cross layer interaction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The WiMAX communications for vehicular use has 
gained a continuous attention from research community, on 
both 
V2V 
(vehicle-to-vehicle) and V2I 
(vehicle-to-
infrastructure) situations. This paper presents a detailed 
experimental study related to WiMAX V2I communications.  
This work aimed to determine multi-dimensional regions 
where different lower layers parameters have influence on 
the overall handover performance in mobility scenarios 
related to WiMAX V2I communications. 
Given the high number of WiMAX physical and MAC 
layer parameters influencing in an inter-dependent mode the 
overall performance in mobility scenarios, experimental 
simulation studies of complex scenarios are very helpful to 
determine the combined effect on such parameters. In this 
work 
the 
simulations 
results 
are 
consolidated 
in 
multidimensional graphs, named decision spaces. These 
decision spaces present in aggregated form the performance 
obtained in a WiMAX V2I mobility scenario, related on a 
specific trajectory. The results can be used as a method of 
optimizing the vehicular communications by guiding the 
handover (HO) decision.  Based on decision spaces, optimal 
parameter sets can be provided by the network operator to 
vehicular mobile station, in order to adapt the major 
WiMAX parameters to its speed and network topology.  
The effect at different PHY parameters adjustments on 
the throughput values has been evaluated, to determine some 
decision regions space usable to optimize working ranges of 
parameters in case those policies are applied to govern the 
handover. That is why we called the aggregated simulation 
results diagrams as “decision spaces”. 
The optimal parameter sets obtained from decision 
spaces can be provided by a network operator to mobile 
station (MS), helping it to adapt dynamically its behavior and 
to obtain the maximum throughput possible from network at 
different speed, antenna gain, maximum transmission (Tx 
power), and scanning values.  
The paper is organized as follows: the Section II presents 
some related work. The Section III defines the simulation 
context. The Section IV describes the simulation results. 
Conclusion, open issues and future work are shortly outlined 
in the Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In [1], the authors propose study the feasibility of using 
WiMAX for V2I communication on a static setting in urban 
environment and perform a comparison with use of WiFi. 
Pegasus, a system providing wireless connection roaming 
at high velocities over multiple interfaces uses network 
information for user locations and used paths for effective 
and balanced utilization of the available bandwidth [2]. 
The reference [3] evaluates an architecture based on 
IEEE 802.21 framework, integrating both mobility and 
Quality of Service (QoS) mechanisms, through an advanced 
mobility scenario using a real WiMAX testbed. 
In [4], mobile WiMAX trials are analyzed to investigate 
the vehicular downlink performance for a number of on-car 
antenna configurations.     
This work presented is a continuation of a set of complex 
studies on WiMAX mobility. First results have been  shown 
in  a study of HO performance for WiMAX mobility [5], 
continued with an WiMAX HO conditions evaluation 
towards 
enhancement 
through 
cross-layer 
interaction 
proposed in [6], together with a SIP-based cross-layer 
optimization for WiMAX Hard HO method, described in [7]. 
III. 
SIMULATIONS CONTEXT 
There are numerous studies about WiMAX mobility and 
methods of optimizing the V2I communications. However, 
an analysis of V2I system behavior on incremental variance 
of speed, antenna gain, maximum Tx power, and scanning 
threshold/methods could add new value to existing 
optimization methods.  
12
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

All simulations were done in OPNET v.14.5. [8] A 
typical mobility scenario has been considered (linear 
trajectory along a road where WiMAX BS stations are 
located). The BSes use the same set of frequencies and the 
mobile station (MS) is moving on a linear trajectory along 
the chain of BSEs. The utility of such a scenario is that it is 
similar with a road region in which WiMAX station are 
located along the road and the MS is a vehicle moving on the 
road. 
The parameters taken into considerations (used in pairs in 
batteries of simulations) have been: (Table 1) 
• 
MS Transmission Power (W) 
• 
MS Antenna Gain (dBi) 
• 
MS Scanning Threshold (dB) 
• 
MS HO Threshold Hysteresis (dB) 
• 
BS Transmission Power (W) 
• 
BS Antenna Gain (dBi) 
Table 1 WiMAX Parameters 
 
WiMAX Parameter 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 10 
A 
MS Maximum Tx Power 
(W) 
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
B 
MS Antenna Gain (dBi) 
-1 0 
2 
4 
6 
8 10 12 14 16 
C 
MS Scanning Threshold 
(dB) 
3 
6 
9 12 15 18 21 24 27 54 
D 
MS HO Threshold 
Hysteresis (dB) 
0.4 2 
4 
6 
8 10 12 14 16 18 
E BS Maximum Tx Power (W) 0.5 0.8 1 1.3 1.5 1.8 2 2.3 2.5 2.8 
F 
BS Antenna Gain (dBi) 
6 
8 
8 
9 10 12 14 15 16 21 
Each set of simulations considered the variance of a pair 
of parameters, the rest of them remain unchanged. The final 
value of average application throughput for each simulation 
is represented as a single point in the related decision space. 
In that way, each decision space covers 100 instances of a 
scenario, describing in details the behavior of V2I 
communication quality under effects of WiMAX parameters 
pair variance, on that particular trajectory and network 
topology.  
IV. 
 SIMULATION RESULTS 
Due paper size limitations, only MS Maximum TX 
Power-MS Antenna Gain, MS Antenna Gain-MS Scanning 
Threshold, MS Scanning-Method MS Speed, MS HO 
Threshold Hysteresis-MS Speed, MS Maximum TX Power-
BS Antenna Gain, and MS Maximum TX Power - MS 
Antenna Gain decision spaces will be presented. Each 
vertical section on decision space provides an analysis of 
system behavior under influence of a single parameter 
variance (depending on the selected axis). 
A. Influence of Maximum transmission power and MS 
antenna gain 
This experiment has been simulated while letting the 
Maximum TX power and antenna gain to pass through all 
specified values, for a MS speed of 10m/s and respectively 
50 m/s. The scanning method had parameters: N=4 P=240 
T=10. N=scanning (frames), P=interleaving (frames), 
T=iterations. The rest of parameters have been constant. 
Simulations set: A_B_C01 D01 E01 F01 for low speed 
(s=10m/s). 
The diagrams from Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 show MS Maximum 
TX Power-MS Antenna Gain decision space for MS speed of 
10m/s and respectively 50 m/s, giving an overall idea on the 
relative performance without presenting details on each HO 
action.  
 
Figure 1. MS Maximum TX Power - MS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 10m/s 
 
Figure 2.  MS TX Maximum Power - MS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 50m/s 
It is seen that speed has a major impact on the 
throughput. Out of theoretical throughput of 64 kbps (source 
rate) for high speed s= 50 m/s, the results are significantly 
worse than for low speed as 10 m/s, for the same range of 
TX power and antenna gain. While for s= 10 m/s we get for 
sufficient TX power ( > 0.5W) and antenna gain (> 8Db) a 
throughput closer to 64 kbps, while in the same conditions 
we get for the s= 50 m/s case, only something close to 
30kbps, i.e. half. Therefore, in such cases MS need a higher 
TX power and higher antenna gain. Also in the case of high 
speed, the effect of vehicular channel is higher than for low 
speed (see the non-monotonic behavior of the second 
diagram). 
Fig. 3 shows details of important antenna gain effect in 
the conditions where only Maximum TX power is varied 
(vertical section on MS Maximum TX Power-MS Antenna 
Gain decision space for MS speed 10m/s). 
The diagrams show that even if we have an increase of 
maximum TX power ten times ( i.e. from 0.1W to 1W), the 
overall throughput achievable  is modest one ( i.e. only 
22kbps), if g= 0dB, while for a gain of g= 10dB ( right 
diagram) it is seen that the throughput increases more than 
100%. This result clearly shows the benefit of a directional 
antenna, which may have a high gain versus a conventional 
omni directional one. 
13
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

  
 
Figure 3. Effect of antenna gain (g= 0DBi – left, and g= 10dBi – right) on 
throughput in Maximum TX power variation conditions, s = 10m/s. 
Fig. 4 shows the same diagrams as in Fig. 5 but for s = 50 
m/s (vertical section on  MS Maximum TX Power-MS 
Antenna Gain decision space for MS speed 50m/s). 
. 
  
 
Figure 4. Effect on throughput of Maximum TX power variation 
conditions, while the antenna gain is fixed (g= 0dBi – left, and g= 10dBi – 
right);   s = 50m/s (180 km/h). 
   It is seen that high speed would worsen the behavior. 
For instance, for s = 10 m/s we get  a throughput of 55 kbps 
(out of 64 kbps), in the conditions ( P= 1W and g = 10dBi) , 
while for s = 50 m/s, even the gain and maximum TX power 
is high, the maximum  throughput at the end of simulation is 
only close to 28 kbps. Still the gain of antenna is important 
(increase from 16kbps to 28 kbps). 
Therefore, even in adverse condition (related to 
Maximum TX power), the gain of the antenna can 
significantly improve the performance. The left diagram 
confirms that, even if MS has high Maximum TX Power, a 
very low antenna gain prevents the system of getting 
sufficient performance. The HO gaps have still large values 
in time (tens of seconds) at P = 1W. On the other side, if MS 
has a gain of g= 10dBi (right diagram), it is shown that 
throughput is good in the range P > 0.7W and increasing this 
power does not bring significant additional increase in 
throughput. These are the confirmation on detailed 
experiments of the conclusions drawn for synthesis 
diagrams. 
B. Influence of MS antenna gain and scanning threshold 
This section studies the scanning process influence on the 
performance in the given linear configuration and together 
with other parameters among which we are mainly interested 
in antenna gain effects. 
A short summary of scanning process is given here as 
reminder. When the fading SNR reaches the scanning 
threshold, the MS begins with scanning process on the 
announced DL channels by sending the MOB-SCN-REQ 
message. The BS allows for scanning by replying with the 
MOB-SCN-RSP message that contains the parameters for 
scan duration (N), interleaving interval (P) and the start 
frame (M). After receiving the MOB-SCN-RSP from the 
target BS, the SS starts the scanning after M received frames 
(start frame). The SS changes after M frames to the next 
channel and stays there for an N frames period (scanning 
interval/duration) to detect a BS and to assess its SNR.  
After a scanning interval, the SS returns to the DL 
channel of the active BS. This behavior aims to keep the 
interruption as short as possible since no payload 
transmissions are possible during the scanning process. If no 
preferable BS could be detected on the scanned channel, it 
reinitiates the scanning mode after a P frames period 
(interleaving interval) to find a new BS. The total number of 
allowed repetitions of the scanning process is given with the 
parameter (T). 
The diagrams from Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the cumulative 
throughput at the end of simulation time, while the antenna 
gain and scanning threshold have been varied, again taking 
two MS speed values of 10 and respectively 50 m/s.  
 
Figure 5. MS Antenna Gain - MS Scanning Threshold -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 10m/s 
 
Figure 6. MS Antenna Gain - MS Scanning Threshold -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 50m/s 
14
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

Simulations set: A05B_C_D01 E03 F01_S10 for low 
speed (s= 10m/s) and A05B_C_D01 E03 F01_S50 for high 
speed (s= 50 m/s).  
Scanning Method: N=4 P=240 T=10. 
As expected, the diagrams illustrate the fact that antenna 
gain has a major effect on the throughput. On the contrary, in 
this scenario adjusting the scanning threshold for a given 
value of gain, does not change significantly the throughput, 
except the high speed scenario (s = 50 m/s) when taking a 
more sensible scanning threshold ( > 21 dB) can bring some 
throughput raising with 10 – 20%. The explanation is that 
making the scanning threshold more sensible does not help if 
the major factor of antenna gain is low. The speed influence 
is again a worsening one: the maximum throughput that can 
be achieved for speed of 50 m/s versus 10 m/s is about a half.  
These conclusions does not mean that scanning 
parameters are not important to be adjusted properly, but 
show that the context is important and in different contexts, 
scanning activity might be more or less critical.  
The two sets of diagrams clearly show the dramatic effect 
of antenna gain increase on throughput increase, while the 
variation of scanning threshold is not so significant. For 
different MS speed values, the density of scanning has more 
effects that are visible.  
C. Influence of MS scanning method and MS speed 
The following set of simulations experimented different 
scanning 
methods 
(Table 
2). 
N=scanning 
(frames), 
P=interleaving (frames), T=iterations. 
Simulations set: A05 B05 Cx1-x6 D01 E03 F01_S10-50 
(it covers all speed range, from 10m/s to 50m/s).  
 
Table 2 Scanning method parameters 
MS scanning method 
Cx1 Cx2 Cx3 Cx4 Cx5 Cx6 
MS Scanning Threshold (dB) 
10 20 30 40 50 60 
N (frames) 
30 25 20 15 10 
5 
P (frames) 
50 100 150 200 250 250 
T 
10 10 10 10 10 10 
 
It is seen that Cx1 represents a scanning method having 
relative large N/P ratio, i.e. the relative time spent with the 
scanning is larger versus the time spent to transmit the data 
payload. At the other end of the range, Cx6 has small N/P, 
i.e. the scanning relative time is less than the time spent for 
data transmission. On the other side, the scanning threshold 
has been adjusted as to compensate in a certain measure this 
scarcity of spanning activity, by taking a higher value of the 
scanning threshold (60 DB). 
Fig. 7 shows an aggregated diagram in which the 
scanning threshold and scanning interleaving are varied on 
one dimension and the MS speed on the other dimension. It 
is seen that for low MS speed the scanning method is not so 
critical, therefore, a light scanning (small N/P) is sufficient to 
allow more relative time for data transmission. However, a 
dense scanning method is very effective for high speed, 
when mobile is quickly aware about the next BS available, 
and the low scanning method implies a slow reaction of 
mobile to communication condition changes. 
 
Figure 7. MS Scanning Method – MS Speed – Decision Space 
Fig. 8 shows the throughput in two extreme cases in the 
range experimented: (Cx1- CX6 at s= 10 m/s – left and Cx1-
Cx6- at s= 50 m/s – right). It is seen that at s= 50 m/s a more 
dense scanning is better (Cx1 and Cx3). 
  
 
Figure 8. Influence of scanning density, scanning threshold variation and 
speed on throughput – sample cases 
D. Influence of MS hysteresis threshold and MS speed 
This section studies the effect of the hysteresis threshold 
values selection when the speed is also varied. 
Simulations set: A05 B05 C08 D01-10 E03 F01_S10-50 
 
Figure 9. MS HO Threshold Hysteresis - MS Speed – Decision Space 
The hysteresis can be used to select BSs as that are 
suitable candidates for the target BS in a HO. When finding 
the candidate BSs, the  MS (or simulation) may compute the 
difference between the CINR of the serving  BS and the 
CINR of the potential target BS .The value of this attribute 
(Hysteresis threshold) specifies the minimum amount by 
which the CINR of potential target BS must exceed that of 
15
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

the serving BS. The value of new signal to noise ratio should 
be greater with the Handover Threshold Hysteresis than the 
current value in order that the HO can be triggered. An 
auxiliary Multi-target Handover Threshold Hysteresis (its 
value is less than Handover Threshold Hysteresis) can also 
be used to select among scanned possible target BSes before 
handover triggering. 
As observed in Fig.9, there is no modification for 
different values of MS HO Threshold Hysteresis, so that 
parameter has no importance in an environment as that 
simulated one. That conclusion is applied for that context 
only; due different network topologies with different 
WiMAX parameter values could produce different results. 
E. Influence of MS Maximum TX Power and BS Antenna 
gain  
This section will study the effect on throughput of the 
MS Maximum TX Power and BS antenna gain.  
Simulations set: A_B05 C08 D07 E03 F_S10 for MS 
speed 10m/s and A_B05 C08 D07 E03 F_S50 for MS high 
speed (s= 50 m/s). 
A major conclusion, highlighted in both Fig. 10 and 
Fig.12, is that BS antenna gain has a major impact on MS 
observed throughput at all ranges of MS TX Power. 
 
Figure 10. MS Maximum TX Power - BS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 10m/s 
For low speed, the application throughput grows with 
MS Maximum TX Power increase or with BS antenna gain.  
There is an important growth with MS Maximum TX Power 
for low values of BS Antenna gain, which will be less 
important as the BS antenna gain increase (see the 50000 – 
60000) region in the figure. 
Sample vertical sections of MS Maximum TX Power-BS 
Antenna Gain Decision Space for MS Speed 10m/s are 
presented in Fig. 11, describing the V2I system behavior 
under effect of BS antenna gain variance.  
One can see that at low MS power (left-upper part 
diagram) the influence of the BS antenna gain is dramatic- 
which is normal in such low MS power condition. When the 
MS Maximum TX power is increasing this compensate a 
lower BS antenna gain and the throughput is better even for 
lower values of the BS antenna gain. The best results are 
obtained (bottom-right diagram) for sufficient power at MS 
(1.0W) and high BS antenna gain g= 16dBi. On the other 
side is to be observed that sufficient throughput can be 
obtained with less power at MS (i.e. for P > 0.6W). This can 
give the possibility to apply policies in adjusting the 
maximum MS TX power in function of current condition. 
  
 
Figure 11. Throughput for different values of MS Maximum TX  power 
and variation of the BS antenna gain (MS TX P = 0.1, 1.0W) s = 10 m/s 
For high speed, the application behavior is more complex 
(Fig. 12). 
 
Figure 12. MS Maximum TX Power - MS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space 
for MS Speed 50m/s 
In the simulated scenario (versus network topology and 
trajectory), there are optimal values for MS Maximum TX 
Power (ex. 0.5W for BS Antenna Gain -1dBi). These optimal 
values are different for each BS Antenna Gain value. The 
mobile could adjust its Maximum TX Power to the value 
indicated in Decision Space and it will obtain the maximum 
application throughput.  There is no clear dependency 
between MS Maximum TX Power increasing or BS Antenna 
Gain and application throughput growth, as obtained for low 
speed. 
The qualitative results for high speed are the same as for 
low speed, but the overall throughput is significantly lower 
(roughly twice), even for high MS TX Power and high BS 
antenna gain. 
F. Influence of MS and BS Antenna gains 
The MS and BS antenna gains are expected to have 
major influence on the overall performance. 
Simulations set: A05 B_C08 D07 E03 F_S10 for low 
speed (s = 10 m/s). 
For MS low speed (s = 10 m/s) the Fig. 13 diagram 
shows a rather monotonic increase of the throughput with 
both BS and MS antenna gain on both dimensions. However 
a “triangle” in the space (BS-gain, MS-gain) of saturation 
(region 50000- 60000) is seen (top-right side) where no 
16
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

increasing in throughput is possible; in other words, the BS 
gain and MS gain “cooperates” and we obtain sufficient 
throughput if an empirical (approximated) relationship is 
fulfilled:  
BS_gain + MS_gain >a 
where limit a can be determined from the figure. This 
observation gives the possibilities to apply policies to cross-
adjust the BS antenna gain and MS antenna gain. 
 
Figure 13. MS Antenna Gain - BS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space for MS 
Speed 10m/s 
 The simulations highlights that for high speed (Fig. 14), 
the application throughput has a approximately constant 
level at middle range of parameters, where the variance of 
MS Antenna Gain and BS Antenna Gain has no major effect, 
as opposite with low speed situations, where that constant 
level is reached near the highest range of parameters. 
 
Figure 14. MS Antenna Gain - BS Antenna Gain -- Decision Space for MS 
Speed 50m/s 
If BS antenna gain is g= 9dBi then after at MS g > =10 
dBi, we do not get further improvement (left diagram). A 
similar effect is seen in the right figure for g>=4dBi. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A. Conclusions related to simulations 
One important conclusion of the simulation studies is that 
the antenna gain of MS and BS has major impact on 
throughput in a large range of other parameter variation 
(speed, power, scanning threshold, hysteresis threshold, etc.). 
Having a good antenna gain at both BS and MS is essential 
in all contexts. This is a reason to use directional antennas, 
which expose such properties. 
As for other parameters (speed, scanning threshold, 
hysteresis threshold, etc.) the results obtained show that the 
behavior of throughput versus variation of parameter 
combinations is not a monotonic one and is context 
dependent. This conclusion is however natural for a system 
that has tens of inter-dependent working parameters, but 
cross-optimizations are possible in the sense that the results 
of the decision spaces can be used in policies governing the 
ranging, scanning, HO, etc. 
B. Conclusions related to decision spaces method and 
cross-layer algorithm 
The analysis of V2I system behavior on incremental 
variance of speed, antenna gain, maximum Tx power, and 
scanning threshold/methods under decision space matrix 
provides 
a 
data 
base 
usable 
for 
optimization 
methods/techniques. Each decision space allow not only the 
combined effect details of a pair of parameters variance, but 
allow to predict the system behavior for each specific 
parameter value (see decision space vertical section 
examples presented in Fig. 11).  
Network operator could use such kind of extended 
simulations for different roads and highway, where the 
network topology and the road details are known. Vehicles 
provided with WiMAX terminal capabilities passing these 
roads could be helped to optimize the communications using 
cross layer-algorithm based on location and speed prediction 
from GPS information and optimal parameters set from 
network operator.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work on mobility presented in this paper has been 
performed within a European research project SMART-Net 
(SMART-antenna multimode wireless mesh Network), 
focused  on the possible advantages if using directional 
antennas in mobility scenarios.    
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Chou, C. Li, W. Chien, and K. Lan, “A Feasibility Study on 
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure Communication: WiFi vs. WiMAX”, 2009 
Tenth International Conference on Mobile Data Management: 
Systems, Services and Middleware, pp. 397-398. 
[2] N. Frangiadakis and N. Roussopoulos, “A Pegasus over WiFi and 
WiMax Demo: Connectivity at high speeds”, 2009 5th International 
Conference on Testbeds and Research Infrastructures for the 
Development of Networks & Communities and Workshops, pp. 1-3. 
[3] R. Matos, B. Sousa, P. Neves, S. Sargento, and M. Curado, 
“Advanced Mobility in Broadband Wireless Access Scenarios”, 2009 
IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, 
Networking and Communications,  pp. 214-220  
[4] G. Zaggoulos, A. Nix, and D. Halls, “Novel Antenna Configurations 
for Wireless Broadband Vehicular Communications”, 2010 6th 
International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications, 
pp. 21-26. 
[5] M. Constantinescu and E. Borcoci, "Handover Performance 
Evaluation in WiMAX Mobility Scenarios", 7th International ICST 
Conference on Broadband Communications, Networks, and Systems, 
BROADNET-MOWAN 2010 
[6] M. Constantinescu, E. Borcoci, and T. Rashid, "WiMAX Handover 
Conditions Evaluation Towards Enhancement Through Cross-layer 
Interaction", 2010 Sixth Advanced International Conference on 
Telecommunications, pp. 422-427 
[7] M. Constantinescu and E. Borcoci, "A SIP-Based Cross-Layer 
Optimization for WiMAX Hard Handover",  The 8th International 
Conference on Communications, COMM2010, pp. 375-378 
[8] www.opnet.com, 01.02.2011 
17
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

