A Radio-Resource Switching Scheme in Aggregated Radio Access Network 
Xuan-Dat Trinh*, Gahee Jo*, Jaewon Lee*, Jee-Hyeon Na**, Woogoo Park**, and Ho-Shin Cho* 
*Electronics Engineering Department, School of IT Engineering 
Kyungpook National University 
Daegu, Republic of Korea 
** Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
E-mail: *{xuandat-trinh, jghv, jwlee, hscho}@ee.knu.ac.kr, **{jhna,wgpark}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract – In an aggregated radio access network (A-RAN), 
wherein multiple radio access technologies (RAT) coexist, 
different radio resource utilization in each RAT may result in 
decreasing quality of service (QoS). In this paper, we propose a 
radio resource switching scheme in A-RAN coexist to provide 
multi-modal mobile users with the best service using a cloud 
base-station concept. The proposed scheme is manipulated to 
optimize radio utilization and QoS.  
Keywords: radio-resource; cloud; radio-access-network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The widespread and increasing use of smart-phones and 
broadband based services such as high-quality video and 
peer-to-peer services has caused the explosion of data traffic 
in mobile networks. To cope with this surge of data traffic, 
new technologies such as the WiMAX [1] and LTE [2] 
families have been implemented in a short period. Therefore, 
these newly deployed systems are likely to coexist with 
legacy systems, with each owning a separately their radio 
access 
network, 
resulting 
in 
high 
capital 
expenditure/operating 
expenditure 
(CAPEX/OPEX). 
Moreover, dynamic variations in traffic load may cause 
lower average utilization of a base station. To settle these 
challenges, a cloud-conceptual base station system has been 
introduced. Through virtualization using cloud technologies, 
any user equipment (UE) is able to access one of the 
common cell-sites, behind which multiple radio access 
technologies (RATs) are used to service a user-specific 
traffic in the best possible manner. We call such a network 
with multi-RATs, an aggregated radio access network (A-
RAN). In A-RAN, it is also anticipated that software-defined 
radio equipment for signal processing of each radio access 
technology (RAT) provides the capability of sharing radio 
resources between different RATs to optimize frequency 
usage. In this paper, we propose a scheme to switch radio 
resources between the different radio access technologies 
used within an aggregated radio access network (A-RAN) to 
increase spectrum utilization. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The system 
to which our proposed scheme is applied is described in 
Section II. The proposed scheme to switch radio resources is 
described in Section III. The current simulation system, 
discussion, and further works to fulfill our study are 
presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V summarizes our 
conclusions. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
A. Aggregated radio access network architecture. 
A-RAN has been developing to reduce network 
implementation and maintenance costs as well as to increase 
efficiency of hardware usage. Some A-RAN models have 
been introduced such as KT CCC (Cloud Communication 
Center) [3], Alcatel-Lucent lightRadio [4] or C-RAN of 
China Mobile Research Institute [5]. Fig. 1 shows the 
generalization of A-RAN architectures mentioned above. 
The A-RAN consists of Radio Units (RUs) and Digital Units 
(DUs), as shown in Fig. 1. A DU performs all of the 
functions performed by a traditional base station transceiver 
(BTS) and base station controller (BSC) in a legacy system, 
including baseband signal processing of user data, radio-
resource allocation, and various control functions. On the 
other hand, an RU only has a physical radio interface 
comprising an antenna and power amplification. By 
centralized processing and control functions in DU, DU can 
be built on cloud computing environment to optimize 
hardware utilization as well as using software-defined radio 
equipments to have flexible capability of processing any 
baseband signals.  
WiBro
WCDMA
LTE
DU
RU 
RU 
RU 
WiBro
WCDMA
LTE
WiBro
WCDMA
LTE
WiBro
WCDMA
LTE
SDR
CORE 
NETWORK
DU controller
 
Figure 1.  A-RAN architecture. 
B. System model 
In our study, we assume three different wireless access 
systems: A, B, and C. These systems are characterized by the 
carried traffic types such as packet or circuit-switched and 
the availability of carrier aggregation, a functionality 
introduced for broadband services in the LTE-Advance 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

standard [6]. The descriptive parameters of the three above 
mentioned systems are summarized in Table 1. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
System A 
System B 
System C
System bandwidth (MHz) 
40 
40 
20 
Channelization (MHz) 
20, 10, 5, 5 
20, 10, 5, 5 
5, 5, 5, 5 
Carrier aggregation 
Yes 
No 
No 
Traffic type 
Packet 
traffic 
Packet 
traffic 
Circuit 
traffic 
Frame length (ms) 
10 
10 
N/A 
 
Systems A and B have LTE-like orthogonal frequency 
division multiple access (OFDMA) channel architectures [7], 
in which the time axis is divided into 10-ms frames that are 
further subdivided into ten 1-ms slots. In the frequency 
domain, the subcarrier spacing is 1 MHz. In the 2-
dimensional channel domain, a resource-allocation unit 
called a resource block (RB) is defined as 1 ms × 1 MHz 
[time × frequency]. There are three UE types: mode-A-only, 
which is capable of only accessing system A; mode-B-only, 
which is for system B only; and multi-modal UE, which is 
capable of using both systems A and B. On the other hand, 
system C is accessible to all UE for circuit traffic. Moreover, 
in terms of the channel handling capability, the UE is 
categorized as having 5, 10, 20, and 40 MHz capability. 
WiBro
WCDMA
LTE
System A
System B
System C
Spectrum sensing
request
System A
System C
System B
 
Figure 2.  Spectrum map in UE 
 
Before making a call request, a multi-modal UE performs 
a kind of preliminary preparation called early spectrum 
sensing (ESS). It measures the power levels over the entire 
frequency band of Systems A, B, and C and builds a 
spectrum map based on these measurements, as shown in 
Figure 2. Then, the UE tries to send a call request to the 
system that contains the lowest power level, which means 
that the frequency availability is the highest. When the target 
system receives UE request, if it has enough available 
resource and its average packet loss ratio over N frames is 
lower than packet loss threshold, it will admit the call. 
Otherwise, it consults DU controller about other available 
system. By checking remaining resource and packet loss 
ratio of other systems, DU controller informs target system 
of a new system that has enough free resource and average 
packet loss ratio over N frames is lower than packet loss 
threshold, and then target system signals to UE to send call 
request to the new one. If other systems also do not meet 
these two conditions, UE call request will be dropped, with 
real-time traffic, or put into buffer, with delay tolerance 
traffic. 
III. 
PROPOSAL OF RADIO RESOURCE SWITCHING 
 
DU is able to monitor the entire radio resource utilization 
for Systems A, B, and C, and control the amount of radio 
resources belonging to each system if needed. On that basis, 
we propose a scheme for switching radio resources between 
systems to ensure better system performance and higher 
resource utilization. The proposed scheme is illustrated using 
the flow chart shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proposed radio resource switching scheme 
 
In our proposed scheme: 
 
If radio resource switching (RRS) has not yet 
occurred, DU calculates the performance measures 
for each period, tDU_mon 
 
If RRS has occurred, DU calculates the performance 
measures for each period, tbr, in the borrower system 
to which the free radio resources are switched, and 
for each tld in the lender system from which free 
radio resources are switched. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

We define a “busy system” as a system in which both the 
average packet loss rate over period tDU_mon, Pavg, is higher 
than the packet loss threshold, PThr, and the average channel 
utilization over period tDU_mon, ChUavg, is higher than the 
channel utilization threshold ChUThr, which is 95 percentage 
capacity of all channels in system. If these two conditions do 
not occur simultaneously, we consider the system to be a 
“free system”.  
The operation of our scheme is described below. If radio 
resource switching has not yet occurred, the DU 
continuously monitors the average packet loss rate, Pavg, and 
average channel utilization, ChUavg, in each system for each 
period, tDU_mon. When it finds a busy system, it then checks 
the utilization of 5MHz channels ChU5M in the free 
systems: if it is lower than a threshold called ChU5MThr_low: 
          ChU5MThr_low = (num_5M-1)/ num_5M                (1) 
whereas num_5M is the number of 5MHz channels in free 
system, the DU will switch resources from the free system 
with the most available resources to the busy system. Then, 
each system will update its channelization information. If 
radio resource switching has already occurred, the DU 
calculates the average packet loss ratio, Pavg_br, and average 
channel utilization, ChUavg_br, over tbr in the borrower system, 
along with the average packet loss ratio, Pavg_ld, and average 
channel utilization, ChUavg_ld, over tld in the lender system. In 
the lender system, if both Pavg_ld and ChUavg_ld are higher than 
thresholds PThr and ChUThr, respectively, the DU restores the 
lent resources to the system to which they belong. This 
means the lender system becomes busier and needs to recall 
its lent resources. In the case of the borrower system, if the 
following condition happens 
          Pavg_br<PThr & ChU5Mavg_br<ChU5MThr_low            (2) 
the DU restores the lent resources to the original system. 
This indicates that the load on the borrower system is 
decreasing and it may no longer need the additional 
resources. When monitoring system C, packet lost ratio is 
replaced by call block probability. 
In A-RAN, channel processing modules of system can be 
software-defined radio equipments. So it is able to switch 
radio channel from one system to other system by re-
configure the software of channel processing module. 
IV. 
ONGOING SIMULATION 
A. Simulation environment 
We start the computer simulation under a single-cell 
condition with a static UE number, but will eventually 
consider multi-cell environments and user mobility with 
handoffs between them. UEs are distributed uniformly in cell 
coverage. DU manages a finite-length buffer for each user in 
order to store data coming from the core network side. If the 
buffer overflows, the packets are lost. In this paper, the 
packets are categorized as real-time packet and delay-
tolerant packet, with tolerances ranging from one to three 
frames. The traffic generation of user n is modeled as a 
Poisson arrival process with rate n, n{1,2,…N}. Then, the 
total arrival rate is 
                                     





N
n 1
n
all
                                 (3) 
The traffic volume is normalized by the number of RBs 
needed to carry it. 
B. Initial simulation result 
In this part, we will discuss our initial simulation result.  
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Number of requested RB/frame
Numberof transmitted RB/frame
 
 
Without RRS
With RRS
 
Figure 4.  System performance 
Fig. 4 compares the system throughput when radio resource 
switching is used and when it is not used. RRS helps to 
improve system throughput. Additional simulations will help 
us ensure that packet lost ratio with RRS is lower than 
without RRS. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, a radio resource switching scheme was 
proposed for application to an A-RAN based on the 
deployment of a cloud base-station in order to improve 
frequency utilization, increase system throughput, and 
enhance the QoS. We expect that after the system 
simulations are completed, the simulation results will 
validate the performance enhancement of the proposed 
scheme. In the next step, we will consider this scheme in an 
environment closer to reality, i.e., system parameters are 
same as defined in standards. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We 
would 
like 
to 
thank 
the 
Electronics 
and 
Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) in Daejeon, 
Republic of Korea for their support to conduct this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
WiMAX http://ieee802.org/16/tgm/ <retrieved: Feb 1st 2012> 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

[2] 
3GPP LTE http://www.3gpp.org/LTE <retrieved: Feb 1st 2012> 
[3] 
Hyun Pyo Kim “ KT smart network world – Mobile Network 
Technology and Advanced Plans” (in Korean) in The 21st High 
Speed Work Shop, Gyeongju, Republic of Korea Jan. 19th -21st  2011. 
Available:  http://plum.hufs.ac.kr/hsn2011/pdf/6-1.pdf   <retrieved: 
Feb 2nd 2012> 
[4] 
lightRadio Portfolio: Technical overview, Alcatel-Lucent white paper. 
Available: 
http://www.alcatel-
lucent.com/wps/portal/Locator?LMSG_CABINET=Docs_and_Resou
rce_Ctr&LMSG_CONTENT_FILE=White_Papers/LightRadio_WP1
_Technical_Overview.pdf&UNIQUE_NAME=&lu_lang_code=en_
WW <retrieved: Feb 2nd 2012> 
[5] 
China Mobile Research Institute “C-RAN – Road Towards Green 
Radio Access Network” in C-RAN International Workshop, Beijing, 
China, 
Apr. 
23rd 
2010. 
Available: 
http://labs.chinamobile.com/article_download.php?id=63069 
<retrieved: Feb 2nd 2012>  
[6] 
3GPP TS 36.300 v10.4 Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access 
(E-UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network 
(E-UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2   
[7] 
3GPP TS 36.201 v10.0 Technical Specification Group Radio Access 
Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); 
LTE physical layer; General description  
 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

