 
An Analysis of Secure Interoperation of EPC and Mobile Equipments 
 
Cristina-Elena Vintilă, Victor-Valeriu Patriciu, Ion Bica 
     Military Technical Academy, Bucharest, Romania 
    cvintila@ixiacom.com, vip@mta.ro, ibica@mta.ro 
 
Abstract - 4G architecture is the latest 3GPP development 
when it comes to mobile networks design and optimization. 
Designed initially for data, but having a flexible architecture, 
4G is capable of integrating IMS, this way bringing in voice 
and services. 3GPP wanted to facilitate the migration from 3G 
and non-3GPP solutions to the 4G design, therefore the core 
network components of 4G are capable of interacting with 3G 
core 
network 
devices, 
provided 
these 
ones 
have 
an 
interoperability feature. This way, even 3G or non-3GPP 
devices are capable of using the 4G services. Nevertheless, one 
of the biggest issues when interoperating these solutions and 
devices is the security aspect. This paper reviews some of the 
most common access methods and summarizes the security 
concerns that raise in each case. The 4G security design is a 
very powerful solution for authenticating the users, even 
though it has some shortcomings that can be addressed. 
 
Keywords – SAE; EPC; AKA; EAP-AKA; HSS; J-PAKE; PKI; 
key management; security context. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
       The 4G architecture consists of two main components: 
the radio access network and the Evolved Packet Core. The 
radio network is represented by the eNodeB, the antenna 
and the air medium of transportation. The mobile devices 
connect to this antenna, which, in turn, has responsibilities 
in the mobile device authentication to the core network. This 
core network has several devices that deal with the 
signaling, traffic routing and prioritization and as well user 
authentication and charging [1]. The most common core 
network devices are the following: MME – Mobility 
Management Entity (that deals with user registration to the 
network, control-plane or signaling of user’s traffic patterns 
permissions and manages the mobility of the user from one 
area to the other), SGW – Serving Gateway (this entity does 
both signaling and user-plane and it is the tracking area 
entity – where tracking area is a group of cells the user may 
camp on), PGW – Packet Data Network Gateway (this is the 
device that connects the 4G network to the intranet or to the 
Internet, it deals with traffic routing and prioritization based 
on the PCRF rules for a particular customer; it is also the 
mobility anchor of the UE – User Equipment, when this user 
moves around the network), PCRF – Policy Charging and 
Rules Function (a policy database of a customer’s 
subscription to the operator) and HSS – Home Subscriber 
Server (a database that contains the mobile device identity 
and credentials) [9]. Figure 1 represents a simplified 4G 
architecture that shows the core network devices, as well as 
the logical interfaces that link their functionality. It also 
represents an example of 3G and non-3GPP connectivity to 
the 4G network. 
       The eNodeB, or the antenna, in the 4G architecture is 
the user’s first point of contact to the network. The 4G 
mobile device identifies the antenna and tries to connect to 
it, asking for permission. The antenna then plays the role of 
an authentication relay agent for the user. The 4G 
architecture has been designed in such a matter that it can 
operate with 3G mobile devices, as long as the 3G parts of 
the network have the capability of communicating with the 
SGW [3]. The 3G portion of the network has multiple 
entities: the SGSN – Serving GPRS Support Node (this is 
the homologous of the MME and part of the SGW in the 4G 
architecture, with the important difference that it does both 
signaling and user-plane, unlike MME which is a signaling-
only entity), GGSN – Gateway GPRS Support Node (this is 
the homologous of the PGW in the 4G architecture) and the 
U-TRAN. U-TRAN stands for UMTS Terrestrial Radio 
Access Network, and it is composed of multiple antennas 
(NodeB devices) and a RNC – Radio Network Controller. It 
is the RNC that actually connects to the SGSN in order to 
authenticate the user. The procedures for both 4G access and 
3G access are similar: UMTS-AKA. 
       The non-3GPP access may be any other form of access, 
like WLAN. This time the user authentication can no longer 
be realized via the classic authentication procedure AKA. 
Instead, there is a separate architecture of 3GPP-AAA 
servers that does the authentication of non-3GPP access 
users using the EAP-AKA procedure [6]. The entities 
involved in this case are the 3GPP AAA server, a 3GPP 
AAA Proxy Server, which is used in case where the user is 
in roaming and an ePDG – Evolved Packet Data Gateway. 
The AAA acronym stands for Authentication, Authorization 
and Accounting. The ePDG has an important role in the user 
authentication; this entity is the peer the UE establishes a 
security communication with. The ePDG authenticates the 
user by accessing the AAA servers. The access to the 4G 
core network can be classified as non-roaming and roaming 
access. It can also be classified by the type of access 
network: 4G, 3G, 2.5G, non-3GPP. The roaming scenarios 
on their own can be further classified as having home routed 
traffic (meaning that the PGW is located in the home 
network), local breakout with home operator’s application 
functions only (the PGW is in the visited network and the 
user does its signaling and data traffic via the visited PDN –
Packet Data Network- – this is the case of a voice mail 
application) and local breakout with visited operator’s 
application functions only (this is the case where the home 
and visited operators have an agreement to provide services 
to each other’s users; all the user’s traffic is served by and 
routed through the visited network, while the home network 
only does the authentication and policy verification). It is 
1
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
not mandatory that the roaming scenarios are of any one 
type of the three types described; there can be a combination 
of architectures, where for certain functions the home 
network offers the services – like the voice mail, while some 
other services, like access to the Internet can be offered 
directly by the visited network. Also, the same network 
operator may have one type of architectural interconnection 
with one operator, while having a different connection with 
 
 another operator. Figure 1 presents a local breakout 
scenario, with both home operator’s and visited operator’s 
application functions. This means that some of the services 
are offered by the home network, while others are offered 
by the visited operator. In this case there are three users, all 
connecting from roaming, one is a native 4G device, the 
other is a 3G device and the third is a non-3GPP device, a 
laptop that connects via WiFi. 
 
 
Figure 1. EPS roaming architecture with local breakout 
 
       The next two sections describe the security architecture 
of the 4G network, summarizing the security domains of this 
architecture, as well as it analyzes the three types of access 
to this network. The types of access are 4G radio access (via 
native 4G mobile stations), 3G compatible radio access and 
non-3gpp access via technologies like WLAN of WiFi. 
 
II. SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND REQUIREMENTS 
       The security architecture involves most of the devices, 
in less or greater measure. 4G design specifies 5 security 
areas: 
- Network Access Security: this area deals with granting 
access to the (core) network only to those users that prove 
their identity, that identity matching a network’s registered 
user, with valid authentication credentials and with a 
subscription that allows services to be delivered to this user 
- Network Domain Security: this area deals with the secure 
interoperation between the Evolved Packet Core (EPC) 
network entities; most of these entities of a 4G network are 
already represented in Figure 1, as well as some of the 3G 
devices, like SGSN; this security is described by the 
protocols involved in securing the communications between 
EPC nodes: IPsec (recommended by Specs to take place 
within an operator’s premises) and TLS (usually for inter-
operator secure communications) 
- User Domain Security: this area deals with the secure 
access to the mobile stations 
- Application Domain Security: this area is concerned with 
how to secure the communication between the applications 
that reside on the user’s mobile device and the core network 
application servers; as a layer 7 application, this area may 
implement a large variety of security structures 
- Visibility and Configurability of Security: this is an 
informational area, for the user; the subscriber must have 
constant access to the information concerning the security 
features available on his device, whether or not they are 
functioning properly and whether or not they are required 
for the secure operation of a certain service 
       The security requirements for the 4G networks are 
classified according to the areas above and most of the 
security requirements are summarized in [6]. The eNodeB, 
being the access point into the network, has a large variety 
of security parameters and classes that must be verified and 
certified in order to assure a secure operation. These classes 
are the setup and configuration (this class deals with the 
secure communication in terms of confidentiality and 
2
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
integrity between the eNB and the EPC, over the S1-MME 
and S1-U interfaces, between eNBs, over the X2 interface, 
with the secure setup configuration of the eNB and the 
secure software update), key management inside the eNB (as 
the eNB participates in the user equipment authentication 
process, it also stores some of the keys derives from the 
authentication process; these keys should be stored on a 
secure environment and never leave it, except in the 
situations specifically mentioned by the Specs), handling of 
the user-plane traffic (this data is transmitted over the S1-U 
interface to the SGW and via X2-U interface between eNBs; 
securing this data means assuring its confidentiality, 
integrity and protection against replay attacks), handling of 
control-plane traffic (this signaling transmissions take place 
over S1-MME interface towards the MME and via the X2-C 
interface between eNBs; securing this data means assuring 
its confidentiality, integrity and protection against replay 
attacks). 
 
 
III. NETWORK ACCESS SECURITY 
A. 4G mobile device access 
       As per [6], the preferred access method for the 4G 
mobile devices is AKA, named EPS-AKA – Evolved Packet 
System Authentication and Key Agreement, compatible 
with 3G UMTS – AKA authentication system, but not 
compatible with the 2G SIM, nor a SIM application on a 
UICC. The purpose of the AKA is to produce master keying 
material for protection of 3 classes of traffic: user-plane 
traffic, RRC – Radio Resource Control and NAS – Non 
Access Stratum. The exact procedure for deriving and 
distributing the keys is not important at this point. There are 
6 keys that result from this process: K-eNB, K-NASint, K-
NASenc, K-UPenc, K-RRCint and K-RRCenc. The AKA 
procedure is represented in the picture below. 
       This exchange is triggered by the UE connecting to an 
antenna. The antenna (called eNodeB) is forwarding to the 
MME the identity declared by the UE. At the very first 
attach, this is usually the IMSI – International Mobile 
Subscriber Identity, afterwards it is a temporary identity 
called GUTI – Global Unique Temporary Identity. The 
MME then contacts the HSS, sending the UE’s identity over 
Diameter. If it finds the identity, the HSS responds with a 
set of AVs – Authentication Vectors (called generically 
Authentication Data). An AV contains 4 fields: the RAND – 
a random challenge string, an AUTN – an authentication 
token, an XRES – expected authentication response and a 
session key for the traffic between MME and HSS, named 
K-ASME – Key for Access Security Management Entity, 
which in our case is the role assumed by the MME. The 
MME forwards, via eNB, the RAND and AUTN to the UE. 
The UE authenticates the network using the AUTN and 
computes the RES – Response, which is sent back to the 
MME. The MME compares the RES and XRES and, if they 
match, the UE is considered authenticated. 
 
 
Figure 2. EPS-AKA procedure 
 
       There are at least 2 security issues related to the EPS-
AKA process. One of them appears at the first Initial Attach 
of the User Equipment, when the user’s identity IMSI is sent 
unencrypted over the air and the second one is the lack of 
PFS – Perfect Forward Secrecy property of the AKA 
algorithm. The identification of any subsequent requests a 
particular user may make to the network is done via a 
temporary identity called GUTI. The new MME reads this 
identifier from the UE’s message (TAU – Tracking Area 
Update, for instance), contacts the previous MME in order 
to obtain the IMSI and then does the actual UE 
authentication to the HSS. The messages exchanged 
between the UE and the MME all pass through the eNB. 
These messages are GTPv2-C packets via the S1-MME 
interface. The AKA process continues over the S6a 
interface, where the information is encapsulated in Diameter 
protocol packets. The actual user-plane, after leaving the 
radio domain, is forwarded by the eNB directly to the 
designated SGW, over the S1-U interface, where the 
encapsulation is GTPv1-U. The keys derived by the AKA 
process are used over the air interface, then between the 
eNB and the MME. Traffic protection between the eNB and 
the SGW is a network domain security field of activity. 
       There have been multiple research projects done in 
order to improve the security and speed up the 
authentication process. Some of these projects are already 
patented and used in industry: SPEKE algorithm for the 
authentication between the BlackBerry device and the BES 
– BlackBerry Enterprise Server. The SPEKE is very similar 
to Diffie-Hellman, with the exception that the hash of the 
password is used as the group generator. Still, this method 
has a lot of vulnerabilities and technical limitations. There is 
yet another project that was very well received by the 
3
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
cryptographic community. This is called J-PAKE [19]. It 
overcomes the vulnerabilities of both Diffie-Hellman and 
EKE – SPEKE methods. J-PAKE provides off-line 
dictionary attacks resistance (it does not leak any 
information that allows an attacker to search for the 
password off-line), forward secrecy (the information 
remains protected even if the original shared secret was 
disclosed), known-key security (even is a session key is 
disclosed, the information protected with other session keys 
is not accessible) and on-line dictionary attacks resistance 
(an on-line attacker can only test one password per 
execution). Even though this protocol requires two 
computational rounds and 14 exponentiations, it is much 
stronger and requires a smaller exponent to generate its 
keys. 
       This method is not yet used in the mobile industry, even 
though it is lightweight and applicable to the mobile devices 
characteristics. This protocol can be used along with AKA 
to provide efficient end-to-end cryptography for the 4G core 
network services, like the ones provided by IMS – IP 
Multimedia Subsystem, as well as instead of AKA in the 4G 
authentication protocol. Besides the fact that it is strong with 
regards to the 4 security aspects listed above, this method 
does not require a PKI implementation, which makes it 
more flexible and easier to use. 
B. 3G mobile device access 
       The 3G security requirements and procedures are 
described in [8]. The solution used for authentication in the 
3G design is the predecessor of the EPS-AKA. It is called 
UMTS-AKA and is uses the same methods. When 
authenticating to a 4G network, the user equipment is still 
connecting through a 3G access network. In the 4G E-
UTRAN, the eNB has the entire access control role as an 
antenna (doing both signaling and data) and it is managed 
by an MME device, which has only signaling role: 
authentication, management and mobility management. The 
3G U-TRAN design had a pool of antennas managed by a 
RNC (Radio Network Controller) and it was the SGSN 
device that did the mobility management, the authentication 
and also data-plane. The 3G design got simpler in the 4G, 
creating a smarter antenna and completely segregating the 
control and data planes in separate entities: MME and SGW. 
So, in order to effectively connect to a 4G core, the design 
must keep the SGW in place, as an essential core device, 
and define the 3G-4G delimitation on the S4 interface, 
between the SGSN and the SGW. This way, the SGSN still 
manages the 3G UE, does its authentication and manages 
also its mobility to the 4G network, but the actual traffic is 
forwarded to the SGW, and then the PGW in order to be 
routed to the Internet/Intranet or IMS behind the PDN the 
user connected to. The authentication of a 3G device is done 
by the SGSN, which interacts with the HSS over the Gr 
interface, which is Diameter based. 
       The interoperability issues between the 3G and 4G 
devices appear when the UE is moving from 3G cover to 4G 
cover and viceversa. It is very possible that the HSS already 
sent multiple AVs to the UE, and this one stores many of 
them, so that at a certain moment in time, it authenticates/re-
authenticates using one of them, at its choice. The security 
association that exists between a mobile device and the 
network is called security context. In EPS, this context is 
composed of 2 other security contexts: the AS – Access 
Stratum and NAS – Non-Access Stratum contexts, which 
are sets of keys between the entities participating in the 
AKA process, which will provide hop-by-hop security 
(confidentiality and/or integrity and/or replay protection) for 
radio bearers, signaling and user-plane traffic. All the 
entities must be able to do Security Context management, 
and mostly the UE must be able to store multiple security 
contexts. It can be a legacy security context (a context 
created after the UMTS-AKA process from 3G) or a native 
EPS security context (results from the EPS-AKA procedure) 
or it may be a mapped security context, where the keys have 
been generated from the EPS-AKA process, but they are 
going to be used in a 3G communication (partial native 
context). As there can be multiple security contexts at one 
time in the UE and network, only one can be in effect (this 
one is called current security context); the others are non-
current contexts. Table 1 summarizes the states and types of 
security contexts. 
 
TABLE I. SECURITY CONTEXTS 
 
AGE/EFFECT 
CURRENT 
NON-CURRENT 
FULL 
NATIVE / MAPPED 
NATIVE 
PARTIAL 
X 
NATIVE 
 
Note that there is possible one single transformation, that is 
from a partially native security context, there can be 
generated a fully native context, but not the other way 
around. 
       There are multiple scenarios that assume 3G-4G 
interaction. One case is when the UE moves from the 4G 
network towards the 3G network, procedure called RAU – 
Routing Area Update, which can take place when the UE is 
either in ECM-IDLE mode or in ISR – Idle Signaling 
Reduction. When the UE is in ECM-CONNECTED mode, 
the procedure is called handover. As this article describes a 
3G mobile connecting to a 4G network, we will detail the 
procedures required when a device moves from a 3G 
network towards a 4G network. These are also divided into 
procedures that apply when the device is in ECM-IDLE 
(specifically the TAU – Tracking Area Update procedure) 
and the handover from UTRAN to E-UTRAN. With regards 
to security, these procedures translate into a mapping of the 
old/previous security context into a new security context. As 
the case discussed involves 3G to 4G mobility, the old 
security context may or may not provide the (new) MME 
with the UE identity:  
a) It may send a temporary identity that was being 
used in the 3G context: the UE sends in the TAU Request its 
former P-TMSI identity used in the 3G context, in the form 
of an old GUTI IE; this implies that the TAU request is 
integrity-protected, but not encrypted, and also implies the 
4
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
UE sending to the MME more information about its 
previous security context: 
- 
the KSI, P-TMSI and RAI, so that the (new) MME 
can find the (old) SGSN 
- 
a P-TMSI signature 
- 
a 32bit Nonce 
b) It may not include the previous temporary identity, 
case where the AKA process takes place again 
       In case of the handover, the process has 2 steps: 
a) Signaling handover using a mapped EPS security 
context 
b) Subsequent NAS signaling to determine whether an 
EPS context can be used – in the cases where the 
network 
and 
UE 
security 
properties 
and 
requirements don’t match – this usually takes place 
at the first MME change mobility process 
       Figure 3 describes a basic 3G to 4G handover process. 
The process is presented in more details in [6]. 
C. Non-3GPP mobile device access 
       A WLAN UE, like a laptop, may also connect to a 4G 
network, provided it supports EAP-AKA procedures and 
that the network has an AAA proxy and an 3GPP AAA 
server. The figure below describes the EAP-AKA process 
that takes place when a laptop connects via WLAN to a 4G 
core network. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. EPS EAP-AKA 
 
       The abbreviations and notations have the same meaning 
as for the classical AKA procedure. The only difference 
here is that this entire AKA negotiation takes place over the 
EAP – Extensible Authentication Protocol, an authentication 
framework used with success in protocols like 802.1x for 
layer 2 authentication in both wired and wireless 
technologies, as well as for upper layer security procedures 
like EoU – EAP over UDP. 
       The EPS-AKA system is essentially the same as the 
UMTS-AKA system. However, there are a several 
distinctive improvements, with regards to both security level 
and negotiation speed. The EPS-AKA process includes in 
the authentication the network ID, which means the 
protection of the mobile station from a fake antenna attack; 
this solution is not present in the UMTS-AKA system. Both 
of the 3G and 4G systems provide user ID protection only 
after the attach process completes (during re-register or 
during handover process): the IMSI is not protected at Initial 
Attach. Another improvement of the 4G AKA is the keying 
hierarchy, which determines the storage of the K-ASME in 
the MME. This means that the NAS traffic is also protected, 
between the UE and the MME, which does not happen in 
the 3G system, where the SGSN stores only the CK and IK 
for the user-plane traffic. Both the 3G and 4G systems 
protect the AS level traffic in terms of ciphering and 
integrity protection. Another key difference between the 3G 
and 4G is that the former allows the 2G interaction with 
regards to security. 4G system does no longer allow for 
handover to 2G systems, considering the security level of 
this system is not high enough. Also, the 4G system design 
permits for handover of non-3GPP devices, which was not 
previously permitted in the 3G system. 
 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
       Interoperating in the 4G worlds is a complex task, as a 
large variety of devices, coming from all over the standards 
and implementations ask for connectivity and for services. 
The 4G operators must be sure to protect their network and 
also their customers, with the minimum overload, for both 
the network and the user equipments. This paper reviewed 
only 3 basic types of access to the 4G core network. These 
are the native EPS – 4G mobile access, the traditional 
UMTS – 3G access, and a generic WLAN device. The very 
first step when deciding whether to serve or not a potential 
customer is to make sure this is a valid customer, and not an 
attacker. Looking from the user perspective, you want to 
make sure you are not connecting to a rogue network, and 
that your data remains private. 4G provides and requires 
mutual authentication. This is done natively via EPS-AKA 
procedure and can also be mapped from a legacy UMTS-
AKA procedure. The WLAN device can enter 4G if it 
supports EAP-AKA and if the 4G network has 3GPP AAA 
capabilities. 
       The university world has come up with newer, faster 
and more secure procedures for doing mutual authentication. 
One of these procedures is derived from the PEKE 
algorithm and it is called J-PAKE. This simple method is 
very appropriate for applications in a mobile world, so it 
may be a revolutionary alternative to the way we do mutual 
authentication, even as an alternative to AKA or as a more 
5
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
secure proof of knowledge before doing AKA key 
derivation. 
       This article is just one of a series of articles that debate 
the way 4G accomplished its 5 Security Domains duties, 
discussing the access security. This work continues with the 
analysis of the security issues that appear at mobility. There 
are a lot of mobility scenarios, both in Connected and Idle 
modes, as well as between 3G and 4G, that test the security 
of a 4G network. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] TS 23.401 – GPRS Enhancements for E-UTRAN access - 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.401/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[2] TS 23.122 – NAS Functions related to Mobile Stations in idle mode 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.122/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[3] TS 
36.300 
– 
E-UTRAN 
Overall 
Description 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/36_series/36.300/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[4] TS 43.022 – Functions of the MS in idle mode and group receive 
mode - http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/43_series/43.022/ [last 
access: February 2011] 
[5] TS 25.304 – UE Procedures in idle mode and procedures for cell 
reselection 
in 
connected 
mode 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/25_series/25.304/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[6] TS 
33.401 
– 
SAE 
– 
Security 
Architecture 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.401/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[7] TS 33.310 – Network Domain Security; Authentication Framework - 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.310/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[8] TS 
33.102 
– 
3G 
Security 
Architecture- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.102/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[9] RFC 5516 - Diameter Command Code Registration for the Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Evolved Packet System (EPS) 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5516 [last access: February 2011] 
[10] TS 29.272 – MME related interfaces based on Diameter - 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/29_series/29.272/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[11] Tech-Invite - http://tech-invite.com/ [last access: February 2011] 
[12] TS 29.294 – Tunneling Protocol for Control plane (GTPv2-C) - 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/29_series/29.274/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[13] TS 33.220 – Generic Authentication Architecture; Generic 
Bootstrapping 
Authentication 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.220/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[14] TR 33.919 – Generic Authentication Architecture – System Overview 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.919/ 
[last 
access: February 2011] 
[15] TS 
33.221 
– 
Support 
for 
Subscriber 
Certificates 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.221/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
[16]  “Efficient Remote Mutual Authentication and Key Agreement with 
Perfect Forward Secrecy” – Han-Cheng Hsiang, Weu-Kuan Shih, 
Information Technology Journal 8 – 2009, Asian Network for 
Scientific Information [last access: February 2011] 
[17] RFC 
4187 
– 
EAP 
Method 
for 
3GPP 
AKA 
- 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4187 [last access: February 2011] 
[18] RFC 
2631 
– 
Diffie-Hellman 
Key 
Agreement 
Method 
- 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2631 [last access: February 2011] 
[19]  “Password Authenticated Key Exchange by Juggling” – J-PAKE – 
2008, F. Hao, P.Ryan, Proceedings of the 16th International 
Workshop 
on 
Security 
Protocols, 
2008 
- 
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/1363/Research/contributions/hao-ryan-
2008.pdf [last access: February 2011] 
[20] TS 
33.234 
– 
WLAN 
– 
3G 
interworking 
security 
- 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/specs/archive/33_series/33.234/ [last access: 
February 2011] 
 
6
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

