Centrality Based Routing Protocol with Message Relay Control in Opportunistic
Networks
Abineza Claudia
Computer Science
University of Rwanda
Kigali, Rwanda
e-mail: abineza1@gmail.com
Santhi Kumaran
African Center of Excellence in IoT
University of Rwanda
Kigali, Rwanda
e-mail: santhikr69@gmail.com
Chomora Mikeka
School of Applied Sciences
Chancellor College, UNIMA
Malawi
e-mail:chomora@gmail.com
Abstract— Opportunistic Networks are a subclass of Delay
Tolerant Networks (DTN), which aim at wireless data delivery
in severely partitioned networks. There exist several protocols
that route messages on a best effort basis. In most cases, the
nodes copy and forward messages to nodes that are more likely
to meet the destination. But, the major challenge is to design a
routing protocol that offers the best tradeoff between cost
(number of message replicas) and rate of successful message
delivery. In this research paper, the tradeoff is being efficiently
handled by using the concept of Google Pagerank like
centrality to rank nodes in a network using social information.
Unlike other nodes in the network, central nodes act as
influential
nodes
to
facilitate
the
message
forwarding.
Furthermore, to the centrality routing, a mechanism of
message relay control is designed and linked to keep the
network overhead ratio low. The proposed Centrality Based
Routing
Protocol
(CBRP)
with
Message
Relay
Control
algorithm
was
evaluated
by
simulations
using
the
Opportunistic Network Environment (ONE) simulator. The
results show that CBRP outperforms other typical routing
protocols in Opportunistic Networks.
Keywords-
Routing
protocol;
Centrality;
Opportunistic
networks; Overhead; message delivery.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, incoming of smartphones and advent of
wireless
technologies
make
a
seamless
and
cheaper
communication between
wireless
devices
anytime
and
anywhere. In this setting, Opportunistic Networks (OppNets)
are considered as specialized ad hoc networks characterized
by
frequently
intermittent
connections,
which
operate
without any assistance to any infrastructure, such as Access
points, Routers etc. Communications in this type of network
is made possible by mobile self-configurable devices, with
no infrastructure assistance feature, exploiting direct contacts
among nodes with a message Store - Carry and Forward way
and incentive way to guarantee information exchange, as
some nodes in a network tend to refuse to share their private
resources,
such
as
buffer
space.
Summarily
network
topology is not known a-priori, at the message sending.
Therefore, routing protocols in such environment rely much
on network assumptions, such as mobility patterns, node
capacity,
scheduling
knowledge,
estimation
and
on
prediction on the likelihood of future network topology [1].
Centrality is one way, among other routing protocol
metrics used to forward the message in social opportunistic
network. As the name expresses, centrality relates to action
to identify central nodes in a network. Therefore, centrality
definition should derive from various means, including
social criteria. Due to the dynamics of node mobility, the
influence that a node may have over the spread of
information
in
relation
to
how
many
other
nodes
(encounters) this node may have been in contact with, has a
significant implication in defining a centrality metric, in this
work.
Based on this implication, each node in a network is
assigned a centrality value using Google Pagerank like
algorithm.
In
the
proposed
Centrality
Based
Routing
Protocol (CBRP), the nodes with highest centrality values
are more likely to act as the best message forwarders. The
algorithm is simulated using the ONE simulator.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
describes a summary of the related works. Section 3 gives
explanation on assumptions made on the CBRP. Section 4
deals with the design of algorithm and parameter metrics
used for the evaluation of the proposed protocol. Section 5
concerns the analysis of the simulation results. Finally in
Section 6, conclusion is made and the future works are
recommended.
II.
REVIEW OF THE RELATED WORKS
A
common
characteristic
of
routing
protocols
in
opportunistic network is that they are replication-based, as
the network topology is intermittent and not known a priori
at the message sending. Consequently, the efficiency of any
protocol relies much on what extent the protocol restricts
message replication while maximizing a message delivery
guarantee. Furthermore, most routing protocols are context-
aware routing protocols, where the knowledge of the context
in which nodes operate is used to identify the best next hop
of a given node. Context aware based routing protocols are
in turn, classified into mobility-based routing protocols, and
social context-based routing schemes as the most of mobile
devices are carried by humans. Furthermore, various social-
based
routing
protocols
have
been
proposed
[2][3],
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

exploiting various social characteristics, such as community
and centrality.
From
the
replication-based
to
context-aware
based
routing protocols, various routing schemes in OppNets
evolved. Initially, Vahdat and Becker [4] proposed the
epidemic routing protocol, a totally replicating and flooding-
based, as nodes continuously replicate and transmit messages
to newly discovered contacts to eventually reach the
destination. It follows the variations of epidemic routing,
such as Spray and Wait (SnW) routing protocol proposed by
T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis and C. S. Raghavendra [5] to
impose the limit on the number of possible replications of a
message
and
to
maximize
the
aggregate
resource
consumption (for example, bandwidth and energy) in the
network. In the latter, a particular message is spread to at
most L different relay nodes. The nodes then perform a direct
delivery when they come in contact with the corresponding
destination of the message. In [6], A. Lindgren, A. Doria E.
Davis and S. Grasic proposed the Probabilistic Routing
Protocol using History of Encounters and Transitivity
(PRoPHET) by ranking nodes encounters with a set of
probabilities as the greater chance of encountering the
destination. A flooding-based MaxProp [7] imposes the
priority on a message by maintaining an ordered-queue
based on the destination of each message and on the
estimated likelihood of a future transitive path to that
destination. In [8] the Resource Allocation Protocol for
Intentional
DTN
routing
(RAPID)
is
proposed,
by
exchanging the expected contact time with other nodes, list
of messages delivered, and average size of past transfer
events are exchanged.
Few social based forwarding that exploit the interplay
between the structural properties of social networks and
mobility aspects are pointed out: SimBet [9] that uses social
network properties, such as betweenness centrality and social
similarity to inform the routing strategy and (BUBBLE Rap)
[10] that targets nodes with high centrality as well as
members of the communities, yielding delivery ratios similar
to flooding approaches with lower resource utilization.
It has been an age since various researches on network
centralities in different domains, such as in sociology,
biology, physics, applied mathematics and computer science.
The computations of centrality in a DTN social network
forwarding, the idea is related [11]-[16]. For example, when
calculating the betweeness and closeness centralities of all
the vertices in a graph involves calculating the shortest paths
between all pairs of vertices. Therefore, many algorithms
evolved to calculate the betweenness centrality, including
Floyd-Warshall algorithm [17], and Baoqiang ’s algorithm
[18]. However, when investigating into the above centrality
computing algorithms are centralized and rely on global
information of the network as they rely on the knowledge of
the network size.
Recently, distributed algorithms have been proposed in
[19]-[21] for computing the betweenness and closeness
centralities and other centrality measures are proposed in
[22][23], to adapt the algorithm to dynamic characteristics of
mobile wireless network. Different approaches were adopted
for computing Pagerank like centrality in mobile wireless
environments, namely eigenvector centralities [24] and
Peoplerank algorithm [25]. The latter, computes centrality
inspired from Google Pagerank, both in a centralized and
distributed way. Motivated by the above-mentioned works,
this work proposes iterative algorithm to compute the
distributed centrality adapted to Google Pagerank concept
and opportunistic mobile network dynamics.
In the proposed CBRP algorithm, every node computes
and evaluates its own centrality by using local interactions
with only its current encounter without knowing the network
size, and the network topology. Consequently, this fits well
the opportunistic networks characteristics where network
topology is frequently intermittent and change, especially
when the network size becomes larger; it is usually very
difficult to compute centrality measures. In addition to that,
the CBRP inspired by Peoplerank algorithm, takes advantage
of the fact that, a time- varying social graph, is iteratively
built to reflect the dynamic of the opportunistic network, by
the inference of social nodes from a node’s encounters. The
assumptions
made from Peoplerank
algorithm,
as the
interpretation towards this assumption inference will be
given in the third Section. Assuming that only neighbors in
the social graph have an impact of the popularity (i.e., the
ranking), as the nodes meet, the node’s centrality is updated
and the number of neighbors is incremented by one to reflect
the impact of a new social node. Consequently, the same
idea in PeopleRank, is applied to tag people as “important”
when they are linked (in a social context) to many other
“important” people. The main concept originated from
Google’s Pagerank [26].
III.
EXPLANATION OF THE ASSUMPTIONS MADE FROM
PEOPLERANK ALGORITHM
PeopleRank is a social distributed routing algorithm
measuring opportunistically the importance of a node in a
social graph based on the social interaction between nodes
and their contact frequencies using real human mobility. In
other words, it tried to determine the optimal forwarding
paths given the mobility patterns and their connectivity
properties, to compute for the success rate as the delivery
probability.
When investing the Peoplerank algorithm, 3 observations
are noteworthy:
Firstly, the impact of the damping factor on the
Peoplerank. It is used to control the amount of randomness
forwarding in Peoplerank. Its value can be chosen and well
adapted to social forwarding, according to whether the stated
social relation is implicitly or explicitly declared, even
though some randomized forwarding might be a little
beneficial. As one of Peoplerank observation, in the 2
previous situations, the optimal value of d is around 0.87 and
0.8. Consequently, an assumption was made of using the
damping factor of 0.86 to reflect the application of CBRP in
a likely high social interaction and connection environment,
as in the closed campus, where social rate is implicitly high.
Although a shared common interest is not an optimal
social property to rely on, when selecting a best message
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

forwarding node, social based on being in a geographic
location, as it was stated by Peoplerank (“Geographic
location helps user to socialize more often and meet with
each other more frequently”) and on implicit or explicit
friendship are optimal, the CBRP will be then applied into a
closed environment, such as in a campus.
Secondly, Peoplerank is compared to the following social
based algorithms: Centrality, that forwards a message from
u to v if, and only if, C(u) = C(v). Here, C(u) denotes the
betweenness
centrality
of
node
u
measured
as
the
occurrence of this node in all shortest paths connecting all
other pairs of nodes and
degree that forwards a message
from u to v if, and only if, d(u) = d(v). Here, d(u) denotes
the degree of node u in the social graph (in a friendship
graph, the degree is the number of friends of node u). Both
Peoplerank and Centrality achieve a comparable result while
they outperform the degree based, with a comparable success
rate of a flooding-based Epidemic routing. Furthermore,
Peoplerank is much preferred over the centrality-based, as
the latter requires centralized computation, which is more
complex to compute.
Therefore, as a higher impact and factor of the meeting
event (to the Peoplerank performance) has been evaluated
better (rather than above-mentioned social criteria) to
improve the social patterns and node position in a social
graph. An assumption is made to infer social nodes from the
meeting event. This validates well the high implication of a
meeting event into a social, as Peoplerank centrality update
and
increment as the nodes meet. Consequently, the
distributed
CBRP
algorithm
has
been
developed,
by
assuming that when the nodes meet, the node’s centrality is
updated and the number of neighbors (inferred encounters)
is incremented by one to reflect the impact of a new social
node.
Thirdly, when Peoplerank is compared to well known
contact-based algorithms (namely Last Contact, Destination
Last
Contact,
Frequency,
Spray
&
Wait
and
Wait-
destination), it outperforms them. This is due to the social
aspect of the algorithm that delivers the messages with
higher probability to the destination.
This validates the
importance of a dynamic and distributive social to the
selection of message forwarding.
Finally, the message forwarding of CBRP does not rely
on network global structure, as it does not require the known
size of the network, as it is the case in Peoplerank.
IV.
ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM
To design the CBRP protocol, a model of an imaginary
social graph is adopted, where a node itself in a network
forms a graph vertex, and its predecessors and successors are
its encounters. Extracting from meeting event, implicit social
node attributes, such as being in a geographic location, being
friends, the protocol aggregates this imaginary node‘s social
attributes into a contact graph. Therefore, the CBRP protocol
computes for popularity of each node in a network, based on
number of its encounters, inferred social nodes.
The CBRP protocol works as follows: When two nodes
meet, one is considered as forming an incoming link to
another node, and the nodes encounters as forming outbound
links on the involved nodes. Then, the meeting nodes
calculate and update their tables: Encounters table whose
current number of encounters is increased by one and their
centrality table get updated with newly calculated Pagerank
like centrality. The Google Pagerank like centrality is
calculated according to the following equation (delivered
from Google PageRank):
C(i) = (1-d) + d(C(j)/T(j))
(1)
where C(i) is centrality of current node, C(j) Centrality of
encountered node and Tj is a number of encounters of node j
and d which depend on how much the social relationship
between nodes can help improving their centrality values.
It is clearly noted that Centrality in the network is
calculated dynamically in time and in space, using a
distributed algorithm, for which the total number of nodes
are not initially known, therefore, much suitable to the
dynamic
wireless
mobile
environment.
For
simulation
purposes, d has been set to 0.86.
More importantly, a message is delivered from node i to
node j, if the centrality value of j is greater than or equal to
that of i or j is the destination node.
Finally, each node maintains an acknowledgement table
in the form <Message ID, Source ID, Destination ID>, that
contains information on message delivered to destination and
that should be flooded among nodes in network. In fact,
when two nodes meet, they should check for any new
acknowledged messages in acknowledgement table of the
encountered node, then update their buffer by removing a
copy of it and update their acknowledgement table to spread
the update information to other nodes in network.
A.
Parameter metrics of the Algorithm
The performance metrics used to evaluate the developed
protocols are:
• Delivery probability is defined as the number of
successfully delivered messages divided by the number of
created messages
(2)
• Overhead ratio: This is a metric used to estimate the
extra number of packets needed by the routing protocol for
actual delivery of data packets. It can be defined as:
(3)
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

B.
Algorithm for the CBRPprotocol
Notations:
• i: Current node
• j: Encounter node
• E(i): Number of encounters of current node i
• Ci: Centrality value of node i
• Buffer(i): The buffer at node I
• M: Message currently being sent
• DN: Destination node
• Ack_table: Acknowledgement table
• Ack_M: Acknowledgement message
1)
Algorithm1
Step 1: select the next Encounter node j
Step2: If j is busy then go to Step1
Step3: Repeat all messages (M) of current node i
3a: If j has M then go to step 3 to select the next
Message
3b: check Ack_table of j for M
If Ack_Table of j has M then
Remove M from buffer of i
Update Ack_table of i
Go to step 3 for next M
End if
3c: If Cj >=Ci or j is equal to DN then
Forward M to j
End if
Algorithm related to Acknowledgement:
2)
Algorithm2
When a destination node is receiving a message:
Step1: Receive message (M) from the Last Sender
Node(LSN)
Step2: If Destination Node(DN) of M is current
node i then
Create and Send Ack_M to LSN
Update Ack_Table of i with Ack_M
Remove M from the buffer of i
End if
3)
Algorithm3
When the last sender is receiving the acknowle-
dgement:
Step 1:Receive Message (M) from the Destina-
tion Node (DN)
Step 2: If M contains ACK_M then
Update Ack_Table of i with ACK_M
Remove M from the buffer of i
End if
C.
Flowchart for the CBRP protocol
The flowchart is given in Figure 1.
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Figure 1. Flowchart for the CBRP protocol.
Start
Select Next Encounter Node
Encounter
Node
is busy
Select Next Message in buffer
of current Node
Encounter has
the same
message
Remove message from
the buffer of current
node & update Ack
table of current Node
Ack_Table
of J has
Ack_M. on
message
Encounter s destination
node or its Centrality
is > to Centrality of the
current Node
Forward Message to
Encounter Node
End
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

V.
SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The proposed protocol CBRP is evaluated by Random
Scenario simulations and compared against the standard
routing
algorithms
including:
Epidemic,
due
to
its
potentially high message delivery, PRoPHET due to its
probabilistic routing and MaxProp due to its predictability
routing with acknowledgement. The simulations focused on
the performance metrics: Delivery Probability and Overhead
Ratio. The simulator used is the ONE simulator version 1.6.
A.
Simulation setup
The simulation parameters used are shown in TABLE I.
TABLE I.
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
B.
Simulation running
Figure 2 shows the simulation environment where, as the
nodes are moving, messages created, relayed, dropped and
delivered are calculated to generate the report file at the end
of the simulation. The latter contains the standard results,
such as the Message Delivery Ratio, Average Latency, the
network overhead, the Average Number of Duplicate
Messages, and many other network statistics, used to
produce the following plots:
-Plots of message delivery ratio as a function of
number of nodes
-Plots of message delivery ratio as a function of
message TTL
-Plots of network overhead ratio as a function of
number of nodes
-Plots of network overhead ratio as a function of
message TTL
Each simulation includes 20 scenarios, run for once and
under the same values for parameters, to be able to compare
4 routing protocols with five values for a variable TTL/
number
of
nodes.
This
validates
and
maintains
the
performance assessment.
C.
Simulation analysis
1)
Analyzing the delivery ratio
Although flooding is controlled, which normally is the
technique to achieve a higher delivery ratio, CBRP is
comparable
to
flooded-based
Epidemic
and
Maxprop,
whereas it outperforms a probabilistic Prophet. This is
attributed to the fact that CBRP is likely to produce a better
forwarding path to deliver the messages to the destination; as
the path is formed with nodes that are likely characterized by
high centrality values compared to nodes that are not part of
the routing paths. Therefore, CBRP has a better metric to
select a relay node that is likely to meet the destination, than
Prophet routing. Additionally, for the 4 routing protocols
compared, as TTL increases, the delivery ratio increases.
This is attributed to the fact that when TTL increases, the
message remains in the buffer for a longer period of time,
leading to a higher chance to meet the destination.
2)
Analyzing the Overhead ratio
For the 4 protocols, it is observed that when TTL
increases, the overhead ratio decreases. This is due to the fact
that the message remains for a long period in the buffer. This
way, messages are not dropped on the way to their
destination and consequently no need to be replicated which
results to a low overhead ratio. Therefore, the lesser relay
messages, the better the overhead. It is observed that under
varying number of nodes and varying TTL, the CBRP
outperforms Prophet, while the flooded Epidemic and
Maxprop achieve higher overhead ratio.
The CBRP
is compared against 4
aforementioned
protocols. The results are depicted in Figures 2, 3, 4 and 5.
Simulation parameter
Value
Routing Protocol
CBRP, Epidemic,
Prophet, Maxprop
Number of nodes groups
1
Number of nodes
Variable(36,72,100,130,
170)
Mobility Model
RandomWaypoint
Simulation Time
43200 secs
Simulation Area
(4500X3500)m
Time-To-Live(TTL)
Variable(100,150,200,25
0,300) minutes
Node speed
0.5-1.5(meters/sec)
Scenario.updateInterval
0.1
Interface type
Bluetooth/Simple
broadcast interface
Transmit speed
2Mbps(250kBps)
Interface transmit range
10 meters
Size of the message buffer
5MB
seed for movement models
1
Number of event generator
1
Class of event generator
MessageEventGenerator
Creation interval of event
A new message every
25-35 seconds
Message size
500KB-1MB
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Figure 2. Comparison of CBRP, Epidemic, MaxProp and
Prophet for varying number of nodes.
Figure 3. Comparison of CBRP, Epidemic, MaxProp and
Prophet for varying message TTL.
Figure 4. Comparison of CBRP, Epidemic, MaxProp and
Prophet for varying number of nodes.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a CBRP protocol for OppNets has been
developed which uses the Centrality concept for the message
forwarding process. Simulation results on the performance of
CBRP in comparison with Epidemic, Prophet and MaxProp
under the same experimental conditions have revealed
improvement that cannot be ignored, both in terms of a
message delivery ratio and overhead ratio. Therefore, a
developed model could be a choice to follow for a message
forwarding in opportunistic networks. However, as for
recommendation, two things are mentioned. On one hand,
the tests performed here were limited to the random scenario
simulation as the Randomwaypoint movement model of
nodes was used. Due to this, it can be recommended to test
the developed protocol under human scenarios and other
recurring pattern based structures to explicitly show how
well CBRP routes message under realistic mobility scenarios.
On other hand, the developed CBRP protocol can be
enhanced with new capabilities that deserve attention in a
network routing, such as security and privacy.
Figure 5. Comparison of CBRP, Epidemic, MaxProp
and Prophet for varying message TTL.
REFERENCES
[1]
Chander Prabha, Surender Kumar and Ravinder Khanna,
“Analysis
of
routing
and
forwarding
protocols
in
opportunistic networks”, Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 85,
pp. 891-898, 2016, doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.05.279.
[2]
Tie Qiu, Arun Kumar Baochao Chen and Runhe Huang, “A
survey
of
mobile
social
networks:
applications,
social
characteristics, and challenges,” IEEE Systems Journal, pp. 1-
16, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1109/JSYST.2017.2764479.
[3]
Radosław 
O. 
Schoeneich 
and 
Rafał 
Surgiewicz, 
“SocialRouting: The social-based routing algorithm for delay
tolerant networks”, International Journal of Electronics and
Telecommunications, Vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 167–172, June 2016,
doi: 10.1515/eletel-2016-0023.
[4]
Amin Vahdat and
David Becker,
“Epidemic
routing
for
partially connected ad hoc networks”, Technical Report CS-
2000-06, Dept. of Computer Science, Duke University,
Durham, NC 27708, 2000.
[5]
Thrasyvoulos Spyropoulos, Konstantinos Psounis and Cauligi
S. Raghavendra, “Spray and wait: An efficient routing scheme
for intermittently connected mobile networks”, Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM
Workshop
on
Delay-Tolerant
Networking
(WDTN ’05), Philadelphia, PA, USA, Aug. 2005, pp. 252–
259, doi: 10.1145/1080139.1080143.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

[6]
Anders Lindgren ,
Avri Doria,
Elwyn
Davies
and
Samo Grasic, “Prophet routing protocol for intermittently
connected networks,” IETF RFC 6683, August 2012, ISSN
2070-1721.
[7]
John Burgess, BrianGallagher and David Jensen, “”Maxprop:
routing for vehicle-based disruption- tolerant networks,” the
25th International Conference on Computer Communications,
IEEE
INFOCOM,
April
2006,
pp.1-
11, doi:10.1109/infocom.2006.228
[8]
Aruna
Balasubramanian,
Brian
Neil
Levine
and
Arun Venkataramani, “DTN routing as a resource allocation
problem,”
SIGCOMM,
Aug
2007,
doi:
10.1145/1282380.1282422.
[9]
Elizabeth Daly and Mads Haahr, “Social network analysis
for routing in disconnected delay- tolerant
MANETs,”
Proc. Symp. ACM international on Mobile ad hoc networking
and computing (MobiHoc '07), USA, Sept. 2007, pp. 32-40,
ISBN: 978-1-59593-684-4, doi:10.1145/1288107.1288113.
[10] Pan Hui, Jon Crowcroft and Eiko Yoneki, “ Bubble rap:
social- based forwarding in delay- tolerant networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, Vol. 10, No. 11, Nov.
2011, pp. 1576-1589, doi:10.1109/TMC.2010.246
[11] Santiago Segarra and
Alejandro Ribeiro,
“Stability
and
continuity of centrality measures in Weighted Graphs,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 64, no. 3, Feb. 2016,
pp. 543-555, doi: 10.1109/TSP.2015.2486740.
[12] Deepak Kumar Sharma, Amit Gupta, Ashray Anand and
Sanjay
K.
Dhurandher ,
“Centrality
based
congestion
controlled routing protocol for social opportunistic networks,”
1st India International Conference on Information Processing
(IICIP),Aug. 2016, doi: 10.1109/IICIP.2016.7975388.
[13] Pavlos Nikolopoulos, Therapon Papadimitriou, Panagiotis
Pantazopoulos and Ioannis Stavrakakis “How much off-center
are centrality metrics for routing in opportunistic networks”,
ACM MobiCom 2011 Workshop on Challenged Networks
(CHANTS'11), Las Vegas, USA, Vol. 6, October 2011, doi:
10.1145/2030652.2030657.
[14] Paolo Boldi and Sebastiano Vigna, “Axioms for centrality,”
Internet Mathematics, vol. 10, No.3-4, 2014, pp. 222-262,
https://doi.org/10.1080/15427951.2013.865686.
[15] Zhenxiang Gao1, Yan Shi1, and Shanzhi Chen, “Identifying
influential
nodes
for
efficient
routing
in
opportunistic
networks,” Journal of Communications, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 1-
53, Jan. 2015, doi: 10.12720/jcm.10.1.48-54.
[16] Muhammad Arshad Islam, Muhammad, Azhar Iqbal Zahid
Halim
and
Muhammad
Aleem,“Analysing
Connectivity
Patterns and Centrality Metrics for Opportunistic Networks,”
Proc. International Conference on Communication, Computing
and
Digital
Systems
(C-CODE), pp.
64-70, 2017,
doi.org/10.1109/c-code.2017.7918903.
[17] Weisstein,
Eric
W. "Floyd-Warshall
Algorithm."[Online].
Available
from: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Floyd-
WarshallAlgorithm.html, 2008.
[18] Baoqiang Li, Guangya Si , Jianfei Ding and Fei Wang, “A
faster algorithm to calculate centrality based on Shortest Path
Layer,” IEEE Control And Decision Conference(CCDC),
Chongqing, China , May 2017,pp. 6283 - 6290 ISSN: 1948-
9447 doi: 10.1109/CCDC.2017.7978302.
[19] Wei Wangu and Choon Yik Tang ,“Distributed computation of
node and edge betweenness on tree graphs,” The 52nd Annual
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 2013 , IEEE,
2013, pp. 43–48.
[20] Wei Wangu and Choon Yik Tang, “Distributed estimation of
closeness centrality, “Proc. IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control,” Osaka, Japan, 2015, pp. 4860–4865.
[21] Wei Wangu and Choon Yik Tang, “Distributed computation
of classic and exponential closeness on tree graphs,” Proc.
American Control Conference, Portland, OR ,2014, pp. 2090–
2095.
[22] Keyou You, Roberto Tempo,
and
Li Qiu,
“Distributed
algorithms for computation of centrality measures in complex
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 62,
no.5,
Aug.
2016,
pp.
2080–2094,
doi: 10.1109/TAC.2016.2604373.
[23] Michel Raynal and Franck Petit, “Special issue on distributed
computing and networking,” Theoretical Computer Science,
vol. 561, pp. 87–144, 2015.
[24] Robert John D.Souza and Johny Jose, “Significance of
Eigenvector Centrality for Routing in a Delay Tolerant
Network,” Journal of Computations & Modelling, vol.1, no.1,
2011, pp. 91-100, ISSN: 1792-8850.
[25] Abderrahmen Mtibaa,
Christophe Diot,
Martin May
and
Mostafa Ammar,
“PeopleRank:
social
opportunistic
forwarding,” conference Paper, Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ,
March 2010, doi: 10.1109/INFCOM.2010.5462261.
[26] Vince Grolmusz: “A note on the pageRank of undirected
graphs,” Information Processing Letters, Vol. 115, No. 6-8,
pp. 633-634, June 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.ipl.2015.02.015.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

