Unified Methodology for Broadband Behavior Measurements in the Acreo National 
Testbed 
Christina Lagerstedt, Andreas Aurelius, Hemamali 
Pathirana, Claus Popp Larsen 
Netlab, Acreo AB 
Kista, Sweden 
christina.lagerstedt@acreo.se 
andreas.aurelius@acreo.se 
hemamali.pathirana@acreo.se 
claus.popp.larsen@acreo.se
 
Olle Findahl 
World Internet Institute 
Gävle, Sweden 
olle.findahl@wii.se
 
 
Abstract— The continuous evolution of Internet and Internet 
applications increases the demands on access networks. 
Understanding user behavior and Internet usage patterns is 
fundamental in developing future access networks that meet 
technical as well as end user needs, and from a societal point of 
view it is equally important to correctly recognize and 
understand user behavior. In this paper, we present 
measurements from the Acreo National Testbed where we have 
access to traffic measurements from real end users. We have 
developed 
a 
unified 
methodology 
combining 
traffic 
measurements with web questionnaires and diaries to compare 
the results from different methods as well as investigate user 
behavior. By comparing the different measurement methods 
we find that the end users have difficulty in estimating the time 
they spend on different Internet activities although they are 
fairly well able to estimate the frequency of usage. We also 
found that though the diaries are quite accurate, the traffic 
measurements give us a much more detailed picture of the end 
user activity. The importance of having a testbed with real end 
users is invaluable to this kind of study and we emphasize the 
importance of having access to access network traffic.  
Keywords - Testbed; Traffic measurements; User behavior; 
FTTH. 
I.      INTRODUCTION 
As the Internet continues to evolve and offer new 
services, it takes up a larger part of our lives. We find new 
ways to communicate, interact and entertain ourselves. This 
puts new demands on access networks [1] and requires new 
insights into the behavior of those who use them. We 
believe that understanding user behavior and needs is the 
key to develop future networks and services that are 
accessible, reliable and that address the needs of real end 
users. There are several ways to study user behavior. From 
the technical side, the data traffic can be measured and 
analyzed. Other common ways are to use surveys or diaries. 
Traffic measurements are routinely performed by all larger 
operators, but results are rarely published because the 
operators don’t want to share this information with 
competitors. On the other hand, published behavior studies 
are almost always based on surveys with individuals (e.g., 
telephone interviews with a large population). Such surveys 
often attract considerable interest among in the public 
debate, and far-reaching conclusions may be drawn. 
The question is now whether such surveys are reliable. 
People can forget about their Internet behavior, they may 
not know what they did, they may not know what the 
children in the household have done, they may lie about 
sensible subjects, etc.  
The purpose of this study is to develop a unified 
methodology where different kinds of surveys are combined 
with actual traffic measurements. We compare three 
different methods of looking at Internet user behavior; 1) 
Internet protocol (IP) traffic measurements, 2) web 
questionnaire and 3) diary. This will lead to a more detailed 
knowledge of the behavior, and, by evaluating results from 
different methods, we will obtain a better knowledge of 
their respective limitations. Furthermore, this way it can be 
verified whether surveys are correct or whether there 
perhaps is a systematic bias in survey answers that thus 
leads to misleading results. 
There are few comprehensive traffic measurement 
studies in the literature and most of these are based on 
traffic from a campus areas [2], [3] or measure aggregated 
traffic [4], [5]. Questionnaires and diaries are well known 
and often used methods [6], [7], [8], but, as far as we know, 
have not been used together with traffic measurements. In 
the following sections, we will first describe the 
measurement setup and population. We will then present 
and discuss our results and finally presents our conclusions. 
Combining technical measurements with surveys require 
test subjects in order to get statistical data. At Acreo we put 
a lot of effort into developing the Acreo National Testbed, 
ANT, which enables us to perform in-depth measurements 
and test new technology and equipment as well as to interact 
with end users. Here we can study user behavior in a unique 
way as we have access to real user traffic measured on a 
household level.  
We have signed agreements with the end users where 
they agree to give feedback and participate in surveys and 
investigations. This means that the network conditions such 
as network topology, link speeds, service setup, etc as well 
as user metadata such as the number of people in a 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

household, age, etc are known. This gives us a unique 
opportunity to perform measurements of user behavior, and 
to compare the results from different measurement 
techniques in order to evaluate the validity of the results.  
 
II. 
TEST ENVIRONMENT AND POPULATION 
As mentioned in the introduction, the measurements in 
this study were performed in the Acreo National Testbed 
(ANT), which has previously been described in [9] and [10]. 
Contrary to lab based testbeds, this is a live network with 
real end users or test pilots. In return to being test pilots the 
end user households are given free access to services like 
Internet and IPTV. Fiber to the home (FTTH) is the main 
access technology in the testbed, and a schematic picture of 
the network is shown in Fig. 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Schematic picture of the Acreo National Testbed, ANT. 
The FTTH installation at the test households is active 
Ethernet providing 100 Mbit/s symmetrical connections to 
each household.   
The number of households in the testbed changes over 
time according to the current tests that are being performed. 
At the time of this study, there were approximately 40 active 
households in the testbed. Approximately 20 were 
apartments in a building centrally located in the Swedish 
town Hudiksvall. The rest of the households, approximately 
20 single dwelling units, were connected to the testbed via a 
fixed wireless access network, depicted as HSPA (High 
Speed Packet Access) in Figure 1. 
The measurements in this paper are based on data from 5 
testbed households. The reason for using a small population 
in the study is that we wanted to perform a qualitative 
analysis of their Internet usage, i.e., the main point is not to 
gather data for statistical analysis, but rather to study the 
user behavior in depth, as we have not found any similar 
studies in the literature. As this is a novel comparative 
methodology it was also important to develop methods and 
analysis tools that can be scaled up to considerably larger 
populations [13] where the amount of data to be handled 
will be much more extensive. That is, we do not claim to be 
able to make statistical conclusions in this study, but 
interesting trends for further study will be pointed out. 
Nevertheless, we will develop a unified methodology that, 
at a later stage, can be used for more substantial 
conclusions. 
A letter of invitation was sent out to all households in 
the testbed, asking for participation in the study. The 
participants were selected from those who responded. In the 
selection process, household details such as number of 
people in the household, number of computers, ages, etc 
were taken into account, in order to get a varied test 
population with different household constellations. The test 
pilots were assured that their answers would be treated 
anonymously. This resulted in a test group of 5 households 
of which 2 were single households and 3 family households. 
Of the family households, one had small children (<7 years 
old), one had teenage children and one both teenagers and 
small children. 
III. 
MEASUREMENTS 
The combined measurement methodology consists of 
three parts: traffic measurements, web questionnaires and 
diaries. In this section we will describe these methods. 
A. Traffic Measurements 
The traffic measurements have been performed using 
PacketLogic (PL) [12], a commercial traffic management 
device used in many commercial broadband access 
networks all over the world. Traffic is identified based on 
packet content (deep packet inspection and deep flow 
inspection) instead of port definitions. The device can 
identify more than 1000 Internet application protocols, and 
the signature database is continuously updated.  
Since the PL is a commercial product, the details of its 
functions are proprietary. However, the identification 
process is connection-oriented, which means that each 
established connection between two hosts is matched to a 
certain application protocol. When a new connection is 
established, the identification of this connection begins. The 
identification algorithm searches for specific patterns, 
signatures, in the connection. The patterns are found in the 
IP header and application payload. The PL uses the traffic in 
both 
directions 
in 
the 
identification 
process. 
The 
measurement point is depicted as “deep packet inspection” 
in Fig. 1. 
The PL can track and identify several hundred thousand 
simultaneous connections, storing statistics in large 
databases. The statistics database records the short-time 
average amount of traffic in inbound and outbound 
directions as well as the total traffic for all nodes in the 
network. The data is averaged over 5 minute periods. Data 
concerning which web sites have been visited is stored in 
the connection log. 
The measurement setup, although giving detailed 
measurements, has certain constraints. First, the traffic is 
measured per household and not per person and the analysis 
in this paper is therefore done on a per household basis. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

There is also a 5 minute resolution in the measurements, 
which may have an impact on measurements of applications 
that are used in short time periods such as instant 
messaging. The data cut-off is 1 kbps, which may influence 
the measurements of certain applications such as gaming 
where the amount of data is generally very low. The 
signature database in this study was not up-to-date due to 
old hardware, which may result in a larger amount of 
unknown traffic. An upgrade will be performed before 
follow-up studies are performed. 
The Internet traffic of each household was measured both 
during the days when the household recorded their diaries 
and for a complete month (May 2009) to get enough 
statistics to compare with the web questionnaire. Statistics 
on what web sites were visited by the different households 
were monitored for two weeks.  
B. Web questionnaires 
Each household member was asked to answer a web 
questionnaire regarding their Internet activity and behavior. 
In the case of small children (<7 years), the parents were 
asked to answer for them. The web questionnaire contained 
basic questions concerning family situation, education and 
occupation as well as questions pertaining to computer 
knowledge and Internet activity. The Internet activity 
questions include questions on what kind of medium is used 
to access Internet applications and frequency of use of 
different applications.  
The questionnaire also surveys how often different types 
of web sites are visited such as banks or newspapers, etc. 
Finally the respondents are asked to estimate the amount of 
time they spend on different Internet activities. The 
questions are multiple choice with an additional field for 
comments. 
C. Diaries 
The members of each household were asked to fill in a 
diary logging their Internet activity during two consecutive 
days, 17-18 May 2009. Each day was divided into 15 
minute intervals. The diary had four columns that the test 
pilots were asked to fill in: 
1. Daily activity (sleep, work/school, leisure time 
activities, meal times etc.) 
2. Media usage (TV, newspaper , radio, book, etc) 
3. Internet activity when at home (web browsing, 
playing games online, community, downloading 
material from the Internet, etc) 
4. Web address or service used  
IV. 
RESULTS 
From the traffic measurements, we find that the Internet 
activity of the households in the study occurs mainly during 
afternoons and evenings with shorter bursts of traffic during 
the morning and lunch hours. This is consistent with the 
traffic patterns established both in ANT and in municipal 
networks of similar characteristics, but with much higher 
populations [10]. The daily traffic pattern in the testbed 
during May 2009 is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Daily traffic pattern of all active households in ANT during May 
2009. 
We also note that the average time spent online 
calculated from the traffic measurements is greater during 
the weekends than the weekdays for the family households 
while the opposite is true for the households without 
children, see Table I.TABLE I.  The assumption here is that 
for the family households, the time of day when household 
members use Internet applications will be more spread out 
during the weekends and of course there are more people at 
home with leisure time. However, this assumption should be 
confirmed for a larger population. 
TABLE I.  
AVERAGE TIME PER DAY SPENT ON INTERNET 
APPLICATIONS PER HOUSEHOLD. 
Household 
All days [min/day] 
Weekends [min/day] 
1 
253 
111 
2 
432(IP1) / 75(IP2) 
614 (IP1) / 66(IP2) 
3 
588 
496 
4 
196 
154 
5 
1047 
1162 
 
Concerning application usage, the frequencies of use 
reported by 
the 
household members in the 
web 
questionnaires corresponds well with the measured data for 
the most part. The test pilots were able to give estimations 
of how often they used specific applications such as Spotify 
or file sharing applications and how often they visited 
certain types of web sites such as newspapers or banks. 
Deviations in the estimation of frequencies were however 
seen for more general questions about usage. For example, 
the users were able to estimate how often they use Spotify 
but had a harder time answering questions about how often 
they listened to streaming music or watched streaming 
media. Here it is important how the questions are posed and 
if the user understands which medium he/she is using.  
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
TABLE II.  
 USER PENETRATION OF SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS SEEN IN 
THE TRAFFIC MEASUREMENTS. 
Application 
Household 
HTTP 
HTTP  
media stream 
BitTorrent 
Spotify 
SSL 
Flash video 
MSN  
messenger 
Skype 
1 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
2 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
3 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
4 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
x 
 
 
5 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
The user penetration of a number of applications seen in 
the traffic measurements is found in Table II. This is in 
good agreement with the answers from the web 
questionnaires. As is expected, HTTP is used by all 
households as well as the SSL protocol, which is used by for 
example Internet shops and banks. All of the households 
also use HTTP media stream as well as flash video meaning 
that they look at streaming material on the Internet.  
Although the estimation of frequencies agreed fairly 
well with the traffic measurements, there were discrepancies 
between the approximations of the time spent on different 
applications and the measured time. For example, three of 
the households were able to give a reasonable figure as to 
how much time they spent using Internet applications 
though tending to slightly underestimate the actual figure, 
see Table III. The deviation between measurements and 
questionnaire was especially large for household number 2. 
We note that this is a family household and the total time is 
more difficult to estimate. 
TABLE III.  
TIME SPENT ON INTERNET APPLICATIONS PER HOUSEHOLD 
AND PER WEEK. 
Household 
Questionnaire 
[h/w] 
Measured HTTP 
[h/w] 
Measured ALL 
[h/w] 
1 
14 
16 
30 
2 
97 
28 (IP#1) 
50 
3 
8 
10 
69 
4 
7 
14 
23 
5 
49 
48 
122 
 
Comparing the diaries with the traffic measurements we 
find that they are mainly in accordance with each other. 
However, the traffic measurements add details to the picture 
given by the diaries, showing the potential that the method 
has in analyzing user behavior. A limitation of a diary is that 
users may not record all activities, either because they are 
done very frequently or because they are a natural part of 
your daily life that you do without reflecting that you are 
actually using the Internet. For example, one of the 
respondents had noted down “watching TV” in the diary. 
From the traffic measurements, we find that she was 
watching SVT play (streaming video from the Swedish state 
television) while at the same time being active on several 
community sites. This raises, among other things, an 
interesting question: What is actually meant by watching 
TV in the future when even more TV material will be 
available on-demand over the Internet? 
The questionnaire contains questions concerning file 
sharing. The answers correspond well with what is 
measured and the frequencies of use recorded in the 
questionnaires agree well with the measurement. Although 
the use of file sharing applications is a sensitive question in 
public debate, the test pilots seem comfortable answering 
questions about this. Three of the households have used file 
sharing applications during the measurement period but 
none of the households are heavy users. It should be noted 
here that the test pilots are used to answer questionnaires, so 
they may not be representative in the sense that they may be 
less shy than other users when sharing sensible information. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed and applied a unified 
methodology using three different methods to study Internet 
user behavior: traffic measurements, web questionnaires and 
diaries with the purpose of verifying and comparing the 
different methods as well as gaining more insight into user 
behavior.  
From the measurements, we conclude that the test pilots 
are well able to describe some of their short term behavior 
seen in the diaries, although some activities were not noted 
in the diaries. The long term behavior seen in the web 
questionnaires are fairly accurate in describing frequencies 
of use specific applications and visits to specific web sites. 
The estimation of the amount of time spent on different 
activities was seen to differ from that of the traffic 
measurements, with a slight tendency to under-estimate the 
time spent. An even more powerful conclusion is the 
complex and rich picture of user behavior, which is obtained 
via traffic measurements. Here, details and behaviors that 
are not exposed in diaries or questionnaires are visible. This 
gives new insights into user behavior as well as valuable 
feedback for better construction of question based 
investigations in the future.  
Another major result of the study is the importance of 
the testbed to the study. Here, we have the possibility of 
making measurements in a controlled environment with real 
end users. We gain much more insight into the behavior of 
the end users than can be obtained from only questionnaires 
or diaries. We also gain understanding of what the end user 
experiences that complements the traffic measurements. 
From the network side, this can be used to improve the 
quality of service both from the technical and the end user 
perspective.  
Our future work will continue with a wider study to 
follow up on the results presented here as well as a 
continued development of our testbed, which makes these 
types of measurements possible.  
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work in this project has been partly financed by the 
VINNOVA project Broadband Behavior and the European 
Regional Development Fund project Acreo National 
Testbed. Also, it has been partly funded by the Celtic 
IPNQSIS project and Swedish National Strategic Research 
Area (SRA) within the program TNG (The Next 
Generation) and the project eWIN. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Chesire, A. Wolman, G. M. Voelker, and H. M. Levy, 
“Measurement 
and 
Analysis 
of 
a 
Streaming-Media 
Workload”, Proceedings of the 3rd conference on USENIX 
Symposium on Internet Technologies and Systems - Volume 
3, 2001. 
[2] M. Alvarez-Campana, A. Azcorra, J. Berrocal, D. Larrabeiti, 
J. I. Moreno, and J. R. Pérez, “CASTBA: Internet Traffic 
Measurements over the Spanish R&D ATM Network”, 5th 
HP Openview University Association Workshop, 1998. 
[3] Y. Bhole and A. Popescu, “Measurement and Analysis of 
HTTP 
Traffic”, 
Journal 
of 
Network 
and 
Systems 
Management, pp. 357-371, Vol. 13, No. 4, December 2005. 
[4] C. Fraleigh, S. Moon, B. Lyles, C. Cotton, M. Khan, D. Moll, 
R. Rockell, T. Seely, and C. Diot, “Packet-level traffic 
measurements from the sprint ip backbone”, IEEE Network, 
pp. 6-16, vol. 17, no. 6, 2003. 
[5] J. Zhang, J. Yang, C. An, and J. Wang, "Traffic Measurement 
and Analysis of TUNET," 2005 International Conference on 
Cyberworlds (CW'05), Nov. 2005. 
[6] J. George, “Researching Life in E-Society with Diary 
Studies”, Paper 67, Proceedings of the 2006 European 
Conference on Information Systems, Gothenburg, Sweden, 
June 2006. 
[7] K. Vermaas and L. van de Wijngaert, "Measuring Internet 
Behavior: Total Time Diary and Activity Diary as Research 
Methods”, Journal of Information Technology Theory and 
Application (JITTA): Vol. 7: Iss. 1, Article 11, 2005.  
[8] O. Findahl, ”Vad säger Internetstatistiken? (What do the 
Internet 
Statistics 
Tell 
Us?)”, 
Stiftelsen 
för 
internetinfrastruktur .SE, 2008. 
[9] C. P. Larsen, C. Lindqvist, H. Pathirana, R. Lindström, E. 
Modin, and A. Aurelius, “ANT: The Acreo National Testbed 
– Status and Plans”, in proc. NOC 2007, Stockholm, Sweden, 
June 18-21, 2007. 
[10] http://www.acreo.se/en/Technology-Areas/Broadband-
Technology/Projects/Current-Projects/Acreo-National-
Testbed  [Accessed 10th April 2012]. 
[11] M. Kihl, C. Lagerstedt, A. Aurelius, and P. Ödling, “Traffic 
analysis and characterization of Internet user behavior”, In 
Proc. ICUMT 2010, pp. 224-231, Moscow, Oct. 2010. 
[12] Procera networks, http://proceranetworks.com [Accessed 10th 
April 2012]. 
[13] W. S. Cleveland and D. X. Sun, “Internet Traffic Data”, 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1995, pp. 
979-985. Reprinted in Statistics in the 21st Century , edited by 
A. E. Raftery, M. A. Tanner, and M. T. Wells, Chapman & 
Hall/CRC, New York, 2002. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

