Service Strategies for Eliminating Digital Divide in Korea
Hyongsoon Kim, Sang-Ug Kang, Kwang-Taek Ryu
Digital Infrastructure Division, IT Convergence Service Department
National Information Society Agency
Seoul, Korea
{khs, sukang, ryukt}@nia.or.kr
Eunyoung Lee
Dept. of Computer Science
Dongduk Women’s University
Seoul, Korea
elee@dongduk.ac.kr
Abstract—Republic of Korea is one of the countries which
possess the top-class network infrastructure in the world.
However, the network facilities are concentrated in densely
populated areas, and this causes the data access speed of less
populated areas, such as rural areas, to become relatively slow.
The low speed of network makes broadcast-communication
convergence services in rural areas difﬁcult, and it leads to
the digital divide between cities and rural areas which will
emerge as a social issue. In the paper, we analyze the rural BcN
project of the Korea government, which aims at accelerating
the network infrastructure of rural areas. We also propose
the service strategies for boosting the usage of the network
infrastructure in rural areas.
Keywords-digital divide; BcN; convergence services; policies.
I. INTRODUCTION
For the last few decades, the Korea government (i.e., the
government of Republic of Korea) has executed a series of
projects to build the network infrastructure of high speed.
As the result of successful projects, Republic of Korea (in
short, Korea in this paper) has become one of the top
Information Technology (IT) countries in the world [1].
The Korea government executed the high-speed information
and communication network project in the 1990’s, and
has constructed the broadcast-communication convergence
network (BcN) infrastructure since the mid 2000s [2], [3],
[4].
The development of the network infrastructure of high
speed was government driven, so it made it possible to build
a network infrastructure timely and effectively. Fast network
infrastructure built by the government has been provided to
IT industries in Korea with low costs or almost for free,
and it enables IT companies to concentrate on developing
new IT services and technologies without worrying building
their privately-owned networks. The networks developed
by the government-driven projects have been served as
the infrastructure and the testbed for commercial services
and academic researches. It has been pointed out by many
professionals that the excellent network infrastructure is one
of the main mile stones which lead Korea to the top class
of IT technology in the world.
However, the investment of the Korea government and
nation-wide network operators is focused on only densely
populated areas. According to the survey of Korea Telecom,
the current nation-wide BcN coverage are up to about 80%,
and would be increased to 90% by 2010 [5]. But, small
farming and ﬁshing villages, which lack proﬁtability from
the perspective of service providers, are not included in the
operators’ BcN expansion plans. Although the residents in
small farming and ﬁshing villages can access the Internet,
the data rate remains at 1–3Mbps (xDSL type). As a result,
various convergence services cannot be used in these areas,
unlike in metropolitan-, medium-sized, or small-sized cities.
Voluntary investment to these less populated areas by
communication service providers cannot be expected, be-
cause communication service providers generally pursue
short-term proﬁts. This situation will cause the gap between
people with effective access to digital and information tech-
nology (those in city areas) and those with very limited or no
access at all (those in rural areas), called the digital divide.
The digital divide could wide the knowledge divide between
city areas and rural areas, which is already considered
as a serious social problem. The governmental support is
inevitably necessary to alleviate the digital divide. The Korea
government has set up the BcN establishment project to
provide high-speed network convergence services such as
IPTV and VoIP in sparsely populated rural areas, and has
conducted the project since 2010.
In this paper, we analyze the rural BcN project of the
Korea government, and propose the service strategies for
boosting the usage of the resulting network infrastructure.
In Section II, we outline the motivation of rural BcN and
the development plan of it. After the brief introduction
of rural BcN, we analyze and discuss the strategies for
service applications to stimulate the usage of rural BcN in
Section III. We draw a conclusion in Section V.
II. RURAL BCN DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The Korea government has set up the BcN establishment
project to provide high-speed network convergence services
in sparsely-populated rural areas. The outline of the rural
BcN project was made in 2009 [6], and the full version of
the rural BcN project has been made and executed since
2010 [7], [8].
86
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

Figure 1.
Strategy Deployment Circle
A. Motivation
The construction project of high-speed networks in rural
areas of over 50 households had been performed from 2002
to 2005. As the result of the success of the project, high-
speed Internet service came to be provided to 3.53 million
households, that is, 94 percent of all rural households.
Through the construction of high-speed networks in rural
areas of less than 50 households from 2006 to 2008, 3.76
million households, in other words, 99.7 percent of all rural
households came to enjoy high-speed Internet services.
However, the speed of the network in rural areas was not
fast enough for emerging broadcast-communication conver-
gence services. The early version of the rural BcN project
was made in 2009, and a feasibility study on the project was
conducted. The result of the feasibility study was reﬂected in
the plan called “Mid- and Long-term Development Plan for
Broadcast-Communication Networks” in 2009 [6]. In 2010,
the panel on the construction of smart infrastructure in rural
areas has been formed, and the project has begun.
The broadcast-communication convergence network in
rural areas is needed to lay a foundation for universal
broadcast-communication convergence services by expand-
ing broadband broadcast-communication networks, which
are concentrated in cities, into rural areas. Constructing
BcN in rural areas will help solve rural areas’ economic,
social and cultural issues and will vitalize the economy
and industry through the diffusion and spread of specialized
services based on broadband broadcast-communication net-
works. It is also required to establish a national cooperation
system integrating ministries, local governments and carriers
in order to construct broadband broadcast-communication
networks and expand broadcast-communication convergence
services.
B. Phases of the development plan
In order to construct broadband networks and cre-
ate an environment for increasing the use of broadcast-
communication convergence services, executive plans for
rural BcN have four sub-goals: network infrastructure, ser-
vice accessibility, customized services, and political and
economical support. The plans for network infrastructure
and political support are presented brieﬂy in this section,
and we will make a close analysis and discussion of service
plans in Section III.
To construct broadband networks in rural areas, broad-
band networks in small rural villages (with less than 50
households) will be built by 2016. The expenses are partially
covered by the central government. The central government,
local governments, and carriers share the costs in the ratio of
1:1:2. For the broadband network construction in medium-
sized rural villages (with more than 50 households), the
efﬁciency of the broadband network will be increased.
The construction of broadband networks in medium-sized
areas will be completed by 2012. This construction will
be supported through efﬁcient policies, such as inducing to
carriers to divide construction projects among themselves
87
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

or to construct networks jointly. Broadband networks will
be built in remote islands and isolated areas, too. Remote
islands and isolated areas are considered as places where
new wired networks cannot be constructed. For these areas,
a foundation to provide broadcast-communication conver-
gence services will be made by considering and applying
various alternatives.
The use of wireless networks such as 4G will be tested for
rural areas. Test beds for wireless ultra wide-band networks
will be built in small rural areas that have no broadband
networks, and the possibility that wireless ultra wide-band
network could replace ﬁxed broadband networks will be
veriﬁed. The government is trying to rent the optic ﬁber
cables from Korea Electric Power Corporation in rural and
isolated areas. The rented optic ﬁbers can be considered as
another option, but it requires the governmental involvement
in the process of mediation and negotiation. Pilot projects
will be promoted to verify other wireless technologies such
as WiFi Mesh, WiBro. Services through a two-way satellite
will be provided for areas where other alternatives cannot
be applied.
In order to encourage service carriers to construct broad-
band networks efﬁciently, a supportive legislation for carriers
will be enacted. Carriers will be encouraged to voluntarily
invest in building broadband networks in non-competitive
rural areas by reforming laws and regulations that deal with
the construction of broadcast- communication infrastructure
and developing a support system.
Policy and institutional supports for facilitating the use
of services will be provided. The use of services will be
facilitated by organizing and operating an effective body that
promotes and supports the projects, and by developing a
reasonable and affordable tariff plan for specialized services
for rural areas. The ecology of broadcast communication
industry for boosting the local industry in rural areas will
be established. A basis for sustainable development of rural
areas will be founded, and the opportunity to grow together
will be offered to the related industries by establishing an
ecological system that promotes a virtuous cycle.
Figure 1 shows how each direction of deployed strategies
is related to other directions and makes inﬂuence in a
circular way. The ﬁrst direction of the rural BcN plan begins
with building an economical and efﬁcient network. In this
part, the voluntary competition of the private sector and
the governmental support are combined. In order to avoid
duplicate investment, the communication resources will be
used as much as possible.
The second direction of the rural BcN plan will be to
promote the pilot projects on the basis of users’ actual
demand. In this part, the actual demand of rural residents
will be identiﬁed before providing services. Analyzing the
actual demand will create a service environment where the
services reﬂect the characteristics of rural communities, and
the most frequently used services.
The last direction of the rural BcN plan is to implement
a nation-wide cooperation system. There exists a need for
a cooperative body which involves all government agencies,
local governments and carriers. The cooperative body can
effectively foster the ecological environment such as con-
vergence among related industries.
III. STRATEGIES FOR SERVICE APPLICATIONS
To stimulate the usage of BcN in rural areas, the project
should be conducted in two directions: making people to
access the convergence services more easily and developing
killer services to satisfy the needs of rural residents. We
suggest service strategies in these two directions in the
following subsections.
A. Enhancing user accessibility
To enhance the accessibility of users in rural areas,
terminal guidelines for rural residents should be authored
and provided. This will facilitate the use of broadcast-
communication convergence services in rural areas by elim-
inating the complexity of using the terminals. The guideline
of IT terminals and interfaces will enable the aged rural
residents to use the IT terminals and interfaces more easily.
As well as authoring the guideline, testing whether or not the
IT terminals meet guidelines should be performed through
rural BcN pilot projects. Using the terminals with guidelines
should be also encouraged through the pilot projects.
The user interfaces (UI) should be enhanced for rural
residents, and for this purpose, UI design solutions should
be developed and provided with the governmental support.
The study of UI structures and UI deployment should be
conducted ﬁrst, so that rural residents can easily access
programs, contents, and information through BcN. The
developed UI will be tested and veriﬁed for its usability
by applying them to pilot services. For example, a new
user interface of IPTV would be implemented and provided
to rural residents with guidelines, and the effectiveness
will be scored by the real users. Easy and accessible user
interfaces will encourage rural residents to use broadcast-
communication convergence services.
For customer support, the remote support solutions can
be considered for the candidate. Concerning the use of
broadcast-communication convergence services, it is im-
portant to resolve the inconvenience of rural residents. To
support customers in rural areas, various measures should
be invented. One of the feasible ways is developing ter-
minals and solutions which can be controlled remotely.
When telephone consultation is not sufﬁciently convenient to
customers, a video-based remote support system like IPTV
would be an attractive substitute for resolving customers’
inconvenience. The terminals and solutions with remote
control function will be developed in the pilot projects, and
will be distributed to rural residents. Customer satisfaction
surveys will be conducted several times during the period
88
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

of pilot projects, and the remote customer support will be
tested and veriﬁed based on user feedback.
There must exist a system which connects and integrates
IT services for rural areas. The system aims at enhancing
existing services into broadcast-communication network-
based services specialized for rural areas, and maximizing
synergy. The goals can be achieved by establishing an
inter-ministerial cooperation body and by promoting the
connection and convergence among different IT services for
rural areas. It is important to establish a nationwide coop-
eration body committed to exploring ways of integrating
and connecting IT services for rural communities, although
those IT services have been promoted separately by different
government agencies. The uniﬁed governmental body can
integrate the developed public services for rural areas, and
make effective support to future development. A centralized
service center will be a part of the uniﬁed governmental
body, and it will operate an open platform, develop and
connect specialized services, and offer a test environment.
B. Developing specialized service applications
There have been a few services for rural areas, but those
services scatter among several governmental bodies. It is
urgent and important to integrate all these scattered services
to avoid duplicate investment and to maximize the synergy.
The IT services for rural areas have performed one-way
communication from service providers to users, and there
is no connection among these IT services though their
duplicate functionalities. These services have Web-based
user interfaces, and are delivering only simple information
to users. To supply broadcast-communication convergence
services effectively, it is important to integrate similar IT
services and upgrade it into a two-way communication
service with higher quality.
Integration is not an easy job, so is integrating the existing
IT services for rural areas. To support and expedite the
integration of IT services, it is necessary to develop a
software platform to support the integration. First of all, the
open platform must be developed, and be applied for the
integration of IT services through a couple of pilot projects.
The government should be in charge of the pilot projects
since the projects are not beneﬁciary enough for IT industry
to invest their money to.
After integrating the duplicated IT services of various
governmental ministries or bodies, it is needed to ﬁnd
good broadcast-communication convergence services, and
to provide a test bed for the developed new services. At
least one research center should be dedicated for these
purposes. The research center will be in charge of operating
the integration platform of rural IT services, and be a base
station if some rural IT services, e.g., open agricultural
market, are expanded nation-wide.
The specialized services for rural areas must be iden-
tiﬁed, implemented and tested through the pilot projects.
The demand of rural residents can be categorized in ﬁve
ﬁelds: welfare, culture, education, economy and safety. The
services should be identiﬁed based on these ﬁve ﬁelds, and
the service provision models should be aligned with existing
services offered by other ministries and local governments.
For the welfare of the rural residents, a u-health sys-
tem will be implemented for senior residents and children
based on IPTV and video telephone. Local weather, trafﬁc
information and local news will be delivered through IPTV.
IPTV can be also used for education: home tutoring for
students in rural areas, Korean language classes for multi-
cultural families and educational lectures of new agricultural
technologies. To stimulate the economy of rural areas, IPTV
could offer e-commerce services which connect consumers
in cities to the providers in rural areas directly. The history
of products can be traced by the consumers in cities through
IPTV. This will give more credibility of the agricultural
products, and guarantee more proﬁt to the providers in rural
areas. For regional safety, guarding services using CCTV
will be implemented through IPTV and video telephone.
Smart phones as well as IPTV will be used for an emergency
alert system.
Executing pilot services should begin with offering the
service of the highest demand. The feasibility of each
service candidate must be veriﬁed and evaluated based on
the beneﬁts of the service. The provision of pilot services
will be given in steps. At the ﬁrst step, a framework of
service development will be come up with, and only a few
services will be implemented. In the following step, these
pilot services will be spread around widely in order to
stimulate the usage of rural BcN and its related services.
At the last step, the services will be provided nation-widely
after the usefulness of the services is veriﬁed.
To increase the use of services, promotional and edu-
cational activities should be organized and executed. For
effective educational and promotional activities, existing
organizations and facilities owned by other institutions and
carriers can be utilized. A regular education system for
rural residents should be organized by training at least one
educator per community. There must a regular re-education
program for the educators at least once in a year, which is
run by a dedicated organization.
As well as educational activities, regular surveys should
be conducted on the use of services and customer satisfac-
tion. The feedback from the users will increase the use of
services in rural areas through a virtuous cycle of demand
analysis, service development and provision, customer sat-
isfaction study, and increase of usage rate. To achieve this
goal, it is necessary to develop indicators and indices for
evaluating customers’ usage statistics and satisfaction level
objectively. A survey on the usage status and satisfaction
level of broadband networks can be conducted on a yearly
basis.
89
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

IV. SUGGESTIONS
We have designed and developed the BcN establishment
policy in rural areas with assisting the Korea government.
We want to make a few suggestions to whom are considering
deploying an enhanced IT infrastructure in isolated areas of
their countries.
First, the economic efﬁciency of network facilities should
be considered. The feasible options for our BcN establish-
ment in rural areas would be narrowed into two candidates:
one is the wired networking using PONs and the other is
the wireless networking using wireless LANs or wireless
mesh networks (WMNs). Using PONs as the network in-
frastructure of rural areas costs more than using wireless
network techniques. But, using PON has an advantage when
upgrading the speed of the network to over 1 Gbps. It
is much easier and less costly to accelerate PONs than
to upgrade wireless networks. The wireless networking is
much cheaper than the wired networking using PONs, while
the coverage of wireless networks is smaller. The wireless
networking has the strength in the case that subscribers
inhabit densely in a relatively small area. The network
deployment method should be determined with considering
the characteristics of a given area and the budget of the local
government.
For the successful deployment of the BcN in rural areas,
good services should be also developed and provided. Good
services on BcN will stimulate the network usage. At the
same time, the provided services should reﬂect the unique
features of rural areas. For example, u-Health service can be
one of promising killer services, when considering the fact
that the population of rural areas becomes older than the
population of urban areas on average. U-Learning would be
another killer service for rural areas in order to narrow the
academic gap between rural and urban areas. The services
can be implemented in cooperation with private service
providers and local government, and during the development
phase, the opinion of local residents, who are the future
beneﬁciaries, must be feed-backed.
Local governments must have plans for diminishing the
burden of communication charge, i.e., the fee of using the
BcN network and its related services in rural areas. Service
providers should supply cheaper rate plans for rural inhabi-
tants, and local government has to consider to support a part
of communication charge as a way of eliminating the digital
divide. One of the feasible ways would be to designate
the BcN services as universal services like electricity or
telephone services. Another feasible way would be lowering
the rate by a long-term contract between local government
and private service providers.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Korea is one of the countries which possess the top-class
network infrastructure in the world. However, the network
facilities are concentrated in densely populated areas, which
causes the data access speed of less populated areas, such
as rural areas, to become relatively slow. The low speed
of network makes broadcast-communication convergence
services in rural areas difﬁcult, and it leads to the digital
divide between cities and rural areas, which will emerge
as a social issue. The Korea government has set up the
BcN establishment project to provide high-speed network
convergence services, such as IPTV and VoIP, to sparsely-
populated rural areas, and has conducted the project since
2010.
In the paper, we analyzed the rural BcN project of the
Korea government, which aims at accelerating the network
infrastructure of rural areas. The service strategies for boost-
ing the usage of the network infrastructure in rural areas
were proposed. Boosting network usage is as important as
speeding up the network itself. Fast network infrastructure
is useless unless it is used actively. The suggested boosting
strategies can go to two directions: enhancing user accessi-
bility to the services and developing specialized services.
The rural BcN project of the Korea government is under
progress now, and it will become complete by 2016. We
believe that we can make another further discussion of the
rural BcN project after the project itself is over with some
analyzable result.
REFERENCES
[1] National Information Society Agency of Korea, “Broadband
convergence Network annual report 2007,” Ministry of Infor-
mation and Communication of Korea, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[2] Ministry of Information and Communication of Korea, “Basic
blueprint for building the Broadband convergence Network,”
Ministry of Information and Communication of Korea, Tech.
Rep., 2004.
[3] Ministry of Information and Communication of Korea, “Sec-
ond phase plan for establishing BcN,” Ministry of Information
and Communication of Korea, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[4] Korea Communication Counsil, “Third phase plan for es-
tablishing BcN,” Korea Communication Counsil, Tech. Rep.,
2008.
[5] Korea Communication Counsil, “UBcN deployment policy,”
Korea Communication Counsil, Tech. Rep., January 2009.
[6] Korea Communication Counsil, “Directions for BcN infras-
tructure of rural areas,” Korea Communication Counsil, Tech.
Rep., 2009.
[7] Korea Communication Counsil, “Project plans for promoting
BcN construction in rural areas,” Korea Communication Coun-
sil, Tech. Rep., March 2010.
[8] Korea Communication Counsil, “Long-term plan for construct-
ing broadband networks in rural areas,” Korea Communication
Counsil, Tech. Rep., June 2010.
90
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

