Modular and Reconﬁgurable Testbed For 5G Systems And Applications
Heena Rathore, Abhay Samant
Hiller Measurements
Austin, TX
Email: [heena.rathore,abhay.samant]@hillermeas.com
George Koutitas
Texas State University
San Marcos, TX
Email: george.koutitas@txstate.edu
Abstract—The ﬁfth generation (5G) cellular standards operating
in various millimeter frequency bands, are the proposed next
telecommunications standards beyond the current 4G standards.
The speciﬁcations of 5G technology are currently being standard-
ized by international regulatory agencies and they hold promise
for a wide array of applications ranging from transportation to
health. Testing of this standard across a matrix of speciﬁcations
and applications presents a daunting challenge. To overcome
this, a 5G testbed design which is based on reconﬁgurable
components enabled by Software Deﬁned Networks (SDNs) and
Software Deﬁned Radios (SDRs) has been presented in this paper.
The reconﬁgurable measurement hardware has been designed
such that it can be integrated across all the layers of TCP/IP
protocol through an open-source software deﬁned architecture.
Programmability is a key feature of this architecture, and this has
been addressed by a Software Development Kit (SDK). The SDK
contains pre-built IP, a baseline end to end stack implementation,
and an application programming interface (API) for accessing
different features of the platform. The testbed has been designed
with a modular hardware and scalable software architecture so
that it can facilitate the development of numerous 5G applications
in the long run, allowing multiple users to operate it, thus making
the testbed self-sustainable over the years.
Keywords–testbed; scalability; modular; 5G; health; transporta-
tion; energy.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The ﬁfth generation (5G) of cellular standards, holds
promise for a variety of applications including, but not limited
to, health, energy, transportation and public safety. 5G focuses
on solving various present-day communication challenges,
such as area trafﬁc capacity, network energy efﬁciency, con-
nection density and latency. It is being designed for enhanced
mobile broadband applications such as streaming 4k video,
augmented reality, and 3D gaming. Ultra reliable, low latency
communication for autonomous driving and mission critical
applications has been presented as an application area. 5G also
is focused on improving spectrum efﬁciency and mobility, thus
making it a prime candidate for massive machine to machine
type applications such as in smart cities and smart factories.
While there is a lot of excitement around the promise that
5G holds, a key requirement is the need of common methodol-
ogy and systems for testing these applications in real-world sit-
uations. It is extremely critical that researchers have a common
test platform to validate scalability and interopertablity across
these applications. 5G CHAMPION testbeds, described in [1],
were designed for the 2018 Winter Olympic games, to validate
how 5G-enabled mmWave wireless backhaul can provide an
interoperable and seamless connection between two different
access networks. 5G Hardware Test Evaluation Platform, pre-
sented in [2], deploys software deﬁned wireless networks in
the urban area, allowing academics, entrepreneurs and wireless
companies to test, evaluate, and improve their hardware design
and software algorithms in real-world environment. Addition-
ally, it supports advanced wireless communications theory and
technology research. An educational setup for service oriented
process automation with 5G has been presented in [3]. The
intended outcome is that students can obtain knowledge with
emerging industrial technologies and become the actors of
upcoming industrial revolution. A testbed described in [4]
demonstrates SDN orchestration capabilities in adapting data
paths across IoT, cloud, and network domains, based on the
real-time load state of switches. This enables recovery from
congestion, thereby assuring reliable data delivery services.
All of these testbeds have been designed to meet the
requirements of a speciﬁc application or achieve a particular
learning outcome. A key challenge is that these testbeds are
not ﬂexible to scale for different applications and evolving
speciﬁcations. This paper presents a testbed architecture, based
on reconﬁgurable Software Deﬁned Networks (SDN) and
Software Deﬁned Radio (SDR) components. The testbed has
been designed in a modular hardware fashion with a scalable
software interface to allow its use for evolving 5G systems
and technologies. It has been designed such that it can be
integrated across all the layers of TCP/IP stack through an
open-source software deﬁned architecture containing a pre-
built IP, a baseline end to end stack implementation, and
an Application Programming Interface (API) for accessing
different features of the platform. Section II describes the
hardware architecture of the platform. Software architecture
has been described in Section III. Sustainability aspects of
the testbed have been described in Section IV. The testbed
has been designed with the objective that it will facilitate the
development of numerous 5G applications in the long run,
some of which have been described in Section V.
II.
HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
The core of the testbed hardware lies in the SDR and SDN
components that interface with other essential services such
as data logging and aggregation access, administrative and
performance monitoring services. They have been integrated in
such a way that they can be controlled through a programming
interface. This allows the testbed to interface with a variety of
services frameworks. Figure 1 describes the overall architec-
ture of the 5G testbed.
Flexibility at the baseband level is enabled via the use
of SDRs such as USRP [5]. The current generation USRPs
support 160MHz instanteneous bandwidth with frequency cov-
erage from 10MHz to 6GHz, referred to as sub-6GHz in
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Figure 1. 5G Testbed Architecture
the rest of the paper. This serves as the baseband system
of our testbed and provides sufﬁcient frequency coverage
and reconﬁgurability for research on topics such as Long
Term Evolution (LTE)-to-5G migration, LTE-5G co-existence
and/or convergence, and IoT. The modular nature of our
testbed addresses one of the key 5G challenges related to the
different frequency bands being considered [6], [7]. The World
Radio Conference WRC-19 [8] and the designated ITU-R [9]
qualiﬁer for 5G, includes a set of bands to be considered for
5G, with direct applicability to 5G New Radio (5G NR). 5G
NR is already taking shape in 3GPP with OFDM-based Uniﬁed
Flexible Radio Access Technology below 40 GHz. Likewise, a
non-stand-alone version was ﬁnalized in Dec. 2017 and several
companies are releasing their 5G/KT mmWave spec. with a
pre-standard for mmWave in 5G at 28 GHz for ﬁxed wireless.
As shown in Figure 2, the modular nature of the testbed allows
the sub-6GHz system to be extended with mmWave up and
down converters for different frequency bands. For example, a
mmWave up/down converter for the 27.5-29.5 GHz band and
direct interfaces to multi-element phased-array antenna RFICs
have been added to the testbed. Some of the other spectrum
bands which are under study for WRC-19 and can be added to
the 5G testbed are the 37-40.5GHz 60-66GHz and 71-76GHz.
To get to custom mmWave frequencies, RF daughter cards can
be replaced by new commercially available upgrades or custom
front ends. Local Oscillators (LO) can be used independently,
in pairs or in external/shared modes.
Figure 2. 5G Testbed Hardware Architecture
Earlier this year, ITU agreed on key 5G bandwidth re-
quirements for IMT-2020 [10]; for example, the target values
for downlink and uplink user experienced data rates were set
at 100 Mbit/s and 50 Mbit/s respectively. These values are
deﬁned assuming supportable bandwidth as described in [11];
however, the bandwidth assumption does not form part of the
requirement. Considering that the frequency and bandwidth
requirements for 5G standards are still being deﬁned and are in
development, the 5G testbed described in this paper has been
designed in a modular fashion to adapt to different require-
ments. As Analog to Digital Conversion (ADC) technology
evolves, we expect to see new digitizers with wider bandwidths
to become commercially available. In the meantime, signal
processing techniques such as spectrum stitching [12] can be
used to achieve wider bandwidths by concatenating multiple
USRPs. The RF interface block contains elements such as
ﬁlters, ampliﬁers, switches and interfaces. Testbed has been
designed to include multiple sub-6GHz RAN nodes, some of
which can support indoor network research, while the rest
can be located outdoors using roof mount and ﬁxed ground
installations.
Since directionality will be a key feature of 5G networks,
beam forming and beam steering will be essential. Hybrid
beamforming has been approved for LTE release 13, Phase 1.
It has been shown that by signiﬁcantly increasing the number
of antennas, for example 64 antennas, the narrower beams
can provide three to ﬁve times capacity gains, while taking
advantage of existing infrastructure. For Phase 2 of LTE release
13, it is expected that each antenna will include its own
transceiver, enabling both traditional MIMO techniques and
the Zero Forcing beamforming approach, achieving 10 times
capacity gain. To enable testing of this feature, an external
phased-array antenna RFIC (such as SiBeam 12x12 element
phased-array antenna) can be easily added to the 5G testbed.
Many of the new 5G implementations will require beam
steering on multiple beams. So, as advanced beam steering
technology is developed and integrated into new 5G designs,
the 5G testbed can be easily adapted using the Antenna Control
block in Figure 2, to use 4 beams and 4 phased arrays for a
total of 256 elements.
III.
SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE
Reconﬁgurability of the hardware elements is a key feature
of the testbed and this is enabled by the control and processing
software running either on the FPGAs or host computer. This
section describes the software architecture of the 5G testbed,
as shown in Figure 3. The testbed software has been designed
using a plug and play architecture such that researchers can
easily introduce new algorithms at any of the layers of the
TCP/IP stack. It aims to provide users an insight into different
blocks from an application point of view, without requiring
them to go into any of the implementation details. Software
will integrate the new algorithms, which can be deployed either
on FPGA or host PC, with the rest of the stack and allow
researchers to experiment with different settings. The testbed
provides a default end-to-end stack, which will be used as
a baseline. Users can then replace individual components in
the stack. As an example, a researcher may like to develop a
MaxWeight multiuser scheduler and then plug this algorithm at
the MAC layer, without the need to know anything else about
the baseline wireless stack. Once the user provides a binary
representation of the new algorithm through a prescribed API,
the platform will generate the entire stack, run the program,
and provide throughput results. This will be based off the
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) which will indicate per-
formance metrics, such as bandwidth, energy consumption, or
latency.
The novel and guiding design principle of this testbed is
rooted in its programmability across all layers, pre-built IP
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Figure 3. 5G Testbed Software Architecture
as a baseline implementation, and a hybrid approach to spec-
trum management that features both sub-6GHz and mmWave
frequencies. This programmability has been provided through
well deﬁned interfaces such as NET API, PHY API, RF API,
as shown in Figure 3 and described next.
SDN provides a breakthrough in network transformation. It
decouples the software and the hardware layers by disengaging
the data plane and control plane of the networking device
[13]. Evolution of SDN programmability at network level will
pave the way for new innovations. The testbed will leverage
the principles of SDN to enable scalable, ﬂexible and highly
adaptive networking and communication layers through decou-
pling of the control and data planes. SDN will support efﬁcient
trafﬁc and ﬂow management, including resource reservations,
and custom network layer protocols by abstracting the routing
and networking intelligence (control layer) away from the
switching hardware (data layer). The NET API will interface
with the underlying radio signal processing plane abstractions
using a well-deﬁned API at each layer. It will be a superset of
OpenFlow [14] and extensions for receiving information from
different SDR blocks, such as modulators, coders, timing. It
will also include a mechanism to deﬁne a set of actions for
different network nodes. Users will be able to modify some
contents of the packet, deﬁne performance indices, and deploy
customized routing and switching protocols using this API.
OpenFlow currently supports a limited number of protocols.
This testbed will extend OpenFlow constructs for 4G and
eventually 5G networks.
The PHY API is responsible for controlling the physi-
cal layer algorithm parameters such as modulation scheme,
symbol rate, ﬁlter type, channel response equalization ﬁlter
taps, coding parameters and such. This layer will also monitor
the received signal characteristics such as RSSI and provide
feedback to the upper layers. The testbed will be designed
such that it allows for real-time conﬁguration of RF layer
parameters. The RF API will be responsible for controlling
hardware speciﬁc parameters such as frequency, power level,
and instantaneous bandwidth (speciﬁed as sampling rate). The
RF API will abstract the features of the interface board to
make it easier to program. Using General Purpose Input/Output
(GPIO) lines on the USRP, the testbed will also facilitate real-
time reconﬁguration of RF hardware parameters using features
such as Adaptive Gain Control (AGC).
Figure 4. System Process for Usage Tracking and Billing
IV.
USAGE TRACKING AND BILLING
Usage tracking and billing are important aspects for the
successful implementation and monetization of the proposed
5G testbed. Usage tracking is crucial for the collection of
raw experimental and platform utilization data whereas the
billing mechanism provides the required monetization and the
engagement of users. The proposed testbed will have a set
of measurement instruments that will collect experimental and
utilization data. The nature of the experimental data depends
on the API layer that is used. For example, referring to
Figure 3, measurements related to the testbeds Physical and
Link layer API can be channel fading, time domain, frequency
domain and modulation quality data. On the other hand, energy
efﬁciency, throughput, latency and other measurements can be
used for the characterization of the higher layers. Utilization
data will keep track of the used platform resources of the
experiment such as duration, number of APIs and 5G sites used
and the overall energy consumption. The energy consumption
provides information about the operational expenses of the
platform for the purpose of the experiment but also can work
as an incentive for researchers to design energy efﬁcient 5G
algorithms. This is because the billing will depend on the
energy consumption.
In general, an important dimension of 5G networks is
the energy efﬁciency [15] and different Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) have been proposed to quantify the efﬁciency
[16]. An overlaid IoT based smart metering network capable
of monitoring the energy consumption of the network will be
used for energy monitoring. Each 5G site is expected to have at
least 4 energy consumption points to capture the consumption
at the radio unit, the IT equipment, the cooling/power units and
of course the entire station to provide the required KPIs such as
Joule/bps, W/m2, W/user, Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE).
These measurements will also allow researchers to monitor and
disaggregate the energy efﬁciency of the developed algorithms
and create new energy efﬁciency proxies and metrics following
recent advancements in the data center sector such as the Green
Grid association [17].
Usage tracking data will be available to the researchers in
real time during their experiments in a cloud based dashboard
connected to the usage tracking database. A cloud platform
interfacing the software and hardware of the 5G testbed will
empower the users with the ability to remote access the system
using time/frequency sharing scheduling processes.
The usage tracking data will be used to not only evaluate
the efﬁciency of the experiments and the performance of the
newly developed algorithms, but also to provide billing. The
billing algorithm will use pricing principles met in Software
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

as a Service (SaaS) paradigms [18]. The pricing schemes can
be based on an a-la-carte or a bundle approach providing the
option to the end user to select according to the needs. The
a-la-carte scheme allows a user to pay per experiment whereas
the bundle approach creates packages of products, services and
usage priorities with monthly subscription. For this case, the
product is the API and the 5G site of the experiment and a user
can select a number of them to be utilized for the experiment.
The ﬁnal cost of the pricing scheme is a function of the energy
consumption, the number of 5G sites and APIs used and the
performance of the algorithm. The overall process is presented
in Figure 4.
V.
APPLICATIONS
The 5G testbed has been designed with various general
purpose wireless research and application speciﬁc research in
mind, as shown in Figure 5. Understanding and defending
against potential cyber-security attacks on SDNs, such as
denial of service, is a key. The testbed can be used to test
the self-evolving and self-healing characteristics of SDNs,
taking inspiration from bio-inspired techniques. Some of the
signiﬁcant challenges that can be tackled through the testbed
are the interference of small cells and macro-cells, new inter-
ference situations, and synchronization. Algorithms focusing
on ultra-low latency (less than 10ms for remote medicine
applications), ultra-high throughput (several Gbps for large
scale data transfers) and support for massive number of devices
(greater than 1000 for IoT applications). This testbed will
allow for the fast reconﬁguration of network nodes to handle a
dynamic mix of such applications via selection of appropriate
per-packet scheduling mechanisms. The testbed will also allow
for sampling performance metrics such as latency, throughput,
jitter, packet loss, and communicating these back to a central
controller, which will use data-analytics to choose between a
set of curated per-packet mechanisms to attain optimal system
performance for the current applications.
Figure 5. 5G Applications
Some additional general purpose wireless research top-
ics include analyzing new RF front end elements such as
power ampliﬁers, ﬁlters and transceivers for mmWave, study
of coexistence of sub-6GHz, 5G, and hybrid multi-spectral
communication systems and the development of appropriate
channel and fading models that are correlated to develop new
systems concepts that can capitalize on spectral agility, new
access schemes, and other resource management paradigms.
While these are very important stand-alone research topics,
they are particularly critical for many of the 5G application
areas, as discussed next.
A. Transportation
Figure 6. 5G Applications for Transportation
Wireless communication is bringing a new level of con-
nectivity to cars. As shown in Figure 6, with wireless, cars
may communicate with each other directly in Vehicle-to-
Vehicle (V2V) mode, or through the infrastructure in Vehicle-
to-Infrastructure (V2I) mode. There are many applications of
connectivity to support safety, transportation efﬁciency, and
internet access. Additionally, connectivity makes self-driving
cars safer by increasing their sensing range, leveraging what
can be seen by other vehicles in the front, in the back, or
on the sides. Exchanging such information between vehicles
will improve driver assist and full automation over time. Un-
fortunately, conventional technologies such as dedicated short-
range communications, which support data rates of megabits
per-second and low-latency messaging, will not be sufﬁcient
to support the exchange of high rate sensor data or exchange
of data to support automatic high deﬁnition map updates. 5G
networks hold the promise to support high data rates and low
latency for connected vehicles, which is driving tremendous
interest in transportation as a key use case. In particular,
mmWave 5G is especially attractive because of very high data
rates, which can be used for the exchange of raw sensor data,
enhancing the safety and efﬁciency of automotive driving. This
would allow vehicles to enhance their situational awareness
by seeing many car lengths in different directions, and around
corners. Additionally, 5G can support lower latency and ultra-
reliability to facilitate distributed control for transportation
systems. For example, vehicles can travel together with smaller
gaps using platooning, or can be coordinated through an
intersection at high speeds without a trafﬁc lights. These
attributes enable safe operation of connected vehicles in a va-
riety of traditional crash hot-spot situations such as overtaking
on rural roads, conﬂicts at urban intersections, and weaving
sections on highways. There are also opportunities to co-locate
sensing and communication together in 5G systems. Sensing
on the base station gives a birds-eye-view of the environment
and may assist in automated intersection management. This
functionality is supported by edge-computing, which will be
supported by 5G networks.
B. Health
5G networks hold the possibility to empower new potential
avenues regarding health care including imaging, diagnostics,
data analytics, and treatment [13]. This includes devices such
as clinical wearables, remote sensors and numerous different
gadgets that screen and electronically transmit medical infor-
mation such as vital signs, physical activity, individual security,
and pharmaceutical adherence [19]. These devices will provide
unprecedented telemedicine diagnosis and treatment beneﬁts,
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

while signiﬁcantly lowering health costs. These devices and
capabilities generate higher ﬁdelity data, thereby enabling
precise analytics capabilities. For example, doctors typically
require access to detailed information about hereditary, social
condition, and way of life attributes to provide informed health
care. The billions of devices and sensors connected through
5G will make collection of this information possible. Storing
this information on a cloud infrastructure enables all-time
accessibility. Some mission-critical medical functions require
high dependability and accessibility with latency intervals that
are down to a few milliseconds [20]. 5G will make this possible
and predictable, thus enabling dependable client encounters to
enhance medical care. Similarly, remote surgery will be possi-
ble once latency levels are reduced to small intervals. Surgeons
will have the capacity to utilize virtual and augmented reality
tools for certain kinds of techniques. Some other examples
incorporate imaging, remote monitoring and diagnostics, and
data analytics for effective treatment. Recently, wireless med-
ical devices have enabled many hospital facilities the ability
to provide continuous patient care throughout the treatment
process. Standardization strategies to assist machine learning
algorithms in adding to the efﬁciency of these devices would be
the core interest. It will characterize the necessities of machine
learning algorithms as they relate to network architectures
and data security. Machine learning based data security will
examine the information being transmitted between the patient
and specialist to provide better treatment process. Utilizing the
machine learning algorithms that iteratively learn from data,
would enable these gadgets to discover hidden insights without
being explicitly programmed to look for a speciﬁc pattern.
C. Energy
The energy sector is expected to be technologically en-
hanced with the direct, systematic and indirect implementa-
tions of 5G networks for energy-efﬁciency. The ﬁrst pillar
concerns the direct implementation of energy efﬁciency tech-
niques in 5G access networks. By introducing new network
planning and Base Station (BS) management strategies, the
Joules required per offered bit will be reduced, integrating the
5G network into the paradigm of energy efﬁcient networking,
part of the ITU-R and IMT 2020 vision. 5G systems with high
energy performance should be built on two design principles,
a) to only be active and transmit when needed, b) to only be
active and transmit where needed. The lean design architecture
of 5G sites support sleep modes and the SDR capabilities
enable BS on/off schemes. The most important challenges
are resource allocation, resource sharing and base station
management as well as integration of the latter with Renewable
Energy Sources (RES). The deployment of a set of 5G off-
grid sites powered by RES will provide an important testbed
for experimentation and research. In the second pillar, the
systematic application of 5G in the smart grid will enable
a communication infrastructure which is able to support the
emerging energy use-cases of 2020 and beyond. Part of the so-
called Internet of energy, 5G networks support reliable data and
command ﬂow between a network of Internet of Things (IoT)
such as smart meters/smart actuators and electric utilities. The
third pillar concerns the indirect implementation of 5G net-
works to incorporate virtual spaces. This approach integrates
densely-deployed IoT devices into an Augmented Reality (AR)
environment for energy management. The main challenges
concern the integration of high-rate, human-centric AR data
with low-rate, machine-centric IoT data for effective cross-
domain, real-time control. In addition, low latency end-to-end
communications will be addressed, including applications of
Ultra Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC). Such
services are a key driver for the successful penetration of
VR/AR services in 5G networks.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Health, energy, public safety and transportation are some of
the many applications that can beneﬁt from 5G capabilities for
latencies, massive bandwidth, and connectivity. 5G focuses on
various aspects of present-day communication challenges such
as area trafﬁc capacity, network energy efﬁciency, connection
density and latency. 5G also is focused on driving spectrum
efﬁciency and mobility, thus making it a prime candidate for
massive machine to machine type applications such as in smart
cities and smart factories. This paper addresses a key gap in
the long term adoption of this standard for these applications
by presenting a modular and scalable testbed architecture to
test interoperability and scalability of this standard across the
various applications. For example, the ability of the testbed to
adapt to various mmWave frequencies is crucial for self-driving
cars as it has to work across the cellular, high bandwidth
wireless (60G-66G) and evolving vehicular radar frequency
bands (76G-82G). Likewise, the ability of the testbed to scale
to multiple Transmit and Receive nodes is of big beneﬁt for
health applications. Ability to program at different layers is
crucial to test machine learning enabled safety and security
of 5G enabled wireless devices. Likewise, the ability to try
different algorithms is of immense beneﬁt to general purpose
research and energy applications. In summary, we envision that
this testbed will facilitate the development of numerous 5G
applications in the long run. The testbed has some limitations
which need to be addressed in future scope of work. For
example, the USRP is currently not seen as a network interface
card (NIC) by the operating system on the host machine. One
needs to overcome this limitation by making the USRP visible
as a virtual network interface. Once this is done, users can
directly use the USRP to provide Internet connectivity via
bridging it to an Ethernet NIC, and exploiting the existing
TCP/IP stack on the host. Thus, using an Ethernet-Host-USRP
combination as a ﬁxed base station, with combinations such
as USRP-Host-WiFi, USRP-Host-Bluetooth, and USRP-Host-
Zigbee acting as client/mobile-access-points, connectivity to
off-the-shelf handhelds and IoT devices will be possible,
thereby enabling a new set of applications.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. H. Won, et al., “Development of 5G CHAMPION testbeds for
5G services at the 2018 Winter Olympic Games”, IEEE International
Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC), no. 18, pp. 1-5, 2017.
[2]
Y. Yang, J. Xu, G. Shi, C. X. Wang, “5G Hardware Test Evaluation
Platform”, 5G Wireless Systems. Wireless Networks. Springer, Cham,
2018.
[3]
J. Kortela, B. Nasiri, A. Smirnov, A. Lahnalammi, S. L. Jamsa-Jounela,
“Educational Setup for Service Oriented Process Automation with 5G
Testbed”, FAC-PapersOnLine, 50(2), pp. 127-132, 2017.
[4]
S. Fichera, M. Gharbaoui, P. Castoldi, B. Martini, A. Manzalini, “On
experimenting 5G: Testbed set-up for SDN orchestration across network
cloud and IoT domains”, IEEE Conference on Network Softwarization
(NetSoft), pp. 1-6, 2017.
[5]
www.ni.com/white-paper/12985/en/ [Accessed on 03/17/2018]
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

[6]
P. Rost, et al., “Mobile Network Architecture Evolution towards 5G”,
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 54, Issue. 5, pp. 84-91, May
2016
[7]
T. Wang, et al. , “Spectrum Analysis and Regulations for 5G”, 5G
Mobile Communications”, SpringerLink, pp. 27-50.
[8]
M. J. Marcus, “5G and IMT for 2020 and beyond [Spectrum Policy
and Regulatory Issues],” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no.
4, pp. 2-3, August 2015. doi: 10.1109/MWC.2015.7224717
[9]
International
Telecommunication
Union
(ITU),
http://www.itu.int/en/about/Pages/default.aspx
[Accessed
on
02/26/2018]
[10]
D. Soldani, and A. Manzalini, “Horizon 2020 and Beyond: On the
5G Operating System for a True Digital Society,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 32-42, March 2015
[11]
X. Meng, J. Li, D. Zhou and D. Yang, “5G technology requirements
and related test environments for evaluation,” China Communications,
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 42-51, N/A 2016. doi: 10.1109/CC.2016.7405721
[12]
S. L. Dark, D. J. Baker, J. R. W. Ammerman, “Spectral stitching method
to increase instantaneous bandwidth in vector signal analyzers”, US
Patent US9326174B1
[13]
H. Rathore, “Bio-inspired Software-Deﬁned Networking”, Mapping
Biological Systems to Network Systems. Springer, Cham, 2016.
[14]
https://www.opennetworking.org/projects/open-datapath/ [Accessed on
02/26/2018]
[15]
S. Buzzi, Chih-Lin I, T. E. Klein, H. V. Poor, C. Yang, A. Zappone, “A
Survey of Energy-Efﬁcient Techniques for 5G Networks and Challenges
Ahead”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34,
no. 4, April 2016.
[16]
L. Budzisz, et al., “Dynamic Resource Provisioning for Energy Efﬁ-
ciency in Wireless Access Networks: A Survey and an Outlook”, IEEE
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, 2014
[17]
https://www.thegreengrid.org/ [Accessed on 02/26/2018]
[18]
A. Ojala, “Selection of the Proper Revenue and Pricing Model for
SaaS”, IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology
and Science (CloudCom), no. 6, 2014.
[19]
A. Weissberger, “Selected Applications/Use Cases by Industry for ITU-
R International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) 3G, 4G, 5G”, IEEE
Comsoc Technology Blog, 2017.
[20]
D. M. West,“How 5G technology enables the health internet of things”,
Brookings, 2016.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

