Wireless Frequency Data Manipulation for Embedded Databases Used in 
Cybersecurity Applications 
 
Page Heller 
Endpoint Security Inc 
College Station, TX, USA 
email: heller@endpointsecurityinc.com 
 
 
Abstract— A unique fingerprint in radio frequency signals 
provides a natural authentication for wireless edge devices in a 
cybersecurity application based on frequency analysis. Such 
fingerprints can be improved if extraneous frequency data is 
removed from the Fourier Transform prior to authentication, 
but the data manipulation must be done in real time systems 
with embedded databases designed to store such fingerprints. 
These embedded systems require a simple and fast process. A 
method is proposed to manipulate frequency-domain data 
captured from wireless signals for use in cybersecurity 
applications to remove unwanted features and ensure the 
retention of important attributes in embedded databases. 
Experimental measurements and field studies are presented 
which lead to modifications in the methodology to address 
unexpected features encountered. Computational efficiency is 
taken into account. 
Keywords-physical layer cybersecurity; wireless security; 
Fast Fourier Transform; radio frequency waveforms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Under consideration in this paper is a cybersecurity 
application which relies on analysis of the frequency content 
of wireless signals sent from sensors, cameras and actuators 
that make up what is colloquially referred to as the Internet 
of Things. This particular application is based on 
authenticating fixed wireless devices by recognizing a 
fingerprint in wireless signals unique to each device. The 
fingerprint is based, in part, on polarization mode dispersion 
resulting from reflections in a multipath environment [1]. 
This was previously considered an undesirable trait of 
wireless communications has become a boon to secure 
identification of individual transmitting devices [2]. Such 
dispersion is found to be stable for fixed edge devices and 
relatively impervious to interference and motion within the 
multipath. The process may be deployed in applications 
which use channel-hopping, as well, indicating a broad 
application area [3][4]. 
Improvements in the fingerprint may be obtained by 
removing frequency data that is not specific to the 
calculation of polarization mode dispersion, specifically, data 
that is outside the bandwidth of the transmitting device. This 
often includes side lobe data and data near zero resulting 
from a transformation from the time domain to frequency 
domain. Because this authentication must be made as 
received signals are being demodulated in an access point, 
time is of the essence to minimize latency in the data 
transmission. Therefore, a method is suggested to trim 
frequency data for such applications in a manner suitable for 
real time systems employing embedded databases for 
retaining such fingerprint data. The method is simple and 
efficient. 
To properly address the subject matter of this paper, the 
following sections are offered. Section II covers background 
in the area of common implementations of side lobe 
reduction for applications that are not necessarily real time 
and embedded systems, so it is possible to envision how the 
suggested method compares. Section III discusses the theory 
behind the suggested method for context on why certain 
decisions were made. Section IV describes the precise signal 
processing that takes place in the method in a step-by-step 
manner. Section V shows results of laboratory measurements 
and modifications made to the method as a result. Section VI 
shows 
data 
from 
field 
measurements 
and 
further 
modifications made to the method taking these tests into 
account. Section VII draws conclusions from observations 
made in the previous sections. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Obtaining Radio Frequency (RF) data for the proposed 
fingerprinting analysis requires receiving a wireless signal, 
digitizing it and transforming it to the frequency domain. 
Here, a Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) is being used for 
the transformation. 
Inherent to the digitization are certain artificial artifacts 
of the transformation process that may affect future 
calculations. Primarily targeted in this paper are side lobes in 
the frequency response data. To remove these, many 
methods have been proposed for use in applications of radar, 
radio and ultrasound, dating back to pivotal publications in 
the 1960s, like Blackman’s Data Smoothing and Prediction 
[5]. The most common of these methods are addressed here. 
A. Windowing 
Windowing covers a broad area of research in RF 
waveform manipulation. In this process, a function described 
mathematically within a fixed window and is multiplied with 
the signal of interest while being incrementally moved, 
sample by sample, from one end of the signal to the other, 
that is, in a sliding window. More precisely, the two 
functions representing the signal and the window, 
respectively, are convolved; that is, the integral is taken of 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

the multiplication of the two functions as in the definition of 
convolution given in equation (1), where f is the signal 
function and g is the window function which advances 
relative to f by frequency bin steps, τ. In this case t refers, not 
to time, but instead to frequency. 
 
                           (f*g)(t) := ∫ f(τ)g(t−τ) δτ 
 (1) 
 
Window functions may be as simple as having a 
rectangular shape or as complex as a Parzen, Welch, or sine 
wave. One of the most common is a parabolic shape with 
three different versions introduced each by Hann, Hamming 
and Blackman [6][5]. Each has a slightly different effect on 
modifying the transform, particularly in the area of interest: 
the side lobes. 
Even a simple triangular function can greatly reduce the 
amplitude of side lobes in RF waveforms. Applications 
engineers in industry have done extensive studies comparing 
such techniques in both the time and frequency domains [7]. 
These methods prove useful in operations that are not time 
critical and have been found appropriate for displaying the 
results, for instance. It is even conceivable to use such 
functions to precondition the waveform in the application 
under consideration. However, the side lobe data is still 
present after these convolutions and still troublesome for 
securely identifying RF fingerprints. 
B. Discrete Wavelet Transform 
A wireless signal of interest in the application of wireless 
cybersecurity often travels from transmitter to receiver in an 
industrial, commercial or residential setting. In these 
environments, the signal reflects off of many walls, ceilings, 
floors and objects on its way to the receiver. Such rich 
multipath channels have caused researchers to investigate 
other means of transforming received signals into frequency 
domain data. It is desired to find a transform that is perhaps 
less sensitive to the distortion and dispersion caused by the 
multipath. One such method is the Discrete Wavelet 
Transform, which has been shown to improve the Bit Error 
Rate (BER) over receivers using the DFT [8][9]. In the case 
under consideration, however, the dispersion caused by the 
multipath is of particular interest. There is, therefore, a need 
to preserve it across the main lobe of the resulting DFT. 
C. Subcarrier Weighting 
Commonly used in the popular Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiplexing (OFDM) protocols is a concept of 
subcarrier weighting [10]. In this process of transmitting a 
wireless signal, each OFDM subcarrier is weighted, that is, 
multiplied by a fixed or dynamic value used to reduce its 
impact on adjacent channels. This is commonly done using 
complex numbers to account for polarization of the signal. 
Another similar method has been proposed, which takes 
computational time into consideration to produce a real time 
method called advanced subcarrier weighting [11]. Designed 
primarily for the transmission of signals rather than receiving 
them, the method reduces side lobe interference with signals 
in adjacent frequency channels. However, since it is designed 
for the transmission side of the data communications, it is 
not directly applicable to this application. 
D. Ultrasound beam summation 
Some of the more exotic concepts of dealing with side 
lobes have come from the medical industry. These 
application areas are typically centered upon medical 
imaging, where the frequency domain data is useful in 
detecting abnormalities or enhancing features of biological 
images. Methods of beamforming, again on the transmission 
side, have provided a rich research area for new methods and 
improvements. One interesting method, which could have 
mathematical equivalency in received signals, is interference 
cancellation. For instance, ultrasound beam summation 
employs pseudo-inverse foci with a second focus located a 
distance from the initial focus such that the constructive 
interference between the two signals cancels the side lobes 
[12]. Although such methods are complex and again centered 
on transmission, they may lead to interesting developments 
in received signal manipulation in the future. 
E. Other Fingerprinting Methods 
Many research approaches to wireless cybersecurity have 
centered on fingerprinting source devices as a form of 
authentication. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have 
been proposed to fingerprint radios though deep learning of 
certain inherent hardware features and responses [13][14]. 
Ongoing research has indicated, however, that wireless 
multipath channels introduce distortion that negatively 
affects the reliability of such methods [15].  
The new method of cybersecurity authentication with 
fingerprinting, which is the method under consideration in 
this paper, employs such distortion for fingerprinting rather 
than trying to eliminate it. This new method, however, is 
impacted somewhat negatively by side lobes, which are 
formed due to the discrete nature of the transformation into 
the frequency domain. A new approach is sought to remove 
the undesired features while not creating a burden on real 
time system computation time. 
III. 
THEORY 
In real time embedded system design for radio frequency 
applications, the primary criterion of concern is execution 
time. The time required to prepare and store data is a cost 
subtracted from the total time available to make decisions on 
actions that must be taken. Thus, the more exotic solutions, 
although they may produce better results, must give way to 
the simplest to allow time for the more critical decision-
making algorithm. 
In the case considered in this paper, execution time is 
constrained by the requirement to make a decision on the 
authentication of a received signal prior to the receipt of the 
next viable signal. A DFT transforms the signal to the 
frequency domain and further analysis of the dispersion leads 
to a correlation of the received signal with a known signal. 
As an example of available time to do this function, using 
WiFi 802.11n signals transmitted as beacons to search for 
other devices yields a duration for a signal of around 300 
microseconds.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
 
Fig. 1. Windowing data produces side lobes in the results of a DFT on 
sinusoidal data 
 
By restricting the execution time for data preparation and 
storage, more time is available for proper authentication. 
Thus, it is desired to find a way to eliminate unwanted data 
from the frequency domain data in a short amount of time. 
The shape of an ideal DFT resulting from a strong signal, 
for example one with a Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of 40 
dB, consists of a main lobe centered on the transmitted 
frequency and side lobes to each side with incrementally 
lower intensities, such as the one depicted in Figure 1 above. 
The task, therefore, is to identify and store only the main 
lobe in an embedded database designed for such signals. 
One may note that the ideal case is symmetrical. Often 
this fact is relied upon to store only half the amount of data, 
considering that it is mirrored around the center frequency. 
In the case presented here, however, the non-symmetry of 
actual frequency data in the main lobe is important to the 
cybersecurity application under consideration and, thus, the 
entire main lobe is to be saved. 
While many hardware and software solutions have been 
proposed for reducing side lobes in wireless signal DFTs, a 
simpler solution would be to trim the resulting DFT to 
include only the frequency bins of interest. This can also be 
referred to as cropping, although that term comes from 
image analysis with the data being removed being image 
data. Based on trimming as a proposed simplification applied 
to RF signals, the question then arises of whether or not it is 
feasible to identify the proper points at which the DFT 
should be trimmed. 
The feature of a DFT being discrete is inherent in the 
need to trim data. The transform assumes that a selected 
window for the DFT calculation is the exact width of one or 
more full cycles of the waveform of interest. However, in 
reality, the window often cuts a particular waveform short of 
a full cycle (or whole number multiple of a full cycle). The 
result is an introduction of side lobes in the transform, 
representing frequency components that are artifacts of the 
math rather than frequencies that actually exist in the signals 
of interest. This is referred to as spectral leakage. 
IV. 
SIGNAL PROCESSING 
To identify the main lobe with the least computational 
effort, one might consider using the maximum intensity of a 
DFT as an indication of a location near its center. From 
there, the edges can be sought and the width calculated. The 
main lobe data must then be trimmed to be placed into a 
database, along with like entries from other signals received. 
A. Step 1: Selecting the Main Lobe 
To begin, a point is identified with a high probability of 
being located as a frequency bin within the main lobe. That 
would be a point with a high intensity. Thus, a function 
invoked to find the maximum value in an array of floating 
point numbers would be appropriate. If the DFT output is an 
array, using a maximum value function may remove the 
dimension of the array of interest, replacing it with a scalar 
value. Look for a function argument, like ‘keepdims,’ in 
cases where it is desired that the resulting dimension remain 
consistent with the original dimensions. 
In practice, abnormalities exist in the DFTs measured in 
applications involving WiFi signals; abnormalities which 
will affect the selection of this point. These will be addressed 
in Section IV Laboratory Measurements, as well as in 
Section V Field Measurements. They will require altering 
this step. Until then, it is sufficient to say that the initial step 
is to identify a point of high intensity. 
B. Step 2: Finding the Edges 
Using a point with a high probability of residing in the 
main lobe as the starting point, it is now possible to examine 
lower, and then higher, frequency bins to find indications of 
the edges of the main lobe. In this portion of the process, low 
intensity is of more interest than high intensity. Finding the 
edges of the main lobe involves finding the points on either 
side of the point thought to be in the main lobe where the 
resulting value is first near zero; that is, near zero at the point 
closest to the maximum. 
Actual measurements are never as clean as the ideal 
example, however. The main lobe, in fact, is often sprinkled 
with many points that are near zero. In fact, “zero” can mean 
some value close to the noise floor of the signal. 
A moving-average acts as a low pass filter to smooth the 
normally jagged transform and provides a more stable value 
with which to compare some threshold value that is set near 
zero. A basic form of a moving average is the uniform 
moving average where the current frequency bin and the 
prior N-1 bins are summed and divided by N. This is 
equivalent to multiplying each frequency bin by 1/N and 
summing. 
Yet, a moving average is not necessary. A moving 
summation accomplishes the same task without requiring a 
division operation each time a signal is received, nor does it 
require handling the special case where there could be an 
undesirable division by zero. Using a summation only 
requires adjusting the threshold by the number of samples in 
the moving summation. 
 
 
Intensity 
normalized 
Frequency units 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 In the proposed process, where generalization is desired, 
the threshold is set as a multiple of the center of the first 
quartile of sorted and ordered frequency bin intensities. For 
example, when collecting 12-bit data at 20M samples per 
second, one might receive a signal for which the DFT covers 
the full bandwidth of the receiver. However, it might also be 
far less than the full bandwidth. In either case, the center of 
the first quartile of sorted intensities most often carries some 
value close to the noise floor. By adjusting the multiplication 
factor of this value, a threshold may be chosen to 
appropriately mark the points at which the main lobe 
approaches zero (or really the noise floor). 
This simple algorithm compares a moving summation 
incrementally moving away from the maximum, first in the 
lower frequencies, then in the higher frequencies. It 
increments until it reaches the limits of the data or falls 
below the threshold, at which point the bin in the summation 
window closest to the maximum is used to mark the low and 
high side of the main lobe; variable names fftlo and ffthi. 
The “fft” refers to the fundamental function, a Fast Fourier 
Transform [16]. 
C. Step 3: Matching the Database 
To enter the selection into a database, one must consider 
the size allotted for each entry. If the simple difference, ffthi-
fftlo, is either greater than or less than the entry size for the 
database, then the data must be manipulated to fit the 
database. In cases where the difference is less than the size 
allotment in the database, the DFT data is zero-padded on the 
side of the highest frequency bins. 
It is important to note here that future comparisons of the 
padded data should take into consideration that the padding 
is not reflective of there being no high frequency 
components in the stored signal, but rather that the width of 
the main lobe is smaller than the allotted space. Thus, the 
values of the fftlo and ffthi should also be stored so the data 
retrieved may be viewed in proper context. 
It is also important to note that padding the frequency 
domain data is not mathematically the same as padding the 
time domain data for a signal. In the case of the latter, 
resulting side lobes in a DFT can be accentuated as the 
window of data analyzed is artificially shortened. 
On the other hand, the DFT of the received signal may be 
larger than that of the stored data. If the high-to-low 
difference is greater than the allotted space in the database, 
then the data must be trimmed again. In performing this 
operation, the center line between the fftlo variable and the 
ffthi variable is used trim each the low and high ends of the 
available frequency bins such that the center remains the 
center of the trimmed data. This is done to preserve the most 
valuable portion of the data for later analysis or comparison. 
Thus, the allotted size is halved and points marked lower and 
higher by the length of each half are marked relative to the 
center line. This results in a main lobe that is of lesser width 
than the original. 
 
V. 
LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS 
Initially, a test was created to establish a baseline for 
future testing. In this case, the baseline would be defined as 
one with minimal multipath travel and a single, strong 
wireless signal to study. 
A. Setup 
An Ettus B210 Universal Software Radio Peripheral 
(USRP) is employed to receive two channels of 
synchronized data capture. This device features an Analog 
Devices two-channel 14-bit Analog-to-Digital Converter. 
Two RF Elements OARDSBX244 4 dBi Omni antennas are 
attached to the receive channels and placed in horizontal and 
vertical positions, with an angle of 90 degrees. A Netgear 
N600 wireless dual band router generates a periodic beacon 
broadcast on channel 10 (centered on 2.462GHz) to 
announce its presence to any listening devices. 
In an outdoor setting with no measurable WiFi signals, 
the router is placed 10m from the antennas of the receiver. A 
recording is made of the electromagnetic signal with settings 
of 20M samples per second at a gain of 20. 
The recording is used as input data to a pulse detection 
algorithm which extracts a single beacon in the form of a 
multidimensional array of complex numbers representing 
each sample pair for the horizontal and vertical inputs. That 
beacon is processed using Python’s library NumPy function 
fft.fftn() in an orthonormal mode, placing resulting vectors 
on a unit sphere. An FFT shift function is performed to place 
the frequency bins in order of lowest to highest along the x-
axis. 
B. Results 
The resulting DFT, shown in Figure 2, produces an 
interesting result. The center point is not the maximum 
value. In fact, the main lobe dips in intensity at the center. 
This attribute is consistent over many tests. Thus, the 
algorithm was modified in Step 1 “Selecting the Main Lobe” 
to find the two highest points and take the center point 
between them to better reflect a point near the center of the 
main lobe. With the center point selected, the moving sums 
increment first forward and then backward from it to find the 
points at which the intensity is below the selected threshold. 
 
 
Fig. 2. A Unitized DFT for an example WiFi signal shown across 
frequency bins centered on 2.462GHz marking main lobe 
Intensity 
normalized 
Frequency bins 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Fig. 3. A signal with lower SNR has a dip in the center approaching zero 
The results of the selection process are shown in the same 
figure as dashed vertical lines demarking the low side and 
high side of the main lobe. 
Moving the router farther away reduces the signal to 
noise ratio. The impact lessens the prominence of the main 
lobe making it slightly harder to identify. Nonetheless, the 
modification of using the two highest points continues to 
work. This is not obvious since the two highest points are 
now both to the left of center. But, since we are trying to 
identify a point with high probability of being in the main 
lobe, this point will suffice. One near the center would be 
more certain, but in this case, we are still well within the 
main lobe. The iteration to the higher frequencies will simply 
take longer than the iteration to the lower frequencies.  
Now, however, it may be seen that the dip in the center is 
approaching zero. This could cause the method to select the 
center as one of the edges of the main lobe.  
To compensate, the moving summations above and 
below the selected point begin on either side of a fixed 
margin around the center, in which we do nothing. Now, 
when incrementing to higher frequencies, the iterations will 
begin, not at the selected point, but at a fixed margin away 
from it, spanning the low center of the DFT. 
This is the second modification made to Step 1. Figure 3 
displays a signal with lower SNR and the resulting low and 
high points selected. Note in this image that a side lobe on 
the high frequency side of the main lobe was included in the 
selection erroneously. A minor adjustment lowering the 
multiplication factor on the threshold would resolve this. 
 
VI. 
FIELD MEASUREMENTS 
A. Setup 
A site was selected with an indoor space approximating 
an industrial setting. A barn home was used with cross 
beams, fixtures in the space and miscellaneous objects which 
would produce a rich multipath channel for the RF signals to 
traverse. A barn home is one that is shaped like a barn, 
featuring a very large living space that has a 12x18 meter 
floor space and 12 meters ceiling. A USRP was placed along 
one wall of the facility.  
The same router was placed at a point 9 meters in front of 
the receiving antennas and four Raspberry Pi 3B 
microcontrollers were placed on an arc 12 meters away from 
the receiving antennas and on positions relative to the plain 
of the two orthogonal antennas at angles of 60, 80, 100 and 
120 degrees. The Pi’s were programmed to connect with the 
router. Data was captured using the same parameters as the 
laboratory measurements. 
All electrical devices in the house were shut down and 
interference studies were conducted with electrical fans and a 
microwave. The tests which follow were shown to have no 
electrical interference and no stray transmitters. 
B. Results 
In this environment, the SNR of some of the signals was 
much lower than those of the previous tests. The shape of the 
DFTs were also found to vary. The relative signal strength of 
received signals was not always as strong as those in the 
laboratory measurements. Their shape may be even less 
predictable than the lowest laboratory measurements, as may 
be seen in Figure 4, depicting the DFT for a WiFi signal with 
low SNR. It is much more difficult to see the main lobe, 
which extends over what seem to be two lobes rather than 
one. 
 
 
Fig. 4. DFT with low SNR causes the main lobe to be harder to determine 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. When the SNR is low the dip in the center can be missing 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Margin 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Fig. 6. Even lower SNR lessens the definition of the main lobe 
 
 
Fig. 7. A DFT of a Bluetooth signal is narrow with sidelobes farther away 
from the main lobe (before correction) 
 
Fig. 8. A DFT of a Bluetooth signal centered on a different channel 
On occasion, the dip seen in the previous tests was not 
present, as may be seen in Figures 5 and 6. Nevertheless, the 
algorithm for identifying the main lobe worked as modified. 
A Bluetooth signal from one of the Pi’s was recorded and 
analyzed. This signal is much more narrow then the previous 
WiFi signals and thus, the modification to have a fixed 
margin around the center that is not part of the calculations, 
along with the width of the window for a moving sum, each 
failed to accurately mark the low and high sides of this main 
lobe, as may be seen in Figure 7.  
 
Fig.9. A DFT showing a WiFi signal captured from an adjacent channel 
 
 
Fig. 10. DFT of a Gaussian pulse has a high intensity artifact that must not 
be counted as a peak intensity 
 
Bluetooth signals use a channel-hopping protocol and, 
thus, may appear in several locations across a fixed 20MHz 
receiver bandwidth. Figure 8 is an example of one that is not 
centered on the same channel. 
In the particular cybersecurity application under 
consideration for use with this proposed process, the 
inclusion of data near zero causes problems in later analysis 
and, thus, is undesirable. As a result, narrow signals, like that 
depicted in Figures 7 and 8, are made exempt from these two 
interfering constraints. That is, the fixed margin to begin the 
sliding summation is not enforced and the window for the 
moving summation itself is removed, as seen in Figure 8. 
This is the third modification to Step 1 “Selecting the Main 
Lobe.” The binary parameter marking a narrow band signal 
is stored along with the fftlo and ffthi parameters. 
It should be noted that some signals may not be centered 
on the appropriate channel frequency, but may still be 
desirable to process. Such is a case depicted in Figure 9. 
Here, the signal is centered near the limit of the bandwidth of 
the receiver, which is approximately 20 MHz. The algorithm 
continues to perform appropriately in such cases with one 
boundary being selected as either zero or the maximum 
number of frequency bins, depending on which side of the 
desired channel it falls. 
Lastly, the DFTs of some WiFi signals were seen to 
contain one point away from the main lobe with a very high 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Intensity 
normalized 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Frequency bins 
Undesired upper 
bound requires 
modification 
Boundary 
selection 
solved 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

intensity. This typically occurred near an extreme of the 
receiver’s bandwidth, likely from a dominant frequency in 
the noise floor, or as an artifact of the transform calculations. 
In either event, the errant point should not be used in the 
selection of the main lobe, as it is not in the main lobe. 
Figure 10 is an example of a case where there is a single 
point with a very high intensity. This is not a signal, per se, 
but rather a pulse of Gaussian energy like one may see 
emitting from a radar. 
The fourth and final modification to Step 1, as a result, is 
to not use the first and second highest peaks, but instead use 
the second and third highest peaks to find a point with high 
certainty of being a part of the main lobe. Figure 8 depicts 
such a case, where the second and third peaks were used to 
find the boundaries of the main lobe efficiently. 
With these four modifications made, approximately three 
thousand signals were studied and marked with selection of 
the main lobe for storage and retrieval from an embedded 
database. Only three were improperly marked and all three 
were signals with SNR less than 3 dB. The markings on all 
three truncated the main lobe on one side of the center point. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Real time devices requiring use of an embedded database 
in RF signal applications must be efficient in terms of 
computing time. In cases where the frequency content is of 
particular interest, efficiency may be gained by carefully 
selecting only the main lobe resulting from discrete Fourier 
transforms and eliminating the side lobes and extraneous 
data on high and low sides. 
Selecting the main lobe, however, can be hindered by 
several common abnormalities seen in the transforms of 
wireless signals; abnormalities like a dip in the center of the 
main lobe, the dip nearing the noise floor, and a single 
frequency outside the lobe with a very high intensity. In 
addition, some signals may be narrow band, requiring 
alternate handling. 
Methods presented in this paper have been tested with a 
large number of varying cases and have shown to produce 
good results in selecting the proper main lobe information to 
offer efficient data storage and retrieval for further 
computation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author extends his thanks to Dr. Thomas G. Pratt of 
the University of Notre Dame for his encouragement and 
experience in the use of the experimental settings and 
measurement equipment and also to Jay Labhart, Chief 
Technology Officer for Endpoint Security, for his knowledge 
of field conditions and assistance in the actual tests. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. G. Pratt and R. D. Kossler, “Input-to-Output Instantaneous 
Poalrizaton 
Characterization,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Antennas and Propogation, Vol. 67, No. 3, pp. 1804-1818, 
March 2019. 
[2] R. P. Heller, T. G. Pratt, J. Loof and E. Jesse, “RF Biometric 
for Wireless Devices,” In: Arai K., Bhatia R., Kapoor S. (eds) 
Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference (FTC) 
2018. FTC 2018. Advances in Intelligent Systems and 
Computing, vol 881. Springer Nature Switzerland AG, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02683-7_65, October 2018. 
[3] J. Loof and T. G. Pratt, "Frequency-Hopped Signal Source 
Identification in Frequency-Selective Channels," IEEE 
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 55, 
Issue 6, pp. 3316-3329, December 2019. 
[4] J. Loof and T. G. Pratt, "Unsupervised Classification of 
Frequency-Hopped 
Signals 
in 
Frequency-Selective 
Channels," Resilience Week, Denver Colorado, Best 
Cybersecurity Technology Paper Award, pp. 108-113, IEEE 
Cat. No. CFP18B24-POD, ISBN 978-1-5386-6914-3, August 
2018. 
[5] R. B. Blackman, “Linear Data-Smoothing and Prediction in 
Theory and Practice,” January 1, 1965, Addison Wesley, 1st 
Edition, ISBN-10: 0201006103. 
[6] F. J. Harris, “On the use of Windows for Harmonic Analysis 
with the Discrete Fourier Transform,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE 66(1): 51-83 doi/10.1109/PROC.1978.10837, January 
1978. 
[7] J. Carnes, “Windowing High-Resolution ADC Data-PartI,” 
EETimes, Designlines, Frbruary 4, 2009 
[8] S. V. Moholkar, “BER Performance for FFT and Wavelet 
Based OFDM Systems over AWGN Channel,” International 
Journal of Research and Scientific Innovation, Vol II, Issue 
VIII, pp. 52-54, ISSN 2321-2705, August 2015. 
[9] A. N. Akansu and X. Lin, "A comparative performance 
evaluation of DMT (OFDM) and DWMT (DSBMT) based 
DSL communications systems for single and multitone 
interference," Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 
ICASSP '98 (Cat. No.98CH36181), Seattle, WA, USA, pp. 
3269-3272 vol.6, doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.1998.679562, 1998.  
[10] I. Cosovic, S. Brandes and M. Schnell, “Subcarrier 
Weighting-A Method for Sidelobe Suppression in OFDM 
Systems, IEEE Communications Letters 10(6); pp. 444-446, 
DOI: 10.1109/LCOMM 2006.1638610, June 2006. 
[11] A. Selim and L. Doyle, “Real-time sidelobe suppression for 
OFDM systems using advanced subcarrier weighting,” IEEE 
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, pp. 
4043-47. 10.1109/WCNC.2013.6555224, 2013. 
[12] A. Ilovitsh, T. Ilovitsh and K.W. Ferrara, “Multiplexed 
Ultrasound Beam Summation for Side Lobe Reduction,” 
Nature, 
Scientific 
Reports 
9, 
article 
13961, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50317-7, September 27 
2019. 
[13] K. Sankhe et al., “ORACLE: Optimized Radio clAssification 
through 
Convolutional 
neuraL 
nEtworks,” 
in 
IEEE 
INFOCOM 
2019-IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Communications. IEEE, pp. 370–378, 2019. 
[14] S. Riyaz, K. Sankhe, S. Ioannidis, and K. Chowdhury, “Deep 
Learning 
Convolutional 
Neural 
Networks 
for 
Radio 
Identification,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 
9, pp. 146–152, Sept 2018. 
[15] A. Al-Shawabka et al., "Exposing the Fingerprint: Dissecting 
the Impact of the Wireless Channel on Radio Fingerprinting," 
IEEE INFOCOM 2020 - IEEE Conference on Computer 
Communications, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 646-655, doi: 
10.1109/INFOCOM41043.2020.9155259, 2020. 
[16] M. T. Heidman, D. H. Burrus and C. S. Sidney, “Gauss and 
the History of the Fast Fourier Transform,” IEEE ASSP 
Magazine, Vol 1, Issue 4, pp. 14-21, October 1984. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

