A Low-Power Passive Mixer Receiver for Software Defined Radio (SDR) Applications 
Pierre Bousseaud, Emil Novakov and Jean-Michel Fournier 
Institut de Microélectronique, Electromagnétisme et Photonique (IMEP-LAHC), 
MINATEC – 3 parvis Louis Néel, B.P. 257, 38016 Grenoble, France 
e-mail: pierre.bousseaud@minatec.grenoble-inp.fr, novakov@minatec.grenoble-inp.fr, fournier@minatec.grenoble-inp.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract— Software Defined Radio (SDR) is a promising 
concept for the next generation of low-power portable wireless 
devices. Different communication standards can be processed 
just by changing the software in the transmitter. This 
approach allows great flexibility as well as hardware cost 
reduction. In this paper, we describe discrete-time passive 
mixer architecture for Radio Frequency (RF) direct sampling 
receivers. This architecture can achieve wideband quadrature 
demodulation and is suitable for SDR applications. The 
performances of the architecture are evaluated by simulation. 
Currently, we are working on the design of an Integrated 
Circuit (IC) that will implement a quadrature sampled I/Q 
receiver front-end. The IC is based on a 130nm CMOS 
technology. The receiver should be able to work in the 868MHz 
and 2.4GHz ISM bands. The expected power consumption is 
less than 2 mW. 
Keywords-Software defined radio; RF sampling; discrete-time 
mixer; linearity; QAM; I/Q; BER; noise figure; filtering; phase 
noise; blockers. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The pervasive wireless applications and the presence of 
multiple communication standards based on different 
modulations, with variable channel bandwidth and carrier 
frequencies have motivated the development of multi-band 
and multi-standard radio communication technologies like 
the Software Defined Radio (SDR). On the other hand the 
CMOS technology’s scaling allows now the fabrication of 
fully integrated radio transceiver chips able to work 
practically in any available frequency bands [1].  The final 
goal of the SDR is to receive a plurality of standards on just 
one single chip, whose functionalities can be updated by 
software only. The ideal SDR receiver hardware is 
composed of an antenna immediately followed by an 
Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC) followed by the digital 
signal processing unit. Nevertheless, sampling a 2.4 GHz 
Radio Frequency (RF) signal at 4.8 Gsample/sec and 12 bit 
amplitude resolution would consume too much power which 
makes such approaches clearly unrealistic for miniaturized 
battery powered devices. In a more practical approach the 
ADC can be located at the Intermediate Frequency (IF) 
output of a frequency mixer (down-converter) in a standard 
super heterodyne RF receiver. Another possible solution is 
to use direct RF sampling mixer to down convert the wanted 
RF frequency band around the DC component and to 
amplify and process the band-pass signal at low frequency.  
 
By using N paths sampling structures it is possible to 
sample the RF signal on N passive elements such as 
switched capacitors with both filtering and down-conversion 
at base-band [2]. This permits to greatly reduce the 
constraints for the ADC. Some receivers based on this 
principle have already been studied, implemented and tested 
by different research groups [3], [4], [5]. They show very 
interesting properties concerning the linearity and the power 
consumption. It is interesting to note that with such 
structures, very high Q pass-band filters can be realized at 
high frequency [4]. They easily replace RF SAW filters or 
LC structures which are bulky, costly and difficult to 
integrate. 
The goal of our project is to design, simulate, implement 
and evaluate passive four paths mixer architecture for direct 
RF sampled conversion. In this paper we present the 
receiver architecture as well as the simulation results of its 
performances. The sampled receiver is designed to work 
with Quadrature Amplitude Modulated (QAM) signals but 
can also work with Amplitude Modulated (AM), Frequency 
Modulated (FM) and Phase Modulated (FM) signals. The 
complete receiver front-end will be further fabricated in a 
130 nm CMOS RF technology. 
Section II presents the RF sampling mixer structure and 
its basic parameters. Section III presents Matlab simulations 
of the receiver [6].  Section IV defines the implementation 
characteristics of the receiver and final conclusions are 
drawn in Section V. This paper is an intermediate report of a 
“work in progress”. 
II. 
FOUR PATHS MIXER ARCHITECTURE 
A. Conventional  and 4- paths structure  
The conventional I/Q passive mixer structure is shown 
in Fig. 1. For a QAM modulated RF signal VRF(t) = 
Acos(ω0t+φ) where w0 and φ are respectively the carrier 
pulsation and phase. During the symbol period A and φ are 
constant. In the passive sampling mixer, I and Q are 
obtained on two different sample/hold circuits by separating 
their sampling instant by T0/4, where T0 is the signal’s 
period (T0 = 2π/ ω0). At the sampling time t0 = 0, I(t0) = 
Acos[φ]. At the sampling time t1 = t0 + T0/4, Q(t1) = Acos(φ 
+ π/2) = - Asin(φ). In this way it is possible to find the 
magnitude A and phase φ of the RF signal in an orthogonal 
basis I/Q created by the voltage values sampled at the 
moment t0 and t1 as follows: A = (I²+Q²)0.5 and φ = -
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

arctan(Q/I). Nevertheless, in such architecture due to the 
low conversion gain the noise figure is high, thus severely 
limiting the high frequency performances.  
 
 
 
It is possible to improve the two phases I/Q sampling 
mixer by sampling the RF signal at four different points. 
The four phases mixer operation is based on the 
relationships: Acos(φ + π) = - Acos(φ) and Asin(φ + π) = - 
Asin(φ). The structure of the mixer is shown in Fig. 2. Now, 
I and Q redundant information are obtained by sampling 
data I+ and I- during phases 0° and 180° at and data Q+ and 
Q- during phases 90° and 270° respectively. If we subtract 
both I+ and I- as well as Q+ and Q- we’ll have I = I+ - (I-) 
= 2Acos(φ) and Q = Q+ - (Q-) = 2Asin(φ). The power gain 
is improved by 6 dB and in the same time the Noise Factor 
(NF) is reduced by 3 dB for each I and Q paths. 
 
 
Figure 2. Passive four paths mixer (left) and clock scheme (right) 
 
Further improvement can be obtained by using a fully 
differential topology. In this case, as shown in Fig. 3, the 
differential RF signal is sampled on eight different paths and 
the corresponding values are stored in two capacitors. The 
differential RF signal can be generated by either a 
transformer or a single-to-differential buffer amplifier 
before the sampler. This system is able to work without 
Low Noise Amplifier (LNA). The gain stage (G) can be 
moved to the base band signals I and Q thus increasing the 
noise figure of the receiver. This sampling scheme has 
multiple advantages. It is possible to reduce significantly the 
even order harmonic terms created by the non-linearity in 
the transistor forming the switch. 
 
Figure 3. Differential sampling mixer and phase generator 
 
At the sampling moment two opposite switches are 
activated at the same time. This allows the compensation of 
the charge injection phenomenon in the switch which causes 
a distortion in the amplitude of the sampled RF signal. 
Finally, the error caused by the clock feedthrough is 
completely rejected [6]. Indeed this error signals appears as 
a common mode voltage on both top and bottom plate of the 
capacitor C. At least 20 dB of improvement can be done 
concerning the IIP2. 
B. Conversion Gain and Filtering 
When the received signal VRF and the sampling signal 
VLO in Fig. 2 have the same frequency, the difference of 
frequency seen by each capacitor C is null and their 
equivalent impedance is infinite. Each capacitor behaves as 
an open circuit. In this case the mixer detects the complex 
envelope of the modulated signal VRF without attenuation. If 
D is the duty cycle of VLO (D = Tφ / T0) the conversion gain 
(CG) of the sampler at the carrier frequency f0 is given by: 
 
      
)
sin (
c D
CG 
 
 
      (1) 
 
When the two signals VRF and VLO are with different 
frequencies each capacitor observes a periodic sliding of 
VRF. The equivalent impedance is now non infinite. C starts 
to conduct and provides some voltage attenuation. If we 
consider one branch of the mixer, a first order low-pass 
filter if formed by the antenna resistance Ra, the conducting 
switch resistance Ron and the capacitor C. By choosing a 
time constant τ = (Ra+ Ron)C higher than the period of the 
Q- 
Q+ 
t 
270° 
180° 
90° 
0° 
t 
t 
t 
T0 
T0 /4 
I- 
I+ 
VRF 
C 
C 
C 
C 
( f0 ) 
0° 
90° 
180° 
270° 
Sampling Signals:  VLO 
t0 
+VRF 
Q 
Q 
G 
G 
Q 
( f0 ) 
90° 180° 
0° 
C 
Q- 
Q+ 
I- 
I+ 
Phases Generator 
 
2f0 
C 
 
180° 
180° 
90° 
270° 
270° 
VRF 
-VRF 
0° 
0° 
90° 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
I 
270° 
50% duty cycle 
Sampling Signals VLO 
I 
Q 
VRF 
( f0 ) 
t 
0° 
t 
90° 
=T0 /4 
T0 
0° 
90° 
C 
C 
Sampling Signals:  VLO 
t0 
Tφ 
Tφ 
t1 
Figure 1. Classical I/Q sampling mixer 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

modulated signal we can filter the input signal VRF. If fIF = f0 
- fLO is the difference of the frequency between the radio 
signal and the sampling signal and fC = 1/(2π τ) is the cut-off 
frequency of the low-pass filter, the transfer function of the 
sampler at the base-band is given by [3]: 
 
C
IF
IF
Df
f
j
c D
f
H


1
sin ( )
)
(
    
 
      (2) 
The equivalent bandwidth B of the sampler is: 
C
R
R
D
B
on
a
)
2 (

 
 
 
      (3) 
The system is equivalent to a frequency converter and a 
band-pass filter at the same time. By changing the VLO 
frequency it is possible to down convert VRF and by 
choosing the duty-cycle it is possible to control the 
bandwidth of the converted signal. 
C. Harmonics rejection 
The sampling receiver architecture is based on the N 
paths filtering concept [2]. At the base band the sampler 
down converts the signals VRF with harmonic frequencies 
multiple of fLO. By combining signals from the different 
paths some harmonics can be suppressed. Using a N paths 
mixer, only the harmonics of the form (Ni+1)fFLO remain 
(i=±1, ±2, ±3 …). For the four path mixer in Fig. 3 (N=4) 
the harmonics (-5, -4, -2, -1, 2, 3, 4, 7 …)fLO are rejected.  
D. Noise 
In the mixer there are two main noise sources: the 
thermal noise of the antenna and the thermal noise of the 
switch resistance Ron when the switch it turned on. The major 
contributor to the noise is the resistance of the switch. That’s 
why this resistance must be as low as possible. That imposes 
the use of larger transistors with higher Wide to Length 
(W/L) gate ratio. This also increases the parasitic capacitor 
between the gate and the source, which leads to degradation 
of the linearity due to more charge injection phenomenon 
[5]. That’s why a trade-off must be found between linearity, 
noise factor and sizing of transistors realizing the switches. 
The Noise Figure (NF) of the system is given by [4]:  
                
) 8
1(
2

a
on
R
R
NF


    
      (4) 
The best NF is obtained when Ron is null. In this case NF 
= 0.9 dB.  With the four paths architecture, very low-noise 
figure can be achieved. 
III. 
MATLAB SIMULATION RESULTS 
A. System level architecture 
Using the Matlab Simulink software package [7], we 
have simulated the four phase down sampling mixer 
represented in Fig. 3. The simulation takes into account the 
phase noise of the sampling signal VLO, the switch thermal 
noise and the presence of radio interferences and blockers at 
the mixer input. The radio frequency signal VRF parameters 
have been chosen as follow: carrier frequency f0 = 2.4 GHz, 
16-QAM modulation and 9MHz RF bandwidth. The cut-off 
frequency is fC = 20 MHz and the duty-cycle is D = 0.25. 
The sampling signals VLO are generated from a 4.8 GHz 
external signal. 
B. Ideal transmitted signal 
Fig. 4 shows the received signal constellation for an 
ideally 16-QAM modulated signal without any source of 
perturbation added. The rotation of the constellation is due 
to the delay produced by the time constant τ of the receiver. 
This problem is not harmful and can be compensated by 
some calibration methods. 
                 
 
 
Figure 4. Ideal received constellation at the sampler output 
 
C. Phase noise 
The presence of phase noise in the sampling signal VLO 
is a very important problem because it can degrade SNR at 
the output of the receiver and makes harder to detect the 
correct symbols. Simulations were performed with a phase 
noise of -102dBc@1MHz (1ps jitter). This is the maximum 
noise tolerated by the WiFi system. Fig. 5 shows the 
received constellation. Phase noise introduces some 
variations in the phase of received symbols which span an 
arc around its ideal value. Nevertheless the distortion is 
acceptable and received symbols still can be detected. 
 
 
Figure 5. Received constellation with 1ps jitter@2.4GHz 
In-phase Amplitude 
Quadrature Amplitude 
 
 
 
In-phase Amplitude 
Quadrature Amplitude 
 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
D. Influence of the thermal noise 
Fig. 6 shows the effect of the receiver’s thermal noise 
generated by the antenna and the switch resistances. By 
taking Ra = 50 Ώ and Ron = 100 Ώ, NF is about 5.68 dB for 
20 MHz bandwidth. The noise power at the switch output is 
-95.3 dBm. Here we assume 10 dB of SNR at the output, 
which is 10 dB lower than the expected one for a correct 16-
QAM demodulation. In Fig. 6 we can observe clouds of 
symbol randomly distributed around the ideal one.  
 
 
Figure 6. Received constellation with input AWG noise 
 
E. 
Influence of interferers 
Selectivity is one of fundamental criteria for a receiver and 
determines how much strong power blockers it is able to 
receive without deteriorating the Bit Error Rate (BER). Here 
we placed a sinusoidal interferer at a distance of 50 MHz 
from the modulated signal. The interference signal power is 
10 dB higher than the power of the modulated signal. In Fig. 
7 we observe symbols distributed on a circle around the 
ideal symbol position. This phenomenon is the consequence 
of AM to PM modulation in QAM systems. It shows the 
limits of the mixer for very close interferers in terms of 
filtering.  
 
 
Figure 7. Received constellation with a 10dBm interferer@50MHz 
 
That’s why some passive filtering needs to be made at the 
antenna level. Some digital filtering can also be done on the 
down converted signal. 
IV. 
AIM OF THE WORK 
The main objective of this work is to design, realize, test 
and evaluate the performances of a four paths sampling 
mixer implemented in a 130 nm CMOS technology.  The 
Integrated Circuit (IC), based on the structure represented on 
Fig. 3, includes the mixer (switches and capacitors) the four 
phase generator, and the low frequency amplifiers (G). The 
mixer is designed to work in the ISM frequency band of 868 
MHz and 2.4 GHz with special care to the low power 
consumption. The design target IC power consumption of 
less than 2 mW. The finality is to demonstrate the possibility 
to receive different communication standards with a simple 
structure with low power consumption, high linearity and 
low noise figure. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The present article describes low complexity four paths 
differential sampling mixer architecture. The passive mixer 
has the property to act also as a high Q pass-band filter. The 
mixer is flexible in frequency and achieves good linearity. It 
consumes low dynamic power, has low noise figure and is 
easy to integrate on silicon. It is a serious candidate for 
future SDR receivers and cognitive radio applications. Some 
Matlab simulation results are presented in the paper. A 130 
nm CMOS integrated circuit implementing the mixer and the 
phase generator is under development. It is dedicated to be 
used in the 868 MHz and 2.4 GHz ISM frequency bands. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abidi, “RF CMOS Comes of Age”, IEEE Journal of Solid-
State Circuits, Vol. 39, No. 4, April 2004. 
[2] L.E. Franks and J.W. Sandberg, “An alternative approach to 
the realization of network transfer functions : the N paths 
filter”, The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 39, pp. 1321- 
1350, September 1960. 
[3] M. Soer, E. Klumperink, Z. Ru, F. van Vliet and B. Nauta, “A 
0.2-to-2.0GHz 65nm CMOS Receiver without LNA achieving 
>11dBm IIP3 and <6.5 dB NF”, In: IEEE International Solid-
State Circuits Conference, ISSCC, San Francisco, U.S.A., 8-
12 February 2009. 
[4] C. Andrews and A. Molnar, “Implications of Passive Mixer 
Transparency for Impedance Matching and Noise Figure in 
Passive Mixer-First Receivers”, IEEE Transactions on 
Circuits and Systems-I: Regular papers, Vol. 57, No. 12, 
December 2010. 
[5] "Discrete-Time 
Mixing 
Receiver 
Architecture 
for 
RF-Sampling Software-Defined Radio", IEEE Journal of 
Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 45, No. 9, September 2010. 
[6] G. Wegmann et al. , “Charge injection in analog MOS 
switches”, IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-22, 
No. 6, December 1987 
[7] Matlab, “The Wath Works”, version 7.1.11, August 2010
 
Quadrature Amplitude 
In-phase Amplitude 
 
 
Quadrature Amplitude 
In-phase Amplitude 
 
 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

