Unmanned Aerial Vehicles as Assisting Tools in Dismounted Company Attack 
 
Major Tapio Saarelainen, PhD, IARIA Fellow 
Army Academy 
Army Research and Development Division 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of 
how to utilize swarms of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in 
performing a dismounted company attack. UAVs are used in 
the process of data gathering and as tools to increase overall 
Situational Awareness (SA). A company represents a basic 
military unit performing time-critical tasks whose completion 
is mandatory for operational survival. The discussed idea-stage 
solution relies on using UAVs as tools of military commanders 
to act as data collectors, hub-stations and tools to gather data 
from the areas of interest. Since the tempo of operations at 
tactical level (battalion and below) has increased, the amount 
and type of data gathered are crucial in terms of operational 
success. The need for timely and accurate data from a 
designated area is necessary for improved decision making 
process, which is dependable on Situational Awareness and 
Common Operational Picture (COP). Once the critical data 
have been gathered and analyzed, UAVs act as versatile 
assisting tools in military operations in the roles of collecting 
and forwarding data to support processes of control and 
command. The main contribution of this paper is to identify 
the possibilities and the process of how to improve the overall 
performance of military troops by utilizing UAVs as assisting 
tools in gathering real-time data required for decision making. 
Keywords-Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), dismounted 
company attack, real-time data, military decision making process. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Militaries all over the world continue developing 
methods for saving the lives of own troops. The reason for 
this is the downsizing process of armies in western countries. 
Battlespace is the environment where military operations are 
executed. The number of soldiers in combat units decreases, 
and simultaneously the number of personnel to take care of 
the logistics and maintenance issues increases as the 
maintenance of machinery utilized in the battlespace asks for 
ever increasing resources. The overall aim of militaries 
continues to be the sustained capability to improve 
operational performance despite the downsizing and 
minimized number of soldiers in combat. The key for this is 
in attempting to increase SA. This asks for the use of UAVs 
to produce the required data for analyzing purposes. 
Creating a simulation to model a UAV assisted operation 
is at present unfortunately not feasible on the grounds that 
neither funding nor facilities are available. To measure the 
utilization of UAVs in a dismounted company attack would 
require real functioning swarms of UAVs. No funding is 
available for this at the moment. 
A company attack, typically a dismounted company 
attack, is a demanding military operation, which requires 
constant real-time data to allow executing all the phases of 
an operation to achieve the set goal. It comprises several 
phases of action, the first of which is reconnaissance. An 
attacking unit must find out the composition and location of 
the opposite entity before the attack can be executed. Once 
the reconnaissance data have been gathered, the planning 
sequence of the operation begins by implementing the 
process of Military Decision Making Process (MDMP). In 
this process, it is possible to benefit from automated assisting 
tools. When the MDMP has been carried out, it results in 
different types of Courses of Action (COAs). These COAs 
represent different alternatives to military commanders on 
how to organize the attack. Once the optimal COA has been 
chosen, the maneuvre named dismounted company attack 
can be ignited. A Dismounted Company Attack is composed 
of the phases outlined in the following Figure 1: Assembly 
area, dismount line, line of departure, engagement, combat 
and the objective. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dismounted Company Attack as a process [1.] 
As an example of examining COAs, Figure 2 depicts two 
different types of COAs in the battlespace. In the first COA, 
the objective is to stop an armored enemy by deploying a 
flanking movement, whereas in the second COA, the 
objective is to destroy an enemy command post by direct 
engagement. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Different types of Courses of Actions. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

The utilization of UAVs can be seen as having a central 
role when real-time data are required for rapid decision 
making. UAVs can be seen as a resource for military 
commanders in that they offer the advantage of surprise in an 
attack by producing the real-time data needed for decision 
making. If a commander fails in surprising the enemy, he or 
she loses the possibility to take the initiative in the operation. 
The ability to take and maintain the initiative is usually a 
must in a successful military operation, especially in a 
dismounted company attack. When real-time data are 
available, an improved decision making process and its 
outcome become possible. 
The utilization of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles is necessary 
to get the correct information from enemy space as rapidly as 
possible in the hectic tempo of operations, save soldiers’ 
lives and support the morale of troops performing the 
maneuvres in an operational area. Furthermore, the use of 
unmanned machines can be seen as part of optimizing the 
existing resources of military units as machines continue 
performing fearlessly. 
When militarily utilized, UAVs can be used for varying 
tasks: performing terrain reconnaissance in the area of 
objective, performing reconnaissance of the use of Nuclear, 
Biological 
and 
Chemical 
substances, 
maintaining 
reconnaissance engagement by providing data on enemy 
movements, and monitoring the actions of enemy troops 
(direction and speed of movement, location, size, formation, 
action). UAVs can also be utilized in the targeting process in 
that UAVs can be sent airborne to the designated areas for 
the reconnaissance and targeting of the potential enemy 
targets. UAVs can act as relay stations for sustaining the 
constant capability to communicate and control the troops 
and machines in the hostile area.  
Collected data from the designated areas is utilizable in 
the MDMP. This process is linked to gaining SA and 
choosing between different COAs. These data can be 
collected more safely, if an appropriate number of UAVs of 
the necessary type are available for these operations. When 
UAVs are used aside the soldiers, to complement the data 
gathering, it is optimal to combine the capabilities of soldiers 
and machines. Machines can be sent out to the most 
dangerous locations while soldiers remain in charge of the 
less lethal task, if ever possible in a battlespace. 
The use of machines gives an advantage for 
commanders. First, UAVs can be sent to the areas of interest, 
days ahead, if required. UAVs can be shut down or 
reactivated via electrical signals when necessary. This gives 
commanders the advantage to transport the UAVs as 
reconnaissance resources to the designated areas well in 
advance and at the chosen moment. When UAVs have been 
flown to the area and shut down, they will not consume any 
energy, the saved energy can be used at a chosen moment 
and in the wanted operation, which supports the own battle 
plan and own objectives. Commanders can plan these actions 
well in advance and have UAVs transported to the areas 
when appropriate and safe. UAVs can be ready and standing 
by well in advance, in a chosen area, with the chosen sensors 
embedded in the UAV platform.  
To summarize: commanders can benefit from the use of 
push and pull factors. Commanders can push the UAVs to 
the optimal area of battlespace at a chosen moment. The 
optimized location of UAVs guarantee the improved 
performance in own oncoming military maneuvers. The pull 
factor means pulling the data from the designated areas at a 
chosen moment. These data are pulled to increase the 
performance of own operations in analyzing the collected 
data. The collected data are raw material for defining SA and 
COP. The accrued data are utilized in the MDMP and in the 
process of choosing between different COAs. 
Communication is critical in the execution process of 
command and control. The lack of communication results in 
an ineffective military operation. When the possibilities 
offered by the Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN) are 
taken into active use together with using One Time Pads 
(OTPs), two communication goals become achievable: the 
covert network and security in messaging. This is discussed 
more in Section V.  
When machines, such as UAVs, are utilized, Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA) becomes applicable. In 
digitized battlespace and in digitized operational planning, 
SOA is utilizable in the allocation processes of own existing 
resources and optimizing the use of troops in correct time 
and in the correct operational area. SOA is also useful in 
offering assistance in the overall planning process. SOA can 
be used in optimizing the timing of the different actions, also 
while the dismounted company attack is in progress, and in 
automating the MDMP. By automating the MDMP and 
using UAVs, commanders can save time, resources and lives 
as well as achieve the set objective.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
concentrates on the related work, Section III discusses 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, and Section IV concentrates on 
the essence of communication. Section V deals with 
Wireless Polling Sensor Networks and the use of One Time 
Pads, Section VI deals with Military Decision Making 
Process, and Section VII focuses on the Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture. Section VIII 
discusses the significance of sensors, and Section IX looks at 
SOA in relation to MDMP and reorganizing the chain of 
command in troops. Section X comprises discussion, Section 
XI concludes with the results, and Section XII addresses the 
requirements for further studies. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several researchers have been studying the use of UAVs 
in accruing data to support SA, COP and MDMP by 
increasing the performance of different types of networks. 
Moreover, the studies listed here have concentrated on 
increasing the speed, safety and capability to communicate in 
an improved manner.  
As demonstrated in [2], ad-hoc networks can create a 
UAV access net ensuring communication among mobile or 
stationary users. These ad-hoc networks support Blue Force 
Tracking, as indicated in [3]. When UAVs are equipped with 
Free Space Optics (FSO) communication links, operations 
can be executed by avoiding to become sensed by means of 
electrical reconnaissance detection, as concluded in [4]. FSO 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

represents an optical communication technology that uses 
light propagating in free space to transmit data from point-to-
point (and multipoint) by using low-powered infrared lasers, 
which can also be used for localization purposes, if range 
and orientation information is available FSO-technology 
offers high-speed, up to 10 Gb, reliable and cost-effective 
connectivity for heterogeneous wireless services provision in 
both urban and rural deployments when Dense Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (DWMD) is utilized in Radio-on-FSO 
(RoFSO) system.  
In vision-based tracking, pan-tilt gimbaled cameras using 
Commercial off-the shelf (COTS) components can be used 
as well as calculation algorithms and advanced controlling 
systems for integrated control of a UAV and an onboard 
gimbaled camera, see [5]. Along with the availability of both 
low-cost and highly capable COTS-based UAVs and 
Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) and communications 
equipment, it is reasonable to apply quick and inexpensive 
means for surveillance, tracking and location purposes, as 
discussed in [6]. UAVs of varying types and sizes can be 
used in aerial surveillance and ground target tracking, see 
[7]. To boost the performance of a single UAV, swarms of 
small UAVs can rely on airborne MANETs, as indicated in 
[2]. Transmit antennas are significant in the process of 
operating UAVs, as indicated in [8]. When swarms of UAVs 
are utilized for navigation, localization and target tracking, 
information synchronization is important, as discussed in [9]. 
In present battlespace miniature UAVs are becoming 
increasingly significant among surveillance applications, as 
shown in [10]. Remotely controlled UAVs can act as an 
assisting tool in tracking and monitoring, as discussed in [5]. 
Remotely controlled UAVs can enhance SA, Blue Force 
Tracking (BFT), thereby enforcing the probability of success 
in missions, even when operating beyond line-of-sight, see 
[11]. The means for exploiting UAVs and UGVs in the 
processes of data collection and the distribution of near real-
time COP to be implemented in Shared SA are discussed in 
[12]. Battle Management Language (BML) can be seen as a 
common language enabler between machines and interfaces 
along with almost ubiquitous swarms of UAVs [9.]. For 
example, networks utilizing COTS components mounted on 
of UAVs add survivability and remove the need for a line-of-
sight connection, as described in [6.]. 
This present paper examines the topic from a different 
angle by focusing on how to facilitate a dismounted 
company attack with the use of UAVs. This means aiming at 
optimizing the use of existing resources and automating the 
attack to the extent feasible. The objective is to contribute to 
the overall goal of increasing safety in military operations by 
means of improved use of resources resulting in decreasing 
numbers of casualties as well as increasing the tempo of own 
military operations. 
III. 
UNMANNED AERIALVEHICLES 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles utilized in a dismounted 
company attack can be autonomous or guided platforms built 
with COTS material ensuring the relatively inexpensive price 
tags on the UAVs. The main function of UAVs is to produce 
real-time data for commanders for decision making 
purposes. The use of swarms of UAVs ensures the gathering 
of data behind the visual horizon. Distances between 
command link and the swarms of UAVs are typically few 
kilometers. Typically, if a UAV has been identified by the 
actions of an adversary, the particular UAV ends up 
becoming annihilated. Therefore UAVs have to be built to be 
disposable elements. Once the UAVs are used as swarms, the 
combat survivability of the system can be increased. 
This paper examines only UAVs because of their 
versatility compared to the other Unmanned Vehicles (UVs), 
such as Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs). When a small 
tactical level military unit, such as a company, is performing 
a complicated maneuver, a dismounted company attack, the 
UAVs represent the only reasonable type of UVs to be 
utilized. UAVs are capable of monitoring the designated 
target areas and transmitting real-time data to the base-
station simultaneously when monitoring the area. See Figure 
3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  UAVs and the data transmission. 
Typically, when flight times are short, less than an hour, 
engines and sensors embedded into UAVs can be powered 
by liquid fuel batteries to ensure adequate level of energy. 
Liquid Polymer (LiPo) batteries are utilizable for their 
capacity. Electrical surveillance components, guidance 
systems, and command systems are depend on adequate 
electricity level.  
Typically, the distance between a communication link 
and a swarm of UAVs is few kilometers, and therefore 2,4 
GHz 
Ultra-Wideband 
Network 
system 
between 
the 
communication link and the base station is applicable for 
these distances. The typical speed of swarms of UAVs is tens 
of kilometers per hour. This is a chosen speed to balance the 
energy consumption and the range of transmission power 
and movement. 
UAVs are most versatile with their capability for quick 
deployment. UAVs tend to be miniature-sized airplanes, 
drones and helicopters, weighing few kilograms. The range 
of these vehicles can vary from few hundred meters to few 
kilometers as can their mass and size. The same applies to 
the payload. The payload can be measured from tens of 
grams to few hundred grams depending on the use and 
measurements of UAVs.  
The typical payload of UAVs can comprise varying 
sensors, such as: acoustic-, seismic-, magnetic-, visible 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

image-, shortwave infrared (SWIR)-, thermal-, infrared-, 
low-light television (LLTV)-, and sensors for laser tracking 
and spotting, and for facial recognition. These sensor 
packages can be also deployed into the area of interest at a 
desired moment. If the area of interest is known well in 
advance, a UAV and the sensor package can be flown into 
the perimeter in advance and been dropped in the chosen 
area. In addition, a UAV can be guided close to the area of 
interest. The UAV can then be parked, for example, on 
rooftops and cliffs to wait for the command to start the 
reconnoitering mission. This saves time and positions the 
UAV in nearby perimeters of the desired area. The UAVs 
remain hidden and hard to detect, and when detected, it is too 
late anyway. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION 
Communication between different troops and inside the 
company remains vital from the perspective of a successful 
military operation. The sustained capability to communicate 
between troops (soldiers) and machines (UAVs) must be 
maintained throughout a military operation. Without 
communication there is neither command nor control 
between the entities. Communication can be described as 
comprising three layers. These layers are sensor-layer, 
C4I2SR –layer and shooters –layer. The layers are connected 
with the existing communication networks. Different layers 
are depicted in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Communication network from sensor to shooter. 
The depicted layers communicate and forward data via 
UAV 
–radios, 
which 
can 
utilize 
the 
output 
of 
GPS/GLONASS receivers for automatic position reporting. 
When Software Defined Radios (SDRs) are embedded 
onboard UAVs, typical SDRs’ features can be included into 
transmission protocols. These include: Multiband 30 – 512 
MHz, multimode, multi-mission, software programmable 
architecture, Low Probability of Detection (LPD) and Low 
Probability of Identification (LPI), simultaneous voice and 
data, near-real time data transfer from sensor to decision 
maker and onwards to the shooter applications. Lightweight 
UAV 
–implemented 
radios 
offer 
low 
consumption 
transceivers operating in the frequency of 2.4 GHz Industrial, 
Scientific and Medical (ISM) band. The use of this 
frequency offers very low Radio Frequency (RF) signature 
modulation scheme based on spread spectrum technology 
(DSSS) and provides a robust, reliable and low probability of 
detection time division multiple access (TDMA) waveform. 
Radios typically feature advanced encryption standard (AES) 
encryption providing a very high security level on the 
transferred audio and data systems, while security keys can 
be downloadable. UAV -radios can provide several tactical 
communication services: full-duplex voice conferencing, 
GPS reporting, e-mail, chat, file transfer, and real-time video 
streaming. 
When properly adopted into active use, UAVs can be 
seen as flying hubs or flying relay-stations, tools of 
communication. 
When 
UAVs 
are 
used 
to 
secure 
communication, as depicted in Figure 4, the throughput of 
communication can be maximized. Furthermore, the swarms 
of UAVs end up creating an own data communication 
system, as depicted in Figure 5. This ensures that the data 
transmission distances between UAVs remain short and 
become operationally secure. This aids in meeting the 
requirements of Low-Probability of Detection (LPD) and 
Low-Probability of Identification (LPI). The described 
delicate system introduced is a new one and based on ideas 
that can be executed by utilizing existing COTS- technology 
[13]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  A data exchange process inside the swarm of UAVs. 
Figure 5 describes the idea of using UAVs as swarms. 
The number of UAVs used in each scenario varies depending 
on the commanded mission and its speed and other set 
requirements. 
V. 
WIRELESS POLLING SENSOR NETWORKS 
A battlespace tends to be embedded with different types 
of sensors found from the soil, airborne or attached into 
various types of manned and unmanned vehicles. The 
utilization of Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN) 
together with OTPs can be seen as one possible solution for 
communication system between sensors and UAVs, as 
indicated in [14]. WPSN can be viewed one possible solution 
when gathering data from different sensors and sensor 
networks. When a swarm of UAVs are utilized in forming an 
ad-hoc network and polling a large number of fixed sensor 
nodes, a secure network system can be created. The WPSN 
system is more robust in the military environment than 
traditional Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). Although 
WSNs have been used for a long time, they demonstrate 
particular disadvantages. These include the fact that multi-
hop transmission fails when nodes are destroyed in military 
environments, battery lifetime creates limitations, and 
security challenges remain unsolved. A WPSN has 
advantages in all of these areas compared to other proposed 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

solutions. WPSN comprises a small mobile ad-hoc network 
of UAVs and a high number of fixed ground-based sensors, 
which are periodically polled by the UAVs. 
The advantages concerning WPSN and OTP include that 
in the WPSN solution the fixed sensor nodes remain 
concealed, yet active, because the sensor nodes of WPSN do 
not communicate with each other but only respond to polling 
by the mobile nodes. The WPSN node communicates with a 
UAV through encrypted messages. Thereby, WPSN 
responds only after a UAV has submitted a polling request 
with a specific code. The routes of UVs can be fed into the 
systems early enough to gain the needed information from 
the designated areas [14]. 
When speaking about a battlespace and actions taking 
place in this hostile environment, it is mandatory that some 
of the UAVs be shot down or destroyed by other means of 
contemporary warfare. This possibility must be recognized 
prior to engagement. UAVs must be designed so that once 
malfunctioning, they will get automatically destroyed 
(software and hardware) to become instantly useless for the 
adversary. Yet, this destruction of one UAV does not 
jeopardize the concept of sustained secure communication, 
for the network composed by remaining UAVs will reroute 
itself automatically. 
VI. 
MILITARY DECISION MAKING PROCESS 
In military operations performed at tactical level, i.e., 
battalion and below, the significance of tempo and timing 
becomes critical. In the MDMP all the raw data collected by 
UAVs have to be analyzed and taken into account as they are 
directly connected with targeting systems, weapon selection 
processes, COP, SA and Control, Command, Computers, 
Communication, Information, Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance (C4I2SR ). 
Here, automation and mathematics can be seen as 
assisting tools in the process of making rapid and reliable 
decisions. When mathematical methodology is implemented, 
measuring the additive value model is the simplest and most 
commonly used mathematical model in multiple objective 
decision analysis. As described in [15], the additive value 
model is given by the equation: 

 
 



n
i
ij
i i
j
wv x
x
v
1


where 
 
jx
v
  is the total value of alternative j,  
i 1
 to n are the value measures specified in the 
qualitative value model, 
ij
x  is alternative j’s score (raw data) on value measure i, 
 
vi xij
 is the single-dimensional value of alternative j on 
value measure i, 
and 
i
w  is the swing weight of value measure i. 
 
Equation (1) is the simplest and most commonly used 
mathematical model in multiple objective decision analysis. 
Obviously, mathematics alone cannot solve the dilemma 
of making the correct operational decision quickly in a 
chaotic combat setting. When a decision is made between 
different COAs, mathematics and probability prognosis can 
only be seen as assisting tools. The human commander is the 
only one who is responsible for sensible and applicable 
decision which can be converted into commands to be issued 
and executed in an operation.  
VII. SITUATIONAL AWARENESS AND COMMON 
OPERATIONAL PICTURE 
The term Situational Awareness has been given an apt 
definition in the Army Field Manual 1-02. SA can be 
understood as knowledge and understanding of the current 
situation, which promotes timely, relevant and accurate 
assessment of friendly, competitive and other operations 
within the battlespace in order to facilitate decision making. 
SA, furthermore, equals an informational perspective and 
skill that fosters an ability to determine quickly the context 
and relevance of events that is unfolding. The term SA 
comprises three levels: 1) perception, 2) comprehension and 
3) projection. [16]. SA, or, the lack of it, remains critical in 
performing military operations successfully. The means to 
increase SA can and must be fostered and developed, since 
the loss or deterioration of SA results in inaccuracies, human 
errors, and eventual casualties and fratricide. The military 
operation in progress usually fails because of poor level of 
SA. 
Situational Awareness has a strong relation to COP. COP 
represents an overall understanding of the prevailing 
situation in the battlespace. COP can be displayed on the 
screen of a computer or a digital device, and by using 
markers and traditional maps. COP features elements, such 
as individuals of friendly forces, neutral entities and the 
adversary, presented by symbols of various types. 
To complete the list of phenomena affecting the MDMP, 
C4I2SR needs to be taken into account. UAVs are utilized to 
assists the MDMP performed in C4I2SR environment. When 
combined together as swarms, UAVs form tools for accruing 
data, forwarding and analyzing these data into the form of 
information to create COP and increase SA. 
To sum up, all these listed elements are linked to the 
MDMP. The decisions made as part of the MDMP can also 
be seen as tools in targeting and weapon selection processes. 
Figure 6 explains the relations and functions inside MDMP 
when the use case is related to targeting and weapon 
selection systems. In the MDMP the end-come is the optimal 
use of weapon systems to avoid collateral damage and 
fratricide. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Figure 6.  Decision making system in targeting and weapon systems. 
VIII. SENSORS 
In order to achieve the set objective in a given military 
setting, it makes sense to utilize maximally the data produced 
by various types of sensors when accruing data from hostile 
environments. In some cases, especially when the weather 
conditions are challenging, for example, the wind speed 
exceeds 10 metres per second, the UAVs cannot be used or 
they are too slow and there has to be an alternative 
possibility to deploy sensors for accruing real-time data. 
Some of these sensors can be deployed to the area of interest 
with the assistance of artillery fire produced by mortars or 
cannons. Rapidly deployable airborne sensors represent 
relatively inexpensive and versatile tools for low-level 
battalion and company operations. As indicated in [17], light 
sensor munition can be deployed behind enemy lines. An 
example of sensors’ deployment, when UAVs are not 
applicable, is Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs). SEMs can 
be manufactured of composites surfaced with materials 
capable of absorbing radar beams, making the SEM less 
visible in enemy counter-artillery radars. In any military 
operation, airborne sensors are important for missions, such 
as force protection, perimeter control and intelligence 
utilization, as discussed in [18]. Transmitting the accrued 
data to prevent cases of fratricide and to ensure success in 
operations presupposes optimal communications. WiMAX 
transmission offers applicable possibilities in forwarding 
collected data. The distances in the transmission process are 
relatively short, ranging from 1 kilometre to few kilometres 
in conditions of clear Line-Of-Sight.  
The sensor package inside SEMs (Sensor Elements, SE) 
is made of COTS-products comprising sensors capable of 
sensing most of the phenomena occurring in the 
electromagnetic spectrum. Overall, COTS-products are 
relatively inexpensive and reliable in terms of function, as 
explained in [19]. Sensor Elements can contain the same 
sensors as UAVs. The command post has the capability for 
the data fusion of all the accrued sensor information.  
Once an SE is airborne, it immediately starts to transmit 
the gathered data to friendly troops either directly or, if the 
transmission distance exceeds the capability of the 
transmission unit, the SE transmits the data to another 
airborne device, which acts as a relay station in relation to 
own troops. The SE communicates with the receiver station 
and other sensor element packages over a 2,4 GHz Ultra-
Wideband Network system. The accrued data are encrypted 
for security reasons. The composition of SEMs is depicted in 
Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Structures of Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs): An artillery 
SEM (left), a mortar SEM (right) [17]. 
SEMs can be deployed to the target area with manned 
artillery weapons or unmanned remotely controlled pieces of 
artillery or by using mortars, as mentioned earlier. The 
process of deploying SEM to the area of interest is depicted 
in Figure 8. SEM ejects the Sensor Element (SE) which in 
turn reports the gathered data to the base station [17].  
 
 
Figure 8.  Process on how to deploy an SE to an enemy territory [17]. 
Figure 8 presents a typical use case, in which a company 
is executing a military operation supported with an artillery 
or mortar unit. The reconnoitering range tends to vary from 
one to few kilometers. When a dismounted company attack 
is supported with units of UAVs tailored for Close-Air 
Support (CAS), the data exchange transmission process for 
the target data is depicted in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  The process of detecting target to the shooter [17]. 
The UAVs of CAS units optimize the speed and 
destruction power used in proximity to destroy the 
designated targets. When a small unit operates, it needs to 
achieve results in short time in order to maintain the 
initiative and reach the set objective. A company is a small 
military unit, which has to maximize the momentum offered 
by the performance produced by CAS units. UAVs must be 
utilized as tools to evaluate the outcome of the executed CAS 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

fire-mission. If the result of CAS fire-mission is reported not 
to fulfil the requirements set, the new round of CAS fire-
mission must be performed to destroy the chosen target. 
IX. 
SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE 
SOA offers a variety of possibilities to improve the 
performance in military operations. SOA can be exploited 
when needing to reorganize the military organization after 
casualties affect the chain of command in a dismounted 
company. This process is described in [20]. Military 
operations nowadays usually demonstrate features of 
Network Centric Warfare (NCW) in which one key aspect is 
to be able to offer a valid and accurate COP for the operating 
troops in the battlespace. A basic requirement for a military 
commander is the ability to command the troops and sustain 
optimal SA and COP. An important aspect in distributing 
information in the battlespace is the amount and quality of 
information shared at different levels. SOA can be seen as a 
useful tool in distributing data in a preprogrammed manner. 
The amount of information allocated must be set to a level 
where the decision maker can perform timely and draw 
accurate conclusions. In the battlespace units suffer from 
casualties and the chain of command never remains intact.  
A constructive idea in SOA is in its process ideology. In 
a dismounted company, the composition of the unit and its 
performance are critical in executing the operations. Military 
units suffer from casualties and their mathematical 
performance value tends to change in an unpredictable 
manner. The performance of a military organization, such as 
a dismounted infantry company, can be mathematically 
calculated as explained in [20]. 
Behind these mathematical values is a Psycho Physical 
Factor, described in [20]. The process of creating this factor 
is described in [21] and the formula may be useful in 
calculating the performance of a military unit. 
The implementation of SOA is described in [20]. A key 
aspect in the presented architecture [20] is the dynamically 
changing architecture. Benefitting from the possibilities 
offered to orchestrate data and services with the assistance of 
SOA allows for improved performance in the execution of 
operations. SOA can be utilized in the process of choosing 
between different COAs. Eventually, the chosen COA will 
be fine-tuned into commands and maneuvres of a 
dismounted company attack. 
In applying SOA paradigms, loose coupling, dynamic 
binding and independency of development technologies, 
platforms and organizations, as well as locations, all these 
become advantages in that the use of SOA typically 
encourages reusing services. The identified assets belong to 
military units, but military units offer their responsibilities 
through services, and capability deployment requires 
invoking and integrating a number of services. Figure 10 
depicts the relations of services, assets and capabilities of a 
military unit. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Conceptual model of C4I2SR capabilities based on SOA [22]. 
In a dismounted company attack, all operating military 
platoons use the same services and assets of a dismounted 
company. In this case, SOA itself offers a flexible approach 
to identify C4I2SR capabilities when several platoons benefit 
from the services and assets of a dismounted company. SOA 
enables a company to respond more quickly to the changing 
battlespace situations and requirements to execute the given 
missions in the given time and with the allocated resources. 
X. 
DISCUSSION 
When the UAVs are successfully utilized in the different 
phases in a dismounted combat attack, the results can be 
optimally utilized. These gained results can be identified and 
evaluated in relation to the different stages of the process of 
a dismounted company attack. When the need of a requested 
service is identified, automated systems assist to fulfil the 
need of any type (need of data, resupply, firepower, 
evacuation). 
As noted in the Related Work –Section, the use of UAVs 
has been identified as critical and effective for a successful 
military operation. UAVs can be used for collecting near 
real-time data, as a flying hub-station and in assessing the 
impact of artillery fire. Using swarms of UAVs enables 
quick, reliable and effective data collecting from a specified 
area. 
Furthermore, 
when 
UAVs 
function 
as 
the 
communication link, the chain of command and control 
remains secure as regards communication. 
By exploiting the data accessed by means of using UAVs 
it is possible to enhance a dismounted military operation: 
readjusting the direction and action of combat units and 
increasing their speed. The communication between UAVs 
and ground base-stations is encrypted. This ensures that the 
data collected and communication transmitted remain intact 
and coherent. UAVs may fly via automated waypoints or 
serve as fighter-operated systems. UAVs can be designed to 
be disposable, self-destroyable, once their task has been 
completed, or in case of malfunction, or if encountered by 
enemy. The use of SEMs becomes applicable in cases when 
the weather conditions are challenging, for example, the 
wind speed exceeds ten metres per second, or if data 
concerning a target must be rapidly accessed.  
Compared to traditional WSN-systems, WPSN allows for 
improved security protocol in the communication between 
UAVs and sensors. Data collecting systems gather raw data 
on battle space phenomena, for example troop movements 
and action. These raw data feed the MDMP and facilitate 
speeding up the decision making. Using mathematical 
models and –programs produces improved SA and COP, 
compared to non-automatized human decision making 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

performance. The improved SA and COP allow for 
significant increase in efficiency as regards planning and 
implementing the tactical use of destructive fire power.  
As the raw data collected by UAVs are already in 
electronic form, SOA can be utilized in planning, distributing 
and optimizing resources: evacuation, supplies, use of 
artillery fire. When the described systems for data collecting, 
analyzing, and communicating function as planned, it 
becomes possible to carry out an automized, computer-
assisted attack as described in Figure 11. Utilizing FSO 
communication links fosters reliable, secure and coherent 
communication in command and control processes. 
If and when all the accrued data can be properly 
processed and analyzed in MDMP with the assistance of 
SOA, the performance of troops can result in an automated 
dismounted company attack as depicted in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11.  An automated attack operation. [1] 
Figure 11 aims to visualize the goal of commanding 
military troops with the assistance of a computerized 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). The final commands for the 
military units to move and execute are given by a human 
commander, not by a machine. UAVs can be seen as tools in 
monitoring and assisting in an operation when re-adjusting 
its pace: If the pace of the units or an individual soldier is too 
slow, the data transmitted by UAVs is utilized to fine-tune 
the speed and direction of the operating troops. The SA data 
acquired by means of UAVs must be used in taking the 
iniative and translating it into success in battle and 
eventually meeting the set objectives of the given military 
operation. 
XI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has focused on observing how to utilize the 
real-time data collecting ability provided by UAVs in order 
to improve the performance of a dismounted company 
attack. The approach adopted equals idea-stage examination 
and as such aims to examine grounds for further planning of 
how to execute military attack missions with the assistance 
of UAVs. This paper introduces a concept of benefitting 
from the use of UAVs as part of a dismounted company 
attack. When doing so, it also points out the necessity of 
rapid data collection to support the fast MDMP.  
The utilization and performance of UAVs can be seen as 
data collectors in the battlespace. Sensors embedded into the 
UAVs used can produce different types of data from the 
designated area. UAVs can be deployed to the designated 
areas in most weather conditions and immediately when 
required, as there are no latency times. The data collected by 
UAVs are then transmitted to the command posts. The 
collected real-time data remain critical for the MDMP. The 
data accrued must be in a pre-defined digitized form, which 
is applicable in digitized decision making systems exploited 
in the battlespace. The level and quality of SA continues to 
be critical at the soldier level, whilst the level of COP plays 
an important role in command posts, where operations are 
planned, commanded and controlled. 
The data for the MDMP are collected by using various 
types of sensors embedded into UAVs and SEMs. The key 
issue is the speed of deploying the sensor package to the 
area. The prevailing combat situation in the battlespace 
determines the selecting of the type of UAV and sensor 
package embedded. The data accrued must be in a digitized 
form applicable in the software environment used. SOA can 
be used in re-organizing troops and allocating resources.  
The ultimate goal of a dismounted company attack is to 
execute the mission with the resources allocated and to 
obtain the set objective. This asks for sustaining timely 
performance with a minimal number of casualties, no 
instances of fratricide and with the least possible amount of 
collateral damage. The objective is difficult to obtain, when 
using soldiers prone to making human errors. However, 
operational performance can be improved if the data 
collected via UAVs is reliable and can be adopted in active 
use in near-real time. This may result in increased individual 
and collective performance. With improved levels of SA and 
COP, the safety of operations may be sustained. 
With computers acting as assisting tools in the MDMP 
offering suggestions as commands to the commander of 
attacking troops, the role of the commander is to either 
approve or reject the suggested commands. Thus a human 
decision maker remains critical in the chain of command. 
XII. FUTURE WORK 
Because a dismounted company attack represents a time-
critical maneuvre in the category of tactical military actions 
performed at a company level, any efforts to improve the 
company’s capability are worthwhile. This asks for 
developing a ruggedized system based on the idea-phase 
description outlined in this paper. Attention must be paid to 
planning the utilization of UAVs together with accounting 
for the operational security issues concerning using software 
and hardware in the battlespace.  
The usability of UAVs to create a functional 
communication network requires field testing in combat 
exercise settings prior to any operational use. UAVs have to 
be remotely destroyable both physically and digitally. The 
capability of UAVs to self-destroy when malfunctioning or 
having been shot down must be tested. Other identified 
challenges are related to maintaining an adequate level of 
constant energy flow and protecting against violations 
caused by electronic warfare.  
The use of SOA in assisting the MDMP has to be studied 
in combat exercise settings as well in order to gain realistic 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

and relevant data on human commanders evaluating COAs 
when planning a dismounted company attack.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, “Interfacing collaboration 
and command tools for crises management military command 
and control systems”, International Journal of Electronic 
security and Digital Forensics, vol 3, No. 3, 2010, pp. 249 – 
264. 
[2] S. Chaumette, R. Laplace, C. Mazel, and A. Godin, “Secure 
cooperative ad hoc applications within UAV fleets”, IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM 2009), 18-21 Oct. 2009, Boston, MA, pp. 1 – 7, 
doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2009.5379819. 
[3] E. Loren., L. Riblett, and J. Wiseman, “TACKNET: Mobile 
ad hoc secure communications network”, in Proceedings of 
41st Annual IEEE International Carnahal Conference on 
Security Technology, 8-11 October 2007, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada, pp. 156 – 162. 
[4] C. Chlestil, et al., “Reliable optical wireless links within UAV 
swarms”, in Proceedings of Transparent Optical Networks, 18 
– 22 June, 2006, Nottingham, Great-Britain, pp. 39 – 42, doi 
10.1109/ICTON.2006.248491. 
[5] V.N. Dobrokhodov, I.I. Kaminer, K.D. Jones, and R. 
Ghabcheloo, “Vision-based tracking and motion estimation 
for moving targets using small UAVs”, Proceedings of the 
2006 American Control Conference Minneapolis, June 14 - 
16, 
Minnesota, 
USA, 
pp. 
1428 
– 
1433, 
doi 
10.1109/ACC.2006.16564418. 
[6] D. Hague, H.T. Kung, and B. Suter, “Field experimentation of 
cots-based UAV networking”, in Proceedings of IEEE 
Conference on Military Communications (MILCOM2006), 
23-25 
Oct. 
2006, 
pp. 
1 
– 
7, 
doi 
10.1109/MILCOM.2006.302070. 
[7] A. Ruangwiset, “Path generation for ground target tracking of 
airplane-typed UAV”, Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics 
(ROBIO), Bangkok, Thailand, February 21 – 26, 2009, pp. 
1354 – 1358, doi 10.1109/robio.2009.4913197. 
[8] C-M. Cheng, P-H. Hsiao, H.T. Kung, and D. Vlah, “Transmit 
antenna selection based on link-layer channel probing”, in 
Proceedings of IEEE Conference on World of Wireless, 
Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 18-21 June 2007, 
Cambridge, 
MA, 
U.S.A. 
pp. 
1 
– 
6, 
doi 
10.1109/WOWMOM.2007.4351703. 
[9] Y. Qu, Y. Zhang, and Q. Zhou, “Cooperative localization of 
UAV based on information synchronization”, in Proceedings 
of the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics 
and Automation, August 4 – 7, 2010, Xi’an, China, pp. 225 – 
230, doi 10.1109/ICMA.2010.5589081. 
[10] M. Pachter, N. Ceccarelli, and P.R. Chandler, “Vision-based 
target geo-location using camera equipped MAVs”, in 
Proceedings of 46th Conference on Decision and Control 
(CDC2007), 
2007, 
pp. 
2333 
– 
2338, 
doi 
10.1109/CDC.2007.4434038. 
[11] B. Cummings, T. Zimmerman, B. Robinson, and M. Snyder, 
“Voice over blue force tracking”, Proceedings of IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM 2006), 23-25 Oct. 2006, Washington, DC, pp. 1 – 
5, doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2006.302173. 
[12] J. Harrald and T. Jefferson, “Shared situational awareness in 
emergency management mitigation and response”, in 
Proceedings of 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences (HICSS 2007), Jan. 2007, Waikoloa, HI, 
pp. 23 – 23, doi 10.1109/HICSS.2007.481. 
[13] M. C. Zari, et al., “Personnel identification system utilizing 
low 
probability-of-intercept 
techniques: 
prototype 
development and testing”, in Proceedings on The Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers 31st Annual 1997 
International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, 
15-17 Oct 1997, Canberra, ACT, pp. 224 – 230, doi 
10.1109/CCST.1997.626274. 
[14] J. Jormakka and T. Saarelainen, “UAV-based sensor networks 
for future force warriors”, International Journal On Advances 
in Telecommunications, vol 4, numbers 1 and 2, 2011, 
ISSN:1942-2601, pp. 58 – 71. 
[15] R. Dees, S. Nestler, R.Kewley, and K. Ward, “WholeSoldier 
performance: A value-focused model of soldier quality”, 77th 
MORS Symposium, WG20- Manpower and Personnell, 35 
pages, 7 Dec 07, 21.6.2010, accessed on 5.2.2015. 
[16] Field 
Manual 
FM 
1-02, 
www.armypubs.army.mil/doctrine/Active_FM.html FM 1-02, 
accessed on 8.12.2012. 
[17] T. Saarelainen, “Targeting situational awareness beyond the 
event horizon by means of sensor element munition,” ICDT 
2012, The Seventh International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications, pp. 8 – 14. 
[18] P. 
Buxbaum, 
“Denying 
access”, 
Special 
Operations 
Technology, July 2010, Vol 8, Issue 5, pp.  26 – 27. 
[19] R. Kozma, et al., “Multi-modal sensor system integrating 
COTS technology for surveillance and tracking”, Radar 
Conference, 10-14 May 2010, pp. 1030 – 1035, doi 
10.1109/RADAR.2010.5494467. 
[20] T. Saarelainen and J. Timonen, “Tactical management in near 
real-time systems,” IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary 
Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness 
and Decision Support, (CogSIMA2011), Miami Beach, 
Florida, 22.–24 Feb 2011, U.S.A., pp. 240 – 247, 
10.1109/COGSIMA.2011.5753452. 
[21] M. 
Phillips, 
“Air-to-Ground 
and 
ground-to-air 
communications”, Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 
6/2013, pp. 66 – 67. 
[22] Z. Ying, W. Zhixue, L. Xiaoming, and C. Li, “C4ISR 
capability analysis based on service-oriented architecture”, 
The Fifhth IEEE International Symposium on Service 
Oriented System Engineering, 2010, pp. 179 – 180, DOI 
10.1109/SOSE.2010.41.
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

