An Identity-Based Encryption Scheme with Performance Optimization for Privacy 
Preservation in Smart Grid Communication 
 
 
Ulas Baran Baloglu 
Department of Computer Enginnering 
Munzur University 
Tunceli, Turkey 
email: ulasbaloglu@gmail.com 
Yakup Demir 
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Firat University 
Elazig, Turkey 
email: ydemir@firat.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract—Smart grids are expected to replace existing 
electrical grids with advanced mechanisms and intelligent 
entities, 
which 
have 
excessive 
data 
processing 
and 
communication tasks. It is important for the sensitive 
consumer data, such as meter readings, to be secured at these 
intelligent entities. Novel digital communication mechanisms 
should be developed to protect privacy. Existing smart grid 
architectures do not have sufficient and efficient security 
functionalities for data transmission. In this paper, we propose 
an Identity-Based Encryption scheme, which is more 
promising than the classical form regarding performance and 
security. The proposed scheme focuses on the data structure of 
meter readings and optimizes this structure to achieve a better 
privacy preservation. This novel structure further improves 
the performance of the scheme by reducing communication 
overhead caused by public key creation and distribution 
operations, as evaluations demonstrated. 
Keywords-identity-based encryption; smart grid; privacy 
preservation. 
I.  
 INTRODUCTION 
In the following years, smart grids are expected to 
replace the classical grids. Advances in information science 
opened a new path to the grids for transmitting power in a 
more efficient way than before. The electricity grids are 
going to be equipped with adaptation mechanisms, control 
technologies, data processing systems and communication 
mechanisms to react to various grid problems. Problems, 
such as power quality, will still exist in smart grids as they 
did in the past, but the grid structure will be more robust and 
efficient. The biggest problems with the transition to smart 
grids will be information security based including 
computation, data communication, and storage. Therefore, 
privacy and data security will play a very crucial role in the 
success of future smart grids. 
Smart grids add the complexity of a communication layer 
to an electric power system, which is already a complex 
physical network. The introduction of this layer may create 
new challenges, especially regarding security. Smart meter 
readings may reveal some private information about daily 
lives and routines of its consumers. As a result, smart meters 
have to fulfill four essential security requirements: data 
authenticity, data confidentiality, data integrity and consumer 
privacy [1][2]. These requirements can be achieved by 
sender authentication, communication security, and privacy 
preservation techniques. Every part of a smart grid 
infrastructure must incorporate at least some fundamental 
cryptographic features to perform tasks such as data 
encryption and authentication [2]. 
There are several studies in the literature aiming to 
protect consumer privacy while fitting with the smart grid 
concept. One way of doing this is encrypting metering data 
before transmitting it. For this purpose, various encryption 
schemes are applied in this field such as ElGamal encryption 
system, which outperforms existing schemes based on 
Paillier’s 
homomorphic 
cryptosystem 
[3]-[6]. 
This 
encryption system is secure under chosen plaintext attacks 
(CPA), but it is not secure under chosen ciphertext attacks 
(CCA) [6]. Boneh-Goh-Nissim is another homomorphic 
encryption technique, which has one multiplication between 
an arbitrary number of additions [7]. These studies are 
typically directed towards developing a cryptography system 
so that they have not paid much attention to whether they are 
suitable for smart grids. 
Other studies prefer to perturb meter readings, which is 
defined as a process for adding noise to hide the true meter 
readings or privacy of consumers while preserving the 
usability [8]. There are several types of perturbation, such as 
adding 
noise 
(additive 
perturbation), 
k-anonymity, 
compressing data, differential privacy, and geometric 
transformation [9]-[11]. Bayes Estimate and Principal 
Component Analysis can also be used for perturbation 
purposes [12]. The main problem of perturbation techniques 
is the removal of noise from data, which is a difficult and 
computationally expensive task. Furthermore, intruders can 
steal perturbed data and statistically analyze it to reveal a 
consumption profile. 
Although there exist some studies about preserving 
privacy in smart metering systems by applying Identity-
Based Encryption [13]-[16], there are some significant 
differences between those studies and the proposed scheme. 
Our study differs from the previous studies by focusing on 
the data structure of the meter readings. It helps us to 
increase the security while preserving privacy by separating 
identity information from the metering data. Another 
contribution of this study is the performance optimization. 
Unlike all other previous studies, encryption is not 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

performed by using the user identities separately; instead, 
timestamp values of the meter readings used. Using a 
common timestamp value avoids a lot of key circulation 
inside the system, and computations can be done collectively 
instead of computing every key individually because all 
meters have the same timestamp value when the readings are 
completed.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we explain preliminaries that are used to construct the 
proposed scheme. Section III describes the entities of the 
scheme, and in Section IV, the efficiency is evaluated. We 
finally conclude the paper in Section V.  
II.  
PRELIMINARIES 
In this section, we briefly outline the cryptography 
primitives that serve as a basis to describe the proposed 
privacy-preserving scheme. 
A.   Bilinear Pairing 
Bilinear pairing is defined by a quintuple <p, G1, G2, e, 
g> [13]. In this technique, G1 and G2 are two cyclic groups 
with the same prime order denoted as p. The generator of G1 
is denoted with g, and the efficient bilinear map is defined as 
e : G1 x G1 ® G2 such that e(ga, hb) = e(g, h)ab for every g, h 
Î G1 and a,b Î Z*
(p). This bilinear map is proved to be non-
degeneracy and computationally polynomial [13]. 
B.   Identity-Based Encryption for Smart Meters 
Identity-Based Encryption scheme derives public keys 
from public identities, such as e-mail addresses instead of 
using certificates and it is an important alternative to 
certificate-based key infrastructures. Figure 1 demonstrates 
this scheme and how it eliminates usage of certificates. In 
this scheme, a consumer encrypts a meter data with a public 
key, for example with a meter id, and then transmits it to an 
aggregator. Later, the aggregator collects the private key 
from the private key generator to decrypt the transmitted 
data. In this scheme, participants can encrypt data with no 
prior distribution of keys, which could be a problematic issue 
for smart meters. 
BasicIdent is an identity-based encryption algorithm, 
which contains four separate algorithms: setup, extract, 
encrypt and decrypt [13]. In this algorithm, there are two 
cyclic groups G1 and G2, and three random generators are 
chosen as R1, R2, R3 Î G1. Two hash functions are defined as 
H1 : {0, 1}* ® (G1)* and H2 : G2 ® {0, 1}*. A random value 
s is chosen to be the master key, and it is used to calculate 
the public key as Ppub = sR1 where s Î Z*
(p).  
In the proposed scheme, smart meters receive their secret 
keys by using their meter identification number. Public keys 
of smart meters are calculated as SMp = H1(SMID), and these 
values are used to produce secret keys SMs = s(SMp). These 
keys are sent to the metering devices and the aggregator. 
Smart meters receive their secret keys by using their meter 
identification number. 
 
 
Figure 1.    Identity-Based Encryption scheme. 
The meter readings (MID)t are signed with the pair 
G(U,V) by first selecting a random number k Î Z*
(p). It is 
used the calculate U = kR1 and V = SMID + kH2(ID, (MID)t, 
U). The verification is based on the value e(R1, V). If it is 
equal to the value of e(Ppub,H1(ID))e(U,H2(ID, (MID)t, U)) the 
message is verified, otherwise it is rejected. 
C.   Problem Definition 
The problem can be defined as transmitting smart meter 
readings in a secure way to a smart grid application server to 
be used in other smart grid applications, such as demand 
management systems. Each smart meter records readings at 
predetermined intervals t. There are 96 records in total to be 
transmitted per day when the value of t is chosen as 15.  
For this study, we have the following assumptions: 
•  
We assume that the internal hardware of metering 
devices is not accessible. This study concentrates on 
transmission security and data privacy. 
•  
We assume that each metering device operates 
independently. 
•  
Finally, we assume that the application server is in a 
safe zone. Server security mechanisms are beyond 
this study’s interest. 
III.  
THE PROPOSED SCHEME 
The proposed privacy-preserving aggregation scheme for 
secure smart grid communications is based on Identity-Based 
Encryption [13]. However, the proposed scheme has some 
different aspects, as it shown in Figure 2. The scheme mainly 
consists of the following five entities: residents, id collector, 
key server, aggregator, and application server. 
Residents are the consumers with smart metering 
devices. The scheme can also be applied with an extended-
star topology by limiting the number of users per aggregator. 
A corrupted or modified device only reveals its individual 
reading and has no effect on the overall system. Unlike some 
other methodologies, the scheme does not need any 
communication between metering devices, and this will 
reduce communication complexity. 
ID Collector collects meter readings from the residents 
and transmits public keys to them. After collecting the 
metering data, it stores consumer IDs in a hosted database 
and modifies the data structure by removing the ID field 
from the data and then adding a rowID field and data instead. 
This entity has two type of transmissions, as shown in Table 
I. The first transmission is forwarding the modified data to 
the aggregator. The second transmission is as a reply to the 
queries of the application server. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Figure 2.    The proposed encyrption scheme. 
The Aggregator is the entity where the decrypt operation 
happens. It collects meter readings and divides them into 
three parts as timestamp, rowID, and reading. For each data 
collection, only one timestamp value is used for the private 
key request. All meter readings are decrypted with this 
private key. After the decryption process, meter readings are 
stored in a database inside the aggregator. According to the 
structure of the proposed scheme, this entity has the meter 
readings but does not know to whom a particular reading has 
belonged. 
Key Server is the private key generator, and it is 
responsible for key generation and distribution operations. 
Private keys need to be generated only once. According to 
the load, there might be more than one aggregator, and the 
key server in the system and additional servers can be 
distributed to different geographical locations. Unlike 
previous studies in the literature, the key server only 
communicates with the aggregator. Isolating the key server 
and limiting its accessibility provides a much better security.  
Finally, an application server exists for smart grid 
operations, such as demand management. This server 
communicates with ID Collector and Aggregator entities to 
fetch consumption data of the residents. As it seen in Table I, 
the application server is the only entity, which can access a 
user’s consumption data so that it is accepted as secure and 
protection of this structure is out of this study’s scope.   
IV.  
EVALUATION 
In this section, we analyze the security properties and the 
performance of the proposed scheme. 
A.   Security 
The proposed scheme has all security measures of 
Identity-Based Encryption scheme [12] since it is originated 
from that study. As a result, the confidentiality and integrity 
of the consumers’ data are achieved in this study.  
TABLE I.   
TRANSFER AND STORAGE OPERATIONS FOR THE 
METERING DATA 
Sender 
Transmission 
Receiver 
Storage 
Residents 
(timestamp, ID, 
Meter Reading) 
ID 
Collector 
- 
ID 
Collector 
(timestamp, rowID, 
Meter Reading) 
Aggregator 
(rowID, ID) 
ID 
Collector 
(rowID, ID) 
Application 
Server 
- 
Aggregator 
- 
- 
(timestamp, rowID, 
Meter Reading) 
Aggregator 
(timestamp, rowID, 
Meter Reading) 
Application 
Server 
- 
 
 
 
Figure 3.    Total computation overhead. 
Further, the proposed scheme is more secure to the CCA 
attacks than the classical scheme. A scheme is ‘CCA-secure’ 
if access to the decryption oracle does not give valuable 
information to the attacker. If an attacker somehow gains 
access to transmit a random message to the key server, the 
only information resolved will be a meter reading with no 
consumer information as the consumer information is stored 
in the ID collector entity. Hence, the privacy of the sensitive 
data is also achieved in the proposed scheme. 
B.   Performance 
In this subsection, we will evaluate the proposed scheme 
regarding the computational performance. Figure 3 shows 
the total computation overhead of the proposed scheme and 
the traditional Identity-Based Encryption scheme. Total 
computation overhead is linear to the number of smart 
meters. The proposed scheme showed a better performance 
due to two reasons: one key usage for every new time 
interval and possibly decreased communication overhead. 
When the number of consumers and keys is small, both the 
computational and communicational overhead is low in both 
schemes. Total computation overhead increases with the 
increased number of smart meters, and this increase is much 
faster in the case of the traditional scheme. An increase in the 
number of smart meters also increase the performance losses 
of the traditional scheme because of the growing number of 
key exchanges. 
It should be noted that an increase in hardware may 
lower the difference between two schemes but may also 
cause an excessive increase in the infrastructure costs. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

V.  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed an Identity-Based Encryption 
scheme 
for 
privacy 
preservation 
in 
smart 
grid 
communication. Identity-Based Encryption scheme does not 
have issues, such as certificate lookup and management so 
that it is preferred in smart grid studies. The proposed 
scheme is more computationally efficient than the previous 
methods, and further improves the privacy and the security 
of the traditional key management infrastructures. The 
existing studies in the literature have usually been focused on 
the encryption algorithms themselves, but not on improving 
their efficiency in particular environments, such as smart 
grids. In this study, we concentrated on the data structure of 
meter readings and optimized that structure to make it more 
appropriate for smart metering systems. The overall 
performance is improved by reducing communication 
overhead caused by public key creation and distribution 
operations. 
For future work, we will extend this study to analyze the 
communication overhead. We would also plan to optimize 
the computational overhead of the proposed scheme by 
modifying the encryption algorithm according to the 
developed data structure. 
REFERENCES 
[1]   K. Sharma and L. M. Saini, “Performance analysis of smart 
metering for smart grid: An overview,” Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 49, pp. 720-735, Nov. 
2014, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.170. 
[2]   W. Wang and Z. Lu, “Cyber security in the smart grid: Survey 
and challenges,” Computer Networks, vol. 57, pp. 1344-1371, 
Jan. 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2012.12.017 
[3]   N. Busom, R. Petrlic, F. Sebe, C. Sorge, and M. Valls, 
“Efficient 
smart 
metering 
based 
on 
homomorphic 
encryption,” Computer Communications, vol. 82, pp. 95-101, 
May 2016, doi:10.1016/j.comcom.2015.08.016. 
[4]   T. E. Gamal, “A public key cryptosystem and a signature 
scheme based on discrete logarithms,” in International 
Cryptology Conference Advances in Cryptology (CRYPTO), 
1985, pp. 10-18. 
[5]   P. Paillier, “Public key cryptosystems based on composite 
degree residuosity classes,” In Proceedings of Eurocrypt ’99, 
pp. 223-238. 
[6]   X. Dong, J. Zhou, K. Alharbi, X. Lin, and Z. Cao, “An 
ElGamal-Based 
efficient 
and 
privacy-preserving 
data 
aggregation scheme for smart grid,” Globecom 2014 Wireless 
Networking Symposium, pp. 4720-4725. 
[7]   D. Boneh, E. Goh, and K. Nissim, “Evaluating 2-dnf formulas 
on ciphertexts,” in Proceedings of Theory of Cryptography, 
2005, pp. 325–341. 
[8]   F. Laforet, E. Buchmann, and K. Böhm, “Individual privacy 
constraints on time-series data,” Information Systems, vol. 54, 
pp. 74-91, Dec. 2015, doi:10.1016/j.is.2015.06.006. 
[9]   S. K. Hong, K. Gurjar, H. S. Kim, and Y. S. Moon, “A survey 
on privacy preserving time-series data mining,” In 3rd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent 
Computational 
Systems (ICICS’2013), pp. 44-48. 
[10]   X. Yang, X. Ren, J. Lin, and W. Yu, “On Binary 
Decomposition 
based 
Privacy-preserving 
Aggregation 
Schemes 
in 
Real-time 
Monitoring 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 27(10), pp. 
2967-2983, Jan. 2016, doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2016.2516983. 
[11]   P. Barbosa, A. Brito, and H. Almeida, “A Technique to 
provide differential privacy for appliance usage in smart 
metering,” Information Sciences, vol.370-371, pp. 355-367, 
Nov. 2016, doi:10.1016/j.ins.2016.08.011 
[12]   Z. Huang, D. Wenliang, and B. Chen, “Deriving private 
information from randomized data,” In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Management of Data, ACM 
SIGMOD, 2005, pp. 37-48. 
[13]   D. Boneh and M. K. Franklin, “Identity-Based Encyrption 
from the Weil Pairing,” In Proceedings of 21st Annual 
International Cryptology Conference Advances in Cryptology 
(CRYPTO), Springer, 2001, pp. 213-229. 
[14]   J. L. Tsai and N. W. Lo, “Secure Anonymous Key 
Distribution Scheme for Smart Grid,” IEEE Transactions on 
Smart 
Grid, 
7(2), 
pp. 
906-914, 
March 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1109/TSG.2015.2440658 
[15]   H. K. H. So, S. H. M. Kwok, E. Y. Lam, and K. S. Lui, 
“Zero-Configuration Identity-Based Signcryption Scheme for 
Smart Grid,” 2010 First IEEE International Conference on 
Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2010, pp. 
321-326. 
[16]   J. B. Hur, D. Y. Koo, and Y. J. Shin, “Privacy-Preserving 
Smart Metering with Authentication in a Smart Grid,” 
Applied Sciences, vol. 5, pp. 1503-1527, Dec. 2015, doi: 
10.3390/app5041503. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

