A Survey of 5G Security Considerations 
 
Michael L. Casey 
Ingram School of Engineering 
Texas State University 
San Marcos, Texas, USA 
e-mail: mc74@txstate.edu 
Stan McClellan 
Ingram School of Engineering 
Texas State University 
San Marcos, Texas, USA 
e-mail: sm65@txstate.edu
 
 
Abstract—The 5G cellular standard is scheduled to begin the 
first phase of implementation in 2020.  The requirements of new 
services 
and, 
therefore, 
new 
security 
requirements, 
architectures, and technologies mean the new standard will have 
a very different appearance relative to the prior standard.  This 
paper surveys some key aspects of the 5G standard, and 
discusses the effect of security considerations in the context of 
new 5G features. 
Keywords - 5G standard; wireless communications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
THE advent of the 5G cellular standard means new services 
will become available in addition to conventional voice, text, 
and data. Many of these services are forecast to be present in 
the first phase of implementation in 2020 [1], including 
support for capabilities related to vehicular communications 
[2], wearables, healthcare, transportation, and the Internet of 
Things (IoT) [3]. These “vertical services” are a new aspect 
of 5G networks, which bring a new dimension to the design 
problem, requiring additional research and pre-planning for 
deployment.  Here, we present a review of current technology 
and how different aspects of the security features will impact 
those technologies. 
Vertical services are an important aspect of the 5G 
network. The requirements of these dedicated or industry-
specific solutions provide much of the motivation for the 
transition to 5G-enabled technologies. The eight key verticals 
addressed by the 5G architecture include the following: 
Manufacturing, Media/Entertainment, Public Safety, Public 
Transport, Healthcare, Financial Services, Automotive, and 
Energy/Utilities markets [4]. Previously, these industries 
employed dedicated, single-use networks or other industry-
specific communications solutions. With the contemporary 
shift of most activities to data-driven commerce, it is logical 
that public telecommunications networks would respond with 
a broad-based and ubiquitous solution such as 5G. However, 
the disparate requirements of these vertical markets create a 
number of difficult challenges. 
The requirements imposed on the network by the eight key 
verticals can be viewed in terms of Operational, Functional, 
and Performance categories [4].  Each of these categories has 
specific requirements, as listed in Table 1. The approach to 
achieving these often contradictory or mutually exclusive 
requirements is via the implementation of dynamic, 
programmable, segment-specific virtualized subnetworks. 
These isolated 5G subnetworks are known as “slices” and are 
implementations of the business model of Networking as a 
Service (NaaS). 
TABLE 1: VERTICAL INDUSTRY REQUIREMENTS FOR 5G 
Operational 
Functional 
Performance 
Self 
Managing/Policies 
Security 
Latency 
Programming 
Interfaces 
Identity 
Management 
Throughput 
Service Assurance Isolation 
Reliability/Availability 
Charging/Billing 
 
Resiliency 
Global Operation 
 
Coverage 
 
 
As key enabling concepts in 5G networks, network slices 
are a drastic paradigm shift from the management of 
conventional telecommunications networks. Network slices 
are logical networks implemented on a common, shared 
infrastructure. They are required to accommodate the large 
variety of vertical services and the disparate service 
requirements imposed on the network by each vertical service. 
In most cases, slices are viewed as an “on demand” meta-
service which optimizes Operational, Functional, and 
Performance requirements for various use cases, service 
types, and business models.  In their most basic form, network 
slices are groups of functions, resources, and connections, 
which enable certain types of application services, which 
bound certain important performance requirements, and 
which ensure specific service-level agreements between users 
and providers. In this context, it is clear that one of the most 
critical aspects of network slicing is the ability of the 
infrastructure to isolate a multiplicity of slices. Isolation is a 
key component of the general concept of “security,” where the 
isolated slice benefits from (a) greatly reduced attack vectors, 
(b) highly segregated internal and operational data, and (c) 
intelligent 
limitations 
on 
connectivity 
via 
restricted 
architecture. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Figure 1 presents a simplified perspective of three 
different network slices. The Internet and Public Switched 
Telephone Network (PSTN) are connected in the 5G network. 
Each tower represents a connection with different network 
needs. The tower on the left side of the figure needs data 
connectivity for IoT activities in a suburban setting. The tower 
in the middle of the figure needs multiple resources for mobile 
units. The tower on the right side of the figure has mixed 
needs. In all cases, the network resources needed for the 
subnetworks addressed by each tower are different. Each 
tower needs the ability to create its own Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) in order to serve the connected mobile units 
or other equipment. This VPN constitutes a slice of network 
resources. The slice could involve multiple service providers, 
e.g. a server for cloud storage, a company supplying the 
physical infrastructure, and a voice network. These different 
service providers have their own respective domains within 
the network structure. The subdivision of the slice among the 
different service providers must be designed carefully to 
delineate where liability and security needs for one service 
provider end and liability and security needs for another 
service provider begin. The slices and their subdivisions need 
to be isolated from one another since the security needs are 
different for different slices as well as the subdivided domains. 
An important component in Figure 1 is the Orchestrator / 
Resource Allocator (ORA). The ORA is responsible for 
creating end-to-end realizations of services, which are 
requested 
by 
network-resident 
applications. 
Such 
applications request network services, which may span 
multiple operating domains and may be expressed in abstract 
fashion, via a common Application Programming Interface 
(API). A primary function of the ORA is to translate 
abstracted service requests into resource requests to be 
handled by controllers in the various domains. Additionally, 
the ORA maps SLA requirements and Quality of Service 
(QoS) requirements into formats to be managed by domain-
specific controllers. The three slices seen in Figure 1 are 
likely to change with respect to time; therefore, the changing 
needs will mean a new instance of a slice will need to be 
managed by the ORA. Since the concept of “security” in the 
5G network is logical rather than physical, the ORA will also 
have to be virtualized, and the complexity of the ORA will be 
quite substantial. 
The remainder of this paper explores the highlights and 
important aspects of the Functional Requirements in 5G 
networks, or the extended concept of “security.” The intent is 
to introduce the reader to tradeoffs, architectures, and 
considerations which may pervade ongoing implementations 
and standardization efforts. This discussion is undertaken in 
the context of requirements for the several vertical markets, 
and illustrates how security concerns arise in certain cases. For 
example, vehicular communications are an important “vertical 
service” in the 5G standard which contain a number of 
different and considerably complex scenarios [1][2]. 
Connected cars will be expected to interface seamlessly with 
the 5G network, just as many cars already connect easily to 
the 4G/Long-Term Evolution (LTE) network. Additionally, 
this discussion is undertaken in the context of technologies 
that are addressed by 5G implementations. For example, 
integration of IoT systems is an important set of technologies, 
which will be challenging in the development and deployment 
of 5G networks [3]. IoT systems will impact canonical 
network layers (e.g. MAC, PHY) and other vertical services, 
and will drastically alter the security landscape of the overall 
network.   A brief historical perspective is discussed based 
upon [5], which was written for 5G Public Private Partnership 
(5GPPP) and [3] which was written for 3GPP.  Also included 
in the discussion are use cases and performance evaluation 
models from 5GPPP, and issues related to IoT from 3GPP. 
While many of the 5G requirements are not globally unique, 
certain aspects may be designed and adapted to fit local 
geography, specific use cases, or regulatory requirements. 
From these aspects and other architectural concerns, it is clear 
that new security mechanisms, architectures, and technologies 
are required to manage various aspects of the 5G network. 
Section II reviews the features of the security protocol for 
5GPPP.  Section III reviews the security implications for 
vehicular communications.  Section IV review security 
implications for IoT.  Section V reviews the beginning of the 
design of the security protocol from the 3GPP perspective.  
Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
5GPPP SECURITY LANDSCAPE 
Security risks in modern network communications are of 
utmost importance. Developing 5G networks are no different, 
and security aspects of 5G include issues such as: 
unauthorized usage/access, weak slice isolation, traffic 
embezzlement, service level agreement (SLA) compliance, 
 
Figure 1: Illustration of network slices 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

slicing versus neutrality, trust management, service provider 
lock-in, and insufficient technology readiness levels (TRL) 
[2]. Each of these items is briefly discussed below. 
 
Unauthorized usage/access: Unauthorized usage/access of 
assets has several security risks clearly identified. One known 
risk is that of identity theft or cloning. Subscriber credentials 
may also be stolen or cloned. The desired seamless 
interworking between different domains, e.g. a vertical slice 
or a core slice, may expose the 5G security level to new 
threats. Another identified risk is that of allowing appropriate 
security measures for massive IoT deployments while still 
accounting for necessary security of non-IoT services. The 
security features must account for all of these requirements, 
which will likely produce a heterogeneous access security 
protocol. 
 
Weak slice isolation: If the isolation of the slices is weak, 
then side channel attacks are a distinct possibility as a 
security risk. Likewise, management of sensitive data in one 
security domain may be exposed in another security domain 
due to a different set of security requirements. Monitoring 
and management of security protocols across all the security 
domains implies substantial additional complexity in the 
interfaces between various slices. 
 
Traffic embezzlement: The specific security risk in traffic 
embezzlement lies in the weakness of third parties being able 
to capture or alter control plane data or user plane data 
without detection. The heart of this risk lies in the 
inconsistency 
between 
three 
logical 
segments: 
the 
Orchestrator abstraction, the software defined network 
(SDN) abstraction, and the physical and network resources. 
This weakness is of critical concern to use cases such as 
eHealth and lawful interception due to recursive/additive 
virtualization. 
 
SLA compliance: Several security risks, which could be 
called vertical SLA and regulation compliance management 
risks, have been identified by the standards authors. One risk 
is encountered when an API is used to request geolocation 
information. This API request must be clear to the user and 
managed correctly so that information reaches its correct 
network destination as well as satisfying the requirements of 
the third party making the request. The third party may also 
be requesting access to a user’s infrastructure or assets, and 
the orchestrator must manage this request in conjunction with 
the third party. With virtual network functions (VNFs), a 
clear liability chain must be present to protect the user, the 
orchestrator, and the third party. Also, VNF life cycles must 
provide evidence that they will not passively introduce 
additional security risks to the network via updates and 
software evolution. Unfortunately, the management of these 
life cycles are outside the control of the operator.  
 
 
Slicing vs. neutrality: The concepts of network neutrality 
and slicing are yet to be fully defined by the standards authors 
in [1]. While some regulations exist within the EU, the 
regulations do not fully define how to navigate the remaining 
differences between network neutrality and slicing. 
Delivering services via a 5G network outside of applicable 
regulations or in the absence of fully-formed regulations is a 
clear risk. 
 
Trust management: Current trust management protocols 
do not account for the diversity to be found in the 5G 
infrastructure. Given the vertical services (as one dimension 
to the 5G infrastructure) and slicing between security 
domains and layers (as another dimension to the 5G 
infrastructure), trust management protocols must be able to 
span both dimensions simultaneously. Therefore, liability 
must be considered as the question of which party (a 
delegated third party or otherwise) is responsible for which 
part of the chain in a vertical service. Answering this question 
will be part of the design of the overall security protocols for 
the 5G standard, and may lead to unwanted or unsupportable 
system complexity. 
 
Service provider lock-in: Each tenant/owner of a network 
slice must be flexible with their services and infrastructure 
without negatively affecting security SLAs. A tenant/owner 
may offer a service in one slice of the network while the 
supporting infrastructure spans multiple domains. If the 5G 
security protocol is not designed to account for these needs, 
then a tenant/owner would be locked in to a single domain 
and unable to fully exploit the 5G standard; therefore, a 
common standard must be designed with flexibility for 
migration as a defining feature. 
 
Insufficient TRL: The final version of the security 
standard will not be fully available during the first phase of 
deployment (2020).  The security requirements of the 5G 
standard illustrate the insufficient TRLs by exposing new 
vulnerabilities of the new technologies, which the 
technologies may not be fully able to mitigate.  Designers 
propose using a “bridge” version of the security standard for 
the first phase of deployment in 2020 to allow new and non-
mature technologies to begin using the 5G standard while 
adapting and maturing in the time leading up to the final 
phase of deployment.  The “bridge” version may be viewed 
as a precursor to and primer for the fully deployed security 
protocol. 
 
Furthermore, security requirements will have to consider 
which tasks are for which canonical network layer, or which 
party in the vertical service bears the burden of managing 
certain 
functional 
aspects 
of 
the 
implementation. 
Additionally, the 5G security protocol must interface with 
legacy systems. This multi-dimensional problem means new 
security countermeasures must be designed and standardized. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

The multi-dimensional problem of vertical services and the 
wide range of these services, including health, transportation, 
and industrial automation applications means the security 
protocol should be logical instead of physical. This supports 
solutions to other problems since many network functions 
will be virtualized in order to support the vertical services 
while still working within the framework of physical 
infrastructure to be implemented. For example, unwanted 
traffic detection could be based upon an intercept-perceive-
decide-execute (IPDE) model. This model is a forward-
looking method of detecting (intercepting) problems 
(unwanted traffic) as they occur, perceiving how the 
unwanted traffic occurs, deciding how to counteract the 
unwanted traffic, and executing the chosen countermeasure. 
These functional components of the virtualized network 
service would necessarily have to be implemented in multiple 
canonical network layers spread among multiple physical 
systems. 
Prior European security architectures, including TS 23.101 
[6], may be modified slightly in order to account for the new 
security requirement as well as the context of virtualized 
network functions (VNFs). Likewise, access control adds a 
level of complexity to determining which provider in the 
vertical service is responsible for which aspect and level of 
security. A privacy-by-design approach is required to 
accommodate greater awareness of privacy concerns among 
users.  
One possible solution for the three main use cases (cloud, 
mobile, and IoT) may include forms of attribute-based 
encryption (ABE). ABE extends and generalizes the concepts 
of public-key encryption, where users have a private (secret) 
key as well as a public (accessible) key, and private 1:1 
communication with the holder of the private key is possible 
when messages are encrypted with the public key. In ABE, the 
encryption keys and encrypted messages may be dependent 
on sets of user-specific attributes, and may be associated with 
access policies. As a result, data is encrypted via attributes 
and/or policies related to groups of target users rather than via 
each user’s public key. Thus, messages can only be decrypted 
by users whose attributes align with the intended 
requirements, and/or who satisfy the intended policies. 
III. 
V2X: VEHICULAR CONNECTIVITY 
 Considering the transport vertical services [3], short and 
long range communications standards will be necessary [3], 
and they will be required to dovetail with the 5G standard. 
Transportation services typically are referred to as “Vehicle-
to-anything” (V2X) which encompasses the four component 
services listed in Table 2. Primary use cases in V2X scenarios 
include activities such as automated driver assistance systems 
(ADAS), situational awareness, mobility services, and 
auxiliary services/comfort. Two highly desirable auxiliary 
service use cases include dynamic route guidance and having 
municipalities connect to vehicles denoting the locations of 
available parking, which would provide a mechanism for 
conserving fuel.  Key risks are summarized in [7]-[9].  In the 
US, Europe, and China multiple projects and testing sites have 
been leveraged to understand the different foci of the V2X 
spectrum in different locations.  
 
 
Contemporary communications technologies, such as 
4G/LTE and dedicated short-range communications (DSRC), 
have shown promise in V2X applications. DSRC is a two-
way, short-range wireless technology that provides high 
throughput for active safety applications [10] and is based on 
a 
conventional 
implementation 
of 
frequency-division 
multiplexing (FDM). In some respects, 4G/LTE V2X 
communications may provide operational advantages over 
DSRC. As new V2X use case appear, become possible, or 
become desirable, the Society of Automotive Engineers 
(SAE) J2735 [11] dictionary already has the necessary 
flexibility to adopt these new use cases. J2735 has a dictionary 
of at least 16 messages with more than 230 elements, which 
means LTE adaptation and adoption of LTE V2X is likely 
because most use cases are already included. Additionally, the 
connectivity/platform for road operators, certificate and 
certificate revocation list distribution, range extension, and 
roadside unit (RSU) backhaul can be done on the LTE 
network, which provides business value for mobile providers. 
However, in comparison testing, 4G/LTE has been shown to 
lack important characteristics for many real-time V2X 
scenarios. For example, the cellular handoff mechanisms 
required by 4G/LTE implementations resulted in long lag-
times for collision avoidance, and although 4G/LTE has 
extended range, it is not effective when high throughput 
and/or point-to-multipoint connections are required [12]. As a 
result, and even though it may be cost-prohibitive in certain 
scenarios, DSRC 
may continue to dominate V2X 
communications technologies and intelligent transportation 
systems for near-term applications, as many manufacturers 
are already implementing DSRC systems in some or all of 
their vehicles. 
While incumbent technologies such as 4G/LTE and DSRC 
may prove useful in V2X applications, the exploitation of the 
5G standard and IEEE 802.11p [13] could solve current and 
future problems altogether. Unfortunately, IEEE 802.11p has 
not been updated to account for multiple transmit and receive 
antennas and other optimizations such as Multiple 
Input/Multiple Output [MIMO] and beamforming), or 
advanced modulation and channel access techniques 
(orthogonal frequency-division multiple-access, or OFDMA), 
which may become important aspects of V2X technologies in 
the future. And, again, security issues arise. The Security 
Credential Management System (SCMS) will have to be 
designed to account for multiple authorities across several 
network functions in the virtualized 5G network. The design, 
 
 
TABLE 2: 5G VEHICULAR SERVICES 
Service 
Description 
V2V 
Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
V2I 
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure 
V2N 
Vehicle-to-Network 
V2P 
Vehicle-to-Pedestrian  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

for the sake of privacy, will have to be such that no one 
authority has enough information to track a vehicle for a long 
period of time.  Instead, a lawful intercept (LI) will bring 
together enough pieces of the total picture of a vehicle’s data 
to track them, and an entity with a LI will never have all of the 
pieces of the picture.  The disparate security requirements of 
the different services to be provided causes the design of the 
security protocol to have increased complexity.  Furthermore, 
the security protocol design must account for how strong (or 
weak) the slicing must be between the different providers in 
this vertical service. 
IV. 
THE INTERNET OF THINGS (IOT) 
IoT is a widespread aspect of the 5G standard. IoT has two 
main use cases: critical and massive [4]. These use cases have 
key differences between them. Critical IoT must have low 
latency and high reliability because it provides connectivity 
cases such as public safety. Massive IoT requires that devices 
be inexpensive with multi-year battery lives; low latency and 
high reliability are desirable if they can be designed into the 
device, otherwise these features need not be present.  
Enterprise applications comprise a third use-case, which 
will address needs serving vertical services. Typical needs 
may include personal digital assistants or insurance 
telematics. The primary market drivers include applications 
such as connected wearables, cars, homes, cities, and 
industrial IoT. Vertical requirements will depend upon the 
operator’s perspective, and the operator will have 
requirements to a greater or lesser degree depending up on 
the services they provide. Typical functional requirements 
include traffic patterns, identity/security, simple installation, 
mobility, SLAs, reliability, sector regulations, analytics, and 
charging efficiency. To address these requirements, 3GPP 
Rel.14 [14] was enhanced to improve positioning 
capabilities, greater multicast downlink transmission, 
mobility awareness, higher data rates, and packetized voice 
via voice-over-LTE (VoLTE). These enhancements provide 
for third party and group-based communications with better 
support in the radio aspect.  
Of special note is the use case regarding private and other 
networks that intend to use unlicensed or shared spectrum. In 
most instances, basic capabilities exist in wireless (“WiFi” or 
IEEE 802.11x) [13] and wired Ethernet [15] to create 
network partitions. For example, wireless partitions can be 
created in unlicensed spectrum using the Service Set 
Identifier (SSID or “network name”), and wired partitions 
can be created using Virtual LANs (VLANs). Both of these 
approaches create isolated traffic via a shared infrastructure, 
which is a foundational capability for 5G networks. However, 
the overlapping or simultaneous use of licensed and 
unlicensed wireless spectra can be more complicated. 
One promising approach in this regard is the concept of 
Licensed-Assisted Access (LAA), which is standardized in 
3GPP Rel.13 [16] and enhanced (eLAA) in 3GPP Rel.14 [14]. 
LAA and eLAA provide systems based on 4G/LTE the ability 
to operate using unlicensed spectrum. Via a combination of 
techniques, including dynamic channel avoidance and “listen 
before talk,” these hybrid systems can coexist efficiently. 
MuLTEfire is the tradename for Qualcomm’s implementation 
of LAA/eLAA [17].  MuLTEfire exploits parts of LAA for 
downlink and eLAA for uplink transmissions. In trials, 
MuLTEfire has been shown to coexist fairly with WiFi in a 
fashion which can roughly double overall system throughput. 
Future releases of MuLTEfire will include IoT-specific 
enhancements.  Private networks using MuLTEfire will have 
to meet the new security requirements for the disparate 
services to be provided so that they complete the private tasks 
necessary to them while operating seamlessly within the new 
standard, within the unlicensed spectrum, and without 
degrading the security requirements across disparate domains 
of providers. 
V. 
USE CASES & PERFORMANCE EVALUATION MODELS 
Although highly preliminary, a starting point is necessary 
for understanding whether or not an aspect of the 5G standard 
will work. In [5], the authors provide a background setting of 
how testing was to be conducted, and whether it could be 
applied to almost all aspects of the 5G standard. The 
beginning of the roadmap denotes use cases meant to 
encompass the entire standard, namely: device density, 
mobility, infrastructure, traffic type, user date rate, latency, 
reliability, availability, and 5G service type (e.g. machine type 
communication, or MTC). Key performance indicators (KPIs) 
are sorted based upon their evaluation method, and those 
methods are inspection, analysis, or simulation. Furthermore, 
vertical services will have security requirements and localized 
needs/requirements. Vertical services have a set of use cases 
to which these KPIs apply. The use cases are dense urban, 
broadband everywhere, connected vehicles, future smart 
offices, low bandwidth IoT, and tactile internet/automation. 
These use cases are mapped to vertical services use cases, 
including 
automotive, 
eHealth, 
energy, 
media 
and 
entertainment, and factories of the future. The KPIs and the 
use cases cover most, if not all, of the needs presented by the 
5G standard. 
Analysis methods have been developed and have been 
applied to measure such details as control plane latency ([5], 
Table 3), user plan latency ([5], Table 4), massive MTC 
(mMTC) device energy consumption improvement ([5], 
Table 5), inter-system handover, interruption time, mobility 
interruption time, and peak data rate.  Although these 
measurements and calculations are simple to complete, they 
provide benchmarks regarding device performance with 
respect to the new network. 
These benchmarks need to be measured in the different 
contexts of the use cases even though not all use cases occur 
in all contexts.  A context is a specific configuration for a BS, 
and contexts being considered for the 5G standard include 
indoor hotspot, urban macro, outdoor small cells, and rural 
macro/long distance configurations. 
VI. 
 CONCLUSION 
This paper set out to explore several aspects of the 5G 
cellular standard with respect to security issues as the focus.  
The paper explores the general security protocol design as 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

written by 5GPPP; the V2X communications standard results 
from research completed by the 3GPP; the IoT results from 
research completed by the 5GPPP; and the general design of 
5G cellular standard with respect to the use cases and how to 
measure, via KPIs, when the use cases were being met.  
Security is a common thread among the use cases as well as 
the vertical services to be used by the 5G cellular standard.  
Security concerns are noted in each of the aspects.  The 
general security protocol design written by the 5GPPP 
provides an introduction to the issue itself.  The V2X and IoT 
aspects highlight how the general security protocol could or 
does impact implementation in these specific vertical 
services. Both V2X and IoT aspects will result in enormous 
numbers of additional network nodes, each of which presents 
numerous threat vectors. Additionally, Network as a Service 
(NaaS) or slicing is one approach to reconciling competing 
priorities. However, slicing produces a host of additional 
issues related to virtualization, automation, and guarantees of 
isolation. Whether the discussion is about network and 
infrastructure or vertical services, security is a concern 
affecting both the vertical services and use case dimensions 
at all levels, and security is a concern that arises even when 
security is not the specific focus. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The lead author would like to acknowledge the 
contribution of Dr. George Koutitas, Texas State University. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 5GPPP (2017 June).  “5G PPP Security Landscape.”  [Online] 
https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/5G-
PPP_White-Paper_Phase-1-Security-Landscape_June-
2017.pdf [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[2] 5G Americas (2017 Oct.).  “V2X Cellular Solutions.”  [Online] 
http://www.5gamericas.org/files/2914/7769/1296/5GA_V2X_
Report_FINAL_for_upload.pdf [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[3] 5G Americas (2017 Dec.).  “LTE Progress leading to the 5G 
Massive 
Internet 
of 
Things.” 
 
[Online] 
http://www.5gamericas.org/files/8415/1250/0673/LTE_Progr
ess_Leading_to_the_5G_Massive_Internet_of_Things_Final_
12.5.pdf [accessed Sept. 2017]  
[4] Global Mobile Suppliers Assoc. “5G Network Slicing for 
Vertical Industries.” [Online]. https://gsacom.com/paper/5g-
network-slicing-vertical-industries/ [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[5] 5GPPP (2016 April).  “5G PPP Use Cases and Performance 
Evaluation 
Models.” 
 
[Online] 
https://5g-ppp.edu/wp-
contents/uploads/2014/02/5G-PPP-use-cases-and-
performance-evaluation-modeling_v1.0.pdf [accesed Sept. 
2017] 
[6] 3GPP 
TS 
23.101, 
“General 
Universal 
Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS) architecture” [Online] 
http://www.3gpp.org/dynareport/23-series.htm [accessed Feb. 
2018] 
[7] National Transportation Library (2016 Sept.).  “Connected 
Vehicle Pilot Deployment Program Phase 1 – Deployment 
Readiness Summary – New York City.”  [Online] 
https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/31731 [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[8] National Transportation Library (2016 Sept.).  “Connected 
Vehicle Pilot Deployment Program Phase 1 – Deployment 
Readiness 
Summary 
– 
Tampa 
(THEA).” 
 
[Online] 
https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/31721 [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[9] National Transportation Library (2016 Sept.).  “Connected 
Vehicle Pilot Deployment Program Phase 1 – Deployment 
Readiness 
Summary 
– 
ICF/Wyoming.” 
 
[Online]  
https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/37124 [accessed Sept. 2017] 
[10] S. Sill. “DSRC: The future of safe driving.” Intelligent 
Transportation Systems Joint Program Office. [Online] 
https://www.its.dot.gov/factsheets/dsrc_factsheet.htm 
[accessed Feb. 2018] 
[11] SAE J2735. DSRC Message Set Dictionary. [Online] 
https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j2735_200911/ 
[accessed Feb. 2018] 
[12] Z. Xu et.al. “DSRC versus 4G-LTE for Connected Vehicle 
Applications: A Study on Field Experiments of Vehicular 
Communication 
Performance,” 
Journal 
of 
Advanced 
Transportation, Volume 2017 (2017), Article ID 2750452, 
Aug. 2017. [Online] https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/2750452 
[accessed Feb. 2018] 
[13] IEEE 802.1, Wireless Local Area Networks, The Working 
Group 
for 
WLAN 
Standards 
[Online]. 
http://www.ieee802.org/11/ [accessed Feb. 2018] 
[14] 3GPP Release 14. [Online]. http://www.3gpp.org/release-14 
[accessed Feb. 2018] 
[15] IEEE 
802.3, 
Ethernet 
Working 
Group 
[Online]. 
http://www.ieee802.org/3/ [accessed Feb. 2018] 
[16] 3GPP Release 13. [Online]. http://www.3gpp.org/release-13 
[accessed Feb. 2018] 
[17] D. Malladi, “Best Use of Unlicensed Spectrum,” Qualcomm, 
Feb. 3, 2016. [accessed Feb. 2018]
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

