Modeling War as a Business Process with the Assistance of Service Oriented 
Architecture  
 
Major Tapio Saarelainen, PhD 
Research and Development Division 
Army Academy 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract— The pace of war is increasing since militaries are 
adopting the ideas of Network Centric Warfare (NCW). 
Therefore, the process of war has to be modeled into the 
Business Process in order to benefit from available resources in 
real-time. There is an increasing need to automate command 
and control tools utilized in military operations because of the 
versatility and increased tempo of operations. Operations can 
be commanded and orchestrated with the assistance of Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA). SOA is currently seen as a 
technology that can satisfy these needs of network centric 
operations (NCO). The Business Processes are chains of logic 
that request SOA services. This paper argues that in the case of 
a military setting, in order to achieve maximum impact with 
minimal effort (cf. downsizing), military operations need to be 
modeled as Business Processes (BP) (e.g., a dismounted 
company attack). This asks for using a Resource Manager 
(RM), a Scheduler and a Battle Secure Scheduler (BSS) in 
allocating the requested services (e.g. processing a fire support 
order). In the future, a single Future Force Warrior (FFW), an 
essential performer in military operations, can benefit from the 
Business Processes approach via enhanced performance, 
improved Situational Awareness (SA) and with decreased 
instances of fratricide.  
Keywords - Business Process; Service Oriented Architecture; 
Future Force Warrior 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The asymmetric nature of war requires improved 
capabilities in allocating available resources. This sets 
increasing demands for commanders executing operations in 
the battlespace. The requirement of precise data in location 
information, current data in performance capabilities of own 
troops and current operation status are only a few critical 
pieces of information commanders are depending on in 
military operations. The pace of war constantly increases and 
the need for accurate Situational Awareness is imminent and 
vital from the perspective of successive operations. 
This paper examines how to model the phenomenon of a 
war as a business process assisted by means of Service 
Oriented Architecture. The contribution of this paper 
introduces a possible method to improve the overall 
performance of military operations by sequencing the 
combat services available in real-time. Typically these types 
of combat service sequencing systems are based on classified 
data. Therefore also this paper can only draw from sources 
available for non-restricted use. 
Military commanders are depending on automatic data 
accruing processes and the tools to simplify complicated 
military maneuvers. A military operation has to be simplified 
into a form of an untestable Business Process (BP). This can 
be achieved with the successful use of Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA). When an attack as an operation can be 
simplified in a form of a Business Process, Service Oriented 
Architecture can be used. The element named Resource 
Manager is a tool to be used in managing and allocating the 
existing resources. 
The possibilities to compare various approaches for 
modelling a war as a business process assisted by means of 
Service Oriented Architecture are difficult to find. This is 
because by default value models of this kind fall in to the 
category of classified data. Thus the model introduced here is 
one of a kind. Comparing different models is out of the 
scope of this paper. Furthermore, the issues of network 
topology and energy remain outside the scope of this paper. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses 
about the Military Operation as a process, Section III 
introduces Service Oriented Architecture, Section IV 
introduces the Business Process. Section V concentrates on 
combining the Business Process and the Resource Manager. 
Section VI explains the functions inside the Resource 
Manager and Section VII concentrates on security and the 
Scheduler. Section VIII examines benefits and drawbacks of 
this solution and Section IX concludes the paper. 
II. 
MILITARY OPERATION AS A PROCESS 
Military operations use real resources available. In the 
Business 
Process 
approach 
to 
Service 
Oriented 
Architecture, the services available correspond to existing 
real resources. Availability of real resources in a given 
place time is limited and needs to be carefully scheduled. 
Usually, SOA services are assumed to be independent of 
each other but this assumption is no longer valid if SOA 
services represent real resources. The Resource Manager 
is a necessary element in SOA architecture. An example 
of a demanding process, in which the timing and optimal 
use of resources is critical, is a dismounted company 
attack. Successful performance requires that the requested 
services (e.g., processing a fire support order) are 
allocated timely and accurately. This sets demands for 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

enhanced Situational Awareness. In the utilization process 
of SOA, challenges of real-time SOA must be solved [1]. 
To successfully execute BPs, the Business Process 
Execution Language (BPEL) is required, as argued in [2].  
III. 
SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE (SOA) 
Service Oriented Architecture promises to enable 
utilizing and operating complicated systems. SOA enables 
organizations and entities to enhance interoperability, 
collaboration, see [1], and foster the reusing of components 
and interfaces. SOA can be used in service collaboration. 
With the correct framework SOA allows publishing services 
in a service registry and exchanging data through the Simple 
Object Access Protocol (SOAP) [1]. SOA offers a flexible 
solution for systems integration, applications, protocols, data 
sources and processes to form a cohesive system that 
supports the execution of critical BPs [2]. SOA can be used 
as a collaboration tool in crises management and industrial 
environments if the challenges of real-time SOA [2] are 
solved. 
In order to successfully execute BPs, the Business 
Process Execution Language (BPEL) is required, as argued 
in [3]. In military systems, the adoption of SOA principles 
can beneficially result in the overall improvement of system 
flexibility and maintenance. SOA provides the user with 
richer information sets via the ability of Web Services to 
reach out through the networks, see [4]. In the process of 
achieving greater interoperability, SOA can be used by 
utilizing service oriented migration and reuse technique, 
described in [5]. 
In Network Centric Warfare (NCW) contexts, SOA has 
been recognized to act as an enabler of services. SOA is an 
architecture style that encourages loose coupling between 
services to facilitate interoperability and the reuse of existing 
resources as described in [6]. SOA is seen as a tool in 
enabling agility to handle the changing dynamic evolution 
needed in network enabled capability, see [7]. The concept 
NCW can be viewed as an integration of assets to fulfil a 
mission objective, as discussed in [8]. NCW fosters SOA to 
achieve flexible forces, which are constantly ready and 
deployable, capable of dynamic changes and evolution to 
achieve realizable effects. To benefit from SOA in an 
optimal way, organizations require a comprehensive and 
applicable SOA governance framework to implement the 
management and control mechanisms in the system, as 
argued in [9]. 
It has been pointed out [10] that Shared SA is in central 
role for network-enabled capabilities, as described in [10]. In 
NEC, SOA is most commonly realized through Web 
Services GUIs, as discussed in [11], using Extensible 
Markup Language (XML) formatted documents, see [10]. As 
evident, XML WS have been recently used to implement 
SOA enabling the building of BPs by dynamically calling 
services from the World Wide Web. 
SOA is an open concept and supports plug-and-play 
capabilities of heterogeneous software and hardware 
components, with the implementation of Web Services, 
which is probably so far the most popular implementation of 
SOA, as discussed in [12]. For this reason, SOA has been 
selected as the architectural solution for the C4I2SR systems 
for the Finnish Defence Forces [13]. SOA is seen as an 
enabler in crises management organizations for delivering 
data and services across political, organizational and cultural 
boundaries as well as addressing the issues of information 
sharing regardless of where required data is stored, as 
concluded in [14]. The global information grid is an essential 
vehicle in the execution of SOA and for the transformation 
of data. 
In tactical operations, the significance of the real-time 
location data plays an important role. The tools available 
include different types of Tactical Battle Management 
Systems for the dismounted combat to produce the location 
information of own troops and precise target designation. 
Obviously, the tools for target designation and air-land 
coordination are necessary requirements for success in 
operations as described in [15]. Furthermore, air-to-ground 
communications are described in [16]. 
Requirements related to improved Situational Awareness, 
communications and networks are described in [17], grid 
computing in the battlespace plays an important role as 
described in [18], and enhancing squad communications with 
the assistance of smart phones is described in [19]. Lastly, 
multiplication of various technologies is introduced in [20]. 
Their overall purpose is to increase the performance of a 
Future Force Warrior. The inputs of all these tools and 
networks can be processed with the assistance of tools used 
in Business Processes and with the assistance of Service 
Oriented Architecture. 
 
IV. 
BUSINESS PROCESS 
Because of the central role of the business process in 
SOA, the main ideas concerning the BP are described in this 
and the following chapter. In a military environment, an 
example of utilizing a Business Process approach embedded 
to SOA is a military operation consisting of sequenced 
phases, for instance, in an operation labeled as a dismounted 
company attack, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dismounted company attack as a Business Process [21]. 
The variety of services used in BPs may be in operational 
use of a single unit or several units at the same time. This 
requires an efficient orchestration of services to maintain 
service control. SOA can be seen as an enabler in the process 
of executing military operations as BPs. 
A planned dismounted attack usually starts from the 
assembly area, moves on to the dismount line, via a line of 
departure, advances to engagement, results in close combat 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

and ends when the set objective is reached. The SOA BP 
approach can increase the probability of success of an attack 
by empowering the human-based decision-making process 
by computers. This can enable an optimal use of resources, 
and thereby improve overall performance in operations. 
The offered services during an advancing dismounted 
attack are listed in Table 1. Most of these services can be 
pre-programmed to concern the wanted product-line FFW 
level. The company commander utilizes various services 
(fire support orders, location services, medical care, 
resupply, evacuation, geographical information system -map-
service, Blue Force Tracking) while executing the 
commanded attack from the assembly area to the objective. 
Table 1 illustrates possible services available for a 
dismounted company attack. 
TABLE I.  
LIST OF PRE-PROGRAMMED AND ADDITIONAL SERVICES IN 
A DISMOUNTED COMPANY ATTACK. 
 
 
Fulfilling a requested service asks for the requested 
service to be available and within range. When dealing with 
Fire Support Orders (FSO), the range limitations of artillery 
units are critical. An artillery unit has to be located within an 
appropriate range, and it has to be ready to intake Fire 
Support Orders and execute them in the required time frame, 
precisely as ordered. 
V. 
THE BUSINESS PROCESS AND THE RESOURCE 
MANAGER 
The orchestration of Business Processes requires a tool 
for allocating resources, the Resource Manager (RM). The 
tool has been described in [21]. The RM sorts out and lines 
up the requested services. As militaries implement the 
framework of network centric warfare with a continuing 
need to automate the command and control (C2) tools 
utilized in military, the tempo of operations must be taken 
into consideration. The collected data need to be processed, 
analyzed, verified, transmitted, and finally stored. SOA can 
be identified as a technology that can satisfy these needs of 
network centric operations. The starting point in the BP 
approach to SOA is that the main business operations of the 
organization are described by SOA BPs. The Business 
Processes are chains of logic that request SOA services. In 
case of a military setting, the Business Processes represent 
military operations as depicted in Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Business Process Platform as a service enabler. 
SOA -technology involves assisting processes performed 
in military operations. Business processes are executed in a 
specific business process platform. Services and platforms, 
such 
as 
geographical 
information-services, 
weapons 
platforms, and battle management systems, are linked to the 
Business Process Platform to produce the best results to the 
ongoing processes. When an FFW can benefit from the 
possibilities offered by a successful adoption of BP and 
SOA, the result can be improved overall performance in 
military operations. 
Fig. 3 describes how the Business Process approach can 
improve the performance of a Future Force Warrior (FFW). 
Several battlespace sensors gather data from the battlespace. 
The collected data are then automatically transmitted to be 
analyzed in a command post. Various battlespace sensors 
transmit data to a context-aware reasoning layer. In this 
layer, data are converted to context and an inference engine 
transmits the data to a ubiquitous main layer for analyzing 
purposes. The data are verified, analyzed and transmitted as 
information for the execution of the operation. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Increased FFW Performance can be gained via successful data 
utilization and analyzing process. 
VI. 
 INSIDE THE RESOURCE MANAGER  
Several of the needed services require real-time 
resources. These services can be identified, for example, as 
collecting SA data and issuing fire support orders. Thus the 
services and their use must be scheduled and sequenced to 
sustain the processes. The RM sorts out and lines up 
simultaneous requests concerning the requested service. The 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

RM serves as the element, which provides the needed 
services for User Groups (UGs). Services can be either pre-
programmed on demand or be available on request basis. 
The RM as a tool is located at the battalion level. The user 
groups send a request for the demanded service. The UGs are 
then authenticated, and their privileges are verified, and then 
the request is transmitted to the RM. The key functions of the 
RM are: 1) to receive the request of a required service, 2) to 
organize the line of user groups in the correct order 
depending on the UGs’ privileges and battle-situation, 3) to 
check whether the service is available and within range, 4) to 
provide the User Groups with the answer, which is either the 
requested service or a rejection of the service. Fig. 4 
illustrates the process. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The main idea of the Business Process approach to Service 
Oriented Architecture. 
The RM functions as a fully automated chain of functions 
in certain processes [21]. The key function of the person in 
the loop is to monitor the flow of events and to interfere to 
the chain of events if an unpredicted anomaly occurs in the 
process. As the RM is a critical resource, it must be 
physically protected against enemy actions. 
The role of the RM is central in the allocating of 
resources in the BP process. The RM communicates with 
four intermodules. The RM graphical user interface provides 
the core interface between all the presented modules and the 
Local Area Network (LAN), as shown in Fig. 5. The LAN is 
utilized as a battlespace network or a community network as 
it can be used on wide area of networks. Yet, the sharing of 
networking 
environment 
and 
its 
resources 
remains 
challenging. Searching for information and asking for 
resources become challenging when lacking proper search 
mechanisms. Each module has pre-defined and precise 
functions. First, the file and resources sharing module 
communicates with the RM GUI in conjunction with the 
sharing and the download module. The file and resource 
transfer and download module supports and enables the 
transfer or download of the searched file or resource from the 
other node connected to the network. The shared files and 
resources are listed on the RM GUI, where the listed and 
downloaded files can be examined. It is obvious that the 
same identified services are requested simultaneously. 
Therefore, the composition of the RM needs to be stable and 
reliable. Fig. 5 illustrates the composition and function of the 
RM. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The composition and function of the RM. 
The example below in Fig. 6 depicts the processing of 
fire support order requests inside the RM as an informal 
Specification and Description Language (SDL) diagram. 
This action performed by the RM is essential to proceed in 
the process of offering requested service/s [21]. 
  
 
 
Figure 6.  The processing of Fire Support Order requests in RM in an 
informal SDL diagram. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Each request has a time-stamp and own identification and 
the request also contains route data and is traceable 
whenever tracking data are required. Each request is 
categorized according to an urgency class and its execution 
process is monitored and evaluated continuously. Once the 
request has been executed, it will be filed as a completed task 
in the common database. The tracking data of the completed 
request can be retrieved for analyzing purposes at any time 
by the system operator. 
VII. SECURITY AND SCHEDULER 
To account for operational security, there are protocols to 
identify the credentials of the requester entity by applying a 
security, authentication and agreement tool embedded in the 
RM. Before any tasks are given to be executed or resources 
are allocated for use, the task or resource request goes via the 
described system, as presented in Fig. 7. An incoming task 
passes through a preliminary phase, in which it is checked 
and identified. Once the task has been verified and approved 
and sent from a trusted and secure cooperation entity, it will 
be processed via a series of approval and authorization 
policies. 
Security issues remain vital also when dealing with 
unmanned aerial vehicles utilized in Network Centric 
Warfare at tactical level as described in [22]. The accrued 
data have to be secured to be intact and coherent when 
passing different interfaces from the sensor to the shooter. 
The described process ends with a phase in which a 
common language and tools are selected and then the given 
request moves forwards inside the RM. The overall 
description of the whole concept consists of three major parts 
and functions: 1) SA comprehending the existing solutions 
and tools, 2) command and control tools, and, lastly, 3) 
information repository. These three together enable the 
command and control process and saving of logdata for 
further analyses. These functions presuppose the RM and the 
Scheduler to share and distribute the tasks and resources. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Security, authentication and agreement system. 
To provide for the requested service, the RM requires 
one more component [21]. This critical component for the 
military use of SOA which relies on the utilization of the RM 
is called the Scheduler. The role of the Scheduler is to 
coordinate processes to maximize the performance of 
resources and to reduce fratricide and collateral damage. The 
Scheduler enables militaries to execute various operations 
simultaneously but still under a strict command and control. 
The issue of simultaneously operations is solved by the 
element named Battlefield Secure Scheduler (BSS). This 
component uses two different methods of sharing calendar, 
Pre Shared Scheduler (PSS) and Dynamic Schedule Update 
(DSU). The Scheduler functions together with the RM and 
utilizes SOA as a process. These elements can be recognized 
in Fig. 8, which introduces the process from an incoming 
command/task to an outgoing command/task. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The elements inside the scheduler and the permeable command 
and control -process. 
VIII. BENEFITS AND DRAWBACKS OF THIS SOLUTION 
The delicate system introduced can malfunction for 
various reasons. Challenges related to energy have to be 
solved to enable the function of different processes. The 
orchestration of the system can also fail because of 
intentional enemy action (jamming, a virus, a worm). The 
system needs to be equipped with an analyzing program, 
which indicates when the system functions properly. If the 
system malfunctions and retrieving the capabilities becomes 
impossible, the system becomes useless for an FFW. This 
asks for an easily replaceable and fault-tolerant system with 
inbuilt check-in routines. Otherwise, traditional methods in 
orchestrating services need to be adopted. 
By adopting SOA and embedding business processes into 
the existing command and control -system, the overall 
performance of military operations can be improved. With 
the assistance of the RM, limited military resources can be 
allocated more efficiently to the users requiring for services. 
When the new invented tool, the Scheduler is implemented 
together with the RM into the BPs, the performance of the 
system can be significantly increased. The allocated 
resources available can be used optimally. This means 
shorter execution times, and a higher amount of data for 
improved decision making. The overall system performance 
can be optimized with the assistance of these tools. 
Offering a service of ubiquitous computing to battlespace 
commanders increases the possibility to utilize the resources 
available. This fosters a rapid decision-making process 
especially, when SOA can be embedded in the decision-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

making systems. As described in [14], SOA must deliver a 
solution that crosses existing boundaries as well as address 
the issues of information sharing regardless of where that 
information is stored. A BP -like orchestration of systems 
and services can improve the overall performance of military 
operations executed. This can result in improved overall 
performance capabilities while executing missions in the 
battlespace benefitting from SOA, the RM and the 
Scheduler. 
By adopting these introduced new elements into BMS 
together with SOA, it may be possible to gain improved 
capability to execute operations. This can also mean 
reduction in time related to allocation of resources. This can 
result improved overall performance and minimal execution 
times of operations. Besides, with the improved level of SA, 
fratricide and collateral damage can be reduced. 
The system presented here is free to be adopted and 
tested. To create a functioning, automated business process 
applicable for future battlespace purposes requires future 
work. This is briefly tackled in the ensuing section. 
 
IX. 
FURTHER WORK 
So far, this system has not been field tested for 
considerable funding is needed to execute the tests. One 
would hope such funding became widely available since the 
need for automated systems and allocation of ever limiting 
resources force militaries to discover the performance 
offered via SOA. When the process of war has been modeled 
to resemble a Business Process, the performance of FFWs 
can be optimized with the assistance of processes assisted 
with the SOA. The result of this can be seen as an agile and 
modular military performer with improved capabilities and 
improved Situational Awareness, and the capability to utilize 
ever diminishing resources more optimally with decreased 
instances of fratricide. 
Further work related to modeling a war as a business 
process must concentrate on security issues of software. 
Worms and viruses pose an increasing threat in digitized 
battlespace. Issues such as adequate level of constant energy 
flow and protection against violations caused by electronic 
warfare must be studied, tested and finally solved before 
adoption of the system in operative use. 
Funding and human resources are required to run the 
validity tests of the introduced system. Firstly, tens of 
thousands of simulation laps in each scenario type are 
required 
before 
implementing 
the 
introduced 
system/prototype into any real-time military exercise 
performed. Secondly, once resources have been invested in 
implementing the system introduced here, the follow-up 
paper cannot any longer be accessed in any public domain 
data sources.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Panahi, W. Nie, K-J. Lin, The Design and Implementation 
of Service Reservations in Real-Time SOA, in Proceedings of 
IEEE International Conference on e-Business Engineering 
(ICEBE2009), 21-23 Oct. 2009, Macau, pp. 129 – 136, doi 
10.1109/ICEBE.2009.26. 
[2] A. Gravel, X. Fu, and J. Su, An Analysis Tool for Execution 
of BPEL Services, in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE 
International Conference on E-Commerce Technology and the 
4th IEEE International Conference on Enterprise Computing, 
E-Commerce, and E-Services (CEC-EEE2007), Tokyo, pp. 
429 – 432, doi 10.1109/CECEEE.2007.19. 
[3] W. T. Tsai, Q. Huang, J. Xu, Y. Chen, and R. Paul, Ontology-
based Dynamic Process Collaboration in Service-Oriented 
Architecture, 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and Applications 
(SOCA'07), 19-20 June 2007, Newport Beach, CA, pp. 39 – 
46, doi10.1109/SOCA.2007.35. 
[4] M. Jiang, and A. Willey, Service-Oriented Architecture for 
Deploying and Integrating Enterprise Applications, in 
Proceedings of 5th Working Conference on Software 
Architecture (WICSA 2005), Pittsburg, PA, pp. 272 - 273, doi 
10.1109/WICSA.2005.60. 
[5] G. Lewis, E. Morris, and D. Smith, The Service-Oriented 
Migration and Reuse Technique (SMART), Technical report 
CMU/SEI-2005-TN, Software Engineering Institute, in 
Proceedings of 13th International Workshop on Software 
Technology and Engineering Practice, September 2005, 
Budapest, pp. 222 – 229, doi 10.1109/STEP.2005.24. 
[6] M. Medlow, Extending Service-Oriented Architectures to the 
Deployed 
Land 
Environment, 
Journal 
of 
Battlefield 
Technology, vol. 13, No. 1, March, 2010, pp. 27 – 33. 
[7] L. Liu, D. Russell, N. Looker, D. Webster, and J. Xu, 
Delivering 
Sustainable 
Evolutionary 
Service-Oriented 
Architecture for Network Enabled Capability, in Proceedings 
of International Workshop on Verification and Evaluation of 
Computer and Communication Systems (VECoS2008), pp. 1 
– 11. 
[8] D. Russell, N. Looker, L. Lu, and J. Xu, Service-Oriented 
Integration of Systems for Military Capability, in Proceedings 
of 11th IEEE International Symposium on Object Oriented 
Real-Time Distributed Computing (ISORC), 2008, pp. 33 – 
41, doi 10.1109/ISORC.2008.45. 
[9] F. Hojaji, M. Reza, and A. Shirazi, Developing a More 
Comprehensive 
and 
Expressive 
SOA 
Governance 
Framework, in Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE International 
Conference on Information Management and Engineering 
(ICIME), 16-18 April 2010, Chengdu, pp. 563 – 567, doi 
10.1109/ICIME.2010.5478046. 
[10] K. Lund, A. Eggen, D. Hadzic, T. Hafsoe, and F. T. Johnsen, 
Using web services to realize service oriented architecture in 
military 
communication 
networks, 
Communications 
Magazine, 
vol 
45, 
Issue 
10, 
pp. 
47 
– 
53, 
doi 
10.1109/MCOM.2007.4342822. 
[11] J. He, I-L. Yen, T. Peng, J. Dong, and F. Bastani, An 
Adaptive User Interface Generation Framework for Web 
Services, in Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Congress on 
Services Part II, 2008. SERVICES-2, Beijing, 23-26 Sept. 
2008, pp. 175 – 182, doi 10.1109/SERVICES-2.2008.23. 
[12] E. Zeeb, A. Bobek, H. Bohn, and F. Golatowski, Service-
Oriented Architectures for Embedded Systems Using Devices 
Profile for Web Services, in Proceedings of IEEE 21st 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking and Applications Workshops (AINAW '07), 21-
23 May 2007, Niagara Falls, Ont., pp. 956 – 963, doi 
10.1109/AINAW.2007.330. 
[13] J. Jormakka, and J. Lucenius, Possibilities for improving 
dependability of C4I2SR systems based on Service Oriented 
Architecture, in IEEE Transctions 2009 Computation World: 
Future 
Computing, 
Service 
Computation, 
Cognitive, 
Adaptive, 
Content, 
Patterns, 
pp. 
315 
– 
324, 
doi 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

10.1109/ComputationWorld.2009.74., 
ISBN: 
978-1-4244-
5166-1. 
[14] B. Farroha, and D. Farroha, SOA as a catalyst to empower the 
Warfighter through improved enterprise data access over the 
GIG, 
3rd 
Annual 
IEEE 
Systems 
Conference 
(SYSTEMS2003), 23-26 March 2009, Vancouver, BC, pp. 48 
– 53, doi 10.1109/SYSTEMS.2009.4815770. 
[15] Sagem Showcasing Systems for Demanding Infantry Forces 
Mission, www.soldiermod.com, Vol 11 Summer Autumn 
2013, pp. 42 – 43. 
[16] M. 
Phillips, 
Air-to-Ground 
and 
Ground-to-Air 
Communications, Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 
6/2013, pp. 66 – 67. 
[17] P. Donaldson, D-P. Merklinghaus, and S. Nitschke, 
Technology Enablers for Global Special Forces Capability, 
Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 5/2013, pp. 65 – 74. 
[18] P. Cordwainer, Grid Computing on the Battlefield, Military 
Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 4/2013, pp. 74 – 75. 
[19] J. Antal, Enhancing Squad Communications – Seven 
Considerations for the Militarisation of COTS Smartphones. 
Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 5/2013, pp. 58 – 61. 
[20] D. Alexander, Toward NATO Forces 2020: Combat 
Multiplication Technologies for Smart Defence, Military 
Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 10/2012, pp. 84 –86. 
[21] T. Saarelainen, Improving the Performance of a Dismounted 
Future Force Warrior by Means of C4I2SR, Doctoral 
Dissertation, ISBN 978-951-25-2457-0. 
[22] G. Ebbutt, Network Centric Warfare at the Tactical Level, 
Military Technology 2/2011, pp. 106 – 110. 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-316-2
ICDT 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

