Application of Data Mining in the 5G Network Architecture  
Alexandros Kaloxylos 
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications 
University of Peloponnese 
Tripoli, Greece 
email: kaloxyl@uop.gr
 
 
Abstract— Data mining is considered to be one of the key 
enablers for the next generation of mobile networks. The 
building of knowledge models is expected to tackle the 
complexity of these networks and enable their dynamic 
management and operation. Recently, this research area has 
attracted a lot of interest and several models have been proposed 
by the research community. This paper provides a brief survey 
of these efforts and captures the latest status in 3GPP. It also 
provides a detailed description of which information needs to be 
collected by network components, so as to be analyzed by a data 
mining scheme. Finally, it quantifies the amount of information 
that is required to be reported to the data mining engine. 
Keywords- 5G cellular networks; data mining; control 
functions optimizations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
During the past years, a tremendous effort has been made 
for the design of the 5th Generation of mobile networks (5G). 
Research and standardization activities worldwide are in the 
process of finalizing the first release, while all major vendors 
are preparing for the first commercial showcases and large-
scale deployments. 5G mobile networks target the provision 
of tailor-cut solutions not only for the telecommunications 
sector but also for the so called “vertical industries” (e.g., 
intelligent transportation systems, smart factories, the health 
sector, etc.). This will be achieved by deploying multiple 
logical networks (a.k.a. network slices) over the same network 
infrastructure. Thus, 5G networks will be considerably more 
complex than the previous generations [1]. 
At the same time, the scientific community has identified 
that big data solutions can significantly improve the operation 
and management of existing and future mobile networks [2]. 
Data mining is used to discover patterns and relationships 
between variables in large data sets. Towards this end, several 
mechanisms that include statistical analysis, artificial 
intelligence and machine learning are applied in the data set 
to extract essentially knowledge from the examined data. 
Figure 1 illustrates how data mining can be integrated as a 
process with the mobile networks and where the extracted 
knowledge can be used. More specifically, data are collected 
from a number of network components. These data may 
include a variety of information fields such as the quality of 
the wireless channel, the network load, accounting 
information, configuration and fault indications, the profile of 
the subscribers, etc. These data are stored and updated 
regularly. When collected, they are passed through a pre-
processing phase. During this phase transformation, 
discretization, 
normalization, 
outlier 
detection 
and 
dimensionality reduction is executed. The outcome of this 
phase is then passed to a data analysis phase where a model is 
built to extract knowledge from the processed data. For 
example, the result of this process will be the identification of 
situations where the occurrence of some specific events (e.g., 
a significant increase of the number of high moving users) 
causes some specific result (e.g., increase of the handover 
blocking probability). The knowledge model may also include 
some solutions for specific situations (e.g., force the network 
components to place high moving users to macro cells). The 
list of the knowledge discovery results can then be 
communicated to either policy, management or control 
modules. These modules can use this information in order to 
optimize the operation of the network and improve the 
performance. Note that for selecting the best configuration or 
optimization action from the list of the knowledge results, the 
abovementioned communication modules may require also 
real-time information related to the current performance 
indicators of a network.  
 
 
Figure 1. Big data analysis for cellular networks 
As it will be presented in the next section, it is currently 
widely accepted that data mining will be an integral part of 5G 
networks. Currently, proposals focus on how data mining can 
feed knowledge on management and control modules. 
Although this work is quite valuable, the researchers focus on 
the data mining algorithms to be used and they do not always 
provide detailed examples of which exactly information needs 
to be collected, how often this collection has to take place and 
how one can minimize the data that has to be exchanged 
among network components and functions.  
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

At the same time, 3GPP has included a dedicated function, 
called NWDAF (NetWork Data Analytics Function), in the 
latest specifications [3]. This function has currently limited 
functionality. It is used to provide information to influence, in 
real time, the policies that an operator is using.  
The purpose of this paper is to provide a short survey for 
data mining solutions in 5G networks and extend the work 
presented in [4], where a data mining framework, called 
Context Extraction and Profiling Engine (CEPE), was 
introduced to improve the performance of control functions in 
a mobile network. The CEPE extensions include the 
identification of the 5G network components, as specified by 
3GPP, that can be used to collect the necessary information. 
Also, the paper identifies which 5G functions can use the 
outcome of CEPE. The paper quantifies the amount of data 
that must be exchanged between network components for the 
operation of CEPE.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
provides an analysis of the state of the art for data mining in 
5G networks and the latest status of 3GPP for the specification 
of NWDAF. Section III briefly presents the CEPE framework 
and maps its functionality CEPE in the latest 5G architecture. 
Section IV quantifies the amount of data that needs to be 
exchanged and suggest an approach on how this can be further 
reduced. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART ANALYSIS 
This section discusses the existing state of the art 
proposals presented by the research community and the 
current status of 3GPP activities.  
A.  Research literature survey 
As mentioned previously, many academic researchers 
have focused on the use of data analytics mechanisms in 5G 
communications. The authors in [5] explain how random 
matrix theory and machine learning can be used to enable the 
adoption of big data schemes for mobile cellular networks. 
Moreover, they provide a survey of solutions on how big data 
can be used to analyze signaling information in cellular 
networks as well as the traffic of user plane data. This analysis 
is able to reveal certain traffic and user behavior 
characteristics and even waveform related data to estimate the 
mobility of users. The work in [6] presents a generic 
extraction and correlation framework that targets to reduce the 
vast data set through randomization and a coarse preservation 
of statistical relationship among data records. This scheme is 
quite valuable but is generic and the authors do not provide 
detailed examples on the information be used and how the 
outcome can be used by 5G networks. Unfortunately, the 
removal of unrelated and non-useful data remains an open 
question. This is significant, because collection and 
transmission of useless information is burdensome on the 
network.  
[7] presents the findings of the SELFNET H2020 project. 
Its target is to provide an autonomic network management 
framework for 5G mobile network infrastructures. The paper 
focuses on the analyzer module that infers data from a set of 
collected metrics. It describes in detail the operation of the 
analyzer module but it does not provide a detailed discussion 
on the information that needs to be collected to support 
specific 5G use cases. The authors of [8] provide a new 
framework, named Big Data SON (BSON) that takes into 
consideration subscribers' level data (i.e., network related 
performance on a per user basis such as throughput, delay, 
blocking and drop rates, etc.), cell level data (received signal 
strength of serving and neighboring cells, number of active 
users, etc.), core level data (alarms, configuration, security 
data, Call data records, etc.). By applying data mining 
schemes the authors suggest that these data can be used to 
improve SON mechanisms and essentially transform SON to 
be proactive instead of reactive. The paper provides an 
exhaustive list of information that can potentially be used but 
it does not analyze the traffic volume that needs to be collected 
in order for the scheme to perform the desired results. 
Although this is a holistic solution that can be used for all SON 
cases the authors only demonstrate its application for a simple 
scenario. Following the main principles presented in Section 
I, the authors of [9] present the key features of user and mobile 
network data that can be potentially collected and processed 
by a data mining scheme. They also discuss how resource 
management, planning, interference coordination and cache 
server deployment is done nowadays. They suggest that these 
can be greatly improved if data analytics is adopted by 
network operators. Although the paper discusses extensively 
main operation principles, there are no detailed examples. 
In relation to the optimization of radio resources using data 
analytics, the authors of [10] present a scheme that analyzes 
historical information gathered from an operational wireless 
network. Their model uses a weighted k-Nearest Neighbors 
model and can predict future network load levels and optimize 
the network accordingly. An interesting idea is presented in 
[11] where it is proposed that big data can be used to optimize 
the performance of the protocol stack in RAN (e.g., reduce the 
overhead in Radio Header Compression in PDCP, or the 
minimization of signaling during the execution of a handover, 
etc.). 
In [12], a system that can handle 4.2 Tbytes of traffic data 
from 123 Gbs links in the core network of a 2G/3G operator. 
By analyzing application layer information, they are able to 
identify the exact model of an end device as well 
characteristics of users’ behavior. The authors of [13] discuss 
how the call detail records collected from a legacy mobile 
wireless network can be used to identify how a large fraction 
of people are moving inside a city. Using an end-to-end 
Hadoop system, they are able to identify the hangouts and 
trajectories of users with different interests. The goal of this 
work is for the operators to be able to deliver such data and 
insights to other enterprises. 
The work presented in [4], provides a framework where 
data mining on user related information can provide to a 
number of control functions the needed extra context 
information to improve their performance. 
Finally, the work in [14] aims to improve the personalized 
QoE for end users by following a two-step modelling 
approach, combined with big-data analysis, to identify the 
relationship between users and services. More specifically, 
this approach requires to obtain real-time information about 
the application the users are using (online part) and adopt a 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

data mining (offline training part) scheme to predict the users' 
preferences and expectations. Then, the network resources are 
managed accordingly to support a satisfactory QoE. 
Some of the abovementioned solutions require user data 
traffic analysis (e.g., [5] [10] [12]). This however requires the 
transfer and processing of a huge amount of data some of 
which (e.g., video streams) may be encrypted. Some of the 
solutions try to address a holistic approach covering from 
network management process (e.g., healing, optimization, 
fault detection) to the support of personalized QoS for the 
users. These solutions identify a plethora of parameters that 
have to be taken into consideration (from radio measurements, 
preambles, link utilization, subscriber data, customer retention 
management data, as well as application data, etc.). Such 
solutions have of course a huge complexity and the current 
literature does not provide detailed examples, in terms of 
which data have to be collected and from which entities. 
Equally importantly, none of the abovementioned solutions 
elaborates on how to minimize the required information to be 
collected. Finally, some of the solutions like [10] and [11] are 
addressing the management of the resources in a coarse level 
for all users. Only [14] provides a personalized solution for 
end users, but since the paper focuses on QoE it requires that 
the User Equipment (UE) should collect a lot of information 
and transfer it regularly to the network for further processing. 
This requires a lot of processing power in the UE as well it 
may affect the battery level consumption. Moreover, the 
exchange of a significant amount of data over the wireless 
link, by a large number of UEs, may cause performance issues 
to the overall network. In the next section, we will describe 
how [4] can provide improved and personalized services to 
end users while at the same time eliminating the burden on the 
end devices and the exchange of data over the wireless link.  
 
 
Figure 2. Data Analytics in 3GPP 
B.  3GPP’s NetWork Data Analytics Function (NWDAF) 
Quite recently, 3GPP has identified the need to incorporate 
a dedicated data analytics function (NWDAF) in the latest 
specifications [3] [15] [16]. This entity represents an 
operator’s managed network analytics logical function. 
As shown in Figure 2, NWDAF provides slice specific 
network data analytics to the Policy Control Function (PCF) 
and the Network Slice Selection Function over their newly 
specified interfaces (i.e., Nnwdaf, Nnssf and Npcf). 
Interestingly enough the latest specifications describe that 
NWDAF will provide only load level information on a 
network slice level and that it is not required to be aware of 
the current subscribers using a slice. PCF uses the received 
information to select policy rules whereas NSSF may use the 
same information for selecting the most suitable slice for a 
UE. Note here that this type information can be collected from 
the network management system. Also, in Release 14, the 
RAN Congestion Awareness Function (RCAF) was used to 
inform the PCF about the congestion in RAN. Thus, 3GPP 
essentially is currently using NWDAF as a placeholder for 
future releases. In these, additional information will be 
provided to PCF and NSSF. This information will be related 
to the type of UEs or even for specific UEs, since PCF and 
NSSF are used to control the placement and treatment of UEs 
in the appropriate cell and radio access technology. Already, 
the output of NWDAF is considered to feed new network 
components related to access traffic steering, switching and 
splitting schemes (ATSSS) as reported in [17]. 
III. 
INTEGRATING THE CEPE FRAMEWORK WITH THE 5G 
ARCHITECTURE 
A.  The Context Extraction and Profiling Engine (CEPE) 
The work presented in [4], is able to automatically build a 
user profile that can be used to predict the future behavior of 
a subscriber. This information is used to improve the 
performance of network control operations. More specifically, 
static and dynamic information is collected about: 
1. User profile related information (static): gender, 
device type characteristics (e.g., cpu, memory, os, 
device type)  
2. UE and device dynamic characteristics (dynamic): 
location, transmission power, amount of transmitted 
and received data, experienced delay, loss of packets, 
associated cells identifiers 
3. Network related measurements (static and 
dynamic): type of cell (e.g., macro, femto, etc.), 
power transmission level, available resource blocks, 
amount of transmitted and received, data, delay, 
packet loss, number of connected devices 
 
Based on these measurements, the authors use data mining 
to build a knowledge model, the outcome of which is 
essentially a dynamic profile for end users. This profile 
predicts their future behavior based on their location, time and 
day, the battery level of their devices and their monetary 
charging status. This way the network can use this information 
to place users to the appropriate cells and radio access 
technologies during the execution of a handover or a new 
session establishment. Also, this information is used by the 
end devices to select the most suitable cell to camp on, when 
they are in an idle state. Extensive simulations demonstrate 
significant performance improvements both for the network 
operator as well the end users. Note here that this is exactly 
the information (i.e., the dynamic profile of users that captures 
their future behavior in terms of mobility and service 
consumption), that the newly introduced NWDAF can report 
to the PCF and other network components to improve the 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

performance of a 5G network. Thus, CEPE is essentially 
potential future evolution of NWDAF.  
The next subsection presents in detail how the CEPE 
framework can be mapped in the latest 5G architecture by 
extending the interfaces connecting today NWDAF to 
multiple network functions. It also presents which information 
is collected from the network functions as well and the control 
functions that will receive the outcome from the data mining 
model. 
B. Mapping the CEPE framework in the 5G Architecture 
The introduction of NWDAF in the 5G architecture and its 
interfacing with the PCF clearly indicates that in the future, its 
output will be used to select the most appropriate policies for 
UEs or types of UEs (e.g., high/low moving terminals, 
terminals involved in high/low data rate exchange, etc.). 
 
 
Figure 3 Provision of information to NWDAF 
In the state of art research efforts (e.g., [4], [13]), it has 
been identified that users tend to have the same behavior that 
is dependent on the terminal they use, their monetary charging 
status and preferences, the status of their battery and obviously 
their location (e.g., home office, on the road, etc.) during 
specific dates and hours. Their behavior also depends on the 
status of network components (e.g., the load of the network, 
the received signal strength, the experienced delay or packets 
losses). All this information is required for a data mining 
function like NWDAF/CEPE to create a realistic model and 
enable the selection of appropriate policies or fine tune 
network control functions. In Figure 3, the network 
components that have to feed information to the 
NDWAF/CEPE as well as the type of this information are 
illustrated. These 5G network components are: 
• 
Unified Data Repository (UDR): provides 
subscription information about a UE. 
• 
Network Management System (NMS): reports 
performance 
indicators 
(e.g., 
bandwidth 
utilization, packet loss, latency, alerts, etc.). 
• 
Access Network Discovery and Selection 
Function (ANDSF): reports the current policy 
rules shared with a UE to help it decide to which 
available WiFi it may connect to. 
• 
Offline Charging System (OFCS): passes 
information contained in Charging Data Records 
(CDRs) that are related to the resource usage of a 
UE. 
• 
Online Charging System (OCS): informs about 
the current credit management status of a UE. 
• 
Application Function: is able to inform which 
services (even from those not being owned by the 
operator) are being used by a UE. As specified in 
[3], the communication of AF with the network 
operator’s components takes place via the 
Network Exposure Function (NEF). 
• 
Policy Control Function (PCF): provides 
information 
about 
the 
current 
session 
management policies being used in the network. 
• 
Radio 
Congestion 
Awareness 
Function 
(RCAF): provides RAN user plane congestion 
information. 
• 
User Equipment (UE): provides real time 
information about the current battery level of a 
UE.  
 
Based on this information, the NWDAF/CEPE can collect 
information that is related to the current behavior of users and 
create their dynamic profile that essentially is a prediction of 
their future actions. Table I presents some examples of 
behavioral profiles that can characterize a single user or a set 
of users that have the same behavior. To create such a list the 
NWDAF/CEPE requires mainly information from the UE, the 
OFCS the OCS, the UDR and the AF (optionally). It also 
requires information from the NMS and the RCAF. 
At the same time, the NWDAF/CEPE should have the 
information about the current policies being used by the 
operator as it receives the related information from the PCF 
and ANDSF. This way it is able to correlate the received input 
and identify a) the best policies to be used, b) the estimated 
bandwidth required for a future period of time in an area and 
c) what is the optimum placement of UEs in cells and radio 
access technologies. This is doable since the network is aware 
of the type of users in an area, their number (from those that 
are connected or those that have recently performed a location 
update process) and the available capacity of the network. 
Thus, NWDAF/CEPE can provide rules to PCF in the form of  
• 
Profile (Home C) ^ # of users (high) ^ Network 
load (high) à place users in femto cells 
• 
Profile (On the road) ^ # of users (any) ^ Network 
load (any) à place users in macro cells 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF BEHAVIORAL PROFILES 
 
 
The behavioral profiles of users can be communicated to 
any network functions that are responsible for managing the 
user mobility or the establishment and management of user 
sessions. Such entities are: 
• 
Access and Mobility Management Function 
(AMF): supports mobility management, access 
authentication and authorization, security anchor 
functions 
and 
context 
management. 
The 
behavioral profile can be used to fine tune the 
location update procedure (e.g., its frequency, the 
tracking area list, etc.). 
• 
Session 
Management 
Function 
(SMF): 
supports session management, selection and 
control of UP functions, downlink data 
notification and roaming. The behavioral profile 
can be used to select the most appropriate user 
plane path. 
• 
Traffic Steering Support Functions (TSSF): 
receives traffic steering control information from 
the PCF, to steer traffic towards specific WiFis. 
The behavioral profile can affect these steering 
decisions. 
• 
5G Base Station (gNB): provides user plane and 
control plane protocol terminations towards a 
UE. The behavioral profile can be used to fine 
tune the admission control and handover 
procedures 
as 
well 
as 
the 
information 
broadcasted to the UEs to assist them selecting 
the best cell to camp on.  
 
The next section presents an approximation of the amount 
of data that is required to be exchanged and suggests how this 
can be minimized. 
IV. 
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 
The analysis in Section III indicates that the sources 
providing data to the NWDAF can be distinguished in four 
categories. The first one consists of sources that provide static 
or rarely changed information. In this category belongs 
ANDSF and PCF that provide the list of active policies in a 
network and UDR that contains user related subscription 
information. Since this information does not change often 
limited actions can take place in order to minimize their 
communication to NWDAF/CEPE.  
The second category contains information from the NMS 
and the RCAF that have to be reported to the NWDAF either 
at regular intervals or whenever there is a specific event (e.g., 
a threshold violation). This information is required for 
NWDAF to create a knowledge model that correlates the 
number of specific types of UEs in a specific area, the applied 
policies in this area and the performance of the network. 
Again, this information cannot be easily avoided or 
minimized. 
The third group of information is related to the battery 
level of UEs (that influence the usage from the users) and the 
accessed services from the application servers. This 
information can be considered as optional since the behavior 
based on the remaining battery level can be inferred by 
information available in the fourth category, whereas the 
accessed services information is useful for the operator to fine 
tune the support of the services (e.g., video caching schemes). 
The final category contains information available at OFCS 
and OCS [18]. The CDRs contain essentially all the 
information needed to create the user behavioral profiles while 
avowing any extra communication of network components 
with the UEs. Table II contains the required parameters and 
their size. Note that this is a simplified version of the overall 
list since as specified in [19], several parameters are 
duplicated based on the network used (GSM, UMTS, LTE) as 
well as the specific services (circuit switched, packet 
switched, IP Multimedia Subsystem – IMS, etc.) 
TABLE II.  
CDR PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Size 
1. International Mobile Subscriber Identity 
(IMSI) 
64 bits 
2. International Mobile Equipment Identity 
(IMEI)–Which device a user is using 
64 bits 
3. Timestamp 
32 bits 
4. Call duration (CS) 
16 bits 
5. Cell Identifier 
20 bits 
6. RAT Type-which Radio access technology 
was used 
8 bits 
6. Duration (PS) 
16 bits 
7. Data Volume Downlink 
16 bits 
8. Data Volume Uplink 
16 bits 
9. Record Opening time 
32 bits 
9. Change Condition – e.g., user location change 
 5 bits 
10. QoS Profile – requested/negotiated 
128 bits 
11. Service Identifie 
32 bits 
13. Traffic Steering Policy Uplink 
8 bits 
14. Traffic Steering Policy Downlink 
8bits 
15. User location information 
8 bits 
16. User location information time 
32 bits 
Total 
505 bits 
 
Note that to identify the level of mobility of a user 
NWDAF/CEPE can simply process the information about cell 
identifiers, and user location that is contained in the 
parameters of Table II. This way neither the UE has to monitor 
and report its mobility level, nor the network components 
perform any complex functions to estimate it. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

The analysis above indicates that based on this small amount 
of data per UE, the behavioral profile of end users can be 
created and improve the control performance of a mobile 
network [4]. Also, this process is transparent to the UEs and 
is based on information already available to the operators. 
Overall, the data that has to be collected from all network 
components is captured the following equation: 
Total = ' CDRk ∗ Tk +
.
/01
'𝑁𝑀𝑆NCl ∗ Tl +
6
701
𝑅𝐶𝐴𝐹data ∗ 𝑇r 
 
Where CDRk and Tk are the information of Table I for every 
UE and their transmission rate, NMSNCl and Tl are the network 
related information for the different network components and 
its correspondent transmission rate and RCAFdata and Tr 
indicates the information transmitted by RCAF. From the 
above discussion only the first part of the equation can be 
minimized. This can be achieved only if the behavioral 
profiles of the UEs are communicated to the OFCS. When the 
received profile of the users is consistent with their current 
recorded behavior, no additional information needs to be 
transmitted back to NWDAF/CEPE. The gain in efficiency of 
such a scheme can be deduced from an example with basic 
parameters, as presented in Figure 4. In the figure, the 
performance gain is compared in a network of 1-10 million 
users using scenarios where data is sent every 30’ to the 
NWDAF/CEPE without optimization versus optimization via 
several 
assumptions 
on 
“profile 
consistency”. 
The 
assumptions on “profile consistency” include scenarios where 
data is transmitted only when user behavior is inconsistent 
with the received profile 30%, 60%, and 90% of the time.  
 
Figure 4. Comparison of data transfer schemes 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper discusses why data mining is going to be a key 
enabler for 5G networks by providing a short survey of 
existing proposals. Also, based on the latest progress of 3GPP 
it analyses why the newly introduced NWDAF is not 
adequate, in the current version, to support data mining.  
Moreover, it presents in detail which information is 
required to be collected and reported to NWDAF/CEPE and 
quantifies the amount of information that is required. It also, 
reports which entities of the 5G architecture could exploit of 
the knowledge created by a data mining framework.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
5G-PPP Architecture WG, “View on 5G Architecture”, Version 2.0, 
July 2017, https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/5G-PPP-
5G-Architecture-White-Paper-2-Summer-2017_For-Public-
Consultation.pdf, (accessed 15-12-2017). 
[2] 
M. De Sanctis, I. Bisio and G. Araniti, “Data Mining Algorithms for 
Communication Network Control: Concepts, Survey and Guidelines”, 
IEEE Network Magazine, January/February 2016. 
[3] 
3GPP, TS 23.501 “System Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2 
(Release 15)”, Version 2.0.1, December 2017. 
[4] 
P. Magdalinos, S. Barbounakis, P. Spapis, A. Kaloxylos et. al., “A 
context extraction and profiling engine for 5G network resource 
mapping”, Computer Communications, 108, pp. 184-201, 2017. 
[5] 
Y. He, F. R. Yu, N. Zhao, H. Yin, H. Yao, and R. Qiu, “Big Data 
Analytics in Mobile Cellular Networks”, IEEE Access, Vol. 4, 2016. 
[6] 
S. Robitsch, F. Zaman, S. van der Meer, J. Keeney, G. Muntean, 
“Magnet: Real-Time Trace Stream Analytics Framework for 5G 
Operations Support”, IEEE Network Magazine September/October 
2017. 
[7] 
L. I. B. Lopez, J. M. Vidal, L. J. G. Villalba, “An Approach to Data 
Analysis in 5G Networks”, Entropy Vol. 19, Issue 2, 2017. 
[8] 
A. Imran, A. Zoha, and A. Abu-Dayya, “Challenges in 5G: How to 
Empower SON with Big Data for Enabling 5G”, IEEE Network 
Magazine, November/December 2014. 
[9] 
K. Zheng, Z. Yang, K. Zhang, P. Chatzimisios, K. Yang, and W. Xiang, 
“Big Data-Driven Optimization for Mobile Networks toward 5G”, 
IEEE Network Magazine, January/February 2016. 
[10] Z. Feng, X. Li, Q. Zhang, W. Li, “Proactive Radio Resource 
Optimization with Margin Prediction: A Data Mining Approach”, 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 66, Issue 10, 
October 2017. 
[11] S. Han, C. Lin, G. Li, S. Wang, and Q. Sun, “Big Data Enabled Mobile 
Network Design for 5G and Beyond”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol 55, Issue 9, July 2017. 
[12] J. Liu, F. Liu and N. Ansari, “Monitoring and Analyzing Big Traffic 
Data of a Large-Scale Cellular Network with Hadoop”, IEEE Network 
Magazine, July/August 2017. 
[13] V. Kolar, S. Ranu, A. Prabhu et. al., “People In Motion: Spatio-
temporal Analytics on Call Detail Records“, Sixth International 
Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), 
2014. 
[14] Y. Wang, P. Li, L. Jiao, Z. Su, et. al., “A Data-Driven Architecture for 
Personalized QoE Management in 5G Wireless Networks”, IEEE 
Wireless Communications, Vol. 24, Issue 1, February 2017. 
[15] 3GPP, TS 23.502, “Procedures for the 5G System”, Stage 2 (Release 
15), Version 1.3.0, November 2017. 
[16] 3GPP, TS 23.503, “Policy and Charging Control Framework for the 
5G system”, Stage 2 (Release 15), December 2017. 
[17] 3GPP, TR 23.793, “Study on Access Traffic Steering, Switching and 
Splitting support in the 5G System Architecture”, Release 15, Version 
0.1.0, August 2017. 
[18] 3GPP, TS 32.240, “Charging architecture and principles”, Release 14, 
Version 14.4.0, June 2017. 
[19] 3GPP, TS 32.298, “Charging Data Record (CDR) parameter 
description”, Release 15, Version, 15.0.0, September 2017.
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Data (Gigabytes)
Number of Users (million)
No optimization
Gain (consistent 30%)
Gain (consistent 60%)
Gain (consistent 90%)
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

