Targeting Situational Awareness beyond the Event Horizon by Means of Sensor 
Element Munition 
Tapio Saarelainen 
Department of Military Technology 
National Defence University, Finland 
Helsinki, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
 
 
Abstract — The main input of this paper is to examine a 
solution for acquiring data from beyond Event Horizon in an 
area of interest while operating in low-level operations in a 
given battlespace. As the pace of modern warfare increases, so 
does the necessity for maintaining accurately and timely 
updated Situational Awareness as well. Especially in tactical 
operations, the need for relevant reconnaissance data is critical 
in fostering effective decision making, and in this data 
collecting and analyzing process sensors capable of being 
deployable above an enemy territory play an important role. 
Versatile military operations in the modern battlespace strive 
for real-time information about enemy actions. Sensors 
capable of detecting seismic, acoustic and magnetic phenomena 
can be deployed to hostile areas with the assistance of mortars 
and howitzers. This paper describes basic principles 
concerning Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs) and discusses 
utilizing Sensor Elements (SEs) capable of sensing motion, 
magnetic, infrared and electro-optical phenomena and 
transmitting the accrued data to command posts in real-time to 
offer data and tools for rapid decision making to facilitate 
mission success. Rapidly deployable airborne SEMs represent 
versatile tools for low-level battalion and company operations.  
Keywords 
- 
Situational 
Awareness 
(SA); 
Common 
Operational Picture (COP); Sensors; Sensor Element Munitions 
(SEMs); Sensor Elements (SEs). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
 This paper introduces a method for accruing data for 
military troops operating in tactical level in a battlespace, 
namely, Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs) with encased 
Sensor Elements (SEs) . The objective of the introduced idea 
is to foster the means and technologies which increase the 
possibilities to facilitate collecting data for an improved 
Common Operational Picture (COP) utilizable in tactical 
operations. This rapidly deployable reconnaissance element, 
SEMs, is introduced as a tool for a comprehensive approach 
to perimeter control and intelligence, surveillance and data 
gathering in tactical level operations. This paper discusses 
how to utilize SEMs in military operations carried out in 
versatile battlespaces. Finally, the significance of the concept 
of Situational Awareness (SA) beyond the Event Horizon is 
discussed in relation to mission success in tactical level 
operations.  
This paper tackles the following three research questions: 
1) How to allow rapid collecting of data beyond the event 
horizon necessary for tactical troops with the assistance of 
Sensor Element Munitions? 2) What is the composition of 
SEMs? And lastly, 3) How to forward these gathered data to 
the given troops rapidly and reliably? 
In particular in low-level operations, namely, those of a 
company and battalion, military commanders must be able to 
maintain an optimal COP facilitated by an equally optimal 
overall SA. Some of the practical data gathering means 
enabling fulfilling these data requirements involve issues 
such as Blue Force Tracking (BFT), Target Identification 
(TID) and Combat Identification (CID) as discussed in [1]. 
The term CID can be defined as a process of attaining an 
accurate and timely characterization of detected objects in 
the joint battle space to the extent that high confidence, 
timely application of military options and weapon resources 
can occur [2]. The collected data can thus be forwarded by 
using available existing network systems to a given entity. A 
definition for SA applicable is verbalized in the Army Field 
Manual 
1-02 
(September 
2004): 
“Knowledge 
and 
understanding of the current situation which promotes 
timely, relevant and accurate assessment of friendly, 
competitive and other operations within the battle space in 
order to facilitate decision making. An informational 
perspective and skill that fosters an ability to determine 
quickly the context and relevance of events that is 
unfolding.” Now, to improve SA to ensure mission success, 
tools and concepts applied in Net Centric Warfare (NCW) 
environments can be utilized. The end-state aims at merging 
the data collected from a finite array of sensors and sources. 
SA comprises three levels: 1) perception, 2) comprehension 
and 3) projection [3]. Operationally, SA, or lack of it, 
remains a key factor in military operations and intelligence 
capabilities [3], [4]. SA is linked to Dismounted Battle 
Command System (DBCS) [5] and to Blue Force Tracking.  
For the purposes of this paper, the term Event Horizon is 
used to denote the level which transcends the level of 
traditional reconnaissance capabilities of low-level military 
commanders. This is, commanders in battalion and company 
levels in militaries of small countries lack the capability of 
exploiting reconnaissance tools, such as Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAVs) and satellite services. Therefore, it is 
essential to introduce quickly deployable means to gather 
intelligence data, the means and tools that do not require 
procuring new types of weapons or materiel to overburden 
the organization in question. 
Data beyond the Event Horizon refers to data collected 
beyond the visual horizon. In case of troops and operations 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

concerning the battalion and lower levels, this collecting of 
data beyond the visual horizon is impossible because of the 
lacking reconnaissance tools described above. The pace of 
warfare is hectic in these low-level operations with multiple 
encounters in a tight time-frame. Thus more precise data are 
required for improved SA to ensure effective and timely 
decision making. This involves accounting for the 
phenomena taking place in the electromagnetic spectrum 
based on these observations and, moreover, the accrued data 
have to be in operational use in a matter of minutes. 
Indications of shots, explosions and acoustic and visual 
signatures of vehicles and their locations and actions are 
needed to create a Common Operational Picture (COP). 
Typically, a COP comprises three types of modules: 1) 
information gathering sources that observe events and report 
information to the command and control module, 2) a 
command and control module that makes decisions based on 
both information received directly from its information 
gathering sources and information reported by other peers, 
and 3) display units at the emergency location that receive 
instructions from the command and control module [4].  
The core capability in an optimal SA is a COP that 
fosters effective decision making, rapid staff actions, and 
appropriate mission execution [4]. The COP is employed to 
collect, share and display multi-dimensional information to 
facilitate collaborative planning and responding to security 
incidents. 
This paper discusses recent research in regard to 
possibilities for increasing SA to ensure mission success in 
low-level military operations in battlespace. The remaining 
of the paper is arranged as follows: Section II introduces 
related work, Section III describes the composition and 
characteristics of SEMs and their utilization, Section IV 
explains the characteristics of SEMs together with the 
communication process, Section V concentrates on the 
targeting process, Section VI deals with the possibilities to 
analyze the collected data with Section VIII concluding the 
paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This paper is linked to three major areas researched by 
armed forces. Firstly, the key issue concerning military 
troops is their efficiency, which can be gained via an 
improved operational setting involving optimal SA, BFT and 
Command, 
Control, 
Computers, 
Communication, 
Information and Intelligence, (C4I2) [6]. Secondly, efficiency 
in military operations asks for optimized target identification, 
gained via utilizing the electro magnetic spectrum [7]. 
Thirdly, performance in low-level operations is currently 
being extensively examined, especially in conscript-based 
armed forces  
In low-level operations, only minimal time is allocated 
for gaining SA data or waiting for orders. Systems applied in 
this level have to be simple, easy to use, and rapidly 
deployable. An example of this type of an operation is a 
dismounted company attack, where the structure of an attack 
process can be seen as a chain of planned events. This 
process requires particular services, which can be allocated 
to the requester of a service only if the service is available 
and within reach. The overall process of a company attack is 
explained in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Company attack as a process. 
Secondly, as militaries search for effective, rapid and 
reliable means to collect and analyze SA data in the 
battlespace, the realm of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
[8] is relevant. As noted, WSN can be quickly-deployed, 
suitable for unattended monitoring and unnoticeable, 
representing an ideal choice for military applications [8]. For 
this particular purpose, remote, ground-based electronic 
sensors, used to collect intelligence on enemy movements 
and manoeuvres have been available for decades [9]. Yet, the 
reconnaissance and beneficial utilization of various types of 
sensors and sensor networks continue to be applicable. By 
adopting suitable sensors for appropriate platforms, the 
critical data can be gathered from the battlespace early 
enough to foster executing versatile military operations. 
Improved SA remains a key issue for small units operating in 
versatile military operations in a given battlespace and thus 
new and rapid means to collect data continue to remain 
necessary. For instance, the Finnish Defence Forces is 
developing its own sensors for improved skills in 
surveillance and intrusion detection systems to replace the 
anti-personnel land mines. 
Obviously, all armed forces look for enhancing the 
performance and agility of their troops. This paper discusses 
a solution, the Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs) that can be 
produced by utilizing existing COTS-technology. The 
sensing elements of SEMs represent inexpensive, rapidly 
deployable means and draw from COTS-products to 
facilitate data accruing behind the event horizon. 
III. 
THE SET-UP AND UTILIZATION OF SENSOR ELEMENT 
MUNITIONS 
The data collecting and reconnaissance carried out by 
means of SEMs take after the standard High Explosive 
ammunition used in mortars and howitzers. The main 
difference is in the payload, in which the explosive charge 
has been replaced with a parachuted Sensor Element (SE). 
This SE is strong enough to withstand the forces of 
acceleration of a regular munition. The munition is delivered 
to a hostile area with similar procedures as standard High 
Explosive munition. The SE acting as a payload will be 
exhausted from the ammunition shell while airborne. 
Structurally, the SE comprises a power source, an array 
of sensors, a transmitting unit and a relay-unit. The SE can 
act simultaneously in two roles: in accruing data and in a 
relaying role between two SEs. The SE does not receive 
data, but only transmits the data gathered, including GPS-
data of its own position. The SE comprises sensors such as a 
visual sensor applicable to monitor targets both in daylight 
and low-light conditions as well as in the darkness. The 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

central sensor is forward-looking infrared (FLIR) which is an 
important sensor for its advantages in night vision in 
securing military camps, reassuring soldier security, and 
detecting suspected terror activities in the battlespace [10]. 
The SE carries an image intensifier element and low-light 
sensors. It also features shortwave infrared (SWIR) and 
longwave infrared (LWIR). In addition, the SE includes 
detection elements for sensing acoustic, seismic and 
magnetic interference. Moreover, the sensor package features 
detection elements capable of detecting infrared and the 
movement of an individual and a wheeled or tracked vehicle. 
Once the SE has been ejected out of the munition, it 
immediately starts to gather and transmit information from 
its area to own troops in an Ultra-Wideband using the 
frequency of 2,4 GHz for securing the transmission QoS. 
Another suitable method for transmitting the data is 
Worldwide 
Interoperability 
for 
Microwave 
Access 
(WiMAX), which is based on IEEE 802.16 standard utilizing 
frequencies of 4,4 -5,0 GHz. 
The WiMAX standard 802.16d is applicable for slowly 
moving users whereas 802.16e is tailored for mobile users 
[11] and therefore we concentrate on Portable (Mobile) 
WiMAX, 802.16e, the channel sizes of which are 5 MHz, 
8.75 MHz and 10 MHz. The usable WiMAX, 802.16e is 
based on orthogonal frequency division multiplexing 
(OFDM), orthogonal frequency division multiple access 
(OFDMA) [12]. In short, WiMAX combines OFDMA, an 
advanced multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) as well as 
beamforming (BF) features [13]. These features together 
offer flexible bandwidth and fast link adaptation, creating a 
highly efficient air interface exceeding the capacity of 
existing 3G radio access networks [13]. These systems are 
suitable for military surveillance applications. 
In low-level operations in the battlespace, data collecting 
can be facilitated by SEMs. The shell of SEMs can be 
manufactured of either steel, composite, or heat-treated 
plastics. SEMs can be deployed to a target area either by a 
howitzer or a mortar. In what follows, we take a closer look 
at SEMs and examine the processes of munition deployment, 
data collecting and data distribution. 
Firstly, the ammunition shell of SEMs can be 
manufactured of various materials. One of these is 
composite, originally tailored for ballistic protection. The 
benefits of this material are its strength and suitability for 
munition core material in that it is lighter than steel and 
easily forged into the desired shape and structure. When 
munition is lighter, the payload can be heavier, if desired. 
Light-weight munition can be deployed further behind 
enemy lines by using the same charge as in steel munition. 
Moreover, composite represents a material, which can be 
surfaced with materials capable of absorbing radar beams, 
making the SEM less visible in enemy counter-artillery 
radars. This means that SEMs and the SEs are invisible on 
the screens of an adversary’s counter-artillery radars while 
SEMs are being deployed to enemy territory by air. 
Furthermore, as the SE is made of composite, when it hovers 
in the air above an adversary, the SE manufactured of 
composite is less visible compared to an SE made of 
traditional steel. In short, an adversary receives no early 
warning of the incoming munition and is unlikely to be 
capable of locating either the positions of an artillery weapon 
or the howering elements early enough. Therefore, it is 
highly unlikely that any counter measures be executed for 
there are no indications of any oncoming actions whatsoever. 
Figure 2 illustrates the structures of various types of SEMs 
with the encased SEs. 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Structures of Sensor Element Munitions: An artillery SEM 
(left), a mortar SEM (right). Artillery and mortar shells can be 
manufactured of various materials. Composite-manufactured Sensor 
Elements (SEs) are packed inside the munitions together with their 
parachutes. 
Secondly, 
the 
tactical 
use 
of 
the 
SEM-based 
reconnaissance 
system 
is 
as 
follows: 
1) 
When 
reconnaissance data beyond the Event Horizon are needed, a 
commander issues the order to deploy the munition to the 
target area, 2) mortars or/and howitzers perform the tasks to 
the designated areas, 3) the SE transmits the data to own 
receivers, 4) resulting improved SA is utilized in 
commanding troops and shooters to the designated areas or 
targets to maximize the performance of own troops (and gain 
the initiative). If more data are wanted, the described phase 
two can be repeated and more data can be gathered. This 
process is explained in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  On deploying an SE above an enemy territory: 1) Fire Support 
Order is issued, 2) the SEM is airborne, 3) the SEM opens and ejects the 
SE, 4) the SE starts to transmit gathered data from the enemy territory and 
targets. 
Once the critical data have been collected they have to be 
quickly analyzed to be used for evaluating different Courses 
of Action (COAs). Success depends on an accurate mission 
analysis and a timely evaluation process of the accrued data. 
Improved SA results in optimal time for mission execution 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

and simultaneous minimizing of casualties, which increases 
efficiency and leads to minimum recovery times improving 
the overall efficiency and performance capabilities of the 
troops utilized. 
Once commanders have access to more current 
reconnaissance data for mission execution, they are able to 
analyze different COAs and calculate the pros and cons to 
evaluate the best possible method to operate in any scenario 
prevailing. As explained in Figure 4, military commanders 
have by default value at least two different options for 
executing the mission in question. Having completed 
Military Decision Making Process (MDMP), the most 
effective operation can be executed to maximize the 
performance of the designated troops. In the described 
scenario below, the commander focuses the performance on 
incapacitating the Command Post (CP), the alternative 
number 2, instead of attacking against the armored enemy. 
 
 
  
Figure 4.  
Possibilities of COAs. 
Figure 5 explains the basic process of data gathering 
beyond the Event Horizon, especially in operations suitable 
for low-level troops. The deployed and hovering sensor 
element acts like loitering munition, sensing and measuring 
the prevailing electromagnetic spectrum, collecting and 
transmitting data to the receiver-station. An antenna can be 
installed both in a fighting vehicle and on the ground, 
depending on the prevailing combat-situation.  
 
 
Figure 5.  
The data gathering process for improved SA beyond the 
Event Horizon and the transmitting of these data to own troops. 
Time itself is a critical resource in this type of 
reconnaissance process. In order to avoid wasting time, the 
signals and data must be transmitted reliably from the SE to 
the receiver-station. For this purpose, the SE utilizes smart 
antenna technology meaning that antenna transmission and 
propagation pattern can be optimized for the optimal 
outcome. The accrued data can be transmitted reliably to the 
receiver, and because of the clear Line-Of-Sight (LOS), there 
is only a limited number of obstacles or attenuation 
disturbing the coded transmission process from the sensor to 
the receiver-station. This method is described in Figure 6.  
 
Figure 6.  
A method for transmitting the accrued data to the 
commanded troops to ensure successful operations. 
IV. 
ON AIRBORNE SENSORS, SEMS AND 
COMMUNICATION  
In any military operation, airborne sensors are important 
for missions, such as force protection, perimeter control and 
intelligence utilization [9]. Transmitting the accrued data to 
prevent fratricide and ensure success in operations 
presupposes optimal communications. WiMAX transmission 
offers applicable possibilities in forwarding collected data. 
The distances in the transmission process are relatively short, 
ranging from 1 kilometer to 20 kilometres in conditions of 
clear Line-Of-Sight.  
The sensor package inside SEMs, namely the SE, can be 
made of existing COTS-products comprising sensors capable 
of sensing most of the phenomena occurring in the 
electromagnetic spectrum. In general, COTS-products are 
relatively inexpensive and reliable in terms of function, as 
explained in [14]. An SE of a SEM comprises the following 
sensors: acoustic-, seismic-, magnetic-, visible image-, 
shortwave infrared (SWIR)-, thermal-, infrared-, low-light 
television (LLTV)-, and sensors for laser tracking and 
spotting and sensors for facial recognition. In terms of 
automatized 
identification 
and 
verification, 
a 
facial 
Recognition System represents a computer application 
capable of automatically identifying or verifying a person 
from a digital image. One possibility is to compare selected 
facial features from the captured image with an existing 
facial database.  
The analyzing centre has the capability for the fusion of 
all the accrued sensor information. The sensor package 
comprises a short lifetime battery, which can produce energy 
for the sensor package for the duration of 4 – 6 minutes 
(howering time). The battery can be equipped with 
capacitors or electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) if the 
required energy level is inadequate with the selected sensor 
package.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Once an SE is airborne, it immediately starts to transmit 
the gathered data to own troops either directly or, if the 
transmission distance exceeds the capability of the 
transmission unit, the SE transmits the data to another 
airborne device, which acts as a relay station in relation to 
own troops. The SE communicates with the receiver station 
and other sensor element packages over a 2,4 GHz Ultra-
Wideband Network system. The accrued data are crypted for 
security reasons. 
V. 
COMPREHENSIVE TARGETING PROCESS 
The cycle of a complete targeting process can be 
described as Detect, Identify, Decide; Engage and Assess 
(DIDEA) [4]. The cycle is outlined in Figure 7 below. The 
DIDEA provides an iterative, standardised and systematic 
approach supporting targeting and decision making, being 
generic enough to be used as a systematic process for C2 
node targeting and decision making. This process is 
thoroughly discussed in [4]. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  
 The simplified DIDEA process. 
The decision as to whether or not to open fire is based on 
the visual signature of a given uniform, weapon and gear as 
well as magnetic, seismic or acoustic signals identified by a 
sensor [9]. Self-evidently, the transmission of combat-critical 
location and identification data play a crucial role in the 
battle space. After the accrued data have been transmitted 
and received, they flow through a dissemination process, 
where these data are analyzed and fused to form a COP and 
to increase the overall SA. Figure 8 explains the process of 
Signature Prediction Process (SPP). As described in Figure 
8, sensors accrue data and transmit these data for analyzing 
centers. The data collected with SEMs are verified with the 
data gathered with other sensors to in order to predict and 
anticipate the type of target and its actions.  
 
 
Figure 8.  
The Signature Prediction Process, typical of several 
surveillance and detection systems. 
The destruction power of a given weapon system has to 
be optimized to account for the enemy location (forest, open 
area, Urban Territory), the state of movement on-the Move 
(OTM) or at-the-halt (ATH), and the protection-level 
(mounted, dismounted, dug).  
The cruel reality remains that an executive commander is 
necessarily aware of fact the there is always the possibility of 
fratricide and collateral damage. Figure 9 emphasizes the 
importance of accurate and timely SA around the target area. 
The shooter has to be aware of the locations and status of 
both own troops and the enemy. It is critical to optimize the 
destruction power of a weapon system along the 
identification of a target. When the target represents a 
hierarchically critical enemy commander, he or she can be 
incapacitated by transmitting the coordinates and visual 
signature to the designated shooter, as indicated in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  
The importance of accurate and timely SA around the target 
area. 
If the commander has Close-Air Support (CAS) 
available, he or she can utilize the performance of the data 
analyzing centre (indicated as a satellite dish in Figure 10), 
the collected data can be forwarded directly to the shooter. 
This process improves the overall performance and saves 
time and utilizes the performance of a designated fighter (cf. 
Figure 
10 
below). 
As 
for 
the 
receiving 
antenna 
constellations, they can be both ground- and vehicle-born 
systems. 
 
 
Figure 10.  
The process of detecting enemy forces and forwarding the 
accrued data to an Analyzing Center and finally to the shooter. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

In a critical case when the target is a very important 
human being, he or she can be incapacitated by transmitting 
the required precise data of the target and its location to the 
sniper or to a team of snipers. A cellular telephone can act as 
a receiver. The figure caption of a sniper’s cellular phone is 
depicted in Figure 11. 
 
Figure 11.  
Adequate target identification data transmitted to an 
individual member of Special Forces for eliminating purposes. 
VI. 
MEANS TO ANALYZE COLLECTED DATA 
When it comes to transmitting data, the following issues 
have been identified. As tested in [13], an 802.16e WiMAX 
Testbed has provided throughputs of 5.75 Mbps Upstream 
with a modulation and coding of 64 QAM ¾ [13]. These 
amounts of data seem adequate to receive all the required 
sensor data.  
With the assistance of automated targeting programs and 
classifiers, it is possible to recognize faces, find hidden and 
concealed targets, and look for essential information by 
means of computation algorithms [15]. Classifiers, such as a 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbourhood 
classifier (KNN), and BP neural classifier, can be utilized in 
battlefield target identification [7]. The recognition of an 
end-user can be based on visual biometrics and the most 
conventional 
identification, 
the 
computer-assisted 
recognition of human face [16]. The ubiquitous networks and 
sensor data can act as assisting tools in detection, recognition 
and especially in target classification [15]. Moreover, the 
data produced by various multi-sensors can be utilized in the 
data refinery process to ease the recognition and 
identification process with the assistance of data fusion 
processes by resorting to computer-programs designed for 
data fusion processes [17]. In fact, when using the K-
Nearest-Neighbour (KNN) algorithm, approximately 80 % of 
unknown target samples can be recognized correctly, when 
the known target classification accuracy remains above 95 
%. This enables the use of the ATR and the Automatic 
Target Cuer (ATC). Face recognition schemes that combine 
wavelet transform, SVM and clustering can be exploited 
identifying human beings [18].  
 As for object categorization, high-definition closed-
circuit television (CCTV) cameras feature many computer 
controlled technologies that allow them to identify, track, 
and categorize objects in their field of view. As defined in 
[19], WiMAX mobile technology is a good candidate in 
supporting the CCTV applications in the context of mobile 
users. Furthermore, Video Content Analysis (VCA) 
represents the capability of automatically analyzing a video 
to detect and determine temporal events not based on a single 
image. Moreover, a system utilizing a VCA can recognize 
changes in the environment and identify and compare objects 
in the database using size, speed, and color. Also, VCA 
analytics can be used to detect unusual patterns in a video’s 
environment. The system can be set to detect anomalies in a 
crowd of people and a VCA also has the ability to track 
people on a map by calculating their position from the 
images. 
VII. CONLUSIONS 
This paper has introduced a robust SEMs-based data 
collecting means for gathering data beyond the Event 
Horizon. This approach draws from the utilization of existing 
sensors and WiMAX technology. The composition and 
functionality of SEMs have been introduced. The results of 
this paper offer a method to improve SA, COP, CID, and 
TID. The concepts of SEM and SE have been introduced in 
Figures 2 – 3. The introduced solution is applicable in 
increasing the performance capabilities of modern troops. 
Three research questions were raised in Section I, and the 
answers to questions 1 and 2 were provided in Section III 
with visualizations in Figures 2 and 3, and question 3 was 
addressed in Section III with visualizations in Figures 5 and 
6. 
As evident, in all operations and in low-level tactical 
operations in particular, critical Situational Awareness data 
have to be collected rapidly, since mission success is time-
dependent. Figures 4 – 6 concentrated on describing the data 
accruing process and utilization of data in military 
operations. Once data have been collected, a battle can be 
won only by careful mission planning, comparing different 
COAs and rapidly executing successful operations. Figures 7 
– 9 illustrated the process of targeting. Thereby the adoption 
of existing COTS-technologies, when appropriately applied, 
offers a key to ensuring the desired success.  
Operational time spent in the battlespace can be 
minimized by careful mission analysis and thorough 
evaluation of Courses of Actions (COAs). Critical data have 
to be forwarded to shooters, as illustrated in Figures 10 – 11. 
So far, all the decision-making processes in battlespace 
settings have culminated in a human being making the final 
decision to apply performance in missions. In the future, this 
decision maker’s position may be manned by Artificial 
Intelligence (AI). AI can be benefitted as an assisting power 
of a commander to ensure mission success. Figure 12 
describes this process in brief. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
 
Figure 12.  
Once COP and SA have been fused, a computer can assist in 
fostering the movement of own troops along the pace and direction. 
This mid-term solution remains applicable until the 
current armed forces are being replaced by robotic militaries 
of the future. Before this, however, humans have to continue 
coping with their own intelligence assisted with optimal data 
accruing and analyzing tools in order to be able to make 
judgements that keep incorporating both the probability of 
success and affordable costs. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Saarelainen, Enhancing Situational Awareness by Means of 
Combat-ID to Minimize Fratricide and Collateral Damage in the 
Theater, 
The 
Sixth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Telecommunications, (ICDT2011), Budapest, 17 – 22.4.2011, 
Hungary.  
[2] T. Saarelainen, White Force Tracking, in Proceedings of the 8th 
European Conference on Information Warfare and Security, 
ECIW2009, 6 – 7 July 2009, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 216 – 223.   
[3] M. Endsley, and Connors, E., Situation awareness: State of the art, in 
Proceedings of Power and Energy Society General Meeting - 
Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, 
20-24 
July 
2008, 
Pittsburg, 
PA, 
pp. 
1 
– 
4, 
doi 
10.1109/PES.2008.4596937  
[4] T. Saarelainen, and J. Timonen, Tactical Management in near real-
time Systems, in Proceedings of IEEE International Multi-
Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation 
Awareness and Decision Support (Cogsima 2011), CogSIMA2011, 
Miami 
Beach, 
Fl, 
U.S.A., 
pp. 
240 
- 
247, 
doi 
10.1109/COGSIMA.2011.5753452. 
[5] T. Saarelainen, and J. Jormakka, Computer-Aided Warriors for Future 
Battlefields, The 9th European Conference on Information Warfare 
and Security ECIW2009, Lisbon, 6 – 7 July, 2009, Portugal, pp. 224 
– 233.  
[6] Saarelainen, T. and J. Jormakka, C4I2-Tools for the Future Battlefield 
Warriors, in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on 
Digital Communications (ICDT), 13 –19 June 2009, Athens, Greece, 
pp. 38 – 43, doi 10.1109/ICDT.2010.15.  
[7] J. Li, C. Zhang, and Z. Li, Battlefield Target Identification Based on 
Improved Grid-Search SVM Classifier, International Conference on 
Computational Intelligence and Software Engineering, 2009 (CiSE 
2009), 11-13 Dec. 2009, pp. 1 – 4, Doi  10.1109/CISE.2009.5365100. 
[8] T. Jing, Y. Shengwei, Y. Bing, and M. Shilong, Study On Wireless 
Sensor Networks, International Conference on Intelligent System 
Design and Engineering Application (ISDEA), 13-14 Oct. 2010, Vol 
2, 
ISBN 
978-1-4244-8333-4, 
pp. 
510 
– 
521, 
doi 
10.1109/ISDEA.2010.392.  
[9] P. Buxbaum, Denying Access, Special Operations Technology, July 
2010, Vol 8, Issue 5, pp.26 – 27. 
[10] I. Zafar, U. Zakir, I. Romanenko, R. Jiang, and  E. Edirisinghe, 
Human Silhouette Extraction on FPGAs for Infrared Night Vision 
Military Surveillance, IEEE, International Conference onSecond 
Pacific- Asia Conference on Circuits, Communications and System 
(PACCS), 2010, pp. 63 – 66, doi 10.1109/PACCS.2010.5627025.  
[11] J. Martin, B. Li, W. Pressly, and J. Westall, WiMAX Performance at 
4.9 GHz, pp. 1 – 7, doi 10.1109/AERO.2010.5446943. 
[12] M. Al-Adwany, A performance study of wireless broadband access 
(WiMAX), 1st International Conference on Energy, Power and 
Control (EPC-IQ), Nov. 30 2010-Dec. 2 2010, pp. 320 – 324, 
INSPEC Accession Number: 11989694. 
[13] K. Etemad, Overview of Mobile WiMAX Technology and Evolution, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, October 2008, pp. 31 – 40, doi 
10.1109/MCOM.2008.4644117. 
[14] R. Kozma, L. Wang, K. Iftekharuddin, E. McCracken, M. Khan, K. 
Islam, R. Demir, Multi-modal sensor system integrating COTS 
technology for surveillance and tracking, Radar Conference, 10-14 
May 2010, pp. 1030 – 1035, doi 10.1109/RADAR.2010.5494467. 
[15] Frankot, R.T., Performance of cued target acquisition systems: Impact 
of automatic target recognition, in Proceedings of 42nd Conference 
on Asilomar Signals, Systems and Computers (ACSSC2008), pp. 1619 
– 1623, doi 10.1109/ACSSC.2008.5074697.  
[16] R. Luo, Y. Chou, T. Chung, C. Liao, C. Lail, and C. Tsai, NCCU 
Security Warrior: An Intelligent Security Robot System, in 
Proceedings of 33rd IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics 
Society (IECON 2007), 5-8 Nov. 2007, Taipei, pp. 2960 – 2965, doi 
10.1109/IECON.2007.4460380.  
[17] Libiao, T. ; Lu, W., Qi, D., Kai, Z., Target Recognition Based on 
Seismic Sensors and Neural Network, in Proceedings of 8th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Electronic 
Measurement 
and 
Instruments (ICEMI '07), Aug. 16 2007-July 18 2007, Xi'an, pp. 1-18 
– 1-21, doi 10.1109/ICEMI.2007.4350418.  
[18] Luo, B; Zhang, Y., and Pan, Y-H., Face recognition based on wavelet 
transform and SVM, Conference on Information Acquisition, in 
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Information 
Acquisition, 27 June-3 July 2005, doi pp. 373 – 377, doi 
10.1109/ICIA.2005.1635115.  
[19] M. Aguado, E. Jacob, J. Matias, C. Conde, and M Berbineau, 
Deploying CCTV As an Ethernet Service Over the Wimax Mobile 
Network in the Public Transport Scenario, International Conference 
on Communications Workshops, 2009. (ICC Workshops 2009), 14-18 
June 2009, pp. 1 – 5, doi 10.1109/ICCW.2009.5208011.  
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

