Transmission Control to Suppress Interference Between Periodic and Non-Periodic
Trafﬁc in Wireless Coexistence Scenarios
Ryota Ikeuchi and Hiroyuki Yomo
Graduate School of Engineering Science, Kansai University
3-3-35 Yamate-cho, Suita, Osaka, 564-8680 Japan
e-mail: {k097114, yomo}@kansai-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we consider a wireless coexistence
scenario where multi–radio platforms are employed to simulta-
neously support periodic and non–periodic trafﬁc. Considering
a scenario where wireless terminals generating periodic trafﬁc
over one frequency band change their operating band to the
other band after detecting long–term communication failures, we
consider how to suppress mutual interference between periodic
and non–periodic trafﬁc over the shared channel. In this paper,
we propose a transmission control alleviating negative impact of
mutual interference by exploiting interface heterogeneity, trafﬁc
periodicity, and queue management. The proposed scheme real-
izes high packet delivery ratio of periodic trafﬁc by suppressing
transmissions of terminals with non–periodic trafﬁc at the timing
when periodic trafﬁc is expected to be transmitted by their
hidden terminals. With computer simulations and experiments,
we investigate the practicality and effectiveness of the proposed
scheme.
Keywords—Wireless Coexistence, Factory Automation, IEEE
802.11, IEEE 802.15.4, Internet of Things
I. INTRODUCTION
The proliferation of diverse wireless access technologies,
such as LTE, WiFi, ZigBee, Bluetooth, etc., has been accel-
erated during the last decade to support heterogenous trafﬁc
with different requirements. Today, we have an option to
simultaneously exploit these technologies with multi–radio
platforms [1][2]: for instance, small, low–price IoT devices,
which are equipped with multiple interfaces operating over
different frequency bands, such as 2.4/5GHz and 920MHz,
are commercially available [3].
In this paper, we exploit multi–radio platforms to enhance
robustness of wireless networks in a highly noisy environment.
A typical use–case is factory [4], where there are many metal
objects blocking communication links between transmitters
and receivers [5]. Furthermore, there can be noise emitted
from industrial machines, as well as interference from many
radio equipment around a factory. The resulting instability
of communication channels causes temporal communication
failure, which can last for a long period of time. If we
employ wireless devices with a single interface operating over
a speciﬁc frequency band in such an unstable environment,
we cannot offer reliable transmissions of data: once blocking,
noise or interference is generated over an operating frequency
band, each device has no way to avoid them. The lack of
reliability for data transmissions in a factory can result in
serious incidents that could even cause human life to be in
danger. Therefore, in our work, we focus on the usage of wire-
less devices equipped with multiple radio interfaces operating
at different frequency bands, called Flexible Terminal (FT).
With FT, even if noise or interference is generated over one
frequency band, its operating band can be changed to the other
frequency band, which enables us to avoid communication
failures due to noise and interference. More speciﬁcally, we
employ radio standards operating at unlicensed frequency
bands: IEEE 802.11 at 2.4 GHz and IEEE 802.15.4g at
920MHz since these standards are widely employed in many
industrial ﬁelds [6].
Besides the heterogeneity of radio interface, the heterogene-
ity of communication trafﬁc has become a common trend
in current wireless networks. In addition to non–periodic
(bursty) trafﬁc generated by classical applications, such as
Internet access and video/image transfer, more deterministic
and periodic trafﬁc has become a dominant pattern especially
in a scenario with sensor devices deployed for monitoring
purpose [7][8]. In general, small amount of data is generated
by sensor devices, for which 920MHz radio supporting low
data rate with large coverage is a favorable option. On the
other hand, 2.4GHz commonly used by WiFi offers higher
data rate with smaller coverage than 920MHz, which makes it
suited for supporting Internet access and transfer of large–
size image/video ﬁles. In this work, we employ FTs to
simultaneously support periodic and non–periodic trafﬁc. In a
normal operation mode without any noise or interference, FTs
with non–periodic trafﬁc employ an interface operating at 2.4
GHz while FTs with periodic trafﬁc use an interface operating
at 920MHz. Then, we consider a scenario where noise or
interference is generated by surrounding devices/machines
over 920MHz, and each FT with periodic trafﬁc changes its
operating interface to that at 2.4GHz. In this case, there is
mutual interference between FTs with periodic trafﬁc and
FTs with non–periodic trafﬁc. In this work, we propose a
transmission control, which suppresses mutual interference
by exploiting interface heterogeneity, trafﬁc periodicity, and
queue management. In the proposed scheme, FTs with non–
periodic trafﬁc detect possible hidden FTs with periodic trafﬁc
by using difference of propagation characteristics of different
frequency bands. Then, FTs with non–periodic trafﬁc predict
the transmission timing of FTs with periodic trafﬁc, and
suppress their packet transmissions at the predicted timing
with adaptive queue management. With computer simulations
and experiments, we investigate the practicality and possible
gain of the proposed scheme.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After describ-
ing the system model and problem deﬁnition in Section II, we
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

present our proposed transmission control in Section III. After
showing and discussing some numerical results in Section IV,
Section V concludes the paper with several future work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM DEFINITION
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the system model consid-
ered in this paper, followed by the problem formulation.
A. System Model
In this work, we employ FTs with interfaces operating at
2.4GHz and 920MHz. In general, 920MHz signals have larger
propagation distance than 2.4 GHz while the former achieves
lower data rate than the latter. We consider a factory–like
indoor area where FTs and a single Flexible Gateway (FG),
which is in charge of aggregating data generated by FTs, are
deployed as shown in Figure 1. The FG is also equipped with
2.4GHz and 920MHz interfaces to receive data from FTs.
Some FTs are supposed to generate non–periodic, bursty, and
heavy–load trafﬁc, which are called NP–FTs. Since this type
of trafﬁc is in general supported by higher PHY rate at 2.4GHz
that has limited communication range, we assume that NP–FTs
are deployed near FG. On the other hand, FTs except for NP–
FTs are assumed to generate periodic, light–load trafﬁc, which
are called P–FTs. A typical example of P–FT is a sensor device
generating monitoring data of industrial machines and/or a
given environment, which are deployed at various places
within an area. This requires P–FTs to employ an interface
and/or parameters realizing a larger communication range, for
which 920MHz is more favorable option. We assume that
the information on period of P–FT’s trafﬁc is known and
shared by all FTs/FG. This is a reasonable assumption since
these terminals and gateway are considered to be deployed by
a single administrator of a factory. Furthermore, the timing
of packet–generations of P–FTs are controlled to be equally
separated over time so that they are not overlapped. This
enables us to avoid contention among P–FTs. In a normal
operation mode, NP–FTs employ 2.4GHz interface while P–
FTs utilize 920MHz interface. Here, 2.4 GHz interface is
supposed to follow IEEE 802.11 PHY/MAC protocol while
920MHz interface is in accordance with IEEE 802.15.4g/e
PHY/MAC protocol. Note that both of these standards employ
CSMA/CA protocol. The FG receives data from both NP–FTs
and P–FTs by using its two interfaces. It is assumed that the
carrier–sense range of 2.4GHz interface is smaller than that
of 920MHz as shown in Figure 1: for example, carrier–sense
range of NP–FT1 in Figure 1 over 920MHz is sufﬁciently large
to detect signals transmitted by all terminals while it can only
sense signals transmitted by a part of terminals over 2.4GHz.
B. Problem Deﬁnition
In this work, we consider a scenario where severe
noise/interference is caused over 920MHz, which can be emit-
ted from industrial machines and/or radio devices deployed
inside/outside a factory area, and 920MHz interface suffers
from continuous communication failures for a long period
of time. As mentioned in Section I, FTs are able to switch
Flexible Gateway (FG)
Non-Periodic Flexible Terminal
(NP-FT) using 2.4GHz band
Periodic Flexible Terminal
(P-FT) using 920MHz band
Carrier-sense area of NP-FT1 
in 2.4GHz
Carrier-sense area of NP-FT1
in 920MHz
NP-FT1
P-FT3
P-FT1
P-FT2
Figure 1. The considered, factory–like system model.
their operating interface. Therefore, P–FTs, which operate
with 920MHz interface in a normal operation mode, can
switch their operating interface to 2.4GHz, e.g., after detecting
continuous packet errors or after receiving some instruction
if there is a central entity to monitor the radio environment.
Here, each P–FT is assumed to employ low PHY rate (e.g.,
1Mbps) at 2.4GHz, which enables each P–FT to achieve
sufﬁciently large communication range to transmit data to FG.
However, when P–FTs and NP–FTs share the same 2.4GHz
frequency band, another problem can occur, which is a hidden
terminal problem. For example, as shown in Figure 1, NP–
FT1 and P-FT2 cannot sense their signals with each other
at 2.4GHz. Therefore, CSMA/CA mechanisms do not work
properly among these nodes after P–FT2 changes its operating
band to 2.4GHz, which can cause packet losses at FG, thereby
degrading packet delivery ratio and throughput.
A well–known solution to hidden terminal problem is
RTS/CTS handshake deﬁned in IEEE 802.11. However, it has
been reported that the efﬁciency of RTS/CTS handshake is low
when short packets, such as small amount of data generated by
P–FTs in our scenario, are involved in data transmissions [9].
Furthermore, RTS/CTS mechanism does not fundamentally
solve problems on collisions among hidden terminals: RTS
frames transmitted by hidden terminals can collide with high
probability. Another requirement speciﬁc to industrial appli-
cations is more strict and deterministic protection for sensing
data in comparison to Internet access/ﬁle transfer [10], which
is difﬁcult to achieve with RTS/CTS handshake even with QoS
differentiation deﬁned in IEEE 802.11e [11]. Therefore, in this
work, we propose a mechanism to deterministically suppress
transmissions of NP–FTs to avoid interference with hidden P–
FTs without resorting to RTS/CTS mechanisms by exploiting
interface heterogeneity, trafﬁc periodicity, and adaptive queue
management.
III. PROPOSED TRANSMISSION CONTROL
The proposed scheme controls packet transmissions of NP–
FTs in order to suppress interference with their hidden P–FTs.
A. Mechanism to Detect Hidden Terminals
The NP–FTs ﬁrst need to identify possible hidden terminals
in order to suppress their mutual interference. This is achieved
by exploiting the heterogeneity of interface. Each NP–FT
observes trafﬁc over 920MHz and 2.4GHz while they are not
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

transmitting their own data. In the normal operation mode,
P–FTs transmit data at 920MHz. In this case, each NP–FT
ﬁnds packets of all P–FTs over 920MHz since they can easily
reach each NP–FT thanks to a large communication range of
920MHz. For example, NP–FT1 shown in Figure 1 observes
periodic receptions of all P–FTs at 920MHz interface in a
normal operation mode. After P–FTs detect noise/interference
at 920MHz, they switch their interface to 2.4GHz, where
NP–FT1 receives packets only from P–FTs located within its
communication range over 2.4GHz. Thus, in the example of
Figure 1, NP–FT1 cannot receive packets transmitted by P–
FT2 since P–FT2 is out of carrier–sense/communication range
of NP–FT1. Then, NP–FT1 ﬁnds that it has a hidden terminal
of P–FT2 over 2.4GHz. At this timing, NP–FTs can also ﬁnd
that P–FTs have changed their operating band to 2.4GHz.
Thus, by comparing packet receptions at 920MHz and 2.4GHz,
each NP–FT can identify its hidden terminals over 2.4GHz,
whose packets can cause collisions against itself.
B. Basic Idea of Proposed Transmission Control
While receiving packets from P–FTs in the normal operation
mode, each NP–FT records the reception timing of each P–FT.
Based on this information and pre–knowledge of the period
of packet transmissions of each P–FT, each NP–FT predicts
the timing of periodic packet transmissions. Then, each NP–
FT suppresses its packet transmissions when the transmissions
of its hidden P–FTs are expected. This is achieved by our
proposed Transmission Control (TC), which executes queue
management to control timing to pass upper–layer packets to
MAC layer module.
The basic idea of the proposed TC is shown in Figure 2.
Here, the blue solid arrow shows the predicted transmission
timing of a hidden P–FT. With the proposed TC, a duration
called Suspending Duration (SD), which consists of Pre–SD
(before the predicted timing) and Post–SD (after the predicted
timing) is prepared. A NP–FT attempts to suspend its packet
transmission over SD, i.e., even if packets are generated at
upper layer, it stores them into its upper–layer queue, and
does not pass them to MAC layer module. In Figure 2, the
dashed green arrow represents the timing when packets are
generated at upper layer of NP–FT. Once SD is over, NP–
FT passes the stored packets to MAC layer module, which
are then transmitted by MAC layer module over the air. Note
that packets generated at non–SD duration can be immediately
passed to MAC layer module and transmitted as in the packet
P4 in Figure 2. The ﬂowchart of these operations of the
proposed transmission control is shown in Figure 3. The
duration of Pre–SD and Post–SD are decided considering
trade–off between achievable Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) of
P–FTs and throughput of NP–FTs as discussed in Section IV-B
in more detail.
With the above operation of TC, we can prevent NP–
FTs from passing their packets to MAC layer module at
the timing when hidden terminals are expected to transmit
their packets, thereby suppressing interference. However, the
queue management at upper layer has difﬁculty to precisely
control the timing when signals are actually transmitted at
t
Pre-SD Post-SD
Suspending Duration (SD)
Pre-SD Post-SD
Suspending Duration (SD)
P1
Packet arrival at upper layer of NP-FT 
Predicted transmission timing of hidden P-FT 
Upper Layer Queue
Upper Layer Queue
P2
P3
P4
P5
Figure 2. Basic idea of the proposed transmission control.
A packet generated 
at upper layer
SD period?
Store the packet into 
upper-layer queue 
Pass the packet to 
MAC layer module
Yes
No
Figure 3. A ﬂowchart of basic operations of the proposed
transmission control.
PHY/MAC level. This problem is explained in an example
shown in Figure 4. Here, a NP–FT suspends passing packets
to MAC layer module during the ﬁrst SD, and three packets
are stored in the upper–layer queue. These packets are passed
to MAC layer module after the ﬁrst SD is over, which are then
stored in lower–layer PHY/MAC queue. The transmissions
of packets in PHY/MAC queue are managed by PHY/MAC
module, which are in general hard to control since it requires
the modiﬁcation of ﬁrmware installed into WiFi module/chip.
The packets are transmitted if they win contentions against the
other terminals. In the example of Figure 4, it is supposed that
NP–FT succeeds in transmitting a packet P1 by winning the
contention. However, it fails to transmit packets P2 and P3 due
to the lost contentions with BackGround (BG) trafﬁc. Then,
these 2 packets remain in PHY/MAC queue in the beginning
of the next SD. As mentioned above, it is impossible to control
the transmissions of these lower–layer packets, therefore, they
can be transmitted even during SD, which can cause a collision
with packets transmitted by hidden P–FTs.
A possible solution to the above–mentioned problem is to
control the number of packets to be passed to MAC layer
module based on the congestion level over the channel, i.e.,
each NP–FT controls the number of packets passed to MAC
layer module in the end of SD in such a way that these packets
can be transmitted in the following non–SD period at the
PHY/MAC level. This requires each NP–FT to continuously
monitor the congestion level over the operating channel. Note
that background trafﬁc at 2.4GHz are not necessarily generated
by WiFi terminals, whose packets can be decoded by NP–FT,
but generated by the other radio equipment, e.g., Bluetooth or
Microwave oven. In this case, each NP–FT needs to monitor
the congestion level without decoding each background signal.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

t
SD1
SD2
P1
Packet arrival at upper layer of NP-FT 
Predicted transmission timing of hidden P-FT 
Upper Layer Queue
PHY/MAC Queue
BG
BG
BG
Background (BG)
Packets
PHY/MAC Queue
P1
P2
Collision between
hidden terminals
Figure 4. An example of problem on controlling packet
transmissions with SD.
Therefore, in the following subsection, we ﬁrst investigate
whether it is practically possible for a WiFi terminal to conduct
real–time monitoring of busy rate (i.e., fraction of time during
which the channel is occupied by radio signals) of a channel.
C. Feasibility to Monitor Congestion Level
We found a parameter called CCAcount in a device driver of
an off–the–shelf WiFi module (Buffalo WL–U3–866DS [12]).
The parameter seems to be related to busy rate of a channel,
however, there was no evidence that this parameter represents
our desired information on busy rate. Therefore, we conducted
experiments to check the relationship between CCAcount and
busy rate of a channel. In the experiments, we prepared 3
laptop PCs with USB dongles of WL–US–866DS. A laptop
PC (Tx PC) was conﬁgured to be a transmitter of packets,
which are directed to Rx laptop PC. A laptop PC to observe
CCAcount was located at a sufﬁciently close position to Tx
PC. The busy rate was varied by changing the number of
packets transmitted per a unit time, for which the output of
CCAcount was monitored at the observing PC. The PHY
rate, packet size, and ACK size of packet transmissions were
respectively set to be 54Mbps, 1496Bytes, and 46Bytes. The
busy rate for each trafﬁc load can be calculated based on
these parameters. The measurements were conducted inside
a shielded room.
Figure 5 shows the output of CCAcount against trafﬁc
load (packets/s). From this ﬁgure, we can see that CCAcount
increases as trafﬁc load increases, which saturates over the
range of high trafﬁc load. There is a maximum trafﬁc load
that can be generated by a single WiFi terminal, which depends
on back–off parameters and Inter–Frame Space (IFS) of IEEE
802.11, where the saturation is observed. From this ﬁgure,
we can conﬁrm that there is a direct relationship between
CCAcount and trafﬁc load, i.e., busy rate of the channel, which
enables us to employ CCAcount as a measure of busy rate of
the channel.
D. Proposed Adaptive Transmission Control
In this work, we design an Adaptive TC (ATC), which
controls the number of packets to be passed to MAC layer
module based on the observed CCAcount. In ATC, each
NP–FT observes CCAcount during each non–SD period. The
output of CCAcount is converted to the trafﬁc load by using a
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Traffic Load [packets/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
CCAcount [counts/s]
Figure 5. Experimental results on CCAcount against trafﬁc
load.
linear equation approximating the relationship between CCA-
count and trafﬁc load over the load range of [0:1500] packets/s
in Figure 5, which is used to calculate the busy rate. Based
on the derived busy rate, the maximum number of packets
permitted to be passed to MAC layer module at the next non–
SD period, Nmax, is decided. Nmax is calculated as follows:
Nmax = (1 − Bave)TNSD
TD · α
.
(1)
Here, TNSD is the duration of next non–SD period, TD is
the duration required to transmit a single data frame including
SIFS and ACK duration, and α is a parameter to vary effective
number of Nmax, and Bave is average busy rate calculated as
Bave =
W
i=1 Bi
W
,
(2)
where Bi is busy rate calculated for the i-th last non–SD
period, and W is the window size (number of non–SDs) used
for calculating average busy rate. Nmax calculated with (1)
represents the estimated (effective) number of packets that can
be transmitted by a single NP–FT during free period in the
following non–SD period. Note that α is introduced in order to
take the impact of back–off duration and number of contending
FTs into account. With smaller (larger) α, the estimation of
Nmax becomes more optimistic (pessimistic). The range of α
considered in this paper is set to [0.4, 6.0].
The proposed ATC is executed in the end of every SD
period. For instance, in the end of SD1 in Figure 4, Nmax
is calculated by using busy rate over the last W non–SD
periods. Then, if the number of packets stored in the upper–
layer queue is equal to or more than Nmax, only Nmax packets
out of stored packets are passed to MAC layer module, and
no more packets are passed to MAC layer module during the
following non–SD period. Otherwise if the number of packets
stored in the upper–layer queue is less than Nmax, all stored
packets are passed to MAC layer module. Then, newly arriving
packets in the following non–SD period can be passed to MAC
layer module as long as the total number of packets passed
to MAC layer module does not exceed Nmax. With these
operations, we can reduce the probability that packets remain
in PHY/MAC queue in the end of each non–SD period.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Flexible Gateway (FG)
Non-Periodic Flexible Terminal
(NP-FT)
Periodic Flexible Terminal
(P-FT)
130m
130m
16.25m
16.25m
Carrier sense area in 2.4GHz
Carrier-sense area in 920MHz
Figure 6. Simulation Model.
TABLE I: Simulation Parameters
NP–FT
P–FT
PHY rate
54Mbps
1Mbps
Communication range
75m
100m
Carrier-Sense Range
100m
100m
Packet generation
Poisson (mean λ)
period = 1s
Data size
2000Bytes
200Bytes
ACK size
30Bytes
DIFS
28μs
SIFS
10μs
Slot time
20μs
Max. Num. of Retransmissions
3
Min. Contention Window
31
Simulation Duration
20s
IV. SIMULATION MODEL AND RESULTS
In this section, we provide numerical results obtained by
our computer simulations, and discuss the beneﬁt brought by
the proposed transmission control in detail.
A. Simulation Model
The simulation model is shown in Figure 6. The layout
given in Figure 6 is selected since it can increase the number
of hidden terminals, which allows us to consider a worst–
case scenario. In the simulations, communication performance
after P–FTs change their operating frequency band to 2.4GHz
is evaluated. The main parameters used in simulations are
shown in Table I. Most of the parameters are taken from the
IEEE 802.11g standard [13]. The P–FTs generate packets with
period of 1s, and their generation timing are scheduled so
that they do not overlap with each other. In the evaluation,
since there are 32 P–FTs, a period of 1s is divided into
32 sections, and the beginning of each section is randomly
assigned to each P–FT as its generation timing. Each NP–FT
applies the proposed TC/ATC to its hidden P–FTs. We use
the application–level PDR of P–FT and throughput of NP–
FT as performance measures. A packet is decided to be lost
and discarded once the number of retransmissions reaches the
maximum value. For simplicity, packet errors are assumed
to occur only due to collisions. The throughput is deﬁned
as the amount of data successfully delivered by NP–FTs to
FG. The simulation is conducted by a custom–made simulator
developed with Matlab software.
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.6
4
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.6
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
PDR of P-FTs [%]
Figure 7. PDR of NP-FTs against α for ATC.
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.6
4
4.4
4.8
5.2
5.6
6
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Throughput of NP-FTs [bits/s]
107
Figure 8. Throughput of NP-FTs against α for ATC.
B. Simulation Results
Below, we show simulation results averaged over 5 simula-
tion trials. Figure 7 shows PDR of P–FTs against the parameter
of α in (1) when the proposed ATC is employed with Pre–SD
= 2ms, Post–SD = 6ms, W = 10, and λ = 400 [packets/s].
From Figure 7, we can see that PDR of P–FT is degraded
with smaller α. With smaller α, each NP–FT passes a larger
number of packets to MAC layer module in the end of SD
as calculated by (1), which exceeds the number of packets
that can be transmitted at PHY/MAC layer during the next
non–SD period. In this case, packets remained in PHY/MAC
queue can be transmitted simultaneously with hidden P–FTs,
which causes collisions with high probability. This problem is
alleviated by increasing the value of α where the number of
packets passed to MAC layer module is reduced. Therefore,
PDR of P–FT is improved with larger value of α. However,
larger values of α force each NP–FT to keep more packets in
its upper–layer queue, and degrade its throughput performance.
This is conﬁrmed in Figure 8, where throughput of NP–FTs
against α is shown. The throughput of NP–FTs is largely
degraded with too large α, i.e., the range of α exceeding 3.6.
From these results, we can see that there is an appropriate
value of α to be employed to achieve both high PDR of P–FTs
and high throughput of NP–FTs. In the following evaluations,
we employ α = 3.6 based on the above results.
Next, we investigate the impact of SD length on the
achievable performance of the proposed ATC. Figures 9 and
10 respectively show PDR of P–FTs and throughput of NP–
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

0
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.01
Post-SD[s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
PDR of P-FTs [%]
Figure 9. PDR of P-FTs against Post-SD for ATC.
0
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.01
Post-SD[s]
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Throughput of NP-FTs [bits/s]
107
Figure 10. Throughput of NP-FTs against Post-SD for ATC.
FTs against the length of Post–SD, where Pre–SD is ﬁxed
to be 2ms, W = 10, α = 3.6, and λ = 400 [packets/s].
First, from Figure 9, we can see that a sufﬁciently large
value of Post–SD is required to achieve high PDR of P–FTs.
Each packet generated at P–FT is transmitted with CSMA/CA
protocol, where its actual transmission timing at PHY/MAC
level can be delayed due to contentions with the other NP–
FTs and P–FTs within its carrier–sense range. Therefore, if
NP–FT employs too small Post–SD, it can transmit packets
with hidden P–FTs whose transmissions are delayed due to
CSMA/CA operations. The increase of Post–SD also offers
the improvement on throughput as shown in Figure 10 thanks
to higher probability to avoid mutual collisions, however, too
large Post–SD leads to the reduction of throughput of NP–
FTs since it can reduce the duration for NP–FTs to be able
to transmit their packets. From these ﬁgures, we can see that
Post–SD of 6ms is an appropriate choice in our considered
settings.
Finally, we respectively show PDR of P–FTs and through-
put of NP–FTs against trafﬁc load of NP–FTs for different
schemes in Figures 11 and 12. Here, we set Pre–SD = 2ms,
Post–SD = 6ms, W = 10, and α = 3.6. In these ﬁgures,
we also show upper–bounds, which are obtained if we can
ideally stop/start the transmission of packets at PHY/MAC
level according to the schedule of SD and non–SD. Note that
the performance of these upper–bounds can be obtained only
if we can modify PHY/MAC module so that we can arbitrarily
0
100
200
300
400
500
Traffic load of NP-FTs [packets/s]
0
20
40
60
80
100
PDR of P-FTs [%]
ATC
TC
Upper-bound
W/O TC
Figure 11. PDR of P-FTs against trafﬁc load of NP-FTs.
control transmission timing at PHY/MAC level. On the other
hand, our proposed ATC only requires the modiﬁcation of
a device driver of WiFi module. The results of W/O TC in
these ﬁgures represent achievable performance of an existing
scheme, which follows conventional IEEE 802.11 MAC pro-
tocol without employing our proposed TC. From Figure 11,
we can ﬁrst see that PDR of P–FTs is largely degraded
if we do not employ TC. This is due to packet collisions
between NP–FTs and their hidden P–FTs. By introducing
TC with SD, PDR of P–FTs can be improved, however, we
can obtain gain only over the range of small trafﬁc load
of NP–FTs. As the trafﬁc load of NP–FTs increases, more
packets are stored in the upper–layer queue in the end of
each SD, which can exceed the number of packets that can
be handled at PHY/MAC level during the following non–SD
period. Therefore, more collisions occur for larger trafﬁc of
NP–FTs, which degrades PDR of P–FTs. On the other hand,
it can be seen that the proposed ATC achieves high PDR
of P–FTs even for larger trafﬁc load of NP–FTs thanks to
the adjustment of number of packets passed to PHY/MAC
queue, which is adapted to the observed trafﬁc load. We can
see that the proposed ATC achieves PDR close to the upper–
bound. Next, from Figure 12, we can see that the proposed
ATC does not degrade throughput of NP–FTs even with the
introduction of SD. The avoidance of collisions eventually
leads to throughput improvement in comparison to the other
schemes. With the proposed ATC, packets are stored in the
upper–layer queue according to the estimated trafﬁc load. If
the actual trafﬁc load is smaller than the estimated value,
all packets passed to PHY/MAC queue can be transmitted at
early timing within a non–SD period, after which no packet
is transmitted since there is no packet in PHY/MAC queue.
This problem does not occur with upper–bound, therefore,
throughput of the proposed ATC does not reach close to the
upper–bound. However, from these results, we can conﬁrm
that the proposed ATC can signiﬁcantly improve PDR of P–
FTs while achieving slightly better throughput of NP–FTs in
comparison to the other schemes.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, focusing on a wireless coexistence scenario
where multi–radio platforms are employed to support het-
erogenous trafﬁc, we proposed an Adaptive Transmission
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

0
100
200
300
400
500
Traffic load of NP-FTs [packets/s]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Throughput of NP-FTs [bits/s]
107
ATC
TC
Upper-bound
W/O TC
Figure 12. Throughput of NP-FTs against trafﬁc load of NP-
FTs.
Control (ATC), which suppresses mutual interference between
hidden terminals generating periodic and non–periodic trafﬁc.
The proposed ATC exploits interface heterogeneity, trafﬁc
periodicity, and queue management adapting to the observed
congestion level. We ﬁrst conﬁrmed with experiments the
practicality for WiFi device to monitor congestion level in a
real–time manner. Then, we evaluated the gain of the proposed
ATC in terms of packet delivery ratio and throughput by
computer simulations. Our numerical results showed that the
proposed ATC signiﬁcantly improves PDR of periodic trafﬁc
while slightly improving throughput of non–periodic trafﬁc in
comparison to reference schemes.
Our future work includes experimental evaluations of the
proposed ATC with actual multi–radio platforms. More ex-
tensive veriﬁcations of simulation results, e.g., with a larger
number of simulation trials and comparison with theoretical
results, are also our future work. Furthermore, in this paper,
it is assumed that the transmission timing of P–FTs can
be ideally estimated by NP–FTs. However, in practice, this
estimation can be incomplete, which can shift SD from the
desired duration. This causes degradation of PDR of P–FTs
and throughput of NP–FTs, therefore, we need to evaluate the
impact of estimation error on the achievable performance of
the proposed transmission control.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and Communications for the project entitled “R&D on Tech-
nologies to Densely and Efﬁciently Utilize Radio Resources
of Unlicensed Bands in Dedicated Areas.”
REFERENCES
[1] J. Gummeson, D. Ganesan, M. D. Corner, and P. Shenoy, “An Adaptive
Link Layer for Heterogenous Multi-Radio Mobile Sensor Networks,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 28, no. 7, pp.
1094–1104, Sept. 2010.
[2] D. K. Tosh and S. Sengupta, “Heterogenous Access Network(s) Selec-
tion in Multi-Interface Radio Devices,” IEEE International Workshop
on Managing Ubiquitous COmmunications and Services, pp. 117–122,
2015.
[3] “Smart Energy Gateway CUBE, NextDrive Co.” accessed: 2020-01-07.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nextdrive.io/en/productNew/Cube
[4] S. Dietrich, G. May, O. Wetter, H. Heeren, and G. Fohler, “Perfor-
mance indicators and use case analysis for wireless networks in factory
automation,” in 2017 22nd IEEE International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), Sep. 2017, pp. 1–8.
[5] M. Dungen et al., “Channel measurement campaigns for wireless
industrial automation,” Automatisierungstechnik, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 7–
28, 2019.
[6] A. Varghese and D. Tandur, “Wireless requirements and challenges in
Industry 4.0,” Proc. of 2014 International Conference on Contemporary
Computing and Informatics (IC3I), pp. 634–638, 2014.
[7] M. Sansoni et al., “Comparison of M2M Trafﬁc Models Against Real
World Data Sets,” Proc. of IEEE 23rd International Workshop on
Computer Aided Modeling and Design of Communication Links and
Networks (CAMAD), pp. 1–6, 2018.
[8] X. Cao, J. Chen, Y. Cheng, X. X. Shen, and Y. Sun, “An Analytical MAC
Model for IEEE 802.15.4 Enabled Wireless Networks With Periodic
Trafﬁc,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 14,
no. 10, pp. 5261–5273, Oct. 2015.
[9] L. Zhang et al., “Signal Strength Assistant Grouping for Lower Hidden
Node Collision Probability in 802.11ah,” Proc. of 9th International Con-
ference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (WCSP), pp.
1–6, Oct. 2017.
[10] A. A. K. S., K. Ovsthus, and L. M. Kristensen, “An Industrial Perspec-
tive on Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey of Requirements, Protocols,
and Challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16,
no. 3, pp. 1391–1412, Third Quarter 2014.
[11] “Ieee standard for information technology–local and metropolitan area
networks–speciﬁc requirements–part 11: Wireless lan medium access
control (mac) and physical layer (phy) speciﬁcations - amendment 8:
Medium access control (mac) quality of service enhancements,” IEEE
Std 802.11e-2005 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.11, 1999 Edition (Reaff
2003), pp. 1–212, 2005.
[12] “BUFFALO,
WI-U3-866DS,”
accessed:
2020-01-07.
[Online].
Available: https://www.buffalo.jp/product/detail/wi-u3-866ds.html
[13] D. Vassis, G. Kormentzas, A. Rouskas, and I. Maglogiannis, “The ieee
802.11g standard for high data rate wlans,” IEEE Network, vol. 19, no. 3,
pp. 21–26, May 2005.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-768-9
ICDT 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

