IoT Applications with Common Distributed Architecture for Data Acquisition
Kushal Thapa
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA
email: k t260@txstate.edu
Vinay Lokesh
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA
email: v v183@txstate.edu
Kevin Seets
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, USA
email: kms489@txstate.edu
Abstract—Internet of Things (IoT) applications have many
forms, and leverage many different technologies. However, certain
classes of applications have extremely strong similarities in system
architecture. This paper discusses several important applications,
which leverage a small set of loosely coupled, distributed data
acquisition subsystems to effect a centrally coordinated, data in-
tensive function or application. For brevity, we call this structure
“Coordinated IoT for Data Acquisition” (CIDAQ). Finally, this
paper introduces a novel power line communication research,
which employs this CIDAQ architecture for data capture and
processing.
Keywords—Internet of Things; IoT; Smart Grid; Active Shooter;
Machine Learning; ML; Artiﬁcial Intelligence; AI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In some scenarios where Internet of Things (IoT) tech-
nologies are used, the application of interest could be useful
for training ﬁrst responders, as it provides a more analytical
approach to how ﬁrst repsonders move and react. In other
cases, IoT’s use relates more to optimization of an industrial
process, where a net of data could increase functionality or
longevity. It could also have use in observations of biological
processes where data has proven difﬁcult to gather by more
traditional means. In all cases, the application beneﬁts from
the Coordinated IoT for Data Acquisition (CIDAQ) architec-
ture, where a distributed, loosely-coupled set of IoT devices
provides telemetry data to a central repository, and Machine
Learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ML/AI) algorithms are
employed to produce some application-related insights.
In this paper we describe various applications which lever-
age the CIDAQ architecture as well as some useful tech-
nologies. Section II presents a compelling application related
to training of ﬁrst responders in active shooter scenarios.
Section III brieﬂy describes several other applications, and
presents some of the ML/AI techniques that can be useful
in these applications. Section III-D exhibits some businesses
and products that are already available for purchase, ranging
in size and scope.
We conclude the paper in Section IV with a particularly in-
teresting application of the CIDAQ architecture, which focuses
on the electrical grid. In this application, the distributed system
“listens” to current disturbances on the electrical distribution
grid, “talks” upstream from the outlet to the substation, and
“geolocates” electrical devices for system management pur-
poses based on actively and passively gathered telemetry data.
II.
ACTIVE SHOOTER TRAINING
A particularly compelling application of IoT systems is
to augment the training of ﬁrst responders. This application
leverages the CIDAQ architecture by placing data acquisition
Fig. 1. Comparison of active shooter situations with and without ﬁrst
responder intervention [1].
devices and sensors on various body parts of ﬁrst respon-
ders who are participating in scenario-based, real-time active
shooter training.
Having properly trained ﬁrst responders immediately avail-
able for active shooter situations is paramount to ensuring the
safety and survival of bystanders. Fig. 1 indicates an increase in
victim shootings and death associated with police intervention.
In a comparison study of 83 events with and without police
intervention, 37 (45%) included police intervention, which
accounted for over half of total victim shootings (63%) and
deaths (56%) [1]. Though this is a particularly alarming trend,
it does give insight on the fact that police ofﬁcers need to be
better trained to deal with active shooter situations.
Traditional training for an active shooter situation can be
time consuming and expensive, and so is often not effective in
producing measurable outcomes [2]. The prevalence of active
shooter situations in the United States reveals a necessity for
ofﬁcer training that is effective in measurable outcomes as
well as conventional metrics of time and cost [3]. Students
at Texas State University have designed a system with the
potential to improve training for ﬁrst responders which could
play a part in revolutionizing ﬁrst responder training, as shown
in Fig. 2. This system leverages the CIDAQ architecture. By
placing sensors strategically on participant, data about proper
movement and weapon handling can be gathered in real-
time from multiple participants, processed, and analyzed in a
central location, and leveraged to improve the effectiveness of
ﬁrst-responder training. This information can in turn be used
to create augmented reality training programs that could be
effective tools in saving law enforcement valuable time and
money, and in improving the ability to repeat training remotely
[2]. Additionally, the data can be used to precisely compare
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 2. Augmented motion-tracking of ﬁrst responders using CIDAQ
architecture sensors [4].
and contrast the effectiveness of different training programs,
thereby improving the effectiveness of the training program as
well as the measurable outcomes for each participant.
The devices used in this application consist of Inertial
Measurement Units (IMU) placed on the head, chest, and
weapon of the participants. Each IMU contains analog ori-
entation, acceleration, and location sensors whose outputs can
be easily acquired, stored, measured, and manipulated. The
data collected by these devices creates a 3-dimensional map
of the user’s movements which can be reconstructed and
replayed at-will. Augmented reality devices can create virtual
training experiences with these maps that include all of the
necessary movements and actions required by a ﬁrst responder
[3]. This training method not only improves time and cost
effectiveness, but also affords a new level of access. The
ease of distribution of these expert training programs increases
accessibility for smaller or more distant municipalities and also
helps streamline training. This ensures ﬁrst responders have
access to the exact same training, which will help with joint
operations as well as transfers between departments.
The application of CIDAQ architecture for training ﬁrst
responders does not stop at active shooter situations; there are
a number of other projects being developed and at least one
that is already in use. Dartmouth College’s Interactive Media
Laboratory and Institute for Security Technology Studies cre-
ated a virtual program designed to aid in training for terrorism
response. The program, called Ops-Plus, utilizes 3D simulators
to aid in training against attacks that involve nuclear, radiolog-
ical, biological, and even chemical warfare. The Los Angeles
Police Department currently uses an immersive simulation
trainer, called HYDRA, used to train ﬁrst responders in a
series of scenarios, from earthquakes to terrorism response,
that would be difﬁcult to recreate. New York City has partnered
with the Environment Tectonics Corporation to develop a
software, similar to HYDRA, that creates an immersive envi-
ronment designed to help ﬁrst responders prepare for citywide
disaster management [5]. As these technologies progress, the
breadth and depth of IoT application will increase, reducing
potential harm to ﬁrst responders and civilians.
III.
SIMILAR APPLICATIONS AND ML/AI
In addition to applications such as training for ﬁrst respon-
ders, the CIDAQ architecture is being actively deployed in
various other applications including monitoring and control of
industrial processes, monitoring of the habitat for endangered
species, and enabling efﬁcient hospital care for bedridden
patients. These applications are described brieﬂy along with
the general nature of ML/AI algorithms which could be
used in processing the resulting telemetry data to create new
knowledge, or to improve application-speciﬁc outcomes.
A. Industrial Application
Heat trace cables or heat tapes are vital in oil and gas,
chemical treatment, power generation and many other indus-
tries. These cables and their control systems assist in the
continuous delivery of gases and liquids, often preventing
the contents of pipes or tanks from freezing in extreme
environments.
Based on advances in heat sensitive polymer design, many
of these cables come with self-regulating ability. In other
words, the heat generated by these cables can compensate for
environmental temperatures by autonomously adapting their
absorption of electrical current [6]. This capability provides
operational simplicity in external power control systems, as
well as convenience in direct attachment to the electrical power
source.
However, the heat cable can be damaged during deploy-
ment, or can degrade due to aging or other conditions. Ap-
proaches to locating damaged portions of heat cable is a
difﬁcult challenge. One approach to this remote monitoring
problem is to integrate temperature sensors into the cable, or
add IoT-based devices along the cable to make measurements.
As a distributed, network-based monitoring architecture, a
CIDAQ system is a logical candidate for this application. Via
a CIDAQ architecture, deployed heat cables and the systems
they monitor can be remotely evaluated using low-rate data
transmitted along the heat cable and power lines. This data,
transmitted directly via low-frequency power line communi-
cations techniques, can also be aggregated, assimilated, and
analyzed using the ML/AI algorithms.
B. Biodiversity Application
The conservation of endangered species is important for
maintaining biodiversity and a well-balanced ecosystem. Sev-
eral techniques have only recently been applied in the marine
environment to detect the presence of marine species [7].
Conﬁrming presence relies on locating the animals, which can
prove challenging for species with low population numbers. A
variety of methods have been used to determine the presence
of rare marine species, including ﬁshing and underwater visual
surveys [8]. However, these approaches typically require sub-
stantial ﬁeld-based effort by researchers and data gatherers.
Although scientists have been able to achieve a signiﬁcant
amount of success using Environmental DNA (eDNA), not
every organism will be readily detected by eDNA and the scale
of the water bodies impacts the probability of detection.
Importantly, the abiotic factors of temperature, UV ra-
diation, and amount of DNA present all impact the length
of time that the eDNA stays in the environment [9]. A
compelling approach which uses the CIDAQ architecture to
monitor endangered species is detects and processes animal
voice or audio signals. Examples of such endangered species
that are being monitored with a CIDAQ architecture are the
Houston Toad and Craw Frog [10]. In these applications, an
embedded solution detects toad calls automatically with real-
time notiﬁcation transmission capabilities to engage remote
researchers. The labelled audio data is ﬁltered and fed to
a machine learning model to extract features. The extracted
features are then fed to classiﬁcation algorithms using the
processing pipeline shown in Fig. 3.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 3. Experimental Method.
This application of the CIDAQ architecture leverages deep
learning architectures, such as Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Long Short-
Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) as
well as conventional signal processing such as Mel-frequency
Cepstral Coefﬁcients (MFCC), Linear predictive coding (LPC),
Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP), Mel Filter banks, and
Spectrograms [11]. These technologies are used to improve
the identiﬁcation of endangered species with reduced false-
positive rate [10].
C. Medical Application
Another intuitive application that uses CIDAQ architecture
enables efﬁcient hospital care for bedridden patients. The
feasibility of using pervasive sensing technology and artiﬁcial
intelligence for autonomous and granular monitoring in the
Intensive Care Unit (ICU) is vital since manual observations
can suffer from subjectivity. The use of sensing technologies
and network-based telemetry can bring timely intervention
to assist in making life-saving decisions while dealing with
high levels of uncertainty under strict time constraints [12].
Artiﬁcial intelligence in the critical care unit could reduce
doctors’ workload to allow them to spend time on more
critical tasks. The approach used in this application include
accelerometer sensors, a light sensor, a sound sensor, and
a high-resolution camera to capture data on patients and
their environment in the ICU. Various computer vision and
deep learning techniques are used to recognize a patient’s
face, posture, facial expressions, head pose, and extremity
movements from video data [13]. For activity recognition, data
from wearable accelerometer sensors worn on the wrist, ankle,
and arm are analyzed. Additionally, the information uses the
room’s sound pressure and light intensity levels to examine
their effect on patients’ sleep quality. This framework employs
a cascaded architecture with three stages of deep CNNs to
predict face and landmark locations in a coarse-to-ﬁne manner
[12].
In general, most embedded applications dealing with
IoT, machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence implement
a CIDAQ architecture. Many of these applications leverage
deep learning algorithms, which are concerned with very large
datasets of labelled analog data, such as image, text, audio
and video [14]. Machine learning algorithms used in CIDAQ-
based systems can be based on supervised, unsupervised or
semi-supervised learning. Supervised learning model is based
on training data and helps to make predictions, some of the
important algorithms under supervised learning are logistic re-
gression and back propagation neural networks. Unsupervised
learning model is prepared by deducing structures present
in the input data, some of the important algorithms under
unsupervised learning are Apriori and K-means algorithm.
Semi-supervised learning is a mixture of both labelled and
unlabeled data.
D. Market Data
As IoT technologies gain in popularity and scope of
capability they will become more available and more widely
used. There are a number of businesses–ranging from startups
to Fortune 50 companies–using IoT, and implementing CIDAQ
architecture in a range of ways, for their products and services.
A few smaller startup companies are: Vicotee, MachineMax,
and Radio Bridge [15]. Vicotee is a Norwegian company that
offers a variety of sensors that can be used in conjunction with
each other for myriad ’smart’ applications including but not
limited to shipping, infrastructure, healthcare, air quality, and
land management [16]. MachineMax, based out of the UK, on
the other hand offers a software, rather than only offering a
full-package, that uses IoT to interconnect 3rd party sensors
into a a single platform [17]. Similarly, US based Balena offers
IoT ’ﬂeet management’ that is designed to push updates across
varying platforms using a cloud-based container [18].Instead of
simply offering a product line, US based Radio Bridge offers
IoT data-as-a-service where they set up devices and monitor
the data, allowing the end user to focus on whatever task
is at hand [19]. Small startups are not the only businesses
interested in IoT technologies, there are also several major
players competing in the market as well, speciﬁcally IBM,
Samsung, AWS, and Microsoft [20]. Each of these Global 500
businesses offers a proprietary monitoring solution for their
products.
IV.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION GRID
As mentioned in Section I, the electric distribution grid is
a particularly compelling application of the CIDAQ architec-
ture. As more compute and sensor devices pervade modern
society, reliance on the electrical infrastructure continues to
increase. Although “the grid” is one of the unspoken wonders
of the modern technological society, the increased burdens
of two-way power ﬂow, distributed generation facilities, and
complex/dynamic structure are pressing technologists to create
better approaches to monitoring, controlling, and leveraging
existing grid infrastructure.
An intuitive approach to leverage existing grid infrastruc-
ture is to use the grid itself as a communication medium. This
would pave a way for the development of a self-regulating
power grid, and in addition, obviate the need for deploying
other communication resources for grid related applications,
thereby saving time and money worth billions [21]. This
distributed system concept ﬁts precisely within the CIDAQ
architecture.
Using the power grid as a communication medium is
not a novel concept. This technology, commonly referred to
as Power Line Communication (PLC), has been used since
early 1920’s for applications like fault detection and automatic
meter reading [22]. However, the development in the PLC
applications has been severely hindered due to the dynamic
and unpredictably noisy nature of this medium. This problem
is aggravated by the different electrical devices in the power
grid, like transformers, which obstruct and muddle the com-
munication signals even more [23].
One simple approach to solving this problem is the trans-
mission of low-frequency communication signals. Low- fre-
quency signals don’t attenuate or distort as much compared
to high-frequency signals, even after passing through the
transformers [24]. Thus, a low-frequency band, typically in
the range of 150 Hz-1350 Hz [24], can be used directly for
PLC applications. However, one major disadvantage of using
low- frequency bands for communication is the low data rate.
Consequently, this solution has been under-researched and
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 4. Experimental setup for sending and capturing communication signals
through powerlines.
mostly overlooked.
Nonetheless, such low-frequency PLC has applications in
ﬁelds that don’t require high-speed data transmission but prior-
itize reliability, simplicity, scalability, and ease of deployment.
There is an urgent need for this type of technology in the power
sector. As mentioned before, the existing power grids are fail-
ing because of the exponential increase in power demand over
the last few decades [25]. This problem is exacerbated by the
disconnect between the power producers and consumers which
leads to a huge waste of already depleted power supply. Low-
frequency PLC can bridge this disconnect thereby becoming
the backbone communication infrastructure of a continuously
sensing and self-monitoring power grid called “smart grid”
[26].
Therefore, there is a need for research and study in the
ﬁeld of low-frequency PLC. To that end, our research is going
to be focused on employing a CIDAQ network architecture
to test low-frequency power line communication for simple
digital communication. Fig. 4 shows a simpliﬁed design of
this network architecture.
As shown in Fig. 4, a programmable current source injects
a known signal into the powerline via a stabilizing ﬁlter. This
signal passes through single-phase and three-phase distribution
grid via transformers. When the signal passes through a
transformer, the image of the signals are ingrained in the
other two-phases of the power line, creating noisy image
or echo signals [23]. In the electric substation, the injected
signals, which have passed through multiple transformations,
are collected by a Data Acquisition Device (DAQ) [27]. The
DAQ is controlled by an embedded system such as a Raspberry
Pi [28]. The control system and remote DAQ devices are
connected to a common wireless network for synchroniza-
tion. The control system commands the programmable current
source to inject communication or disturbance signals, and
simultaneously commands the DAQ to acquire signal data.
This data is collected centrally for signal processing and
machine learning techniques to analyze and reconstruct the
original signal, remove extraneous noise or images of signals,
and create a global understanding of the signal context on the
distribution grid.
The raw data captured at the substation contains the input
communication signal mixed with a more dominant power
signal and its highly correlated harmonics, plus a highly
dynamic and unpredictable environmental noise. Using the
CIDAQ architecture, the distributed system extracts the infor-
mation sent by the input signal from this mixture. Traditional
Fig. 5. Flowchart showing the basic signal workﬂow from input to machine
learning output.
Digital Signal Processing (DSP) techniques [29] do this job in
other communication media like telephone wires and optical
ﬁbers, but are not adequate for highly noisy PLC. As a result,
supplementing DSP techniques with ML becomes a critical
aspect of this CIDAQ implementation. Machine learning is a
data-driven technique that formulates a relationship between
the input and the output based on the training data [30]. In
the case of the ultra-low-frequency powerline environment,
the training data is composed of various features of the raw
signal extracted using DSP techniques. This data is fed into
ML algorithms to form a model which extracts the transmitted
information from the raw noisy data. The overall signal ﬂow
from transmitted input to the extracted ML output is shown in
Fig. 5.
This way, the CIDAQ architecture effectively captures PLC
data from the electrical grid and deciphers the information
contained in the data. This CIDAQ architecture can also easily
be scaled to employ multiple DAQs, which can be placed at
differing locations in the power grid. A similar architecture
can also be used to capture non-PLC internal power grid data,
which can contain information about the state of the grid and
its components. This non-PLC data can similarly be processed
and deciphered using signal processing and ML techniques via
the same CIDAQ architecture.
V.
CONCLUSION
Using the context of several related applications, this paper
has introduced the CIDAQ architecture, which leverages dis-
tributed IoT-like devices to acquire relatively high-rate signals
and analyze them collectively to produce some application-
speciﬁc outcome. In cases of ﬁrst responder training, IoT
devices are distributed on a participant’s body for analysis of
form and function in a high intensity situation. In cases of
industrial control and management, IoT devices are distributed
on heat-tape which ensures the consistent ﬂow of gas or liquid
in an industrial environment. In cases of species management
or healthcare management, IoT devices gather data from the
environment or from healthcare facilities for processing and
analysis, and to create a larger context from which to prioritize
societal or personal decisions.
In the electrical grid, which underpins almost all related ap-
plications, sensors, and data acquisition systems are distributed
throughout a larger, dynamic context in order to acquire
signals, gather data, cross-correlate events, and effect changes
in system efﬁciency that will enable future applications which
could beneﬁt from the CIDAQ architecture.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Bo Hyse, Matt Healea,
and Karina Paz for the use of their senior design project
as an example in this paper, as well as the Advanced Law
Enforcement Rapid Response Training (ALERRT) team at
Texas State University for the use of their research involving
active shooter training.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. H. Martaindale, W. L. Sandel, and J. P. Blair, “Active-shooter events
in the workplace: Findings and policy implications,” J. Bus. Contin.
Emer. Plan., vol. 11, no. 1, p. 6–20, 2017.
[2]
P. Glass et al., “Use of computer simulation modeling to reduce the
consequences of an active shooter event in a large event venue,” in
2018 IEEE International Symposium on Technologies for Homeland
Security (HST), 2018, pp. 1062–1065.
[3]
B. Heyse, M. Healea, and K. Paz, “EE Senior Design project Statement
of Work: 3-D Motion Capture and Virtualization for Response Train-
ing,” Ingram School of Engineering, Texas State Univ., San Marcos,
Texas, Senior Design Thesis, 2019.
[4]
Miecz. Blender motion capture retargeting tip. 25-March-2021. [On-
line].
Available:
https://www.blendernation.com/2018/08/29/blender-
motion-capture- retargeting-tip/
[5]
G. Meyers. Simulation software is cost-effective for emergency response
training. FyorgeFX Training Simulations. 25-March-2021. [Online].
Available: https://forgefx.com/simulation-software-is-cost-effective-for-
emergency-response-training/
[6]
USXTM Self-Regulating Heating Cable. Thermon. 25-March-2021.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.thermon.com/us/products/electric-
heating/heat-trace/usx#overview
[7]
K. Weltz et al., “Application of environmental DNA to detect an
endangered marine skate species in the wild,” PLoS ONE, vol. 12, pp.
1–16, June 2017.
[8]
G. F. Ficetola et al., “Species detection using environmental DNA from
water samples,” Biology letters, vol. 4, pp. 423–5, Sep. 2008.
[9]
H. C. Rees et al., “The detection of aquatic animal species using
environmental DNA – a review of eDNA as a survey tool in ecology,”
Journal of Applied Ecology, vol. 51, pp. 1450–1459, 2014. [Online].
Available: http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/id/eprint/30254
[10]
S. Islam and D. Valles, “Houston Toad and other chorusing amphibian
species call detection using deep learning architectures,” in Proc. 10th
IEEE Computing and Comm. Workshop and Conf., Jan. 2020, pp. 0511–
0516.
[11]
L. Rabiner and R. Schafer, Theory and Applications of Digital Speech
Processing.
Pearson, 2011.
[12]
A. Davoudi et al., “Intelligent ICU for Autonomous Patient Monitoring
Using Pervasive Sensing and Deep Learning,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 9,
pp. 1–13, May 2019.
[13]
N.
A.
Halpern
and
S.
M.
Pastores,
“Critical
care
medicine
in
the
united
states
2000-2005:
an
analysis
of
bed
numbers,
occupancy rates, payer mix, and costs,” Critical care medicine,
vol.
38,
no.
1,
p.
65—71,
Jan.
2010.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181b090d0
[14]
Deep Learning. Machine Learning. 25-March-2021. [Online]. Available:
https://machinelearningmastery.com/what-is-deep-learning/
[15]
5 top wireless sensor solutions impacting the telecom sector. 30-March-
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.startus-insights.com/innovators-
guide/5-top-wireless-sensor-solutions-impac ting-the-telecom-sector/
[16]
How vicotee’s technology can help you move fast forward. 30-March-
2021. [Online]. Available: https://https://www.vicotee.com/use-cases/
[17]
We’re building the new age of construction. 30-March-2021. [Online].
Available: https://machinemax.com/pages/solutions
[18]
What
is
balena?
08-April-2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.balena.io/what-is-balena
[19]
Iot
data-as-a-service.
30-March-2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://radiobridge.com/services/iot-data-as-a-service
[20]
J. Guth et al., A Detailed Analysis of IoT Platform Architectures:
Concepts, Similarities, and Differences.
Springer, 2018, pp. 81–101.
[21]
K. Rabie et al., “IEEE Access Special Section Editorial: Advances in
Power Line Communication and its Applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 133 371–133 374, Sep. 2019.
[22]
K. Dostert, “Telecommunications over the power distribution grid -
possibilities and limitations,” in Proc. Int. Symp Power Line Comm.
and Appl., 1997, pp. 1–9.
[23]
S. U. Ercan et al., “Power line communication design and imple-
mentation over distribution transformers,” in 2017 10th International
Conference on Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ELECO), 2017,
pp. 190–194.
[24]
D. Dzung, I. Berganza, and A. Sendin, “Evolution of powerline com-
munications for smart distribution: From ripple control to OFDM,” in
2011 IEEE International Symposium on Power Line Communications
and Its Applications, 2011, pp. 474–478.
[25]
S. McClellan, D. Valles, and G. Koutitas, “Dynamic voltage optimiza-
tion based on in-band sensors and machine learning,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9,
no. 14, p. 2902, July 2019.
[26]
N. Uribe-P´erez et al., “Smart grid applications for a practical implemen-
tation of IP over narrowband power line communications,” Energies,
vol. 10, no. 11, p. 1782, Nov. 2017.
[27]
DI-1100
4-channel
USB
Data
Acquisition
Starter
Kit.
DATAQ
Instruments.
25-March-2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.dataq.com/products/di-1100/
[28]
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B. Raspberry Pi. 25-March-2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-
b/
[29]
D. Kakati and S. C. Arya, “A full-duplex optical ﬁber/wireless
coherent communication system with digital signal processing at the
receiver,” Optik, vol. 171, pp. 190 – 199, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003040261830799X
[30]
S. Raschka and V. Mirjalili, Python Machine Learning, 2nd ed.
Packt
Publishing, 2017.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

