Using Smart Sensors to Monitor Concrete Infrastructure 
Assets for Useful Life Prediction Modelling 
 
Peter J. Schemmel 
Institute of Photonics and Quantum Sciences 
School of Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Heriot-Watt University 
Edinburgh, Scotland EH14 4AS 
email: P.Schemmel@hw.ac.uk 
John J. Schemmel 
Evan D. Humphries 
Ingram School of Engineering 
Texas State University 
San Marcos, TX 78666 USA 
email: john.schemmel@txstate.edu 
email: ec1149@txstate.edu
 
Abstract—Cities operating smart infrastructure systems will 
soon be ubiquitous. Transportation, health, education, water 
treatment, water resource, storm water management, and waste 
management systems will all be monitored and controlled 
remotely by computer programs and asset managers. 
Researchers continue to make advances in sensor technology, 
power supplies, communication networks, data storage, and 
data interpretation methodologies. First generation monitoring 
systems are currently being deployed and evaluated. However, 
use of these monitoring systems to develop predictive models for 
approximating the remaining useful life of an asset is not 
receiving the same level of attention. This paper will outline a 
method for using sensor systems to develop empirical lifetime 
prediction models for concrete structures. Two monitoring 
systems capable of accomplishing this goal, one well-established 
and the other in its infancy, are examined. Developing such a 
tool will provide asset managers with increased warning of 
impending structural issues such that more efficient and 
effective repairs can be implemented. 
Keywords-concrete; infrastructure; life prediction; sensor. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the coming years, cities across the world will begin to 
deploy smart sensor systems to monitor local infrastructure. 
City leaders will support such initiatives as a means to 
improve quality of life for its citizens though improved safety, 
functionality, environmental impact, and economic efficiency 
of its infrastructure. Monitoring of transportation networks, 
water and waste management systems, hospitals, and other 
public works using sensors is no longer a novel concept. 
However, even today, this process relies heavily upon visual 
inspections carried out sporadically over time, likely by 
different individuals. Such evaluations are unreliable, in part, 
due to variances in the knowledge and experience among 
inspectors. Deploying smart sensor systems across a city’s 
infrastructure will allow asset managers to evaluate structures 
remotely, continuously, and consistently. Furthermore, the 
inclusion of intelligent software has the potential to redirect a 
significant portion of the monitoring burden away from 
required human involvement. If considered from a different 
perspective, these systems can also help city leaders assess 
when any one of its assets is approaching its useful life and 
whether it makes sense from a safety and economic viewpoint 
to repair the structure. 
Section II of this paper presents the components of a 
Technology Enhanced Infrastructure system. This section also 
introduces the premise that sensor data can be used to estimate 
the remaining useful life of an asset. The steps necessary for 
developing a useful life predictive model are then outlined in 
Section III. A simplified example illustrates the methodology 
involved in creating a predictive model. Section IV further 
explains the process of creating a model by examining the how 
a commercial sensor monitors concrete maturity in real time. 
An innovative means for monitoring stress in a concrete 
structure using radio waves is discussed next. This remote 
sensing device uses principles from physics, electrical 
engineering, and construction materials to measure stress in 
concrete. The paper concludes with a summary of the process 
for using sensor data to develop a predictive life model.  
II. 
TECHNOLOGY ENHANCED INFRASTRUCTURE 
SYSTEMS 
Technology Enhanced Infrastructure (TEI) systems have 
four elements in common: an array of physical assets, an 
inventory of embedded, attached and remote sensors, a data 
communication and storage network, and a cohort of asset 
managers. Before engineers and scientists can create an 
efficient, effective, and comprehensive TEI monitoring 
system for a city they must have a holistic understanding of 
the city’s structural inventory, be aware of available sensor 
systems, and understand the informational needs of the asset 
management team. For example, the type of physical asset, its 
geographic location, its expected use, and relationship to other 
assets will all contribute to determining the relevant structural 
properties 
and 
performance data 
to be 
monitored. 
Communication 
networks, 
data 
storage, 
and 
power 
requirements will further define the specifications for a 
monitoring system. Intentions for quantifying, displaying, and 
interpreting the transmitted data must also be considered. 
Lastly, all this information, along with the objectives and 
goals of the asset managers, must pass through a sensor 
selection protocol. 
Several research groups have begun the process of 
developing and deploying TEI systems to understand how 
future systems should be designed and implemented [1] - [4]. 
While this work is critically important, there is an unrealized 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

opportunity to exploit these systems for the betterment of a 
city and the general public. In addition to current applications, 
smart sensor technology can be used to inform asset managers 
of the remaining useful life of a structure and help them 
predict when and where failures might occur. Proposed herein 
is a methodology for developing an alternate use for a TEI 
system. In addition to monitoring a structure, TEI systems can 
be used to determine the remaining useful life of a structure. 
Two such systems for use with concrete structures, and 
capable of accomplishing the desired goal, are examined here. 
One system uses temperature sensors and maturity concepts 
to predict strength while the other, still in its infancy, uses 
radio frequencies to monitor stress. 
III. 
A METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPING EMPIRICAL LIFE 
PREDICTION MODELS 
TEI networks capable of predicting the remaining useful 
life of a structure would be an invaluable resource for 
infrastructure asset managers. Having knowledge of an 
approximate time when major and minor repairs would be 
required for a structure would allow asset managers to 
schedule and budget these repairs in a more efficient and cost 
effective means. Being able to purchase repair materials in 
advance when prices might be lower, scheduling manpower 
to limit idle time, and mobilizing manpower in advance of a 
repair would ultimately improve the economic efficiency of a 
city’s entire infrastructure inventory. For example, specific 
repairs might be explicitly scheduled on a recurring basis to 
extend the life of a structure. Alternatively, use of a structure 
by the public could be managed to prolong its life or maintain 
adequate safety, such as with load ratings for bridges. To 
realize these advantages requires an empirical lifetime 
prediction model based upon actual field data captured by a 
smart sensor and transmitted over a communication network. 
Building a proposed life prediction model involves the 
following steps. First, one or more sensors must be selected 
that measure the desired structural parameters, recognizing 
that these parameters will vary as a function of the structure’s 
age. For example, increases in stress and strain due to the 
corrosion of reinforcement bars in a concrete slab can lead to 
cracking and potential structural failure. In this instance the 
selection of a fiber Bragg grating strain sensor or electrical 
impedance sensor would be an appropriate selection. 
Alternatively, anemometers and vibrational measurements, 
which are often employed in early versions of TEI systems, 
are not well suited to predicting remaining life. This is because 
these devices primarily measure transient events. While such 
events are certainly significant as they can eventually lead to 
a structural failure, they do not vary with the age of the 
structure. 
With a suitable sensor selected, the relationship between a 
measured property and a structure’s age must be established. 
Clearly, this step is difficult to accomplish as waiting for full 
sized structural elements to fail is impractical. Therefore, 
correlations between measured properties and structural 
health must be established. One means for defining a 
correlation is through accelerated laboratory testing. As an 
example, sensor data can be recorded concurrently with the 
fatigue testing of metals subject to accelerated heat treatments. 
Other examples involving concrete include freezing and 
thawing, alkali-silica, and sulfate attack behavior. Regardless 
of the material and parameter being evaluated, accelerated 
laboratory testing must continue to the defined failure of the 
material. While sensors may still need to be developed to 
measure some structural parameters in the field, accelerated 
laboratory tests for many materials are already available or 
well under development. 
An example of an empirical model of measured sensor 
data as a function of a structures age is shown in Figure 1. This 
is the next step in establishing a predictive model. This chart 
plots the value of an expected measured parameter as a 
function of age. Regions above and below the measured data 
constitute an acceptable range for the parameter. An empirical 
model of this nature should be refined and adjusted over time 
as additional field data is recorded. However, as more 
monitoring systems are deployed and data is collected, it will 
be possible to establish an open source library of “standard 
parameter values.” 
The final step in predicting life expectancy is to use the 
library of standard parameter data to estimate the remaining 
life of a structure. In turn, this will provide asset managers 
with ample warning of the need for impending repairs. Two 
cases studies are presented below where work on life 
prediction models is being conducted. 
IV. 
CONCRETE STRENGTH PREDICTION USING RELATIVE 
HUMIDITY SENSORS 
Maturity is a relatively simple concept associated with 
concrete where time, temperature, and relative humidity (RH) 
are used to estimate the early age in-place strength of concrete. 
This concept assumes that concrete mixtures with similar 
maturity indices, a computed value, will have similar strengths 
regardless of their individual age, temperature, or RH 
histories. The relationship between maturity index and in-
place strength, as shown in Figure 2, is established from 
laboratory calibration testing for each individual concrete 
mixture. ASTM C1074 Standard Practice for Estimating 
Concrete Strength by the Maturity Method [5] defines the 
protocol for computing the maturity index. Today, several 
companies market sensors to monitor concrete age, 
temperature, and RH, though ASTM does not require RH be 
measured. When in-place, these sensors perform the necessary 
computations, based on prior laboratory calibration, to 
establish a measured maturity index. In general, that 
information is sent to a cellular phone where the maturity 
index is presented with a calibration curve and the associated 
concrete strength. An example of a modern sensor and 
smartphone display are provided in Figure 3 [6] and Figure 4 
[7]. While not detecting a “failure” event, these sensors and 
the maturity concept can be used to create a predictive model. 
As opposed to considering the development of strength from 
zero to that associated with a particular maturity index, focus 
can instead be placed on the later portion of the index/strength 
curve. Again, refer to Figure 2. Rather than concentrating on 
the estimated concrete strength at any moment in time, 
attention can be given to the remaining strength capacity in 
the concrete. In other words, how much more strength is the 
concrete likely to develop within some period of time. This 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

information could have ramifications as to the time remaining 
until formwork can be removed or when vehicles might be 
allowed to travel across a pavement patch. Although basic in 
nature, this is a very clear example of how sensor technology 
and laboratory data can be used to create a predictive model 
for concrete. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Simulated sensor data with depiction of predictive useful life. 
Figure 2. Graphic depiction of the maturity method. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Embedded sensor monitors temperature and relative humidity, 
calculates strength by ASTM C1074. (Courtesy of ConcreteSensors, 
http://www.concretesensors.com/products/). 
Figure 4. Cellphone interface for embedded maturity sensor. (Courtesy of 
ConcreteSensors, http://www.concretesensors.com/) 
 
 
V. 
CONCRETE STRESS MEASUREMENTS USING RADIO 
FREQUENCY 
A research collaboration housed in the School of 
Engineering at Texas State University is employing principles 
from physics, electrical engineering, and construction 
materials to develop a novel approach for the measurement of 
stress in concrete. This approach employs radio frequency 
illumination to measure stress. In this study, properties of 
concrete specimens are measured remotely using lensed horn 
antennas connected to a vector network analyzer. The 
parameters being measured are related to concrete strength 
and are known to be correlated to the age of concrete. 
Currently, testing is being conducted to establish an empirical 
lifetime prediction model with appropriate boundaries on the 
measured parameters. Calibrating field measurements are 
planned for the near future. Correlation of the field and 
laboratory data will then be used to refine the predictive 
model. Once the predictive model has been validated, research 
will examine the sensitivity of the model to variations in the 
concrete’s constituent materials and proportions. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper outlined a method for using TEI systems to 
develop a predictive model for estimating the remaining life 
of a structure. Not only will this contribute to more resilient 
structures it will also extend the functionality and economic 
feasibility of a monitoring system. While TEI systems will 
soon become common place, utilizing them to predict the need 
for major structural repairs is still a novel concept. However, 
efforts are underway to develop an empirical lifetime 
prediction model for concrete structures using field data 
measured and transmitted via a TEI system. 
Developing a predictive model is a multi-step process that 
relies on engineering parameters being measured in the field 
by smart sensors. The measured parameters must be a function 
of, and vary with, the age of the structure. Field data is then 
correlated with comparable laboratory garnered from 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

accelerated testing of the construction material. These two 
data sets establish the foundation for the predictive model. 
Over time, an open source library of engineering parameter 
values with accepted bounds will be populated and routinely 
updated for use by the engineering community. 
Two sensor monitoring systems that can be used to create 
predictive models were reviewed. One sensor system is based 
on well-established principles while the other has brought 
several science and engineering disciplines together to create 
a novel solution. 
The overarching objective of the concept proposed here is 
to provide asset managers with a new tool which they can use 
for early warning of impending structural issues, including 
failure. Such a tool would allow for more efficient and 
effective repairs to an infrastructure asset with the goal of 
maintaining, or improving, its safety and value. While this 
paper has focused on concrete structures and parameters, it is 
envisioned that this approach can be applied to any 
infrastructure asset built from a construction material with a 
time variable behavior. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the efforts of Dr. Karl Stephan, 
Mr. Jagadish Khanal, Mr. Mason Davis, and Mr. Daniel 
Arkin, all of Texas State University, for their work in the 
laboratory to obtain measured performance data using radio 
frequency techniques. 
The authors also thank Mr. Bruce and Mrs. Gloria Ingram. 
Their Endowment in the School of Engineering at Texas State 
has provided much of the funding for the radio frequency 
research discussed herein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. A. Hoult, P. R. A. Fidler, P. G. Hill, and C. R. Middleton, 
“Long-term wireless structural health monitoring of the Ferriby 
Road Bridge,” J. Bridge Eng., no. 15, pp. 153-159, 2010. 
[2] N. A. Hoult, P. R. A. Fidler, P. G. Hill, and C. R. Middleton, 
“Wireless structural health monitoring at the Humber Bridge 
UK,” Proc. ICE-Bridge Eng., vol. 161, no. 4, pp. 189-195, 
2008. 
[3] S. Jang et al., “Structural Health Monitoring of a cable-stayed 
bridge using smart sensor technology: deployment and 
evaluation,” Smart Structures and Systems, vol. 6, no. 5-6, pp. 
439-459, 2010. 
[4] S. Cho et al., “Structural Health Monitoring of a cable-stayed 
bridge using smart sensor technology: data analysis,” Smart 
Structures and Systems, vol. 6, no. 5-6, pp. 461-480, 2010. 
[5] ASTM C1074-11 Standard Practice for Estimating Concrete 
Strength by the Maturity Method, ASTM International, West 
Conshohocken, PA, 2011, www.astm.org. 
[6] Structural Health Systems, Inc. Embedded sensor, digital 
image, Structural Health Systems, Inc., provided 9 March 
2017, via electronic mail. 
[7] Structural Health Systems, Inc. Cell phone interface 
screenshot, digital image, Structural Health Systems, Inc., 
provided 9 March 2017, via electronic mail. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-544-9
ICDT 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

