Data-centric Operations in Oil & Gas Industry by the Use of 5G Mobile Networks 
and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) 
Spandonidis C. Christos 
Prisma Electronics 
Athens, Greece 
email: c.spandonidis@prismael.com 
Giordamlis Christos 
Prisma Electronics 
Athens, Greece 
email: christos@prismael.com
 
 
Abstract - For many years, the Oil & Gas Industry has been 
collecting huge amounts of data, turning thus slowly and 
gradually to “Data-centric Operations”. Unfortunately, this 
data collection has typically happened via many independent 
pieces of equipment and systems – each with its own data and 
interfaces. The promising features of the forthcoming 5th 
generation (5G) mobile networks have enhanced the Industrial 
Internet of Things providing technology improving safety and 
optimizing performance. In this work a dedicated platform 
aiming at the continuous collection of critical information from 
multiple nearshore assets and transmission of the data through 
a 5G network is proposed. Important details and technology 
challenges that drive to a competitive proposal are discussed. 
Keywords - Offshore monitoring; Industrial Internet of 
Things; 5th Generation (5G). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ability to utilize data to obtain knowledge, 
predictions and insights gives today the tools for continuous 
process improvements and optimal performance throughout 
the lifetime of assets. According to World Economic Forum 
[1], the Oil & Gas industry is seeking to leverage new 
developments in digital technologies to unlock a value at $1.6 
trillion by 2025. Major Energy companies like Aramco, BP 
and Statoil are leading the way in the “digitalization” of the 
oil field and recently presented their plans to invest in new 
digital technologies through 2020, in order to improve safety, 
security, and efficiency of their operations (see for example 
[2]). Based on the existing data flows from vessels, we are 
exploiting a unique business window opportunity for a 
platform 
architecture 
that 
allows 
the 
reliable 
and 
uninterrupted reception and management of data from a wide 
range of sensors within a near-shore offshore structure 
network.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, experience gained by shipping industry is provided in a 
critical way. Characteristic examples of data that lead to 
effective decision making and cost reduction are discussed. 
In Section III, the main challenges when it comes to Oil & 
Gas Industry are briefly described, while in Section IV a 
platform based on the development of the existing LAROS-
based platform [3] that allows reliable and uninterrupted 
reception and management of data from a wide range of 
sensors within a wide range of offshore structures is 
proposed.  
II. 
EXPERIENCE FROM SHIPPING 
LAROS is a dedicated platform aiming at the continuous 
collection of critical information from the ship's inputs, the 
transmission of the data through a wireless network, 
centralization and homogenization of information in central 
computing, and analysis of measurements to support the 
decision-making mechanism of shipping companies. The 
system is using the vessel’s communication systems (satellite) to 
transmit all collected & synchronized data to the Headquarters, 
in a very efficient manner in terms of cost, speed, and security. 
Transferred data are further processed using LAROS Data 
Analysis System. 
A. System description 
In more detail, the Data Collection process can be 
described as follows:  
LAROS Smart Collectors are connected using the 
appropriate interface to analog or digital signals coming from 
different sensors and instruments of the vessel. Smart 
Collectors analyze the signals and calculate the required 
parameters. The sampling rate, as well as rate of the 
parameters calculations can be set from 100msec up to 30 
minutes. Smart Collectors setup a wireless secure network 
inside the vessel to transmit the processed data to the Gateway 
with a user-defined sampling rate and ability to maintain and 
customize them remotely. The wireless protocol is based on 
IEEE 802.15.4 MESH [4] with additional layers and data 
format to cover the requirements of the vessel environment 
and increase the network Quality of Service. Through the 
Gateway, all the measured and processed parameters are 
stored in LAROS Server (onboard). All data are stored in 
LAROS server’s database for a long period (up to 1 year 
depending on the number of sensors and on sampling rate). In 
addition, there are options to forward the data to any third 
party systems on board avoiding costly cabling or other 
infrastructure implications. LAROS On board Server 
periodically produces binary files and compresses them in 
order to reduce the size of the data to be sent via normal 
satellite broadband. The compressed files are transmitted 
through File Transfer Protocol (FTP) to the data center that 
will be selected by the operator. In the data center, there is a 
service that decompresses the incoming files and stores the 
new measurements in the main data base. In case the system 
is connected to a weather site, the weather data are stored in 
the main data base in the same format.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

B. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications 
Table 1 summarizes the main functionality modules, the 
needed signals and the collection points onboard: 
TABLE I.  
INDICATIVE FUNCTIONAL MODULES - SHIPPING 
Module 
Needed signals 
Connection points 
Proppeler 
– 
Hull 
Performance 
Vessel Speed, Shaft 
Revolutions per Minute 
(RPM), Shaft Power. 
Speedlog, Torque-
meter- RPM Indicator. 
Engine 
Performance 
Fuel Oil Consumption 
(FOC), Power (Specific 
Fuel Oil Consumption - 
SFOC), Diesel 
Generator (DG) Output  
Flowmeters [Fuel Oil 
(FO) flow], FO temp, 
FO density, DG Power 
Analyzer 
FO 
Consumption 
FOC, Vessel Speed 
through water, Shaft 
RPM, Boiler Status 
Flowmeters (FO flow), 
FO temp, FO density, 
Boiler status indicator 
On-line 
bunkering 
Tank level, FO 
temperature 
Cargo Control 
Console, Engine 
Control Room (ECR)/ 
Cargo Control Room 
(CCR) Indicators. 
Maintenance 
managementt 
Pressures, 
Temperatures, Alarms 
from critical systems  
Alarm Monitor 
System (AMS), ECR 
Indicators 
Power 
management 
DG Output, Reefers 
Power Consumption 
DG/Reefer Power 
Analyzers 
Environmental 
conditions 
Wind speed & direction, 
Water depth, Ambient 
temperature & Pressure 
Anemometer, Echo-
Sounder, weather 
station 
Operational 
profile 
Ground Speed, Drafts, 
Trim, Rudder angle 
GPS, strain gage, 
Inclinometer 
 
Next, we present two characteristic examples of 
performance increase. In the first example, real time data 
were used to identify a problem in condition of crucial 
system, while the second is an example of using historical 
data to find a root cause on increased operational expenditure. 
Example 1: The operator was unaware about any issues 
with the Diesel Generator. As shown in Figure 1, the 
visualization of data pointed increasing deviation in Lube Oil 
(LO) inlet pressure which normally is an indication of the 
main axis of Diesel Generator cracking. The crew inspected 
the axis and fixed the issue in the next stop. As a result, the 
operator saved thousands of Euros, and his liability in the 
case this issue caused a serious accident.  
 
Figure 1.  Observed increasing deviation in LO inlet pressure. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Shaft power vs vessel speed. With red dots are indicated the 
actual measurements. Sea trial baseline is indicated with yellow curve. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Turbo Charger (TC) Rounds per Minute (RPM) vs Shaft RPM 
(up) and TC Scav. Air Pressure vs Shaft RPM (down). 
Example 2: Often dry-docking is a scheduled event and 
it is a costly one. However, a persistent problem may be much 
more costly if it is not addressed as soon as possible. Operator 
had the insights of very accurate data, proving that loss was 
greater than gain to keep operating.  By using historical data, 
it was able to find out the propulsion performance and power 
analysis on the main engine’s performance, influence of 
wind, waves, swell, current, shallow water, trim, use of 
rudder, possible drift, resulting in 73% deviation from Sea 
Trials/Model test report (Figure 2).  Further analysis on 
engine performance (Figure 3) identified a well operating 
engine with no deviation, which was indicative of a clear hull 
fouling problem. This results in estimated 65% excess FOC. 
III. 
OIL & GAS CHALLENGES 
For many years, the Oil & Gas Industry has been 
collecting huge amounts of data (e.g., one rig can generate 1 
terabyte of data per day), turning thus slowly and gradually 
to “Data-centric Operations”. Wang et al. [5] provide a 
comprehensive review of the recent developments in field 
monitoring for offshore structures. In their work, the authors 
present a detailed list with typical monitoring projects of 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

offshore platforms for the last 3 decades. Table II summarizes 
the main monitoring scopes and related sensing technologies. 
Unfortunately, this data collection has typically happened via 
many independent pieces of equipment and systems – each 
with its own data and interfaces. Integrated Marine 
Monitoring Systems (IMMS) have been developed to 
overcome such problems. A review of IMMS systems that 
enable the synchronization of collected data is presented by 
Yuan [6], while Wu [7] described the aspects of software and 
hardware to ensure the long term operation of such systems. 
Von Aschwege [8] presented the principles of design as well 
operational and technical considerations an Independent 
Remote Monitoring System (en entirely independent back up 
system used to transit critical data during hurricane 
conditions) should follow.  
Despite the significant number of offshore platform 
monitoring related projects conducted all over the world, they 
are almost entirely limited to single offshore platforms. Data 
exchange between long-distance remote located offshore 
structures (e.g. between offshore platform and hurricane 
prediction stations, pipeline /reservoir monitoring systems, 
ocean ecological environment monitoring) or even between 
platform and support vessels or on-shore low-coverage areas, 
is a difficult to solve the problem.  
Through our experience implementing LAROS on ships, 
we have highlighted several issues in the transmission of 
information, when it comes to multi structure network 
architectures, mainly due to (a) adverse conditions within 
specific offshore environments, (b) long distances between 
the nodes and (c) dependence of the system on the main 
power supply network (d) latency/bandwidth limitation on 
communication network, (e) cybersecurity issues. The 
promising features of the forthcoming 5th generation (5G) 
mobile networks assisting the aim of integrating multiple 
offshore structures into a wider ecosystem for the exchange 
of large dimensional structured information leading to an 
efficient and comprehensive operation of the offshore assets 
through Information Intelligence.  
IV. 
INTEGRATED 5G BASED PROPOSAL 
The proposed platform is based on the  development of the 
existing LAROS-based platform to allow the reliable and 
uninterrupted reception and management of data from a wide 
range of sensors within a wide range of offshore structures 
(e.g. platform, Support Vessel, floating buoy) with emphasis 
on the requirements described by Wang et al. [1]: 
 (a) Need for smart monitoring instruments with less power 
requirement, higher accuracy, ability for synchronization, 
and applicable in a variety of sensor types (Table II) and 
ideally on fiber-optic sensors.  
(b)  Need for efficient wireless communication network that 
allows multi-measurement acquisition and real time data 
exchange between different offshore structures and between 
offshore structures and third parties (e.g., port authorities).  
TABLE II.  
INDICATIVE MONITORING SCOPES – OIL & GAS 
Scope 
Needed signals 
Sensing technologies 
Metocean 
Wind 
Anemometer 
Sea Waves 
Remote wave buoys 
X-band Radar 
Current 
Acoustic Doppler 
Current Profiler 
(ADCP) 
Internal waves 
SAR 
Ice 
Moored Upward 
Looking Sonar (ULS) 
Environmental 
conditions 
Humidity, pressure, 
Ambient Temperature  
Tide 
Pressure & 
Water Density sensor 
Structural 
Motions 
Positioning 
Differential Global 
Positioning Systems 
(DGPS), Inertial 
Navigation System 
(INS) 
Structural 
operational 
status 
Platform Hull 
Altering Current Field 
Method (ACFM), 
Field Signature 
Method (FSM), 
underwater robot 
probe, Remoted 
Operated Vehicle 
(ROV)  
Riser 
Tension riser 
Monitoring system 
Mooring line 
Load cells, 
inclinometers 
Submarine pipelines 
Visual inspection 
Tension sensors, Echo 
sounder, contour sonar 
A. Smart monitoring instruments 
The viability of the LAROS-based smart sensing platform 
in wireless-based systems for predictive maintenance and 
management in a harsh industrial environment was 
demonstrated by Sachat et al. [3]. The outcome of that work 
was a sensing platform that was viable, low cost and of low 
complexity, able to be efficiently integrated in autonomous 
fiber-optic sensing units and capable of forming a distributed 
monitoring network. The selection of large core optical fibers 
additionally allows the use of low power light sources and 
photodetectors that could be integrated in the sensing unit 
with low power requirements (Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4.  (a) Measuring apparatus with the sensing head connected to the 
wireless sensing node unit; (b) Photograph of the glass measuring cell (c) 
Photograph showing in detail the dual tube glass cell. [3] 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Figure 5.  Decsriptive example of proposed system architecture  
 
B. Smart communication network 
Mesh networking combined with low power consumption 
(e.g., Zigbee [9]) is proposed be used for exchange of data 
between nodes at short distances. For communication 
between remote nodes or an external network, 5G protocol 
will be used that allows communication at long distances in 
an efficient and energy-efficient way. 
Use of 5G mobile network has been proposed instead of 
other communication technologies, such as Wifi, 4G, etc, 
mainly due to rate (b) lower End-to-end latency, (c) large 
number of connection points, (d) reduced Capital and 
Operational Expenditures, (e) consistent Quality of 
Experience and (f) reduced demand for energy [10].  
Following Mugen et al. [11], in order to achieve these 
goals, we propose a heterogeneous cloud radio access 
network (H-CRAN), where cloud computing is used to fulfil 
the centralized large-scale cooperative processing for 
suppressing co-channel interferences. As shown in Figure 5, 
central stations (on offshore platform) (Node C in [11]) act as 
the Base Band Unit (BBU) pool to manage all accessed 
Remote Radio Heads (RRHs), and the software-defined H-
CRAN system architecture is presented to be compatible with 
Software Defined Networks (SDN). This architecture will 
eliminate issues of path loss and the need for line of sight due 
to the high operating frequency of such networks.  
The development of 5G-based Low Earth Orbit (LEO) 
satellites will further enhance the integration of satellite and 
terrestrial networks in 5G [12], enabling thus even larger or 
distant located eco-systems (e.g., deep water oil platforms). 
Figure 6 schematically presents such an integrated 
architecture.  
 
Figure 6.  Schematic view of 5G Low Earth Orbit LAROS architecture 
C. Benefits of proposed monitoring platform 
An advanced monitoring system, as the one described 
above, enables the following core functionalities:  
Efficiency control 
The platform provides the necessary tools that allow 
managers and operators to measure in detail the efficiency of 
every asset on board. Further OPEX reduction is possible as 
a result of performance analysis of the facilities and 
corrective action plans, e.g., effective power system 
management, rational usage of equipment, isolation and 
replacement of heavy energy consumers, etc. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
Condition Monitoring and Event Detection  
Continuous monitoring of an asset or of a condition can only 
be performed by an online system onboard. The more 
parameters examined and analyzed simultaneously the better 
the monitoring performance. The platform provides alarms 
triggered in real time when anomalies get detected.  
 
Centralized monitoring 
Monitoring of multiple assets can be achieved using a unified 
dedicated dashboard that allows centralized monitoring and 
reporting. The operational and performance parameters of 
each asset can be individually tracked and analyzed using a 
single reporting system accessed from anywhere in the world 
using simple Web services.   
 
Expandable  
The platform is expandable and adaptable in order to 
cover any future needs and required measurements. This is 
easily done by connecting additional sensors to the installed 
LAROS Collectors or by adding extra Collectors in the 
existing 5G network. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To gain reliable and comparable data at low cost and in 
energy efficient method from a wide network of offshore 
assets, mesh networking combined with 5th generation 
network architecture is proposed. Examples from experience 
on vessels, for the exchange of data between nodes at short 
distances is presented and existing challenges for 5G mobile 
network are drafted for communication between remote 
nodes and the external network. Technology barriers and 
challenges for a robust operational model that drives to a 
competitive and integrated 5G based proposal that will make 
an impact in the field of Offshore “Data-Centric Operations” 
were further discussed. It was shown that State-of-the-art 
technology trends in various sectors including M2M, 
intelligent processing, machine learning, data agents, cyber-
safe datasets, telco etc., should be part of new generation 
platforms to secure data science in a level that allows the Oil 
& Gas Industry to enter the IIOT – 5G area dynamically and 
support effectively decisions, safety, efficiency and 
interoperability. The goal for the next step would be to define 
the important details in order the designed platform 
architecture to offer a reliable and usable monitoring system 
even in harsh and non-accessible until now environments. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Paganie, “Assesing the digital transformation,” Offshore 
Magazine, vol 17:10, pp 3-5, 2018. 
[2] Fugro. Fugro Complete Wellhead Monitoring Project for BP in 
Gulf of Mexico, 2015. (source: https://www.fugro.com/media-
centre/news/fulldetails/2015/10/01/fugro-complete-wellhead-
monitoring-project-for-bp-in-gulf-of-mexico).  
[3] A. El Sachat et al., "Characterization of industrial coolant 
fluids and continuous ageing monitoring by wireless node-
enabled fiber optic sensors", Sensors MDPI 17, 568, pp. 568-
588,2017. doi:10.3390/s17030568.  
[4] J. T. Adams, “An Introduction to IEEE 802.15.4”, IEEE Press, 
vol. 2, pp. 1-8, 2006.  
[5] W. Peng, T. Xinliang, P. Tao, and L. Yong, A review of the 
state-of-the-art developments in the field monitoring of 
offshore structures, Ocean Engineering, Volume 147, pp 148-
164, 2018. 
[6] S. Yuan,“Prototype Measurement and Monitoring Technology 
Research of Floating Offshore Platform (Master's thesis). Da 
Lian Engineering University, 2013. 
[7] W. Wu et al., “Design, implementation and analysis of full 
coupled monitoring system of FPSO with soft yoke mooring 
system”. Ocean. Eng. 113, pp. 255–263, 2016. 
[8] J. Von Aschwege, K. Jassal, and R. Barker, “An independent 
remote monitoring system for Gulf of Mexico deepwater 
floating 
production 
systems”, 
Offshore 
Technology 
Conference,pp. 2007.  
[9] K. Pantelaki et al., “Survey of the IEEE 802.15.4 Standard’s 
Developments for Wireless Sensor Networking”, American 
Journal of Mobile Systems, Applications and Services vol. 2, 
No. 1, pp. 13-31, 2016. 
[10] J. G. Andrews et al., “What will 5G be?”, IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1065–
1082, 2014. 
[11] M. Peng,Y. Li, Z. Zhao, and C. Wang, “System architecture 
and key technologies for 5G heterogeneousc loud radio access  
networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 6–14, Mar. 2015.  
[12] M. D. Sanctis, E. Cianca, G. Araniti, I. Bisio, and R. Prasad, 
“Satellite communications supporting internet of remote 
things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 113–
123, 2016.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

