 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel spatial mapping technique 
that is capable of extracting the vector map of an indoor 
environment based on images captured from a smart phone 
camera. The extracted vector map follows the facet model concept 
and can be used as input in ray tracing algorithms for indoor 
wireless channel predictions. The algorithm computes the 
coordinates of the walls and doors of each room of the indoor 
environment and creates the facet model of the entire 3D space by 
applying edge and corner detection on the wall images of each 
room. The output of the algorithm is a facet model that can be 
used by ray tracing algorithms which are embedded in 
Augmented Reality (AR) applications. The overall process 
provides a better human-to-network interface and an improved 
user experience that is expected to provide a new way for indoor 
network planning of residential 5G systems. 
 
Keywords-augmented reality; spatial mapping; facet model; ray 
tracing; indoor networks; channel prediction. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The computation of indoor vector maps and spatial mapping 
are active research fields for various Augmented Reality (AR) 
applications. Characteristic examples are gaming, interior 
design, 
property 
advertising, 
indoor 
security, 
indoor 
navigation, that all require information of the indoor space in 
order to overlay holograms. Spatial mapping requires high-end 
cameras like RGB depth (RGB-D) and Simultaneous 
Localization and Monocular (SLAM) cameras and this 
increases the overall cost of the system [1]. Spatial mapping is 
the process of analyzing the 3D space and transforming it to a 
set of vertices coupled to other information such as vertices 
normal and vertices type. In most applications, this 
transformation is very useful since a user can place holograms 
and avatars in the real space and interact with them. In some 
occasions, other applications may require a simplified spatial 
mapping where the overall objective is just to create the vector 
map of the walls and doors of the indoor environment without 
the need for indoor clutter information. This paper proposes a 
novel technique that can provide 3D mapping of indoor spaces  
utilizing the facet concept and only requires the use of a 
commodity smart phone cameras. 
  
Different types of AR algorithms and limitations for real-
time imaging are discussed in [2]. The presented applications 
mainly concern the use case of military, medical, gaming, 
interior designing and advertising.  
A survey of AR technologies and applications is also presented 
in [3][4]. With the increase of various AR applications, the 
need for more sophisticated spatial mapping and 3D indoor 
mapping algorithms also increases. Spatial mapping is usually 
performed by RGB-D cameras [5][6] and simultaneous 
localization and monocular (SLAM) cameras [7][8]. The RGB-
D camera captures 3D RGB images with their depth details. 
SLAM cameras, simultaneously map the indoor environment 
with localization of indoor environment features and clutter. 
Both RGB-D cameras and SLAM cameras are integrated 
within expensive AR devices.   
     
The next generation of communication networks, namely, 
the 5G networks, are expected to create new opportunities for 
mobile AR applications [9]. One characteristic application is 
network visualization and human-to-network interaction. For 
example, with the use of an AR application a user can visualize 
the results of ray tracing simulations that are overlaid on top of 
the physical space. This is very important for 5G networks 
where short range communications are expected to create 
important indoor network planning challenges [9]. To perform 
field strength prediction, ray tracing algorithms use the facet 
model where the indoor environment is represented in a vector 
format with facets incorporating data of the coordinates and the 
material structure of each facet [10]. An example of the use of 
indoor vector maps for ray tracing algorithms is given in [11]. 
The proposed algorithm uses a simple camera of a smart 
phone device that captures images of individual walls and is 
capable of constructing a simplified 3D map of the indoor 
space. The 3D map is a facet model that can be used by indoor 
channel estimation algorithms. The AR application then 
overlays the ray tracing results to enable a better human to 
network interaction. The facet model is created by identifying 
the coordinates and sizes of the walls and doors of the indoor 
environment. This process incorporates image processing 
techniques responsible for the edge and corner detection. The 
proposed solution uses the Canny edge detector to extract wall 
and door boundaries [12]. Corners on the found edges are 
detected using the concept of detect minimum eigenvectors 
algorithm. An interesting analysis and comparison of corner 
detection techniques is given in [13]-[15]. Based on the 
detected corners of the walls and doors of individual rooms, the 
entire indoor environment is synthesized to create a full 3D 
vector representation.  A Graphical User Interface (GUI) is also 
developed to enable an easier interaction between the user and 
 Varun Kumar Siddaraju 
Ingram School of Engineering 
Texas State University 
San Marcos, USA 
varunsiddaraju@gmail.com 
  
An Augmented Reality Facet Mapping Technique for  
Ray Tracing Applications 
 
  George Koutitas 
Ingram School of Engineering 
Texas State University 
San Marcos, USA 
george.koutitas@txstate.edu 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
the application. The overall objective of the proposed solution 
is to create the necessary foundations for the efficient network 
planning and positioning of femtocell stations with the use of a 
typical smart phone device and AR applications. 
 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
present the system description with overview of the new 
algorithm. In Section III, we present the facet model with 3D 
model construction and its data structure. In Section IV, we 
present the results with detailed Graphical User Interface 
(GUI), computed facet model and ray tracing visualization 
output. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section V with the 
algorithm applications and future work. 
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
A. Overview 
The algorithm processes images of the indoor environment, 
identifies the walls and doors positions, computes the 
coordinates and creates the facet model for each wall and door. 
For the purpose of this investigation, window detection was 
omitted. This process is performed for each room of the indoor 
space and the found facets are combined in a data structure to 
represent the entire indoor environment. This process can be 
considered as a simplified spatial mapping technique that 
neglects the detailed furniture clutter since it is not significantly 
affecting signal propagation. The input of the algorithm are the 
images of every wall but also the height of the ceiling. The 
images can be captured using a standard camera of a typical 
smart phone device, without the need of using an expensive 
depth camera. The input images are then pre-processed to 
enable an efficient edge and corner detection process which is 
important for the identification of the vertices and coordinates 
of the walls and doors. The 3D Cartesian coordinates of a room 
are calculated using the length, width and height of the room 
which is computed once the wall and door vertices are detected. 
Using these coordinates, the 3D vector map or else the facet 
model can be constructed and become available to third party 
applications such as ray tracing and AR. 
The detailed overview of the proposed solution is presented 
in Figure 1 and is analyzed in the following sections. For 
efficient performance of the algorithm, the following 
assumptions should stand: 
• Capture photo of the wall from the center of the room by 
standing parallel to the wall 
• The captured image must be clear without any clutter near 
the top corners of the walls 
• If the wall is large, the user can use the panorama function 
of the smartphone device to capture the entire wall in a 
single image file 
In practice, the aforementioned conditions are usually met in 
most typical residential units. It should be noted that the 
proposed technique cannot be used for large corporate offices, 
since a wall is usually large enough and cannot fit in one photo 
screen. 
B. Image pre-processing  
The image pre-processing is the first step of the overall 
technique and prepares the images of the room for the edge and 
corner detection phase. For the efficient edge and corner 
detection, the input image is converted into a grayscale image 
[5]. The second step of the pre-processing phase is to crop 
selected regions of interest from the gray scale image.  
For the purpose of our investigation these are the top and left 
corners of the wall as shown in Figure 2. The regions of interest 
are used to minimize unwanted edge and corner detection and 
reduce the computational demands of the algorithm. The last 
part of the pre-processing phase corresponds to a down 
sampling of the image pixel size procedure on the cropped 
images that further reduces the computational demands of the 
process. Usually, the image can be convolved with a Gaussian 
filter to reduce the number of unwanted edges [9]. The 
smoothing process [9] is given in the following formula: 
 
𝑆[𝑖, 𝑗] = 𝐺[𝑖, 𝑗; 𝜎] ∗ 𝐼[𝑖, 𝑗] 
 
(1) 
where I[i, j] denotes the input image of pixel size ixj, G[I,j;σ] 
denotes Gaussian smoothing filter and S[i, j] denotes  the array 
of smoothed data and σ is the gradient level of the filter. Image 
is down-sampled to different resolutions like 1280x768, 
960x720, 640x480 and experimented for best corner detection 
results. Images with low resolution 640x480 help to reduce the 
number of false corner detection compared to higher resolution 
images. A 5x5 size Gaussian filter is used for efficient edge and 
corner detection [13]. The overall process of the image pre-
processing is demonstrated in Figure 2 a) and Figure 2 b). The 
next phase of the proposed solution is to process those images 
 
Figure 1.  Flowchart of 3D indoor facet mapping. 
  
 
a) 
      
 
 
 
 
b)                                       c) 
Figure 2.  a) The two regions of interest on the original wall image, b) Pre-
processed image of top left region, c) detected edges and candidate corners. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
for the edge and corner detection, as shown in Fig 2. c). 
C. Edge and corner detection 
The edge and corner detection of the wall image is the most 
crucial part of the algorithm. This is because, corner detection  
is directly related to the coordinates of the wall of the room, 
and thus the development of the facet model. The edge and 
corner detection flowchart is given in Figure 3. The first part of 
the algorithm is to perform edge detection upon the 
preprocessed input wall images by implementing the edge 
Canny method [9]. The Canny method calculates the gradient 
using the derivative of a Gaussian filter and uses two 
thresholds to identify strong and weak edges. With this 
approach, the edge detection of unwanted noisy parts of the 
image is minimized. The Canny method uses a threshold to 
distinguish between strong and weak edges. For the purpose of 
our investigation, the edge is detected according to the 
following function. 
 
where S, denotes the pre-processed image, ‘Canny’ denotes the 
edge detection algorithm, δ is the threshold used and is a two 
element vector, σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian 
filter and is a scalar and EM denotes the edge map of the wall 
image. The EM image is a binary matrix with 1s representing 
the points where an edge is detected. The threshold value is a 
sensitivity value, and is used to ignore all edges that are not 
stronger than the selected threshold. It is a scalar value that 
specifies the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter. The 
initial threshold was set to δ=0.4 and if no corners found, it 
decrements by 0.02. The standard deviation was set to 
σ=sqrt(2). 
The corner detection is the second step of the process during 
which the edge map of the image is processed for the 
identification of the candidate corners. The output of the corner 
detection algorithm is a set of potential points that can be 
considered corners of the walls, as shown in Fig 2. c). The red 
mark corresponds to the set of potential points. It is obvious 
that the corner point that falls on the intersection of the three 
edges is the preferred wall corner. The identification of the 
final corner is described in the next section of the appear. For 
the purpose of our investigation, the detectMinEigenFeatures 
corner detection algorithm [14] was used. This is a function of 
MATLAB and has the following structure: 
 
 
Corner = detectMinEigenFeatures (EM, q, G); 
 
(3) 
 
where EM denotes the edge map in gray scale (binary), q is a 
scalar value between [0, 1] and denotes the corner strength and 
quality. Larger values of q are used to eliminate erroneous 
corner points. For the purpose of our investigation, the value 
was set q=0.5 because the pre-processing phase of the image 
eliminates the majority of erroneous points. The function 
returns an object file called Corner that incorporates location 
of corners in pixel coordinates i, j and the corner metric value, 
Cmetric. Larger corner metric indicates a strongest candidate for 
a corner [13]. Parameter G is the Gaussian filter dimension and 
is an odd integer value in the range [3, inf]. For the purpose of 
our investigation, we set G=3. The Gaussian filter is used to 
smooth the gradient of the input image. The minimum Eigen 
values of the corner detection algorithm is computed using the 
following formula [14]: 
 
𝐶CDEFGH = IJ 𝐼K
L
𝐼K𝐼M
𝐼K𝐼M
𝐼M
L N = O𝜆Q
0
0
𝜆LS 
(4) 
 
where Ix denotes the horizontal gradients of the edge map, Iy 
denotes the vertical gradients of the edge map, IxIy denotes the 
edges on diagonal. Cmetric denotes the matrix with two Eigen 
values λ1, λ2 characterized by their shape and size of the 
principal component ellipse inside each filter of an image were 
computed. According to the used parameter q the output of the 
corner detection algorithm may not provide any candidate 
corner points. In that case, the algorithm reduces the corner 
quality parameter q with a step of 0.05 until corner points are 
detected. This process is also presented in Figure 3. The corner 
detection phase ends with the detection of at least one or more 
strong candidate corner points with a corner metric value above 
 
EM = edge (S, Canny, δ, σ) 
 
(2) 
 
Figure 4.  Corner points matching between two regions of interest of a wall 
image. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Flowchart of edge detection and corner detection. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
the quality level. The same procedure is performed for the 
bottom corners of the wall. Thus, the output of the corner 
detection process is a set of corner points for each region of 
interest of the wall. For the top left part of the wall, the output 
is a set of points (xi,yi), iÎTL where TL indicates the number of 
found corners for this region of the wall. Respectively, for the 
top right part of the wall the potential corner points are (xj,yj), 
jÎTR. The bottom left part includes the candidate corner points 
(xm,ym), mÎBL. Finally, the bottom right part of the image 
includes the candidate corner points (xn,yn), nÎBR. 
D. Computation of wall width 
This part of the algorithm provides an estimation of the wall 
width according to the detected candidate corners. These 
corner points may include both good candidate corners but also 
erroneous corners. In order to avoid the negative effects of the 
erroneous corners in wall width measurements, the best 
candidates should be determined. For that reason, each corner 
point in all regions of interest are compared with each other. 
The corner points from the top part of the wall that have 
approximately the same y value yi~yj, where i and j are the two 
candidate corner points from the top right and top left part of 
the wall, are preferred. In addition, the corner points from the 
top left and bottom left part of the wall that have the same x 
value xi~xm, where i and m are the two candidate corner points 
from the bottom and top left part of the wall, are preferred. 
Similarly, the same procedure occurs for the bottom left and 
right and also for the top and bottom right part of the walls. The 
final corner detection is computed according to: 
 
𝑖∗,𝑗∗,𝑚∗,𝑛∗ = min
G,[,C,\]|𝑥G − 𝑥C| ∙ b𝑦G − 𝑦[b ∙ |𝑦C − 𝑦\|
∙ b𝑥[ − 𝑥\bd 
(5) 
The overall process is shown in Figure 4. The width, w, of a 
room wall is calculated by measuring the pixel distance 
between the two final corners.  
 
𝑤 =
ℎ
|𝑦G∗ − 𝑦C∗| ∙ b𝑥G∗ − 𝑥[∗b 
(6) 
where ℎ |𝑦G∗ − 𝑦C∗|
f
 is the pixel resolution rp measured in 
meters/pixel. The pixel resolution can be computed according 
to the height of the wall, h, which is defined by the user and the 
number of pixels between the two corners. In a mathematical 
form, this is presented in (6). The detected wall boundary is 
demonstrated in Figure 5. 
E. Door detection 
The door detection process follows a similar approach where 
an edge and corner detection algorithm is used to find the 
location of the boundaries of the door [17]. An illustration of 
the overall process is given in in Figure 6. For the door 
detection, the region of interest is focused above the half of the 
wall and below the third quarter of a wall. This is because, most 
doors found in typical residential units have these height 
values. To increase the efficiency of the door corner detection 
algorithm, the following conditions were assumed: 
• 
Preferred door corner should have y-axis value 
relatively equal to standard door height of 2.1 meter. 
Thus, rp×|yi-ym|=2.1m. 
• 
Two corner points should have relatively same y-axis 
values. Thus, |yi-yj|~0. 
• 
Two corner points should be separated relatively by 
standard door width 0.9 meters. Thus, rp×|xi-xj|=0.9m. 
Similar to the wall detection process, the algorithm first 
identifies the position of the door boundaries, computes the 
door dimension and defines the coordinate values of its corners. 
III. THE FACET MODEL 
A. Constructing the 3D environment 
After the successful wall and door width detection, the final 
coordinates of the room can be stored in a facet model format. 
The vector map is represented by its facet where each wall and 
door is defined by four coordinate points x,y,z. These 
coordinates indicate the respective corners. The facet 
representation of a single room is presented in Figure 7. For 
more enhanced experience, it is possible to overlay the picture 
as texture on the facet as presented in Figure 7b. 
Using the same method and principles, the 3D vector map of 
the remaining rooms of the indoor environment can be 
constructed. One difficulty for this case, is the positioning of 
the rooms to form a realistic indoor environment, close to the 
real one. For the purpose of our investigation, we assume that 
the user takes four pictures per room to cover the 360 space and 
takes the pictures in a clockwise manner. Once the user 
completes this process for one room, then the user takes the 
pictures of the adjacent room, starting from the wall that is 
shared with the previous room. In that way, there is always a 
“calibration” or orientation point that allows the algorithm to 
reconstruct and attach the facet of each room and form a 
realistic indoor environment. This process is presented in 
Figure 8. In this figure, the first room is marked as initial and 
attached to the adjacent room according to the shared wall of 
the two rooms. In the next iteration, the second room becomes 
 
 
a)          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
Figure 5.  a) Detected wall boundary. (b) Detected wall corner on a wall with 
an unclear top right corner 
 
 
 
a) 
          
 
 
 
b)      
 
 
 
 
 
c) 
Figure 6.  (a) Input image with region of interest (ROI) selected. (b) Detected 
door corners over edge map. (c) Detected door on a wall 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
the reference room and the third room is attached according to 
their shared wall. This process is followed until the user 
captures images of all rooms of the indoor environment and the 
indoor environment is fully constructed. 
B. Data structure 
The data structure of the facet model is presented in Table I. 
The indoor environment in composed by a set of individual 
rooms. Each room has a number of walls and each wall may 
have a number of doors. The elements of the room structure 
store all the details of the indoor environment like wall width, 
room number, room position, wall image, wall coordinates and 
door coordinates. The room position field is used to determine 
the position of the room according to the previous one. The 
wall image is used as a texture and is overlaid on the facet 
 
TABLE I. DATA STRUCTURE OF THE FACET MODEL 
Room Wall 
Position 
Room 
Properties 
Description 
Room(i).Wall(j) 
Room_Position 
Top, down, left, right, front 
& back position 
---------||--------- 
Wall_Image 
Respective room wall image 
---------||--------- 
Width_Pixel 
Wall width in pixel size 
---------||--------- 
Width 
Wall width in meter 
---------||--------- 
Height 
Wall height in meter 
---------||--------- 
Coordinates 
Wall (x,y,z) coordinates as a 
set of four corners 
---------||--------- 
Door 
Door (x,y,z) coordinates as a 
set of four corners 
model to enhance the user experience. The pixel size is used 
for the computation of the dimensions of the walls and doors 
length and width and may also be used for future applications. 
The wall coordinates and door coordinates represent the vector 
format of the facet and is the most valuable element of the 
structure, used by the ray tracing algorithm. Finally, each facet 
incorporates its constitutive parameters that are used for the 
computation of the diffraction, reflection and transmission 
coefficients of the ray tracing model. For the purpose of our 
investigation, the wall was assumed to be made by brick 
material and the doors by wood material. The constitutive 
parameters of these materials can be found in [12]. The details 
of the indoor environment can be fetched using the ‘Building 
Details’ button of the main GUI, as described in the following 
section of the paper. 
IV. RESULTS 
A. Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
A GUI was designed to make the use of the developed app 
easy and user friendly. The user can enter the standard height 
of the ceiling that is used as reference for the pixel resolution 
definition. The user also enters the room position that is used 
as a reference point for the construction of the 3D space. 
Finally, the user uploads the images for each wall of the indoor 
environment by using a secondary GUI as indicated in Fig 9. 
The user can upload four individual wall images per room and 
indicate if there is a door in the room. The door checkbox was 
used to reduce the computational cost by eliminating unwanted 
door detection processes. Once the user uploads the data to the 
system, the facet model is computed. Within the GUI, there is 
a button to indicate if there is a window in a wall. For the 
purpose of our investigation, windows were not incorporated 
in the facet model and is something that will be integrated in 
future versions of the algorithm. 
B. Augmented Reality to Ray Tracing 
The scenario under investigation is presented in Figure 10. A 
two-bedroom student dorm apartment was examined that has 
three main rooms. The facet model of the apartment was 
successfully reconstructed when the user uploads the twelve 
images of the walls of the three rooms. A commodity smart 
phone device was used to capture the images. The user spent 
approximately 3 minutes to take the photos and upload into the 
system using the GUI. When the user uploads the images to the 
system, the algorithm performed the pre-processing phase by 
down sampling and applying Gaussian filters. The input 
images were down sampled to different resolutions, and the 
best performance was met when the resolution was set to 
640x480 from. It was found that the most suitable corner 
detection 
technique 
was 
‘DetectMinEigenFeatures’ of 
MATLAB since it provided the most accurate results and is 
widely used by the research community. The found coordinates 
of all rooms were integrated together to form the facet model 
of the entire indoor environment. The processed images are 
then embedded on to their respective walls to form a 3D interior 
view which is as demonstrated in Figure 10 b). It should be 
noted that the user inputs at the GUI, such as the height of the 
ceilings, the position of different rooms and the existence of 
doors on walls, reduced the computational cost by 
approximately 35%-40%. This is because, the algorithm did 
not search for doors in case there was no door at the room and 
made a more efficient positioning of the rooms to form the 
entire indoor space. 
 
Figure 8.  Integrating individual room blocks into a building based on the 
direction of next room with respect to initial room. 
   
 
a) 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
Figure 7.  a) 3D vector map. (b) 3D indoor environment interior view. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
The final step of the proposed system is to use the facet 
model of the indoor space as input to a ray tracing algorithm 
[11]. The ray tracing algorithm models the propagation of the 
electromagnetic waves using the Geometric Optic (GO) 
technique and decomposes the total field strength as sum of 
individual rays each one carrying a different amplitude and 
phase. The amplitude was computed as a combination of 
multiple reflection, transmission and diffraction coefficients. 
For the purpose of our investigation the used frequency was 
assumed to be of the order of the 6GHz band of 5G systems. 
The results are presented in Fig 10 c). It is observed that the 
walls and doors of the environment interact with the 
electromagnetic waves and change the signal strength. With the 
use of the proposed system, the user is able to take 12 images 
of the walls of the house and with just a few clicks be able to 
visualize the signal variation and channel condition of the 5G 
femtocell station inside the house. This process opens new 
frontiers in indoor network planning that can be performed by 
non-technical users and non-experts in the field. In addition, it 
creates new opportunities for the education of indoor channel 
modelling with the use of Augmented Reality (AR) devices and 
applications.  
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a novel image processing algorithm 
that is capable of creating the facet model of an indoor 
environment based on images captured by typical smart phone 
cameras. The algorithm can be considered as a simplified 
spatial mapping technique that leverages Augmented Reality 
(AR) technologies and principles. The application of the 
algorithm was focused on ray tracing and wireless indoor 
channel prediction. With the evolution of 5G networks and AR 
application, it is expected that there will be a great need for 
integrating network planning and visualization algorithms with 
AR technologies. It was found that the proposed solution could 
be used for standard indoor residential houses, but it is not 
efficient for large or complex indoor spaces. The proposed 
solution applies edge and corner detection algorithms on the 
images of the walls and identifies the coordinates and 
dimensions of the basic electromagnetic clutter, which are 
walls and doors. The coordinate system was based on the facet 
model that is used by most of the ray tracing and channel 
estimation algorithms. It was found that in less than 3 minutes 
a user could obtain signal strength estimations in a 3-bedroom 
house just by uploading .jpg images of the walls of all rooms.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Gupta and H. Li, "Indoor mapping for smart cities — An 
affordable approach: Using Kinect Sensor and ZED stereo 
camera," International Conference on Indoor Positioning and 
Indoor Navigation (IPIN), pp. 1-8, 2017. 
[2] N. I. A. M. Nazri and D. R. A. Rambli, "Current limitations and 
opportunities in mobile augmented reality applications," 
International Conference on Computer and Information Sciences 
(ICCOINS), pp. 1-4, 2014. 
[3] D. Chatzopoulos, C. Bermejo, Z. Huang, and P. Hui, "Mobile 
Augmented Reality Survey: From Where We Are to Where We 
Go," IEEE Access, pp. 6917 - 6950, 2017. 
[4] M. E. C. Santos, "Augmented Reality Learning Experiences: 
Survey of Prototype Design and Evaluation," IEEE Transactions 
on Learning Technologies, vol. 7, pp. 38-56, 2014. 
[5] L. C. Chen, N. V. Thai, and H. I. Lin, "Real-time 3-D feature 
detection 
and 
correspondence 
refinement 
for 
indoor 
environment-mapping 
using 
RGB-D 
cameras," 
IEEE 
International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, Taipei, 
Taiwan, pp. 1-6, 2013. 
[6] X. Xu and H. Fan, "Feature based simultaneous localization and 
semi-dense mapping with monocular camera,"Image and Signal 
Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-
BMEI), International Congress on, pp. 17-22, 2016. 
[7] J. P. Collomosse, "Real-time environment mapping for stylised 
augmented reality," The 3rd European Conference on Visual 
Media Production (CVMP), pp. 184-184, 2006. 
[8] S. Damodaran, A. P. Sudheer, and T. K. Sunil Kumar, "An 
evaluation of spatial mapping of indoor environment based on 
point cloud registration using Kinect sensor," Control 
Communication & Computing India (ICCC), International 
Conference on, pp. 545-552, 2015. 
[9] S. Singh and R. Singh, "Comparison of various edge detection 
techniques," 2nd International Conference on Computing for 
Sustainable Global Development (INDIACom), New Delhi, pp. 
393-396, 2015. 
 
a) 
                                                  b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) 
 
Figure 10.  a) 3D Vector map of a building. b) 3D Interior view of a building, 
c) Implementation of a Ray Tracing algorithm on the facet model. 
  
 
a)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) 
Figure 9.  a) Main GUI of indoor building vector mapping, b) Secondary 
GUI for uploading images of a room and mapping individual rooms. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

 
[10] X. Ge, "Multipath Cooperative Communications Networks for 
Augmented 
and 
Virtual 
Reality 
Transmission," 
IEEE 
Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 19, no. 10, pp 2345-2358, 
2017. 
[11] G. Koutitas, A. Karousos, and L. Tassiulas, "Deployment 
Strategies and Energy Efficiency of Cellular Networks," IEEE 
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 
2552-2563, 2012. 
[12] F. S. D. Adana, O. G. Blanco, I. G. Diego, J. P. Arriaga, and M.F. 
Catedra, "Propagation model based on ray tracing for the design 
of personal communication systems in indoor environments," 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 
2105-2112, 2000. 
[13] S Singh and R Singh, "Comparison of various edge detection 
techniques," Computing for Sustainable Global Development 
(INDIACom), 2nd International Conference on, pp. 393-396, 
2015. 
[14] X. C. He and N. H. C. Yung, “Corner detector based on global 
and local curvature properties,” Optical Engineering 47, no. 5, 
pp. 1-4, 2017. 
[15] P. Ram and S. Padmavathi, "Analysis of Harris corner detection 
for 
color 
images," International 
Conference 
on 
Signal 
Processing, Communication, Power and Embedded System 
(SCOPES), pp. 405-410, 2016. 
[16] Bastanlar, Yalin, and Y. Yardimci, “Corner validation based on 
extracted corner properties”, Computer Vision and Image 
Understanding, 112, pp. 243-261, 2008. 
[17] X. Yang and Y. Tian, "Robust door detection in unfamiliar 
environments by combining edge and corner features," IEEE 
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition - Workshops, San Francisco, CA, pp. 57-64, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-623-1
ICDT 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

