Ontology for IP Telephony Networks
Ilija Basicevic, Miroslav Popovic, and Nenad Cetic
Department of Computer Engineering
Faculty of Technical Sciences
Novi Sad, Serbia
Email: ilibas@uns.ac.rs, miroslav.popovic@rt-rk.com, nenad.cetic@rt-rk.com
Abstract—Ontologies have already been used in computer
science research in different ﬁelds. In this paper, we apply the
concept to the area of IP telephony. The paper presents on-
tology for development of software for IP telephony networks.
It is based on the analysis of SIP and H.323 protocols, as
dominant signaling protocols in VoIP telephony of today. The
ontology we developed covers both static aspects (structure of
the network) and dynamic aspects (most importantly telephony
sessions, but also other types of associations). The structure of
the telephony network is modeled with classes that represent
different types of nodes in the network: end user terminals and
various types of infrastructure nodes. The dynamic aspects
of network operation are modeled with a set of classes, the
most important being those that represent different associations
that are established and terminated in the network. The
realized ontology can be used in development of frameworks
for telephony applications, and for speciﬁcation of common
data format used by cooperating telephony applications.
Keywords-Ontologies; Network communications; Internet Ap-
plications; VoIP; IP telephony; SIP; H.323
I. INTRODUCTION
Ontologies have already entered and claimed an impor-
tant place in several ﬁelds of computing science. In this
article, we present application of ontology in the ﬁeld
of IP telephony. The ontology is focused primarily on
signaling aspect, but covers all aspects of operation of
IP telephony networks. Computer telephony is a result of
merging of computing and telephony domain. Traditionally
the two domains were separated, and telephony applications
restricted to circuit switched networks, e.g. Public Switched
Telephone Network (PSTN). With the intensive development
of Internet in the last three decades, it became logical that
IP network (although a packet switched network) could be
used for personal communications with acceptable quality,
which gave birth to Voice over IP (VoIP). Today VoIP is
used in great extent - for example majority of new installed
Private Branch Exchange (PBX) lines are VoIP. In most of
the published papers dealing with application of ontologies
in telephony domain, only segments or certain details of used
ontologies are presented. This paper provides a systematic
overview of the ontology we developed. The overview be-
gins with the development process. The method that has been
applied in development of the ontology is described. Next,
two important class hierarchies that embody structure and
dynamics of IP telephone networks are presented, visually
and in text. Also, the paper tries to position the developed
ontology in the context of existing work in this area.
Section II describes shortly the method applied in de-
velopment of the ontology. In Section III are presented
classes dealing with the structure of the telephony network,
which is a very important static aspect of the network
functionality. The prevailing formats of protocol messages
in IP telephony systems are shortly described in section IV.
Section V presents classes that are responsible for dynamic
aspect of the operation of telephone network. In the section
VI are shortly presented some published papers on the
use of ontologies in this application domain. Section VII
contains an analysis on possible applications of the ontology,
including the one already realized. Section VIII contains
concluding remarks.
II. THE DEVELOPMENT OF IP TELEPHONY ONTOLOGY
The ontology that is presented in this paper has been
developed using a combination of deductive and inductive
approaches. In the conception phase of development, the
deductive approach has been followed. As in other ﬁelds,
published standards can be used as one of the starting
points in deﬁnition of ontologies. Number of telephony
standards is quite large. Each of many telephony standards in
a way establishes its own taxonomy and usually deﬁnes most
important terms. Thus the existing standards: most notably
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [1], and in less extent H.323
[2] inﬂuenced very much the conception and elaboration
phases in the development of the ontology. The importance
we gave to SIP is due to its dominant place in the market.
The analysis of standards and telephony applications
resulted in an informal description of ontology, and has been
an input for the elaboration phase. The result of elaboration
phase has been expressed in Uniﬁed Modeling Language
(UML) and Java. The ontology has been the basis for the
development of framework [3]. By building the framework
we tested and further developed the ontology (see Fig. 1).
In this manner we combined the deductive and inductive
approach. This approach is similar to Forward-Lockstep
Build-Test model of Helix-Spindle [4].
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

III. STRUCTURE OF TELEPHONY NETWORK
Structure of telephony network is in general case a graph
consisting of nodes and links. Identiﬁcation property of
any network node is its network address. There are several
types of nodes. The most important classiﬁcation is into end
points, directly accessed by end users who use the services of
network, and infrastructure points, ”invisible” to end-users.
For that reason class NetPoint has the following subclasses:
EndPoint, RoutingPoint, LocServPoint and ConferencePoint
(see Fig. 2). ConferencePoint presents infrastructure nodes
that support conferencing feature (conference servers and
media mixers). The majority of infrastructure nodes in
a typical network are responsible for routing. Those are
modeled by RoutingPoint. Examples of RoutingPoint are
SIP [1] proxy and H.323 [2] gatekeeper. Essential property
of a routing point is the administrative policy database and
a routing table. Routing relies on address mapping which
is the responsibility of LocServPoint (location service or
registrar in SIP terminology). Network is administratively
separated into segments called domains in SIP and zones
in H.323. Usually, there is one location service and one
routing point per telephony domain. Location service keeps
mappings for endpoints in that domain. Essential property
of a location service is the table of address mappings that
map telephony addresses to network layer addresses. Fig.
3 presents a typical case of IP telephony communication.
Figure 1.
The development process
It is usually referred to as SIP trapezoid. There are two
EndPoint instances (SIP user agents) shown in Fig. 3, one
in each domain. In both domains there is RoutingPoint and
LocServPoint - in the SIP case, the two (SIP proxy and SIP
registrar) are often collocated.
An important class of telephony applications is the class
of network side applications [5]- applications with logic
residing at infrastructure nodes. For that reason ontology
contains another class, subclassed from RoutingPoint Rout-
ingPointExt. In SIP networks, network side applications
are often built using back-to-back user agents which is a
network element containing SIP client and server side user
agent stack, controlled by one application. Essential property
of endpoint is its conﬁguration and the list of supported
capabilities. The important property of EndPoint class is the
active user currently logged in at the end point, modeled by
the EndUser class. The characteristics of telephony services
are such that there is only zero or one user active at any end-
point at any moment of time. The identiﬁcation property of
this class is the end user address, speciﬁed using the address
scheme supported by telephony protocol of the network in a
case. Examples are sip and sips address schemes, supported
by SIP protocol or E.164 directory numbers [6], supported
by H.323. While functions of endpoint are obvious - it is a
user interface to end users that supports required functions
(login/logout, authentication, call control, input/output of
multimedia stream), the functions of infrastructure elements
are more sophisticated and include:
• routing of messages
• enforcement of administrative policies
• bandwidth control
• location service
• authorization and authentication.
It can be seen that authentication is a support function
required at all network nodes, both end points and routing
points.
IV. PROTOCOL MESSAGES
All telephony operations are carried out as exchange
of messages. Rigid property of ProtocolMessage is the
message syntax. H.323 uses ASN.1 [7] while SIP uses
UTF.8. H.225 [8] messages are based on Q.931 [9] syntax.
The procedural view of telephony provides us with a list
of most important operations including location service,
capabilities query, session-related operations (establishment,
modiﬁcation, termination) and authentication. Each of listed
operations assumes parameters. In case of session establish-
ment and session modiﬁcation, that parameter is proposed
session description (in SIP case, it is presented in Session
Description Protocol (SDP) [10] notation and in H.323 it
is part of OpenLogicalChannel H.245 message [11]). In
case of location query, this parameter is user address. But,
modern protocols allow speciﬁcation of many parameters of
secondary importance - for instance, ringing tone that is used
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

to signal new call can be speciﬁed in session establishment
in SIP.
V. DYNAMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE NETWORK
A. Associations
Speaking about dynamic relationships that appear during
the operation of telephony network, one of the most impor-
tant classes in this segment is Association. This class is iden-
tiﬁed with addresses of participating sides and identiﬁcation.
We consider the association of two sides ﬁrst. Association is
a subclass of feature class (Feature). Feature is any function
provided by the network to end users or a primitive function
that goes unnoticed by end users, serving as a building block
for complex functions (services) that end users invoke. One
rigid property of Feature is OperationInterface. Subclasses
of Association class are: Session – for telephony session,
RegAssociation - for registration association, PubSubAsso-
ciation – for publish/subscribe association, and Conference
(see Fig. 4). Session class models peer-to-peer telephony
Figure 2.
The NetPoint class and related classes
Figure 3.
Typical IP Telephony communication path
communication. The notion of telephony session implies ex-
istence of media (audio/video) stream that typically conveys
speech or a video phone call, thus a rigid property of the
Session class is SessionDescription which includes negoti-
ated characteristics of audio/video stream and some other
parameters. Registration association is the prerequisite of
location service. In case of RegAssociation, rigid property is
address mapping. Publish/subscribe associations are used for
event publishing and are building blocks for different types
of complex services. Rigid property of subscribe/publish
association is the speciﬁc item of interest, in other words,
the topic of information that is published. Conference is
a feature that requires existence of infrastructure support
(media mixers). Conference server is node which contains
signaling sessions to participating nodes and media mixer
contains media sessions to participating nodes. The two
do not have to be collocated. Conference is a subclass of
Association that presents association of n > 1 points. Rigid
property of this class is the list of participants. In its early
form, SIP dialog was about multimedia session only but,
with the introduction of publish/subscribe mechanism, the
notion of dialog has been extended. At this point, we do not
recognize the need to incorporate such a composite class in
ontology because all operations can be described using the
existing association classes.
Figure 4.
The Feature class and related classes
B. Interfaces
The telephony operations are provided by interfaces of
our ontology. For each subclass of Association, there is
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

analogous interface, providing telephony operations typi-
cal for that class. The following are subclasses of Op-
erationInterface: SessionInterface, PubSubInterface, Reg-
istrationInterface and AuthenticationInterface. There are
two instances of SessionInterface: P1SessionInterface and
P3SessionInterface, one being for the ﬁrst party, and the
other for the third party call control of the telephony session,
which is used in complex telephony applications - call
centers etc.
Several assumptions are used. Terminate is a two-step
transaction and Establish is done in three steps, as it is the
case in three way handshake that is used in SIP protocol.
The session negotiation supports exchange of three messages
both in SDP [10] based offer-answer model and in H.245
[11] Open Logical Channel sequence - in the case of
bidirectional channel. (In the case of two unidirectional
channels H.245 assumes exchange of four messages in
session negotiation.) Also, session modiﬁcation is in our on-
tology realized in three steps reusing some of the messages
of Establish transaction. This is again in accordance with
SIP protocol and its re-INVITE mechanism. On the other
hand, a protocol has been proposed where instead of two-
step and three-step transactions, each message represents a
transaction by itself [12]. Essential methods of PubSubIn-
terface are: Subscribe, Accept and Notify. Subscribe/Publish
association ﬁnds its use in many complex services. For
example, in SIP environment, it is used for dissemination
of presence and registration information, for publication of
the result of transfer operation, and for third party control.
In SIP protocol, the session transfer operation is complex
feature that uses basic service session and publish/subscribe
association as building blocks. For de-registration, we use
SIP convention: register message with speciﬁc values of
parameters (expiration time set to 0). For that reason, there
is no explicit Deregister method in the interface.
C. Authentication
Session establishment as well as registration may re-
quire authentication. In our ontology, we assume stateless
challenge-based solution as in SIP protocol. Authentication
interface contains the following methods: AuthenticationRe-
quired, AuthenticationRequest and AuthenticationResponse.
However, the last two are not transferred as separate mes-
sages but as message parameters in messages like Establish
or Register. For example, endpoint sends Establish with no
user credentials. Routing point checks the administrative
policy rules, determines that authentication is required and
sends AuthenticationRequired back with the challenge in-
cluded. Endpoint sends Establish again, this time with user
credentials and computed response to the received challenge.
This solution implies existence of some kind of public key
infrastructure.
VI. RELATED WORK
A discussion on the use of ontologies in telecom domain
can be found in [21]. The work presented by Geneiatakis
et al. [14] is an example of the use of ontology for VoIP
security. It is the case of target-centric intrusion detec-
tion. Data model based on this ontology would provide a
framework for cooperation of elements of distributed IDS
system protecting the domain of telephony network. Also,
cooperation of different IDS systems protecting different
domains of telephony network can be based on the model.
The ontology presented in this paper can also be used in
security and, if extended with classes related to speciﬁc
details of telephony protocols, it would cover wider range
of detected attacks since it comprises a holistic view of IP
telephony network.
Campbell et al. [15] presents specialization of APPEL
policy language for call control in the scope of the Advanced
Call Control Enhancing Network Technologies (ACCENT)
project. APPEL encapsulates generic aspects of a policy
language, but some specialized aspects related to call control
are included too. In [15], parts of call control ontology used
in ACCENT project, related to trigger, condition parame-
ter and action classes are presented. Campbell et al. [15]
presents segment of the call control ontology at the level of
details, which complements the high level overview given
in this paper. The Call Processing Language (CPL) scripts
are used in many SIP based services. Devlic [16] presents
context ontology for enhancement of CPL possibilities and
the architecture of context aware VoIP system. Another
system that uses context information and is developed using
ontology is presented in [22]. The context related classes are
not covered in the ontology presented in this paper. It is a
potential topic for further work on the ontology.
Tetlow et al. [17] presents system architecture of an
ontology based application server. Sources that provide input
to the system are various metadata ﬁles (including applica-
tion server conﬁguration ﬁles). This information is parsed
into semantic metadata - metadata in terms of the applied
ontology. The semantic metadata and the ontology are inputs
to the inference engine that is embedded in the application
server. The engine is used either by core services or by
tools which provide GUI interface. Akhmanov et al. [18]
presents an ontology based system for prevention of Spam
over Internet Telephony (SPIT) attacks in SIP networks.
Anti-SPIT security policy is expressed as a set of rules,
coded in SWRL language. Each rule contains two segments:
conditions and actions. Applicable actions are: Allow, Block,
Check Further. The rules are incorporated into the ontology
model. An example of a rule that checks PRIORITY and
FROM headers in a SIP message is given, but the details of
the ontology are not.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

VII. APPLICATIONS OF THE ONTOLOGY
Presented ontology is used in the development of tele-
phony framework [3]. The framework supports the following
features:
• ﬁrst-party call control operations,
• third-party call control operations,
• instant messaging,
• presence services,
• monitoring of the state of logged-in users and active
sessions,
• network side applications.
Besides the classes described in this paper, the framework
includes several other important classes. An object of Sig-
nalingDevice class interfaces the underlying session layer
protocol. P3Server and P3Session classes implement third
party call control. AppLEObserver is a parent of classes
that provide support for monitoring, in the framework are
used EndUserObserver and SessionObserver classes. Moni-
toring is based on publish-subscribe relationship which maps
directly to SIP event notiﬁcation mechanism. An object
of FeatureMng class is responsible for feature interaction
control (in collaboration with the classes that implement
active features, and inherit the generic Feature class).
Certain design decisions regarding feature management
are further explained in [13]. The session transfer and
session redirection features are used as examples. Also
in the paper are described two simple taxonomies of call
control features. The ﬁrst one groups features into primitive,
derivative and composite. Basic call with interface for ﬁrst
party call control is a primitive feature. An example of a
composite feature is conference. The relationship between
composite and primitive feature is similar to aggregation
(’has’ relationship in Uniﬁed Modeling Language). In call
processing derivative features can have read access to basic
call data, but no feature has full (read and write) access
to other feature’s data. The second taxonomy distinguishes
symmetric and asymmetric features. The former are im-
plemented as peer-to-peer, and the later as client-server
modules. Basic call is a symmetric feature, while session
transfer and redirect are asymmetric features.
The ontology could be used in a framework as Multime-
dia Ontology-Driven Architecture (MODA) [18]. It would
complement the ontologies used in [18] (ITU multimedia
services ontology, IETF protocols ontology, software imple-
mentations ontology etc.). In network security, this ontology
could be used for building data models, as in [14]. In that
case the ontology should be extended with the work in
[20]. In SIP environment, complex services are built as
software applications residing on top of a SIP stack. Such
ontology could be used to establish common data format for
cooperation of different VoIP applications.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper systematically presents important classes of
a new ontology for IP telephony networks - by giving an
overview of important aspects of network functionality and
corresponding classes, while in most of the published papers
only segments of used ontologies are presented. The ontol-
ogy outlined in this paper is built around several key classes
that are roots of class hierarchies. Those classes embody
the most important qualities of the telephony network. The
most important static aspect is the structure of telephony
network. The corresponding class hierarchy starts with the
class NetPoint. The dynamics of the telephone network are
best described with appearance, and duration of telephony
associations. The corresponding class hierarchy starts with
the class Association. The most obvious association is the
telephony session, or call, but there are also other important
associations, which are not so obvious. An example is the
publish/subscribe association, which is a building block for
many complex services. Class Feature represents a generic
telephony service.
Application of this ontology is possible both in design
of telephony software (as in [3], [13]), and in data formats
used for interoperability of different telephony applications
and/or security applications in telephony systems. The sup-
port for context-based applications and potential application
of ontology for multimedia systems beyond telephony are
elements for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Ministry of
Education and Science of the Republic of Serbia under the
project III 44009-2.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, J.
Peterson, and R. Sparks, “SIP: Session Initiation Protocol”,
RFC 3261, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2002.
[2] ITU-T, “Visual Telephone Systems and Equipment for Local
Area Networks Which Provide A Non-Guaranteed Quality Of
Service”, H.323, 1996.
[3] I. Basicevic, “Object-Oriented Framework for Development
of Telephony Applications”, International Conference on Dig-
ital Telecommunications, Colmar, France, 2009, pp.11–14.
[4] R. Kishore, H. Zhang, and R. Ramesh,, “A Helix-Spindle
Model for Ontological Engineering”, Communications of
ACM, vol. 47, No. 2, 2004, pp. 69-75.
[5] I. Basicevic and M. Popovic, “Use of SIP in the Development
of Telecom Services - A Case Study”, The Journal of the
Institute of Telecommunications Professionals, vol.2, Part 3,
2008, pp. 55-65.
[6] ITU-T, “The International Public Telecommunication Num-
bering plan”, E.164, 2005.
[7] ITU-T, “Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation
One (ASN.1): Speciﬁcation of basic notation”, ITU-T Rec.
X.680 —ISO/IEC 8824-1, 2002.
[8] ITU-T, “Call Signaling Protocols and Media Stream Pack-
etization for Packet-Based Multimedia Communication Sys-
tems”, H.225.0, 1998.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

[9] ITU-T, “ISDN User-Network Interface Layer 3 Speciﬁcation
for Basic Call Control”, Q.931, 1998.
[10] M. Handley, V. Jacobson, and C. Perkins, “SDP: Session
Description Protocol”, RFC 4566, Internet Engineering Task
Force, 2006.
[11] ITU-T, “Control Protocol for Multimedia Communication”,
H.245, 1998.
[12] P. Zave and E. Cheung, “Compositional Control of IP Media”,
International Conference On Emerging Networking Experi-
ments And Technologies, 2006.
[13] I. Basicevic, “Modular Design of Call Control Layer in Tele-
phony Software”, International Journal Of Computer Science
Issues, vol. 8, Issue 1, 2011.
[14] D. Geneiatakis and C. Lambrinoudakis, “An Ontology De-
scription for SIP Security Flaws”, Computer Communica-
tions, vol. 30, 6, 2007, pp. 1367-1374.
[15] G. A. Campbell and K. J. Turner, “Ontologies to support
Call Control Policies”, Proc. 3rd. Advanced International
Conference on Telecommunications, 2007, pp. 5.1–5.6.
[16] A. Devlic, “Extending CPL with context ontology”, IMAC
Workshop, Espoo, Finland, 2006
[17] P. Tetlow, J. Pan, D. Oberle, E. Wallace, M. Uschold, and E.
Kendall, “Ontology Driven Architectures and Potential Uses
of the Semantic Web in Systems and Software Engineering”,
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) working draft, 2006.
[18] S. A. Akhmanov, A. S. Chirkin, K. N. Drabovich, A. I.
Kovrigin, D. Stelios, and G. Dimitris, “An Ontology-Driven
antiSPIT Architecture”, Lecture Notes of the Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunica-
tions Engineering, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 189-198.
[19] E. Exposito, J. Gomez-Montalvo, and M. Lamolle, “Multime-
dia Ontology-Driven Architecture for Multimedia Systems”,
Second International Conference on Information, Process, and
Knowledge Management, eKNOW ’10, 2010, pp.7–12.
[20] VOIPSA,
“VoIP
Security
and
Privacy
Threat
Taxonomy”,
Public
Release
1.0,
http://www.voipsa.org/Activities/taxonomy.php,
accessed
05.2.2013.
[21] J. Frankowski, P. Rubach, and E. Szczekocka, “Collaborative
Ontology Development in Real Telecom Environment”, 1st
International Working Conference on Business Process and
Services Computing, 2007, pp. 40-53.
[22] P. Gutheim, “An Ontology-Based Context Inference Service
for Mobile Applications in Next-Generation Networks”, IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 1, 2011, pp. 60-66.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-262-2
ICDT 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

