Enhancing Situational Awareness by Means of Combat-ID to Minimize Fratricide 
and Collateral Damage in the Theater 
Tapio Saarelainen 
Department of Military Technology 
National Defence University, Finland 
Helsinki, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi
 
 
Abstract—The Future Battlefield has expanded to a battlespace 
where its commanders rely on SA-tools to perform optimally in 
their given tasks. Operations may include combat settings as 
well as counter insurgency actions, peace-keeping operations 
and disaster relief activities. In multi-national operations 
taking place in versatile and hostile environments, it is essential 
to detect, classify and identify the encountered objects in the 
battlespace early enough. The concept of war has changed in 
the direction of multi-symmetric warfare involving enemy 
troops, own forces and impartial entities. This paper describes 
existing technical solutions and oncoming tools applicable in 
enhancing Situational Awareness (SA) and minimizing 
fratricide and collateral damage in the battlefield. This paper 
adopts a meta-analytic approach and examines the current 
capability of utilized Combat Identification (CID) systems to 
minimize fratricide and avoid collateral damage in the theatre 
as described in relevant existing studies and military exercises. 
This, furthermore, involves introducing means to enhance the 
overall SA in the battlespace. 
Keywords 
- 
Situational 
Awareness 
(SA), 
Common 
Operational Picture (COP), fratricide, collateral damage. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS 
This paper begins by first taking a look in Combat 
Identification (CID) issues. Secondly, a comprehensive 
approach to Target Combat Identification (TCID) is 
discussed. Thirdly, the paper examines how an ongoing 
training program, the Bold Quest 2011, is testing these 
presented methods. Lastly, the concept of Shared Situational 
Awareness (SSA) is introduced with the help of utilizing 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Unmanned Ground 
Vehicles (UGVs). Combining a swarm of UAVs with Free 
Space Optics (FSO) offers a reliable platform for aerial ad-
hoc networking [6]. The capabilities of these platforms are 
implemented by enhancing SA and data distribution to 
enable near real-time Common Operational Picture (COP) to 
be implemented into SSA. Once the location data of different 
entities can be reliably forwarded to respective command 
posts, the number of fratricide incidents and collateral 
damage can be significantly minimized. The significance of 
Target Combat Identification (TCID) in minimizing 
fratricide is introduced. 
Once the information and its distribution in the 
battlespace is defined as the key in Network Centric 
Operations (NCO), every effort to ensure the information 
flow between own warriors and sensors needs to be analyzed 
[5]. Contemporary weapon systems require greater amounts 
of intelligence data at a higher fidelity than ever before [19]. 
Since operations tend to be multi-national, different sensors 
and systems are required to communicate understandably 
between each entity to minimize fratricide and collateral 
damage by maximizing the distribution of the near real-time 
Common Operational Picture (COP). One solution is to 
utilize Battle Management Language (BML) [5].  
This paper tackles the following three questions: What 
are the means to locate the soldier by employing the existing 
CID and SA technology? How to increase SA with the 
available technical solutions? And, furthermore, how to test 
these technologies in peace-time? 
As for defining terminology, a new network structure 
called the Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN) is 
explained in [1]. Since nodes do not form a network per se 
but rather are polled by a selected node of the mobile 
network, they remain undetected due to their passive nature. 
The network structure offers a new and ubiquitous way to 
share and forward all kinds of data, including data collected 
by various sensors. Moreover, the outdated Identification 
Friend or Foe (IFF) systems are replaced and supplemented 
with effective and accurate means to identify the prevailing 
objects. 
Examining the means to minimize fratricide and 
collateral damage presupposes applying the model presented 
in Figure 1 below. This terminologically updated model 
emphasizes how Tactics Techniques and Procedures (TTP), 
CID, COP, and SA play a central role in minimizing 
incidents of fratricide and collateral damage. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Reason’s Swiss Cheese Model updated by applicable 
terminology as a tool to explain the mechanism of avoiding fratricide and 
collateral damage, Blue-on-Blue (BoB). 
131
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

An applicable definition for SA is given in Army Field 
Manual 
1-02 
(September 
2004): 
“Knowledge 
and 
understanding of the current situation which promotes 
timely, relevant and accurate assessment of friendly, 
competitive and other operations within the battle space in 
order to facilitate decision making. An informational 
perspective and skill that fosters an ability to determine 
quickly the context and relevance of events that is 
unfolding.” 
The process of determining the affiliation of detected 
objects in the battlefield equals Target Identification (TI) [4]. 
When using this categorization, blue denotes the friendly 
force, red the enemy, and white refers to neutral (impartial) 
entities. The traditional method of TI is based on visual 
signature of the object of interest. In contemporary warfare 
TI is also based on utilizing the electromagnetic spectrum of 
the target. Properly applied data and sensor fusion can be 
seen as a means to prevent collateral damage and fratricide. 
As a matter of fact, TI can be divided into two categories: 
Cooperative 
Target 
Identification 
(CTI) 
and 
Non-
Cooperative Target Identification (NCTI). CTI allows a 
human shooter or sensor to interrogate a potential target and 
thereby forces the potential target to respond to the 
interrogation in a timely manner as described in Figure 2 [3]. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The process of Cooperative Target Identification (CTI). 
NCTI in turn does not require a cooperative response 
from the target. NCTI involves systems or methods which 
exploit physical characteristics of entities in the battle space 
to help identify and determine affiliation. NCTI systems 
include optics such as Thermal Weapon Sights (TWS), night 
Vision Goggles (NVG), Forward Looking Infrared Radar 
(FLIR), as well as vehicle and personnel markings such as 
Joint Combat Identification Marking Systems (JCIMS). 
JCIMS are used in conjunction with TWS, NVG and FLIR 
assisting in friendly identification at the point of engagement 
[4].  
CID can be defined as a process of attaining an accurate 
and timely characterization of detected objects in the joint 
battle space to the extent that high confidence, timely 
application of military options and weapons resources can 
occur [4][25]. An extension of this can be understood as a 
process of accurately characterizing the detected objects via 
the 
operational 
environment 
sufficiently 
to 
support 
engagement decisions [4]. The purpose of CID is to enhance 
unit combat effectiveness and simultaneously minimizing 
fratricide. In the form of an equation CID reads as: SA + TI 
= CID [4].  
The core capability in SA is COP that fosters effective 
decision making, rapid staff actions, and appropriate mission 
execution [4][26]. COP is employed to collect, share and 
display 
multi-dimensional 
information 
to 
facilitate 
collaborative planning and response to security incidents. 
Each organization involved in applying COP typically 
comprises three types of modules: 1) information gathering 
sources that observe events and report information to the 
command and control module, 2) a command and control 
module that makes decisions based on both information 
received directly from its information gathering sources and 
information reported by other peers, and 3) display units at 
the emergency location that receive instructions from the 
command and control module [4]. 
The acronym MOUT (Military Operations on Urbanized 
Terrain) denotes military actions planned and conducted on a 
terrain complex where manmade constructions impact the 
tactical options available to commanders. Urban combat 
operations may be conducted in order to capitalize on the 
strategic or tactical advantages gained by the possession or 
control of a particular urban area or to deny these advantages 
from the enemy [1]. The characteristics of MOUT include 
complex situations brought about by urban environments 
(ambushes, civilians). The maze-like boxed surroundings 
hamper command and control leading to combat engagement 
taking place at squad level with low coordination with higher 
echelons. 
Combat Effectiveness (CE) can be defined as the ability 
of a (friendly) unit to rapidly and accurately sort and 
characterize detected objects into categories (blue, white, 
red) and make a decision as to whether or not to employ 
deadly force against the identified object/target. Effectively 
applying the CE guarantees a minimum level of collateral 
damage and fratricide. Now, to exemplify the previously 
defined terms, the following briefly examines Rules of 
Engagement (ROE) together with tactics, techniques and 
procedures (TTP). ROE defines the situations and guidelines 
which then support an individual in a situation when a 
decision is made about whether or not to open fire. TTP 
supports the decision making process regarding force 
implementation in the Area of Operations (AOR). 
Depending on the ROE formulations, the orders concerning 
using force may vary as indicated in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  ROE in a relation to the number of troops killed (blue, white, 
red) and the number of losses and fratricide. 
132
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

All warriors depend on SA [2] which can be provided 
also by using WPSN-systems introduced in [1]. The Blue 
Force Tracking-systems (BFT) along with the White Force 
Tracking (WFT) presented in [3] provide vital information 
for improving commanders’ decision-making and avoiding 
fratricide and collateral damage. Blue Forces, allies and 
White Forces need to be constantly precisely located. It is 
crucial to improve the efficiency of dismounted operations 
with smaller and more capable units. These units require a 
great degree of flexibility and reliability to obtain their set 
goals to ensure the desired end state.  
This paper discusses recent research in the Finnish 
Defence Forces and elsewhere on Combat Identification. 
Since the author’s research has targeted the networking of 
the future warfighter in particular, this paper examines 
components relevant in this regard. The remaining of the 
paper is arranged as follows: Section II introduces the related 
work, 
Section 
III 
describes 
challenges 
in 
combat 
identification, Section IV explains the process of the 
comprehensive targeting process, Section V deals with the 
problems causing fratricide, whereas Section VI explains the 
challenges in distributing the SA, Section VII focuses on 
problems designated in Military Operations in built-up areas, 
Section VIII introduces the Bold Quest exercise, and finally, 
Section IX concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In military operations in the Persian Gulf, BFT was used 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) for coordinating 
operations among the Joint Services and with allies and 
resulted in reduced causalities due to enhanced SA [21]. 
Obviously, Soldier Modernization Programmes (SMPs) are 
significantly important in enhancing the performance of the 
militaries. These SMPs concentrate on improving and 
updating dismounted soldiers’ equipment. These Future 
Soldier Programs are currently underway along with a series 
of demonstrations and exercises in which collateral damage 
and fratricide are to be minimized, whereas the means to 
increase SA via improved BFT and WFT are also in 
progress. One example of these is a series of Bold Quest 
(BQ) exercises carried out since 2007. The incoming Bold 
Quest 2011 (BQ11) features a primary emphasis on 
enhancing the capability of CID as related to the needs of 
dismounted coalition warfighters and those providing them 
with timely and effective supporting fires.  
The principal 
contributing 
efforts, technical and 
procedural, involve the following [21]. First, CTI, automated 
query or response systems for dismounted personnel and 
light vehicles need to be addressed. Secondly, a means to 
share SA systems for employment at the platoon, squad, 
team, and individual levels must be applied. Thirdly, 
digitally-aided supporting fires’ coordination and control 
must be defined. Fourth, Digitally-aided Close Air Support 
(DCAS) coordination and control has to be applied. In 
addition, challenges with Combat Identification Server (CIS) 
interoperability and Personnel Recovery command and 
control (C2) need to be solved. Lastly, marking and beacon 
systems for dismounted personnel, light vehicles, and 
friendly locations need to be applied. In fact, the US Army is 
fielding its new SA system known as Force XXI Battle 
Command and Brigade and Below (FBCB2) [2][21]. There 
is also a European Defence Agency (EDA) proposal, named 
the SAFE, a cancelled project, which was to increase SA and 
efficiency in crisis management operations in the urban 
environment ranging from mid-intensity battle to peace 
keeping operations. One of the keys into the success is 
careful mission analysis and thorough evaluation of Courses 
of Actions (COAs). Both processes can save time and 
minimize collateral damage. The use of available Blue and 
friendly Forces and resources can be optimized. This 
increases efficiency and along with minimum casualties, 
leads to minimum recovery times. 
Another objective of the BQ11 for the Finnish Defence 
Forces (FDF) is currently developing new joint fires and 
joint C2 capabilities both for national defence and coalition 
combined operations [22]. The recent progress involves 
starting to develop tactics, TTP for Air-to-Ground (AG) 
operations and Joint Fires (JF). One of the Finnish goals 
involves purchasing an interoperable, net-enabled and 
digitally-aided material solution for close air support. 
Engaging the target accurately and cost-effectively is vital 
especially for a nation with limited resources. At the 
moment, fourteen nations participate in the BQ11 exercise to 
improve the outlined objectives [21]. 
Obviously, all nations want to enhance the SA, minimize 
fratricide and collateral damage in the battlespace. This 
paper provides a meta-analysis and describes the results 
gathered in existing studies and military exercises thereby 
highlighting the significance of technology in maximizing 
the effectiveness of own forces. This is applicable until 
robotic armies replace human warriors in the battlespace. 
Until then, the continuous developing of the SA and CID 
systems in instrumental for saving lives in the ongoing and 
ensuing conflicts.  
 
III. 
CHALLENGES IN COMBAT IDENTIFICATION 
In military operations everything is done to prevent BoB. 
Currently, identifying a warrior regardless of the visibility 
conditions is essential. As evident in Figure 2 above, both an 
interrogation unit and a responder unit are necessary, 
presupposing, first of all, that the systems are fully 
operational, and, secondly, that the distance between the 
warriors is appropriate. In case the identification system 
doesn’t reply, a human is making the decision to open fire 
based on the TTP. The Identification to whether or not to 
open fire is based on the visual signature of the uniform, 
weapon and gear [23]. 
However, one needs to keep in mind that there is always 
the possibility that the location device gets stolen or misused 
by a third party, for example, an insurgent tries to function as 
a member of the White Force (WF) [3]. In order to increase 
the reliability of the system, the tracking devices have to be 
pre-coded and tied in pairs in advance before entering the 
battlefield to prevent the stealing of the tracking device. 
Once paired devices are torn apart, they stop functioning as 
planned – and devices become dysfunctional [3]. After the 
133
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

separation process, the devices must be re-paired and re-
coded by the operator. During this process, the operator re-
identifies the person. 
 
IV. 
COMPREHENSIVE TARGETING PROCESS 
When returning to ROE/TTP (whether or not to open 
fire), a link behind the targeting process deserves a closer 
look. The process is known as Detect, Identify, Decide; 
Engage and Assess (DIDEA) [4]. The DIDEA provides an 
iterative, standardised and systematic approach supporting 
targeting and decision making, being generic enough to be 
used as a systematic process for C2 node targeting and 
decision making. Separate actions inside DIDEA area as 
follows: 
Detect: The process of acquiring and locating an object in 
the battle space by analysing the phenomena in the 
electromagnetic spectrum.  
Identify: The process of classifying an object into the 
category of blue, white (neutral) or enemy. This represents a 
primary step where specified CID tasks are accomplished.  
Decide: The decision making process that follows the 
detection and identification phases. This is the most generic 
step within the process and represents the primary step where 
a specific ROE application occurs. In the decision-making 
phase the executive officer/warrior has to decide and define 
what type of weaponry is appropriate for to the mission. In 
cases of opting for the use of deadly force, the following 
questions need to be addressed: 1. Can I engage (ROE 
application)? 2. If there are several targets, what is the order 
to engage the selected targets? 3. Which one is the most 
appropriate weapon system (most cost-effective, least 
collateral damage and fratricide causing). 
Engage: The execution of selected weapons in a selected 
order starting from the most dangerous target moving on 
according the panned sequence.   
Assess: Monitoring the gained effects with the use of 
destruction power. Employing the force of various weapon 
systems available is repeatedly executed until the required 
level of destruction is achieved. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   The simplified DIDEA process. 
V. 
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM? 
Self-evidently, cases of BoB and collateral damage are 
bound to surface to some extent. Militaries are interested in 
locating own troops and increasingly also in the neutral 
entities of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and 
Governmental Organizations (GOs), the WF, the members of 
which can be tracked by using WFT described in [5]. 
Briefly put, the problem relies in relating the TTP, CID, 
COP and SA to the rules of ROE. This involves dealing with 
the balance described in Figure 2. If ROE formulations are 
too strict – for example, the commander’s intent is to avoid 
the use of deadly force unless it is absolutely certain that the 
targeted object is positively identified to be an enemy – the 
Blue Force will suffer on the basis of actions caused by the 
enemy. And, if ROE formulations leave too much room for 
interpretation, various types of casualties (red, blue and 
white) are bound to occur. Thereby the transmission of 
combat-critical location and identification data plays a 
crucial role in the battle space.  
A warrior can be equipped with the appropriate locating 
devices as presented in Figure 5, but this not, however, apply 
in the case of representatives of the White Force. 
 
 
Figure 5.  An example of a fully integrated Warrior for location purposes 
outdoors, indoors and in MOUT for contemporary warfare [18]. 
The destruction power of a chosen weapon system has to 
be optimized according to the enemy location (forest, open 
area, Urban Territory) state of movement on-the Move 
(OTM) or at-the-halt (ATH) and the protection-level 
(mounted, dismounted, dig). Aside, the commanding officer 
has to keep in mind that operations are executed with 
improper SA, COP and with lack of precise real- time CID. 
The cruel reality remains that an executive commander is 
always aware of fact the there is always the possibility of 
fratricide and collateral damage. The commander who is not 
employing the firepower in his possession will have his 
troops killed by the actions of the enemy as presented in 
Figure 2 earlier. 
To enhance improved SA and COP, Geographical Based 
Situational Awareness (GBSA) can be utilized [9]. The 
system utilizes the VHF-frequency operated Combat Net 
Radios (CNRs). When the CNRs are on the connectivity 
range, they recognize and identify radios in the system. Once 
134
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

the radios are at the same channel and the clock (hopping 
sequency) of CNRs are in a correct time, a reliable SA-tool 
[9]. The main problems related to this system have to do 
with the clock and hopping sequence. This is one possibility 
to avoid fratricide and collateral damage. At the moment, the 
main benefit of this concept is in preventing from being fired 
at by own weapon systems, BoB, by means of improved SA-
information. 
Figure 6 below emphasizes the importance of both CID 
and BFT in a battlefield environment. The end-user of the 
weapon system, the one opening fire, has to be aware of the 
locations and status of both own troops and the enemy. 
Before employing the deadly force, the impact of the given 
weapon system needs to be in proportion to the chosen target 
and its perimeters in order to avoid unnecessary collateral 
damage caused by possibly choosing too effective weapon 
systems to destroy a particular target.    
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Military problems of CID-BFT identified from the perspective 
of collateral damage and fratricide assets. 
VI. 
CHALLENGES INVOLVED IN DISTRIBUTING 
SITUATIONAL AWARENESS DATA 
The amount of gathered data via sensors and tracking 
systems is vast. To distribute the location information 
filtered and fused through various systems remains a 
challenge. A warrior has to fight, not to monitor his palm, 
wrist computer or lap-top. Besides, the disturbances in 
electromagnetic spectrum, quality of service (QoS) and 
transmitting power along with the limited bandwidth set 
limitations to the communication systems. As indicated in 
Figure 7, the possibilities of communication are vast, since 
almost all the sensors are somehow linked together to 
maximize BFT, CID, COP and SA. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  The types of possible platforms serving as sensors and network 
nodes. 
 
The problems in data distribution are linked to various 
devices and data in interfaces. BML can be seen as a 
common language enabler between machines and interfaces 
[5] along with almost ubiquitous swarms of UAVs described 
in [6]. Limitations in energy and bandwidth play an 
important role. Locating instruments of various types 
consumes reasonable amounts of energy, not to mention the 
increase in weight and number of devices in warrior gear and 
required maintenance. Due to the lack of accessible wire line 
infrastructures, unmanned systems have to be powered 
through a combination of batteries, solar power, and power 
scavenging [15]. When FSO-technology is adopted in 
backbone networks and between selected ground stations, an 
intelligent, dynamic and secure data transmission with high 
data rates can be offered to mobile end-user [7]. FSO-
technology offers high-speed, reliable and cost-effective 
connectivity for heterogeneous wireless services provision in 
both urban and rural deployments when Dense Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (DWMD) is utilized in Radio-on-FSO 
(RoFSO) system [8]. It has been demonstrated in tests that 
the advanced DWDM RoFSO offers a viable solution to 
provide broadband wireless connectivity. Radio over Fiber 
(RoF) technology will most likely offer a reliable data 
transmission rate of 10 Gbps in the next generation FSO-
systems [8]. 
Furthermore, older existing systems are available for 
distributing data gathered by various types of sensors in 
various 
types 
of 
military 
and 
humanitarian 
crises 
environments. These technologies are based on WPSNs 
described in [1] and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) 
described in [10][16]. The former is passive, so it will remain 
hidden once the latter is active, representing an easier 
detected system. Both systems are applicable to be used in 
transmitting constant data from a sensor to a node, for 
example, to a vehicle or an Unmanned Vehicle (UV).  
To maximize the possibility of devices communicating in 
a proper and planned manner, the topology of network 
135
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

systems has to be correctly coordinated (manage spectrum 
usage with group mobility patterns) [24]. Also the hierarchy 
of a network has to support and enable this. Both the goals 
can be achieved by hierarchical design where devices are 
only to interact with their peers from the same group [11]. In 
addition, the transmit antenna selection is a practical 
technique for achieving significant power gain, even with 
commodity hardware and without changes to different 
waveform protocols [12]. 
 
VII. LOCATION POSSIBILITIES IN URBAN AREAS 
An Army tactical warfighter needs network services both 
OTM and ATH [3]. One of the lessons learned from Iraq and 
Afghanistan was the need for a more robust Beyond-Line-
Of-Sight (BLOS) communication capacity between the 
lower Army echelon Land Warriors, from Squad Leaders to 
Battalion Commanders [3]. 
The proposed and described solutions have to be based 
on novel, generic and robust battlefield-proven solutions in 
order to meet the given needs, and this in turn involves 
addressing the topology of the network system carefully. In 
MOUT transmitting and receiving signals of different 
waveforms simultaneously is challenging due to the nature 
of the combat environment [17]. 
Since the power production and power consumption will 
remain as a challenge, certain issues need to be addressed. 
Thus when defining the network design, it has to be 
emphasized that network coding enables a more efficient, 
scalable and reliable wireless network [14].  
The MOUT environment features no GNSS indoors and 
indoors propagation poses a serious problem. The placement 
of an antenna platform is challenging. One solution can be 
the installing of a high-bandwidth conformal antenna in the 
soldier’s helmet with the coverage of over 750 MHz through 
a 2,7 GHz frequency band [13]. The combat-critical 
solutions involve improving communicating, SA and 
transmitting C2 information among highly dispersed 
battlefield units in dynamic environments, such as MOUT 
[14] [17]. 
Next, let us assume that there is a WPSN-system 
available for positioning and location services. If the 
capability of GPS-Pseudolite, better known as the Self-
Calibrating Pseudolite Array (SCPA), is attached into the 
satellite-based 
Carrier-phase 
Differential 
GPS-type 
(CDGPS), it is possible to determine positioning in locations 
without access to the GPS satellite constellation [16] [1] 
[20]. This in turn will improve locating own troops inside 
buildings dramatically, thereby significantly improving CID, 
TID and SA. The particular challenges set by the MOUT 
environments are presented in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The challenging environment of MOUT. 
VIII. BOLD QUEST EXERCISE 
The Bold Quest is a name of exercises which have been 
executed as a series of exercises since 2007. One purpose of 
these exercises is to enhance SA, TID and minimize 
collateral damage and fratricide. The exercises are planned to 
be executed biannually. Between the exercises there is an 
evaluation period, where collected data are analyzed. 
Damage control in operations can be minimized by adopting 
advanced combat identification technologies via executing 
series of experiments. In Bold Quest 2009 (BQ09), 
organized by the US Joint Forces Command at Camp 
Lejeune and Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point, North 
Carolina, Coalition Combat Identification – Advanced 
Concept Technology Demonstration (CCID – ACTD), 
various 
systems 
were 
tested. 
Ten 
partner 
nations 
participated, and the objective of the exercise was to 
demonstrate and assess air-to ground CID technologies in a 
stressful and challenging operational environment [18].  
In BQ09, technical initiatives included prototype-level 
systems to enable aircrew and controllers to exchange 
position information digitally among friendly ground 
elements relative to their proximity to potential ground 
targets [4][25]. The results improve the capabilities in target 
acquisition and minimize the risk and level of fratricide.  
One of the most promising technologies demonstrated 
during BQ09 was the Smart-Pull Warfighter Information for 
Targeting (SWIFT) Combat Identification Server (CIDS) 
[17]. SWIFT provides the fighter pilot of a combat aircraft 
with on-demand request capability for friendly forces 
location information. Information is forwarded via a secure 
transmission from the ground located CIDS as request based 
service. This is the process for the fighter pilot to verify the 
known 
friendly locations according to the ground 
commanders close air-support request. Figure 9 portrays the 
CCID-ACTD system. 
 
136
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
 
Figure 9.  The CCID-ACTD system of collateral damage and fratricide 
assets. 
When it comes to CIDS, the requirement is to contribute 
to improving Tactical Situational Awareness (TSA) for allied 
forces involved in the delivery and control of indirect and 
direct fires to land operations. The CIDS is about to correlate 
BFT information from 15 different sources, including LINK-
16, BOWMAN [25]. Besides, the CIDS will enable the joint 
fires assets and Close Air Support (CAS)/Close Combat Air 
(CCA) aircraft on request. The CIDS will utilize Link-16, 
Variable Message Format (VMF) and other tactical networks 
to redistribute BFT information [17].  
Once the next Bold Quest series exercise is arranged in 
June 2011 (BQ11), the focus will be on Fires on Dismounts. 
The CIDS technical demonstrator will be ready for the 
exercise for the extensive testing of the planned concept [17].  
The air-to-air and ground-to-air systems utilize the IFF as 
a method to define entities in their battle space. In the near 
future, ground-to-ground systems may start using Battlefield 
Target Identification Device (BTID), CTI systems. As 
demonstrated in Figure 10 below, Radio-Based Combat 
Identification (RBCI), along with different types of IFF-
systems available, can be utilized. 
A key factor is the efficiency of a warrior, which can be 
gained via improved SA, BFT and Command, Control, 
Computers, 
Communication, 
Information, 
Intelligence, 
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C4I2SR). However, since 
supplementary gear can never fully substitute human 
intelligence, a warrior must remain active and alert maintain 
in the battlefield.  
The constant objective of military forces is to gain the 
initiative and turn this into success – to maximize 
performance 
in 
military 
operations 
with 
minimized 
casualties in minimal recovery times. Operational time spent 
in the battlefield can be minimized by careful mission 
analysis and thorough evaluation of Courses of Actions 
(COAs). 
These presented technologies expand the possibilities to 
carry out the set missions in the future with ever increasing 
performance capabilities. On a practical level, this involves, 
for instance, minimizing fratricide and collateral damage by 
detecting roadside bombs early and precisely enough. One of 
the most promising Combat Identification systems is 
introduced in Figure 10 below. The collected CID data can 
be forwarded via different means of communication to 
everyone requiring these CID data. 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Radio-Based Combat Identification (RBCI). 
 
To facilitate capability development, the Finnish Defence 
Forces plans to participate in the BQ11 in to increase combat 
effectiveness in national defence and coalition combat 
operations. This constant and continuing process enhances 
the capability to avoid BoB along with the capability to 
avoid collateral damage by tracking the WF. 
The battle can be won only by careful mission planning 
and comparing different COAs, whereas winning wars 
presupposes winning the hearts and minds as well. Avoiding 
collateral damage, minimizing fratricide and increasing SA 
among the coalition forces enables performing maximally in 
minimum time, and enhances the probability to succeed in 
this 
complex 
challenge. 
The 
adoption 
of 
existing 
technologies and their viable solutions offers a key to 
constant success when appropriately applied. 
 
IX. 
CONLUSIONS 
This paper is a synthesis of recent research work in the 
Finnish Defence Forces and elsewhere on Combat 
Identification, and many of the proposed components in this 
synthesis are based on the author's research on the 
networking of the future warfighter. Since accurate and 
timely identification in the battlefield is life-preserving for 
each warrior, a careful analysis of the performance and 
capabilities of chosen systems needs to be executed before 
introducing any of these systems in the battlespace. CID 
equals the process that warriors and sensors go through in 
order to identify battlefield objects prior to deciding whether 
or not to open fire. Warfighters are trained to employ all 
available means at their disposal to define and assess 
potential targets in the battlespace prior to employing combat 
power. CID can be viewed as a complex series of networked 
systems, procedures and doctrine as presented in Figures 1 – 
137
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

4.  These systems also include the definitions of TTP, COP, 
SA, ROE and DIDEA. 
More specifically, problems can arise in particular in 
commanding and being commanded, as indicated in Figures 
5 – 7. Moreover, the functioning capacities of a chosen 
network are relevant, as demonstrated in Figures 8 and 9. 
CIDS offers military commanders and fighter pilots access to 
accurate and near real-time BFT and WFT systems. Besides 
this, CIDS offers commanders a tool which can foster 
improved mission planning resulting in increased accuracy 
and tempo of missions. To sum up, CIDS aids commanders 
to reduce the number of unexpected incidents and minimize 
collateral damage.  
Once the TTP, CID, COP, and SA systems discussed in 
this paper (cf. Figure 1) are designed, tested and become 
fully implemented as part of the combat gear, some progress 
may be discernible in minimizing fratricide and collateral 
damage. The reality is that for as long as human actors 
remain part of any decision-making processes, incidents of 
fratricide and collateral damage are bound to occur. All 
efforts to minimize the human error factor by improving 
existing technologies, TTP, CID, COP and SA together with 
defining explicitly the formulations in ROE, are to be 
saluted. The efforts to minimize unwanted phenomena are to 
be applied, for example, in the ongoing series of Bold Quest 
exercises. 
So far, all the decision-making processes in battlespace 
settings have culminated in a human being making the final 
decision to apply combat power. In the future, this decision 
maker’s position may be manned by Artificial Intelligence 
(AI). And, needless to say, detailed planning, testing and 
implementation are necessary prerequisites for all future 
warrior systems to be successfully deployed by any robotic 
militaries of the future. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, C4I2-Tools for Future Battlefield 
Warrior, IEEE Conference on Digital Communications (ICDT), 13 – 
19 June 2009, Athens, Greece, pp. 38 – 43. 
[2] K. Chevli, P.Kim, A.Kagel, D. Moy, R. Pattay, R. Nichols, and A. 
Goldfinger, Blue Force Tracking Network Modeling and Simulation, 
IEEE Military Communications Conference, MILCOM 2006, pp. 23-
25 Oct. 2006, Washington, U.S.A., pp. 1 – 7. 
[3] T. Saarelainen, White Force Tracking (WFT), ECIW2009, Portugal, 
pp. 216 – 223. 
[4] E.Ospital and A. Wojack, A Holistic Approach to Combat 
Identification, Military Technology, vol XXXIV, issue 9, 2010, 
ISSN-3226, pp. 68 –73. 
[5] K. Rein, U. Schade and M. Hieb, Battle Management language 
(BML) as an enabler, IEEE Conference on Communications, ICC’09, 
14 – 18 June, Wachtberg, Germany, 2009, pp. 1 – 5. 
[6] C. Chlestil, E. Leitgeb, N. Schmitt, S. Sheikh Muhammad, K. Zettl, 
and W. Rehm, Reliable Optical Wireless Links within UAV Swarms, 
Transparent Optical Networks, 18 – 22 June, 2006, Nottingham, 
Great-Britain, pp. 39 – 42. 
[7] A. Desai and S. Milner, Autonomous Reconfiguration in Free-Space 
Optical Sensor Networks, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communication, vol 23, issue 8, 2005, pp. 1556 – 1563. 
[8] K. Kazaura, K. Wakamori, M. Matsumoto, T. Higashino, K. 
Tsukamoto, and S. Komaki, A Proposal for a Broadband Wireless 
Access 
Technology 
based 
on 
Radio-onFSO 
Links, 
IEEE 
GLOBECOM Workshops, Nov. 30 – Dec 4, 2008, New Orleans, 
U.S.A., pp. 1 – 6. 
[9] T. Sierksma, J. Hoekstra, and B. Jansen, Geographical Based 
Situational Awareness in Military Mobile Domain, IEEE Military 
Communications Conference, MILCOM2007, 29 – 30 Oct, 2007, 
Orlando, U.S.A, pp. 1 – 7. 
[10] M. Bahrepour, N. Meratnia, and P. Havinga, Sensor fusion-based 
Event Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks, Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Systems, Networking  Services, MobiQuitous, 2009, 13 – 
16 July, Toronto, Canada, 2009, pp. 1 – 8. 
[11] H. Zheng, J. Shi, and L. Cao, Group-Mobility-Aware Spectrum 
Management for Future Digital Battlefields, MILCOM 2006, 
Washington, DC, U.S.A.,  pp. 1 – 7. 
[12] C-M. Cheng, P-H. Hsiao, H. T. Kung, and D. Vlah, Transmit Antenna 
Selection Based on Link-layer Channel Probing, World of Wireless, 
Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 2007, Cambridge, MA, U.S.A. 
[13] D. Herold, L. Griffiths, and T.Y. Fung, Lightweight, High-Bandwidth 
Conformal Antenna System for Ballistic Helmets, MILCOM 2007, 
Orlando, FL, U.S.A., pp. 1 – 6. 
[14] G. Jakobson, J. Buford, and L. Lewis, A Framework of cognitive 
situation modelling and recognition, MILCOM 2006, 23 – 26 Oct. 
2006, Washington, DC, pp. 1 – 7. 
[15] O. Kosut, A. Turovsky, J. Sun, M. Ezovski, L. Tong, and G. Whipps, 
Integrated Mobile and Static Sensing for Target Tracking, MILCOM 
2007, 29 – 31 Oct. 2007, Orlando, FL, U.S.A., pp. 1 – 7. 
[16] D. Al-Abri and J. McNair, Improving Localization Accuracy in 
Wireless Sensor Networks using Location Verification Feedback, 
MILCOM 2007, 29 – 31, Oct. 2007, Orlando, FL, U.S.A., pp. 1 – 7. 
[17] J. Miller, Coalition Combat Identification Capability Assessments 
“Bold Quest”, A presentation in the Combat-ID and Situational 
Awareness Conference, IQPC, London 16.11.2010, www.sa-
combatid.co/uk/presentations, accessed on 1.1.2011. 
[18] J. Rantakokko, Towards a Robust Communications System for the 
Dismounted Soldier through an European Consortium, A presentation 
in the Combat-ID and Situational Awareness Conference, IQPC, 
London 16.11.2010, www.sa-combatid.co/uk/presentations, accessed 
on 2.1.2011.  
[19] R. Buchanan, Intelligence as Fuel Data Requirements for Modern 
CID Systems, A presentation in Combat-ID and Situational 
Awareness Conference, IQPC, London 16.11.2010, www.sa-
combatid.co/uk/presentations, accessed on 31.1.2011. 
[20] M. Matsuoka, S.M. Rock, and M. G. Bualat, Autonomous 
Deployment of a Self-Calibrating Pseudolite Array for Mars Rover 
Navigation, Position Location and Navigation Symposium, PLANS 
2004, 26 – 29 April 2004, pp. 733 – 739.  
[21] Bold Quest 2011 Overview, a presentation attached to the Finnish 
Defence Forces’ Letter of Intent concerning the Bold Quest 2011.  
[22] The Finnish Defence Forces’ Letter of Intent concerning the Bold 
Quest 2011. 
[23] T. Saarelainen, Emerging Technologies for Improving Situational 
Awareness and Preventing Fratricide and Collateral Damage, A 
presentation 
in 
the 
Combat-ID 
and 
Situational 
Awareness 
Conference, 
IQPC, 
London 
16.11.2010, 
www.sa-
combatid.co/uk/presentations, accessed on 1.1.2011.  
[24] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, Computer-Aided Warrior for Future 
Battlefields, Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on 
Information Warfare and Security, ECIW2009, Braga, Portugal, 6-7 
July 2009, pp. 224 – 233.  
[25] J. Donner, Combat Identification with German Air Force, A 
presentation 
in 
the 
Combat-ID 
and 
Situational 
Awareness 
Conference, 
IQPC, 
London 
16.11.2010, 
www.sa-
combatid.co/uk/presentations, accessed on 1.1.2011. 
[26] A. Bhattacharyya1, C. Mazumdar, and V. Saraswat, A Real-Time 
Robust Decision Support System for Network Centric Warfare, 
138
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

Computer-Aided Warrior for Future Battlefields, Proceedings of the 
8th European Conference on Information Warfare and Security, 
ECIW2009, Braga, Portugal, 6-7 July 2009, pp. 9 – 19. 
 
139
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

