Joint Design of RFID Reader and Tag
Anti-Collision Algorithms: A Cross-Layer Approach
Ramiro S´amano-Robles and At´ılio Gameiro
Instituto de Telecomunicac¸˜oes, Campus Universit´ario, Aveiro, 3810-193, Portugal.
emails:ramiro@av.it.pt; amg@ua.pt
Abstract—This paper investigates the potential interactions
between reader and tag anti-collision algorithms of passive RFID
(radio frequency identiﬁcation) systems. Conventionally, reader
and tag anti-collision algorithms are designed by assuming that
they are independent from each other. In practice, however,
readers and tags usually operate in the same frequency band.
Therefore, contention between their transmissions can also po-
tentially arise. Furthermore, reader anti-collision policies directly
inﬂuence the way in which tags are activated, and thus also
the way in which they collide when responding to reader’s
requests. In view of this and considering the growing numbers of
readers and tags, independence of both schemes can not longer
be considered as a realistic assumption. This paper partially
ﬁlls this gap by proposing a new cross-layer framework for
the joint evaluation and optimization of reader and tag anti-
collision algorithms. Furthermore, the paper proposes a new
approach, based on a Markov model, which allows capacity
and stability analysis of asymmetrical RFID systems (i.e., when
readers and tags experience different channel and queuing states).
The model captures the dynamics of tag activation and tag
detection processes of RFID. It also represents a ﬁrst step towards
a joint design of physical (PHY) and medium access control
layers (MAC) of RFID. The results indicate that the proposed
approach provides beneﬁts in terms of stability and capacity
over conventional solutions even when readers and tags operate
in different channels. The results also provide useful guidelines
towards the cross-layer design of future RFID platforms.
Index Terms—RFID anti-collision algorithms, cross-layer de-
sign, random access theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. RFID technology and previous works
RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) is a technology that
uses radio frequency signals for purposes of identiﬁcation
and tracking of objects, humans or animals [1]. In passive
systems, where tags reuse the energy radiated by the reader,
coordination capabilities are considerably limited, thereby
leading to signal collisions. Therefore, an efﬁcient medium
access control layer (MAC) is crucial to the correct operation
of RFID [2].
Two types of RFID MAC collision can be distinguished:
tag and reader collision. A tag collision arises when several
tags simultaneously respond to the same reader request, thus
causing the loss of information. To address this issue, tag anti-
collision schemes such as ALOHA and binary tree algorithms
are commonly employed [2]. Improvements on these solutions
have been further proposed by using tag estimation method-
ologies [3], and modiﬁed frame structures [2]. Two types
of reader collision can be also identiﬁed: multiple-reader-
to-tag and reader-to-reader collision [4]. To address these
issues, reader anti-collision algorithms based on scheduling
or coverage control have been proposed. Typical scheduling
schemes are frequency division multiple access (FDMA) [5]
or listen-before-talk (LBT) [6]. Advanced schemes such as
Colorwave in [7] and Pulse in [8] implement inter-reader
control mechanisms to assist in collision avoidance, whereas
HiQ in [9] uses analysis of collision patterns to improve
scheduling. In coverage-based algorithms, we ﬁnd schemes
that reduce the overlapping coverage area between readers
(e.g., [10]), and those that monitor interference to adapt power
levels accordingly (e.g., [12]).
B. Paper contributions
Despite these advances in RFID MAC design, several issues
remain open. This paper addresses some of these issues and
proposes several advances over previous solutions. The paper
addresses for the ﬁrst time in the literature (to the best of our
knowledge) the joint design of reader and tag anti-collision
algorithms. To achieve this goal, a novel framework for cross-
layer design of MAC and PHY (physical) layers of RFID is
also proposed. Based on this framework, a Markov model
is further presented for the study of capacity and stability
of asymmetrical RFID systems, which is also new in the
literature. More details on these objectives and the rationale
behind them are next explained.
1) Joint design of reader and tag anti-collision: In con-
ventional RFID system design, reader and tag anti-collision
algorithms are considered as independent from each other.
This means that reader anti-collision schemes ignore tag
collisions, and viceversa, tag anti-collision schemes ignore
reader collisions. The reason for this is that the number of
readers is low in typical RFID applications, which means
that reader collisions rarely occur. However, recent years have
seen an increasing numbers of readers and tags. Also, readers
and tags of passive systems usually operate in the same
frequency band, which increases the probability of collision
between their transmissions. Furthermore, reader anti-collision
schemes directly induce tag collision patterns. Therefore, the
assumption of independence of these two schemes does not
longer hold. The objective of this paper is to ﬁll this gap by
studying the interactions between all the elements of a multi-
tag and multi-reader RFID network.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

2) Cross-layer design in RFID: In order to achieve an
accurate evaluation of multi-tag and multi-reader systems, this
paper proposes a novel theoretical framework which includes
relevant PHY and MAC layer parameters. Previous works
on RFID MAC design have used simplistic formulations of
the PHY layer which are inaccurate when modeling real-
life systems. In general, cross-layer design has been scarcely
used in the literature of RFID. At the MAC/PHY level,
some anti-collision algorithms based on power control and
reader scheduling can be considered as cross-layer solutions
(e.g.,[12]), but they have not been explicitly designed with
a cross-layer methodology. At upper layers, only a few
cross-layer solutions using context aware analysis have been
shown to signiﬁcantly improve reading reliability levels (e.g.,
[13]) and security/privacy features (e.g.,[14]). By contrast, in
conventional wireless networks cross-layer design has shown
considerable beneﬁts, particularly at the MAC/PHY level [11].
Therefore, there is a big potential in using cross-layer design
to improve RFID. The proposed framework in this paper
represents an initial step towards a full joint design of RFID
PHY and MAC layers [15]. Stochastic reception models for
correct tag activation and correct tag detection probabilities
considering channel and queuing states are here proposed.
This stochastic framework can also be used, for example,
to describe advanced multiuser detection schemes for RFID
applications.
3) Asymmetrical scenarios, results and future work: RFID
MAC algorithms have been conventionally modeled in sym-
metrical scenarios, i.e. when all elements are statistically
identical. However, this assumption is unrealistic and can
lead to inaccurate design. This paper also proposes a Markov
model that allows capacity and dynamic stability analysis
of asymmetrical RFID systems (i.e., readers and tags have
different channel and queuing states). This approach is, to
the best of our knowledge, new in the literature of RFID,
as it captures the dynamics of tag activation and detection
processes. The results in this paper indicate that joint cross-
layer optimization of reader and tag anti-collision algorithms
provides considerable beneﬁts in terms of capacity and stabil-
ity even when readers and tags operate in different channels.
The proposed approach was found particularly helpful in
the asymmetrical case. Future work will include the use of
advanced algorithms such as beam-forming, retransmission
diversity, and multi-packet reception.
C. Paper organization
Section II describes the proposed framework for cross-layer
optimization with the signal models for down-link and up-link
reception. Section III describes the proposed metrics, the tag
reception and activation probabilities and the Markov model
for dynamic analysis. Section IV presents the optimization of
the throughput and the results obtained in different scenarios.
Finally, Section V presents the conclusions of the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND CROSS-LAYER FRAMEWORK
Consider the slotted RFID network depicted in Fig. 1 with
a set R of K readers, i.e., R = {1, . . . K}, and a set T
of J tags, i.e., T = {1, . . . , J}. Two main processes can be
distinguished in the RFID network in Fig. 1: Tag activation
by the transmission of readers, also called the down-link
transmission; and the backscattering response towards readers
by previously activated tags, also called up-link transmission
(see Fig. 1). In the down-link, the transmit power of reader k
will be denoted by Pr,k while its probability of transmission
will be denoted by pr,k. The subset of active readers at any
given time will be denoted by Rt. Tags are activated whenever
the energy received from a reader is above an activation
threshold. The set of activated tags will be denoted here by TP
(TP ⊆ T ). These active tags proceed to transmit a backscatter
signal to the readers using a randomized transmission scheme.
The subset of tags that transmit a backscatter signal once they
have been activated will be given by Tt(Tt ⊆ TP ⊆ T ), where
each tag j ∈ Tt will transmit with a power level denoted by
Pt,j.
Reader 1
Reader 3
Tag 1
Down-link (tag activation)
Up-link (backscatter signal)
Interference
Interference
Interference
Reader 2
Reader K
Tag J
Fig. 1.
Multi-tag and Multi-reader deployment scenario.
A. Tag activation: Down-link model
For convenience in the analysis, consider that the channel
between reader k and tag j is given by hk,j. Similarly, the
channel between reader k and reader m is given by gk,m, and
the channel between tag i and tag j is given by ui,j. Therefore,
the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) experienced
by tag j due to a transmission of reader k will be denoted by
γk,j, and it can be expressed as follows:
γk,j =
Pr,k|hk,j|2
Irk,j + Itj + σ2
v,j
,
k ∈ Rt
(1)
where Irk,j = P
m∈Rt,m̸=k Pr,m|hm,j|2 is the interference
created by other active readers, Itj = P
i∈Tt,i̸=j Pt,i(|uj,i|2)
is the interference created by other contending tags, and σ2
v,j
is the noise component. If the SINR experienced by tag
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

j is above the tag sensitivity threshold eγj, then the tag is
powered-up and is then considered as active. The probability
of tag j being activated can be written as Pr{j ∈ TP } =
Pr{maxk γk,j > eγj}.
B. Backscattering reply and tag detection: up-link model
Once a given tag j has been activated, it starts a random
transmission process to prevent collisions with other active
tags. This random transmission control will be characterized
by a Bernoulli process with parameter pt,j, which is also the
transmission probability. We consider the backscattering factor
βj as the fraction of the received power reused by the tag to
reply to the reader. Therefore, the transmit power of tag j
can be calculated as Pt,j = βjPr,k|hkopt,j|2, where kopt =
arg maxk γk,j denotes the reader that has previously activated
the tag. The SINR of the signal of tag j received by reader k
can then be written as:
bγj,k =
Pt,j|hj,k|2
bIr,k + bItj,k + Pr,kηk + bσ2
v,k
,
j ∈ Tt
(2)
where bIr,k = P
m̸=k Pr,m|gm,k|2 is the interference created by
other active readers, bItj,k = P
i̸=j Pt,i|hi,k|2 is the interfer-
ence created by other active tags, ηk is the power ratio leaked
from the down-link transmission chain, and bσ2
v,k is the noise.
Tag j can be detected by reader k if the received SINR is above
a threshold denoted by ˇγk. The set of detected tags by reader
k will be denoted by TD,k, while the probability of tag j being
in TD,k will be given by Pr{j ∈ TD,k} = Pr{bγj,k > ˇγk}.
III. PERFORMANCE METRICS AND MARKOV MODEL
The main performance metric to be used in this paper is
the average tag throughput, which can be deﬁned as the long
term ratio of correct tag readings to the total number of time-
slots used in the measurement. Before providing an expression
for this metric, it is ﬁrst necessary to deﬁne the network state
information, as well as the tag activation and tag reception
probability models, and the deﬁnition of the Markov model
for the dynamic analysis of an RFID network.
A. Network state information and tag activation model
The network state information can be deﬁned as all the
parameters that completely describe the network at any given
time. In our case, the network state information N(n) at time
slot n is deﬁned as the collection of the sets of active readers
Rs(n) and contending tags Tt(n):
N(n) = {Rs(n), Tt(n)}.
Once the network state information has been deﬁned, we
can deﬁne the probability of tag j being activated in slot
n conditional on a given realization of the network state
information N(n) as follows:
Qj|N (n) = Pr{j ∈ TP (n + 1)|N(n)} =
Pr{max
k
γk,j(n) > eγj}.
For convenience in the analysis, let us rewrite this tag acti-
vation probability in terms of the set of active tags TP (n) by
averaging over all values of N(n) where Tt(n) ∈ TP (n):
Qj|TP (n) =
X
N (n);Tt(n)∈TP (n)
Pr{N(n)}Qj|N (n)
where Pr{N(n)} is the probability of occurrence of the
network state information N(n). This term can be calculated
by considering all the combinations of active tags and readers
as follows:
Pr{N(n)} =
Y
k∈Rt
pr,k
Y
m̸∈Rt
pr,m
Y
j∈Tt
pt,j
Y
i̸∈Tt
pt,i
where (·) = 1 − (·). This concludes the deﬁnition of the tag
activation probability and the network state information.
B. Markov model
In order to deﬁne the Markov model for dynamic analysis of
the system, let us now calculate the probability of having a set
of active tags TP (n+1) in time slot n+1 conditional on having
the set of active tags TP (n) during the previous time-slot. This
transition probability must consider all the combinations of
tags that either enter (i.e., they are activated in time slot n) or
leave the set of active tags (i.e., they transmit in time slot n).
This can be expressed as follows:
Pr{TP (n + 1)|TP (n)} =
Y
j∈TP (n),j̸∈TP (n+1)
pt,j
×
Y
i̸∈TP (n),i∈TP (n+1)
Qi|TP (n)
Y
l̸∈TP (n),l̸∈T (n+1)
Ql|TP (n)
×
Y
w∈TP (n),w∈TP (n+1)
pt,w.
Let us now arrange the probability of occurrence of all the
possible sets of activated tags Pr{TP } into a one-dimensional
vector given by s = [s0, . . . sJJ]T , where (·)T is the transpose
operator (see Fig. 2). This means that we are mapping the
asymmetrical states into a linear state vector where each ele-
ment represents the probability of occurrence of one different
state Pr{TP }. In the example given in Fig. 2 we have only
two possible tags, where the ﬁrst system state is given by
both tags as active, the second state with only tag 1 as active,
the third state with only tag 2 as active, and the fourth
state with none tag active. Once these states are mapped
into the state vector s, the transition probabilities between
such states (Pr{TP (n + 1)|TP (n)) can also be mapped into a
matrix M, which deﬁnes the Markov model for state transition
probabilities (see Fig. 2). The i, j entry of the matrix M
denotes the transition probability between state i and state
j. The vector of state probabilities can thus be obtained by
solving the following characteristic equation:
s = Ms,
using standard eigenvalue analysis or iterative schemes. Each
one of the calculated terms of the vector s can be mapped
back to the original probability space Pr{TP }, which can then
be used to calculate relevant performance metrics.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

C. Tag detection model
Before calculating the tag throughput, ﬁrst we must deﬁne
the correct reception probability of tag j at the reader side
conditional on the network state information N(n) as follows:
qj|N (n) = Pr{j ∈ TP (n + 1)} =
X
k∈R
Pr{bγj,k(n) > ˇγk}
It is also convenient to re-write this reception probability in
terms of the set of active tags TP (n) by averaging over all
values of N(n) where Tt(n) ∈ TP (n):
qj|TP (n) =
X
N (n);Tt(n)∈TP (n)
Pr{N(n)}qj|N (n)
D. Tag throughput and stability
The tag throughput can be ﬁnally calculated by adding all
the contributions over the calculated probability space Pr{TP }
using the Markov model presented in previous subsections.
This can be mathematically expressed as:
Tj =
X
TP
Pr{TP }qj|TP .
(3)
As a measure of stability we will use the average number of
activated tags, which can be calculated as follows:
E[|TP |] =
X
TP
Pr{TP }|TP |.
(4)
A high number of active tags means that stability is com-
promised, while a relatively low number indicates that the
algorithm is more stable.
Tag 1 
Tag 2 
State  
Active 
Active 
Active 
Inactive 
Inactive 
Active 
Inactive Inactive 
1 
2 
3 
4 
State probability vector s 
s=[ s1  s2  s3  s4] 
Transition probabilities: Matrix M 
Characteristic equation 
1 
2 
3 
4 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Transition 
probability 
between state 3 
and state 1 
(M31) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
s=Ms 
Markov chain 
M14 
M41 
M31 
Fig. 2.
Example of the Markov model for a two-tag system.
IV. OPTIMIZATION AND RESULTS
The parameters to be optimized are the vector of reader
transmission probabilities pr = [pr,1, . . . pr,K]T , the vector
of reader transmit powers Pr
= [Pr,1, . . . Pr,K] and the
vector of transmission probabilities of the active tags pt =
[pt,1, . . . pt,J]. The objective of the optimization is the total tag
throughput, so the optimization problem can thus be written
as follows:
{Pr, pt, pr}opt = arg
max
{Pr,pt,pr}
X
Tj
subject to
Pr < Pr,0
(5)
where Pr,0 is the reader transmit power constraint vector.
Since the explicit optimization of the expressions is difﬁcult
to achieve, particularly when considering the Markov model
proposed in the previous section, in this section we will
simplify the optimization problem by applying the previous
concepts to an ALOHA protocol implemented both at the
reader and the tag side. This means that we consider that any
collision yields the loss of all information. Two different cases
will be considered: one in which readers and tags transmit
in orthogonal channels, i.e. no collision exists between the
transmissions of readers and tags, and the second case in which
readers and tags transmit at free will in the same channel,
thereby leading to potential collisions. Under these assump-
tions, the power optimization problem reduces to simply
setting the transmit power of the readers to a particular level to
ensure an average tag activation and tag detection probabilities.
The remaining variables to be optimized are the reader and tag
transmission probabilities. To further illustrate the operation
of the proposed approach, two different scenarios will be
addressed: one in which all elements are statistically identical
(symmetrical scenario) and another with asymmetrical features
(some tags and readers have different characteristics).
A. Symmetrical case with tags and readers operating in dif-
ferent channels
The ﬁrst scenario consists of R = 5 readers and J = 15
tags all with the same channel and queuing states (symmetrical
case). Tags and readers are assumed to work in different
channels. Fig. 3 displays the results of using the throughput
expression in eq.(3) for various values of reader and tag
transmission probabilities (pr and pt). MATLAB is used for
calculating the results and solving explicitly the Markov chain
model presented in the previous section and thus obtain the
steady state vector and the throughput values. All the cases
discussed in this section will use a ﬁxed transmit power
that has been set to provide the following tag activation and
detection probabilities: Qj = 0.7 and qj = 0.95, respectively.
The surface shape of the global tag throughput in Fig. 3
is slightly asymmetrical, which indicates that the optimum
probabilities cannot be considered as completely independent.
Consider the values of optimum transmission probability with-
out joint design for the ALOHA protocol: ptopt = 1/15 and
propt = 1/5, which yields a value of throughput in Fig. 3 of
0.354. By contrast, the true maximum of the system, which
can be only found using joint optimization, yields 0.3558
with values ptopt = 0.085 and propt = 0.1975. Regarding
stability, Fig. 4 shows the average number of active tags,
where it can be observed that joint design can also help in
driving the system towards a region with low numbers of
backlogged tags. By using joint optimization, the achieved
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

value for the average number of active tags is 9, whereas
using the original strategy it would yield an average of 9.8
active tags. Therefore, in this case it has been observed that
even in a completely symmetrical scenario where tags and
readers operate in different channels, joint design also provides
beneﬁts in terms of capacity and stability.
B. Symmetrical case with tags and readers operating in the
same channel
Fig. 5 displays the results for the same scenario but this time
considering full interference between tags and readers. In this
case, the shape is even more asymmetrical, which is consistent
with the assumption of full interference between tags and
readers and which indicates the increased importance of joint
optimization. Consider the values of optimum transmission
probability without joint design ptopt = 1/15 and propt = 1/5,
which yields a value of throughput in Fig. 5 of 0.1789. By
contrast the true maximum of the system, which can only
be found using joint optimization, yields 0.2499 with values
ptopt = 0.035 and propt = 0.085. This indicates that joint
design increases its efﬁciency when readers and tags operate
in the same channel.
C. Asymmetrical case with tags and readers operating in
different channel
In the second scenario, we consider that the tag/reader
space is divided into two different sets of readers and three
different sets of tags (asymmetrical scenario). Readers and
tags are working in different channels. The ﬁrst and second
sets of tags can only be reached by the ﬁrst and second
sets of readers, respectively. The third set of tags can be
reached by both sets of readers. All tags have the same
transmission probability pt as well as all readers transmit
with the same parameter pr. The results displayed in Fig. 6
show that the throughput has also an irregular shape, which
indicates a complex dependency between the transmission
probabilities and, hence, an increased advantages of using joint
optimization. The results of Fig. 6 have been obtained using
three groups of tags with J1 = 3,J2 = 5 and J3 = 7 tags, and
two groups of readers with R1 = 5 and R2 = 10 readers. The
maximum of the global throughput using joint optimization
is 0.4780, whereas using the conventional strategy is 0.4413.
Therefore, joint optimization provides even higher gains in
this asymmetrical scenario as compared to its symmetrical
counterpart. According to these results, joint optimization is
well suited for asymmetrical scenarios. However, in an RFID
network, accurate tracking of different channels of the tags is a
difﬁcult task. A solution to this problem is to use context aware
techniques that allow us to estimate tag relative positions with
respect to the set of readers. Thus, it is foreseen that joint
optimization will be further improved by exploiting context
information acquired from different layers. In the future, RFID
systems can be based on cross-layer design and then help in
the acquisition of all the relevant information to carry out a
more efﬁcient optimization.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper addressed the joint optimization and design of
reader and tag anti-collision algorithms for RFID systems. A
general framework was developed for cross-layer evaluation
and optimization of these two contention resolution schemes.
Basic examples using ALOHA protocol have shown that in all
the cases joint optimization provides beneﬁts to global system
operation in terms of stability and capacity even when readers
and tags operate in different channels. The results also indicate
that the gains provided by the joint optimization approach
increase when the scenario deviates from the symmetrical
case, which also means that in a real system deployment
context aware information can be used to further improve the
joint optimization process. The tools developed in this paper
represent a ﬁrst step towards the full joint design of MAC
and PHY layers of RFID systems. The expressions derived
in this paper also allow the investigation of advanced signal
processing schemes for multi-packet reception which will be
addressed in future works.
Fig. 3.
Throughput (T) vs. reader and tag transmissions probabilities (pr
and pt) of a symmetrical ALOHA protocol for reader and tag anti-collision
assuming no interference between readers and tags.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Weinstein, “RFID: A Technical overview and its application to the
enterprise,” IT profesional, 2005, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 27-33.
[2] L.A. Burdet, “RFID Multiple Access Methods,” ETH Zrich, Summer
semester 2004, Seminar ”Smart Environments.
[3] D. Liu, Z. Xang, J. Tan, H. Min, and J. Wang,
“ALOHA algorithm
considering the slot duration difference in RFID system,” 2009 IEEE
International Conference on RFID, pp. 56-63.
[4] S. Birari, “Mitigating the reader collision problem in RFID Networks
with mobile readers,” Master Thesis.
[5]
“EPC Radio-Frequency Identity Protocols. Class-1 Generation-2 UHF
RFID. Protocol for communications at 860 MHz - 960Mhz.” Ver-
sion1.2.0”, EPC Global, 2008., http://www.epcglobalinc.org/standards/.
[6]
“ETSI
EN
302
208-1,2
v1.1.1,
September
2004.
CTAN:
http://www.etsi.org”
[7] J. Waldrop, D.W. Engels, and S.E. Sarma, “Colorwave: An anticollision
algorithm for the reader collision problem,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2003.
[8] S. Birari, “Mitigating the reader collision problem in RFID Networks with
mobile readers,” 13th IEEE Int. Conf. on Networks, 2005, pp. 463-468.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 4.
Average number of active tags (E[|TP |]) vs. reader and tag
transmissions probabilities (pr and pt) of a symmetrical ALOHA protocol
assuming no interference between readers and tags.
Fig. 5.
Throughput (T) vs. reader and tag transmissions probabilities (pr
and pt) of a symmetrical ALOHA protocol for reader and tag anti-collision
assuming full interference between readers and tags.
Fig. 6.
Throughput (T) vs. reader and tag transmissions probabilities (pr
and pt) of an asymmetrical ALOHA protocol for reader and tag anti-collision
assuming no interference between readers and tags.
[9] K.Ho. Junius, “Solving the reader collision problem with a hierarchical
q-learning algorithm,” Master’s thesis,MIT, February, 2003.
[10] S.Y. Kim and J.K. Lee
“A study on control method to reduce
collisions and interferences between multiple RFID readers and RFID
tag,” International Conference on New Trends in Information and Service
Science NISS, 2009, pp.339-343.
[11] V. Srivastaya and M. Montani “Cross-layer design: a survey and the road
ahead,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, Vol. 43, No. 12, December 2005, pp.
112-119.
[12] K. Cha, S. Jagannathan, and D. Pommerenke “ Adaptive power control
with hardware implementation for wireless sensor and RFID networks,”
IEEE Systems Journal, Vol. 1, No. 2, December 2007, pp. 145-159.
[13] N. Ahmed, R. Kumar, R.S. French, and U. Ramachandran
“RF2ID:
A Reliable Middleware Framework for RFID Deployment,” IEEE Int.
Parallel and Distributed processing Symposium, March 2007, pp. 1-10.
[14] T. Kriplean, R. Kumar, R.S. French, and U. Ramachandran “Physical
Access control for captured RFID Data,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
Vol. 6, No. 4, 2007, pp. 48-55.
[15] R. Samano-Robles and A. Gameiro “Collision resolution algorithms for
RFID applications,” Asia-Paciﬁc Microwave Conference, 2008, pp. 1-4.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-193-9
ICDT 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

