Mobile Phone Security Awareness and Practices of Students in Budapest 
 
Iosif Androulidakis  
 
Jožef Stefan International Postgraduate School 
Jamova 39, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia 
sandro@noc.uoi.gr 
 
 
 
Gorazd Kandus 
 
Department of  Communication Systems 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Jamova 39, Ljubljana SI-1000, Slovenia 
gorazd.kandus@ijs.si 
 
 
 
Abstract—The present paper presents the results of a survey about 
users’ security practices regarding mobile phone usage that took 
place in 4 Universities of Budapest in February 2010. We targeted 
an extended pool of respondents reaching 959 answers. The 
general users' feeling is that mobile phone communication is 
secure and this possibly leads to a relaxation. As results indeed 
further showed, students are unaware of the necessary measures to 
avoid a possible unauthorized access and/or sensitive data retrieval 
from their phones and that they lack proper security education. 
There was also a statistically important difference in the answers, 
depending on the type of operating system (modern or not). Since 
users fail to secure their phones they should either be educated or 
preferably presented with transparent security features, built in 
their phones, in order to mitigate the dangers. 
Keywords-mobile phone security; security practices; user 
interface security; questionnaire survey; mobile phone usage 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile devices are becoming a critical component of the 
digital economy, a style statement and useful communication 
device, a vital part of daily life for billions of people around 
the world. Modern mobile phones’ enhanced capabilities 
allow them to be almost as versatile as a computer becoming 
a valuable business (mobile applications) and entertainment 
tool (mobile games, m-commerce). At the same time users 
store and process more data including sensitive information 
in their phones. A few years ago the only concern of a 
mobile phone user would be his communication privacy.  
This is not the case anymore. Users have to be protected 
from unauthorized third party access to their data.  Apart 
from the traditional security measures such as PIN (Personal 
Identification Number) usage and voice encryption, users 
have to take extra security measures and to follow new best 
practices. Unfortunately, as the survey revealed, users aren't 
adequately informed about security issues in regards to their 
mobile phones’ options and technical characteristics and fail 
to follow proper security measures and practices.  In Section 
II, related work is examined. The methodology used for the 
survey is described in Section III. Results are presented in 
Section IV, closing with conclusion and future work in 
Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Although there have been quite many theoretical studies 
concerning mobile services, a significant means for 
investigating and understanding users’ preferences is asking 
their opinion via specific questioning techniques. The vast 
majority of these surveys indicate the growing importance 
of mobile phones in everyday life and the increased 
popularity of new features [1].  
In any case, the security of mobile phones is proven not 
to be adequate in many research papers [2][3]. There also 
exist several survey studies in this direction. Some of these 
surveys studies focus on mobile phone’s security issues 
[4][5] while others on mobile phone services, touching also 
security issues [6][7]. Modern smart phones, specifically, 
are open to more security risks [8]. 
A recent survey [9] published in November 2008 
focused on mobile phones security issues and in which 
degree these issues concern the users. The conclusion was 
that a major part of the participants are extremely concerned 
about security and don’t want any of their private data to be 
available to 3rd party unauthorized users.  
It is interesting to note that according to other surveys 
[10] a major part of the participants is interested in mobile 
services adoption only if the prices are low and the security 
framework tight enough.  At the same time, cyber security 
and safety education is left out from the educational system 
[11] and users do not know if their phones are secure or not 
[12]. Given the fact that mobile phones could be a dominant 
feature of future classroom, special security awareness and 
training courses, presenting the necessary guidelines, should 
definitely be implemented in schools. This is why the 
present paper tries to address users’ security awareness and 
practices, as an enabler for greater mobile services market 
penetration. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY  
A very useful evaluation method for surveying user’s 
practices is the use of multiple-choice questionnaires (i.e. in 
person delivery or e-mail questionnaires) [13][14]. Our 
survey was conducted using in-person delivery technique, 
with a total of 959 respondents participating in this survey. 
This method was selected from other alternatives because is 
more accurate and has a bigger degree of participation from 
18
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

the respondents (e-mail questionnaires usually treated as 
spam 
mail 
from 
the 
respondents 
or 
they 
might 
misunderstand some questions). Data entry took place using 
custom software [15]. Due to lack of financial resources the 
survey was limited to Europe. An interesting approach 
would be to use social networks such as Facebook to amend 
the results of the survey, especially targeting students from 
United States and other continents.  
The target group of the survey was university students 
from ages mostly 18-26, incorporating both younger and 
older  youth segments (24-26 years old  percentage was 
25.5%) because these ages are more receptive to new 
technologies. They also understand better the technological 
evolution than older people who use mobile phones mostly 
for voice calls. 
In the analysis of the security feeling and the security 
knowledge a simple mathematical formula was developed to 
produce numerical values. We weighted the responses with 
the following weights: Very Much: 4, Much: 3, Moderately: 
2, Not much: 1, Not at all: 0 and then divided by the number 
of occurrences, in order to get a mean value.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
The questionnaire was divided in two parts. In the first 
part participants were asked some demographic data 
including gender, age and field of studies as well as some 
economic data including mobile phone usage, connection 
type and budget spent monthly on phone service. In the 
second part we proceeded to our main contribution, the 
specific questions related with their practices and security 
perceptions regarding mobile phones’ security issues. 
 
A. Demographics  
56.3% of the participants were females and 43.7% were 
males.  Most of the respondents, in turn, were aged 18-26 
(82.4%). The main body of respondents was studying 
Economics or Business Administration (30.1%) Following 
in the sample there were students of Humanities or 
Philology (22%), Engineering, Mathematics or Natural 
Sciences (13.7%), Medicine (13.2%), Law (10.8%) and 
other fields (10%). 
Regarding mobile phone usage, 60.3% of them are using 
daily a single mobile phone, with some 21% using two 
phones regularly and even 10% using more than two 
phones. Nokia is the favourite brand, reaching one third of 
students (34.3%) followed by Sony-Ericsson (21.3%) and 
Samsung (17.6%) (Figure 1). Apple’s iPhone (which is 
expected to have a higher percentage in the US market) has 
a very descent 7.8% of penetration given the generally low 
budgeted section of the population targeted. It is 
immediately apparent that focusing on Nokia and Sony-
Ericsson phones a security awareness campaign would 
immediately target more than half of users yielding a very 
high return. Of course the brand itself is not enough to 
categorize attack vectors and practices, since there is also 
the feature of the specific operating system running on each 
phone.  
 
Figure 1. Favourite brands. 
 
B. Economics  
Proceeding to economics, participants were asked 
whether they are using a pre-paid or post-paid (contract) 
mobile phone connection. Half of students are using a 
contract based subscription, a rather high percentage, while 
17.2% have both prepaid and postpaid SIMs (Subscriber 
Identity Module).  
Answering how much money they spent monthly, 
student mobile phone users had a wide range of financial 
capabilities. The leading 25.7% spends 11-20 Euros 
(currency converted) monthly while almost equal parts of 
20% spend 21-30, 31-40, or more than 40 Euros per month.   
  
C. Security Specific Questions 
The objective of this particular subsection and the main 
contribution of our research were to determine whether our 
participants acknowledge some security related features of 
their phone and what is their security feeling. The results are 
analysed in the following paragraphs. 
Our fundamental research question was whether students 
are informed about how the options and the technical 
characteristics of their mobile phones affect the security of 
the latter and whether they are taking the necessary 
measures to mitigate the risks. The results that follow are 
totally in line with the initial response of students that only 
29.6% believe they are much or very much informed while 
42.6% state that they are not at all (a large 20.4%) or not 
much (Figure 2). 
19
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

 
Figure 2. Knowledge of mobile phone security aspects.  
 
Using the simple formula described in Section III 
(Methodology), the mean “security knowledge value” was 
1.76, in the 0-4 scale (0 not at all, 4 very much). Further 
correlating their responses to the type of operating system–
O/S (modern or not) proved that students owning phones 
without modern operating system have statistically (Pearson 
Chi-Square) better knowledge of security aspects than those 
who actually own a phone with modern O/S (Figure 3). As 
it was expected users that do not know the type of their O/S 
were the least informed about security. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Security knowledge value vs. operating system. 
 
Continuing with a general question about how “safe” 
mobile phone users feel, the majority (30%) replied “high 
(much)” followed by 26.7% “moderately” (Figure 4). On 
the other hand, some 27.9% felt not too much or not at all 
sure they are safe. This general feeling of security in turn  
 
leads to an over-relaxation of students in regards to security 
practices as following answers reveal. 
 
Figure 4. How safe do you consider communication through 
mobile phones? 
 
Using the same methodology, the mean “security 
feeling) value was 2.22 in the 0-4 scale. The correlation to 
the operating system showed that users without modern O/S 
feel statistically (Pearson Chi-Square) the least secure while 
users that do not know the type of O/S are more “relaxed” 
(Figure 5).  
 
 
Figure 5. Security feeling value vs. operating system 
 
In regards to operating system itself, a significant 
percentage of the participants (33.2%) doesn’t know about 
the capabilities of his phone’s operating system. Almost the 
same percentage (31.6%) of students is using mobile phones 
20
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

with an advanced operating system. In any case, apart from 
the relaxation in security awareness that was previously 
shown, the ignorance of the type of operating system 
renders users more vulnerable to hacker attacks with the use 
of exploits specifically targeted for their phones. 
Similarly, in Figure 6, only a very small percentage of 
the participants (less than 24%) knows his/her phone’s IMEI 
(International Mobile station Equipment Identity) and has 
noted it somewhere. IMEI is very significant because if the 
phone is ever stolen, using this serial number the provider 
can block access to the stolen phone effectively mitigating 
stealing risks. Almost half of students are completely 
unaware of its existence. Knowledge of this feature would 
possibly help 41.1% of them who unfortunately had their 
phone stolen once or more (Figure 7). Similarly high 
percentages are noted by other studies too [16][17]. 
 
 Figure 6. IMEI knowledge. 
 
Figure 7. Lost or Stolen phone. 
 
At the same time, 71% of users are not aware of the 
existence of the special icon that informs the user that 
his/her phone encryption has been disabled [3]. Ignorance of 
this security icon leaves users vulnerable to man in the 
middle attacks since they can’t recognize the attack taking 
place. This was probably the most expected result as even 
professionals are not aware of this feature and another hint 
that user interfaces should help and not obscure security. 
Users, as expected, are actively (almost 70%) using 
SIM’s PIN code. The negative finding that Figure 8 reveals 
is that only a small percentage (24.5%) uses screen-saver 
password while similar percentages do not know if their 
phone has such an option.  That leaves 75% of users without 
a screen saver password, and their phones ready to be 
manipulated by “malicious” hands. An attack can take place 
in a few minutes by downloading specific software to the 
phone; this is why it is not enough to protect the phone only 
by PIN but also by a screen saver password. 
 
Figure 8. Screen-saver password. 
 
A great attack vector of the past, Bluetooth, seems not to 
be the problem anymore (Figure 9). Just one out of five 
students has Bluetooth switched on and visible (leaving the 
phone vulnerable), while 42.3% of users have it switched 
off. It is not clear whether this is a security practice or a 
social practice that stemmed from the continuous 
harassments messages over Bluetooth caused upon users.  
 
Figure 9. Bluetooth. 
21
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

In a question that touches upon issues of politeness and 
openness, 44.7% of students are lending their phones, but 
only while they are present (Figure 10). This is a major 
factor that compromises the phone’s security even if the 
participant is present, because a single minute is needed for 
someone to install malicious software in the phone. In that 
respect 36.2% of them refuse to lend their phone in any case 
being better safe and “impolite” than sorry. 
 
Figure 10. Phone lending. 
 
Following, in Figure 11, with a question of both security 
and economic importance, almost 60% of participants don’t 
download any software at all. There is also a 13% that 
actively downloads ringtones or logos, a 16% that tries 
applications and just 11% of “gamers”. It is well interesting 
to note that security considerations is one of the hindering 
factors of mobile phone downloading [2]). In the antipode, 
getting familiar with downloading users are being more 
vulnerable to downloading and using unauthorised software 
that can harm their phone. 
 
Figure 11. Software downloading. 
 
This is where a mobile phone Antivirus would help. In 
our case (Figure 12), 19% of users acknowledge it exists 
such a product but don’t use it, while 44% do not know 
whether such a product exists. That leaves 12.3% using it. 
Compared to PC users where nowadays everybody is using 
(at least) an antivirus shows a clear lack of security 
education and different mind-set. Organizations, in turn, 
show an increase in mobile phone antivirus tools usage [18] 
 
Figure 12. Anti-virus usage. 
 
Being young, 57% of university students keep sensitive 
information into their mobile phones (Figure 13). It seems 
that we consider our mobile phone to be a very personal 
device and we save equally important and sensitive 
information there. Such kind of information should be 
protected but again, the results from our survey show that 
users fail to do so. The consequences from a breach of data 
of this type could be devastating for the life of the victim. 
 
Figure 13. Sensitive information kept in phone. 
 
22
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

In a rather alarming finding, 21.6% of users (Figure 14) 
keep passwords saved in plain in their mobile phone. At 
least, another 22% is using some form of encryption (i.e. 
letter scrambling). Since users generally follow the notion of 
encryption in these saved passwords, it is expected that they 
would be able to do the same with private information (i.e. 
photos) kept in the phone, should they be provided the 
necessary software. Once again, the issue of better designed 
user interfaces surfaces. 
 
Figure 14. Important passwords kept in phone. 
 
Closing our survey, the issue of backup was examined. 
As it can be seen in Figure 15, a large percentage of the 
participants reaching 47% never performs a backup of their 
phone’s data. At least some 53% do backup up, although the 
majority (19%) less often than once per month.  
 
 Figure 15. Backup frequency. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The majority of the respondents care about security 
issues and are concerned about data interception and the fact 
that an intruder could gain unauthorized access to their 
devices, as previous surveys have clearly showed. However, 
there is no culture of security and no advanced technical 
knowledge of their mobile phones.  
 
A very high percentage of users didn’t know there is an 
icon that informs them about the phone encryption status. 
Most of them don’t take backups at all while at the same 
time would lend their phone that contains sensitive data and 
passwords to somebody else.  Contributing to the problem, 
badly designed interfaces are an additional factor of 
hindering the development of security culture. 
Students owning phones without modern operating 
system have statistically (Pearson Chi-Square) better 
knowledge of security aspects than those who actually own 
a phone with modern O/S. At the same time, they feel 
statistically the least secure while, on the other hand, users 
that do not know the type of O/S are more “relaxed”.  
In order to have comparative results, we have conducted 
a similar survey in more than 10 European countries 
reaching more than 7500 students and the results will soon 
be published. The preliminary findings however, show that 
users exhibit the same behaviour everywhere. Since students 
(who are young people and mostly receptive to technology 
and knowledge) do not actively follow most of security best 
practices then  academia, phone manufacturers and 
operators must team up informing users, raising awareness 
level and building more secure systems and user interfaces 
with transparent security features. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  Synovate, “Global mobile phone survey shows the mobile is 
a 
'remote 
control' 
for 
life”, 
Synovate 
survey, 
http://www.synovate.com, 2009 [accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[2]  Rahman, 
M. 
and 
Imai, 
H., 
Security 
in 
Wireless 
Communication, Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 
22, issue, 2, pp. 218-228, 2002 
[3]  I. Androulidakis, Intercepting Mobile Phones, Article in «IT 
security professional» magazine, Issue 8, pp. 42-28, Jan-Feb 
2009 
[4]  Trend Micro, “Smartphone Users Oblivious to Security”, 
Trend Micro survey, http://www.esecurityplanet.com, 2009, 
[accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[5]  Goode Intelligence, “Mobile security the next battleground”, 
http://www.goodeintelligence, 2009,  [accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[6]  Androulidakis, N. and Androulidakis, I. Perspectives of 
Mobile Advertising in Greek Market, 2005 International 
Conference on Mobile Business (ICBM 2005), pp. 441-444, 
2005  
[7]  Vrechopoulos, A.P., Constantiou, I.D., and Sideris, I. 
Strategic Marketing Planning for Mobile Commerce 
23
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

Diffusion and Consumer Adoption, in Proceedings of M-
Business 2002, pp. CD, July 8-9, 2002 
[8]  comScore M:Metrics, “Smarter phones bring security risks: 
Study”, 
http://www.comscore.com, 
2008 
[accessed 
09/10/2010] 
[9]  I. Androulidakis and D. Papapetros, Survey Findings towards 
Awareness of Mobile Phones’ Security Issues, Recent 
Advances in Data Networks, Communications, Computers, 
Proceedings of 7th WSEAS International Conference on 
Data Networks, Communications, Computers (DNCOCO 
'08), pp 130-135, Nov. 2008 
[10]  I. Androulidakis, C. Basios, and N. Androulidakis, 
Surveying Users' Opinions and Trends towards Mobile 
Payment Issues, Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and 
Applications - Volume 169, (Techniques and Applications 
for Mobile Commerce - Proceedings of TAMoCo 2008), pp. 
9-19, 2008  
[11]  National Cyber Security Alliance (NCSA), “Schools Lacking 
Cyber 
Security 
and Safety 
Education”, 
http://www. 
staysafeonline.org, 2009 [accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[12] McAfee, “Most Mobile Users Don't Know if They Have 
Security”, 
McAfee-sponsored 
research, 
http://www. 
esecurityplanet.com, 2008 [accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[13] Dillman, D. A., Mail and Internet Surveys: The Tailored 
Design Method, John Wiley & Sons, 2nd edition, November 
1999  
[14]  Pfleeger, S. L. and Kitchenham, B. A. Principles of Survey 
Research Part 1: Turning Lemons into Lemonade, ACM 
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, vol. 26 (6), pp 16-
18,  November 2001 
[15]  Androulidakis I., Androulidakis N. On a versatile and 
costless OMR system Wseas Transactions on Computers 
Issue 2, Vol 4, pp. 160-165, 2005 
[16]  CPP, “Mobile phone theft hotspots”, CPP survey, 
http://www.cpp.co.uk, 2010 [accessed: 09/10/2010] 
[17]  ITwire, “One-third of Aussies lose mobile phones: survey”, 
ITwire article, http://www.itwire.com, 2010 [accessed: 
09/10/2010] 
[18]  Darkreading, “Survey: 54 Percent Of Organizations Plan To 
Add Smartphone Antivirus This Year”, Darkreading article, 
http://www.darkreading.com. 2010[accessed: 09/10/2010] 
  
APPENDIX 
The Questionnaire used 
 
1) 
Male (A) or Female (B)?  
2) 
Age? (A < 18, B 18-20 , C 21-23, D 24-26 , E >26)  
3) 
Are you studying: (A: Humanities-Philology, B Medicine, C 
Law, D Engineering-Computer Science, E Maths-Natural 
Sciences, F Economics-Business Administration, G OTHER 
4) 
How many mobile phones do you use (daily)?  
 
Α) 1 
Β) 2 
 
C) >2   
D) None 
5) 
Are you a contract subscriber or a prepaid subscriber?  
 
Α) Pre-paid (Card)   Β) Post-paid (Contract) C) Both  
6) 
Your average monthly phone bill? (A up to 10 Euros, B 11-
20 Euros, C 21-30 Euros, D 31-40 Euros, E >40 Euros) 
7) 
Brand of the phone you are mostly using now?  (A Nokia, B 
Sony-Ericsson, C Samsung, D Sharp, E Apple I-phone, F 
Motorola, G LG, H Other)  
8) 
Does it have an advanced operational system (eg Symbian, 
Windows Mobile, Android)? (A I don’t know, B yes, C no,)  
9) 
Have you noted somewhere your mobile phone’s IMEI? 
 
(A, I don’t know what it is, B yes, C no,) 
10) Was your mobile phone ever lost or stolen? (A Never, B 
once, C more than once) 
11) Are you aware of the existence of a special icon in your 
telephone which informs you for the encryption's 
deactivation? (A Yes, B No)   
12) Do you have SIM card’s PIN activated? (A Yes, B No) 
13) Do you use password in your phone's Screen-Saver? (A I 
don’t know if it has such a feature, B, doesn’t have such 
feature, C, Yes, D No) 
14) Do you have Bluetooth: (A Switched on and visible, B 
Switched on and invisible, C Switched off, D don’t know the 
difference between visible and invisible, E My phone doesn’t 
have Bluetooth, 
15) Do you lend it to others? (A Never, B Only for a while and if 
I am present, C Yes) 
16) Do you "download" software to your phone? (A I don’t know 
if my mobile phone can download, B No, C mostly 
Ringtones/Logos, D mostly Games, E mostly Applications) 
17) Do you use Antivirus software in your phone? (A Doesn’t 
have the ability, B Don’t know if there is such product for 
my phone, C I know there is but I don’t use D Yes) 
18) Do you store important passwords in your phone (eg Credit 
cards passwords, ATM passwords)? (A No, B Yes and 
"encrypted", C yes, without encryption) 
19) How often do you create backup copies of your phone's data? 
(A Never, B >3 times per month, B 2-3 times per month, C 
Once per month, D Less often) 
20) Do you keep sensitive personal data into your phone 
(photos/videos/discussion recordings)? (A Yes, B No) 
21) How safe do you consider communication through mobile 
phones? (A Very Much,   B   Much,   C   Moderately,   D   
Not too much,    E   Not at all) 
22) 
Are you informed about how the options and technical 
characteristics of your mobile phone affect its security? (A 
Very Much,   B   Much,   C   Moderately,   D   Not too 
much,    E   Not at all) 
24
ICDT 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-127-4

