Power Consumption Analysis of Energy-aware FTTH Networks 
 
 
Kun Wang, Anders Gavler, Manxing Du, Christina 
Lagerstedt  
Dept. Network and Transmission Lab 
Acreo Swedish ICT 
Kista, Sweden 
Email: kunw@kth.se 
Maria Kihl 
Dept. Electrical and Information Technology 
Lund University 
Lund, Sweden 
Email: maria.kihl@eit.lth.se 
 
 
Abstract—With increasing usage of the Internet, energy 
consumption of network equipment has become a crucial 
challenge from both an economic and an environmental point 
of view. This paper combines users’ behavior of accessing the 
network with energy saving algorithms for energy-aware 
network equipment, and investigates potential energy savings 
in the access network. The study is based on a set of traffic 
data that collected from a real residential fiber-to-the-home 
(FTTH) network during three continuous months in 2013. The 
results show that on average every household link in the access 
network can potentially save at least 18% energy consumption 
with sleep-mode enabled equipment. 
Keywords- energy efficiency; user behaviour; traffic 
measurement; FTTH; access netowork. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With increasing usage of Internet and its related services, 
the volume of global IP traffic is growing enormously [1]. 
Recent reports states that the world’s Information-
Communication-Technologies (ICT) ecosystem approaches 
10% of the world’s electricity generation [2]. Other papers 
estimate that about 37% of the ICT electricity is generated in 
the telecommunication networks, whereas the rest is mainly 
generated in data centers and user devices [3]. Therefore, 
energy consumption has become a particularly important 
economic and environmental interest when the global IP 
traffic grows at such dramatically fast pace. 
In the recent years, a number of studies have been 
published 
focused 
on 
energy 
consumption 
in 
telecommunication networks. For example in [4], the power 
consumption of nodes and links in a backbone network was 
investigated. Further, according to [5][6], the access 
networks account for about 70% of the networks’ total 
electricity generation. Also, according to [7], in a Fiber-To-
The-Home (FTTH) network, a major part of the electricity 
consumption is due to the optical network unit (ONU) at the 
end-user’s home and the access line utilization is quite low, 
which means that the majority of the spent power could be 
saved with power-saving solutions. In [8], a benchmark for 
current network devices was presented, and the results 
showed that the power consumption of the Ethernet switch 
depends on the number of active ports, which means that 
switching off unused ports can reduce power consumption.  
Further, in [5][9] some existing energy saving 
approaches used in fixed network and optical access 
networks were summarized.  Two common approaches are 
idle mode (also called sleep mode) and adaptive link rate 
(ALR) [10][11].  
The idle mode concept is adopted by the Energy Efficient 
Ethernet (EEE, also known as IEEE 802.3az) [12][13], 
which was published in 2010. EEE allows network 
components to sleep, i.e. standby at a low power idle state to 
save the energy consumption, when there is no data packets 
transmitted in the link. The ALR approach dynamically 
associates the energy consumption of the network equipment 
with the actual data rate or workload transmitted in the 
network, so that the energy dissipation can be allocated 
according to the traffic load pattern. In [12][13], the 
potentials of EEE for reducing energy consumption was 
evaluated, however, not including data from real operational 
networks.  
In order to develop efficient ways of reducing energy 
consumption in the networks, it is essential to also 
understand the users’ behavior when accessing the networks 
[14][15]. However, there are only a few papers that use real 
data traces to investigate energy consumption and energy 
saving solutions for telecommunication networks. In [4], a 
real aggregated traffic profile was used in order to study the 
power consumption of nodes and links in a backbone 
network.  In [16], a daily Internet usage pattern from 2008 
was used to calculate potential energy saving from an ALR 
approach. However, both these papers used one generic 
example of the traffic pattern for their analysis. In reality, 
different households can have very varying traffic patterns 
depending on each household’s Internet usage behavior.  
This study uses traffic measurement data from real 
residential users in a FTTH access network, and estimates 
the potential amount of energy savings when sleep-mode 
enabled energy-aware equipment were applied. The main 
novelties are: firstly our investigation covers 2627 
households with ultra-fast internet access service in a FTTH 
network during the 3 months period, so that our results give a 
practical evaluation of the performance of energy saving 
approaches in connection to a real network user case; 
secondly this paper proposes a method of mapping users’ 
traffic behavior to link states, which then can be mapped to 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Aggregation
network
Internet
Edge
Access
network
Access Switch
Optical 
Transceivers
Home
network
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
ONU
/gateway
.
.
.
.
PL
Traffic 
Measurement
Fig.1. Network architecture 
 
Internet
Edge
FTTH access network
PL
Traffic Measurement
Central functions:
(Processor, Memory, 
firewall, etc.)
WAN
Optical
transceiver
ONU gateway
Central functions
Fully equipped, 
maximum configuration
Downlink
Optical
transceiver
Access Ethernet Switch
Fig.2. Network scenario 
 
corresponding power consumption in the network devices; 
thirdly, two ONU energy models are proposed and compared 
according to the characteristics of traffic measurement data, 
the first model includes sleep-mode feature, and the second 
model includes both sleep-mode and off-mode feature. 
The paper is organized as follows. First a description of 
the network scenario, energy consumption models, and the 
scope of the work are presented in Section II. In Section III, 
we propose a mapping between Internet user behavior and 
energy models, and then analyze how much energy can be 
saved in different energy consumption models when Internet 
user behavior pattern applied in Section IV. A conclusion is 
drawn in Section V. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Network and measurements 
The analysis in this paper is based on measurements in a 
real operational FTTH residential network in Sweden. The 
FTTH network is an active optical network (AON), which is 
currently the most deployed fiber access solution in Europe 
representing 78% of overall deployment at the mid of 2012 
[17]. As Fig. 1 shows, every household has a 100 Mbps 
Internet service subscription and connects to the network via 
an Optical Network Unit (ONU) acting as a home gateway. 
Further, the ONU is connected to the network operator’s 
access switch via a dedicated fiber link. 
The access Ethernet switch, also called optical line 
termination (OLT) for Point-to-Point (PtP) FTTH, is located 
at the border between the aggregation network and access 
network. Every downlink port of the access Ethernet switch 
is connected to one household. The uplink interface towards 
aggregation network is shared among all households 
connected to the switch. 
Traffic measurements were performed by the network 
operator, and post processed, anonymous data were made 
available to the authors for analysis. The traffic measurement 
probe was PacketLogic (PL) [18], a commercial traffic 
management device, which can track and identify several 
hundred thousand simultaneous connections. The PL was 
placed at the Internet edge of the network, see Fig. 1, and the 
volumes of traffic for each household, in both inbound and 
outbound directions, were recorded at 5 minutes intervals. 
The collected data comprise 2627 households and the study 
is based on data from 2013-March-01 to 2013-May-31. 
B. Investigated scenario 
In this paper, we focus on the access (first mile) part of 
the network, more specifically the ONU (optical network 
unit) with home gateway functions, the access Ethernet 
switch and optical transceivers as described in Fig. 1. The 
ONU terminates the fiber optical signal from the FTTH 
network and converts it to electrical signal which is then 
communicated with other home network devices, e.g., TV, 
PC, IP telephony, etc. 
The power consumption of the ONU can be assumed to 
come from two parts. The first part is the home gateway 
central functions, for example, the processor, memory for 
routing, firewall, OAM and user interfaces [19]. The second 
part is the wide area network (WAN) interface, i.e., the 
optical transceiver, which directly connects to the access 
switch. 
Further, in this paper, we consider the power 
consumption of the downlink Ethernet switch center 
functions and optical transceiver that connects towards users. 
However, the uplink interface was excluded, since we 
assume that the possibility of this shared interface to be idle 
is low. 
A more detailed illustration of the investigated network 
scenario is shown in Fig. 2. 
III. 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
In this section, we describe the proposed energy models 
used in this paper. The objective of our analysis has been to 
investigate the potential energy-savings that can be obtained 
with energy-aware equipment, based on data from a real 
operational network.  
The European commission code of conduct for 2013 [19] 
defines three power states for energy-aware equipment using 
idle or sleep mode approach. The first power state is the 
“Active state”, which means that the link is actively used and 
that the device is processing user traffic at its best 
performance. The second power state is the “Idle state”, 
which indicates that the device is not processing or 
transmitting any user traffic, but that the link is established 
and ready to detect activity. The third power state is the “Off 
state”, which corresponds to that the device is totally 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Fig. 3. An example of measured household traffic volumes during one day.
The measured traffic rate is shown by the solid line. Empty entries are 
intervals where no traffic was detected. The threshold value is used to 
separate the Active and Idle power states. 
TABLE I AVERAGE POWER OF ONU AND ACCESS SWITCH. 
VALUES WERE EXTRACTED FROM [19] 
Link 
ONU gateway 
Access switch 
Active 
Gactive=5 watt 
Eactive = 4 watt / port 
Idle 
Gidle=2.9 watt 
Eidle = 2.7 watt / port* 
Off 
Goff=0 watt 
Eidle 
*This value was not available in [19]. We assumed 2/3 of active power 
powered off and not providing any functionality, which 
means that the link cannot send any traffic. 
A. Mapping from traffic volumes to link states 
To be able to analyze the effects of energy-aware 
equipment, we need to map the measured traffic volumes to 
link states, which then can be mapped to corresponding 
power consumption in the devices. In this subsection we 
describe the mapping from the measured traffic volumes to 
link states.  
The measurements registered the average traffic rate (in 
bits per second) during five minutes intervals for each 
household, as illustrated in Fig. 3. For each interval, the total 
incoming and outgoing traffic rate was measured. If 
substantial traffic was observed by the PL, the household 
was assumed to be actively using the Internet, and therefore, 
the link was determined to be in the Active state. If a low 
rate of traffic was observed by the PL the network devices 
are powered on, but the household was assumed to not 
actively use the Internet, and therefore, the link can be 
determined to be in the Idle state. The small amount of traffic 
was assumed to be control and management (C&M) 
communications between the ISP and the ONU gateway.  
If no traffic was observed by the PL during an interval, 
this was registered as an empty entry in the database. This 
can be due to two main reasons. Either the household’s 
traffic was too small to be recorded, or the ONU gateway 
was powered off by the household. When there was an 
empty entry in the database, the link was considered to be in 
an Off state.  
To separate the Active and Idle link states, we need a 
threshold value. In this paper, we use two cases for the 
threshold value. In the first case we use a threshold value of 
100 bps. In this case, we assume that the C&M 
communications constitute maximum 100 bps for each 
household. If the registered data rate is smaller or equal to 
100 bps we assume that the gateway is not processing and 
transmitting any user requested data, therefore we determine 
that the link is in the Idle state. In the second case, we use a 
threshold value of 0 bps, which leads to an extreme case 
where the Idle state can be activated only when there is no 
traffic observed at all in the ONU gateway.  
B. Power values 
The power values for the ONU gateways and the 
Ethernet access switches used in this paper were extracted 
from [19]. TABLE I summarizes the proposed link states and 
corresponding power of the network equipment. The power 
values for the ONU gateway are denoted as Gactive, Gidle, and 
Goff for the respective link states. The power values for the 
Ethernet access switch are denoted as Eactive and Eidle for the 
respective power states. The Ethernet access switch is 
assumed to not have an energy-aware Off state. Therefore, 
the switch can use the same power as in the Idle state also 
when there is no traffic. 
C. Energy models 
In this subsection, we present our proposed energy 
models that we use to investigate the potential energy-
savings with energy-aware equipment. 
For one household k, the total power consumption, Pk, is 
modeled as (1). Pg(k) is the total power consumption of the 
household’s ONU gateway, and Pe(k) is the total power 
consumption related to the household’s port in the access 
Ethernet switch. 
                              
( )
( )
P k
k
P
P
e
g
k
+
=
 
         (1) 
To estimate the power consumption for each device, we 
need to know the amount of time that the device works in its 
respective power state. We estimate the power states by 
using our traffic measurements. Each data point in the 
measurement (corresponding to a five minutes interval) is 
mapped to a corresponding power state, according to the 
procedure described in the previous subsection. The total 
time that the devices for household k is considered to be in 
Active power state is denoted Tactive(k), the total time for Idle 
power state is denoted  Tidle(k), and the total time for the Off 
power state is denoted Toff(k).The values are calculated as 
accumulated five minutes intervals. 
Thereafter, the total power consumption for the Ethernet 
access port switch corresponding to household k can be 
derived as 
             
( )
( ))
( )
(
( )
k
T
E
k
T
k
T
E
k
P
active
active
off
idle
idle
e
⋅
+
+
⋅
=
 
 (2) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

TABLE II AVERAGE ENERGY CONSUMPTION PER HOUSEHOLD 
DURING THREE MONTHS. STD = STANDARD DEVIATION. 95% CI = 
95% CONFIDENCE INTERVAL 
 
ONU 
Access 
switch / 
port 
ONU + 
switch 
STD 
95% 
CI 
No Energy-
awareness 
11.04 
kwh 
8.83 kwh 
19.87 kwh 
0 
0 
ONU Model 1 
TH 100bps 
7.28 kwh 
(-34.1%) 
6.50 kwh 
(-26.4%) 
13.78 kwh 
(-30.7%) 
1.39 
0.05 
ONU Model 2 
TH100bps 
4.59 kwh 
(-58.4%) 
11.09 kwh 
(-44.2%) 
3.06 
0.12 
ONU Model 1 
TH 0bps 
8.76 kwh 
(-20.7%) 
7.42 kwh 
(-16%) 
16.18 kwh 
(-18.6%) 
2.36 
0.09 
ONU Model 2 
TH0bps 
6.07 kwh 
(-45.0%) 
13.49 kwh 
(-32.1%) 
4.34 
0.17 
 
0
20
40
60
80
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5 x 10
5
Energy reduction (%)
Accumulated Active time (hour)
 
 
ONU model1 + Access switch
ONU model2 + Access switch
Fig. 4. Relationship between accumulated active time per household and 
the potential energy savings. Each data point corresponds to one 
household. 
where Eidle and Eactive are the power values for the Ethernet 
access switch found in TABLE I. Since the access switch is 
assumed to not have an energy-aware Off state, both the 
household’s mapped Idle and Off states correspond to the 
Idle power value. 
In this paper, we propose and evaluate two energy 
models for the ONU gateway, in order to show the effects 
when an energy-aware Off state is implemented in the ONU. 
Therefore, the first ONU gateway model (in the following 
called ONU1) only has “Active” and “Idle” power states, 
whereas the second ONU gateway model (in the following 
called ONU2), instead has all power states, “Active”, “Idle” 
and “Off. 
For model ONU1, the total power consumption for the 
ONU gateway belonging to household k is given by 
            
( )
( ))
( )
(
( )
k
T
G
k
T
k
T
G
k
P
active
active
off
idle
idle
g
⋅
+
+
⋅
=
 
(3) 
where Gidle and Gactive are the respective power values for the 
ONU gateway found in TABLE I. Both the link’s Idle and 
Off states correspond to the Idle power value. 
For model ONU2, the total power consumption for the 
ONU gateway belonging to household k is instead given by 
           
( )
( )
( )
( )
k
T
G
k
T
G
k
T
G
k
P
active
active
idle
idle
off
off
g
⋅
+
⋅
+
⋅
=
 (4) 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The main objective of our investigations was to evaluate 
the amount of energy savings that can be achieved with 
energy-aware equipment based on the households’ Internet 
usage. Each household’s energy consumption during the 
three months measurement period was therefore estimated 
using both energy models and the two threshold values for 
the links. 
A. 
Average energy savings 
TABLE II shows the estimated average energy 
consumption per household when compared to a benchmark 
case without energy-aware equipment. The potential energy 
savings are shown in the parentheses of TABLE II). As can 
be seen in the table, each ONU gateway consumes in average 
11 kWh whereas each connected port on access switch 
consumes in average 8.8 kWh without energy-aware 
equipment. However, with energy-aware equipment, large 
energy savings can be achieved. The most striking result is 
that 58% of the ONU energy consumption can be saved in 
the case where the ONU uses an Off mode (ONU Model 2) 
and the link state threshold 100bps. Even when ONU Model 
1 is used, without Off mode, and the link state threshold 
value of 0 bps is applied (which is very strict), there is still a 
potential of 21% average energy savings for the ONUs. 
Energy-aware access switches can also have significant 
potential energy savings, about 26% and 16% on average for 
the two cases respectively. 
B. 
Households’ Internet usage and energy-savings  
Fig. 4 shows the relationship between the accumulated 
active time (Tactive) for each household and the potential 
energy savings calculated from the energy models with 
threshold of 100bps. Every data point in the figure 
corresponds to one household. The results clearly show that 
the most active households only have small benefits from 
using 
energy-aware 
equipment. 
However, 
for 
the 
households who have less active time, significant potential 
energy savings can be achieved by using energy-aware 
equipment. Using ONU model 1, without Off mode, the 
households who are the least active can save about 36% of 
the energy consumption, while for ONU model 2, with Off 
mode, the savings can reach as high as 67% compared to the 
case without energy-aware equipment. When energy-aware 
equipment is not deployed in the access networks, these 
“light” Internet users will consume the same amount of 
energy as the “heavy” Internet users. 
Further, the graph indicates the potential benefits of 
introducing an Off state in the ONU gateway. The shorter 
active Internet time a household has, the more energy-
savings from the Off state will the household have. 
C. 
Cumulative distribution functions 
Fig. 5 shows the cumulative distribution function (CDF) 
for the households in relation to the potential ratio of energy 
savings that the households can achieve, when ONU Model 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

0
10
20
30
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x = Energy saving (%)
F(x)
Empirical CDF
 
 
Threshold=100bps
Threshold=0bps
Fig. 5 Distribution of households in relation to the amount of energy 
savings using ONU model 1. The blue line corresponds to the link state 
threshold of 100bps, and the red crossed marker corresponds to the link 
state threshold of 0bps. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x = Energy saving (%)
F(x)
Empirical CDF
 
 
Threshold=100bps
Threshold=0bps
 
Fig. 6 Distribution of households in relation to the amount of energy 
savings using ONU model 2. The blue line corresponds to the link state 
threshold of 100bps, and the red crossed marker corresponds to the link 
state threshold of 0bps. 
 
1, without Off state, is applied. Both link state thresholds 
are shown in the figure. As can be seen in the figure, for the 
100 bps threshold case, the CDF curve increases 
exponentially. About 30% of the households in the network 
can save only up to about 30% of the energy using energy-
aware equipment, whereas the rest of households can save 
from 30% to 36% of the energy with energy-aware 
equipment. There is a significant difference in the 0bps 
threshold case, where the CDF shows a clear linear trend. In 
both cases, the maximum energy saving is about 36%. Since 
it is the households with the lowest active time that have the 
maximum energy savings this result indicates that the 
households with the most energy saving have too little 
accumulated active time to be influenced by the threshold 
values. 
Fig. 6 shows the cumulative distribution function using 
ONU model 2, with Off state, and both link state thresholds. 
In this case, the maximum potential energy-saving reaches as 
high as 67%. With the 100 bps threshold, about 83% of the 
households can save more than 30% of the energy, whereas 
even in the 0 bps threshold case there are still 51% of 
households that can achieve more than 30% energy savings. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The study uses real traffic data traces from a residential 
FTTH access network to investigate energy consumption 
and energy saving solutions of energy-aware equipment. 
The paper has proposed a method of mapping users’ traffic 
behavior to link states that then can be mapped to 
corresponding power consumption in the network devices. 
The results show that on average every household link in the 
access network can potentially save at least 18% energy 
consumption with sleep-mode enabled equipment. With an 
additional off-mode feature on ONU, the amount of energy 
can be further reduced about 14% when compared to sleep-
mode only ONU. The link state threshold value has 
significant impact on the amount of energy savings. 
Currently, 70% energy of the whole telecommunication 
network is consumed in the access network, when we put our 
experiment results of access network into an end-to-end 
network scope, we can see that the total potential energy 
savings of a whole network can reach up to 31% with 
energy-aware equipment. Even if in a strict case, when ONU 
Model 1 is used, without Off mode, and the link state 
threshold value of 0 bps is applied, the estimated end-to-end 
network energy savings can achieve 13% 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has partly been financed by the Swedish 
Governmental Agency for Innovation Systems (VINNOVA) 
in the EFRAIM project, and Celtic-plus NOTTS project. 
Maria Kihl is a member of the Lund Center for Control of 
Complex Engineering Systems (LCCC) and the Excellence 
Center Linköping – Lund in Information Technology 
(eLLIIT). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Index, Cisco Visual Networking. "Forecast and Methodology, 
2012–2017." White Paper , 2013.  
[2] M. P. Mills, “The cloud begins with coal: Big data, big 
networks, big infrastructure, and big power”, Technical 
Report, Digital Power Group, 2013. 
[3] J. Malmodin, Å. Moberg, D. Lundén, G. Finnveden, and N. 
Lövehagen, "Greenhouse gas emissions and operational 
electricity use in the ICT and entertainment & media sectors." 
Journal of Industrial Ecology 14.5, 2010, pp. 770-790. 
[4] L. Chiaraviglio, M. Mellia, and F. Neri. "Energy-aware 
backbone 
networks: 
a 
case 
study." 
Communications 
Workshops, 2009. ICC Workshops 2009. IEEE International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2009. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

[5] R. Bolla,  R. Bruschi, F. Davoli, and F. Cucchietti, "Energy 
efficiency in the future internet: a survey of existing 
approaches and trends in energy-aware fixed network 
infrastructures."Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE 
13.2 , 2011, pp. 223-244. 
[6] L. Christoph, D. Kosiankowski, R. Weidmann, and A. 
Gladisch. 
"Energy 
consumption 
of 
telecommunication 
networks and related improvement options." Selected Topics 
in Quantum Electronics, IEEE Journal of 17.2 , 2011, pp. 
285-295. 
[7] A. Otaka, "Power saving ad-hoc report.", Technical 
presentation, IEEE 802 LAN/MAN standards committee, 
2008.  
[8] P. Mahadevan, P. Sharma, S. Banerjee, and P. Ranganathan. 
"A power benchmarking framework for network devices." 
NETWORKING 2009. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. 
795-808. 
[9] J.-I. Kani, S. Shimazu, N. Yoshimoto, and H. Hadama, 
"Energy efficient optical access network technologies," 
Optical Fiber Communication Conference and Exposition 
(OFC/NFOEC), 2011 and the National Fiber Optic Engineers 
Conference , 2011, vol., no., pp.1,3, 6-10. 
[10] S. Nedevschi, L. Popa, G. Iannaccone, S. Ratnasamy, and D. 
Wetherall; "Reducing Network Energy Consumption via 
Sleeping and Rate-Adaptation." NSDI. Vol. 8. 2008. 
[11] C. Gunaratne, K. Christensen, B, Nordman, and S. Suen. 
"Reducing the Energy Consumption of Ethernet with 
Adaptive Link Rate (ALR)," Computers, IEEE Transactions 
on , vol.57, no.4, pp.448,461, April 2008. 
[12] K. Christensen, P. Reviriego, P., B. Nordman, M. Bennett, M. 
Mostowfi, and J. A. Maestro, "IEEE 802.3 az: the road to 
energy efficient ethernet." Communications Magazine, IEEE 
48.11 ,2010, pp. 50-56. 
[13] P. Reviriego, J.A. Hernández, D. Larrabeiti, and J.A. Maestro. 
"Performance evaluation of energy efficient ethernet." 
Communications Letters, IEEE 13.9 ,2009, pp. 697-699. 
[14] G. Hasslinger, J. Mende, R. Geib, T. Beckhaus, and F. 
Hartleb, “Measurement and characteristics of aggregated 
traffic in broadband access networks,” in Managing Traffic 
Performance in Converged Networks, vol. 4516 of Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 998–1010, Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2007. 
[15] M. Kihl, C. Lagerstedt, Å. Aurelius and P. Ödling. "Traffic 
analysis and characterization of Internet user behavior." Ultra 
Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and 
Workshops (ICUMT), 2010 International Congress on. IEEE, 
2010. 
[16] C. Lange, and A. Gladisch. "Energy efficiency limits of load 
adaptive networks." Optical Fiber Communication (OFC), 
collocated National Fiber Optic Engineers Conference, 2010 
Conference on (OFC/NFOEC). IEEE, 2010. 
[17] Valerie Chaillou. (2012). Inventory of FTTH/B in Europe. 
IDATE 
DigiWorld 
Institute. 
Available: 
http://www.idate.org/en/News/Inventory-of-FTTH-B-in-
Europe_765.html,  retrieved: March, 2015 
[18] “Procera 
networks.” 
http://www.proceranetworks.com, 
retrieved: March, 2015 
[19] European Commission. "Code of Conduct on Energy 
Consumption of Broadband Equipment ver. 4.1." (2013). 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-396-4
ICDT 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

