A non-Linear MIMO-OFDM Preprocessor for non-Gaussian Channels
Danilo Pena∗, Thais Areias†, Luan Pena‡, Juliano Bazzo§
Sidia Institute of Science and Technology, Manaus, Brazil
E-mail: ∗danilo.pena@sidia.com, †thais.areias@sidia.com, ‡luan.pena@sidia.com, §juliano.bazzo@sidia.com
Abstract—Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) and
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM) are crucial
technologies inside the 5G mobile communication systems and be-
yond. Design and evaluation of detector techniques over realistic
channel conditions are essential in order to transmit signals at
high rates and with high reliability in such technologies. In this
paper, we present the evaluation of MIMO-OFDM preprocessors
over non-Gaussian impulsive noise. Also, we propose a non-
linear sigmoid preprocessor without a threshold parameter as
an alternative to the traditional preprocessors. The simulation
results show that the Symbol Error Rate (SER) performance
depends on not only the preprocessors used and their thresholds
but also the impulsiveness level in the noise.
Keywords—Impulsive noise; sigmoid function; non-linear pre-
processors; non-linear MIMO.
I. INTRODUCTION
Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems have
received much attention in recent years due to the increasing
demand of high transmission rates and high quality of service
for wireless communications. MIMO-OFDM techniques are
applied to many applications and contexts, such as 4G and 5G
networks, 802.11ac, and vehicular environments [1]. With the
increasing number of mobile users in the same time-frequency
resource, the array efﬁciency of MIMO allows us to reduce the
transmit power and improve energy efﬁciency [2]. In addition,
MIMO is robust in the face of hardware imperfections, such
as multiplicative phase drifts and additive distortion noise [2].
One of the greatest challenges of MIMO-OFDM systems
is to detect signals with high performance and relatively
low computational complexity. However, information signals
are degraded by many different undesirable wireless channel
effects in which noise assumptions have been demonstrated
as one of the greatest challenges faced by MIMO systems.
Thus, the design conception of such technology must consider
realistic channel and noise models in order to represent well
the current applications. On the other hand, various wireless
channels have been demonstrated to suffer from impulsive
noise which is more accurately characterized as non-Gaussian
processes [3]. Those effects are commonly caused by man-
made sources, electrical devices, ignition noise in vehicles,
and bursty radio frequency emissions typical in urban envi-
ronments [1].
In severe impulsive noise scenarios, the effects of the
MIMO performance may be misread as low Signal-to-Noise
Ratio (SNR), when in fact there is a certain impulsiveness
level degrading overall system performance. Especially for
classical MIMO detectors that rely on second-order statistics
noise models, the Gaussian model assumption of wireless
noise behavior leads to meaningful degradation or does not
work well. Thus, one way to improve the performance of
MIMO-OFDM systems is minimizing undesirable effects of
channel and noise by designing detectors considering non-
Gaussian noise. Notably, detectors have been proposed over
non-Gaussian noise models with considerable improvements
compared to traditional ones in those scenarios.
Several papers show non-linear preprocessors with threshold
level in order to mitigate the impulsive noise in receivers [4],
[5]. Performance evaluation has been done with those non-
linear techniques in OFDM receivers [5], reducing adverse ef-
fects of impulsive noise. Recently, an adaptive MIMO receiver
was proposed using an impulsive noise level detector. Other
adaptive techniques were also presented based on Recursive
Least Mean Square (RLS), adaptive Normalized Least Mean
Square (NLMS), and Variable Step-size adaptive Normalized
Least Mean (VSNLMS), thereby mitigating the impulsive
noise effects [6]. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) has been
investigated with non-linear complex Multiple Support Vector
Machine regression (M-SVM) in this environment. Further-
more, a MIMO detector was proposed based on the maximum
complex correntropy criterion using channel estimation to ﬁt
a parameter of its technique [7].
Those methods present improvements in detection over
impulsive non-Gaussian noise as compared to traditional de-
tectors. However, they usually have too high computational
complexity making them often infeasible, due to the adding
of an adaptive step or the making of a channel estimation to ﬁt
a parameter of the detector. Moreover, many detector solutions
require a parameter usually based on a prior noise information.
In this context, this work introduces a non-linear preprocessor
based on sigmoid functions without free parameter for MIMO
detector over non-Gaussian channels.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe
the MIMO-OFDM system, presenting the channel and noise
model. MIMO-OFDM preprocessors are presented in Section
III. In Section IV, we propose a MIMO preprocessor based on
sigmoid function. In Section V, we evaluate its performance
over non-Gaussian scenarios by simulations. In Section VI,
we present our ﬁnal remarks.
II. MIMO-OFDM SYSTEM
Consider a MIMO system with NR antennas at the receiver
and NT antennas at the transmitter, illustrated in Figure 1.
The transmitter consists of MIMO-OFDM modulation over N
subcarriers [5]. In the Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multi-
plexing (OFDM) transmitter, the bits are mapped into base-
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

band symbols Sk using Phase Shift Key (PSK) or Quadrature
Amplitude Modulation (QAM) scheme. Then, the complex
baseband OFDM signal is computed by means of inverse
Discrete Fourier Transform (iDFT) as:
sn(t) =
1
√
N
N−1
X
k=0
Skej 2πkt
Ts
(1)
where N is the number of subcarriers, and Ts is the active
symbol interval.
Serial-to-
parallel
converter
Modulator
Modulator
Input
NT
.
.
.
Detector
Demodulator
Demodulator
Preprocessor
Preprocessor
.
.
.
Parallel-to-
serial
converter
Output
NR
.
.
.
Non-Gaussian
Channel
Figure 1. MIMO system architecture.
The NR antennas are spaced such that the received signals
may be considered independent of each other. The k-th symbol
received by the m-th antennas is given by:
ym(t) =
NT
X
n=1
sn(t)hmn(t)p(t) + wm(t),
(2)
where sn(t) represents the transmitted symbol from the n-th
antenna, hmn(t) represents the channel coefﬁcient between the
n-th transmitting antenna and m-th receiving antenna, wm(t)
corresponds to the channel noise, and p(t) is a rectangular
pulse.
The channel may be described as:
hmn(t) = hmn,r(t) + jhmn,q(t),
(3)
where hmn,r(t) and hmn,q(t) are Gaussian processes with
mean zero and variance equal to 1/2. We also assume that
the differences in propagation times of the signals from the
transmitters to the receivers are small relative to the symbol
duration.
A. Noise Model
We assume that the noise is uncorrelated, and its distribution
can be represented by α-stable distributions, which are based
on crucial properties such as generalized central limit theo-
rem and stability. According to the generalized central limit
theorem, if the sum of independent and identically distributed
random variables with or without ﬁnite variance converges,
then the limit distribution must be α-stable. Another relevant
property, known as stability property, states that the sum of
two independent random variables with the same characteristic
exponent (α value) is also α-stable.
There are different parametrizations of α-stable distribution
for different speciﬁcations of the characteristic function. We
assume the parameters θα = (α, β, γ, δ) and the following
characteristic function [8]:
ϕ(ω; θα) = exp(−γα|ω|α[1 − jΘ(ω; α, β)] + jδω),
(4)
with
Θ =
 β(tan πα
2 )(sign ω),
α ̸= 1
−β 2
π(ln |ω|),
α = 1,
(5)
where
α is the characteristic exponent such that 0 < α < 2,
β is the symmetry parameter such that −1 ≤ β ≤ 1,
γ is the dispersion or scale parameter such that γ > 0,
δ is the location parameter such that −∞ < δ < ∞.
ω is the independent variable of the characteristic function.
-0.5
0
0.5
x
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Density
 = 2
 = 1.5
 = 1
Figure 2. Probability distribution function of symmetrical α-stable with β =
δ = 0 and γ = 1.
We also assume a Symmetric α-Stable (SαS) class because
it has proved to be very useful in modeling impulsive noise [3].
For such distribution class, β = 0 and δ = 0 [9]. Figure 2 shows
the α value variation versus the random variable representing
the impulsiveness level of the distribution, where a low value
of α suggests high impulsiveness and a non-Gaussian behavior,
and a high value of α means that the distribution is close to
the Gaussian behavior, where α = 2 is the Gaussian case.
III. NON-LINEAR PREPROCESSORS
In order to mitigate impulsive noise effects, non-linear
preprocessors are applied at the receiver as illustrated in
Figure 1. Those memoryless preprocessors are non-linear
transformations over the signal amplitude. The most common
non-linear preprocessors are blanking and clipping based on
thresholds.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

A. Blanking
The blanking non-linear mapping can be described as:
yk =
 rk,
|rk| ≤ T
0,
|rk| > T ,
k = 0, 1, . . . M − 1
(6)
where T is the blanking threshold and M is the signal length.
B. Clipping
Similar to blanking, the clipping technique maintains the
amplitude when the signal is below a threshold. However,
when the signal is above the threshold, then the amplitude
is saturated by the threshold keeping its phase. This function
can be described as:
yk =
 rk,
|rk| ≤ T
Tejarg(rk),
|rk| > T ,
k = 0, 1, . . . M − 1
(7)
where T is the clipping threshold and M is the signal length.
IV. PROPOSED PREPROCESSOR
In this proposed technique, we compute the MIMO-OFDM
using a non-linear preprocessor function based on a class
of functions called sigmoid. These functions have essential
characteristics as non-linear functions, such as monotonically
increasing and anti-symmetry.
The non-linear functions aim to ensure the existence of
higher-order statistics. The most common functions in the
sigmoid family are the hyperbolic tangent functions, described
as follows.
yk = tanh(rk) = erk − e−rk
erk + e−rk .
(8)
These functions are commonly used to compute covariance
by using non-linear data transformation, allowing to access
information from the signal, even when it is contaminated by
non-Gaussian noise [10].
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
This section presents numerical simulation results for the
performance evaluation of the MIMO-OFDM system using
different preprocessors. We examined the Symbol Error Rates
(SER) versus the quality of signal metrics in a 2x2 MIMO
system. The simulations assess the results using the Monte
Carlo method with curves computed with at least 50 errors
in the estimation, using 104 subcarriers and 1000 frames.
All simulations consider baseband signal using Quadrature
Phase Shift Keying (QPSK) modulation and unity energy with
the antennas statistically independent of each other. Also,
Rayleigh ﬂat fading was assumed as the multipath propagation
model in the wireless channel.
The performance metrics are usually computed versus the
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). However, the inﬁnite variance of
non-Gaussian SαS processes prevents to compute the signal-
to-noise ratio as a measurement of signal quality. In this work,
we use the Geometric Signal-to-Noise Ratio (GSNR) [11]
instead of the SNR. The GSNR is given by
GSNR =
1
2Cg
 A
S0
2
,
(9)
where the normalization constant Cg = eCe ≈ 1.78 is the
exponential of the Euler constant (Ce), used to ensure that
GSNR corresponds to SNR when the channel is Gaussian (α =
2); S0 is the geometric power of a SαS random variable; and
A is the root-mean-square value of the signal.
Figure 3 shows the performance of MIMO-OFDM receivers
over non-Gaussian SαS noise with impulsiveness level of
α = 1.3 and threshold T = 2 for blanking and clipping pre-
processors. This scenario represents an environment with high
impulsiveness noise where the performance of the MIMO-
OFDM system is very low compared to the Gaussian case.
However, one can see the preprocessors deliver better perfor-
mance than the case without the preprocessor, mainly for high
GSNR values. Thus, although all preprocessors increase the
performance of the MIMO-OFDM system, their performance
depends on the impulsiveness level of the noise.
Figure 3. Performance comparison among the preprocessor techniques over
SαS noise with α = 1.3 and T = 2.
A. Impulsiveness Analysis
Figure 4 presents the performance of preprocessors over
SαS noise model over different impulsiveness levels, i.e.,
many different values of α. More impulsiveness level is
close to the Gaussian case (α = 2), less is the increase in
performance due to preprocessors nonlinearity over impulsive
noise. This behavior occurs because in this case, the noise is
less impulsive than with low values of α.
Although all preprocessors increase performance over high
impulsive noise, that also depends on the threshold level used
for the blanking and clipping methods.
B. Threshold Analysis
Figure 5 presents the performance of blanking and clipping
preprocessors over different threshold levels. For an interme-
diate range of threshold values, these techniques have better
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

Figure 4. Performance of preprocessors over SαS noise with many different
values of α, GSNR = 15 dB and T = 2.
performance than the sigmoid preprocessor. However, this
range changes with impulsiveness level and GSNR, making
this region of values difﬁcult to be set.
Figure 5.
Performance varying threshold level of blanking and clipping
preprocessors over SαS noise with α = 1.3 and GSNR = 15 dB.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we evaluated traditional preprocessors in
the detection of signals in MIMO-OFDM systems over non-
Gaussian channels. We analyzed those preprocessors by dif-
ferent aspects, such as the impulsiveness level of the noise,
the threshold level of the preprocessors, and the quality of the
signal. Also, we presented a non-linear sigmoid function as
an alternative to the classical preprocessors, comparing their
performance over all aspects mentioned before. The traditional
blanking and clipping preprocessors depend on the threshold
level, which, in turn, also depends on the impulsiveness level
in the environment. On the other hand, the sigmoid function
does not have any parameters, being an alternative in the trade-
off of preprocessors in the MIMO-OFDM detection systems.
Future works may use those results to investigate adap-
tive and machine learning solutions based on non-Gaussian
noise parameters such as GSNR and α values. Thus, the
preprocessors using such techniques must present a different
performance, thereby being an alternative to the traditional
ones.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by Samsung Eletronica
da Amazonia Ltda., under the auspice of the informatic law
no 8.387/91.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Liu, F. Yang, X. Wang, J. Song, and Z. Han, “Structured-compressed-
sensing-based impulsive noise cancelation for MIMO systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 6921–6931,
Aug 2017.
[2] X. Cheng, J. Sun, and S. Li, “Channel estimation for FDD multi-user
massive MIMO: A variational bayesian inference-based approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7590–
7602, nov 2017.
[3] C. L. Nikias and M. Shao, Signal Processing with Alpha-stable Distri-
butions and Applications.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience,
1995.
[4] H. A. Suraweera, C. Chai, J. Shentu, and J. Armstrong, “Analysis of
impulse noise mitigation techniques for digital television systems,” in
Proc. 8th International OFDM Workshop, 2003, pp. 172–176.
[5] S. Zhidkov, “Analysis and comparison of several simple impulsive
noise mitigation schemes for OFDM receivers,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 5–9, jan 2008.
[6] A. Hakam, N. A. Aly, M. Khalid, S. Jimaa, and S. Al-Araji, “Impul-
sive noise reduction in MIMO-OFDM systems using adaptive receiver
structures,” in 2013 IEEE 20th International Conference on Electronics,
Circuits, and Systems (ICECS).
IEEE, dec 2013, pp. 674–677.
[7] P. T. V. De Souza, A. I. R. Fontes, V. S. V. De Souza, and L. F.
Silveira, “A novel signal detector in MIMO systems based on complex
correntropy,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 137 517–137 527, 2019.
[8] M. Shao and C. L. C. Nikias, “Signal processing with fractional lower
order moments: Stable processes and their applications,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 81, no. 7, pp. 986–1010, jul 1993.
[9] G. Samorodnitsky and M. S. Taqqu, Stable Non-Gaussian Random
Processes: Stochastic Models with Inﬁnite Variance, ser. Stochastic
Modeling Series.
Taylor & Francis, 1994.
[10] D. Pena, A. Lima, V. de Sousa Jr, L. Silveira, and A. Martins,
“Robust time delay estimation based on non-gaussian impulsive acoustic
channel,” Journal of Communication and Information Systems, vol. 35,
no. 1, pp. 86–89, 2020.
[11] J. G. Gonzalez, J. L. Paredes, and G. R. Arce, “Zero-order statistics: A
mathematical framework for the processing and characterization of very
impulsive signals,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 54,
no. 10, pp. 3839–3851, 2006.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-835-8
ICDT 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications

