 
 
A Security Policy for Cloud Providers 
The Software-as-a-Service Model 
Dimitra Georgiou 
Secure Systems Laboratory  
Department of Digital Systems 
School of Information & Communication Technologies 
University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece 
dimitrageorgiou@ssl-unipi.gr 
 
Costas Lambrinoudakis 
Secure Systems Laboratory 
Department of Digital Systems 
School of Information & Communication Technologies 
University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece 
clam@unipi.gr 
 
 
Abstract─Cloud Computing is a new computing paradigm 
originating 
and 
combining 
characteristics 
from 
grid 
computing, 
distributed 
computing, 
parallel 
computing, 
virtualization and other computer technologies. Trust and 
security in Cloud Computing are more complex than in 
traditional IT systems. Conventional security policies designed 
for other technologies do not map well to the cloud 
environment, which, on top of that, may exhibit additional 
security requirements. In an attempt to assist cloud providers 
to secure their environment, and specifically for the Software-
as-a-Service Model (SaaS), this paper starts with the 
presentation of the already reported threats. Because of these 
security threats, there are specific requirements that we claim 
must be clearly addressed in the Security Policy for the Cloud 
Environment. Our work focuses on the required structure and 
contents of such a security policy. In this respect, this paper 
proposes a model to describe the relationship between threats, 
measures, and security policies applicable to the SaaS model. It 
is worth stressing that in the SaaS service model, the client 
depends on the provider for the proper security measures. 
Keywords-Cloud Computing Security; Security Policies; Security 
Requirements; Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, in an interconnected world, every corporation 
needs a very well thought security policy. The rapid growth 
of the information age has significantly changed the nature of 
computing, and gives rise to a new set of security concerns 
and issues. According to the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), the Security Policy is defined as an 
“Aggregate of directives, regulations, rules, and practices that 
prescribes how an organization manages, protects and 
distributes information”[1]. 
For the new era of Cloud Computing, the purpose of a 
security policy is to protect people and information, set rules 
for expected behavior by users, minimize risks and help to 
track compliances with regulation[2].Considering the fact 
that in recent times anyone with an interest in information 
technology has come across the term Cloud Computing [3], it 
is really important to seriously consider the security issues in 
Cloud Computing: Are there any Security threats in Cloud 
Computing, that do not appear in non- Cloud Systems? Is the 
Cloud secure and safe for the users? As Cloud Computing is 
achieving popularity, we attempt to demystify the security 
and privacy risks that are introduced, because of its 
transformational nature [4].The success of a Cloud Policy 
really depends on the way the security contents are addressed 
in the policy document and how the content is communicated 
to users [5]. But, before we analyze all these risks, we need to 
have a clear understanding of what “Cloud Computing” is. 
Cloud Computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, 
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of 
configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, 
storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or 
service provider interaction [6].Cloud is a recent trend in 
Information Technology that moves computing and data 
away from desktop and portable PCs into large data centers. 
It refers to applications delivered as services over the 
Internet, as well as to the actual cloud infrastructure, namely, 
the hardware and systems software in data centers that 
provide these services [7] (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Visual Model of NIST Working Definition of Cloud Computing 
[7] 
The advantages of Cloud Computing and specifically its 
ability to scale rapidly (through subcontractors), store data 
remotely (in unknown places) and share services in a 
dynamic environment, can become a major flow in 
maintaining a level of privacy assurance sufficient to sustain 
confidence in potential customers. Cloud has exacerbated the 
strain on traditional frameworks for privacy that globalization 
has already started. To understand the importance of Cloud 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
Computing and its adoption, we must understand its principal 
characteristics, its delivery and deployment models, how 
customers use these services, and how to safeguard them. 
There are three service models of Cloud Computing: 
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) and three main deployment 
models which are: Private cloud, Public cloud and Hybric 
cloud [8][9][10][11][12][13] (see Figure 2). These service 
models also place a different level of security requirements in 
the cloud environment. IaaS is the foundation of all cloud 
services, with PaaS built up on it and SaaS in turn built upon 
it. Just as capabilities are inherited, so are the information 
security issues and risks. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Cloud Computing Service Models 
This paper proposes a methodology that may be adopted 
for the development of a Cloud Security Policy. It assesses 
how security, trust and privacy issues can be addressed in the 
context of a Cloud Computing Policy and is organized as 
follows: Section II presents an overview of related work on 
security issues and security Policies for Cloud Computing. 
Then, Section III, analyses the policy issues related to Cloud 
Computing, while Section IV depicts the proposed 
methodology for a Cloud Security Policy, for Cloud 
Providers in the SaaS service model. Section V presents the 
linking of threats, security measures and security policy rules 
for Threat 5 (Introduction of damaging or disruptive 
software) and finally, Section VI concludes the paper and 
provides some pointers for future work.  
 
II. RELATED WORK 
Cloud Computing is a new computing model originating 
from grid computing, distributed computing, parallel 
computing, virtualization technology, utility computing and 
other computer technologies. It exhibits many advantages 
such as large scale computation and data storage, 
virtualization, high expandability, high reliability and low 
price service. Trust and security in Cloud Computing are 
more complex than in a traditional IT systems. But, what 
exactly is the problem? 
In order to have a secure Cloud Computing deployment, 
it is necessary to consider the following areas: the Cloud 
Computing 
architecture, 
governance, 
portability 
and 
interoperability, traditional security, business continuity and 
disaster recovery, data center operations, incident response, 
notification and remediation, application security, encryption 
and key management, identity and access management 
[14][15][16]. Many of the security issues arising from the 
aforementioned areas, have been already addressed in other 
systems. However, the specific characteristics of cloud 
environments result into new security concerns; Cloud 
architecture is fundamentally different from other systems, 
the cloud environment is by nature multitenant with shared 
resources, and the location of the data and the local privacy 
requirements will not be controlled by the user. Another 
major problem is the lack of standardization. Since no proper 
standards for Cloud Computing exist, it becomes extremely 
difficult for a company to secure the services that it offers or 
uses through a cloud. 
Cloud Computing security challenges and issues have 
been addressed by various researchers. The National Institute 
of Standards and Technology contends that security, 
interoperability, and portability are the major barriers to a 
broader cloud adoption [17]. Data confidentiality and service 
availability in Cloud Computing are also key security issues. 
A single security method cannot solve the Cloud Computing 
security problem and many conventional and new 
technologies and strategies must be employed together for 
protecting the entire Cloud environment. 
Robert Gellman’s report at the World Privacy Forum [18] 
focuses on privacy issues and legal compliance of sharing 
data in the cloud. He mentions various legal issues such as 
the possibility of the cloud being in more than one legal 
location at the same time with different legal consequences 
and such uncertainty making it very difficult to assess the 
privacy protection level offered to the users [19]. Also, 
ENISA investigated the different security risks related to 
adopting Cloud Computing along with the affected assets, the 
risks likelihood, impacts, and vulnerabilities in Cloud 
Computing that may lead to such risks [20]. 
According to Al Morsy et al. [21] the Cloud Computing 
model has different stakeholders involved, namely: cloud 
provider, service provider and service consumer. Each 
stakeholder 
has 
its 
own 
security 
management 
systems/processes and each one has its own expectations 
(requirements) from the other stakeholders.  
Cloud environments exhibit different architectures based 
on the services they provide, thus making it even harder to 
find ‘global’ security measures .Louay Karadsheh [22] 
examines the risks encountered by implementing the 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) model and discusses the 
role of security policies, Service Level Agreement (SLA) and 
compliance for enhancing the security of the IaaS service 
model. Subashini and Kavitha [13] describe the various 
security issues of Cloud Computing in relation to its service 
delivery model and they list some of the existing solutions 
that partly address the security challenges posed by the cloud. 
Cheng and Lai [23] introduce the characteristics of the newly 
developed Cloud Computing technology first, and then they 
highlight the reasons for emphasizing the issue of 
information privacy in relation to new cloud applications. 
Vaquero et al. [24] analyze the security risks that 
multitenancy induces the Infrastructure-as-a-Service clouds 
and present the most relevant threats and relevant state of the 
art of solutions. Also, in the same paper they continue 
analyzing the open security issues and challenges that should 
be addressed. Even though the majority of the research work 
published focuses on security issues, legal and jurisdictional 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
risks [25][26][27], none addresses the need for a Cloud 
Security Policy. For instance, Karadsheh [22] discusses the 
role of security policies, SLA and compliance for enhancing 
the security of the IaaS service model, by presenting several 
applicable policies. Furthermore, this paper discusses the 
possibilities of applying different types of security policies to 
enhance security of IaaS to acceptable level, but they do not 
propose a security policy. Similar is the approach by 
Subashini and Kavitha [13], who describe the common 
security issues posed by the cloud service delivery models 
and the security threats posed by the IaaS delivery model, but 
they do not provide a comprehensive analysis of the specific 
threats to be addressed by cloud providers.  
In an attempt to assist cloud providers to secure the 
environment that they offer, and specifically for the 
Software-as-a-Service Model (SaaS), this paper presents the 
already reported threats to ease their comprehension. Because 
of these security threats, there are specific requirements that 
we claim must be clearly addressed in the Security Policy for 
the Cloud Environment. Our work focuses on the required 
structure and contents of such a security policy.  
 
 
III. AN ANALYSIS OF THE SECURITY POLICY ISSUES 
RELATED TO CLOUD COMPUTING 
The 
Cloud 
Computing 
model 
involves 
different 
stakeholders: the Cloud Provider (an entity that offers the 
cloud infrastructure or /and services to the cloud consumers), 
the Service Provider (an entity that utilizes the cloud 
infrastructure to deliver applications/services to the end 
users) and the Service Consumer (End user; an entity that 
uses services hosted on the cloud infrastructure). Each 
stakeholder has its own expectations (requirements) and 
security management systems/processes [21]. For instance, if 
we consider user expectations they would expect that the 
cloud provides: reliability and liability, security, privacy, 
anonymity, access and usage restrictions [28].  
The decision of whether the Cloud Customer or the Cloud 
Provider (Service Provider) is responsible for a given control 
and for security and privacy depends on three factors: 
 
a) The cloud model (SaaS, IaaS, or PaaS) chosen. 
b) The extent to which the Cloud Customer is allowed 
to configure the CP’s controls. 
c) Legislations, which may dictate the assignment of 
responsibilities and thereby overrides the previous 
two factors. 
 
 
 
Next, we highlight the possible threats for a Cloud 
Provider who adopts the Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) 
model:  
 
Threat 1: Masquerading of user identity by insiders: 
The threat of masquerading of user identity by 
insiders covers attempts by authorized users to 
gain access to information to which they have 
not been granted access. These users may 
attempt to gain access to that information by 
using another user’s account. 
Threat 2: Masquerading of user identity by contracted 
service Providers: The threat of masquerading 
of a user identity by contracted service 
providers covers attempts by people working for 
a 
contracted 
service 
provider 
to 
obtain 
unauthorized access to information by using an 
authorized person. 
 
Threat 3: Masquerading of user identity by outsiders: 
The threat of masquerading of a user identity by 
outsiders covers attempts by outsiders to obtain 
unauthorized access to information by posing as 
an authorized user. 
Threat 4: Unauthorized use of an application: It covers 
various cases of unauthorized use of an 
application. 
Threat 5: Introduction of damaging or disruptive 
software: This threat covers Viruses, Worms, 
Trojan Horses, logic bombs, any other form of 
malicious software. 
Threat 6: Misuse of system resources: Identifies factors 
that increase the threat of misuse of system 
resources; covers People playing games on 
business 
systems, 
People 
using 
business 
systems for personal work, People downloading 
non-work related information from the internet, 
People setting up databases or other packages 
for non-work related matters. 
Threat 7: Communications 
infiltration: 
This threat 
covers the following types of event: Hacking 
into a system using, for example, buffer 
overflow attacks, Masquerading as a server, 
Masquerading as an existing user of an e-
commerce application, Masquerading as a new 
user of an e-commerce application, Denial of 
service (deliberate), Flaming attacks, and 
Spamming. 
Threat 8: Communications interception: This threat 
covers 
Passive 
interception 
and 
Traffic 
monitoring. The ease of interception is 
determined by two basic-factors: The medium 
of transmission and the type of protocols being 
used. Interception of some types of traffic on the 
internet is relatively easy. It can be achieved by 
attackers sending messages to target systems 
instructing them to send traffic via specific 
(hostile) machines. 
 
 
 
Threat 9: Communications 
manipulation: 
Active 
interception, Insertion of false 
messages, 
Deliberate delivery out of sequence, Deliberate 
delay of delivery, Deliberate misrouting. If an 
attacker can force a message to be sent via a 
hostile host, the attacker may be in a position to 
intercept, alter and the forward the message. 
Threat 10: Repudiation: This threat addresses cases of 
people denying that they sent a message 
(repudiation of origin), or that they received a 
message (repudiation of receipt). 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
Threat 11: Communications failure: Unavailability of 
Service Provider, Failure of data link, Non –
delivery of message, Accidental delivery out of 
sequence, 
Accidental 
delay 
in 
delivery, 
Accidental denial of service. The Internet does 
not provide a service level agreement. There are 
no guarantees on how long it will take for a 
message to get to a recipient, or even that it will 
get there, eventually. 
 
 
 
Threat 12: Embedding of malicious code: Includes email 
viruses and hostile mobile code (for example 
hostile Active X applets). Once on a network, 
they can quickly infect many machines causing 
significant disruption. Java and Active X raise a 
range of new security concerns. Users are now 
running code written by people from outside of 
the organization, sometimes from unknown 
sources. This code has often not been tested by 
the organization. There are concerns that hostile 
code written using these types of techniques 
could inflict damage on systems and networks. 
Threat 13: Accidental 
misrouting: 
The 
threat 
of 
accidental misrouting covers the possibility that 
information might be delivered to an incorrect 
address when it is being sent over a network. 
Threat 14: Technical failure of host: This threat covers 
failures of the CPU or other hardware items. 
Threat 15: Technical failure of storage facility: This 
threat covers disk crashes and disk failures. 
Threat16: Technical failure of Print facility: This 
questionnaire identifies the factors that increase 
the threat for a technical failure of the print 
facility. 
Threat 17: Technical failure of network Distribution 
Component: This threat addresses cases of 
network distribution components, such as 
bridges and routers, failure. 
 
 
Threat 18: Technical failure of Network Management or 
Operational Host: This questionnaire identifies 
the factors that increase the threat of technical 
failure of a network management or operation 
host. 
Threat 19 : Technical Failure of Network Interface: 
Here, the factors that increase the threat of 
failure of the network interface are identified. 
Threat 20: Technical failure of Network service: Here, 
the factors that increase the threat of failure of 
the network service are identified. 
 
Threat 21: Power 
failure: This 
threat 
covers 
the 
possibility that the power supply to the 
building may fail. The types o power failure 
covered include: spikes, surges, brown outs, 
black outs. 
 
Threat 22: Air conditioning failure: This threat covers 
the possibility that operation may have to be 
suspended because temperatures in the location 
fall outside of acceptable parameters. 
 
 
 
 
 
These threats are being used for illustrating where the 
dangerous points lurk at every level of the typical SaaS 
model in a Cloud Provider’s environment. 
In all three cloud models, the Cloud Provider manages 
and controls the infrastructure, which comprises the servers, 
networks, electricity, human resources, and site services. As 
such, the Cloud Provider is responsible to implement and 
operate suitable infrastructure controls such as employee 
training, physical site security, network firewalls, and others. 
Infrastructure controls are of fundamental importance. It is 
evident, from the complexity of Cloud Computing and the 
threats that the cloud is facing, that the development and 
adoption of a Security Policy is necessary. Understanding the 
threats relevant to the SaaS service model will assist in 
formulating a well-established security policy. 
Although much research into cloud services security 
engineering has been undertaken and almost everybody 
accepts that there are a lot of security and privacy issues for 
Cloud Computing, no one has raised the need for a Security 
Policy for Cloud Computing. 
 
 
IV. A SECURITY POLICY STRUCTURE FOR CLOUD 
COMPUTING 
Existing research analysis methodologies are not 
appropriate for Cloud Computing since threats in Cloud are 
different. The appropriate Security policies designed for 
conventional architectures do not map well to the cloud 
environment. Cloud architectures must have well-defined 
security policies and procedures in place. As companies 
move to Cloud Computing, the traditional methods of 
securing data are being challenged. For instance, it may be 
difficult for the cloud customer to effectively control the data 
processing that the cloud provider carries out and thus to be 
sure that the data is handled in a lawful way. Failure to 
comply with data protection law may lead to administrative, 
civil and also criminal sanctions, which vary from country to 
country, for the data controller. It is therefore important all 
security requirements, including the ones that are only 
applicable to the cloud environments, to be covered by a 
security policy. Therefore in this paper we indeed provide a 
new methodology for assessing the threats/risks in Cloud, in 
order to identify new rules that must be incorporated in the 
Cloud Security Policy. The work, in this paper, does not 
result in a Cloud Security Policy. Instead, it proposes a 
methodology that may be used for the development of the 
appropriate Cloud Security Policy. 
 
The proposed methodology for the development of a 
cloud Security Policy exhibits three distinct levels:   
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
1) The Cloud Provider level,  
2) The Service Provider level and  
3) The User level.  
Even though there are parts of the security policy that are 
common to all levels, each level will also exhibit dedicated 
security policy parts/rules. This three-layered classification 
of security requirements of cloud systems and the common 
parts of the Policy (colored) is illustrated in Figure 3. As 
already mentioned earlier, the focus will be on SaaS 
(Software-as-a-Service) models. 
Public Cloud
Public Cloud
Cloud Provider
    Service Provider
User Provider
SAAS (Software as a Service)
PAAS (Platform as a Service)
IAAS (Infrastructure as a Service)
 
Figure 3.  Security Policy Structure for Cloud Providers 
 
The threats that we referred to in the previous section can 
be employed for deducing the security requirements that 
must be satisfied by the cloud provider. 
To demonstrate this, a specific threat (Threat 5 - 
Introduction of damaging or disruptive software) has been 
chosen to depict the correlation between Threat -Requirement 
– Security Measures – Policy for a Cloud Provider (see 
Section V and Figure 4). 
More specifically, in Figure 4, each security measure that 
can be employed for eliminating Threat 5 is associated with 
the necessary set of rules that make up the security policy of 
the cloud provider. The same information is provided in more 
detail with more analysis in Section V below. Doing this type 
of analysis for each Threat that the SaaS service model is 
facing will help in formulating a well-established security 
policy. 
 
 
V. 
LINKING THREATS , SECURITY MEASURES AND 
SECURITY POLICY RULES  
A. Threats 
Next, Threat 5: Introduction of damaging or disruptive 
software, will be analyzed as an example. In parallel the 
security measures and policy rules linked to that threat will 
also be examined. 
 
 
Measure 2:
Logical Access Control
Measure 1:
Identification and 
authentication
Measure 4:
Software Distibution
Measure 5:
System input/output 
controls
Measure 6:
Back up of Data
Measure 7:
Incident Handling
Policy Cloud
Provider
Policy 1:
Identification Authentication and 
user accounts [A]
 Policy 2:
  Logical Access Control [B]
Policy 3:
Protection of Software [C]
Policy 4:
Secure use of Data [D]
Policy 5:
Recording events / incidents and 
prevent intrusion [E]
Policy 6:
Handling security incidents [F]
Policy 7:
Access Control and resource use 
[G]
Policy 8:
Compliance with regulatory 
requirements [H]
Policy 9:
Inspection systems [I]
Policy 10:
 Protection Tool surveillance system 
[J]
Policy 11:
 Supervision and controls [K]
Measure 3:
Protection against 
Malicious Software
Threat 5: 
Introduction of damaging or disruptive software
Figure 4. Security Policy rules covering Threat 5 
 
B. Measures 
The 
security 
measures 
associated 
with 
the 
aforementioned threat follow.  
• Identification and authentication (Security Policy 
Rules Α)  
• Logical access control (Security Policy Rules B & D)  
• Protection against malicious Software (Security 
Policy Rules C) 
• Software Distribution (Security Policy Rules C) 
• System input /output controls (Security Policy Rules 
E & G & I & J & K)  
• Back-up of Data (Security Policy Rules D) 
• Incident Handling (Security Policy Rules F & H) 
 
Security Requirement 
Protection against 
Disruptive Software 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
C. Security Policy Rules 
The 
security 
policy 
rules 
associated 
with 
the 
aforementioned threat and security measures follow.  
1) Identification and authentication 
Users are identified uniquely ensuring that any action 
can be attributed to a specific user. This rule applies to the 
operating system level and to the application level, while the 
following minimum requirements should be satisfied. 
• Each user has a unique identity (user ID). 
• A list of users and their unique identities is 
maintained. 
• Each authentication identifier is assigned to a user 
and is used by a single user. 
• The system administrators have identities that 
correspond to accounts with elevated privileges.  
 
2)   Logical access control 
There shall be a formal user registration and de-
registration procedure in place for granting and revoking 
access to all information systems and services. Specifically: 
• Registered user accounts shall be reviewed for 
applicability at specific periods. 
• Privileges shall be defined for specific business 
purposes. 
• The allocation and use of privileges shall be restricted 
and controlled. 
• Privileges and privilege allocation shall be reviewed 
for applicability at specified periods. 
• The allocation and establishment of user passwords 
shall be controlled through a formal management 
process. 
• Management shall review user rights at regular 
intervals using a formal process. 
• Users shall be required to follow good security 
practices in the selection use of passwords. 
 
 
3) Protection software 
Special care should be taken to control the development 
and maintenance of software applications. Specifically: 
• Application development should be conducted with 
specific, scientifically accepted methodologies. 
• Each new application must be accompanied by 
sufficient 
documentation 
in 
accordance 
with 
international standards. 
• The risk analysis must fit into the requirements 
analysis. 
• Systems utilized for the development and testing of 
software must be separate from the operational 
systems. 
Software changes should be authorized prior to their 
implementation: 
• Application software changes require approval by 
their respective makers. 
• Any proposed change should be examined whether it 
affects the security of the information system. 
Changes that affect - directly or indirectly - security 
requirements must be approved by the Security Officer. 
Specifically: 
• The 
amendments 
must 
be 
made 
in 
the 
development/testing environment and should be 
tested prior to their application to the operational 
system. 
• All changes must be characterized by a unique serial 
number. 
• At each change request it is necessary to record the 
corresponding date and the name of the applicant. 
• All software changes must be accompanied by 
documentation updates. 
In case where urgent changes are required, it is necessary 
to ensure the following: 
• Keep to a minimum the changes that will be 
performed. 
• The modified files must be monitored.  
• The Security Officer must be informed.  
• Irrespectively of how urgent are the modifications, 
they must be tested before they are incorporated in 
the live system. 
After any kind of modifications on the live system it is 
necessary to re-test system security. To this end the security 
officer must monitor the effectiveness of the security 
mechanisms after the modification took place. 
 
4) 
Secure Data Management 
Data should be categorized according to the protection 
they need, as derived from the risk analysis or assessment of 
the head of Information System. The following categories 
have been identified: 
• Top secret: information and critical data of the 
Information 
System 
that 
any 
disclosure 
or 
unauthorized modification will have direct impacts 
on the operation. 
• Confidential: information and data that is important 
for seamless operation and should be subject to strict 
controls and protected. 
• Sensitive: information and data that is subject to 
legislation on protection of personal data. Disclosure 
of this data requires specific permission / license. 
• Reportable: information and data that can be 
disclosed. 
The requirements of information security and the way 
data is processed vary according to the category of 
information. It is necessary to specify the authorized data 
recipients, according to the above classification. Data 
processing must ensure procedural and technical resources 
that can be attributed to a specific individual. Therefore, all 
critical operations will be accessed in a strictly personalized 
way. 
 
5) Recording actions / events and intrusion prevention  
Incidents of failure or non-routine functions of hardware 
or/and software, should be recorded and evaluated in 
relation to the operation that they support. Critical 
application systems should exhibit real time alarm systems. 
If there is a risk of invasion by external systems, intrusion 
detection and prevention systems should be in place. 
Systems will record the suspicious actions for the invasion 
and react automatically if this is dangerous for the security 
of the Cloud Provider. Proven invasions activate alarm 
system in real-time. The log files should be protected from 
loss or intentional corruption. The logs will be inspected by 
authorized personnel from time to time to highlight events / 
actions that endangered the Service Provider. 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
6) Handling security incidents 
A procedure for reporting faults and general security 
incidents is mandatory. There should be documented 
procedures that will ensure the timely and effective response 
to the occurrence of a security incident. This framework 
should include: 
• The roles and responsibilities to be undertaken. 
• Recorded evidence of what happened. 
• Rescuing electronic material proving the breach (e.g., 
unchanged medium). 
• The process of identifying the cause of the break up. 
• The process of recovery. 
 
7) Access control and resource use 
A strict registration process should be in place. As a 
minimum it should support the following: 
• The access rights are determined through a rigorous 
registration process. 
• The new system users are required to submit an 
application in order to obtain an account. 
• The application contains the elements of the 
applicant's position and the department to which she 
belongs. 
• The application is signed by the user and her 
supervisor and is forwarded to the IT director. 
• The rights granted are always appropriate for the 
purpose that they serve. 
• Inspections must be conducted by the Security 
Officer. 
• If a user changes responsibilities and requires a new 
set of usage rights, she should request it through a 
new application. 
• When a user is given a new set of usage rights, old 
rights he should be removed. 
• Users should take care of the safe use of their 
accounts. 
• The idle time of a workstation should be limited. 
After some time of inactivity, workstations should 
lock (e.g., password protected screen saver). 
Regarding the use of system resources it is necessary to 
keep a list of all IT resources (hardware, software and 
documentation) and to record the classification level of each 
resource. 
Furthermore an Access Control Policy is necessary for 
controlling access to the resources of the Information 
System. The access control policy should exhibit the 
following:  
• The access policy setting takes into account the 
principle of « need to know» (need-to-know). 
• Users can use only the applications and the resources 
needed to perform the tasks associated with their 
position. 
• The use rights assigned to each user category are 
inspected at least once every six months, with the 
responsibility of IS Security Officer to ensure that it 
is not given more rights than necessary. 
• A copy of the password of the system administrator 
account must be kept in a safe place. The access to 
stored passwords should be controlled. 
• System administrators should use different passwords 
for administrative accounts and the accounts they use 
as ordinary users.  
• The exercise of rights of access users will be 
monitored and controlled in order to avoid the abuse 
of rights.  
 
8) 
 Compliance with regulatory requirements  
It is necessary to comply with existing legal and 
regulatory framework. Specifically: 
• Monitor all legal and regulatory requirements and 
examine how they can be satisfied.  
•  Notification of the Data Protection Authority for 
keeping personal data. 
• If records of sensitive data are kept, permission from 
the Data Protection Authority is necessary. 
• Description of procedures to ensure the fulfillment of 
legal obligations for use hardware / software, ie the 
necessary licenses. 
• Employ the necessary measures for protecting critical 
data from loss, destruction and unauthorized 
amendment 
in 
accordance 
with 
legislative 
requirements. 
• Employ the necessary measures to ensure data 
protection and privacy as required by laws and 
regulations. 
• Monitor and comply with all existing technical 
standards.  
 
9) Inspection systems 
Determine all audit requirements in accordance to the 
existing legal and regulatory framework, as well as the 
procedures for controlled access to inspection tools in order 
to avoid damage, loss or misuse. 
 
10) Protection of surveillance system 
Access to the tools of IS surveillance shall be controlled. 
Specifically: 
• Access to the monitoring tools should be restricted to 
authorized persons. 
• Ensure that maintenance contractors will not have 
access to surveillance tools. If they need some data 
they should be provided by the system administrators 
according to the need-to-know principle. 
• Restrict the access rights of the administrators in 
order to ensure that they will not be able to remove or 
change registration details of their own actions. 
• In order to facilitate correct monitoring, the clocks of 
different systems must be synchronized. 
 
 
11) Supervision and control 
Audit trails and event logs must be recorded in order to 
support the identification of violations or attempted 
violations and scrutinizing every suspicious incident. To this 
end the following are necessary: 
• To maintain monitoring data for all systems 
supporting multi-user access.  
• To use special software for managing these files.  
• To record the use of privileged functions.  
• To record system startup. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
• To record failed attempts.  
• To record binding energy (log-on).  
• To record disconnect actions (log-off).  
• To record changes in access rights and use.  
• To record the basic data for each suspected case.  
• To record the user identifiers (User IDs).  
• To record the time and the time of the event.  
• To record the type of the event.  
• To record the files accessed.  
• To record the identity of the station.  
• To record the state of the data before and after the 
changes.  
• A copy of the audit data files must be kept in back up 
media (back-up). 
• Data must be kept at least for a period of three 
months. 
In 
systems 
that 
manage 
classified 
information, data must be retained for the period 
specified by the national safety regulations.  
• Copies are kept in a safe place, so to prevent any theft 
or sabotage.  
• Access to log files is prohibited in those that do not 
have privileges (administrative rights).  
• Log files should be protected from potential disaster.  
• There should be integrity checks in place.  
• Log files should be tested at least once a year.  
• If the space available for log files reaches 75% of its 
storage capacity, an alarm must be produced.  
• Inform users which of their activities are recorded by 
the system. 
• Analyze logs of actions and events. 
• Monitor the creation of accounts with elevated 
permissions.  
• Identify deviations from normal use of system 
resources (e.g. unusually large number of prints from 
a user). 
• The system automatically notifies the Security 
Officer when it detects certain suspicious events. 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Cloud Computing is a very promising technology that 
helps companies reduce operating costs while increasing 
efficiency. Even though Cloud Computing has been deployed 
and used in production environments, security in Cloud 
Computing is still in its infancy and needs more research 
attention. This paper reviews the potential threats for the 
Software-as-a-Service Model (SaaS), in an attempt to assist 
cloud providers identifying the security requirements and 
securing the environment that they offer. 
We claim that by linking each threat to the security 
measures that can be utilized for eliminating it, and in turn, 
with the security rules that are necessary for the 
implementation of the security measures, a Security Policy 
for cloud providers that clearly addresses the specific threats 
can be defined.  The aforementioned correlation / linking is 
provided indicatively, for only one of the identified threats. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] National Institute of Standards and Technology, systems, 
“Guide for developing security plans for federal information 
systems”, vol. 800-18, February 2006, [Online]. Available 
from:http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-18-
Rev1/sp800-18-Rev1-final.pdf/, [accessed December 2013]. 
[2] Divers S. - SANS Institute, "Information Security Policy A  
development Guide for large and small companies", 
November 2007, pp. 43-44. 
[3] Svantesson D. and Clarke R., “Privacy and consumer risks in 
Cloud Computing", Computer Law and Security Review, vol. 
26, 2010, pp. 391-397. 
[4] Kshetri, N., “Privacy and security issues in Cloud Computing: 
The role of institutions and institutional evolution”. 2012, 
Bryan School of Business and Economics, The Univ. of  
North Carolina at Greensboro, NC27402-6165,USA.  
[5] Hone K., Eloff J. H., “Information security policy: what do 
international information security standards say?”, Proc. of the 
8th European Conference on Information Warfare and 
Security, Computers and Security, vol. 21, Issue 5, 2002, pp. 
402- 409. 
[6] Mellet P.and Grance T., “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing”, NIST, 2011, Special Publications 800-145. 
[7] Dikaiakos, Katsaros M.D., Mehra D., Pallis P. and Vakali G, 
“Cloud Computing Distributed Internet Computing for IT and 
Scientific Research”, IEEE Press 2009, vol. 13, Issue: 5, pp. 
10-13. 
[8] European Network and Information Security Agency (Enisa), 
“Cloud Computing Benefits, risks and recommendations for 
information security”, November 2009.  
[9] Arnold S., “Cloud Computing and the issues of privacy”, July 
2009, KM World, pp.14-22 
[10] Whitepaper, A, “Enterprise Cloud Computing: Transforming 
IT”, Platform Computing, viewed 13 March 2010, pp.6.  
[11] Global Netoptex Incorporated, “Demystifying the cloud. 
Important opportunities, crucial choices”, 13 December, 2009, 
pp. 4-14., [Online]. Available from: http://www.gni. 
[12] Kuyoro S.O., "Cloud Computing Security Issues and 
Challenges", Proc. International Journal of Computer 
Networks (IJCN), 2011, vol. 3, Issue: 5. 
[13] KavithaV. and Subashini S.,“A survey on security issues in 
service delivery models of cloud”, International Journal of 
Network and Computer Applications, January 2011, vol. 34 
Issue 1, pp.1-11 
[14]  Brodkin J., “Gartner: Seven cloud- computing security risks”, 
NetworkWorld, April 2013, [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.idi.ntnu.no/emner/tdt60/papers/Cloud_Computing
_Security_Risk.pdf 
[15] Okuhara M. et al- FUJITSU, “Security Architecture for Cloud 
Computing”, vol. 46, no 4, October 2010, Sci.Tecch.J., 
pp.397- 402 ]. 
[16]  Min Y., Shin H., Bang Y., “Cloud Computing Security Issues 
and 
Access 
Control 
Solutions”, 
Journal 
of 
Security 
Engineering, February 2012, vol. 9, no2. 
[17] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Cloud 
Computing Synopsis and Recommendations”, May 2012, 
Special Publication 800-146. 
[18] Gellman R., “Privacy in the Clouds: Risks to Privacy and 
Confidentiality from Cloud Computing”, World Privacy 
Forum 
February 
2009, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/12805751/ 
Privacy-in-Cloud-
Computing-World-Privacy-Council-Feb-2009, 
[accessed 
November 2013]. 
[19] Chadwick W.D. and Fatema K., "A privacy preserving 
authorisation system for the cloud", November 2012. 
[20] European Network and Information Security Agency, “Cloud 
Computing 
benefits, 
risks 
and 
recommendations 
for 
information security”, 2009. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
 
[21] Morsy M. Al., Grundy J. and Müller I., “An Analysis of the 
Cloud Computing Security Problem”, Proc. APSEC 2010 
Cloud Workshop, Sydney, Australia, 2010. 
[22] Karadsheh L. “Applying security policies and service level 
agreement to IaaS service model to enhance security and 
transition ”Computers & Security, vol. 31, Issue 3, May 2012, 
pp. 315-326. 
[23] Cheng F., and Lai W., “The impact of Cloud Computing 
Technology on Legal Infrastructure within Internet-Focusing 
on the Protection of Information Privacy”, Proc International 
Workshop on Information and Electronics Engineering, 
Elsevier 
Ltd 
Press 
2012, 
vol.29, 
pp.241-251, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.proeng.2011.12.701 
[24] Vaquero M., Rodero-Merino L., and Moran D., “ Locking the 
Sky: A Survey on IaaS Cloud Security Computing”. Springer. 
Press, January 2011, vol. 91, Number 1, pp. 93-118. doi: 
10.1007/s00607-010-0140-x 
[25] European Commission. “Official Journal of the European 
Union On Data protection guidelines for the Early Warning 
and Response System”, 9 February 2012 L 36/31. 
[26] Pearson S. and Charlesworth A., “Accountability as a Way 
Forward for Privacy Protection in the Cloud”, HP 
Laboratories HPL-2009-178, Proc. 1st CloudCom, Beijing, 
Springer LNCS Press, December 2009.  
[27] European Commission, “Safequarding Privacy in a Connected 
World: A European Data Protection Framework for the 21th 
Century” COM (2012), 25 January 2012, article 9 final 
Brussels. 
[28] Jaeger P.T., Lin J. and Grimes J.M., “Cloud Computing and 
Information Policy: Computing in a Policy Cloud?”, 
Forthcoming in the Journal of Information Technology and 
Politics (ITI 2008), vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 269-283. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-362-9
ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

