Towards a Multidimensional Model for Terrorist Attacks Analysis and Mining
Firas Saidi
RIADI Laboratory
National School of Computer Sciences, Manouba,Tunisia
e-mail: firas.saidi@ensi.rnu.tn
Zouheir Trabelsi
College of Information Technology, UAE University, Abu Dhabi, UAE
e-mail: Trabelsi@uaeu.ac.ae
Henda Ben Ghezala
RIADI Laboratory
National School of Computer Sciences, Manouba,Tunisia
e-mail:henda.benghezala@riadi.rnu.tn
Abstract— The number of terrorist attacks have grown steadily
in recent times, causing dire human and material damages.
Analyzing potential terrorism data is without doubt an
indispensable task, not only to understand these terrorist
events, the terrorist implicated actors, their communities and
their operation methods and tactics, but also to predict future
attacks. However, terrorist events are commonly conducted
differently and rarely fit the models of conventional attacks.
Thus, terrorist events are usually hard to analyze, mine and
investigate. In this paper, we propose a multidimensional
model,
named
Terrorist
Data
Warehouse
(TerDW)
for
allowing terrorist investigators to perform interesting and
specific analysis for decision-making objectives. Practically,
while consulting gathered information relative to specific
terrorist attacks, such as attacks’ locations, dates, used
weapons, and implicated attackers, investigators can query the
proposed data warehouse (TerDW) using multidimensional
queries. The proposed model is based on consistent dimensions
and measures. Terrorist attacks data are extracted from the
Global Terrorism Database (GTD), a well-known database
that includes information about terrorist events that took place
from 1970 to 2017. Queries examples have been conducted to
evaluate the efficiency of the proposed model. The queries’
results demonstrate clearly that the proposed model allows
investigators to carry out more appropriate multidimensional
analysis, investigations and decisions.
Keywords- Terrorist Attack; GTD; TerDW; MDX; OLAP
analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Terrorist organizations try to multiply their malicious
activities and to change their tactics, especially with the
emergence of Web accessible devices. In fact, investigators
are trying to gather useful information about these groups to
devise a prevention strategy. Many researchers on terrorism
constructed very interesting data sets about terrorist incidents
around the word such as: Global Terrorism Data Base, John
Jay and ARTIS Transnational Terrorism Database (JJATT),
and Chicago Project on Security and Terrorism [1].
Thus, analyzing potential data related to terrorist events
is
without
doubt
an
indispensable
task,
not only
to
understand the terrorism phenomenon, terrorist implicated
actors, their operation methods and tactics, but also to predict
and prevent future attacks.
However, terrorist events are commonly conducted
differently and rarely fit the models of conventional attacks.
Thus, terrorist events are hard to analyze, mine and
investigate.
To
overcome
this
issue,
we
propose
a
multidimensional model, named Terrorist Data Warehouse
(TerDW), for allowing terrorist investigators to perform
interesting and specific analysis to help their decision-
making. Practically, data gathered about terrorist attacks and
incidents such as attacks’ locations, dates, used weapons, and
implicated
actors
are
interesting
to
be
visualized
as
multidimensional queries’ results for decision- making goals.
TerDW model includes consistent dimensions and indicators
to analyze terrorist data extracted from the GTD database
[2]. Interesting queries examples performed using TerDW
are discussed in this work.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes
related works on terrorist groups and activities identification
and analysis. Section 3 presents and discusses the proposed
framework architecture. In Section 4, the multidimensional
model TerDW is discussed in details. Section 5 discusses
how TerDW can be used for OnLine Analytical Process
(OLAP) analysis and presents results of queries examples.
Section 6 discusses the advantages and limitation of the
proposed model. Section 7 concludes the paper and outlines
perspectives for future research works.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Various
research
works
focused
on
the
detection,
analysis and mining of terrorist organizations and their
malicious activities. These works are categorized into two
approaches, namely Social Networks Analysis (SNA)-based
approaches and hybrid approaches [1].
In [3], the SNA methodology was applied on the Jemaah
Islamiyah cell that was responsible for the Bali bombings in
2002. Furthermore, an intelligent analysis framework was
proposed to understand the structure of such a cell and to
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-729-0
ICIMP 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

predict with real time analysis the outcomes of these terrorist
subgroups.
In
[4],
the
authors
studied
Al
Qaeda
network
characteristics and activities. In fact, the authors argued that
Ben-Laden occupied a central position within the Al Qaeda
network based on the computation of some measures.
The work in [5] presented a list of techniques that may
analyze new summaries of terrorist attacks from the GTD
database. The authors emphasized the use of text mining to
extract critical concepts from free text. In a second phase,
they used different learning algorithms including Naive
Bayes, decision tree and support vector machine, to learn the
terrorism incident, and especially, to detect its types from the
news.
In [6], the authors proposed a dimensional model used in
analyzing cybercrime data. Furthermore, they presented
some interesting queries and the types of cybercrime analysis
that can be performed based on the proposed model.
In [7], the authors introduced a theoretical framework
which has two aims: first, to discover criminal organizations
in networks issued from phone calls records and, second, to
help investigators to analyze their structure and to discover
hidden roles and relationships. Thus, this work contributes to
terrorist network visualization from mobile phone calls and
to community detection and analysis.
In [8], the authors introduced a technique for terrorist
network destabilization based on two main steps, namely,
first, communities detection and, second, the analysis of
these groups by the identification of key actors and potential
links.
III.
TERRORIST DATA WAREHOUSE (TERDW)
MODEL
In order to analyze terrorist attacks and incidents, we use
a multidimensional model of data warehouse. Practically, we
describe the methodology used to design the TerDW model.
In fact, we refer to the well-known methodology of Kimball
[9] to design the proposed Data Warehouse. Indeed, this
process follows four main steps, as shown in Table I.
A fact table operates with dimensions and holds the data
to be analyzed. A dimension table stores data about the ways
in which the data in the fact table can be analyzed.
Furthermore, we note that dimensions and measures of the
multidimensional model are inspired from the GTD data
base structure [2].
Figure 1 describes the proposed TerDW model, which is
a galaxy model with two fact tables, namely Terrorist
incident and Terrorist attack tables. Practically, the Terrorist
attack table is used to analyze attacks, while the Terrorist
incident table is used to analyze crimes at each incidence
level.
We note that the Galaxy schema (Figure 1) is a Data
Warehouse model, which contains two or more fact tables
sharing some dimension tables. Sharing dimension tables can
reduce database size, especially where shared dimensions
have many possible values.
The proposed model can be exploited for decision
making by investigators and terrorism specialists.
We identify two facts, namely, Terrorist Incident fact
and Terrorist Attack fact, used to analyze terrorist events
following different axis, i.e., dimensions and using different
computed values, i.e., measures.
TABLE I. KIMBALL METHODOLOGY FOR TERDW
MODEL IMPLEMENTATION
#
Steps
Description
1
Select the business
process
Our business process is
terrorist attack investigation.
2
Declare the grain,
which establishes
exactly what a single
fact table row
represents
In the Global Terrorism
Database (GTD) [2], there are
two types of terrorist attacks,
namely: incident and attack.
The incidence is a suspicious
activity that may or may not
result in a terrorist attack.
Facts: Terrorist Incident (F1)
and Terrorist Attack (F2).
3
Identify the
dimensions used to
analyze the fact table
Dimensions: Date, Attacker,
Perpetrator organization,
Location, Incident
information, Attack
information, Weapon, Target
(victim), Demographic and
Social information.
4
Identify measures of
the fact table
Measures: Total number of
fatalities, Number of
Perpetrator Fatalities, Total
Number of Injured, Number of
Perpetrators Injured, Value of
Property Damage (in USD),
Total Number of Hostages/
Kidnapping Victims, Hours of
Kidnapping / Hostage Incident,
Days of Kidnapping / Hostage
Incident, Total Ransom
Amount Demanded, Total
Ransom Amount Paid, Number
Released/Escaped/Rescued
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-729-0
ICIMP 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

Figure 1. Galaxy Terrorist Data Warehouse (TerDW) schema
IV.
TERRORIST ATTACKS ANALYSIS PROCESS
In this section, we present the process of terrorist attacks
analysis in Figure 2. We apply the Extract Transform Load
process on GTD database. Data are loaded on a TerDW,
which is used to analyze and mine terrorist attacks based on
various dimensions.
Investigators can ask the OnLine Analytical Processing
(OLAP) cubes [10] constructed from the TerDW and can
perform multidimensional analysis or apply data mining
techniques in order to extract valuable knowledge about
terrorist attacks and their related dimensions. Practically, the
data warehouse is powered by data from GTD data base [2].
Indeed, data are extracted, transformed and loaded using an
open source as Extract Transform Load (ETL) tool.
Figure 2. Terrorist attacks analysis process
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-729-0
ICIMP 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

V.
OLAP ANALYSIS OF TERRORIST ATACKS
In this section, we present some multidimensional
analysis based on TerDW to help investigators in predicting
terrorist attacks and destabilizing terrorist cells (see Figure
3).

Figure 3. Investigator’s decision making process
Based on the dimensions and measures defined in Figure
1, many interesting Multidimensional Expressions (MDX)
(queries) can be executed to analyze data of terrorist attacks
data. Figure 4 presents an example of MDX query which
aims to extract the total number of injured and rescued (Total
Number and Rescued Number) of 2011 and 2016 attacks
(Date dimension) in Africa (Location dimension) from
TerDW-1 OLAP cube (includes Terrorist Attack fact).
SELECT
{ [Measures].[Total Number of
Injured], [Measures].[Number Rescued] },
{[Date].[Attack
information].[Year].&[2011],[Date].[Att
ack information].[Year].&[2016],}
ON
1
FROM [TerDW1]
WHERE ([Location].[Africa])
Figure 4. Example of MDX query
The TerDW
model allows
investigators to
submit
interesting queries on specific terrorist events and actors
(Figure 5).
Investigators can have an idea about establishments and
targeted persons, most frequent attacks, used weapons,
periods
of
frequent
attacks,
demographics
and
social
information
of
attackers,
information
about
terrorist
organizations and can quantify different human and material
damages.
Figures 6, 7 and 8 present the results of three queries
applied on the proposed TerDW data model. Figure 6 shows
the most frequent terrorist attack’s type that took place
between 1995 and 2012. The most frequent attacks are
bombing and explosion, armed assault and infrastructure
attacks respectively.
Figure 7 shows statistics about the most targeted victims
during the terrorist attacks in the GTD database. Military,
police and business actors are the most targeted in terrorist
attacks.
Figure 5. Queries samples for OLAP analysis
Figure 6. Terrorist attack type frequency between 1995-2012
Figure 7. Most targeted victims in terrorist attacks
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-729-0
ICIMP 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

Figure 8 shows the percentages of the most used weapons
during terrorist events in the GTD database. Firearms,
explosive/bombs and dynamite and incendiary devices are
the most used weapons in terrorist attacks, respectively.
Figure 8. Most used terrorist weapons
Thus, investigators can extract data and statistics about
terrorist attacks, used attack tools and techniques and the
attack actors. In fact, terrorists might be key actors of cells or
criminal organizations and might not belong to any terrorist
community. This information is important to identify the
well-known ‘’lone wolves” actors [11]. A “lone wolf” actor
is a terrorist who prepares and executes terrorist acts alone,
i.e., outside of any command organization and without the
assistance of other terrorist actors. In fact, this type of
terrorists is very dangerous since it is difficult to identify and
to predict.
Implementation and Evaluation
In order to experiment the proposed multidimensional
model, we used SQL Server BI framework. We created
TerDW following the conceptual model described in the
paper. After that, we used the SQL Server Integration
Services (SSIS) as Extract Transform Load (ETL) tool. From
the GTD database, data were extracted, transformed and
loaded to the TerDW. For OLAP analysis, we used SQL
Server Analysis Services (SSAS) tool.
Investigators can create various interesting reports in an
easy manner using SQL Server Reporting Services (SSRS).
VI.
DISCUSSION
The
proposed
Data
Warehouse
TerDW
is
a
multidimensional model used for terrorist attacks and
incidents analysis. Practically, investigators can query the
TerDW to answer various interesting questions about
attacks, attackers and used techniques. Indeed, this pack of
information can be indispensable to understand terrorist
organizations following different axes, i.e., dimensions, their
topology, tactics and operation methods.
However, this model is limited and cannot provide deep
information and correlations using simple MDX queries.
Hidden relationships between data can provide interesting
knowledge. Thus, TerDW must be valorized by data mining
techniques in order to extract valuable knowledge and to
discover new information not only used to understand
terrorist events, but also to predict future attacks.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a data warehouse (TerDW)
which is a multidimensional model for decision-making. We
explained how TerDW can be used for OLAP analysis to
help investigators in their work not only to understand the
terrorism phenomenon, but also to predict others related
criminal events. Furthermore, we detailed how this model
can answer some interesting questions and we presented
different results of the aforementioned OLAP queries. As an
interesting perspective of this work, data mining techniques
can be used to extract valuable knowledge about terrorist
events and actors from TerDW. Moreover, a machine
learning process can be applied on GTD to predict future
attacks.
REFERENCES
[1]
F.
Saidi,
Z.
Trabelsi,
K.
Salah
and
H.
B.
Ghezala.
”Approaches to analyze cyber terrorist communities: Survey
and challenges”. Computers Security, vol. 66, pp. 66-80,
2017.
[2]
G. LaFree and L. Dugan, “Introducing the global terrorism
database”, Terrorism and Political Violence, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 181-204, 2007.
[3]
S.
Koschade,
“A
social
network
analysis
of
Jemaah
Islamiyah:
The
applications
to
counterterrorism
and
intelligence”, Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, vol. 29, no. 6,
pp. 559-575, 2006
[4]
E. Wu, R. Carleton, and G. Davies, "Discovering bin- Laden’s
replacement in al-Qaeda, using social network analysis: a
methodological investigation”, Perspectives on Terrorism,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57-73, 2014.
[5]
S. Nizamani and N. Memon, “Analyzing News Summaries
for Identification of Terrorism Incident Type”. Educational
Research International, vol. 3, no. 4, 2014
[6]
I. Y. Song, J. D. Maguire, K. J. Lee, N. Choi, X. Hu and P.
Chen, “Designing a data warehouse for cyber crimes”,
Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, vol. 1, no.
3, pp. 1, 2006.
[7]
J. J. Xu and H. Chen. ”Fighting organized crimes: using
shortest-path algorithms to identify associations in criminal
networks”. Decision Support Systems, vol. 38, no. 3, pp.473-
487, 2004.
[8]
D. Anggraini, S. Madenda, E. P. Wibowo and L. Boumedjout,
“Network Disintegration in Criminal Network”, In 11th
International
Conference
on
Signal-Image
Technology
Internet-Based Systems (SITIS), pp. 192-199, 2015.
[9]
R. Kimball and M. Ross, “The data warehouse toolkit: the
complete guide to dimensional modeling”, John Wiley &
Sons. 2011.
[10] T. Niemi, M. Niinimäki, J. Nummenmaa and P. Thanisch,
“Constructing an OLAP cube from distributed XML data”, In
Proceedings of the 5th ACM international workshop on Data
Warehousing and OLAP , pp. 22-27, 2002.
[11] P. J . Phillips, “Lone wolf terrorism”, Peace Economics,
Peace Science and Public Policy, vol. 17, no. 1, 2011.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-729-0
ICIMP 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

