ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
29
Autonomous Alternative Complex with Remote Data Collection
Alexey Lagunov, Anton Belugin, Ksenya Semkiv
Department of Computer Science and Electronic Devices
Northern (Arctic) Federal University named after M.V. Lomonosov
Arkhangelsk, the Russian Federation
emails: a.lagunov@narfu.ru, d.belugin@narfu.ru, k.semkiv@narfu.ru
Abstract — The northern areas have a strategic importance for
the Russian Federation. Enormous energy resources are
concentrated
in
the
circumpolar
region.
The
successful
development
of
the Arctic
region requires
high quality
telecommunications systems. The power supply for these
communication devices is an acute issue that needs to be solved
in the remote areas of the Arctic. Satellite communication is
available up to a latitude of 80 North. As a rule, the supply of
satellite equipment needs diesel generators. In this paper, we
propose the use of hybrid power energy sources, such as solar
panels and wind turbines. Remote monitoring of such system
makes it possible to understand the running processes, while
generating electricity with the help of alternative sources of
power. On the grounds of the analysis of available battery
charge controllers from solar panels and wind turbines, the
remote acquisition system was developed and tested in the
Arctic. The system is based on a single-board computer
RaspberryPI.
Keywords-Alternative Energy; Remote Data Collection; Wind
Turbine; Solar Panel.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The northern territory plays a significant role in the
economy of the Russian Federation. Currently, the Russian
Federation has as priority the development of information
and telecommunication systems. The Arctic has enormous
reserves of important mineral resources, especially oil and
gas, which are strategically necessary for the dynamic
development of the Russian economy, the provision of the
country
safety
in
mineral
resources
and
to
protect
geopolitical interests.
Within the mainland of the Arctic zone, there are a
number of major oil and gas provinces (PNC) and deposits.
Considering the initial recoverable resources in the Yamal-
Nenets Autonomous District, the largest oil districts (which
have totally over 100 million tons) are: the Timan-Pechersk
one, with initial total recoverable hydrocarbon resources of 6
billion tons in fuel equivalent (the fourth place in Russia),
Russian province, Novo Portovsoe, Sutorminskoye, North
Komsomolskoe Tarasovskoe, Kharampurskoye oil deposits.
More than 90% of the gas deposits in the district are unique
and
large
-
Urengoiskoye,
Yamburgskoye,
Bovanenkovskoye, Zapolyarnoe, Kharasaveyskoye, South
Tambey with their reserves from 1 to 10.6 trillion m [1]
(Figure 1).
The initial aggregate hydrocarbon resources of the Arctic
continental shelf make about 100 billion tons of fuel
equivalent, 80% of which is gas. The main hydrocarbon
resources (approximately 70%) are concentrated in the
Barents, Pechora and Kara Seas. The unique and large
Shtokman
Prirazlomnoe,
Leningrad,
Rusakovskaja
hydrocarbon deposits are located here. The commercial
development of fuel and energy of the Arctic shelf is going
to stabilize the dynamics of oil and gas production since it
compensates possible recession of production activity in the
continental deposits in the years 2015 - 2030. But this is
possible only if material, scientific and technical foundation
for the offshore oil and gas deposits development is
provided.
Figure 1.
Oil and gas provinces in the Arctic region of the Russian
Federation.
The
marine
transportation
system,
especially
the
Northern Sea Route, takes a special place in the transport
sector of the Arctic region. The shortest routes between
markets of northwestern Europe and Asian countries pass
through the Arctic zone. The increased transport activity in
the global economy for the development of transcontinental
transportation, the increase of oil and gas production on the
continental shelf of the Arctic, the improvement of the
internal and external transport needs, have all led to the
growth of the Northern Sea Route role and importance.
When using the Northern Sea Route instead of operating the
routes through the Suez and Panama Canals, the route from
Rotterdam to the port of Yokohama is reduced by 34%, to
the port of Shanghai by 23%, and to the port of Vancouver
by 22% [2].
The vast distances and high-latitude location of the
Arctic make it difficult to build communication systems in
this
area.
The
organization
of
a
telecommunication
infrastructure in the Arctic region meets both technical and
organizational
difficulties.
Having
analyzed
foreign

ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
30
publications about projects focused on providing satellite
communications in the Arctic region, it can be concluded
that many countries are looking for the best way to
implement
systems
for
satellite
communications
management in the Arctic (Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Architecture of the Arctic Communications System.
The number of scientific and technical papers and articles
on this subject in international journals and conferences has
increased by several times over recent years. It shows this
topic became urgent. However, a single technical solution
does not exist. The majority of projects relate to the creation
of the space segment based on satellite in elliptical orbits,
but, in some publications, the authors rightly point out strong
influence of the Earth's radiation belts, which can cause the
reduction of the satellites viability [3]. The "Tundra" orbit
type is offered as an alternative [3]. We should note that,
today, the circumpolar region has only one Iridium system
working adequately, but, for personal communications, this
system has many limitations in bandwidth [4].
The other systems, such as “Globalstar”, and especially
Inmarsat, are available only up to a latitude of about 70°
North [4]. Any other geostationary systems have the same
limitation, although there are some examples of their usage
up to 80th latitude (Table. I presents estimates of fading in
the radio link). The low-orbit systems, like “Orbcomm” [5]
or the Russian system "Gonets" [6], which is planned to be
deployed, actually are not communication systems, but data
transmission systems working like "email".
TABLE I.
FADING OF THE RADIO LINK FOR THE CLIMATE ZONE IN
THE WESTERN PART OF THE BARENTS SEA
Frequency,
GHz
Elevation angle of 2-3, dB
Elevation angle of 5, dB
Precipitation
Without
precipitation
Precipitation
Without
precipitation
30
26
22
15
12
14
8
6,4
4,7
3,4
6
2
2
1
1
The Russian market of satellite communications is based
on the resources of the orbital groups named FSUE (Federal
State Unitary Enterprise) "Satellite Communications" and
Public corporation "Gazprom Space Systems". The first
group is represented by 11 communication satellites; the
second one is represented by the two satellites "Yamal". The
stable connection area with geostationary satellites (elevation
angle of 5 degrees) is shown in Figure 3. The main types of
traffic are: spreading television and broadcast programs
according to broadcast zones; telephone lines and data
transmission; data exchange in enterprise and dedicated
networks; direct television and audio broadcasting; mobile
and fixed government bond (totally about 300 transponders).
Figure 3.
Stable connection area with the geostationary spacecraft
(elevation angle of 5 degrees.)
Satellite communication devices are low-power devices.
According
to
research,
the
maximum
possible
power
consumption is limited by 900 VA. Currently, for the power
supply of satellite communication devices in the Arctic,
diesel generators are commonly used; they consume quite a
lot of fuel and pollute the environment.
It was decided that the installation of the current power
supply of satellite communications be established at Cape
Desire of Novaya Zemlya archipelago (76°51' North latitude,
68°33' East longitude). There was no possibility to leave a
researcher at the installation place, so a remote acquisition
system was needed.
Data acquisition systems are essential to estimate the
potential of renewable energy sources. For instance, a large
quantity of data from different years is necessary to estimate
scenarios using renewable energy sources. These aspects
have an importance, mainly for developing countries, where
decentralized power plants based on renewable sources are in
some cases the best option for supplying electricity to rural
areas. Nevertheless, the cost of commercial data acquisition
systems is still a barrier for a greater dissemination of such
systems in developing countries [3]. A local web server (on
board) is constrained by lower memory limitations for
storage of large amounts of data. In addition, satellite
channels in the Arctic have very low bandwidth, so usage of
this method is not possible.
Hence, remote operators of renewable energy plants
connected to that local web server can view only limited data
[7]. The applied data is usually organized in text files, which
is inefficient. Hence, the development of an automated

ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
31
database is indispensable [7]. The monitoring
system
consists of a microcontroller-based unit to acquire interest
signals, while the collected data is transmitted to a database
server by a Ground Station Module (GSM) modem. The
GSM standard extends the effectiveness of the system
independently wherever the plants are placed, even far from
the electrical distribution network and from the traditional
and wired telecommunication systems. Due to the low cost
and diffusion of the GSM devices, the transmission system is
fairly cheap and it is expected to become even cheaper [8].
The collected data is further processed, stored on the disk
and displayed on the web page using the PHP language
(Hypertext Preprocessor). This method has the advantage of
a rapid data acquisition system development and provides an
easy-to-use graphical environment that permits system
operators
to
process
the
collected
data
easily.
The
maintenance operator presence in a decentralized renewable
energy plant should be as low as possible, considering the
moderate value of the energy produced [8]. This way, the
purpose of the present paper is to allow such plants to be
remotely monitored and controlled by a remote operator.
II.
ARCTIC EXPEDITION
In recent years, the study of the northern and Arctic areas
has been growing very fast. The number of weather stations,
scientific bases, oil and other extractive companies building
settlements around the deposits is increasing. Any living
infrastructure
requires
energy,
and
the
increased
consumption of petroleum products is not economically
feasible. The wind and solar energy application technologies
have already been considered to be used successfully for a
long time in the southern areas. The northern areas impose
serious constrains on the use of such systems, especially in
the Arctic region.
Our team began to study the possibility of introducing
alternative energy systems on scientific, weather, oil and
other stations in the Arctic region. During the laboratory tests
for the project, various "green" energy systems were
installed in Novaya Zemlya archipelago and in the Zhizhgin
Island, which is situated in the White Sea. As these systems
have low efficiency and are not stable enough to work, the
construction of full-power stations for livelihoods is a rather
expensive and unprofitable task. Therefore, in our studies, all
the systems were created to provide people with a permanent
connection to the mainland. Due to the temporary need of
communication with the mainland and because the amount
of energy consumed by the communication systems does not
exceed 200 watts at peak load, the use of such systems is
considered appropriate.
The project targets is to:

determine the most appropriate hardware configuration
for the conditions of the Far North;

provide
a
stable
working
condition
of
the
communication system and configure the system so that
it has maximum autonomy.
At this stage, this is considered a research project.
Therefore, one of the priorities is to obtain the maximum
possible amount of information about how the constructed
systems work. Thus, it is necessary to design a hardware and
software
system
for
the
collection,
processing
and
presentation of data on the alternative energy system
functioning in the Far North.
III.
DESCRIPTION OF THE GENERAL SCHEME
Our team has been conducting studies on this subject for
two years. The initial step was to install the first test
alternative energy complex in Novaya Zemlya archipelago.
During the first laboratory tests, we decided to use the
interfaces provided by the equipment suppliers without any
modification. The system was installed near the research
station that had a satellite communication channel. The
network had a direct connection to the controller of the solar
panels and the data was obtained through the server inquiry.
Not only solar panels, but also a wind turbine of horizontal
type was delivered to the archipelago. Unfortunately, we
were unable to read the data from the wind turbine
controller. According to the results of the first laboratory
tests, the following conclusions can be drawn:

it was determined that the use of horizontal type wind
turbines is impractical in the Far North due to the gusty
wind, quickly changing the direction of movement;

the data collection should be performed by the system
and not by the server, since, in the first case, the service
traffic required for communications protocol demands
many expenses for the satellite channel;

the data obtained using standard controllers was found
to
be
insufficient;
it
requires
additional
sensors
installation.
Based on the above conclusions, we assembled the second
installation. In the complex, we decided to use wind turbines
of vertical type. However, this controller did not have the
ability to be connected directly to the network. It was
necessary to use the digital output RS232 to receive
telemetry data from the controller. Based on the previous
experience, we decided that the data will be collected not by
the server only, but by the complex itself. This method
helped to solve several problems at once. Firstly, we
accessed the data from several devices. Secondly, there was
a possibility to obtain and collect data even in the absence of
the Internet connection with the system. Thirdly, there were
additional opportunities to collect and send data, as well as to
control the whole system.
SBC Raspberry Pi [9] was chosen as a device for data
collection. The main advantages for us were, firstly, its low
energy consumption, which helped to save the system
efficiency in the conditions of very strong battery discharge,
and, secondly, it has a complete operating system at a
sufficiently low cost and small size of the device. All these
factors helped to reduce the development time and improve
the whole system reliability.
After the second installation was tested, the new technical
requirements to both the system and the software were
determined. In the Arctic region, the quality of satellite
communication is extremely unstable because of various
reasons. Therefore, we faced the problem of data safety
during the process of transmission. While operating, the data
was revealed to be obtained after a long delay and was

ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
32
incomplete. For further studies, it was necessary to increase
the reliability of the data transmission through the unstable
Internet connection.
According to the results of the second laboratory test, the
remote acquisition system was completed and implemented
into the third complex of "green" energy. We finalized the
technological
infrastructure
of
the
complex.
As
the
equipment from other manufacturers was used, the number
of devices requiring data collection was increased. The final
system consists of the two wind turbines [11] and the four
solar panels [12] that must be operated by the two hybrid
charge controllers [13]. Each controller is connected to one
wind generator and two solar panels. The system also
includes four batteries [14] and an inverter [15] converting
voltage from 12 to 220 V and managing energy flows in the
system. Thus, the operation of the complex can be divided
into three stages:

Conversion of solar and wind energy into electrical
energy;

Buffering the electrical energy;

Consumption of the accumulated energy.
The individual devices are responsible for each stage of
the system. Therefore, all devices that compose the complex
can be divided into three groups.
The first group of the devices, which are responsible for
the conversion of “green” energy into electrical energy,
includes charge controllers. The devices of this group
provide data on direct work of the energy sources and
display battery charge during their charging. In terms of the
data obtained from these devices, we can, on one hand,
receive
information
about the
performance
of
energy
conversion devices as a complex, and, on the other hand,
watch each of them separately. The second group is
represented by the storage batteries of various power that are
able to accumulate electric charge. The third group consists
of the inverters and provides information about energy
consumption and the state of the battery during the process
of their discharge. Thus, we have so far covered the stages of
energy generation and energy consumption. The stage of
energy buffering is the only one left uncovered. A device to
control batteries was developed based on the microcontroller
ATMega8 [16]. Using this, we were able to control the
voltage of each battery in the system. Monitoring of the
current flowing through each section of the circuit became
possible by connecting current sensors to each battery. Thus,
we could follow the status of each battery separately to react
to possible failures in time. The circuit system described
above is shown in Figure 4.
While designing the monitoring system, we had to solve
some problems. In places where it was planned to install
such systems to communicate with the "main land", the
satellite channel is mostly used. The GSM channel is
available in exceptional situations. However, both of them
are quite expensive, so we needed to minimize the amount of
data traffic, but not at the expense of the volume of data
transmitted. In addition, it should be noted that the satellite
channel is sufficiently sensitive to weather conditions and so
disconnections can take place. Therefore, it was essential to
provide a guarantee of either data delivery or delayed
delivery.
We chose the JSON document format [17] as an internal
data format for data storage and its transmitting to the
mainland. This data format is very suitable for computer
processing and, unlike XML, is compact enough. The binary
data formats were rejected as the JSON documents appeared
to be more compact than the binary ones [17].
As mentioned above, all the data from the system of the
alternative energy is read using the single-board computer
RaspberryPI. It takes readings from all the devices connected
to it twice a minute, forming a "snapshot" of the entire
system at any given moment in time. The collected data is
added to the daily log, which is stored in a separate file.
Originally, we considered the asynchronous data collection
from each device with a separate entry in the log because
each parameter has its own validity interval. The weak point
of this method is the difficulty to carry out correlation of the
readings, since we still have to register all the data at one
time.
Figure 4.
System circuit.
The problem of the unstable channel was solved by using
the synchronization system Rsync [18] through the SSH
connection
to
the
server. The
embedded
Rsync
data
Socket
Inverter MAP SIN
Energy Pro 48 V
SBC Raspberry Pi,
OS: Debian
Batteries DELTA GX 12-200
Charge
controller
MANBLAN
Solar panel 240W
24V
+
-
Wind turbine
MANBLAN 600W
48V
~ 3 Phases
Charge
controller
MANBLAN
Solar panel 240W
24V
+
-
Wind turbine
MANBLAN 600W
48V
~ 3 Phases
control devices based on ATMega 8
GPIO
USB-COM
RS232
RS232
Battery
Battery
Battery
Battery

ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
33
compression algorithms significantly reduced the amount of
the
data
traffic.
The
streaming
compression
of
SSH
connection did not give such results. Rsync also allowed us
to solve the problem of disconnection as it has the algorithms
of the file difference transmission.
Once the data is delivered to the server, the documents
are sorted out and the sorted data is carried over into the
single database. PostgreSQL [19] was decided to be the
database due to its ability to use multiple programming
languages in store procedures [19]. Based on the incoming
data, the database automatically counts and updates daily,
hourly and monthly reports for each installation point. This
data transmission is presented in Figure 5.
Figure 5.
Data traffic pattern.
IV.
RESULTS
This project resulted in designing the hardware and
software complex that allows remote monitoring of the
alternative energy systems through the data collection from
the maximum number of sources. Such sources can include
not only ready devices such as charge controllers but also a
variety of additional current and voltage sensors. The
configurability of such systems explains the integration of
the scaling feature of several devices and sensors that need
monitoring. If necessary, the system supports connection to
some additional devices, for example, a portable weather
station. Our laboratory tests were run in the vicinity of the
meteorological stations, so we did not need such data.
However, if these systems are required to be installed in
remote areas, the weather information is vital to control the
entire system.
Data transmission takes a special place in our system. We
took its design seriously. The foreground task was to ensure
a reliable transmission of the telemetry data and its safety.
According
to
the
research
results,
this
task
was
accomplished.
We generated a web-interface to control the system
operation. This interface allows the available data to be
viewed in a convenient form from each system designed by
our team. Currently, we can view the archival data obtained
from the solar panels located at Novaya Zemlya as well as
the data from the island Zhizhgin. The data received from
our recent tests is preparing to be published. The web-based
interface was originally built on the PHP framework Yii
[20]. However, for technical reasons, it was moved to a
python framework Django [21]. The main reason for
changing the framework was rather small amount of code if
case of using Django. One more reason was the number of
programmers in our team who know syntax of python so we
could support this product better and faster. The main
function of data-viewing was realized. We plan to increase
the functionality of the application to query the historical
data and to compare it in different variants. The Yii
framework screenshot is presented in Figure 6.
Figure 6.
Web-interface, created on the Yii Framework.
In general, on the grounds of the research results, it may
be concluded that the use of alternative energy systems in the
Arctic region is highly promising. However, the use of such
systems in the northern regions requires constant monitoring
and studying the effect of the weather conditions. These
scientific studies target long term testing. Presently, such
systems are rarely used in the North. We need to determine
how long they are able to work to be successfully and
efficiently used.

ICIMP 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-362-9
34
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
After tests, we can conclude that, in the conditions of the
northern latitudes, the use of horizontal wind turbines is not
suitable because of their instability to gusty winds. The
vertical wind generators show a better performance, but still
require some modifications to strengthen their structure.
During the summer, the wind turbines produce power stably.
However, their power depends strongly on the wind direction
and strength variability.
In the future, we plan to use horizontal wind turbines
along with vertical ones for a more stable work. Our last
research in data acquisition and representation shows better
results in case of using Zabbix as monitoring system [22].
While using this system, we had interesting results. But we
also experienced some problems in its performance and user
interface. In the future, we are planning to solve these
problems and use the system with our own interfaces.
REFERENCES
[1]
D.A. Dodin, A.N. Evdokimov, V.D. Kaminsky, “Mineral resources
Russian Arctic (condition, prospects, research areas)”, St. Petersburg.:
Science, 2007.
[2]
V.I. Pavlenko, ‘Arctic zone of the Russian Federation in the system of
national interests” // Arctic: ecology and economy, № 4 (12), 2013,
p.16-25.
[3]
Aleksandre
Akimov,
Vitaly
Poleshchuk,
Denis
Shevchuk,
“Spacecraft service area modeling for constellations based on
“Tundra””,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.tssonline.ru/articles2/sputnik/modelirovanie-rabochey-
zony-sputnikovoy-gruppirovki-sformirovannoy-na-orbite-tundra-
spacecraft-service-area-modeling-for-constellations-based-on-tundra
2014.01.28.
[4]
TEleSat Systems, “How to choose a satellite phone - Globalstar,
Thuraya,
Iridium,
Inmarsat”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.tecckom.ru/satellite_choose.php 2014.02.21.
[5]
ORBOCOMM,
“ORBCOMM”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.orbcomm.com/ 2014.03.18.
[6]
Gonets,
“Gonets
leostat
system”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://english.gonets.ru/Page206.html 2014.03.18.
[7]
S.C.S. Jucá, P.C.M. Carvalho and F.T. Brito, “A low cost concept for
data acquisition systems applied to decentralized renewable energy
plants”, Sensors, 2011, vol.11, pp. 743-756.
[8]
M. Benghanem, “A low cost wireless data acquisition system for
weather station monitoring”, Renewable Energy, 2010, vol. 35,
pp.862–872.
[9]
Raspberry Pi Foundation, “Raspberry Pi”, [Online]. Available from:
http://www.raspberrypi.org/ 2014.03.17.
[10] S. Rosiek and F. Batlles, “A microcontroller-based dataacquisition
system for meteorological station monitoring” Energy Conversion
and Management, 2008, vol. 49, pp. 3746-3754.
[11] Alpek Co LTD, “MBWP-400W User manual”,. [Online], Available
from:
http://manblan.ru/files/manual_MBWP_400W-EN.pdf
2013.12.27
[12] Alpek Co LTD, “Qsolar specification”, [Online]. Available from:
http://manblan.ru/files/solarmodule.pdf 2014.01.15.
[13] Alpek Co LTD, “User manual MBWS-B1”, [Online]. Available from:
http://manblan.ru/files/MBWS-B1%20manual%20eng.pdf
2014.01.17.
[14] Delta battery, “DELTA Batteries for communication systems”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.delta-
batt.com/upload/iblock/548/Delta%20GL12-200_eng.pdf 2014.01.17
[15] “MAC "ENERGIA" SINE inverter”, [Online]. Available from:
http://macenergia.com/ 2014.01.23.
[16] Atmel Corporation, “ATMega 8 datasheet”, [Online]. Available from:
http://www.atmel.com/images/atmel-2486-8-bit-avr-microcontroller-
atmega8_l_datasheet.pdf 2014.01.18.
[17] “JSON”, [Online]. Available from: http://json.org/ 2014.03.23.
[18] W.
Davison,
“rsync.samba.org,”.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://rsync.samba.org/examples.html 2014.02.15.
[19] The
PostgreSQL
Global
Development
Group,
“PostgreSQL:
Documentation: 8.0: PL/pgSQL - SQL Procedural Language”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.0/static/plpgsql.html 2014.02.21.
[20] Yii Software LLC, “Yii PHP Framework: Best for Web 2.0
Development”,
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.yiiframework.com/ 2014.02.12.
[21] Django Software Foundation, “The Web framework for perfectionists
with
deadlines
|
Django”,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.djangoproject.com/ 2014.04.03.
[22] Zabbix
SIA,
An
Enterprise-Class
Open
Source
Distributed
Monitoring
Solution,
[Online].
Available
from: http://www.zabbix.com/ 2014.05.20.

