Performance Evaluation of an Authentication
Scheme for IoT Networks
Chi Ho Lau
Department of Electrical Engineering
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, PRC
email: chihlau-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
Sammy Chan
Department of Electrical Engineering
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR, PRC
email: eeschan@cityu.edu.hk
Abstract—With the wide application of Internet of Things
(IoT), the security of IoT systems has attracted signiﬁcant
research interest. In particular, since many devices can be con-
nected to an IoT network, they face an authentication issue, which
may be exploited by attackers to break into them. Recently, we
have proposed an authentication scheme based on the blockchain
technology to authenticate IoT devices before they can join an
IoT network. In this paper, we develop a stochastic model to
evaluate the efﬁcacy of the authentication scheme. Numerical
results indicate that the proposed scheme signiﬁcantly increases
the probability that a device stays in a healthy state.
Index Terms—IoT, blockchain, authentication.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) has brought tremendous im-
provement to our quality of life. Machines, devices, sensors
can connect and communicate with each other via networks.
Together with existing Internet standards, IoT devices, such
as wireless cameras and innumerable sensors, provide services
for information transfer, analytics, and applications [1].
The security of IoT has already attracted the attention of
many researchers [2]. It is not a trivial issue that may only
affect an individual household or company. For example, the
pitfall of the IoT network may be exploited by the attackers
to break into the smart city infrastructure [3]. Among all
security concerns of IoT, the authentication of IoT devices is
a well-known issue. Since many IoT devices are welcomed
to join the network, how to make sure all of them are
legitimate is an important issue. A straightforward solution
is to scrutinize all IoT devices. One may suggest a system
like a vehicle registration system or mobile phone registration
system to keep a registry of the owners of these IoT devices.
However, the number of IoT devices is far more than the
number of vehicles or mobile phones. This solution may cost
tremendous administration overhead and discourage users to
use IoT devices.
In [4], we proposed a solution to solve the problem of
authenticating devices in IoT networks. This solution utilizes
blockchain technology to store the identity information of
authenticated devices. Based on its characteristics, blockchain
is used to create the digital identiﬁcation of IoT devices and
authenticate IoT devices. A private blockchain is generated in
each IoT network to isolate the network from outside access. It
highly increases the security level of the IoT network and the
integrity of information collected by IoT devices. This paper
evaluates the performance of our proposed authentication
scheme by considering a stochastic threat model. Numeri-
cal results indicate that the proposed scheme signiﬁcantly
increases the probability that a device stays in a healthy state.
II. OVERVIEW OF AUTHENTICATION SCHEME
The distributed property of blockchain makes malicious
tampering or forgery difﬁcult. Also, every transaction within
the network is signed by a private key that provides strong
protection against forgery. Therefore, blockchain technology
is suitable to store identity information.
Fig. 1. Overview of the overlay network.
The ﬁnal target of our scheme is to construct a secure
overlay network that includes authenticated devices only. The
overlay network separates authenticated devices and unauthen-
ticated devices within the same Local Area Network (LAN).
All authenticated devices discard trafﬁc outside the overlay
network, which protects them against internal and external
attacks. Figure 1 shows the resulting overlay network after
using our proposed scheme. More than one overlay network
can be established within a LAN.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-070-4
ICIMP 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

The authentication within the overlay network is supported
by a coin-based blockchain system. The blockchain database
stores transactions which can be used to determine the balance
of an account characterized by an account number. The ac-
count number is a public key of an IoT device which also acts
as the device identiﬁer (Id). A device identiﬁer will be used to
encrypt the communication among the authenticated devices
in the overlay networks. To join the overlay network, a device
needs to be authenticated by a Hardware Authenticator (HA).
HA is an ofﬂine device kept by the system administrator. This
device has three functions, namely, generating genesis block,
signing Authentication Transaction (AT), and generating new
blocks.
The communication within the overlay network is encrypted
based on the identity information provided by the blockchain
system. The encryption and decryption are carried out by a
ﬁrewall module within the IoT device. All trafﬁc will be en-
crypted automatically without any modiﬁcation to the working
programs. The ﬁrewall provides network-layer encryption. For
details of the authentication mechanism, readers are referred
to [4].
III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
It is assumed that an attacker targets an IoT network and
is interested in salvaging all protected data on each device.
These data are protected by the account management module
of the OS. It is assumed that physical access to those IoT
devices is not available for the attacker. The attacker is
unauthenticated and is not in the same network as the IoT.
It is also assumed that no internal attack from another device
within the IoT network is possible. Therefore, the attacker
can only attack IoT systems through the Internet. Exploits
on software packages could sometimes expose protected data,
such as the exploits on database software that could grant
access to the protected folder. However, this access is limited
to the workspace of the software package because a properly
implemented OS contains an application within a sandbox.
Unfortunately, the attacker can still inject malicious programs
using these software exploits to perform privilege escalation
and gain full control of the system.
Healthy 
SH
Partially  
Compromised  
SP
Fully 
Compromised  
SF
γH
γP
γF
εP
εF
βp
βF
Fig. 2. Security model based on Markov chain.
Figure 2 describes our security model. Consider an IoT de-
vice is running at a healthy state (SH) and is not compromised
by any attackers. With probability γH, this device stays in
this healthy state. The attacker keeps attacking this device
which could change the state to others, including partially
compromised (SP ) and fully compromised (SF ). The fully
compromised state must be transitioned from the partially
compromised state. Such a process cannot be reversed because
it is irrational to turn a fully compromised system into a
partially compromised one. Both compromised statuses can
be recovered and return to a healthy state (e.g., by patching).
A partially compromised state recovers with probability εP
while the fully compromised state has probability εF . The
probability for a healthy device to transition to a partially
compromised state is βP and to transition from partially
compromised to fully compromised is βF . However, both
compromised states can remain in the same state. The partially
compromised state has a probability γP to stay that way while
a fully compromised state recovers probability γF . Assuming
the state can only have a one-step transition, the transition
probability matrix of the above Markov chain is:
P =


γH
βP
0
εP
γP
βF
εF
0
γF


If we put a Markov chain {Xn} in the long run such
that n → ∞, the probability for each state j will converge
to a limiting probability (πj). These converged probabilities
are considered as the steady-state probabilities. The limiting
probabilities are not affected by the initial condition X0. It
can be shown that this model is a regular Markov chain when
βP , βF and εF are > 0. To estimate the long-term behavior
for the IoT device, we must assume the probability of being
compromised > 0.
A set of system equations can be set to determine the
limiting distribution (π0, π1, π2):
γHπ0 + εP π1 + εF π2 = π0
(1)
βpπ0 + γP π1 = π1
(2)
π0 + π1 + π2 = 1
(3)
Equations (2) and (3) can be rewritten as:
π1 = βP π0
1 − γP
.
π2 = 1 − π0 − βP π0
1 − γP
.
By substituting π1, π2 into Equation (1)
π0 =
εF (1 − γP )
(1 − γP )(1 − γH + εF ) − βp(εP − εF )
Since for each state i P∞
(j=0) Pij = 1, therefore, βP = 1−γH.
By solving equations (2) & (3):
π0 =
εF (1 − γP )
εF (1 − γP ) + βp(εF + βF )
π1 =
βP εF
εF (1 − γP ) + βp(εF + βF )
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-070-4
ICIMP 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

π2 =
βP βF
εF (1 − γP ) + βp(εF + βF )
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Kuhn et al. categorize computer vulnerabilities into 18
groups [5] based on the US National Vulnerability Database
(NVD) [6]. To estimate the security enhancement of the pro-
posed scheme, this paper further groups them into categories
based on the potential impact on the system: partially com-
promise vulnerability (VP ) and fully compromise vulnerability
(VF ). Table I shows these two groups of vulnerabilities.
By using the previous number of vulnerabilities, the possible
values of βP and βF can be estimated. Assume the average
exploitation rate for Vp and VF be EP and EF , respectively.
Therefore, βP = Ep VP and βF = EF VF .The limiting distri-
bution is computed using the above information. πj consists
of four parameters: βP , βF , γP , εF .
p[n] = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 0.99
Let p[n] be a series of probabilities that are used to substitute
into the model as the above parameters respectively to de-
termine the possible outcome of πj. To compute the value
of πj, we substitute p[n] to one of the parameters one a
time while setting the other three parameters as 0.5. The last
element (0.99) is added to demonstrate the behavior when the
parameters are approaching the limits.
The proposed scheme can use the software ﬁrewall to ﬁlter
unauthenticated communication. However, some of the vul-
nerabilities cannot be resolved because the proposed scheme
relies on them. Three partially compromise vulnerabilities
including conﬁguration, cryptographic issues, authentication
issues, and all fully compromise vulnerabilities cannot be
stopped by the proposed scheme.
Misconﬁguration can still paralyze the proposed scheme
because the privileged user can deactivate the software or
avoid starting it at the beginning. The proposed scheme relies
on cryptography to authenticate and secure communication.
If the problem resides in cryptographic issues, the proposed
scheme will not work properly. Authentication is the key to
the proposed scheme; it will fail if it cannot do authentication
properly. The proposed scheme would use a different VP based
on this property. Table II shows the values of VP for the cases
of using and without using the proposed scheme, respectively.
The calculation of the probability for the proposed scheme
will be using the new VP . Therefore, the model should produce
a higher value for π0, which is the probability for a healthy
state while reducing the probability for a partially and fully
compromised state.
Figure 3 shows the probability of a healthy state at the
steady-state of the Markov process without applying the
proposed scheme. All parameters are displaying a decaying
behavior when p[n] increases except εF . γP has the fastest
decaying rate which is polynomial decay. βP and βF are linear
decay. The range of π0 when replacing βP with p[n] is larger
Fig. 3.
Estimated probability of healthy state (SH) without the proposed
scheme.
than βF , which also decays faster. This phenomenon indicates
that the healthy state is more sensitive to the probability
of partially compromise vulnerability than fully compromise
vulnerability. Parameters including βP , βF , εF yield 0.28 to
0.83 and 0.51 on average. The overall average probability for
staying in a healthy state without using the proposed scheme
is 0.48.
Fig. 4. Estimated probability of healthy state (SH) with the proposed scheme.
Figure 4 shows the probability of a healthy state at the
steady-state of the Markov process by applying the proposed
scheme. Compared to Figure 3, the probability of staying in
a healthy state is greatly increased. Parameters including βP ,
βF , εF yield 0.81 to 0.95 and 0.91 on average in the result.
The decaying behavior is similar except γP . Between 0.9 and
0.99, the decay is greater than the previous data point. This
further indicates the healthy state is more sensitive to the
probability of partially compromise vulnerability than fully
compromise vulnerability. The proposed scheme increased the
overall probability of staying in a healthy state from 0.48 to
0.89, which is an 85% improvement.
A similar analysis can be carried out for the partially
compromised state and fully compromised state. Here, we
summarize the results in Table III, which shows the compar-
ison of the average probability for a healthy state, partially
compromised, and fully compromised state for an IoT system
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-070-4
ICIMP 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

TABLE I
VULNERABILITY COUNTS AND CATEGORIES FROM 2008-2016
Type of vulnerability
Count
Percentage
Level
Possible attack
Format String Vulnerability
110
0.294709
VF
- Execute arbitrary code
Conﬁguration
195
0.522438
VP /VF
- Exposure of conﬁg ﬁle
- Execute arbitrary code
OS Command Injections
208
0.557267
VF
- Execute arbitrary code
Race Conditions
377
1.010047
VF
- Privilege escalation
Link Following
389
1.042197
VF
- Privilege escalation
Credentials Management
589
1.578031
VF
- Privilege escalation
Cryptographic Issues
779
2.087073
VP / VF
- Information leakage
- Password leakage
Authentication Issues
920
2.464836
VP / VF
- Information leakage
- Privilege escalation
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF)
1161
3.110516
VP
- Information leakage
Numeric Errors
1199
3.212324
VF
- Privilege escalation
Code Injection
1545
4.139317
VF
- Execute arbitrary code
Path Traversal
1686
4.51708
VP
- Information leakage
Information Leak / Disclosure
2939
7.874079
VP
- Information leakage
Input Validation
3763
10.08171
VP / VF
- Information leakage
- Execute arbitrary code
SQL Injection
3828
10.25586
VP / VF
- Information leakage
- Execute arbitrary code
Permissions, Privileges, and Access
4661
12.48761
VF
- Privilege escalation
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
6220
16.66443
VP
- Information leakage
Buffer Errors
6756
18.10047
VF
- Privilege escalation
Total
37325
100
VP = 57.57
VF = 67.83
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF VP .
Without proposed scheme
With proposed scheme
VP
0.5757
0.0507
Average improvement
80.43%
with and without our proposed authentication scheme. The
proposed scheme increases the probability of a healthy state
for the IoT device to 0.89. The probability of being partially
compromised or fully compromised is reduced to 0.10.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF STATE PROBABILITIES.
Without
proposed
scheme
With
proposed
scheme
Difference
Average π0
0.4852
0.8911
+83.66%
(Healthy state)
Average π1
0.2989
0.0625
-79.09%
(Partially compromised state)
Average π2
0.2158
0.0463
-78.53%
(Fully compromised state)
Average
improvement
80.43%
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed a stochastic threat model
for IoT systems, which is used to evaluate the efﬁcacy of
our earlier developed authentication scheme. Numerical results
have demonstrated that when the authentication scheme is
deployed, the security level of IoT systems is signiﬁcantly
increased.
REFERENCES
[1] “Smart networked objects and internet of things,” Association Instituts
Carnot, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[2] R. Giuliano, F. Mazzenga, A. Neri, and A. M. Vegni, “Security access
protocols in IoT capillary networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 645657, June 2017.
[3] A. Greenberg. (2015) Hackers remotely kill a jeep on the highway with
me in it. [Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-
remotely-kill-jeep-highway
[4] C. H. Lau, K. Y. Yeung, and F. Yan, “Blockchain-Based Authentication
in IoT Networks,” 2018 IEEE Conference on Dependable and Secure
Computing (DSC), 10-13 Dec, 2018, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, pp. 1-8.
[5] R. Kuhn, M. Raunak, and R. Kacker, “It Doesnt Have to Be Like This:
Cybersecurity Vulnerability Trends,” IT Professional, vol. 19, no. 6, pp.
66-70, 2017.
[6] National Vulnerability Database, http://nvd.nist.gov 2017
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-070-4
ICIMP 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

