New Probabilistic-Based Broadcasting Algorithm for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
 
 
 
Muneer Bani Yassein 
Department of Computer Science 
  Jordan University of Science and Technology 
Irbid 22110, Jordan 
masadeh@just.edu.jo 
Lina Abu-Fadaleh 
Department of Computer Science 
  Jordan University of Science and Technology 
Irbid 22110, Jordan  
Lanooo86@hotmail.com 
Abstract- Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) have a lot of 
features, like the autonomous terminal that means each node 
can function as both host and router. Also, the operations on a 
MANET 
are 
distributed 
because 
of 
the 
absence 
of 
infrastructure and central control of the network. The 
topology of such network changes dynamically because of the 
mobility of the nodes. Nodes use Multi-hop routing to 
guarantee the delivery of messages. A MANET suffers from a 
set of problems. Most of them arise from the nature of the 
network itself, since it use wireless communication which is 
already suffer from the high bit error rate and hence the data 
exchanged through MANET is more likely to interference, 
fading, and subjected to noise. In this paper, a new scheme for 
reactive routing protocols is proposed to decrease the effects of 
the broadcast storm problem and to discover a more stable 
route to maximize the throughput of the network and minimize 
the average delay and the routing overhead. 
 
Keywords- MANET; Probabilistic-Based; AODV; NPBA. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs) are networks of 
mobile nodes that are connected through Multi-hop wireless 
links without any infrastructure. MANETs received more 
attention and became one of the significant areas in network 
world, because of the wide spread of new technologies such 
as laptops, and mobile phones [1][9]. MANETs are simply 
built without the need of any infrastructure, it consists of a 
number of nodes distributed over a geographical area that 
dynamically change their locations, they are rapidly 
deployed, self configured and the nodes are connected 
through wireless links. Due to the nodes mobility, the 
topology of such networks is rapidly changes [2][10]. 
MANETs could be stand alone network or connected to 
external networks (e.g., Internet). 
Ad Hoc network has special characteristics such as highly 
dynamic environment that make the conventional routing 
protocols not appropriate choice for these networks. The 
routing process is one of the most challenging aspects in 
MANET because of its limited resources, distributed 
operations, dynamic features and instable wireless links. It 
needs a routing process that constructs and maintains up-to-
date routes with minimum overhead and resources 
consumption [3][7]. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as follows: Section 2 reviews broadcast in 
MANETs. In Section 3, we present our proposed protocol. 
Then in Section 4, we analyze the broadcast based 
probabilistic scheme with different system parameters. 
Section 5 accommodates the simulation environment and 
analyze of our results, whereas Section 6 concludes this 
study. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Flooding [11] is the simplest static routing protocol. It 
does not need any information about the network topology 
to deliver packets from the source to the destination. When a 
node wants to send a packet, it transmits this packet to all its 
neighbors. Then each node that receives this packet for the 
first time retransmits it to all neighbors except the neighbor 
from which it was received. This process is continued until 
the packet reaches all nodes in the network. Each packet has 
a unique identifier that consists of the source address, a 
special sequence number used to prevent sending duplicate 
packets from the same node, and the destination address 
[12]. The main disadvantage of flooding is the consumption 
of the network resources because of the high traffic load it 
generates. On the other hand, it ensures that the packet 
reaches to the desired destination and gives a high packet 
delivery ratio. Such routing protocol is still used as a 
building block for other enhanced protocols, such as DSR 
[2], and AODV [12]. 
Distance Vector (DV) routing algorithms [8] are based on 
Bellman-Ford formula. Its concern is determining the cost to 
any node in the network. Each node maintains its routing 
table which contains information about best routes to every 
node in the network [11]. Different metrics used to calculate 
the cost between nodes, such as hop count, queue length, 
and delay. Nodes flood the cost information to neighbors 
periodically to update their routing tables. Then each 
neighbor uses this information to recalculate the costs by 
applying Bellman-Ford formula and comparing it with its 
local routes to choose the next hop with minimum cost to 
each destination.  The process is repeated every time new 
distance vector is received from any of the neighbors that 
cause a change in the node distance vector. The slow 
convergence of the routing information is the major 
drawback of DV algorithms [4]. 
45
ICIMP 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-125-0

In the Link State (LS) algorithm, each node has a 
complete view of all links in the network. A shortest path 
algorithm is used to determine the best path or route. The 
best route then is selected based on some metrics like link 
speed, number of hops, or traffic congestion. Upon topology 
change, a notification message is flooded to the whole 
network and each node updates its links state with the new 
information.  The efficiency of LS algorithms is decreased 
when the size of the network is increased. LS has a highly 
space complexity because each node stores information for 
all network elements. 
III. 
NEW PROBABILISTIC-BASED BROADCASTING 
ALGORITHM 
The New Probabilistic-Based Broadcasting Algorithm 
(NPBA) is an on-demand, broadcast-based; Ad Hoc route 
discovery protocol that is designed for MANETs. The main 
goal of this scheme is to minimize redundant broadcasts, 
and to increase the overall routing performance.  
NPBA solves the problem of probabilistic based protocol in 
sparse networks, where, in such networks nodes do not 
receive all broadcasts unless probability parameter is high. 
When probability is 1, this scheme is identical to flooding. 
So, NPBA adjusts the sending probability of broadcast 
packet according to certain parameters such as, network 
density. 
IV. 
DESIGN OF NPBA 
NPBA aims to find the best route with lowest cost while 
preserving network resources.  NPBA modifies the route 
discovery phase specifically the propagation of RREQ 
packets of the original reactive protocols. Other phases are 
the same as the original ones. To implement this scheme, a 
list of neighbors is required to keep track of the current 
neighbors of the node.  
Depending on the network topology, each node in the 
network is assigned a probability to rebroadcast the 
upcoming messages. When source node receives a broadcast 
message, it runs a broadcast procedure to decide whether to 
continue the broadcast process or to drop it. 
According to network topology, network is divided into 
dense and sparse areas. In dense area, nodes that are located 
in such area have a low sending probability to incoming 
broadcast messages. That is clearly minimizes the number 
of rebroadcast messages. This minimizes the opportunity to 
reach new sources in the network. But according to this 
scheme, nodes in dens area check neighbors periodically for 
any changes of neighborhoods information to ensure that the 
message is delivered correctly. This can be achieved by 
adjusting the sending probability. 
      In Spars area, nodes that are located in such area have 
high sending probability to incoming broadcast messages. 
However, if the nodes sense the possibility to reach more 
nodes it adjusts the sending probability.  
 The propose algorithm is outlined in figure 1. NPBA 
consist 5 steps as follows: in step1 and periodically, each 
node broadcasts a HELLO message containing its address 
and list of neighbors.  In step 2 and upon receiving the 
HELLO message, a node updates its routing tables and list 
of neighbors. At any time, the list of neighbor for a 
particular recipient (Y) will contain the addresses of all (Y’s) 
1-hop neighbors. Then source nodes will run a small 
procedure for comparing list of neighbors to adjust the 
forwarding status of the node. After that, in step 3 and 4, 
each node now adjust its sending probability according to 
the result of step 2. 
 When a source node S wishes to communicate with a 
destination D, and there is no known route to this 
destination, it prepares a RREQ message. 
Upon receiving the RREQ message in step 5, nodes will 
propagate the RREQ according to their probability values, 
where nodes that in their forwarding status will have higher 
opportunity to propagate the upcoming messages. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An outline of the new probabilistic-based algorithm 
 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Simulation experiments are carried out on T6400-2 GHz 
computer with Intel Core 2 Duo processor, and 4 GB RAM. 
The operating system is Fedora 10. Network Simulator (NS) 
version 2.29 was used [13].  
NS is discrete even simulator targeted at networking 
research, it provides substantial support for simulation of 
TCP, routing, and multicast protocols over wired and 
wireless networks, it is heavily used in Ad Hoc networking, 
it is widely used in a academia due to its open source model.  
Algorithm:  New Probabilistic-Based Broadcasting Algorithm  
Input:      Ad Hoc network with n nodes 
Output:   route between nodes with minimum cost 
1. 
Periodically, every HELLO-INTERVAL broadcast 
a HELLO message, which is already attached 
with list of friend. 
2. 
On Receiving a HELLO message:  
1. 
Update list of neighbor, so that it will contain 
1-hop neighbor address for all neighbors. 
2. 
Compare lists of neighbors, to find new 
destinations. 
3. 
Update forwarding status 
If there are new destination could be 
reached 
      Forwarding status = true; 
Else 
      Forwarding status = false; 
3. 
Determine the probability of sending according to 
network topology, where dense area has low 
probability, and sparse area has high probability. 
4. 
Check Forwarding status with the probability and 
adjust sending probability according to neighbor’s 
information. 
5. 
Upon receiving an RREQ message, the following 
actions take place: 
If the recipient node is the destination 
     
 
 Done 
46
ICIMP 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-125-0

NS supports many protocols for wireless network such 
AODV, DSR, and others. The proposed scheme is 
compared with AODV. AODV [6] was chosen due to the 
high delivery ratio it scores and low overhead comparing to 
other routing protocols. 
     Each run for the simulation lasts for 900 seconds, each 
simulation scenario within same experiment is repeated 30 
times, and their average value is taken to increase accuracy. 
To study the effects of network density, we used 50, 75, 
100, and 125 nodes that are randomly distributed in 600 X 
600 m2 simulation area. And for deep measurement and 
judgment of our scheme we try different node speeds ( 5, 
10, and 20 m/s). Also different pause times were used (0, 2, 
and 4 seconds).  
 
    The simulations conducted have revealed that a typical 
value for a sparse region in a network size of 50 nodes 
contains Ns =4 nodes while a medium region contains 
Na=16 nodes and a dense region contains Nd =30 nodes. As 
a consequence, there are, on average, 16 rebroadcasts in 
highly adjusted probabilistic flooding when the rebroadcast 
probability, for example, is set at 
1p =0.7, 
2
p =0.35 and 
3
p =0.25, respectively. 
 
    To study the performance of NPBA and compare it 
against AODV, two different types of simulation scenarios 
are conducted: 
 Density Scenarios: is to study the effect of change in 
node density on the performance metrics for different 
protocols. 
 Mobility Scenarios: is done by varying the maximum 
speed of the nodes to see how it affects the behaviors of the 
protocols in terms of some measured metrics. 
Our first scenario is to experiment 50, 75,100, and 125 
nodes, with speed =5m/s, packet rate equal to 4 
packets/second, and pause time= 0. 
       The simulation results presented in Figures 2, 3, 4, and 
5 illustrates the routing packets, packet delivery ratio, 
normalized load, and average-end-to-end delay.   
      From Figure 2, it is clear that our protocols achieve 
major enhancement in terms of reducing the routing 
overhead for all speed values. This is due to the fact that our 
protocol tends to control flooding by selecting only a subset 
of nodes to retransmit packets. This reduction of 
retransmission saves many control packets from being sent, 
and this reduces the overall routing overhead. Figure 3 
shows also that as the number of nodes increases, the 
overhead encountered by AODV increases as well. This is 
because the large number of nodes, the more control packets 
need in order to manage the whole networks. For small 
number of nodes, NPBA outperform AODV at most about 
32.57 %. The enhancement becomes less significant when 
number of nodes is large, which reaches about 14%. 
 
 
Figure 2. Overhead vs. Number of nodes, with speed =5  
 
     The overhead reduction achieved in Figure 2 is reflected 
positively in the network normalized load as can be seen in 
Figure 2. For low density networks, the performance of 
AODV is close to that of NPBA. However, for high density 
networks, NPBA outperform AODV, but in general as 
network density increased, the normalize load also 
increased, due to the huge number of control packets need to 
be exchanged, and the contention and collisions of these 
packets.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Normalized load vs. Number of nodes, with speed =5  
  
      Figure 4 displays the packet delivery ratio for the two 
protocols and shows the superiority of our prtocol for all 
numbers of node. This is an expected result since the 
network overhead decreased and hence number of collisions 
is decreased, which maximize the chance of delivering 
packets to its destination.  
 
 
 
47
ICIMP 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-125-0

 
Figure 4.  Packet delivery ratio vs. Number of nodes, with speed =5   
 
      Figure 5 depicts the average end-to-end delay achieved 
by our protocol in comparison with that achieved by 
AODV. As the Figure shows clearly, our protocol 
outperforms AODV, which is expected as the end-to-end 
delay metric includes delays caused by route discovery, 
queuing and retransmissions at the MAC level. Due to the 
fact that the routing overhead of our protocol is low and 
minimized, the packets are no longer needed for a long 
period of time, in addition, since the number of rebroadcasts 
is reduced, this will reduce the average end-to-end delay. 
 
 
Figure 5. End-to-End Delay vs. Number of nodes, with speed =5   
       The simulation results presented in Figures, 6and 7 
illustrates the routing packets, packet delivery ratio, 
normalized load, and average-end-to-end delay.   
Figure 6 shows that with increasing number of nodes, the 
overhead of AODV result from number of routing packets 
increases significantly. It is obviously that NPBA 
outperforms AODV moderately in all number of nodes with 
average of enhancement equal to 25.94%. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Overhead vs. Number of nodes, with speed =10  
 
      In Figure 7 it can be noticed that at low density, our 
protocol and the AODV have almost identical normalized 
load values. However for high density values, our protocol 
become evidently superior with 46% enhancement score. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Normalized load vs. Number of nodes, with speed =10  
 
     Figure 8 shows that for different network density and as 
the nodes density increases in the Ad Hoc network, the 
packets delivery ratio decreased. In addition, the Figure 
shows that increasing the number of nodes results in lower 
delivery ratio for all protocols compared.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Packet delivery ratio vs. Number of nodes, with speed =10  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, a new scheme of reactive routing protocols 
is proposed to decrease the effects of the broadcast storm 
problem and to discover best route with minimum cost to 
maximize the throughput and minimize routing overhead 
and the average end-to-end delay. The major contributions 
of our protocol are The NPBA is reliable broadcast-based 
protocols that avoid the negative attitude of simple flooding, 
which causes a very high overhead. We minimize number of 
redundant broadcast message, contention and collision by 
allowing only specific nodes to participate on broadcast 
propagation. For future works, it would be interesting to 
compare the performance of our proposed protocol with a 
dynamic probabilistic algorithm on a Dynamic source 
Routing protocol (DSR). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y.-C. Tseng, S.-Y. Ni, and E.-Y. Shih. Adaptive Approaches to 
Relieving Broadcast Storms in a Wireless Multi-hop Mobile Ad Hoc 
NETWORK. ICDCS '01, in proceedings of the 21st International 
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems; 2001. 
48
ICIMP 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-125-0

[2] 
S. Corson and J. Macker. Mobile Ad Hoc Networking (MANET”. 
IETF Internet Draft, http://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-manet-issues-
02.txt; 1999. [Online] [Accessed 2008   June]. 
[3] 
K.  Timo,  A. Christian, E. Stephan,  S. Christoph, and  S. Markus. 
The Scalability Problem of Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks and How to 
Solve it. In IEEE Wireless Communications Magazine; 2006. 
[4] 
Muneer Bani Yassein, Saher S. Manaseer and Abdallh .Al-Turani, “A 
Performance Probabilistic Broadcasting of Ad hoc Distance 
vector(AODV) using Fibonacci Increment Backoff Algorithm” , 25th 
UK Performance Engineering Workshop, Leeds, UK , July, 6-7, 
2009. 
[5] 
E. Royer and C. Toh. A Review of Current Routing Protocols for Ad 
Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks. IEEE Personal Communications; 
1999; 6(2): 46-55. 
[6] 
C. Chiang, H. Kuang, W. Liu, and M. Gerla. Routing in Clustered 
Multi-hop Mobile Wireless networks with Fading Channel. IEEE; 
1997. 
[7] 
G. Pei, M. Gerla, and X. Hong. lANMAR: Landmark Routing for 
Large Scale Wireless Ad Hoc Networks with Group Mobility. In 
MobiHoc ’00, Proceedings of the 1st ACM international symposium 
on Mobile Ad Hoc networking & computing; 2000; 11-18.  
[8] 
K. Gorantala. Routing Protocols in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. M.S. 
Thesis, Umeå University, Sweden; 2006. 
[9] 
A. Pirzada, M. Portmann, and J, indulska. Hybrid Mesh Ad Hoc On-
demand Distance Vector Routing Protocol. Australian Computer 
Science Conference (ACSC), Ballarat; 2007. 
[10] D. Johnson, D. Maltz, and Y. Hu. The Dynamic Source Routing 
Protocol for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (DSR). IETF Internet Draft, 
draft-ietf-manet-dsr-10.txt; 2004. 
[11] Muneer Bani Yassein, Sanabel Nimer, and Ahmad AL-Dubai. The 
Effects of Network Density of a New Counter-based Broadcasting 
Scheme in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. Proceeding of the 10th IEEE 
International Conference on Computer and Information Technology 
(CIT2010), 29 June – 01 July, 2010, Bradford, UK 
[12] S. Das, C. Perkins, and E. Royer. Ad Hoc On Demand Distance 
Vector 
(AODV) 
routing. 
IETF 
Internet 
Draft, 
http://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-manet-aodv-13.txt; 2003. [ Online] 
[Accessed 2008  October] 
[13] 
The 
Network 
Simulator 
Site. 
[Online] 
[Accessed 2011 
January].Available from URL, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
49
ICIMP 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-125-0

