Language-Independent Approaches to Detect Extremism and Collective Radicalisation
Online
Sebasti˜ao Pais
Computer Science Department
NOVA LINCS and UBI
Covilh˜a, Portugal
Email:sebastiao@di.ubi.pt
Irfan Khan Tanoli
Computer Science Department
University of Beira Interior
Covilh˜a, Portugal
Email:irfan.khan.tanoli@ubi.pt
Miguel Albardeiro
Computer Science Department
University of Beira Interior
Covilh˜a, Portugal
Email:miguel.albardeiro@ubi.pt
Jo˜ao Cordeiro
Computer Science Department
University of Beira Interior
Covilh˜a, Portugal
Email:jpaulo@di.ubi.pt
Abstract—Due to lack of regulation, a lot of user-generated
content reﬂects more closely the ofﬂine world than ofﬁcial news
sources. Social media have become attractive platforms for anyone
seeking independent information. Text mining and knowledge
extraction are also crucial issues, in particular, directed toward
social media and micro-blogging. The automatic identiﬁcation
of extremism and collective radicalisation require sophisticated
Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods, text mining tech-
niques, and resources, especially those dealing with opinions,
emotions, or sentiment analysis. The area of understanding and
detecting extremism and collective radicalism on social media has
a connection with sentiment analysis and opinion mining. The
main focus of this work is to provide the state-or-art to identify
extremism and collective radicalisation on social networks based
on user’s sentiment analysis, and to develop an unsupervised
and language-independent approach by relying on statistical and
probabilistic methods. This paper discusses few important case
studies related to the roots of radicalism, extremism detection,
and terrorism detection using sentiment analysis and present
machine learning models, and how these methodologies can be
exploited to develop our desire system.
Keywords–Natural Language Processing; Social Media; Ex-
tremism; Collective Radicalisation; Sentiment Analysis
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last few years, the advent of micro-blogging services
has been impacting people’s mind, communication, behavior,
and activities conduct. It is due to several factors, including the
use of convenience, and the lack of regulation, and the vast
amounts of user-generated contents that reﬂect more closely
the ofﬂine world than the ofﬁcial news source. Social media
and network have become an attractive platform for anyone
seeking independent information and eventually, more authen-
tic news. Recently, we have assisted the news about the ‘Yellow
vests’ or in French ‘Gilets Jaunes’ [1]. It began as a paciﬁc
manifestation, but later few extremist groups have joined the
manifestations that made it a violent protest as was in the news:
‘Absence of the progress of the movement, inexperience of the
demonstrators, the action of extremist groups, the forces of
higher duties’ [2]. In Portugal, we have witnessed some radical
events as few people were protesting against the actions taken
by the police on a tough neighborhood referred as ‘Bairro da
Jamaica’; there were few from an extremist group protesting
against the politicians, violently [3].
In social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube,
each cluster of posts, videos or tweets focus on a burst topic
that may constitute a potential threat. However, the majority
of clusters are harmless and represent casual, conventional or
expressive crowds as well as noisy data [4]. To identify acting
or protesting crowds on social networks, it is necessary to
understand the tone of language usage, e.g., slang, abusive,
jargon, formal, respectful etc., present in each cluster as well
as its network activity. Ultimately, a crowd is characterized by
its dominant emotions; it is the level of interaction and shared
contents. The work in [5] discussed the technique that can
be used to analyze the tweeter contents and detect the event
related to the contents.
Users use social networks for various purposes. Unfortu-
nately, few use it to spread distorted beliefs, negative opinion
about things like spreading terrorism, extremism, and radical-
ism [6]. Since mid-2015 Twitter has already deleted more than
125,000 accounts that were somehow linked to terrorism [7].
Researchers focus Twitter for sentiment analysis due to few
particular reasons: Twitter’s popularity as enormous numbers
of people continuously tweet on Twitter related to various
topics. These topics could be political, about sports, religious,
marketing, people’s opinions or friend’s conversations. Being
an updated huge repository of facts, opinions banter and
other minutiae, Twitter has received signiﬁcant attention from
business leaders, decision-makers, and politicians.
In this study, we aim to provide a theoretical review related
to extremism and collective radicalisation detection. Extrem-
ism is a vague term that can be undermined in three different
contexts [8]: Taking a political idea to its limits, regardless
of unfortunate repercussions, impracticalities, arguments, and
feelings to the contrary, and with the intention not only to
confront but also to eliminate opposition; intolerance towards
all views other than individual own; adoption of means to
political ends which disregard accepted standards of conduct,
in particular, which show disregard for the life, liberty and
human rights of others. radicalisation is a process by which
an individual or group comes to adopt increasingly extreme
political, social, or religious ideals and aspirations.
With our understanding, it is clear that extremism and
collective radicalisation has a direct connection with people’s
sentiments and opinions. There are many barriers to understand
extremism and collective radicalisation on the social network.
Among these challenges, one big challenge is to differentiate
between the users commanding this process and the users
talking about it. Hence, the main goal of this study is to
propose an effective system to detect extremism and collective
radicalisation on social media based on sentiment analysis. To
do so, our focus is on statistical and probabilistic methods
that can be used to develop an unsupervised and language-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

independent system.
The main contribution of this study is signiﬁcant for many
reasons. First, it covers three different research areas, i.e.,
extremism, collective radicalisation, and sentiment analysis,
and to provide a better understanding related to these areas.
Second, instead of just providing brief details of different
works for these areas, we analyzed three essential case studies
in-depth to help readers understand different approaches that
have been used for these ﬁelds. This angle could also help the
researchers who are familiar with speciﬁc techniques dedicated
to extremism and collective radicalisation, to exploit and
choose the appropriate one for their work. Third, this study also
present supervised, unsupervised, and language-independent
approaches proposed for extremism, collective radicalisation,
and sentiment analysis with brief details of the algorithms and
their originating references. This can help us to develop an
efﬁcient unsupervised and language-independent system for
extremism and collective radicalisation detection. Finally, the
survey is enhanced with models related to everyday NLP tasks,
and we discuss which one can be exploited for our desire
system.
In the following sections, we deeply review three different
works for extremism, radicalisation, and sentiment analysis
detection. First, we present a work that discusses the roots
of radicalism. Next, we analyze a work proposed for terrorism
detection based on sentiment analysis. Finally, another work
for sentiment detection on Twitter using hashtags. In section
III, we present a few proposed methodology. Section IV
overview few standard Machine Learning (ML) models. In
the end, we provide a conclusion and a future direction for
our ongoing work.
II.
MACHINE LEARNING CLASSIFIERS FOR EXTREMISM
AND COLLECTIVE RADICALISATION
radicalisation involves a movement towards the support or
representation of radical behavior(s). Radical behavior can be
viewed as ‘when it serves a speciﬁc purpose; it undermines
other goals that are important to most people’ [9]. At the same
time, collective radicalisation is deﬁned as a collective inter-
group process. People are not radicalized on their own, but
rather as part of a group and through the socially constructed
reality of their group by gathering people on the streets to show
their motive and protests against speciﬁc entity or entities.
However, sometimes these protests become violent.
A. The roots of radicalism
Fernandez et Al [10] proposed an innovative NLP and
Collaborative Filtering (CF) based approach for detecting
radicalisation on social networks, The different roots of radi-
calisation, i.e., micro-roots, meso-roots, and macro-roots, are
captured [11], and each user is represented through keyword-
based vector description. The approach presented in [10], is
sufﬁcient enough to detect and predict radicalism. On social
networks, the user either creates or posts the contents or shares
other people’s contents; the authors assumed that micro-roots
or meso-roots are captured from the user’s shared or created
contents. While macro-roots are captured that are external to
the given social network (links/URLs) and from other websites
or other social networks, and videos, etc. [10].
In [10], the authors used keyword-based vectors that in-
clude the user’s post(s). These vectors represent micro-roots
and meso-roots inﬂuences over users, and they are transformed
into n-grams (uni-grams, bi-grams, and tri-grams) [10]. Next,
the value of each n-gram in the micro-root user’s vector
is computed as the frequency of the n-gram in the user’s
post, and normalized by the number of posts. In the macro-
roots inﬂuences case, an automatic data scrapping over the
URLs included on a macro-roots vector is performed by
automatically parsing the HTML, and extracting the title and
description of the websites. Giving the set of n-grams obtained
after pre-processing, all the links deﬁned the macro-roots of
the user. The value of each word in a macro-roots of user’s
vector is computed as the frequency of the n-gram in all user’s
share URL entries and normalized the number of URL [10].
The authors in [10] further collected and integrated ex-
isting lexicons, i.e., ICT Glossary, Saffron Experts, Saffron
Dabiq Magazines, Rowe, and Saif to create a single lexicon
containing a more comprehensive set of terms and expression
that shows radicalisation terminology. To mitigate lexicon
merging issues, the authors ﬁrst remove incorporated syntactic
variances of each term, i.e., lowercase, uppercase, apostrophes
and hyphens removal, diacritics removal. Then, if two terms
are present in both lexicons, they are merged and added as one
unique entry in the ﬁnal lexicon. The ﬁnal lexicon comprises
305 entries, including expression, terms, and variances [10].
The authors in [10] also compute the radicalisation in-
ﬂuence of different roots over the user determining cosine
similarity between the micro-roots and the meso-roots vectors
and the generated lexicon. It is not possible to compute cosine
similarity for macro vectors due to many sites were already
disabled, and it was not possible to collect URLs information.
Next Collaborative Filtering (CF) strategies are used to develop
an automatic prediction about user’s interests by collecting
numerous user’s preference information, using the following
two steps: Search for such users that have a similar rating
pattern to other users for whom the prediction is made; use
the ratings of user found in the previous step to compute the
predictions for the active user. Two publicly available datasets
from the Kaggle Data Science Community are used to study
radicalisation. One of the datasets contains 17,350 tweets from
112 pro-ISIS accounts. The second dataset is created as the
opposite of the previous one. It contains 122,000 tweets from
95,725 users collected on different days.
The corresponding results in [10] show the effectiveness of
the proposed algorithms for detecting and predicting the inﬂu-
ence of radicalisation with up to 0.9 F-1 of the measurement
for detection and between 0.7 and 0.8 precision is obtained
for the prediction. The work concluded as the presentation of
a computational approach to the detection and prediction of the
inﬂuence of radicalisation to which a user is exposed, based
on the concept of ‘roots of radicalisation’ identiﬁed in social
science models.
Detecting radicalisation online faces several challenges.
From an accuracy perspective, most of the ‘ground truth’
datasets used in different works are not reliably veriﬁed.
Many of these datasets, e.g.,
[12], [13], [14], are collected
using keyword sets, with users tweeting those words would
be regarded as in the ‘radicalized’ set. It is also possible that
users who use radicalisation terminology in their tweets may
sometimes report on some event (e.g., ‘Islamic State is hacking
a Swedish radio station’) or share harmless religious rhetoric
(e.g., ‘If you want to talk to Allah, pray, if you want Allah to
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

speak to you read the Quran’).
There is still a need to use a gold standard dataset to train
recognition models. This dataset must be manually checked by
experts to ensure that the cases are real positives and/or real
negatives not false positive and/or false negative. One source
of manually identiﬁed radical accounts is Ctrl-Sec [15], where
volunteers report ISIS propaganda on social media. This initia-
tive claimed to have closed more than 200,000 Twitter accounts
in three years [10]. While these are critical mechanisms to
encounter radicalisation online, still the accounts are closed
quickly once identiﬁed as radical means that the data cannot
be further collected and analyzed to train automated methods.
From a policy perspective, radicalisation is not a crime.
Radicals of all religions and ideologies can freely express their
beliefs and practice their freedom of expression. However,
adopting or preaching violent radicalisation is a crime [10].
Therefore, considering the above-presented work, our ﬁnding
is that online radicalisation detection needs a multi-pronged
approach(es). Researchers need to focus this research area and
developed/proposed more constructive approaches to come up
with the best and the most effective ones to prevent society
from radicalisation.
Figure 1. Sentiment Classiﬁcation Techniques Used in SA [16]
B. Sentiment Analysis
The sentiment, polarity, and opinion mining or sentiment
analysis deal with direction-based text analysis, i.e., text with
opinions and emotions [17]. ‘Sentiment Analysis or opinion
mining is the computational study of people’s opinions, atti-
tudes, and emotions toward an entity. The entity can represent
an individual, event, or topic [16]. Opinion Mining (OM)
is not the same as Sentiment Analysis(SA). OM starts by
extracting and analysing the opinion about something while
SA is more about the sentiment that something causes on
people, usually expressed in the text, like or share tweets or
Facebook posts [16]. SA can also be observed as a type of
text classiﬁcation but deals with subjective statements that are
harder to classify [18].
SA can be viewed as a classiﬁcation process. It can be
divided into three levels: document-level, sentence-level, and
aspect-level. At the document-level, SA classiﬁes an opinion
document according to its polarity (negative or positive).
The entire document should be considered as the primary
unit of information. SA is an expressed feeling classiﬁed in
each sentence at the sentence level. First of all, it must be
determined whether the sentence is subjective or objective. If
the sentence is subjective, SA determines the polarity of the
opinion (positive or negative) [16]. However, using these two
levels does not provide the necessary details on all aspects of
the entity that are needed in many applications. The aspect-
level classiﬁes, taking into account the speciﬁc aspects of the
entities. Firstly, it is required to identify the entities and their
aspects. The opinion holders can give different opinions on
different aspects of the same entity [16].
Figure 2. Proposed system development diagram [6]
C. Terrorism Detection using Sentiment Analysis and Machine
Learning
In this section, we review an approach based on Sentiment
Analysis (SA) for detecting terrorism on social networks.
According to [6], social networks have recently been the most
crucial channel for people to interact and share ideas. People
choose to express their opinion(s) on a particular subject, news,
or event due to the rapid spread of information on social
media. For example, it is easier to reach more people online
and inﬂuences the choices of potential users about the top
trending topic on Twitter. Contrary, it is also easy for extremist
groups and its members to recruit the people sharing the same
ideology and views on social media and networks. In 2015
more the 250,000 accounts were linked to terrorism and later
the accounts have been deleted and disabled [7].
Existing SA approaches aim to ﬁnd a tweet that may or
may not lead to an extremist user. These approaches are still
not practical enough for speciﬁc reasons like ambiguity in
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

tweets, synonymy in tweets, use of emotions in tweets, etc.
It is also quite familiar for humorists to make fun of people
or even joke about terrorism on Twitter just for fun. A big
challenge for existing approaches is to classify if a tweet is a
real threat or not. The two most general approaches to SA are
the lexical and Machine Learning (ML) approach [17]. These
two approaches are further sub-classiﬁed into more approaches
as shown in Figure 1.
The main objective of the proposed work in [6] is to
present a system for improvising current techniques for SA
through ML to detect terrorist acts on Twitter more accurately.
The general structure of the system is shown in Figure 2.
The novelty of this research is having divided the sentence
into positive, negative, and neutral categories. Then all three
categories are compared to the previous sentence for a given
account holder based on the sentiment score for the latest and
previous sentence. This means a speciﬁc account holder’s tweet
history in each of the categories is extracted, and the sentiment
value is calculated. Later, the sentiment score from the above
statement will be compared with the sentiment value of the
latest identiﬁed sentiment. The system is based upon the ML
approach rather lexical-based [6]. For better understanding, the
functions of each component are presented below.
•
Data gathering: The target source for data collection
is Twitter due to its popularity, and even it is used
for communication about terrorism. Even compared
to Facebook and other popular blogs, Twitter has
recorded more signiﬁcant problems related to acts
of terrorism. The data are gathered from the Twitter
streaming API. For this work [6], the authors used
keywords e.g., ISIS, Bomb, etc. to obtain data related
to terrorism. If tweet(s) match(es) the user’s criteria
directly, these tweets are sent directly to the user in
JSON format, a JavaScript object notation.
•
Data pruning: After data collection, it is preprocessed
for normalization. Removal of URLs, @tags, hashtags,
uppercase and lowercase letters, misspellings, etc. are
some examples of data pruning.
•
Mapping: SentiWordNet [19] is used as a dataset for
mapping. It is made up of thousands of English words
that have a positive or negative score for each word.
Tweets are compared and computed with SentiWord-
Net. Since the word alone is not enough to make a
decision, the total score is calculated based on the
sentence context.
•
Sentiment Classiﬁcation: Twitter sentences are clas-
siﬁed into positive, negative, or neutral class for Sen-
timent Classiﬁcation. Na¨ıve Bayes is used because it
is commonly used for SA. Bayes theorem is used to
predict the probability that a given set of features will
belong to a particular label. The Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁes
the statement as positive, negative, or neutral based on
the result of the sentiment assessment.
•
User Behavioral Analysis: User Behavioral Analysis
is carried out using Snapbird tool [6] to track the
previous tweets of a particular user. When tweets
become classiﬁed to their polarity based on the senti-
ment score, all three classes are checked repetitively.
For double-checking, tweets on each category are
compared with tweets history. The purpose of this
repetitive checking is to ﬁnd better results on the
understanding if tweets are leading towards terrorism
or not [6].
If the score is negative after re-checking and results in
the same class, it can be concluded that the account holder
may lead to acts of terrorism. The purpose of reviewing the
user’s previous tweets is to analyze the user’s tweet patterns.
As mentioned above, the user can be a humorist or just joke
about terrorism, so the pattern of user tweets can be related
to jokes. However, if the user seriously discussing to support
terrorism and wanted to convince or inﬂuence other readers
about terrorism support, then that user is categorized in the
terrorist category [6]. The use of Na¨ıve Bayes has been proven
and had the potential to be implemented [6]. Hence, Bayes
theorem is being applied to predict a class for any giver text
from tweets. The authors [6] applies Bayes theorem to predict
the class of any tweet using the Equation 1.
P(label|features) = P(label)P(features|label)
P(features)
(1)
Where P(label) is the class (i.e., positive/negative/neutral) of
the tweets while P(features) is the tweet. P(label—features)
is the result of the application of the techapprichnique. By
using 1, we get 2:
P(positive|tweet) = P(positive)P(tweet|positive)
/P(tweet)
(2)
The process has to be repeated for all three categories (posi-
tive/negative/neutral). Finally, the highest-ranked class is cho-
sen to label the document [6]. The initial results show that there
are more than 50 words indicated as terrorism keywords, e.g.,
jihad, bomb, radical Al-Qaeda etc. Among the top eight words
in the list are terrorism, jihad, bomb, radical, Abu Sayyaf, ISIS
and extremist [6].
To conclude it, Na¨ıve Bayes algorithm-based system is pro-
posed for terrorism detection on Twitter. Naive Bayes approach
appears as a medium accuracy comparing with support vector
machine and neural network. To further enhance the accuracy
of Naive Bayes, the element of user behavioral analysis has
been proposed to embed into the algorithm after sentiment
classiﬁcation process have been performed.
D. Learning with Hashtags
Here we present an interesting supervised approach [20]
based upon for learning hashtags, hashtag patterns, and phrases
associated with ﬁve emotions: AFFECTION, ANGER/RAGE,
FEAR/ANXIETY, JOY, and SADNESS/DISAPPOINTMENT.
It is usual for users to express an emotional state using
hashtags (e.g., #inlove, #hatemylife) on Twitter. Few hashtags
consist of a single word like #Faith, others composed of
multiple words (e.g., #FaithinhumanityRestored), or it can
even be a creative spelling, e.g.,sk8 or cantwait4tmrw. As
these hashtags are continuously created through various inﬁnite
open combinations, it is not easy to identify such hashtags
using sentiments or emotions lexicons.
In [20], a bootstrapping framework for learning emotion
hashtags is proposed as described above, which has been
further improved to learn more general hashtag patterns. The
emotion phrases are extracted from the hashtags and the
hashtag patterns to classify contextual emotions. The ﬁrst step
is to ﬁnd the common preﬁx in the hashtags. For example,
#Angryatlife and #Angryattheworld have the same preﬁx
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

angry at that predicts ANGER emotion. As a result, certain
hashtags generalize into hashtag patterns that match hashtag
with the same preﬁx. A critical challenge here is to identify the
same preﬁxes in hashtags with different emotions that could
lead to incorrect emotion. For example, #anger pattern gener-
ally points out angry tweets. However, hashtag as #angrybirds
refers to a game, not the emotion of the writer. AFFECTION
can be determined as ‘I love you’ followed by the person (e.g.,
#loveyoufather). This can be related to JOY in other contexts
(e.g., #loveyoulife). The authors use the probability estimates
to determine certain hashtag patterns that are reliable indicators
to an emotion [20]. Also, if there is a negation, it can toggle the
polarity of the tweet (e.g., not love life can suggest SADNESS
instead of JOY).
1) Learning Hashtags: The authors used and collapsed
parrot emotion taxonomy [20] into only ﬁve emotions that
occur more often in tweets and are easily distinguishable from
each other, i.e., AFFECTION; ANGER/RAGE; FEAR/ANX-
IETY; JOY SADNESS/DISAPPOINTMENT. Adding another
class, ‘None of the above’ that does not express any emotion.
For each one of the ﬁve classes, the ﬁve common identiﬁed
hashtags are strongly associated with the emotion and these
hashtags are used as seeds.
Figure 3. Bootstrapped Learning (HT = hashtag; HP = hashtag pattern) [20]
The general architecture of the framework is shown in
Figure 3. The process starts with tweets containing the seed
hashtags and marks with the appropriate emotion. There are
323,000 tweets received from at least one of the seed hash-
tags. Additionally, more than 2.3 million untagged tweets are
collected using Twitter’s streaming API that contains at least
one hashtag (an average of 1.29 hashtags per tweet and 3.95
tweets per hashtag). Tweets are preprocessed with the CMU
tokenizer and normalized against the case. The tagged tweet
is then used to train a series of emotion classiﬁers. A logistic
regression classiﬁer is trained for each emotion class [20].
Each emotion classiﬁer applies to unlabeled tweets. For
each emotion e, the obtained tweets are classiﬁed as e,
and the hashtags are extracted from such tweets to create a
candidate pool of hashtags He for that emotion e. Next, the
candidate hashtag h is assigned a score by calculating the
average probability of the same emotion e obtained from the
logistic regression classiﬁer for the entire tweet containing the
candidate hashtag h. From the untagged tweets, all tweets with
one of the learned hashtags are then added to the training
instance, and the process continues. To reduce the number of
potential candidates, hashtags that appear less than ten times,
those with a single character, and those that appear more than
twenty times are discarded.
2) Learning Hashtag Patterns: In this phase, the hashtag
is expanded into a sequence of words using an N-gram
based word segmentation algorithm [21]. The Preﬁx Tree data
structure is used for the representation of all possible preﬁxes
of the expanded hashtag. Then, the tree is traversed, and
all possible preﬁxes are considered as candidates of hashtag
patterns. Later, each pattern is assigned a score as the way
it is done with hashtags. The authors calculate the average
probability of classiﬁer, and for each emotion class, ten hashtag
patterns with the highest scores are selected. For unlabeled
tweets, all tweets with hashtags are added, which match one
of the learned hashtag patterns to the training instances, and
the bootstrapping process continues.
3) Creating Phrase-based Classiﬁers: The ﬁnal type of
emotion classiﬁer aims to acquire is emotion phrases. Right at
the end of the bootstrapping process, the word segmentation
algorithm is applied to all hashtags and hashtag patterns to
separate them into phrases (e.g., #lovemylife → ‘love my life’).
It is assumed that the obtained phrase has the same emotion as
the original hashtag. Nevertheless, it will have low precision
due to the presence of a phrase yields, and the surrounding
context must also be taken into account [20]. Finally, a logistic
regression classiﬁer is trained for each emotion that classiﬁes
a tweet about its emotion based on the presence of learned
phrases for the emotion, as well as a context window of size six
around the obtained phrase, three for each side of the phrase.
The results in [20] show that the learned set of emotional
indicators causes a substantial improvement in F-scores, rang-
ing from + % 5 to + % 18 to basic classiﬁers, The result also
showed that the combination of the emotion indicators learned
with an N-gram classiﬁer in a hybrid approach signiﬁcantly
improves performance in 5 emotion classes. This work [20]
proposed three types of emotional indicators. The approach
is categorized as weakly supervised monitored bootstrapping:
hashtags, hashtag patterns, and phrases. Once the emotion
indicators are trained using hashtags, and the hashtags can gain
form in any language. Moreover, these indicators can also be
applied to any language as a language-independent method
since it does not depend on a speciﬁc corpus.
III.
SUPERVISED, UNSUPERVISED AND
LANGUAGE-INDEPENDENT APPROACHES
In the previous Section II, we discuss three different studies
in detail for extremism, collective radicalisation detection and
detecting sentiment on Twitter using hashtags. The purpose of
this study to create a state-of-the-art that aims to understand
extremism and collective radicalisation, sentiment analysis,
and to develop an unsupervised and language-independent
system using machine learning models. To achieve it, we will
rely on probabilistic approaches that can be applied to any
language, or even in a mix of languages. On the unsupervised
part, we aim to create a system that can detect extremist or
radical tweets by itself without much human intervention. In
this section, we overview a few NLP approach that we can use
to achieve our desire goal.
A. Supervised Natural Language Processing Approach
Supervised machine learning involves labeling or com-
menting on a series of text documents with examples of what
the machine is looking for and how it should interpret this
aspect. Researchers use datasets to train a statistical model
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

that is then given unlabeled text for analysis. Later, more
extensive or better datasets can be used to retrain the model as
it learns more about the documents it analyzes. For example,
one can deploy a supervised learning system to train a model
on Twitter tweets and then use it for various purposes. Several
methods have heretofore been used in a supervised approach,
e.g., Support Vector Machines, Bayesian Networks, Maximum
Entropy Conditional Random Field, Neural Networks/Deep
Learning. An interesting supervised approach based on word
embedding for the sentiment classiﬁcation of Twitter is shown
in [22]. We aim to develop a similar approach to detecting
extremism and collective radicalisation based on sentiment
analysis (SA). For SA, it is essential to examine them at
different levels for extremism and radicalisation detection. A
user may be talking on a topic that represents extremism but is
not an extremist. For example, as ISIS became more active on
social networks, some accounts unrelated to extremism groups
were temporarily deleted from Twitter. Hence, it is essential
to identify an extremist person or someone who is involved in
a radicalisation process.
B. Unsupervised Natural Language Processing Approach
An unsupervised approach refers to a system where training
inputs are not necessary to discover the target point of the
learning. The system needs to train itself without human
supervision and intervention or with human intervention only
if there is a need to add or change the functionalities. Topic
modelling is another core task of NLP. Let say you have
a bunch of books; you want to categorize them according
to (of course) the topics they talk about it, how you solve
the challenge without reading all the books. An unsupervised
approach discussed in [23], which uses matrix factorization to
extract latent (or hidden) topics from the text; this approach is
unsupervised as there is no model trained and tested, one just
set the parameters in a trial and error to achieve the best results.
The work discussed in subsection II-D, a weekly supervised
system, and a supervised language-independent probabilistic
is proposed in [24] for twitter sentiment analysis. Therefore,
our focus is to use probabilistic methods to develop an un-
supervised language-independent system for user’s sentiment
analysis.
C. Language-Independent Approach
A language-independent approach refers to a single system
that is applied to different natural languages (e.g., English,
Chinese, German, etc.), the results keep being satisfactory
and the experiment values represent the reality in a viable
way. Once an algorithm has been developed for a speciﬁc
language, the question arises, it can be trivially extended to
another language; All it is needed an adequate amount of
training data for the new language. It is a virtue. However, the
typical approach to developing language-independent systems
is to avoid using any particular linguistic knowledge in their
development. The approaches presented in [25][26][27] are a
few examples of such an approach.
Hence, we aim to propose a language-independent system
beside unsupervised. For example, if we collect tweets from
the streaming API, having as a criterion the geo-localization as
Portugal, the tweet would not only in Portuguese but probably
on other languages. Therefore, we would like our system to
analyse the tweet regarding the language it is written.
IV.
MODELS
The current known models for solving NLP problems are
based on Supervised Machine Learning (SML). The basic idea
behind SML models is to follow automatically induces rules
from training data. The most common ML models commonly
used to resolve ambiguities in language knowledge with
the main tasks of NLP are Hidden Markov Model (HMM),
Conditional
Random
Fields
(CRF),
Maximum
Entropy
(MaxEnt), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Decision Trees
(DT), Na¨ıve Bays (NB) and Deep Learning (DL) [28]. Apart,
the following models also explain possible ML techniques
in [29] that can also be considered for the development of
our desire system:
Na¨ıve Bayesian: Na¨ıve Bayesian (NB) classiﬁer is constructed
using Bayes’ theorem with assumptions of independence be-
tween predictors. A NB model is easy to develop without
complicated iterative parameter estimation, which makes it par-
ticularly useful for huge big datasets. Despite its simplicity, the
NB classiﬁer often does surprisingly well and is widely used
because it often outperforms more sophisticated classiﬁcation
methods [29]. The classiﬁer is stated as:
P(A | B) = P(B | A) P(A)
P(B)
(3)
Where P(A) is the prior probability of B, P(A|B) is the
conditional probability of A, given B called the posterior probability,
P(B|A) is the conditional probability of B given A and P(B) is the
prior probability of B4.
The NB classiﬁer is based on the assumption of conditional
class independence. If conditional class independence is
assumed, the effect of an attribute value on a particular class
is independent other attributes values [28]. The contribution of
Na¨ıve Bayes technique in computational linguistic is minimal.
Recently, few research works reported based on Na¨ıve Bayes
technique for NLP tasks are [30][31][32] respectively.
Neural Networks: The biological neurons of brain structures
inspire Neural Networks (NNs). Individual neuron models
can be combined into several networks made up of many
individual nodes, each with their variables. These networks
have an input layer, an output layer, and one or more hidden
layers. Hidden levels provide connectivity between entrances
and exits. The network can also receive feedback using the
result variables as input to the pre-processing nodes [29].
A network of interconnected functional elements, each with
several inputs/one output as speciﬁed in equation 4:
y(x1, . . . , xn) = f(w1x1 + w2x2 + . . . + wnxn)
(4)
wn, xn are parameters of equation, f is the activation function of
equation 4, crucial for learning that addition is used for integrating
the inputs.
K-Nearest Neighbor: In the K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN)
model, there is no learning phase as the training set is used
every time a classiﬁcation is performed. The NN search, also
known as an approximate search, similarity search, or closest
point search, is an optimization problem to ﬁnd the closest
points in metric spaces. K nearest neighbor is used to simulate
daily precipitation and other meteorological variables [29].
Decision Trees: The Decision Tree (DT) is one of the standard
classiﬁcation algorithms currently used in ML. The DT is a
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

new ﬁeld of ML that involves the algorithmic acquisition of
structured knowledge in forms such as concepts, decision trees,
and discrimination networks or production rules [29].
Each of these models has its pros and cons. The NB model
is quick to train and classify, but also it is assumed to be
independent of features approach [29]. For NN, they are not
sensitive to irrelevant properties in contrast to NB. NNs are
manufactured as specialized hardware systems. This is also
advantageous for network learning. On the contrary, this is too
large a black box technique, and it is not probabilistic [29].
KNN is an appropriate model once we collected data from
Twitter. Since the data can be quite noisy, this model is robust
for noisy training data, even for a large amount of training data.
On the other hand, the KNN value needs to be determined,
which is not easy to identify. Furthermore, it has a high
computation cost [29]. Finally, the TD that offers an easy
way to understand and interpret calculations, and it can always
be used with other decision techniques. As mentioned before,
these techniques are supervised, but this can be an initial point,
and to exploit one of the model to develop an unsupervised
system.
Native unsupervised approaches generally Lexicon based,
Dictionary-based, and Corpus-based approaches. Lexicon-
based approaches use insights obtained on the ground of words
polarity composing a sentence. With this approach, one can
create a categorical polarity (Positive, Neutral, Negative), or
one can calculate a score [33]. Two most famous lexicons
are: Sentiwordnet [34] and SenticNet [35]. Dictionary-based
approaches follow two main steps: a small amount of manually
collected opinion words with known instructions; expand this
set by searching the WordNet dictionary [36] for synonyms and
antonyms. The newly found words are added to the seed list,
and the next iteration starts. The iterative process stops when
no more new words are found [37]. Corpus-based approaches
rely on syntactic patterns in large corpora. This approach can
generate opinion words with relatively high accuracy. Most of
the corpus-based approaches need extensive labeled training
data. This approach has a signiﬁcant advantage compared to
dictionary-based approaches as it can help ﬁnd domain-speciﬁc
opinion words and their orientations [38].
V.
CONCLUSION
Social media have a signiﬁcant role in the process of
extreme ideas dissemination all over the world. People have the
dissemination of similar information, which can lead to collec-
tive radicalisation and extremism. In this study, we discussed
three different research areas, i.e., collective radicalisation,
extremism, and sentiment analysis, and analysed three different
approaches for their detection. Our aim of this study was
to provide the state-of-art to construct an unsupervised and
language-independent system for collective radicalisation and
extremism detection using SA. To do this, we also presented a
few supervised NLP models and discussed lexicon, dictionary
and corpus based approaches that can be integrated to achieve
this goal. The area of extremism and/or radicalisation does
not have much previous work. However, there are few works
based on SA classiﬁcation. With our knowledge, this study
is the ﬁrst attempt to provide a depth review related to these
research areas.
Furthermore, this study paper gave a generic structure
and guidelines for developing a new unsupervised language
independent-system for addressing radicalisation and extrem-
ism issue. This study intended to cover supervised, unsu-
pervised and language-independent techniques in the context
of NLP tasks to develop an efﬁcient and effective system.
Hopefully, this study will also guide students and researchers
with essential resources, both to learn what is necessary to
know and to advance further the integration of supervised
and language-independent techniques with different machine
learning models.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by National Founding from the
FCT- Fundac˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia, through the
MOVES Project- PTDC/EEI-AUT/28918/2017 and by oper-
ation Centro-01-0145-FEDER-000019-C4 - Centro de Com-
petˆencias em Cloud Computing, co-ﬁnanced by the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) through the Programa
Operacional Regional do Centro (Centro 2020), in the scope of
the Sistema de Apoio `a Investigac¸˜ao Cient´ıﬁca e Tecnol´ogica.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Williamson, “Gilets jaunes: Anger of yellow vests still grips
france
a
year
on,”
2019,
URL:
https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-europe-50424469#:∼:text=But%20three%2Dquarters%20of%
20French,sausages%20over%20a%20small%20ﬁre. [accessed: 2019-
09-18].
[2]
X. Crettiez, “”gilets jaunes”: la violence, l’arme des bavards, est
aussi
celle
des
silencieux”,”
2018,
URL:
https://www.bbc.com/
news/world-europe-50424469#:∼:text=But%20three%2Dquarters%
20of%20French,sausages%20over%20a%20small%20ﬁre.
[accessed:
2018-12-04].
[3]
C.
Reis,
“Pol´ıcia
n˜ao
vai
deixar
manifestac¸˜ao
da
extrema-
direita
chegar
`a
sede
do
bloco
de
esquerda,”
2019,
URL:
www.dn.pt/pais/policia-nao-vai-deixar-manifestacao-da-extrema-
direita-chegar-a-sede-do-bloco-de-esquerda-10487434.html [accessed:
2019-01-25].
[4]
H. Becker, M. Naaman, L. Gravano et al., “Selecting quality twitter
content for events.” ICWSM, vol. 11, 2011, pp. 442–445.
[5]
J. S. Krumm, “Inﬂuence of social media on crowd behavior and the
operational environment,” Army Command and General Staff College
Fort Leavenworth Ks School of Advanced Military Studies, Tech. Rep.,
2013.
[6]
B. S. Iskandar, “Terrorism detection based on sentiment analysis us-
ing machine learning,” Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
vol. 12, no. 3, 2017, pp. 691–698.
[7]
D. Yadron, “Twitter deletes 125,000 isis accounts and expands anti-
terror teams,” 2016, URL: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/
2016/feb/05/twitter-deletes-isis-accounts-terrorism-online
[accessed:
2016-02-05].
[8]
R. Scruton, The Palgrave Macmillan dictionary of political thought.
Springer, 2007.
[9]
A. W. Kruglanski, M. J. Gelfand, J. J. B´elanger, A. Sheveland, M. Het-
iarachchi, and R. Gunaratna, “The psychology of radicalization and
deradicalization: How signiﬁcance quest impacts violent extremism,”
Political Psychology, vol. 35, 2014, pp. 69–93.
[10]
M. Fernandez, M. Asif, and H. Alani, “Understanding the roots of
radicalisation on twitter,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference
on Web Science, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[11]
A. P. Schmid, “Radicalisation, de-radicalisation, counter-radicalisation:
A conceptual discussion and literature review,” ICCT Research Paper,
vol. 97, no. 1, 2013, p. 22.
[12]
S. Agarwal and A. Sureka, “Using knn and svm based one-class
classiﬁer for detecting online radicalization on twitter,” in Interna-
tional Conference on Distributed Computing and Internet Technology.
Springer, 2015, pp. 431–442.
[13]
M. Rowe and H. Saif, “Mining pro-isis radicalisation signals from social
media users,” in Proceedings of the tenth international AAAI conference
on web and social media (ICWSM 2016), 2016, pp. 329–338.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

[14]
M. Ashcroft, A. Fisher, L. Kaati, E. Omer, and N. Prucha, “Detect-
ing jihadist messages on twitter,” in 2015 European Intelligence and
Security Informatics Conference.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 161–164.
[15]
Twitter,
“Ctrlsec,”
2020,
URL:
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-
europe-50424469#:∼:text=But%20three%2Dquarters%20of%
20French,sausages%20over%20a%20small%20ﬁre.[accessed:
2019-
09-18] [accessed: 2020-09-18].
[16]
W. Medhat, A. Hassan, and H. Korashy, “Sentiment analysis algorithms
and applications: A survey,” Ain Shams Engineering Journal, vol. 5,
no. 4, 2014, pp. 1093–1113.
[17]
H. Ismail, S. Harous, and B. Belkhouche, “A comparative analysis
of machine learning classiﬁers for twitter sentiment analysis.” Res.
Comput. Sci., vol. 110, 2016, pp. 71–83.
[18]
M. T. Khan, M. Durrani, A. Ali, I. Inayat, S. Khalid, and K. H.
Khan, “Sentiment analysis and the complex natural language,” Complex
Adaptive Systems Modeling, vol. 4, no. 1, 2016, pp. 1–19.
[19]
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical
resource for opinion mining.” in LREC, vol. 6.
Citeseer, 2006, pp.
417–422.
[20]
A. Qadir and E. Riloff, “Learning emotion indicators from tweets:
Hashtags, hashtag patterns, and phrases,” in Proceedings of the 2014
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1203–1209.
[21]
P. Norvig, “Natural language corpus data: Beautiful data,” 2020, URL:
http://norvig.com/ngram [accessed: 2020-09-18].
[22]
D. Tang, F. Wei, N. Yang, M. Zhou, T. Liu, and B. Qin, “Learning
sentiment-speciﬁc word embedding for twitter sentiment classiﬁcation,”
in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), vol. 1, 2014, pp.
1555–1565.
[23]
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, 2003, pp. 993–
1022.
[24]
S. Narr, M. Hulfenhaus, and S. Albayrak, “Language-independent
twitter sentiment analysis,” Knowledge discovery and machine learning
(KDML), LWA, 2012, pp. 12–14.
[25]
O. Araque and C. A. Iglesias, “An approach for radicalization detection
based on emotion signals and semantic similarity,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
2020, pp. 17 877–17 891.
[26]
M. Nouh, R. J. Nurse, and M. Goldsmith, “Understanding the radical
mind: Identifying signals to detect extremist content on twitter,” in 2019
IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics
(ISI).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 98–103.
[27]
L. Povoda, R. Burget, and M. K. Dutta, “Sentiment analysis based on
support vector machine and big data,” in 2016 39th International Con-
ference on Telecommunications and Signal Processing (TSP).
IEEE,
2016, pp. 543–545.
[28]
W. Khan, A. Daud, J. A. Nasir, and T. Amjad, “A survey on the state-of-
the-art machine learning models in the context of nlp,” Kuwait journal
of Science, vol. 43, no. 4, 2016.
[29]
K. Suresh and R. Dillibabu, “Designing a machine learning based
software risk assessment model using na¨ıve bayes algorithm,” TAGA
Journal, vol. 14, 2018, pp. 3141–3147.
[30]
V. K. Jain, S. Kumar, and S. L. Fernandes, “Extraction of emotions from
multilingual text using intelligent text processing and computational
linguistics,” Journal of computational science, vol. 21, 2017, pp. 316–
326.
[31]
V. Malik and A. Kumar, “Sentiment analysis of twitter data using naive
bayes algorithm,” International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends
in Computing and Communication, vol. 6, no. 4, 2018, pp. 120–125.
[32]
M. S. Mubarok, Adiwijaya, and M. D. Aldhi, “Aspect-based sentiment
analysis to review products using na¨ıve bayes,” in AIP Conference
Proceedings, vol. 1867, no. 1.
AIP Publishing LLC, 2017, p. 020060.
[33]
R. S. Jagdale, V. S. Shirsat, and S. N. Deshmukh, “Sentiment analysis
of events from twitter using open source tool,” IJCSMC, vol. 5, no. 4,
2016, pp. 475–485.
[34]
S. Baccianella, A. Esuli, and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet 3.0: an
enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining.”
in Lrec, vol. 10, 2010, pp. 2200–2204.
[35]
E. Cambria, D. Olsher, and D. Rajagopal, “Senticnet 3: a common
and common-sense knowledge base for cognition-driven sentiment
analysis,” in Proceedings of the twenty-eighth AAAI conference on
artiﬁcial intelligence, 2014, pp. 1515–1521.
[36]
G. A. Miller, “Wordnet: a lexical database for english,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, 1995, pp. 39–41.
[37]
S. Vohra and J. Teraiya, “A comparative study of sentiment analysis
techniques,” Journal JIKRCE, vol. 2, no. 2, 2013, pp. 313–317.
[38]
O. Nasraoui, “Web data mining: Exploring hyperlinks, contents, and
usage data,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, vol. 10, no. 2,
2008, pp. 23–25.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-804-4
ICIMP 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

