A Gateway-based Access Control Scheme for
Collaborative Clouds
Yongdong Wu, Vivy Suhendra, Huaqun Guo
Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, Connexis, Singapore
{wydong,vsuhendra,guohq}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg
Abstract—A collaborative cloud, formed by private enterprise
clouds, is usually task-oriented and tightly correlated. It brings
new ways to build and manage computing systems in terms
of software development, resource sharing, and maintenance.
However, there is little research on the security of collaborative
clouds. This paper presents a virtual private cloud for collab-
orative clouds based on security-enhanced gateways. It enables
users in each private cloud to access other private clouds in the
collaboration transparently, dynamically and anonymously.
Keywords-Virtual cloud computing; Identity management; Ac-
cess control.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the computing ﬁeld, the requirements of cost, security
and ease of use are conﬂicting. PC users have full control
of their computers, but in return have to take full responsi-
bility for software installation, patching-up, viruses, spyware,
crashes, software and hardware upgrades. This makes the total
maintenance cost very high. On the other hand, the low-cost
NetPC (or Network PC), known as a thin client, is intended
to be centrally managed and to function without diskette drive
nor CD-ROM drive. All NetPC software and data are stored on
a server and accessed over a private network from the NetPC
box. Offering a trade-off between these two situations is the
cloud computing paradigm1, a system that provides services
to customers at low cost [1].
In the cloud computing paradigm, a service provider builds
the cloud infrastructure, and leases it to users with a “pay-
as-you-go” business model. From the viewpoint of users,
cloud computing has many merits such as “inﬁnite” scalability,
“always-on” availability, light-weight system maintenance2,
fast access to best-of-breed applications, and the potential to
signiﬁcantly reduce operating costs [2]. Thus, cloud computing
is becoming one of the most important topics in the IT world,
and the use of cloud computing services is an attractive oppor-
tunity for companies to improve their IT services. For instance,
EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) will spend $18.8
billion on cloud services provided by third-party suppliers in
2014 [3], while China will invest about $154 billion to develop
cloud computing hubs. The South Korean government has also
1According to the deﬁnition from National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST): Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-
demand network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources
(e.g., networks, storage, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.
2The end user may have to upgrade/patch some basic components such as
the OS, browser, media decoders etc.
decided to invest $500m in cloud initiatives, and intended to
raise $2 billion investment by 2014 [4].
Despite the value proposition that cloud computing has, its
adoption has been slow due to issues of reliability, consistency,
privacy, and federation, especially security issues [5]–[8]. For
example, the security breach of Twitter and Vaserv.com (via
a zero-day vulnerability) in 2010 and the data breach at
Sony Corporation and Go-Grid in 2011 [9], compromising
data of 100 million customers [10], have made it quite clear
that stringent security measures need to be taken in order
to ensure security and proper data control in the cloud. As
IDC researchers indicated, “Security was a long-term inhibitor
to cloud adoption” [11]. Although Cloud Security Alliance
promoted the use of best practices for providing security
assurance within cloud computing [12], it did not propose
a concrete security solution for collaborative clouds, where
security risk is ampliﬁed and accelerated by the potential
spread of a security ﬂaw from a compromised cloud to a
collaborative peer.
A collaborative cloud is a cloud community which consists
of private enterprise clouds. It comprises virtual computing
resources dedicated to a particular collaborative activity (e.g.,
correlated intrusion analysis [13] or detection [14]), and is
subject to information sharing policies that restrict the scope
of information sharing within the cloud. Users in each private
cloud is able to access the resources of other private clouds
in the collaboration (henceforth termed peer clouds) in a
controllable way. Additionally, as it is impossible to require
that all cloud providers offer the same services, users in
different clouds may exchange information via third-party
platforms (e.g., Facebook). In all, a collaborative cloud is a
task-oriented, high-access relationship.
This paper proposes a Virtual Private Cloud (VPC), similar
to a virtual domain [15] in Grid computing, based on secure
inter-connective cloud gateways. The VPC enables each user
to perform authentication in its own cloud so as to obtain
access to peer clouds anonymously. It also provides a secure
channel for users in the virtual cloud to communicate with
each other via a third-party platform.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II elaborates the security structure in a VPC environment,
particularly the authentication diagram. Section III discusses
the security, property and implementation of the proposed
VPC. Section IV presents the related work, and a conclusion
is drawn in Section V.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

Applications
Infrastructure
Video & Chat
Video & Chat
Screen Capture
Screen Capture
HID Events
HID Events
Data Stream
APP
Services /
Collaboration Tools
Network
Screen Capture
HID 
Events
(APP)
HID Events
Chat / Status
notification
Videostream /
HID
Gateway
Videostream /
HID
Videostream
Facebook,
CA, AA
Fig. 1.
Gateway-based architecture of VPC, adapted from [16].
II. VIRTUAL PRIVATE CLOUD
In this paper, we assume that each enterprise has its own pri-
vate cloud. In order to complete a task, several enterprises will
form a collaborative cloud so that they can share resources.
As a collaborative cloud is task-oriented, users involved in
the task form a virtual team. The team members are dynamic
and anonymous to the peer clouds. Further, team members
may need to use a third-party platform to communicate with
each other because the peer clouds may not have the same
communication platform.
As an illustrative example, assume two team members Alice
and Bob localized in two different cloud environments, Alice
prepared a project presentation for their collaborative project.
Bob likes to download the proposal from the database of
Alice’s home cloud. After reading the proposal, Bob has some
questions and wants to solve them with Alice. Because their
clouds does not share the same interactive platform, they agree
to use Facebook to communicate with each other, but they do
not like to disclose their discussion to Facebook.
A. Virtual Private Cloud Diagram
In a VPC, a user in one cloud is able to access the resources
in a peer cloud. As each peer cloud has its own authentication
mechanism, an identity management mechanism is required to
enable users of one private cloud to securely access resources
of a peer cloud seamlessly, without requiring redundant user
administration. Additionally, in a dynamic collaborative envi-
ronment, some resources (e.g., enterprises, users, applications
or services) may join or leave the environment at any point
of time. Hence, we design a gateway-based structure (adapted
from [16]) as shown in Figure 1.
In the present diagram, the gateway plays a critical role. It
enables secure connection between two private clouds trans-
parently. In addition, as it is highly possible that the clouds do
not have the same communication platform, the team members
may have to use the third-party platform (e.g., social network)
to exchange message or interactive communication such as
instant-messenging. The present diagram enables secure com-
munication between two team members when a third-party
platform is used.
B. Secure Gateway Structure
We adapt the Grid security architecture [17] [18] for the
VPC gateways by adding the data security unit. The architec-
ture includes:
• Trafﬁc Collection Unit: collects trafﬁc from network de-
vices such as routers and servers, or peer secure gateways.
• Trafﬁc Processing Unit: classiﬁes the trafﬁc data from
the Trafﬁc Collection Unit, then records information
such as IP source and destination addresses along with
timestamps in a database.
• Network Security Unit: comprises ﬁrewall, IDS and virus
scanner, etc., which handles the network security function
as local legacy gateway. When a threat is identiﬁed, it
notiﬁes the Response Unit.
• Data Security Unit: the security core of the present VPC
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

Response Unit
Traffic Processing Unit
Data Security Unit:
Authorization
Authentication
Access Control 
Privacy
Confidentiality
Non-repudiation
Integrity
DRM
Policy 
Management Unit
Traffic Collection Unit
Security Gateway
Flow 
Statistics
Topology 
Generation
Alarm 
Reporting
Security Configuration 
Management
Network Security Unit
Peer
Security Gateway
Managed Organization Unit
(or Agent / Router / AP / Servers)
Fig. 2.
A VPC gateway structure showing the functional modules.
gateway. It uses the database in Trafﬁc Processing Unit
together with the rules from Policy Management Unit to
analyze network trafﬁc. When a threat is identiﬁed, it
notiﬁes the Response Unit.
• Policy Management Unit: provides predeﬁned rules for
the Behavior Analysis Unit to identify network anoma-
lies. Depending on management requirement, policies
may be updated by Security Conﬁguration Management.
• Response Unit: in the event of detected threats, notiﬁes
the Alarm Reporting and Security Conﬁguration Manage-
ment, who will then react correspondingly.
With reference to Figure 2, a Managed Organization Unit
(MOU) may be installed in each computer of the enterprise
in order to reduce the burden of the security gateway and
to reduce the risk of information leakage. The MOU acts as
a coordination point for security functionalities. As different
users in an enterprise may have different access priorities and
different applications may have different connectivity priori-
ties, the MOU locally enables the users to enjoy cooperation
and share resources and services. This capability opens up
exciting opportunities for different applications in various
ﬁelds, such as entertainment, business, healthcare, emergency
and education.
C. Secure Connection between VPC Gateways
Figure 3 shows the diagram of the VPC gateway, which
comprises two layers. The ﬁrst layer is used to deﬁne and
enforce inter-enterprise security, while the second layer is
used to deﬁne and enforce intra-enterprise security. At the
inter-enterprise layer, the gateway includes Network Security
Unit (NSU), which is beyond the scope of this paper, and
Data Security Unit (DSU). As shown in Figure 2, DSU
should implement security functions such as authorization,
authentication, access control, conﬁdentiality, and privacy for
any transaction between the two private (or enterprise) clouds.
In addition, a VPC shall be compliant with the existing private
clouds (or peer clouds) and require little change to the intra-
enterprise layer. To this end, when a user from a collaborative
cloud would like to make use of the resource of a peer cloud,
he/she should be treated as a user of the target cloud. Thus,
the gateways shall ensure that the security functions can take
effect in the process.
Global CA
Global AA
External App
NSU
DSU
Gateway
NSU
DSU
Gateway
Users
Local AA
Resource
Policy
Organization 2
Organization 1
Users
Local AA
Resource
Policy
Fig. 3.
VPC Gateway connections
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

For simplicity, we assume the channel between two gate-
ways is mutually authenticated with Public Key Infrastructure
(PKI). This assumption can be satisﬁed easily if each gateway
has a digital certiﬁcate issued by a trusted Certiﬁcate Authority
(CA). This secure channel ensures the security of communica-
tion trafﬁc such as identiﬁcation management among private
clouds.
D. Access Control in the VPC
In the collaborative cloud, the resource are accessible to the
cloud users in two modes which are transparent to the users.
1) Access to Intra-cloud Resources: In an enterprise, any
user can be veriﬁed using the legacy authentication mechanism
(e.g., LDAP). If we regard a gateway as a special user of the
enterprise, the user and the gateway can be authenticated via
the enterprise’s internal mechanism so that they can achieve
mutual authentication. As the security structure in Figure 3
does not require any change to the internal access control
mechanism of an enterprise, access to the internal resources
is transparent to the enterprise members.
2) Access to Inter-cloud Resources: In the VPC diagram
shown in Figure 4, the gateway can represent any user within
its enterprise to send and receive data across clouds. When
a user requests a service or resource from the collaborative
enterprise, the gateway is authorized to complete the request
on the user’s behalf once the user-gateway authentication and
the user’s privilege checking are successful.
As it is impractical to demand that all the collaborative
enterprises adopt the same access control strategy, a VPC
gateway should translate the access request from its local user
to a standard format (e.g. SAML (Security Assertion Markup
Language)) so that the gateway in the target enterprise can
enforce the access control. For instance, if the user requests
access to the resources of a peer cloud, the gateway in the
user’s enterprise will translate the request into another format
that is compliant with the target enterprise, so that the request
can be handled as a local request by the target enterprise. In the
collaborative inter-cloud access, the requestor pays the target
cloud in name of his/her home cloud so as to maintain the
anonymity.
Figure 4 illustrates the authentication process for inter-
cloud access. When a user wants to access the resource (or
service) of one collaborative enterprise, he sends a request
to the local authenticator A1 along with his authentication
information (e.g., credential, identity/role/attribute). He also
notiﬁes the local gateway (e.g., by network trafﬁc snifﬁng)
to send its credential to the local authenticator A1. After the
local authenticator A1 veriﬁes their authenticity, it sends the
request to the gateway G1.
The gateway G1 translates the request into a “standard”
Collaborative Clouds request format (e.g., SAML format),
replaces the requestor with an authorized identity, and signs on
the translated request. Then it sends the request to the target
gateway G2.
The target gateway G2 veriﬁes the request based on the sig-
nature of the sending gateway G1 and translates the “standard”
request format into its own request format. Then it sends the
request to its own authenticator A2. Once A2 authenticates the
request, the user can access the resource or service.
3) Access to External Resources: When two users want to
communicate with each other via a third-party platform (e.g.,
Facebook), the virtual cloud should build its own protection,
as the third-party platform may provide no protection at all.
To guarantee the security level deﬁned by the enterprises,
the VPC gateways should ensure end-to-end security. Loosely
speaking, both gateways should create a secure channel for any
information exchange between them. Speciﬁcally, after each
user authenticates himself/herself to the third-party platform
as usual, the gateway will encrypt all outgoing messages and
decrypt all incoming messages.
III. DISCUSSIONS
A. Security
In the gateway-based access control scheme, we should
consider three security issues. The ﬁrst issue is the intra-cloud
security. As the present scheme does not modify the intra-
cloud access or identiﬁcation method, the security level of
the private cloud remains the same. The second issue is the
inter-cloud security. As the channel between two gateways
is authenticated and conﬁdential, the scheme maintains the
security of the inter-cloud. Further, as requestors are authenti-
cated in their own private cloud, the inter-cloud has the same
level of security as the intra-cloud. The third security issue is
third-party attacks. As the present scheme adopts end-to-end
security, it has the same security level as the widely-deployed
security systems such as HTTPS-based e-business.
B. Property
Transparency: In the present scheme, a user can access intra-
cloud resources and inter-cloud resources in the same way
(differing only in the target URI), hence the access mechanism
is fully transparent to the users.
Anonymity: When a user sends a request to a peer cloud, a
pseudo user name will be used to inform the peer cloud, thus
enforcing anonymity.
Dynamics: Due to the anonymity property, when a user joins
or leaves the virtual cloud (or task group), the home cloud can
handle the dynamics without informing the peer clouds. This
property simpliﬁes the collaboration management greatly.
C. Implementation
As proof of concept, we built a simple VPC consisting of
three private clouds. Each cloud is constructed with computers
supporting BIOS virtualization technology so as to simulate
a group of computers. And the network is conﬁgured with
OpenStack Flat Network mode.
Within each private cloud, local authentication and identity
management is performed with Kerberos 10.04, using the
GSS-API mechanism. All local users are registered in the Ker-
beros system. Upon login, the user is issued with a Kerberos
ticket that can be forwarded to other Kerberos users, including
the VPC gateway, as proof of his identity. Any two Kerberos
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

access request
authentication info
request notification
gateway credentials
authenticate
access request
translate
convert identity
sign
access request
translate
access request
authenticate
access
User
Authenticator A1
Gateway G1
Authenticator A2
Gateway G2
Resource
Local Organization
Target Organization
Fig. 4.
One-way inter-cloud access
users communicate through a secure channel built by Kerberos
GSS-API upon successful mutual authentication. Note that
here Kerberos is our choice of mechanism to simulate an
existing authentication mechanism in the real practice; the
VPC scheme shall apply to any legacy authentication system
and identity management. As described earlier in the paper,
user identity is veriﬁed within his own enterprise and shall
be anonymous to peer clouds; hence, there is no need for a
dedicated collaborative identity management.
Authentication among VPC gateways across the collabora-
tive cloud uses the Station-to-Station (STS) mutual authenti-
cation and key exchange protocol based on PKI. We create
a CA within the collaborative cloud that issues signed digital
certiﬁcates to VPC gateways as they are added to the cloud
community. When a VPC gateway contacts another for an
inter-cloud request, it ﬁrst initiates the STS protocol, which
includes exchanging certiﬁcates for veriﬁcation and agreeing
on a session key, to build a secure communication channel for
further processing of the request. Each gateway also keeps a
list of known peer gateways along with the services offered
within the peer clouds, so that the gateway knows where to
route each request.
We tested two scenarios on the VPC. In the ﬁrst scenario, a
user issues a request for a local data resource (i.e., download a
ﬁle) in the private cloud. In this case, the user is authenticated
by his local identity server normally (via Kerberos mechanism
in our setting). Upon authorization of access based on the
local policy, he then accesses the data directly from the private
cloud. In this scenario, the user goes through the same process
as he would without the VPC.
In the second scenario, a user issues a request for a data
resource in a peer cloud. The access control mechanism in
this scenario is as shown in Figure 4. The user request is
intercepted by his home gateway, who re-directs the request
to the local identity server. The user goes through local
(Kerberos) authentication normally, after which, his request
is forwarded to the VPC gateway. The VPC gateway proceeds
to contact the peer VPC gateway in the target cloud and
build a secure communication channel. The user’s home VPC
gateway processes the request before sending it through the
channel, replacing the requestor identity with a pseudo user
name to achieve anonymity. Upon receiving the request, the
VPC gateway in the destination cloud checks its own local
access policy and determines that the user is authorized to
access the data requested. The gateway then forwards the
request to the resource provider, who then sends the requested
data to the user via the two gateways. This scenario shows
how VPC can achieve inter-cloud access without altering
user experience, that is, the user still goes through the same
authentication process in his local server, and the remote
authorization mechanism is fully transparent to him.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

IV. RELATED WORK
Cloud infrastructure commonly relies on virtualization ma-
chines so as to provide the properties of ﬂexibility and
application independence. When a user requests for resource
properties (such as processor speed, time and memory size),
the service provider will create a virtual machine satisfying
the request.
Although virtual machines have become increasingly com-
monplace as a method of separating hostile or hazardous code
from commodity systems, the potential security exposure from
implementation ﬂaws has increased dramatically. However,
cloud security issues cannot be solved with just virtualization
technologies [19]. Ormandy [20] investigated the state of
popular virtual machine implementations for x86 systems,
and assessed the security exposure to the hosts of hostile
virtualized environments.
A. Intra-cloud security
Chow et al. [21] suggested to use trusted computing and
computation-supporting encryption to enhance the security
of cloud computing. Popovic and Hocenski [22] suggested
considering privacy and security at every stage of a system
design, while other researchers took care of trust [23], [24]
and authorization [25].
Takabi et al. [26] proposed a comprehensive security frame-
work for cloud computing environments. They also discussed
challenges, existing solutions, approaches, and future work
needed to provide a trustworthy cloud computing environment.
Demchenko et al. proposed an architectural framework for
on-demand infrastructure service provisioning in [27], and
discussed security mechanisms required for consistent DACI
(Dynamically provisioned Access Control Infrastructure) op-
eration using authorisation tokens in [28]. Shin and Akkan
[29] proposed a domain-based framework for provisioning and
managing users and virtualized resources in IaaS to support
scalable management of users and resources, organization-
level security policy, and ﬂexible pricing model.
As a standard for identity management, SAML deﬁnes
identity provider (IdP) and service provider (SP). The IdP
focuses on identity management, access policy management,
and security token generation, while SPs receive the remote
security token, retrieve credential data, and reinforce user
access policies locally. In practice, the schemes in compliance
with IdP/SP model may focus on different properties, e.g.,
protocol ﬂow [30], scalability [31], privacy [32], friendliness
with device identity or user behavior [33], and SSO (Single
Sign On) [34]. In all, SAML allows authentication so that a
cloud can provide services to users both inside and outside the
cloud.
B. Inter-cloud security
Riteau [35] built distributed large-scale computing platforms
from multiple cloud providers, allowing to run software re-
quiring large amounts of computation power so as to provide
inter-cloud live migration and offer new ways to exploit the in-
herent dynamic nature of distributed clouds. Similarly, Nguyen
et al. [36] presented a cloud architecture that allows users
with different security authorizations to securely collaborate
and exchange information using commodity computers and
familiar commercial client software.
For a cloud community formed by different vendors or
enterprises, Kretzschmar and Hanigk [37] intensiﬁed cloud se-
curity management domains, integrated various cloud security
services of an organization and providing interoperability for
the clouds. Moreover, Kretzschmar and Golling [38] identiﬁed
functional components for a Security Manager architecture.
These components, together with identiﬁed security data ar-
tifacts, are able to support the cloud provider community to
some extent.
Bernstein et al. presented an InterCloud protocol to solve
the cloud computing interoperability problem in [39], and also
considered the InterCloud security such as identity manage-
ment and access control in [40]. Generally, InterCloud is the
focus of efforts especially in the public sector (e.g., USA
Federal Government’s Cloud Computing Initiative). It can be
regarded as the second layer in the cloud computing stack [41].
In the inter-cloud layer, client-centric distributed protocols
complement more provider-centric, large-scale ones in the
intra-cloud layer. These client-centric protocols orchestrate
multiple clouds to boost dependability by leveraging inherent
cloud heterogeneity and failure independence. Celesti et al.
[42] addressed the Identity Management (IdM) problem in
the InterCloud context and showed how it can be successfully
applied to manage the authentication needed among clouds for
the federation establishment.
The above inter-cloud architectures or protocols enable to
secure collaboration among clouds. However, they are self-
contained, and may require modiﬁcation of legacy authentica-
tion systems.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Collaborative cloud is used to develop a dedicated task such
as ﬂight design such that the users can share resources in a
conﬁdential, authentic and transparent way. The paper presents
a VPC gateway mechanism so as to build a secure channel
for the users in the collaborative environment. With few
modiﬁcations on the private clouds, it supports the resource
sharing among private clouds and 3rd-party communication
platforms.
In our prototype, we implemented the one-way inter-cloud
access protocol for demonstrating the soundness of the pro-
posed diagram only. The future work will be to develop the
whole system, in particular to integrating with the standard
IdP/SP protocol, and securing the 3rd platforms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to appreciate the anonymous review-
ers for their constructive comments and suggestions. Dr. Hui
Fang and Zhigang Zhao helped to build the cloud computing
platform and VPC gateways respectively.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

REFERENCES
[1] National Institute of Standards and Technology, DRAFT Cloud Com-
puting Synopsis and Recommendations. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
drafts/800-146/Draft-NIST-SP800-146.pdf.. Last Access on 30.03.2012.
[2] David Bernstein, Erik Ludvigson, Krishna Sankar, Steve Diamond, and
Monique Morrow, “Blueprint for the Intercloud -Protocols and Formats
for Cloud Computing Interoperability,” IEEE International Conference
on Internet and Web Applications and Services, 2009, pp. 328-336.
[3] Giorgio Nebuloni, “Accelerate Hybrid Cloud Success: Adjusting the IT
Mindset,” IDC, 04.10.2011.
[4] Anuradha Shukla, “China to invest £98 billion in cloud computing,”
ComputerWorld UK, 14.09.2011.
[5] E. Messmer, “Are security issues delaying adoption of cloud comput-
ing?” Network World, 27.04.2009. http://www.networkworld.com/news/
2009/042709-burning-security-cloud-computing.html. Last Access on
30.03.2012.
[6] V. Tchiﬁlionova, “Security and Privacy Implications of Cloud Comput-
ing Lost in the Cloud,” Open Research Problems in Network Security,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 6555, 2011, pp. 149-158.
[7] D. Velev, and P. Zlateva, “Cloud Infrastructure Security,” iNetSec 2010,
Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences 6555, 2011, pp. 140-148.
[8] R. Bhadauria, R. Chaki, N. Chaki, and S. Sanyal, “A Survey on Security
Issues in Cloud Computing,” ACM Computing Research Repository,
vol. abs/1109.5388, http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.5388, 2011. Last Access
on 30.03.2012.
[9] Craig
Balding,
“Go-Grid
Security
Breach,”
30.03.2011.
http://cloudsecurity.org/blog/2011/03/30/gogrid-security-breach.html.
Last Access on 30.03.2012.
[10] Czaroma
Roman,
“Sony
Data
Breach
Highlights
Importance
of
Cloud
Security,”
Cloud
Times,
09.05.2011.
http://cloudtimes.org/
sony-data-breach-highlights-importance-of-cloud-security/.
Last
Ac-
cess on 30.03.2012.
[11] IDC press, “Cloud Adoption Will Have Major Impact on European
Software
Market
in
2011,”
07.03.2011.
http://www.idc.com/
about/viewpressrelease.jsp?containerId=prDK22728011&sectionId=
null&elementId=null&pageType=SYNOPSIS.
Last
Access
on
30.03.2012.
[12] Robert Mullins, “IDC Survey: Risk In The Cloud,” Network Computing,
16.06.2010.
[13] Jia Xu, Jia Yan, Liang He, Purui Su, and Dengguo Feng, “CloudSEC:
A Cloud Architecture for Composing Collaborative Security Services,”
IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and
Science, 2010, pp. 703-711.
[14] S. T. Zargar, H. Takabi, and J. B.D. Joshi, “DCDIDP: A distributed,
collaborative, and data-driven intrusion detection and prevention frame-
work for cloud computing environments,” International Conference on
Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing,
2011, pp. 332-341.
[15] T. Sasaki, M. Nakae, and R. Ogawa, “Content Oriented Virtual Domains
for Secure Information Sharing Across Organizations,” ACM Cloud
Computing Security Workshop, 2010, pp. 7-12.
[16] A. Kipp, L. Schubert, and M. Assel, ”Supporting Dynamism and
Security in Ad-Hoc Collaborative Working Environments”, Identity in
the Information Society, 2(2):171-187, 2009.
[17] Chih-Mou Shih, and Shang-Juh Kao, “Security Gateway for Accessing
IPv6 WLAN,” IEEE/ACIS Int’l Conf. on Computer and Information
Science and Int’l Workshop on Component-Based Software Engineering,
Software Architecture and Reuse, 2006, pp. 83-88.
[18] Ying-Dar Lin, Huan-Yun Wei, and Shao-Tang Yu, “Building an Inte-
grated Security Gateway: Mechanisms, Performance Evaluations, Im-
plementations, and Research Issues,” IEEE Communications Surveys &
Tutorials 4(1):2-15, 2002.
[19] M. Christodorescu, R. Sailer, D. L. Schales, D. Sgandurra, and D.
Zamboni, “Cloud Security Is Not (Just) Virtualization Security,” ACM
Cloud Computing Security Workshop, 2009, pp. 97-102.
[20] Tavis Ormandy, “An Empirical Study into the Security Exposure to Hosts
of Hostile Virtualized Environments,” 15.04.2008. citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.105. Last Access on 30.03.2012.
[21] R. Chow, P. Golle, M. Jakobsson, R. Masuoka, J. Molina, E. Shi, and
J. Staddon, “Controlling Data in the Cloud: Outsourcing Computation
without Outsourcing Control,” ACM Cloud Computing Security Work-
shop, 2009, pp. 85-90.
[22] K. Popovic, and Z. Hocenski, “Cloud computing security issues and
challenges,” Int’l Convention on Information and Communication Tech-
nology, Electronics and Microelectronics, 2010, pp. 344-349.
[23] Khaled M. Khan, and Qutaibah Malluhi, “Establishing Trust in Cloud
Computing,” IT Professional, 2010, 12(5):20-27.
[24] Jiyi Wu, Qianli Shen, Jianlin Zhang, and Qi Xie, “Cloud Computing:
Cloud Security to Trusted Cloud,” Advanced Materials Research, New
Trends and Applications of Computer-aided Material and Engineering,
vol. 186, 2011, pp. 596-600.
[25] P. Bryden, D. C. Kirkpatrick, and F. Moghadami, “Security Authoriza-
tion: An Approach for Community Cloud Computing Environments,”
White Paper, Nov. 2009. http://www.techrepublic.com/whitepapers/.
Last Access on 30.03.2012.
[26] Hassan Takabi, James B.D. Joshi, and Gail-Joon Ahn, “SecureCloud:
Towards a Comprehensive Security Framework for Cloud Computing
Environments,” IEEE 34th Annual Computer Software and Applications
Conference Workshops, 2010, pp. 393-398.
[27] Yuri Demchenko, Jeroen Van der Ham, Volodymyr Yakovenko, Cees de
Laat, Mattijs Ghijsen, and Mihai Cristea, “On-demand provisioning of
Cloud and Grid based infrastructure services for collaborative projects
and groups,” International Conference on Collaboration Technologies
and Systems, 2011, pp. 134-142.
[28] Y. Demchenko, C. Ngo, and C. de Laat, “Access control infrastructure
for on-demand provisioned virtualised infrastructure services,” Interna-
tional Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems, 2011,
pp. 466-475.
[29] Dongwan Shin, and Hakan Akkan, “Domain-based virtualized resource
management in cloud computing,” International Conference on Collab-
orative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing, 2010,
pp. 1-6.
[30] S. Eludiora, O. Abiona, A. Oluwatope, A. Oluwaranti, C. Onime, and L.
Kehinde, “A User Identity Management Protocol for Cloud Computing
Paradigm,” Int. J. Communications, Network and System Sciences, vol.
4, No. 3, 2011.
[31] Anu Gopalakrishnan, “Cloud Computing Identity Management,” SET-
Labs Brieﬁngs, 7(7):45-55, 2009.
[32] Elisa Bertino, Federica Paci, and Rudolfo Ferrini, “Privacy-Preserving
Digital Identity Management for Cloud Computing,” IEEE Computer
Society Data Engineering Bulletin, 2009, pp. 1-4.
[33] R. Chow, M. Jakobsson, and R. Masuoka, “Authentication in the Clouds:
A Framework and its Application to Mobile Users,” CCSW, 2010, pp.
1-6.
[34] Juniper Networks, “Identity Federation in a Hybrid Cloud Computing
Environment Solution Guide,” Oct. 2009. www.ictnetworks.com.au/pdf/
8010035-en.pdf. Last Access on 30.03.2012.
[35] Pierre Riteau, “Building Dynamic Computing Infrastructures over Dis-
tributed Clouds,” International Symposium on Network Cloud Comput-
ing and Applications, 2011, pp. 127-130.
[36] T. D. Nguyen, M. A. Gondree, D. J. Shifﬂett, J. Khosalim, T. E. Levin,
and C. E. Irvine, “A cloud-oriented cross-domain security architecture,”
Military Communications Conference, 2010, pp. 441-447.
[37] M. Kretzschmar, and S. Hanigk, “Security management interoperability
challenges for Collaborative Clouds,” International DMTF Academic
Alliance Workshop on Systems and Virtualization Management, 2010,
pp. 43-49.
[38] M. Kretzschmar, and M. Golling, “Functional components for a Security
Manager within future Inter-Cloud environments,” International Confer-
ence on Network and Service Management, 2011, pp. 1-5.
[39] D. Bernstein, and D. Vij, “Intercloud Directory and Exchange Protocol
Detail Using XMPP and RDF,” World Congress on Services, 2010, pp.
431-438.
[40] D. Bernstein, and D. Vij, “Intercloud Security Considerations,” IEEE
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science,
2010, pp. 537-544.
[41] C.n Cachin, R. Haas, and M. Vukolic, “Dependable Storage in the
Intercloud,” IBM Research Report, RZ 3783, 21.10.2010.
[42] A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliaﬁto, “Security and Cloud
Computing: InterCloud Identity Management Infrastructure,” IEEE In-
ternational Workshop on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructures for
Collaborative Enterprises, 2010, pp. 263-265.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-201-1
ICIMP 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

