Enhancing Network Security Environment by Empowering Modeling and 
Simulation Strategy   
(Cyber Protect Simulation Lesson Learned)    
 
Rudy Agus Gemilang Gultom  
Deputy for Strategic Studies 
The National Resilience Institute of the Republic of 
Indonesia (Lemhannas RI)  
Jakarta, Indonesia 
e-mail: rudygultom@lemhannas.go.id 
Baskoro Alrianto  
Bureau of Telematics 
The National Resilience Institute of the Republic of 
Indonesia (Lemhannas RI)  
Jakarta, Indonesia 
e-mail: karotelematika@lemhannas.go.id
 
 
Abstract—This paper provides an overview based on cyber 
protect simulation experiences to enhance network security 
environment 
by empowering modeling and simulation 
strategy. Cyber protect is a simulation tool developed by the 
US Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA). Cyber 
protect simulation is an integral part of cyber security for 
information leaders course  at National Defense University 
(NDU), Washington, DC. USA. Strategic thoughts can be 
implemented during cyber protect simulation exercises.  
Brilliant ideas  in  simulating an organization network security 
environment become good lesson learned. The implementation 
for proper defense strategy  could secure an organization Local 
Area Network (LAN) from various threats, attacks and 
vulnerabilities in concrete and abstract levels. Countermeasure 
strategy, which is implemented in this simulation exercise is 
presented as well. At the end of this paper, an initial network 
security 
framework 
concept, 
so 
called 
The 
Six-ware 
Framework concept (The SWF concept) has been introduced.   
Keywords-cyber protect simulation; threats, attacks and 
vulnerabilities; countermeasures strategy; network security 
framework and models 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, as the cost of information processing and 
internet accessibility falls, civilian, military and government 
organizations 
security 
environments 
are 
becoming 
increasingly vulnerable from cyber threats or attacks, e.g., 
network intrusions, DoS/DDoS, phishing, spoofing, viruses, 
flooding, etc. At this point, the information security manager  
might allocate budget, spreading it for network defense tools, 
e.g., anti-virus software, firewalls, intelligent routers or 
expensive modeling and simulation (M&S) tools.  M&S is 
an effective technique to support better understanding for 
information security managers in concrete and abstract levels 
[1].  M&S can be used to identify weaknesses proactively 
and it can also provide education and training using “what if” 
scenarios reactively. Ultimately when new threats appear the 
ability of an organization to respond is significantly 
enhanced.  
One good lesson learned in the context of information 
security issue today is the phenomenon of Panama papers 
where over 11.5 million files have been leaked including 2.6 
terabytes of data. E-mails accounted for the majority of 
exposed records (4,804,618 files), followed by database 
formats (3,047,306), PDFs (2,154,264), images (1,117,026), 
text documents (320,166) and other (2,242) files (see Figure 
1). At this point it is still unclear whether the 11.5 million 
files were obtained through hacking (data breach) or leaked 
from someone inside of the Panamanian law firm (insider 
leak). But from a cyber protect perspective, the lessons are 
nearly identical either way [2][3][4][5].  
 
Figure 1. Number of files revealed in Panama Papers data leak in April 
2016 by type [5]   
 
The purpose of this paper is to enhance security 
awareness environment within an organization in order to 
overcome the various security threats, attacks and 
vulnerabilities 
through 
empowering 
modeling 
and 
simulation strategy based on network security framework 
models. It also meets the demands of the countermeasures 
strategy and policy of an organization.  
The rest of the paper is structures as follows. Section II 
presents the cyber protect simulation tool. Section III 
presents security threats, attacks and vulnerabilities 
discussion. Section IV explains    countermeasures strategy 
and policy. Section V discusses why an organization needs 
to adopt an appropriate network security framework model 
45
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

to enhance its network security environment. Section VI 
describes contribution of this paper by proposing a new 
concept proposal, called The Six-Ware Framework (The 
SWF). This contribution is a very early  concept inspired by 
cyber protect simulation experiences. Section VII contains 
concluding remarks and future work for the SWF concept 
development. 
II. 
WHAT IS CYBER PROTECT? 
Cyber Protect is a network security simulation tool 
designed by the DISA [6]. It revolves around the purchase 
and application of information security countermeasures in a 
Local Area Network (LAN) environment. It takes place over 
four quarters. Each quarter the user makes decisions about 
what resources/countermeasures to purchase and put in place 
[7]. After making those decisions, the simulation is set in 
motion. The user is then subject to a variety of security 
attacks. The following cycle steps are repeated four times:  
 First step, choose computer network security 
resources, e.g., user training, redundant systems, 
access 
control, 
virus 
protection, 
backup, 
disconnection, encryption, firewalls, and intrusion 
detection.   
 Second step, applies/installs resources by drag and 
drop to a specific location on the cyber protect 
simulation dashboard.    
 Third step, experiencing a variety of attacks. There 
are nine possible forms of attack, e.g., jamming, 
viruses, moles, social engineering, packet aniffers, 
data theft, data modification, flooding, and imitation 
(spoofing). The numbers and types of attacks are 
random; they can come from outside and inside an 
organization.   
 Fourth step, receiving report indicating performance 
level. For every quarter the user receives a score 
sheet based upon how well they did in purchasing 
and applying resources to thwart the attacks. 
In cyber protect simulation exercise, the user acts as an 
information leader within an organization. The user has full 
responsibility to protect or to defend his LAN department. 
Moreover, by utilizing cyber protect simulation dashboard, 
the user can freely setup the best and appropriate strategies 
of a LAN configurations which are expected to be immune 
from various types of  threat, attack or data breach [8].   
In order to successfully complete the simulation, 
meeting a "commanders" goal, the user needs to score 90 or 
above. As in real world situation, there is good and bad 
experiences and/or fortune associated with the simulation. A 
user might do very poorly in allocating his resources, yet 
through good fortune be subject to very few attacks, and 
therefore receive a final high score. At the other end of the 
spectrum, the user might do a pretty good job in allocating 
the resources, yet because of numerous attacks, the ending 
tally would not be good. Even with perfect "known" 
defenses, the enemy may still slip through.(see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Cyber protect simulation dashboard     
The objective of cyber protect simulation exercise is to 
produce a minimum 90% security readiness rating. If the 
user achieves this requirement, then the user can print out a 
certificate states that the user has passed network security 
readiness rating as an ultimate information leader in his   
organization [9]. For this simulation exercise, a remark of 
94% out of 100% was obtained, which is an evidence that 
the network security design met the standards and passed 
successfully.    
III. 
THREATS, ATTACKS AND VULNERABILITIES 
During the process of cyber protect simulation exercise, 
the user will experience several types of threats, attacks and 
vulnerabilities e.g.,:  
 Flooding, from Internet (external), where the 
symptom on incident report stating “Network server 
and/or Router function seriously impaired, degraded 
or crashed”. 
 Viruses, from internal network stating “Network 
users report odd characters, noises, tunes, and/or 
messages appearing on work station screens. 
Network operations are unusual, degraded or 
crashed”. 
 Packet Sniffer, from  Headquarters (HQ) stating  
“Slight degradation in time required for network 
information transference”. 
 Jamming, from HQ stating “Network Transmissions 
become unreliable or unreadable due to interfering 
signals”. 
 Social engineering attack, from internal network 
stating “Report of suspicious attempts by outside 
individuals to gain access to information”. 
 
To deal  with those threats, attacks and vulnerabilities 
cyber protect simulation exercises was divided into four 
quarter tasks, each quarter consist of at least two threat 
types, attacks and vulnerabilities. Every result obtained in 
each quarter task is displayed into a form of quarter 
summary reports. Useful experiences during cyber protect 
simulation process whereby the user can investigate any 
failures in his network security at  the previous quarter. The 
user  determines why controls in place did not prevent  
46
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

threats, attacks and vulnerabilities, while making attempts to 
improve the network security system at the sub-sequent 
quarter.  
IV. 
COUNTERMEASURES STRATEGY AND METHODOLOGY 
Countermeasure strategy and methodology were needed 
during cyber protect simulation exercises. The user was 
asked to design a secure process, technology and personnel 
of the computer network systems, effectively and efficiently. 
The user can also identify residual risks of the modelled 
LAN. At this point, it was found that most of threats and 
attacks came from internal network; these are more difficult 
to tackle than the external ones (outsiders).   
From the threat-driven approach perspective, most 
threats that came from insiders and outsiders (internet) can 
be handled effectively through a good  methodology e.g., 
placing proper security and adequate peripherals, such as, 
firewalls, IDS and encryption, etc. The threat-driven 
approach is a methodology, a set of practices and a mindset. 
The primary purpose of this approach is to enable 
organizations to allocate the commensurate level of 
resources to defend their assets, to develop the inherent 
skills needed to support these efforts, and to align groups 
and teams into functional roles that will implement this 
approach [10]. Figure 3 shows a success countermeasure 
strategy for a LAN modeled configuration by developing 
appropiate security strategy, effectively and efficiently.  
 
Figure 3. Design of secured LAN  
 
 It was found that the proper security strategy worked 
very well in the proposed modeled network security system; 
the strategy works as follows:    
 First, configure one medium firewall and one low 
encryption system at the main router that is 
connected directly to the internet. The aim is to 
anticipate threats or attacks from outside the 
network, any kind of attacks from the Internet  enter  
the network can be anticipated by a firewall system. 
 Second, configure three low level of access control 
units at the entrance and exit of  data communication 
lanes in the network to make it sure  that there is no 
communication path that is not observed in the 
network. These access control units work as an early 
warning control system for the network administrator 
and it has the capability of monitoring all data 
transmission in the network. 
 Third, complete system security in every servers with 
proper security equipments, e.g., high antivirus 
system, low level backup system, one medium 
Intruder Detection System (IDS) and one medium 
redundant system. This strategy can be applied to 
secure server from various attacks.  
 Fourth, configure two low level backup systems on a 
particular client who has a high risk job in order to 
avoid from internal threats or breaches, especialy via 
social engineering attacks. 
It was found that the proper implementation of 
countermeasure strategy is a crucial point in cyber protect 
simulation exercise. The countermeasure strategy might be 
implemented in various LAN departments, but it depends on    
its information security and risk management policies [11]. 
On the other hand, several countermeasure strategies, e.g., 
Defense-In-Depth Strategy by the US Homeland security or 
ProCurve-ProActive Defense Strategy by the Hewlett-
Packard innovation center can be found on internet. 
A. Defense-In-Depth Strategy 
In October 2009, the US Homeland security developed a 
defense-in-depth strategy as a recommended practice in 
order to improve Industrial Control Systems (ICS) cyber 
security [12]. This strategy is not just about deploying 
specific technologies to counter certain risks, but it depends 
on how effective security program for an organization, its 
adherence and willingness to accept security as a constant 
constraint on all cyber activities.  
Moreover, implementing an effective defense-in-depth 
strategy will require taking a holistic approach and 
leveraging all of an organization’s resources in order to 
provide effective layers of protection.  Figure 4 shows an 
overview on the key elements of a defense-in-depth strategic 
framework. 
 
   Figure 4. The strategic framework for cyber defense-in-depth   
47
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

The basic principles of this framework are as follows:  
 First, to know the security risks that an organization 
faces. 
 Second, to quantify and qualify those risks. 
 Third, to use key resources to mitigate security risks. 
 Fourth, to define each resource’s core competency 
and identify any overlapping areas. 
 Fifth, to abide by existing or emerging security 
standards for specific controls. 
 Sixth, to create and customize specific controls that 
are unique to an organization.  
In order to implement a defense-in-depth strategy an 
organization will need to start at understanding its current 
risk. Risk for industrial control systems is best understood 
by knowing the threats and vulnerabilities that face an 
organization. The organization should undergo a rigorous 
risk assessment that covers all aspects to understand risk. 
Risk assessments are very crucial steps in defining, 
understanding, and planning remedial efforts against 
specific threats and vulnerabilities. All level areas and levels 
in the organization, including executives, must support the 
valuable risk assessments which are constantly updated at 
timely intervals.  
B. ProCurve-ProActive Defense Strategy 
In February 2007, the Hewlett-Packard (HP) innovation 
proposed a new alternative for network security: a 
comprehensive security vision and strategy that arises 
directly from the revolutionary ProCurve Adaptive EDGE 
Architecture™ (AEA). This defense strategy embraces 
distributed intelligence at the network edge and takes a 
holistic approach to an organization’s or company’s 
networking. The HP innovation declared a new security 
vision, called ProCurve-ProActive Defense strategy. This   
was claimed as the first approach that combined proactive 
security offense techniques with steadfast traditional 
defense security techniques simultaneously, at the edge of 
the network, where users connect.  
As such, ProCurve-ProActive defense strategy is 
expected to change dramatically how network security is 
deployed from now on. ProCurve-ProActive defense 
strategy delivers a trusted network infrastructure that is 
immune to threats, controllable for appropriate use and able 
to protect data and integrity for all users. The three main 
pillars of the ProActive Defense strategy are as follows:  
 Access 
Control, 
proactively 
prevents 
security 
breaches by controlling which users have access to 
systems and how they connect in a wired and 
wireless network.  
 Network Immunity, detects and responds to internal 
network threats such as virus and worm attacks; 
monitors behavior and applies security information 
intelligence to assist network administrators maintain 
a high level of network availability.  
 Secure Infrastructure, secures the network for policy 
automation from unauthorized extension or attacks to 
the control plane; includes protection of network 
components 
and 
prevention 
of 
unauthorized 
managers 
from 
overriding 
mandated 
security 
provisions; also includes privacy measures to ensure 
the integrity and confidentiality of sensitive data: 
protection from data manipulation, prevention of 
data eavesdropping, end-to-end VPN support for 
remote access or site-to-site privacy, and wireless 
data privacy (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. The Three Pillars of Access Control, Network Immunity and 
Secure Infrastructure 
 
One of  unique aspects of the ProCurve-ProActive 
defense vision and strategy is that it combines both the 
security offense and security defense at the same time and, 
most importantly, at the network edge [13]. This combined 
offense and defense is possible only because ProActive 
defense is based on AEA principles, which drive 
intelligence to the network edge while retaining centralized 
control and management. ProActive defense strategy 
includes characteristics such as the following: 
 Additional 
enhancements 
to 
Identity 
Driven 
Manager, such as clientless and agent-based endpoint 
integrity 
with 
flexible 
remediation 
and 
a 
vulnerability assessment framework. 
 Additional enhancements to Network Immunity 
Manager, such as increased network behavior 
anomaly detection (NBAD) capabilities. 
 Enhanced policy control at the edge, including Web-
Auth 
with 
clientless 
endpoint 
integrity 
authentication. 
 Standards-based endpoint integrity, with trusted 
agent access for LANs, WANs and WLANs. 
V. 
NETWORK SECURITY FRAMEWORK MODELS  
Based 
on 
cyber 
protect 
simulation 
experience,  
organizations need to adopt an appropriate security policy as 
well as planning and deployment in order to enhance its 
network security. Every personnel within the organization, 
from senior level management down to the staff level, must 
be fully aware of the importance of enterprise information 
security. All employees should understand the underlying 
significance of security policy, planning and deployment of 
48
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

the organization. There are several models providing security 
framework or security reference model, available in the 
market, namely the US National Institute of Standards and 
Technology 
(NIST) or the 
Control 
Objectives 
for 
Information and related Technology (CobiT) security 
framework, etc.  
A.  The NIST cyber security framework  
In February 2013, the US President issued an Executive 
Order (EO) 13636, in order to improving national critical 
infrastructure cybersecurity. The EO states: "It is the policy 
of the United States to enhance the security and resilience of 
the Nation's critical infrastructure and to maintain a 
cybersecurity environment that encourages efficiency, 
innovation and economic prosperity while promoting safety, 
security, business confidence, privacy and civil liberties." 
 This order directed NIST to work with stakeholders to 
develop a voluntary framework – based on existing 
standards, guidelines, and practices - for reducing cyber risks 
to critical infrastructure (NIST 2014) [14]. NIST framework 
consists of standards, guidelines, and practices to promote 
the protection of critical infrastructure. NIST framework is 
organized into five basic cybersecurity activities:  
 Identify (to develop the organization's understanding 
to manage cybersecurity risk to systems, assets, data 
and capabilities). 
 Protect (to develop and implement the appropriate 
safeguards to ensure delivery of critical infrastructure 
services).  
 Detect (to develop and implement the appropriate 
activities to identify the occurrence of cybersecurity 
events).  
 Respond (to develop and implement the appropriate 
activities to take action regarding a detected 
cybersecurity event).  
 Recover (to develop and implement the appropriate 
activities to maintain plans for resilience and to 
restore capabilities or services that were impaired due 
to a cybersecurity event).  
Each of the functions are then divided into categories to 
define more specific security practices and capabilities (e.g., 
asset management, access control). Subcategories describe 
more detailed or technical controls needed to meet objectives 
within each category (see Table I).    
TABLE I.  
THE NIST CYBER SECURITY FRAMEWORK    
Func-
tions 
Categories  
Sub-categories 
Information 
References 
Identify 
 Asset 
Management 
 Governance 
 
 Invetory devices, 
systems and  
software, etc. 
 NIST 800-
53 CM-8, 
CA-2, etc. 
Protect 
 Access 
Control, etc. 
 
 
 Review access 
periodically 
 Two-factor 
authentication 
 ISO 27001  
A6, A9, 
A11, A13, 
etc. 
 
Detect 
 Detect & 
Monitor for 
anomalies 
and events 
 Review logs for 
suspicious 
activity, etc. 
 NIST 800-
53 AU-6, 
CA-7, etc. 
Respond 
 
 Mitigation of 
security 
events, etc.  
 Report suspicious 
events, etc. 
 
 
 
 ISO 27001  
A6, A16, 
etc. 
 
Recover 
 Recovery 
planning, 
improve-
ments and 
communi-
cation  
 Recovery plan 
 Manage public 
relations 
 Repair reputation 
 
 NIST 800-
53 CP-10, 
IR-4, IR-8, 
etc. 
 ISO 27001  
A16, etc. 
 
B. The CobiT security framework   
CobiT is an Information Technology (IT) governance 
framework developed by the Information System Audit and 
Control Association (ISACA). CobiT consists of acquire and 
maintain application software; acquire and maintain 
technology infrastructure; develop and maintain procedures, 
install and accredit systems and manage changes. In April 
2012, CobiT 5 was released, with the concept of enterprise 
governance of IT as a foundation.  
CobiT 5 provides a comprehensive framework that 
assists enterprises to achieve their objectives for the 
governance and management of enterprise IT [15]. CobiT 5 
brings together the five principles that allow the enterprise to 
build an effective governance and management framework 
based on a holistic set of seven enablers that optimises 
information and technology investment and use for the 
benefit of stakeholders (see Figure 6). 
 
   Figure 6. The strategic framework for cyber defense-in-depth   
 
 Principle 1, meeting stakeholder needs - stakeholder 
needs are translated into specific enterprise, IT-related 
goals and enabler goals. 
 Principle 2, covering the enterprise end-to-end – 
governance and management of information and 
related technology is addressed from an enterprise-
wide, end-to-end perspective. 
 Principle 3, applying a single integrated framework - 
COBIT 5 defines the overarching governance and 
49
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

management framework that has been designed to 
integrate seamlessly with other good practice 
guidance, e.g., ISO 38500. 
 Principle 4, enabling a holistic approach – the seven 
categories of inter-connected enterprise enablers are 
set out below (see Figure 7). 
 Principle 5, separating governance from management. 
CobiT 5 advocates that organisations implement the 
key governance and management processes (see 
Figure 8). 
 
Figure 7. The seven categories of CobiT 5 enterprise enablers 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Separating Governance from Management 
VI. 
CONTRIBUTION  
This paper contributes an initial security framework 
concept, so called, The Six-Ware Framework (The SWF). 
The SWF concept is a comprehensive security solution to 
enhance an organization’s network security resilience from 
various threats, attacks and vulnerabilities. This is an 
operational-level security strategy that enables to figure out 
the most efficient and effective actions that may lead to the 
success of cyber security operation [16]. The idea behind this 
new concept was inspired by NIST cyber security platform 
version 1.0., dated 12 February 2014. The SWF concept  
tries to elaborate NIST cyber security framework to be more 
practical for the operational level. The security framework 
disscussion can be found also in mashup web data extraction 
system [18].  
The SWF concept contributes a common thought to 
understanding, managing, and expressing network security 
risks, both internally and externally. The SWF concept 
contributes increased security awareness environment within 
an organization where it requires internal/external risk 
assessment and also threat analysis policies. All levels 
employees in the organization, ranging from highest level to 
lowest level must be actively involved in the SWF concept 
implementation. Otherwise, they can not obtain better 
understanding of how threats or attacks can be carried out 
successfully across the entire organization.  
A. The SWF enablers 
  
The SWF enablers provide a set of activities, which 
consists of six main variables, sub-variables, indicators and 
information references (e.g., reference guidances). The SWF 
enablers are not only a set of checklist of actions to perform, 
but it presents key network security solutions to manage 
security risk and analysis in an organization computer 
network [19]. The SWF enablers comprises six main 
aspects, 
e.g., 
Brainware, 
Hardware, 
Software, 
Infrastructureware, Firmware, Budgetware (see Table II).    
 Brainware or human factor, is the main aspect in 
network 
security 
environment. 
This 
variable 
becomes top list variable within the SWF concept. 
From network security perspective, it commonly 
known that human is the weakest link in information 
security environment. Human factor plays dominant 
role to enhance or on the contrary, to disrupt all 
efforts of existing information security wityhin an 
organization. Therefore, organizations must have 
function or position related to information security, 
e.g., Chief Information Security Officer (CISO).   
The CISO is a company's top executive who is 
responsible for security of personnel, physical assets, 
data and information in both physical and digital 
form. The CISO position has increased in the era of 
cyberspace where it becomes easier to steal sensitive 
company information. One of CISO’s responsibilities 
is to conduct information security certification 
programs to all level employees. The intention is to 
produce "information security awareness employees" 
related to their position and function.  
 Hardware, plays dominant role in handling threats, 
attacks and vulnerabilities. CISO has to teach all 
level employees how to use and treat organization’s 
hardware devices safely and wisely. It is because a 
high-level hacker is not just relying on a specific 
technique, but still combined with the conventional 
attack, e.g., social engineering attack. Combination 
of internal risk assessment and threat analysis are 
extremely needed, e.g., controlling individual access 
into the organization’s premises or facilities, locking 
systems and removing unnecessary CD-ROM or 
50
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

USB thumb drives, or monitoring and protecting the 
security perimeter of organization’s facilities, etc. 
 Software, 
relates 
to 
utilization 
of 
software 
applications security which are used daily in the 
office, e.g., email, website, social media and other 
applications. High security awareness is really 
required because a high profile attacker will always 
kept on trying to infect or inject malicious emails and 
its attachments or invite to visit malware-infected 
websites. 
The 
attackers 
are 
also 
constantly 
introducing new threats although various cyber 
security application tools are available in the market. 
 Infrastructureware, 
has 
an 
important 
role 
in 
facilitating 
secure 
organization 
network 
infrastructure, e.g., monitoring network from various 
threats, attacks and vulnerabilities. Nowadays, most 
of organizations  have been highly dependent on 
Internet access. On the other hand, not all of 
employees have a good level understanding about 
security risks they might face in the office, where 
this condition is making the organization’s network 
infrastructure more vulnerable.   
 Firmware, includes documentation of an organization 
security strategy and policy, standard operating 
procedures 
(SOPs), 
business 
continuity 
plans 
(BCPs), 
network 
security 
frameworks 
or  
international security standardizations compliance to 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), 
such as ISO 27001:2013 [18]; NIST cyber security 
framework version 1.0 or government security policy 
and strategy [20], etc. 
 Budgetware, plays important and strategic role in 
facilitating implementation of the five-ware variables 
above. It is because an organization is urged to 
provide big enough money or sufficient budget to 
purchase e.g., network security application tools, 
patching systems, software licenses, training and 
education, certification programs, etc. It is highly 
recommended top level management must put this 
matter as a high level priority in order to build 
information security awareness. Allocating sufficient 
information security budget could protect the entire 
network 
system. 
Otherwise, 
they 
will 
face 
organization’s significant financial losses, etc. 
TABLE II.  THE SWF CONCEPT  (ENABLERS AND COMPONENTS) 
Aspe-
cts 
Varia-
bles 
Sub-varia-
bles 
 Indicators 
Infosec 
References 
Brain
ware 
 CISO, 
etc. 
 Security 
training, 
etc.  
 Security 
Aware-
ness   
 CISSP, 
CISA, etc. 
Hard
ware 
 Server 
Farms  
 
 USB, etc. 
 No com-  
promises 
 Bench mar- 
king, etc. 
Soft 
ware   
 Applic
ation 
 
 MS 
Office, 
etc. 
 No pira-
ted Appl. 
etc. 
 Regular 
updates,etc 
Infra
struc-
ture-
ware 
 Net-
work    
Infra-
struc-
ture 
 Firewalls. 
 IDS. 
 DMZ, etc. 
 No net-
work 
security 
breaches, 
etc. 
 Self 
penetration 
testing, etc.  
Firm
ware 
 Secu-
rity  
hand 
book 
  Bussiness 
Continui-
ty Plan  
 Good 
Bussi-
ness pro-  
cesses 
 NIST. 
 ISO 27001, 
etc. 
Bud-
get 
ware 
 Suffi-
cient 
budget 
 
  Buy soft-
ware licen 
ses, etc. 
 Licences 
always 
updated, 
etc. 
 Allocated 
budget  
policy, etc. 
B. The SWF component 
The SWF component works together as follows: 
 Variables, organize network security fundamental 
aspects as enablers, e.g., brainware, hardware, 
software, 
infrastructureware, 
firmware 
and 
budgetware) at highest level. These variables help an 
organization in managing its security risk and 
analysis by organizing or clustering information,  
threats and attacks activity. Variables align with 
security and policy framework to reduced impact to 
organization 
quality 
of 
services 
(QoS) 
e.g., 
investments in human resources, planning and 
budgeting exercises or recovery actions, etc.  
 Sub-variables, are sub-divisions of a variable closely 
tied to a particular (for example, brainware variable) 
security 
awareness 
activities 
e.g., 
“security 
awareness”, “socialization and training”, “cyber 
security certification program”, etc. 
 Indicators, are sub-divisions of a sub-variable, 
divided into technical outcomes. Indicators provide a 
set of results to achieve outcomes for each sub-
variable. Indicators example (like security awareness 
sub-variable) e.g., “conducting security awareness 
training program”; “socializing and implementing 
security awareness culture in the company”; or 
“notifications from any social engineering attacks or 
security breaches that are being investigated", etc. 
 Information References (IR), consists of network 
security standards, guidelines, methods and practices 
to achieve solutions or outcomes associated with 
each indicator. IR which presented in the SWF 
concept are illustrative and not complete. Examples 
of IR (like conducting security awareness training 
program indicator) e.g., “certified ethical hacking 
(CEH) course from EC-council”; “DoD information 
assurance awareness training”; and “Achieving ISO 
27001 Certification”; etc.  
 
The SWF component provides a set of activities to 
achieve specific network security outcomes, and references 
examples of guidance to achieve those outcomes. The SWF 
component is not a checklist of actions to perform. It 
presents 
key 
cybersecurity 
outcomes 
identified 
by 
organization as helpful in managing the risk within  
organization network security environment.    
  
51
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Cyber protect simulation is a good simulation tool, but it 
needs to be developed to face the growth of new variants of  
security threats, attacks and vulnerabilities. It provides users 
with useful experiences of tactical and strategical security 
situation awareness. The users are given the freedom to 
model and simulate  the best  strategy to defense his secured 
LAN configurations efficiently and effectively.  
 
In this paper, the SWF concept can not be compared 
with the NIST, because it is just an initial proposal to 
enhance an organization’s network security environment.    
In the future, the SWF concept needs to be developed more 
in-depth through further research on specific areas, e.g., 
determining more technically and specifically security 
framework 
variables, 
sub-variables, 
indicators 
and 
information references. The SWF concept acts as an early 
warning system measurement within an organization. It  
portraits the existing LAN security environment while 
finding the root cause of security loopholes. It can be 
concluded that to achieve a totally secure network 
environment is very difficult.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to give high appreciation to the    
i-College, IRMC, NDU, Washington, DC., USA., for giving 
a valuable chance to attend cyber security for information 
leaders course in March 2015. The authors would like also 
to thank the Lemhannas RI and the Nuffic (Project Niche 
IDN 143) for its financial support so the authors can attend 
and submit this academic paper in the ICIMP 2016 
International Conference, Valencia, Spain,  May 22 to 26, 
2016. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. H. Saunders, "The Case for Modeling and Simulation of 
Information 
Security," 
National 
Defense 
University. 
http://www.johnsaunders.com/papers/securitysimulation.htm, 
last 
accessed April 2016.    
[2] Sara Peters, “7 Lessons From The Panama Papers Leak,” 
vulnerabilities/ threats, http://www.darkreading.com/vulnerabilities---
threats/7-lessons-from-the-panama-papers-leak/d/d-id/1324976, 
last 
accessed April 2016. 
[3] Swati Khandelwal, The Panama papers-Biggest leaks in History 
Exposes 
Global 
Corruption, 
The 
Hacker 
News, 
http://thehackernews.com/2016/04/panama-paper-corruption. 
html, 
April 3, 2016. 
[4] Statista.com, “Number of files revealed in Panama Papers data leak in 
April 2016, by type,” http://www.statista.com/statistics/531286/ 
panama-papers-data-type/, last accessed May 2016. 
[5] Statista.com, “Number of files revealed in Panama Papers data leak in 
April 2016 by type”, http://www.statista.com, last access April 2015. 
[6] The i-college, Cyber Cecurity for Information Leaders course, “Cyber 
Protect Simulation Exercises,” National Defense University (NDU), 
Washington, DC., USA, March 2015.    
[7] Vicente Pastor, Gabriel Díaz and Manuel Castro, “State-of-the-art 
Simulation Systems for Information Security Education, Training and 
Awareness,” IEEE EDUCON Education Engineering 2010, The 
Future of Global Learning Engineering Education, 978-1-4244-6571-
2/10, April 14-16, 2010, Madrid, Spain. 
[8] Cyber 
Protect 
Network 
Defense 
Simulation 
Tool, 
https://ndu.blackboard.com and http://iatraining.disa.mil/eta/ cyber-
protect/launchpage.htm, the i-college, NDU, Washington, DC, USA, 
March 2015. 
[9] Ann O’Brien, “Effective Learning Strategies: Cyber Protect – 
Learning About System Security”, Wisconsin School of Bussiness, 
adapted from Jim Mensching, Chicago State University, USA. 
[10] Michael Muckin, Scott C. Fitch, “A Threat-Driven Approach to 
Cyber Security: Methodologies, Practices and Tools to Enable a 
Functionally Integrated Cyber Security Organization,” Lockheed 
Martin 
Corporation, 
http://lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/ 
lockheed/data/isgs/documents/Threat-Driven%20Approach%20 
whitepaper.pdf, last accessed May 2016. 
[11] Cyber Security for Information Leaders course, “Information Security 
and Risk Management,” CISSP Textbook Reading, Chapter 3,        
the i-college, NDU, Washington, DC, USA, March 2015. 
[12] The US Homeland Security, Recommended Practice: Improving 
Industrial Control Systems Cybersecurity with Defense-In-Depth 
Strategies,https://ics-cert.us-cert.gov/sites/ default/files/recommended 
practices/Defense_in_Depth_Oct09.pdf, October 2009, last accessed 
May 2016. 
[13] The 
Hewlett-Packard 
(HP) 
innovation, 
“ProCurve-ProActive 
Defense: A Comprehensive Network Security Strategy,” Pro Curve 
Networking, February 2007, http://www.hp.com/rnd/pdfs/ProCurve 
_Security_paper_022107.pdf, last accessed May 2016. 
[14] The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),                
“Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity  
Version 
1.0.,” 
http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cyber 
security-framework-021214-final.pdf,  February 12, 2014, last 
accessed May 2016. 
[15] ISACA,“COBIT 5 Framework: A Business Framework for the 
Governance and Management of Enterprise IT,” http://www.isaca. 
org/cobit/pages/cobit-5-framework-product-page.aspx, last accessed 
April 2016. 
[16] Chen, J., and Duvall, G., “On Operational-Level Cybersecurity 
Strategy Formation,” Journal of Information Warfare: 13.3: 79-87.  
SSN 1445-3312 print/ISSN 1445-3347 online, 2014. 
[17] Rudy AG Gultom, “Proposing the new Algorithm and Technique 
Development for Integrating Web Table Extraction and Building a 
Mashup,” Journal of Computer science, Science Publication, NY, 
USA, DOI: 10.3844/jcssp.2011.129.142, http://www.thescipub.com/ 
issue-jcs/7/2, 25 February 2011. 
[18] Rudy AG Gultom, “The Six-Ware Framework Proposal: A New 
Comprehensive Cyber Security Framework To Defend Your Network 
From Social Engineering Attack,” Final Paper, i-college, IRMC, 
National Defense University, Washington, DC., USA, 19 March 
2015. 
[19] ISO, “ISO/IEC 27001: 2013, Information Technology-Security 
Techniques-Information 
Security 
Management 
Systems-
Requirements,”http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=54
534, last accessed April 2016. 
[20] Adam Quinn, “Obama’s National Security Strategy Predicting US 
Policy in the Context of Changing Worldviews,”US Research Papaer, 
Project 
2015, 
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/ 
chathamhouse/field/field_document/20150109ObamaNationalSecurit
yQuinn.pdf, last accessed April 2016. 
52
Copyright (c) The Government of Indonesia, 2016. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-475-6
ICIMP 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

