MAEVA: A Framework for Attack Incentive
Analysis with Application to Game Theoretic
Security Assessment
Louai Maghrabi
Department of Cybersecurity
School of Engineering, Computing & Informatics
Dar Al-Hekma University
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
LMaghrabi@DAH.edu.sa
Eckhard Pﬂuegel
School of Computer Science & Mathematics
Faculty of Science, Engineering & Computing
Kingston University
London, United Kingdom
E.Pﬂuegel@Kingston.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper is concerned with the risk assessment of
cyber security attacks on an organisation. We develop the novel
attack incentive analysis framework Motive, Ability, Exploitabil-
ity, Visibility and Attractiveness (MAEVA) based on taking into
account a multiplicative function of the attacker’s anticipated
attack effort and expected reward. We argue that our approach
can complement and enhance the standard approach based on
estimating risk as a function of attack likelihood and impact on
the organisation. We then present an application of our frame-
work to game-theoretic risk assessment, illustrating how it can be
used to inform the modelling of attacker-defender scenarios using
complete information games. This helps to establish more realistic
game-theoretical modelling of security assessment scenarios for
practical use.
Index Terms—Cybersecurity, risk assessment, game theory,
security games, Nash equilibrium analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
With the advancement and continuous growth of the dig-
itally connected world through the Internet, cyber security
has become a matter of global interest and importance to
governments and private organisations to ensure achieving the
major security requirements of Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and
Availability (CIA) of critical assets. To put this into some
context, for example, a large organisation, such as SolarWinds
recently had a data breach through hidden malicious code
inserted into widely-used SolarWinds software, without being
detected for several months. The attack gave adversaries access
to systems of multiple U.S. government departments, including
the Energy Departments nuclear arsenal. In another recent
incident, Garmin, makers of Global Positioning System (GPS)
devices, smart wearable devices and aviation technology, suf-
fered a ransomware attack that brought down its own systems
affecting the availability of data [1].
Security incidents of such high severity highlight the im-
portance of security controls and mitigation techniques, and
most governments and organisations nowadays have developed
some form of strategies to categorise risks, apply vulnerability
controls and mitigate threats in order to protect critical as-
sets. National and international standards exist, to recommend
formal frameworks and security management methodologies.
Security management refers to a collection of activities that
seek to, in the most general sense, the identiﬁcation, assess-
ment, analysis, establishment and evaluation of the security
of a system or an organisation. This process can be carried
out in different contexts such as information security, network
security, system application or software security or nowadays
generally in cyber security. Managing the security of an
organisation can reduce the risk of running unexpected costs,
help with standardising security practices, and show effective
compliance with legislation and regulatory policies.
Risk management is the risk-based, top-down approach
of security management. According to the National Institute
of Standard and Technology (NIST), risk management is
established as a risk context by producing a risk management
strategy on how to identify, assess, respond, mitigate and
monitor risks within an organisational context [2]. Generally,
the following are typical risk management activities:
• Decide on how to implement a protection strategy and
design risk mitigation plans by developing an action plan;
• Implement the detailed action plan;
• Monitor the action plans for schedule and effectiveness;
• Control variations in plan execution by taking appropriate
corrective actions.
In this paper, we are studying the fundamental problem
of how to compute the risk that an organisation faces from
external attacks, and how to respond to it. According to
[3], there are many approaches to assess risks. Risks can be
assessed through qualitative or quantitative approaches, with
underlying mathematical models of various degrees of com-
plexity. Fundamentally, risk assessment attempts to measure
the impact of an attack on an asset, mitigated by the probability
(likelihood) that the attack will occur. In [4], the additional
difﬁculty of a large (and ever-growing) attack surface of
typical organisations and their assets, and the fact that risk
can be seen as a map with different values at each point of
the enterprise attack surface, is reported. Risk is seen as a
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

function of vulnerabilities in the system, their exposure to an
attacker, the presence of active (relevant) threats, the existence
of mitigating controls and the impact on the organisation. In
this paper, we are interested in the risk assessment stage. We
assume that prior to this step, critical assets and their security
requirements were identiﬁed and that the above-stated relevant
attack surface parameters are known.
This paper presents two contributions. The ﬁrst contribution
is a novel framework for risk assessment of cyber security at-
tacks on an organisation. The framework is based on analysing
the incentive an adversary may have to attack the organisation
when weighing up the potential gain from the attack and the
effort it takes to breach the system. We argue that this point
of view, which is fundamentally different to that taken in
traditional risk assessment, can complement and enhance the
standard approach based on estimating risk as a function of
attack likelihood and impact on the organisation. The second
contribution is an application of this framework to game-
theoretic risk assessment. We show that our framework is very
convenient when wishing to inform the design of complete
information games, modelling attacker-defender scenarios. It
is hence a natural ﬁrst step an organisation can take to prepare
a game-theoretic risk assessment, and to reap the beneﬁts
from this approach which might have advantages compared
to standard risk assessment.
This paper is organised as follows. Section II reviews
modern risk assessment methodologies and formulates the
main research question. In the subsequent section, the novel
framework is introduced. Section IV proposes the application
to game theory. The last section is the conclusion.
II. SECURITY ASSESSMENT BASED ON RISK ANALYSIS
The fundamental problem of how to compute the risk that
an organisation faces from security attacks is the subject of
numerous security risk assessment methodologies. In this sec-
tion, we will recall the principles of risk computation and its
challenges, review some popular mature security assessment
frameworks, and discuss how they can help with the task of
attack likelihood assessment and impact analysis.
A. The Challenges of Risk Computation
Using formal notation, the risk R can be expressed as an
expected impact I, computed using the equation:
R = p · I
(1)
where p is the probability of an attack occurring, often referred
to as attack likelihood. From this equation, one can see
that the problem now is to quantify and compute p and I
and the difﬁculty is to perform a realistic estimate of these
variables. Likelihood assessment is the process of establishing
an estimate for p [5]. However, as pointed out in Tripwire [6],
likelihood assessment appears, in general, to be a challenging
and elusive task. Informally, the impact I is the overall damage
that the targeted asset owner suffers from, this includes any
indirect cost to the organisation such as a loss of reputation or
business revenues. Impact is a central concept in the various
security assessment frameworks, although it is deﬁned slightly
differently. This will be explored further in the following
sections.
B. NIST
NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF) is a popular
and detailed framework. Quoting [2], it states that “the level
of impact from a threat event is the magnitude of harm that
can be expected to result from the consequences of unautho-
rised disclosure of information, unauthorised modiﬁcation of
information, unauthorised destruction of information, or loss
of information or information system availability.” In other
words, the impact from an attack on an asset is the degree of
harm that affects the security requirements of conﬁdentiality,
integrity and availability for an asset. In this deﬁnition, the
impact is created by a threat event, in line with the risk-
based approach explained earlier. It is assumed that one is
able to determine the attack likelihood. This leads to a table
containing risk response actions, such as defending critical
assets, recovering from an attack, planning for defense or
choosing not to respond at all [2]. An appropriate response
action is then determined by indexing the table rows with
attack probabilities using qualitative metrics (low, medium
or high) and its columns with a measure for the impact
(minor, moderate or major) of the attack on the asset, or more
generally, the organisation as a whole. This table, referred to
as Risk Response Matrix (RRM) in this paper, is illustrated in
Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Risk Response Matrix (RRM) [2]
C. OCTAVE
The Operationally Critical Threat and Vulnerability Evalu-
ation (OCTAVE) framework [7] can be used to relate impact
to both threats and vulnerabilities: ”All aspects of risk (assets,
threats, vulnerabilities, and organisational impact) are fac-
tored into decision making, enabling an organisation to match
a practice-based protection strategy to its security risks.” This
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

framework does not explicitly link the analysis of risk to
the probability of an attack occurring. Instead, it informs
the analysis based on threat proﬁling, enhanced by impact
statements, leading to risk proﬁles. OCTAVE recommends at
least looking at the following impact areas: safety, health,
productivity, reputation, ﬁnancial and ﬁnes. The analysis is
done in a qualitative manner, but approximated scores could
be derived from this.
D. CVSS
The Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) primar-
ily focuses on software vulnerabilities, and the assessment of
their severity. The idea is to provide a base score µB(v) for
a CVE-indexed vulnerability v based on open criteria, and to
make the score publicly available on the National Vulnerability
Database (NVD) website [8]. This overall base score is further
reﬁned using an impact score µI(v) and an exploitability
score µE(v). Quoting from [9], ”...the impact metrics reﬂect
the direct consequence of a successful exploit, and represent
the consequence to the thing that suffers the impact, which
is referred to, formally, as the impacted component.” CVSS
formulates the impact as the direct damage to an asset through
an exploited vulnerability. In the context of risk assessment,
we can hence use µI(v) for impact computation for the subset
of suitable assets. It is less clear, how this could help with
attack likelihood computation.
E. STRIDE and DREAD
STRIDE [10] was introduced in 1999 by Microsoft as
a threat proﬁling scheme for categorizing potential threats
according to their impact on common security requirements.
The STRIDE acronym is formed from the ﬁrst letter of each of
the following categories, which cover a fairly complete range
of threats when considering the original context of secure
application development:
1) Spooﬁng identity: illegally accessing and using another
user’s authentication credentials.
2) Tampering with data: malicious modiﬁcation, fabrica-
tion or deletion of data.
3) Repudiation: the denial of having performed an action,
in an environment lacking the capability to prove other-
wise.
4) Information disclosure: exposure of information to indi-
viduals who are not authorised to have access to it.
5) Denial of service (DoS): an attack that interrupts the
availability of a service to valid users.
6) Elevation of privilege: an unauthorized or unprivileged
user gains privileged access and thereby has sufﬁcient
access to compromise or destroy the entire asset or
system.
Hence, risk assessment with STRIDE consists of eliciting
threats using the approach above, followed by a rating system
in order to rank threats by their criticality. This can be done
using the less well-known DREAD [11] approach, based on
the following key categories:
1) Damage potential: the degree of the potential damage a
speciﬁc threat can inﬂict on an asset.
2) Reproducibility: this gives an understanding of the level
of complexity of the threat, by assessing how easily it
can be replicated by different adversaries.
3) Exploitability: this aims to quantify how easy is it for
an attacker to succeed in exploiting the vulnerability
targeted by the threat.
4) Affected users: an estimate of the number of affected
users in the aftermath of the attack.
5) Discoverability: How difﬁcult is it to discover vulnera-
bilities in the system, targeted by the threat.
By inspecting all of these DREAD categories and adding up
individual scores, a risk rating is determined for each threat
and the vulnerabilities affected by it.
III. A FRAMEWORK FOR ATTACK INCENTIVE ANALYSIS
Assessing and responding to risk based on estimating attack
likelihood and impact, and deciding on suitable response
actions by forming and inspecting the corresponding risk
response matrix seems natural and intuitive. While it is indeed
a mainstream approach used in popular mature and standard
security assessment frameworks as reviewed in the previous
section, it is somewhat self-centric and might only lead to
a limited view of the external threat and attack landscape. In
particular, it fails to take into account the attacker’s capabilities
and perspective, in terms of his or her underlying motivation
of the attack, knowledge of the target and its vulnerabilities,
as well as the expected beneﬁts gained. In this section, an
alternative approach for informing risk assessment is devised,
based on estimating the incentive to attack, that the adversary
may have. While it seems very reasonable to assume that
an informed attacker would wish to follow this framework,
we will also suggest that the framework could be useful for
the organisation that might be targeted by the attacker, as an
alternative security assessment approach. This aspect will be
further explored in the discussion part of this section.
A. Attack Incentive Matrix
An attacker is mainly motivated by the anticipated reward
from the attack, which will be referred to as the gain in this
paper, denoted by G. This gain however will be diminished
by the effort he or she has to invest in order to implement the
attack. This effort, denoted by e, is spent by exploiting (tech-
nical) vulnerabilities and breaching cyber security defences.
Overall, the attack incentive A can be computed as
A = e−1 · G.
(2)
Although this equation is simple and might not accurately
reﬂect a potentially more complex inter-dependency of the
involved parameters in real scenarios, we want to maintain
a degree of simplicity which is comparable to that in the risk
computation formula (1).
This idea leads to our proposed Attack Incentive Matrix
(AIM) depicted in Figure 2, describing possible actions that
the attacker might take, depending on the attacker’s expected
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

gain (low, medium or high) and effort (minor, moderate or
major) reference by the rows and columns of the matrix.
We propose to specify the following actions: plan to attack
(monitor target), information gathering (reconnaissance), and
attack the target.
Fig. 2. Attack Incentive Matrix (AIM)
B. Proposed Framework: MAEVA
In this section, we present our MAEVA framework as guid-
ance for computing the attack incentive A, based on estimating
the effort e and the gain G. This proposed framework has sev-
eral key characteristics partially inspired by considerations al-
ready used in the security assessment methodologies reviewed
in the previous section, however in a different context. Our
framework recommends considering the following categories
when trying to estimate the required parameters, guided by
following the MAEVA mnemonic:
1) Motive: the underlying reason for attacking the victim.
This could be for the purposes of ﬁnancial gains, re-
venge, personal satisfaction or thrill, or simply with
the intention of creating damage. From a psychological
point of view, the attacker’s motive might affect the
perceived gain, as well as the appreciation of the effort
required.
2) Ability: the capability of the attacker to invest in re-
sources for implementing the attack, as well as the
technical knowledge available for breaching cyber se-
curity controls. A strong ability will make it easier to
spend effort on the attack, and subjectively reducing the
perceived value of e.
3) Exploitability: the ease by which the system can be
penetrated, through exploiting a vulnerability. It would
be reasonable to expect exploitability and effort to be
inversely related in a proportional manner. This category
could be explored similarly as in the CVSS exploitability
score, taking into account possible attack vectors and at-
tack complexities, as well as the required privileges and
interaction with users, however, the discussion should
not be restricted to software vulnerabilities alone.
4) Visibility of target: how prominent is the target, for
example, does it have a popular website or brand name,
does it have a large user base? Great visibility might
promise a big gain, in the eyes of the attacker.
5) Attractiveness of target: from the point of view of the
attacker, how attractive is the target? This is linked
to how much gain the attacker would estimate from
achieving through the attack, and will strongly depend
on the speciﬁc motive, as discussed in the ﬁrst category.
While the MAEVA framework is intended to be used by the
risk assessing organisation, it is an attacker-aware framework
and the main assumption of its use is that an attacker would
ﬁnd it very natural to follow the same methodology in order
to have a more systematic way to locate speciﬁc points within
the AIM matrix in a given scenario, and use this as a guide
for the decision to attack or not.
C. Discussion
We have reviewed the security assessment approach based
on computing risk and introduced an alternative framework
for modelling the attack incentive. Both approaches bring
challenges in terms of achieving precise estimates for realistic
results in practical scenarios. This will be brieﬂy discussed
and the advantages of combining both approaches outlined in
this section.
In the risk matrix approach, the parameter that is more
challenging to estimate is the attack likelihood p, as it depends
a lot on external factors outside of our control. When trying
to model attack incentive matrices, the difﬁcult parameter is
the effort e, since this has to be viewed as a relative quantity,
depending on the capabilities of the attacker. Both approaches
are complementary and if we use both, we can develop a better
understanding of the risk that the organisation faces from an
impeding cyber security attack.
By taking into account both perspectives (attacker, de-
fender), a good understanding of the impact I can be devel-
oped by comparing it with the gain G. A discrepancy might
reveal the need for correcting any of those two parameters.
Furthermore, the attack likelihood p would be closely related
to the attack incentive A, and this can help with computing
R. As the effort e will depend, amongst other things, on the
organisation’s willingness to apply a security control, in other
words, the perceived risk R, it might be necessary to adapt
the estimate for A. After several iterations of estimations and
adaptions, a ﬁnal model should be obtained. We argue that
the resulting ﬁgures are much more reliable and realistic, than
those obtained without using MAEVA.
IV. APPLICATION TO GAME THEORY
In this section, we will show that the RRM together with the
AIM approach can be used naturally when modelling a non-
cooperative two-player non-zero-sum complete information
game, which is a speciﬁc type of security game useful for
game-theoretic risk assessment. A complete information game
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

means that each player knows the strategies and payoffs of the
other player in the game, but not necessarily the actions. For
more background information on security games, we refer to
[12].
A. Game Description
We are concerned with a single-target security game
G(D, A) where the main focus is on a single asset that
has an exploitable vulnerability. Our simple game comprises
of two players: an attacker A and a defender D where
each player has their own strategies as illustrated in Table
I. The rows corresponds to the strategies available to the
defender: SD = {defend, not defend} = {sd, s−d}, and the
columns indicates the attacker’s strategies: SA = {attack, not
attack} = {sa, s−a}. Moreover, there is a payoff function
(e.g., cost and beneﬁt) that each player will incur depending on
their chosen strategy: cD is the defence cost, I is the defender’s
loss (impact) from an attack. By cA we denote the attacker’s
cost, and G is the gain (beneﬁt) of the attacker from an attack.
Note that we have used notations that are compatible with the
previous sections. The following natural assumptions [13] are
usually made for this type of security game: the Principle of
Adequate Protection prescribes that defence costs must not
exceed potential losses: cD < I, and the Principle of Easiest
Attack states that the attacker prefers to keep his or her cost
for attacking bounded by the expected gain: cA < G. The
game is described using its payoff matrix, which speciﬁes its
strategic normal form:
TABLE I
PAYOFF MATRIX FOR G(D, A)
D ↓ A →
sa
s−a
sd
−cD, −cA
−cD, 0
s−d
−I , G − cA
0, 0
B. Game Analysis
When using a so-called Nash Equilibrium strategy, none
of the players will have the incentive in deviating unilaterally
from this strategy as this will reduce his or her expected utility.
The following results are well-known properties of security
games such as the game G, c.f. [12].
Theorem 1. The security game G(D, A) has no pure Nash
Equilibrium.
Proof. By inspecting the payoff matrix of the game.
Theorem 2. A mixed Nash Equilibrium strategy pair (x∗
D, x∗
A)
is obtained, where q∗ = 1 − cA/G and p∗ = cD/I are the
probability of defense and attack respectively.
Proof. Following Nash, as further detailed in [12].
In the context of security assessment, the outcomes of the
game analysis have the following implications:
• Due to the lack of a pure equilibrium solution, there is no
clear-cut decision whether to defend or not, as there is a
dilemma between the conﬂicting non-cooperating players
of the game.
• The mixed equilibrium solution can be interpreted as a
means to compute risk, by interpreting the mixed strategy
of the attacker as a probability value: R = p∗ · I.
Hence, a more systematic and theoretically justiﬁed way to
compute risk can be achieved, based on game theory.
C. MAEVA Application
As we have seen, under the assumption of complete in-
formation about the strategies available to both players, the
use of game theory improves the traditional risk assessment
approaches as it combines both the non-cooperative nature of
the defender and the attacker. Before the game can be solved,
it needs to be speciﬁed in terms of the precise values for
the payoff functions, and Table I reveals that the MAEVA
framework can be used to determine (an estimate for) G. The
parameter cD is effectively the defense budget of the organisa-
tion and cA can be related to the attacker’s effort e. Hence, in
a natural way, both the RRM and AIM methodologies provide
the input parameters for the game. The analysis of the game
based on computing the Nash equilibrium will then result in
the desired risk value, following the computation as presented
in the previous section.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a new framework entitled
MAEVA, for analysing the attack incentive of a cyber security
adversary of an organisation. Furthermore, we have shown
how to use this framework in combination with traditional
risk analysis, in order to achieve a more reﬁned strategy to
assess typical risk-related parameters such as attack likelihood
and impact. We have also demonstrated that the framework
is useful as preparation of game-theoretic modelling of risk
assessment. To our knowledge, our framework constitutes a
novel approach and we recommend using it as a practical
methodology for any organisation wishing to assess risk,
perhaps in combination with other mainstream methods.
The next step for this research would be an implementation
of a real scenario, and a detailed evaluative comparison
with existing approaches. For example, an organisation could
review their information assets, apply both the RRM and AIM,
and compare the resulting parameters. It would be interesting
to relate this to historical information about cyber security
incidents that happened in the past at this organisation, or
in its sector. Ideally, we would expect an advantage resulting
from the dual use of these frameworks, in terms of obtaining
more realistic risk estimates. While not being the main focus
of this paper, another interesting aspect that deserves further
attention is to more deeply explore the link between traditional
and game-theoretical security assessment. The authors believe
that risk assessment modelling using game theory would have
numerous advantages and that it should be considered for
use in future versions of mainstream security assessment
methodologies.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

REFERENCES
[1] M. Gostovnikas, “The 9 worst recent data breaches of 2020,” https:
//auth0.com/blog/the-nine-worst-recent-data-breaches-of-2020, January
2021. [Online].
[2] NIST, “NIST SP 800-30: Guide for conducting risk assessments,” NIST,
Tech. Rep., September 2012. [Online]. Available: http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf{\%}5Cnhttp://
csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html{\%}5Cnhttp://dx.doi.org/10.
6028/NIST.SP.800-30r1
[3] S. Derakhshandeh and N. Mikaeilvand, ““New framework for compar-
ing information security risk assessment methodologies”,” Australian
Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, vol. 5, no. 9, pp. pp. 160–166,
2011.
[4] G.
Banga,
““Why
is
cybersecurity
not
a
human-scale
problem
anymore?”,” Commun. ACM, vol. 63, no. 4, p. pp. 3034, March 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3347144
[5] W. Kanoun, F. Cuppens-Boulahia, N. Cuppens, S. Dubus, and A. Martin,
““Success likelihood of ongoing attacks for intrusion detection and
response systems”,” in 2009 International Conference on Computational
Science and Engineering, vol. 3, 2009, pp. pp. 83–91.
[6] Tripwire, “Tripwire Vulnerability Scoring System,” https://dsimg.ubm-
us.net/envelope/160343/293772/1396040281 Tripwire Vulnerability
Scoring System white paper.pdf, p. 8, 2016. [Online].
[7] C. Alberts, A. Dorofee, J. Stevens, and C. Woody, “Introduction to the
OCTAVE approach,” Carnegie Mellon University, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[8] N. I. of Standards and Technology, “National Vulnerability Database,”
https://nvd.nist.gov/, March 2021.
[9] FIRST, “Common Vulnerability Scoring System Version 3.1,” FIRST
(Forum of Incident Response and Security Teams), Tech. Rep., June
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/v3-1/cvss-v31-
speciﬁcation r1.pdf
[10] Microsoft, “The STRIDE Threat Model,” https://msdn.microsoft.com/
en-us/library/ee823878(vcs.20).aspx, pp. 1–3, 2002.
[11] EC-Council, “DREAD threat modeling: An introduction to qualitative
and quantitative risk analysis,” https://blog.eccouncil.org/dread-threat-
modeling-an-introduction-to-qualitative-and-quantitative-risk-analysis/,
Dec 2020.
[12] T. Alpcan and T. Basar, Network security: A decision and game-theoretic
approach.
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
[13] C. Pﬂeeger, Security in computing.
Prentice Hall, 2015.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-862-4
ICIMP 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

