Development Model of a Public Safety Broadband Communications  
 
Network in Indonesia 
Gerson Damanik 
Development Studies Doctoral Program 
Satya Wacana Christian University 
Salatiga, Indonesia 
gerson@postel.go.id 
Denny Kusuma Hendraningrat 
National Standardization Agency of Indonesia 
Center for Standards Development 
Jakarta, Indonesia 
denny_kh@bsn.go.id
 
Abstract — The Public and Private Partnership (PPP) 
development model of a public safety broadband 
network between cellular operators and public safety 
agencies, such as the National Disaster Management 
Agency, is a challenge for the government of Indonesia 
to provide broadband access. Public safety agencies are 
local governments, police agency, health agency, fire 
brigades. 
Each 
agency 
built 
their 
networks 
independently. 
In 
this 
study, 
the 
public 
safety 
broadband network model in Indonesia is developed by 
using an investment budget to build a broadband 
network of each agency. The budget of each agency is a 
function of compensation for the public safety, because 
they do not build their own network separately, but they 
rather share it with the cellular network. Public safety 
users are included as cellular users who will be given 
priority access or Quality of Service (QoS), but they are 
not profitable users for cellular operators. So, a cellular 
operator only receives infrastructure compensation 
budget due to the addition of user traffic for public 
safety, because this is part of the responsibilities of the 
government. The feasibility of this model will be 
measured by Net Present Value (NPV) calculations. 
From a cellular operator perspective, it is concluded that 
operators choose the 2x25 MHz option, which must 
share bandwidth and network infrastructure with public 
safety agencies. It has a higher NPV than the 2x20 MHz 
option, which is only for commercial Long Term 
Evilution (LTE). From a government perspective, the 
NPV always has a positive value. So, it indicates that the 
government 
needs 
to 
consider 
implementing 
a 
development model of a public safety broadband 
network with a sharing scheme between cellular 
operators and public safety agencies. 
Keywords — public safety broadband network, sharing 
scheme, NPV, LTE 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Public safety is an activity comprised of prevention, 
treatment, and protection against things that harm other 
people who may be significantly affected or injured, or 
experience a loss or damage, such as a crime or disaster. It 
can be caused by human actions or a natural occurrence, 
which is why it is important to create a secure and 
comfortable condition in the community. By doing so, it can 
support national stability [1]. 
Today, communication systems supporting public safety 
agencies have different standards, such as using different 
frequency ranges of 300 MHz – 800 MHz and using 
different kinds of technology. The most widely used types of 
technology are the conventional systems, trunking systems, 
Public 
Switched 
Telephone 
Network 
(PSTN), 
and 
commercial cellular networks. In fact, the condition of public 
safety in Indonesia is still independent, which does not 
support 
interoperability 
among 
agencies. 
It 
causes 
coordination difficulties between agencies responding to 
disaster. In addition, the public safety network in Indonesia 
is still based on a narrowband system. The capital 
expenditures (capex) and operational expenditures (opex) 
will necessitate high investment costs when each of the 
public safety agencies build their own broadband networks 
independently. So, it will burden the government’s budget 
while the public safety traffic is only used in emergency 
conditions based on operational statistic data [2] and traffic 
site summary information [3]. The average communication 
channel occupation during emergencies or disasters is 31.32 
percent from the total capacity or 7.52 hours/day [4]. 
Consistent with the issue of broadband public safety, 
based on Ministerial Decree No. 22 of 2011, the Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology of Indonesia 
has planned a migration of analog terrestrial television to 
digital television services, which is targeted by 2018 [5]. In 
Article 4 of Ministerial Decree No. 18 of 2005, it is declared 
that in the case where government entities desire to use a 
telecommunications network, they can lease it from the 
network provider. On the other hand, especially in Article 7 
of Ministerial Decree No. 18 of 2005, it is declared that 
government entities networks are prohibited to collect 
payments [6]. 
Based on the explanation above, a public safety 
broadband network has the opportunity to integrate public 
safety networks, in which some portions of the Asia Pacific 
Telecommunity (APT) 700 MHz digital dividend bandwidth 
can be allocated for LTE based technology to serve public 
safety agencies [7]. In this study, public and private 
partnerships are developed to deploy a public safety 
broadband network in Indonesia based on the previous 
model [8] [9], and it has been changed according to 
Indonesia’s condition, based on Ministerial Decree No. 22 of 
2011 and Ministerial Decree No. 18 of 2005. The model is 
still being developed by using the existing public safety 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

network. First, it will be deployed in the greater Jakarta area 
and its satellite area because Jakarta, as the capital city of 
Indonesia, serves the central government and economy with 
a high population density, so it needs to have a public safety 
broadband system. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
Based on previous experiences in other countries, the 
Federal Communications Commission-United States (FCC-
US) adopted an order to create a nationwide broadband 
network with a 2x10 MHz bandwidth for the Frequency 
Division Duplex (FDD) that consists of 758-768 MHz for an 
uplink and 788-798 MHz for a downlink, which is called “D 
Block”. In America, the public safety spectrum is allocated 
at 763-775 MHz for an uplink and 793-805 MHz for a 
downlink, which consists of 2x5 MHz (763-768 MHz and 
793-798 MHz) for a public safety broadband network using a 
bandwidth shared with an LTE network and the other 
spectrum allocated for a public safety narrowband network. 
In March of 2008, the FCC attempted to auction the D Block 
with public safety encumbrances but failed to attract a 
winning commercial bidder [10]. This is caused by several 
reasons, some of which include [11] [12]:  
a. The 2x10 MHz bandwidth allocation in the D Block was 
claimed to be too small to overcome the LTE user traffic. 
b. The issue has been framed in such a way as to suggest 
that allocations to the public safety community are at the 
expense of commercial wireless providers. 
c. Some of the business entities collapsed and the United 
States (US) needs more commercial broadband network 
capacity to remain competitive globally. 
d. The inexact time of the auction which was followed by a 
flurry of waiver petitions, public comments, and much 
debate. 
Ryan Hallahan [8] improved the broadband public safety 
wireless communication based on the US situation, in which 
public safety users were reputed as being profitable users or 
commercial cellular customers who must pay for the use of 
their traffic. He devised a handover scenario whereby a 
handset must connect (roam) to a cellular operator if the user 
moves to another location which does not have public safety 
network coverage in Block D. In addition, APT modified 
2x10 MHz of digital dividend to be allocated only for public 
safety communications [13].  
In this research, a different method from the USA is 
deployed. In Indonesia, it is developed from a public 
partnership model between cellular operators and public 
safety agencies, where the public safety users are cellular 
users that will be given priority access or quality of service 
(QoS), but they are not considered as profitable users for 
cellular operators. Public safety user traffic on a cellular 
network will be converted to the additional costs (capex and 
opex) of cellular network deployment. In a government 
perspective, the investment cost payments should be 
managed by the government, as the Ministry of Finance 
should provide the budget for the public safety broadband 
network agencies. In this study, those payments are defined 
as a function of the government costs. This model developed 
the investment cost utilization as a budget which is canceled 
for each of the public safety agencies to build a public safety 
broadband network independently. In this study, that 
canceled budget is defined as a function of the government 
value. The government should consider the expenditure 
efficiency when deploying a model of a public safety 
broadband network, so that the feasibility will be measured 
from the NPV of a government perspective. From a cellular 
operator perspective, the government cost is a portion of the 
contributions to the cellular network as an operator value 
function of the cellular operator NPV, besides the annual 
revenue per user (ARPU) of commercial users. In this model, 
the operator costs are calculated from the total investment 
sharing network costs and annual spectrum fees. 
III. 
NPV MODEL DEVELOPMENT 
This model is developed from the previous studies of 
Ryan Hallahan [8], John Ure [9], and Administrative 
Incentive Pricing (AIP) recommended by Australian 
Communication and Media Authority (ACMA) [14] with an 
adoption of the conditions of Indonesia. An illustration of 
this model can be viewed in Figure 1. 
In this study, the NPV formula is based on a government 
and cellular operator perspective and developed as a measure 
of examining the feasibility of developing a public safety 
broadband network based on the model proposed in this 
study. The cellular operator NPV during the observation is 
defined by t = i, as follows:  
   (1) 
Then, the government NPV is formulated as follows: 
 
NPVGov = GVi – GCi                
(2) 
Where, 
GVi 
= 
total 
investment 
cost 
utilization as a budget, 
which is cancelled by the 
year-i for each of the 
public safety agencies to 
build a public safety 
broadband 
network 
independently. 
 
[USD/year] 
GCi 
= 
total payment of the 
investment costs by the i-
year which should be 
prepared 
by 
the 
government, 
as 
a 
compensation 
for 
the 
public safety user traffic 
to the cellular operator. 
 
[USD/year] 
SubCOMM,i  = 
total 
number 
of 
commercial subscriptions 
by the year-i. 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

RCOMM      = 
monthly revenue from 
commercial subscriptions. 
 
[USD/month] 
Ci          
= 
amount of equipment per 
element developed in the 
i-year.  
 
 
CTOT,i      = 
total 
amount 
of 
equipment per element 
operating in the i year. 
 
 
Capex     
= 
upfront cost to develop 
the network per element. 
 
[USD] 
Opex       
= 
annual cost to operate the 
 
[USD/year] 
network per element. 
SFi 
= 
Annual 
Spectrum 
Fee 
(LTE 700 MHz) in the i-
year. 
 
[USD/year] 
n             
= 
time horizon. 
 
[Years] 
D            
= 
discount rate. 
 
[%] 
 
Improving Public Safety Wireless 
Communications: Analyzing the Cost of 
Nationwide Network and Strategies for 
Sharing Commercial Network
(Ryan Hallahan) [7]
Administrative Incentive Pricing of Radio 
Frequency Spectrum
(Plum Consulting) [12]
Public Protection and Disaster Relief 
(PPDR) Services and Broadband in Asia 
and the Pacific: A Study of Value and 
Opportunity Cost in the Assignment of 
Radio Spectrum
(John Ure) [8]
Problems
· It is difficult to get exclusive spectrum 
allocation like the agency in charge 
PPDR
· Government agencies built their own 
networks making less efficient use of 
frequencies
· Low network utilities of government 
agencies
Development Model of Broadband Public 
Safety Communication in Indonesia
(Damanik, G & Hendraningrat. Denny K.) 
Contributions
· Using the potential of the investment 
costs which is substituted by 
governments and utilization of 
spectrum fee as PPDR development 
costs in Indonesia.
· It is suitable, with the conditions of
developing countries that still apply the
granting of frequency allocations to
government agencies with Command
Control Spectrum approach.                
On the other
hand, with a mobile spectrum sharing,     
it is a good opportunity to optimize the
network.
· A new strategy in the development of 
PPDR model based on Non-Profitable 
users
· Identify potential losses from a disaster
· Analyze the cost benefit of  broadband 
PPDR implementation
· Development of the broadband PPDR 
network based on Radio Network 
Planning Method in the United States.
· Public Safety users and commercial 
users are profitable users
· Public Safety users are charged 
monthly as revenue for mobile 
operators for using a mobile network.
· Identify potential spectrum fee
· Using spectrum fee for spectrum 
refarming
Tools
· Using the potential of the investment costs and spectrum fee to compensate  
network sharing cost between mobile operators.
· PPDR users are part of cellular users, have priority access and higher QoS 
than commercial users, and they are not a profitable users.
· Using frequency and infrastructure sharing between PPDR and cellular 
network.
i
 
Figure 1. Development Model of a Public Safety Broadband Network 
 
IV. RESULTS AND FEASIBILITY ANALYSIS OF PUBLIC 
SAFETY BROADBAND NETWORK COMMUNICATIONS IN 
INDONESIA  
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has 
identified a 2x45 MHz bandwidth allocation for the Asia 
Pacific Region as a bandwidth allocation for Evolved 
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) technology, 
such as LTE technology [15]. In this study, the digital 
dividend ecosystem is divided into commercial LTE and 
public safety. LTE is more effective than Dual Carrier of 
High Speed Packet Access (DC-HSPA) when using a 2x20 
MHz bandwidth system [16]. This simulation is designed by 
using 2 Mobile Network Operators (MNOs), where the 
MNO that is willing to share bandwidth and network 
infrastructure with the public safety agencies will be given a 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

2x25 MHz bandwidth allocation and the other MNO will be 
allocated 2x20 MHz. 
In this model, public safety users are cellular users who 
will be given priority access. The standard broadband QoS is 
described by 2 Mbps user throughput [17]. The services 
provided to the public safety broadband network include 
voice, two-way video, and data transfer. 
In this study, the feasibility of broadband public safety 
communication is measured based on the NPV calculation, 
both from the government and cellular operator perspectives 
[18]. It consists of calculating the network (coverage and 
capacity) planning and then calculating the network cost 
deployment, so that the NPV can be determined. 
A. Defining 
Network 
Planning 
for 
Public 
Safety 
Communication 
1) Coverage Planning: This computation focused on 
performing a calculation of a maximum cell range of LTE 
700 by QoS, which is outlined in Table I. In this study, it is 
assumed that the use of broadband LTE is in a fixed outdoor 
area. Based on the coverage planning method, the 
propagation conditions are one of the main factors to 
determine the cell size. In this study, link budget 
simulations are conducted to know the number of LTE e-
Nodes B, which are needed to cover the planning area. The 
cell range prediction is calculated by adopting Okumura 
Hatta’s [19] propagation model. An example of an LTE link 
budget calculation is shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
LTE COVERAGE PLANNING 
 
2) Capacity Planning: In a cellular network, capacity 
planning is required for the network optimization to meet 
the QoS requirements [20]. The calculation of capacity 
planning is started with an LTE rollout plan and the user 
prediction of the Indonesia cellular provider which has a 
43% market share. So, the number of eNodes-B is 
calculated using the following formula [21]: 
   (3) 
  
3) Defining Network Cost Deployment: Based on data 
from the vendor, the network infrastructure costs were 
calculated for the components, as shown in Table II.[22] 
TABLE II.  
INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS 
 
The total investment costs were calculated by multiplying 
the results of the network planning with the price list, which 
is shown in Table II. The total investment costs required to 
build the LTE network with a sharing system (first option) 
between a cellular operator and public safety is shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Total Investment Costs 
 
B.  Defining NPV Calculation  
The NPV calculation is developed on the basis of 
revenues minus total expenses. From a government 
perspective, the revenue or government value is the total 
investment cost utilization as a budget which is cancelled by 
public safety agencies to build a public safety broadband 
network independently. On the other hand, the government 
cost is the total payment of the investment costs by the year-i 
which should be prepared by the government, as a 
compensation for public safety user traffic to the cellular 
operator. Figure 3 shows the calculation of government value 
and government costs. 
 
Figure 3. Government Perspective 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

 
From the cellular operator perspective, the operator 
revenue (operator value) is the annual revenue per user 
(ARPU) of commercial users plus the compensation costs 
from the government (government costs). On the other hand, 
the operator costs are calculated from the total investment 
sharing network costs and annual spectrum fees. In the first 
year, the government value has a high value obtained from 
the capex (core networks) of public safety agencies to build a 
public safety broadband network independently. In the 
second year, the public safety network is not required to 
build core networks (only towers and e-NodeB). In the sixth 
year, the public safety network only requires maintenance 
fees (opex). So, if the Ministry of Finance diverts the costs of 
public safety agencies to build a public safety broadband 
network independently to become a sharing model, then it 
will be advantageous for the government. Figure 4 shows the 
calculation of operator value and operator cost. 
 
Fig 4. Cellular Operator Perspective 
 
Figure 4 shows that the operator NPV has a positive 
value after the 5th year of LTE deployment. A cellular 
operator’s revenue always increases after the 5th year of LTE 
deployment. It is concluded that cellular operators need to 
consider implementing the LTE technology. 
 
C. Simulation Results of NPV Calculations  
1) Cellular Operator Perspective: In this scenario, the 
cellular operator is only given two options of bandwidth 
allocation. This simulation will compare the results of the 
NPV calculation between these two options. In the first 
option, the operator using 2x25 MHz must share the 
bandwidth and network infrastructure with the public safety 
agencies. Based on the APT recommendation [16], public 
safety agencies will be given 2x10 MHz dedicated only for 
public safety communication. However, in this development 
model, it is designed with 2x10 MHz for sharing between 
public safety and commercial LTE and 2x15 MHz only for 
commercial LTE. In other words, the maximum bandwidth 
allocation is 2x25 MHz for commercial LTE and 2x10 MHz 
for public safety communication. In the second option, the 
operator only uses 2x20 MHz for commercial LTE. Figure 5 
shows the NPV results for the first option (2x25 MHz) and 
second option (2x20 MHz) while setting a discount rate at 
5% [18]. 
 
Figure 5. Cellular Operator NPV 
 
Figure 5 shows that the NPV results for first option are 
higher than the second option. It is concluded that a cellular 
operator will obtain more benefits if the first option is taken 
rather than the second option. 
2) Government Perspective: In this model, the Ministry 
of Communications and Information Technology acts as a 
grantor of the sharing policy between cellular operators and 
public safety agencies. On the other hand, the Finance 
Ministry acts as the owner of the budget for financing public 
safety broadband network implementation with a sharing 
concept between cellular operators and public safety 
agencies. Figure 6 shows the NPV results based on the 
government’s perspective. 
 
Figure 6. Government NPV 
 
Figure 6 shows that the NPV results have a positive value 
with the implementation of this sharing model. This 
suggests 
that 
the 
government 
needs 
to 
consider 
implementing the development model of broadband public 
safety through a sharing scheme between cellular operators 
and public safety agencies. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

V. CONCLUSION 
In this study, a public and private partnership model is 
developed to deploy the public safety network through a 
sharing model with commercial cellular operators. In this 
model, the investment cost utilization is a budget which is 
canceled for each of the public safety agencies to build a 
public safety broadband network independently. This study 
contributes to the cost savings of public safety network 
development. 
The feasibility of this model is measured by net present 
value (NPV) calculations. From the cellular operator 
perspective, it is concluded that operators prefer the 2x25 
MHz option, which must share bandwidth and network 
infrastructure with the public safety agencies. It has higher 
NPV than the 2x20 MHz option only for commercial LTE. 
From a government perspective, the NPV always has a 
positive value. So, it indicates that the government needs to 
consider implementing Development Model of a Public 
Safety Broadband Communications Network through a 
sharing scheme between cellular operators and public safety 
agencies. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Eason, B. Noble, and I. N. Sneddon, “On Certain 
Integrals 
of 
Lipschitz-Hankel 
Type 
Involving 
Products of Bessel Functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 
London, vol. A247, pp. 529–551, April 1955.  
[2] 
G. Damanik, “Determining the Number of e-Node B 
for Digital Dividend Public Safety Communication in 
Jakarta Area,” ECTI International Journal. Thailand. 
[3] 
Jakarta Local Government., “Operational Statistic of 
Trunking Analog,” Jakarta, Indonesia. 2013. 
[4] 
Polda Metro., “Traffic Site Summary of Land Mobile 
Radio (LMR)”. Jakarta, Indonesia. 
[5] 
Regulation of the Minister of Communications and 
Information Technology of Indonesia No. 22 of 2011. 
[6] 
Regulation of the Minister of Communications and 
Information Technology of Indonesia No. 18 of 2005. 
[7] 
ITU-R M. 2015 Frequency Arrangements for Public 
Protection and Disaster Relief Radiocommunication 
Systems in UHF Bands in Accordance with 
Resolution 646 (Rev.WRC-12). 
[8] 
R. Hallahan, “Improving Public Safety Wireless 
Communications: Analyzing the Cost of Nationwide 
Network and Strategies for Sharing Commercial 
Network,” Carnegie Mellon University. 2011. 
[9] 
J. Ure, “Public Protection and Disaster Relief (PPDR) 
Services and Broadband in Asia and the Pacific: A 
Study of Value and Opportunity Cost in the 
Assignment of Radio Spectrum,” TPRC Corporate. 
2013. 
[10] M. L. Goldstein, “Emergency Communication-
Various Challenges Likely to Slow Implementation 
of a Public safety Broadband Network,” United 
Stated Government Accountability Office. 
[11] Hatfield and Dawson, “Discussion of 700 MHz 
Spectrum Policy Issues for Public Safety in King 
Country,” NetCity Inc. 2010. 
[12] T. Takai and M. Bettenhausen, “California Public 
Safety Radio Communications Strategic Plan,” The 
Great Seal of The State of California. 2010. 
[13] T. Welter, “Assessing the Potential of The 700 MHz 
Band For PPDR,” Amsterdam. 2014. 
[14] Plum Consulting., “Administrative Incentive Pricing 
of Radio Frequency Spectrum,” London. 2008. 
[15] 3GPP TS 36.101 V9.4.0, “Technical Spesification 
Group Radio Access Network; Evolved Universal 
Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); User Equipment 
(UE) Radio Transmission and Reception.” 
[16] H. Holma and A. Toskala, “LTE for UMTS-OFDMA 
and SC-FDMA based Radio Access,” John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd. 2009. 
[17] D. Setiawan, D. Sirat, and D. Gunawan, “Feasibility 
of LTE 700 MHz Digital Dividend for Broadband 
Development Acceleration in Rural Areas,” ITB 
Journal 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology. 2012. 
[18] D. 
Setiawan, 
D. 
Sirat, 
and 
D. 
Gunawan, 
“Acceleration 
Model 
of 
Digital 
Dividend 
Implementation 
in 
Indonesia,” 
University 
of 
Indonesia. 2013. 
[19] D. K. Hendranigrat, N. F. Adriansyah,. U. K. Usman 
and D. Setiawan, “Refarming Analysis of 700 MHz 
Frequency Band for Long Term evolution (LTE) 
Implementation In Indonesia Using Link Budget 
Calculation,” International Conference on Electrical 
Engineering and Informatics (ICEEI). Bandung, 
Indonesia; ISSN : 2155-6822. ISBN : 978-1-4577-
0753-7. volume 3: page.1688-1692, 2011. 
[20] D. K. Hendraningrat, “Analysis of Slot Spectrum 
Selection For Long Term Evolution (LTE),” The 5th 
International Conference TSSA. Bandung, Indonesia. 
ISBN : 978-1-4577-1441-2. 2009. 
[21] S. A. Basit, “Dimensioning of LTE Network 
Descripttion of Model and Tool, Coverage and 
Capacity Estimation of 3GPP Long Term Evolution 
Radio Interface,” Helsinki University of Technology. 
2009. 
[22] D. Setiawan, and  D. K. Hendraningrat, “Digital 
Dividend Implementation Acceleration in Indonesia,” 
The 8th International Conference TSSA. Bali,  
Indonesia. ISBN : 978-1-4799-4774-4. 2014. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-564-7
ICIMP 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protection

