CobWeb Multidimensional Model: Filtering Documents using Semantic Structures 
and OLAP  
Omar Khrouf, Kaïs Khrouf 
University of Sfax, MIR@CL 
Laboratory, Tunisia 
Omar.khrouf@yahoo.fr, 
Khrouf.Kais@isecs.rnu.tn 
Abdulrahman Altalhi 
Faculty of Computing and IT,  
King Abdulaziz University,   
 Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 
ahaltalhi@kau.edu.sa 
Jamel Feki 
Faculty of Computing and IT,  
University of Jeddah,  
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia  
Jamel.Feki@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Today, the documents constitute a capitalization of 
knowledge in the Information Systems of companies. For the 
decision-makers, 
analyzing 
the 
contents 
of 
documents 
represents a real challenge. This paper proposes an approach 
based on the CobWeb model to filter semantic structures in 
order to find documents relevant to the decision-makers’ 
needs. In order to validate our approach, we have developed a 
GUI for the multidimensional queries and we have applied the 
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) analysis on 250 
documents taken from the academic domain. 
Keywords-XML 
documents; 
standard 
facet; 
OLAP; 
multidimensional model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The information systems of companies accumulate, over 
time, an important volume of data. With the web 
applications, 
the 
users 
can 
improve 
the 
internal 
communication within the company by creating, sharing, and 
modifying real-time work files. The information sharing and 
the professional work are essential for communication and 
business productivity. Faced with the rapid development of 
data (particularly in Web applications), the decision-making 
process has become an essential activity and an important 
research area, which requires the implementation of efficient 
systems called Decision Support Systems (DSS). In addition 
to the classical DSS systems, which handle numeric data, 
several studies have been interested in the exploitation of 
documentary information in order to extract semantic 
knowledge, for example, the multi-representation of 
documents using a set of “Facets” [8], or the OLAP of 
documents [13]. 
For the multi-representation of documents, some authors, 
such as Hernandez and al. [8] and Charhad and al. [4] have 
proposed to use a set of facets in order to describe the useful 
aspects of documents. These facets take into account not 
only the semantic aspect, but also other factors related to the 
exploitation context of documents in order to better satisfy 
the users’ needs. However, the various proposed facets vary 
according to the application field. Therefore, it would be 
interesting to define the standard facets, which enable the 
representation of documents in any research area. 
For the OLAP of documents, two categories of works can 
be distinguished: (1) Those which have adopted the classical 
multidimensional model, i.e., the star, the snowflake and the 
constellation models by enriching them with extensions for 
textual processing ([6] and [7] for data-centric documents; 
[15] for document-centric documents); and (2) Those which 
have proposed specific models for the OLAP of documents, 
such as galaxy model [13] and diamond model [1]. However, 
these studies did not treat the heterogeneity of structures and 
hence, require the definition, in advance, of parameters and 
hierarchies. 
In order to give more flexibility to the user in OLAP 
analysis tasks, we have proposed a multidimensional model 
called “CobWeb model”, as an extension of the galaxy model 
dedicated to the OLAP of documents based on standard 
facets [9]. Each facet includes a set of data and is considered 
as a means of expression for the user’s needs. For this 
reason, we have transformed every facet into a dimension. In 
multidimensional modeling, each dimension has a structure 
composed of a set of attributes called parameters, arranged 
hierarchically from the finest to the highest granularity (e.g., 
the Time dimension is composed of: Day < Week < Month < 
Quarter < Semester < Year). The dimension can be 
considered as an analysis axis; a parameter represents an 
analysis level and may be associated with one or several 
descriptive attributes, commonly called weak attributes. 
However, the integration of facets into an OLAP model 
creates a set of new problems, for which the classical models 
of the literature are unable to solve. Such problems arise 
from the multiple use of the same dimension within the same 
analysis, and from the concept of recursivity for a parameter 
of a given hierarchy, etc. To overcome these problems, we 
have proposed a set of extensions in the CobWeb model such 
as the exclusion constraint between two dimensions, which 
doesn’t allow using these two dimensions in the same 
analysis. The recursive parameters are used when the 
hierarchy parameters are not known in advance. The 
duplicated dimension allows the use of the same dimension 
twice in the same analysis, whereas the correlated dimension 
enables the movement between dimensions in the same 
analysis. 
This paper introduces the CobWeb model concepts and 
presents our approach of document filtering by using 
Semantic Structures. It is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents the related works dealing with the representation 
and exploitation of facets of documents and the OLAP of 
documentary information. Then, we define in Section 3 the 
set of five proposed standard facets of documents. Section 4 
describes the CobWeb multidimensional model focusing on 
its specificities. Section 5 presents the filtering of documents 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

and the OLAP querying. Finally, Section 6 is reserved for 
the conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In this section, we first overview the related works 
dealing with the multidimensional modeling of documents. 
Then, we examine the major works dealing with the 
representation and the exploitation of facets extracted from 
documents.  
For the multidimensional modeling of documents, most 
works have adopted the three proposed models in the 
literature for the factual data (star model, snowflake model 
and constellation model [10]) and have suggested some 
approaches or functions for the analysis of textual content. 
Tseng and al. [14] have used the star schema in order to 
analyze documents. This schema distinguishes between three 
types of dimensions: metadata (describing the document, 
e.g., author, language), ordinary (an ordinary dimension 
contains keywords extracted from the document), and 
category (external data for the document description as 
issued from Wordnet). However, it is limited to a simple 
count of general documents (e-mails, articles, Web pages, 
etc.) according to dimensions. 
Boussaid and al. [3] have proposed a modeling in 
snowflake of multidimensional XML data with data mining 
methods. These studies allow the analysis of complex data, 
but are not adapted for the analysis of textual data from 
XML documents.  
Azabou and al. [1] have proposed a diamond model, 
which is the star model enriched with a central dimension 
that attempts to represent the semantics of the document. The 
parameters of this semantic dimension are linked to 
parameters of other dimensions. The main disadvantage of 
this work is that it proposes a model made by a collection of 
documents with the same structure. Ravat and al. [13] have 
proposed a multidimensional model, called Galaxy, which is 
adapted to the analysis of XML documents. A galaxy 
schema is uniquely based on the dimension concept; it 
connects several dimensions by nodes instead of facts. A 
connecting node denotes compatible dimensions for analysis.  
However, this work does not take into account the 
heterogeneity of document structures. 
Zhang and al. [15] have proposed a new model called 
Topic Cube, based on the star schema which extends the 
traditional data cube by integrating a hierarchy of topics as 
an analytical dimension. It is a new cube model using a topic 
dimension and a text content measure which uses parameters 
of a probabilistic model. However, Topic Cube supports only 
a predefined set of themes. 
We notice that the studies dealing with the OLAP of 
documents provide the analysis of the documents having the 
same or similar structures. 
For the representation of documents, the concept of facet 
has been used in several domains and with different types of 
documents.  
For tweets, Kumar and al. [11] have proposed a 
navigation system by facet called Navigating Information 
Facets on Twitter (NIF-T) based on three facets: the Geo 
Facet showing the location of tweets in a map. Subject facet 
is a word showing the different thematic exchanges by the 
tweets. Time facet presents the number of tweets in a given 
date.  
For the video documents, Charhad and al. [4] have 
proposed to widen the Extended Model for Image 
Representation and Retrieval (EMIR²) created by Mechkour 
[12] in order to include audiovisual documents. They have 
added two facets: the temporal facet and the event facet. 
These two facets characterize the dynamic aspect, which is 
specific for this type of document. This new model allows 
the synthetic and integrated consideration of information 
about the image, text and sound elements. 
For textual documents, Hernandez and al. [8] have 
proposed a model based on a multi-facet representation of 
documents in order to associate several facets into the same 
document. They have defined two types of facets: the first 
one represents the semantics of the contents and the second 
one includes parameters aiming to improve the research 
results of documents, such as the description of the 
educational theories, the description by metadata, etc. 
As a conclusion, we notice that some of the studies which 
have used various facets vary depending on the application 
domain. However, for other approaches, the facets are fixed 
for a specific application domain. 
 
The purpose of this paper is to integrate the notion of 
facet in the OLAP model because it is interesting to represent 
documents from several points of view. Then we propose an 
approach based on the CobWeb model to filter semantic 
structures in order to determine the documentary information 
for the user’s needs. 
III. 
STANDARDS FACETS OF DOCUMENTS 
To the best of our knowledge, the concept of facet has 
not been addressed in the decision domain. In order to 
provide a facet-based OLAP model, we define a set of five 
facets to represent one or many documents according to a 
given viewpoint. These facets must be standard, i.e., 
independent of any specific domain of application and must 
give the user the ability to consider the same document or set 
of documents from multiple views (Metadata, Keyword, etc), 
so that he can have a more targeted access to information as 
needed [9]. 
 
 
The Metadata Facet: this facet aims to provide the 
users with a structured collection of the data 
describing a document (such as: title, rights, format, 
etc.). In our work, we use the metadata defined by 
the Dublin Core [5]. 
 
The Keyword Facet:  this facet constitutes a set of 
the most important keywords describing the content 
of 
the 
document. 
These 
keywords 
can 
be 
determined, by using the indexing techniques of 
information retrieval, or they come from the 
document itself when they exist explicitly. 
 
The Content Facet: this facet aims to present the 
information contained in the document (image, text, 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

etc.) by removing everything about the comments, 
structure, etc.  
 
The Semantic Facet: this facet describes the 
semantics of the content of the document. It is used 
in the classification of all or parts of the documents 
in order to facilitate the retrieval /analysis of these 
documents. For the determination of this semantics, 
we have relied on the work in [2] which defines a 
method for the determination of a semantic structure 
for a given document. 
 
The Structural Facet: this facet is a viewpoint of the 
structure of a document. It aims to focus on parts of 
the document (section, subsection, etc.) and not the 
whole document. 
 
Based on the previously defined facets, we present, in the 
following sections, the CobWeb multidimensional model 
devoted to the OLAP of documents. Then, we present an 
approach to filter documents by using semantic structures 
and OLAP querying. 
IV. 
COBWEB MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODEL 
In this section, we present the CobWeb multidimensional 
model (Fig. 1), which is an extension of the galaxy model 
based on standard facets in order to provide more 
opportunities for the expression of analytic queries and a 
more targeted vision of the data to decision makers. To build 
this model, the main idea consists in transforming every facet 
into a dimension since these facets may represent a means of 
expressing the users’ viewpoints and therefore, describe their 
requirements. Besides, we have added the dimension 
Document in order to link the information from different 
facets to their documents. CobWeb differs from the existing 
models by the following extensions: 
 
 
Duplicated 
Dimension: 
The 
classical 
multidimensional modeling does not allow using the 
same dimension twice in the same analysis. Let us 
suppose that we want to analyze the documents by 
two parameters belonging to the same Metadata 
dimension (namely, Date and Editor). This type of 
query is not possible. In order to give more 
flexibility to the user in the task of OLAP analysis, 
we propose the duplicated dimension, which can 
participate many times in the same analysis. 
Graphically, a duplicated dimension is symbolized 
by the letter D in the concerned dimension. In the 
CobWeb model, we have only one duplicated 
dimension, called Metadata (Fig. 1). 
 
Recursive Parameter: In the classical schema of 
data warehouses, the parameters and dimension 
hierarchies are known in advance. However, in our 
work:  
o 
The structure of documents may differ 
from one collection to another.  
o 
The semantic structure of documents is 
determined from taxonomies (hierarchical 
representation of the concepts) and helps 
describe the textual content of documents. 
Specifically, the concepts of taxonomies 
will be assigned to different parts of the 
documents. Therefore, the number of 
concepts and levels varies from a semantic 
structure to another. For the representation 
of these two dimensions, we will use a 
new type of parameters, called recursive 
parameter, since the documents and the 
taxonomies 
are 
represented 
in 
a 
hierarchical manner.  
o 
The structural dimension helps us to move 
from one level to another (Content 
Section 
SubSection 
Paragraph) 
using the conventional OLAP operators 
namely RollUp and Drill Down.  
o 
The semantic dimension allows the 
movement between concepts (Information 
System Data Warehouse Cube, etc.).  
Graphically, a recursive parameter is schematized by    
a directed loop (Fig. 1). 
 
Correlated 
Dimensions: 
In 
the 
classical 
multidimensional modeling, the movements between 
the dimensions cannot be achieved because of the 
absence of inter-dimensional relationships. To solve 
this problem, we propose the concept of correlated 
dimensions which allows, for the same query, to 
move 
between 
dimensions. 
Graphically, 
the 
correlation that can be possible between the 
dimensions of our multidimensional model is 
represented by dashed arrows between dimensions. 
The transition from one dimension to another is 
accepted when we respect the direction of the arrow. 
For example, it is possible to move from the Content 
dimension to the Semantic dimension. 
 
Exclusion Constraint between Dimensions: The 
exclusion constraint requires that a couple of 
dimensions cannot be used simultaneously in the 
same analysis. In CobWeb, the exclusion constraint 
concerns the Content and the Structural dimensions 
because an analysis must concern the content or 
parts of the documents (title, section, paragraph, 
etc.), but not both at the same time. Graphically, this 
exclusion constraint is denoted by a circle containing 
the letter X connected to the involved dimensions, 
such as: Document and Structural in Figure 1. 
V. 
FILTERING AND OLAP QUERING 
In this section, we describe our approach of filtering 
documents using Semantic Structures and OLAP querying in 
order to find the documentary information relevant to the 
decision-makers’ needs according to several analysis axes, as 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 1.  CobWeb multidimensional model.
1. Building a Semantic 
Structure (SS)
System
2. Elimination of SS having 
Few Common Concepts
3. Selection of the Most 
Similar SS
4. Generation of 
Multidimensional Queries
Multidimensional 
Table
Collection of XML 
Document 
(1)
(2)
User
Ontology
The Constructed 
SS
 
Figure 2.  The proposed process of querying
. 
This approach is based on four fundamental stages: 
 
 
The first step is building a semantic structure from a 
selected ontology. The user defines the closest 
concepts to his needs and puts them together into a 
semantic structure according to a set of predefined 
rules. 
 
 
The second step consists in a first filtering of the 
documents to be analyzed by the elimination of the 
semantic structures of documents having few 
common concepts with the built semantic structure 
defined by the user. 
 
 
The third step is a second filtering of documents in 
order to keep those having the most similar semantic 
structures compared to the semantic structure 
defined by the user. 
 
 
The last step in our approach is the generation of the 
multidimensional queries and the result will be 
displayed as a multidimensional table. 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

We note that we have automatically generated, in our 
previous works, a semantic structure for every XML 
document; this semantic structure is superposed on its logical 
structure [2] (Fig. 3). 
The purpose behind the use of semantic structures, in this 
phase of querying, is to keep only the relevant documents for 
the user’s need. In what follows, we explain the different 
steps of our approach. 
A. Step 1:Building a Semantic Structure (SS) 
In order to build his semantic structure, the user chooses, 
through a web application, a semantic resource to select a set 
of concepts depending on his needs and organizes them in a 
hierarchical 
way. 
This 
web 
application 
allows 
communicating and exchanging the semantic structures 
between systems or applications in order to determine the 
documentary information for the user’s needs. The user will 
be assisted by the system that displays error messages for the 
incorrect manipulations and it suggests one or more solutions 
(Fig. 4). 
A semantic resource (ontology, taxonomy, thesaurus, 
etc.) serves to represent the semantics of a given domain in a 
generic and reusable way in order to share knowledge and 
data. 
To build his semantic structure, the user must respect the 
following rules: 
 
 Rule 1: No reverse hierarchical order between 
concepts. Example: the ontology of Figure 4 shows 
that the OLAP is the father concept of the 
Dimension, in the semantic structure built by the 
user which it is prohibited to represent the 
Dimension as the father concept of the OLAP.  
 
Rule 2: The conceptual father of the concepts 
selected by the user represents the common ancestor 
of these concepts in ontology. Example: Figure 4 
shows that the user has selected the OLAP and 
Dimension 
concepts. 
The 
conceptual 
father 
attributed to these concepts is Data warehouse 
because, in ontology, it represents the common 
ancestor of selected concepts. 
B. Step 2: Elimination of SS with Few Common Concepts 
Once the semantic structure is built by the user, we 
compare this structure with the semantic structures of 
documents, in order to keep the pertinent structures, i.e., 
eliminate the structures having few common concepts with 
the semantic structure built by the user. For this reason, we 
propose the measure of similarity (1).                        
CSSC
Sim (SSC, SSU) =
CSSU
                                                                                              
 
|CSSC|: Number of common concepts between the semantic 
structure of the user and the semantic structures of 
documents. 
|CSSU|: Number of concepts in the semantic structure of 
the user. 
Sim (SSC, SSU): The similarity degree between the two 
semantic structures. 
We define a threshold for selecting structures. This 
threshold is determined by experiments and may be modified 
by the user according to his need. 
C. Step 3: Selection of the most Similar SS 
In our work, the order of concepts (father-son relation) is 
very important so, we propose to start comparing branches. 
A branch is a path composed of all the concepts between the 
root and the leaf of the semantic structure. Example: the 
branches of the semantic structure built by the user (Fig. 4) 
are: 
Branch 1: Information System  Graph. 
Branch 2: Information System  Data Base. 
Branch 3: Information System  Data Warehouse  
Dimension. 
Branch 4: Information System  Data Warehouse  
OLAP. 
The measure of similarity (2) allows comparing two 
branches of both semantic structures. 
CA (SSC, SSD)
+
2
(
)
+
(
) 2
SimB(SSC, SSD) =
CAC
CAD
AA (SSC, SSD)
AAC
 
|CA (SSC, SSD) |: Number of common concepts between the 
two mapped branches. 
|CAC|: Number of concepts in the branch of the built 
semantic structure. 
|CAD|: Number of concepts in the branch for the semantic 
structure of the document. 
|AAC|: Number of arches in the branch of the built 
semantic structure. 
|AA (SSC, SSD)|: Number of common arches between the 
two mapped branches. 
 
Table I presents an example of comparison between two 
branches of two different documents with a branch of the 
semantic structure built by the user (Information System (IS) 
 Data warehouse (DW)  Dimension (DIM)). 
TABLE I.  
A COMPARISON TABLE BETWEEN TWO BRANCHES OF TWO 
SEMANTIC STRUCTURES 
X
DW
IS
DIM
Branche of SSC
Branche of SSD
Degree of similarity SimB(SSC, SSD)
3 common concepts(IS, DW, DIM)
One arch aligned: DW
DIM
2 common concepts(IS, DW)
 0 arch aligned
DIM
IS
DW
DIM
IS
(3 +
)
+
(
2
SimB (SSC, SSD)
2
2
2
2
0 )
=
0.8+ 0
=
0.4
=
2
(3 +
)
+
(
2
SimB (SSC, SSD)
4
2
3
2
1 )
= (0.85+0,5 )
=
0.67
=
2
(1) 
(2) 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
Article
Content
Title
Author 
Section Section
Data warehouse
OLAP
Design
Null 
Dimension
OLAP
Logical Structure
Semantic Structure
<Article>
<Title>Modeling for DSS</Title>
<Author>Dupont</Author>
<Content>
<Section>A dimension constitutes a 
component…  </Section>
<Section>The multidimensional 
analyses allow users…   </Section>
</Content>
</Article>
Document XML
 
 
Figure 3.  Logical and semantic structure of XML document. 
Figure 4.  Example of building a semantic structure. 
 
At this level, we need to calculate the weight sum of the 
different branches. The documents having a similarity degree 
above a threshold (fixed by experiment and may be modified 
by the user) will be selected for the OLAP Query. 
D. Step 4: Generation of Multidimensional Queries 
For the multidimensional querying, the user should 
specify his query by indicating the fact and its measures and 
the various dimensions. Then, the system automatically 
generates the needed queries.  
We have developed a GUI for the multidimensional 
querying. In the left part of the interface, the user specifies 
his request by indicating the dimensions and the fact. The 
right part is devoted to the results of the query as a 
multidimensional table. To validate our work, we test and 
evaluate our approach on 250 documents taken from the 
academic domain.  
Figure 5 shows the results of the previous query in a 
multidimensional table, where the columns and the lines 
represent the first two dimensions (Author and Language), 
and where the plans represent the third dimension (Date). 
The measures are placed in the intersection of a line and 
a column for a given plan. The symbol * indicates that there 
is no value for the measure. In this experiment, we observe 
that most documents are written in French (181 documents in 
2012). So we can note that the majority of authors are 
francophone. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have proposed an approach based on the 
CobWeb model to filter the documents using Semantic 
Structures 
in 
order 
to determine 
the 
documentary 
information for the user’s needs. In addition, we have 
developed a GUI for the multidimensional querying.  
The main limitation of our approach is that the user 
builds his semantic structure by using a single semantic 
resource; it would be interesting to offer more opportunities 
to the user in order to build his semantic structure from 
several resources and not just to one. We also intend to 
propose new OLAP operators that take into consideration the 
specificities of the CobWeb model, for example an operator 
for the correlation of dimensions. These operators will 
facilitate 
the 
interpretation 
of 
the 
results 
of 
the 
multidimensional analyses. In the long run, we plan to 
introduce the personalized OLAP analysis which takes into 
account the needs and skills of the users, based on their 
profiles. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Graphical multidimensional querying. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. Azabou, K. Khrouf, J. Feki, C. Soulé-Dupuy, and N. Vallès, “A 
Novel Multidimensional Model for the OLAP on documents: 
Modeling, Generation and Implementation,” International Conference 
on Model & Data Engineering, Larnaca, Cyprus, September 2014, pp. 
258–272. 
[2] 
S. Ben Mefteh, K. Khrouf, J. Feki, and C. Soulé-Dupuy, “Semantic 
Structure for XML Documents: Structuring and pruning,” Journal of 
Information Organization, vol. 3,  issue 1, March 2013,  pp. 37-46. 
[3] 
O. Boussaid, R. Ben Messaoud, R. Choquet, and S. Anthoard, “X-
Warehousing : An XML-Based Approach for Warehousing 
Complex,” Proc. The 10 th East-European Conference on Advances 
in Databases and Information Systems (ADBIS 06), vol. 4152, 
September 2006,  pp. 39-54. 
[4] 
M. Charhad and G. Quénot, “Semantic Video Content Indexing and 
Retrieval using Conceptual Graphs,” Proc. IEEE Information and 
Communication Technologies: From Theory to Applications (ICTTA 
04), 
IEEE 
Press, 
April 
2004, 
pp. 
399-400, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICTTA.2004.1307800.  
[5] 
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI), Dublin Core Metadata 
Element 
Set, 
Version 
1.1, 
ISO 
Standard 
15836, 
2007. 
http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/. 
[6] 
J. Feki, I. Ben Messaoud, and G. Zurfluh, “Building an XML 
Document Warehouse,” Journal of Decision Systems (JDS). Ed. 
Taylor & Francis, vol. 22, issue 2, April 2013, pp. 122-148, doi: 
10.1080/12460125.2013.780322. 
[7] 
Y. Hachaichi and J. Feki, “An Automatic Method for the Design of 
Multidimensional Schemas from Object Oriented Databases,” 
International Journal of Information Technology and Decision 
Making, vol. 12, issue 12, November 2013, pp. 1223-1259, doi : 
10.1142/S0219622013500351. 
[8] 
N. Hernandez, J. Mothe, B. Ralalason, B. Ramamonjisoa, and P. 
Stolf, “A Model to Represent the Facets of Learning Objects,” 
Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and Learning Objects, 
Information Science Institute, Santa Rosa - USA, vol. 4, January 
2008, pp. 65-82. 
[9] 
O. Khrouf, K. Khrouf, and J. Feki, “CobWeb Multidimensional 
Model: From Modeling to Querying,” International Conference on 
Model & Data Engineering, Larnaca, Cyprus, September 2014, pp. 
273–280. 
[10] R. Kimball and M. Ross, The Data Warehouse Toolki: The Definitive 
Guide to Dimensional Modeling, 3rd ed.,  John Wiley & Sons, New 
York,  July 2013.  
[11] S. Kumar, F. Morstatter, G. Marshall, H. Liu, and U. Nambiar, 
“Navigating Information Facets on Twitter (NIF-T),” Proc. The 18th 
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery 
and Data Mining (KDD 12), August 2012, pp. 1548-1551. 
[12] M. Mechkour, “A multifacet formal image model for information 
retrieval,” Proc. The Final WorkShop on Multimedia Information 
Retrieval (MIRO 95), September 1995, pp. 18-20.  
[13] F. Ravat, O. Teste, R. Tournier, and G. Zurfluh, “Designing and 
Implementing OLAP Systems from XML Documents,” Proc. Annals 
of Information Systems, Springer, Special issue New Trends in Data 
Warehousing and Data Analysis, vol. 3, November 2008, pp. 1-21, 
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-87431-9_15. 
[14] F. S. C. Tseng and A. Y. Chou, “The concept of document 
warehousing for multidimensional modeling of textual-based business 
intelligence,” Journal Decision Support System (DSS), vol. 42, issue 
2,  November 2006, pp. 727-744. 
[15] D. Zhang, C. Zhai, J.  Han, A. Srivastava, and N. Oza, “Topic 
modeling for OLAP on multidimensional text databases: topic cube 
and its applications,” Journal Statistical Analysis and Data Mining, 
vol. 2, issue 5-6, December 2009, pp. 378-395. 
 
 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

