A Web Browsing System for Retrieving Scholarly Pages
Ari Pirkola
School of Information Sciences
University of Tampere
Finland
ari.pirkola@uta.fi
Abstract—The major Web search engines are useful tools to
find information from the Web but their commercial nature,
coupled with some other factors, makes it difficult to find
scholarly pages on a specific topic. Many users prefer browsing
to searching because it is easier. Even though browsing subject
directories is an important method to retrieve information
from the Web, such directories are not suitable for specific
scientific retrieval tasks. In this paper, we present a Web
browsing system focused on scholarly pages related to a
specific topic. The first implementation is dedicated to the topic
climate  change,  but  the  method  to  construct  the  system  is  a
general method that can be applied to any reasonable topic.
The climate change browsing system provides access through
links to the thematic Web pages of scientific organizations
engaged in climate change research, as well as to the pages of
organizations that are linked to them. Each link in the system
is categorized under a given index term based on the
occurrences of phrases related to climate change (keyphrases)
on the target pages of the links. In browsing, the user clicks the
desired index term and the system returns a list of links to the
pages associated with the index term. This paper also presents
the crawler used to fetch pages for the browsing system and a
keyphrase dictionary used in indexing the pages included in
the system.
Keywords - browsing; climate change; focused crawling;
information retrieval; scientific organizations
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Web contains tens or even hundreds of billions of
documents (pages). Access to its huge content is dominated
by commercial search engines, and a concern has been raised
about the commercially biased search results. Common
experience shows that the pages of companies and other
commercial organizations often populate the top ranks of the
search results while, for example, many highly informative
pages of scientific organizations do not appear in the results.
Obviously, this bias is caused by the commercial nature of
the search engines and specifically by the search engine
optimization (SEO), which means that Web page publishers
can promote the ranking of their Web pages in the search
results. Commercial organizations are willing and have
resources to invest in SEO whereas in the scientific
organizations such practice seems not to be common. It has
also been discussed where to draw a line between ethical and
unethical SEO. The above facts suggest that there is need for
such retrieval systems that satisfy the information needs of
users who search for scholarly information rather than
products or online shops.
The major Web search engines are query-based retrieval
systems.  Querying  is  an  effective  method  when  the
information need can be expressed using a relatively simple
query and the search term is clear, e.g., when the searcher
looks for information on the disease whose name he or she
knows. However, it is common that the searchers do not
know or remember the appropriate search terms. Complex
information needs are also difficult to formulate as a query.
In situations such as complex work tasks the information
need itself may be vague and ill defined [1]. Browsing
subject directories (e.g., Open Access Directory) is an
alternative way to retrieve information from the Web, and it
is preferred by many users because it is easier, requiring less
mental work than formulating a query. Such directories are
created manually and usually in (more or less) unsystematic
fashion. Their target pages may be both commercial and
informative pages. Even though the subject directories are
helpful tools, these features make them unsuitable for
specific scientific retrieval tasks. Automatically constructed
and systematically organized browsing systems focused on
scholarly pages are missing from the Web. In this paper, we
present a method to construct such a system.
Using the proposed method we implemented a browsing
system (a pilot system) for the topic climate change. We
present the existing climate change browsing system in this
paper, but the proposed method is a general method and can
be applied to any reasonable topic.  The climate change
browsing system contains links to the Web pages of
universities, research organizations, and their units (e.g.,
departments, centers, and institutes) investigating climate
change, as well as to the pages of organizations that are
linked to them. The system provides information that is
difficult or impossible to obtain by the major Web search
engines and not included in scientific publications, such as
information on current and completed research projects,
observational field data and new, not (yet) published
research 
findings. 
The 
system 
allows 
exploring
systematically different aspects of climate change research.
In goal-oriented browsing the system provides answers to the
questions such as: What organizations conduct research in
the field of climate change and what is the specific research
area of each organization. Where can I find information
related to a specific research area of climate change
research? There are also numerous more specific questions
where the system may be helpful.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the main features of the climate change browsing
system. The method to construct the browsing system is
presented in Section III. Section IV describes the tools
needed to construct the system: a focused Web crawler and a
keyphrase dictionary of climate change. Section V contains
the conclusions.
II.
CLIMATE CHANGE BROWSING SYSTEM
In this section, we present the main features of the
climate change browsing system. The system provides
access to the thematic pages of universities, research
organizations, and their units, as well as to the thematic
pages of organizations that are linked to them (e.g., online
journals). Non-thematic pages, such as about us and contact
are pruned out by applying a stop-word list for the URLs of
the pages (Section III). We differentiate between two types
of thematic pages: project pages that describe the research
areas of the organizations, or present ongoing or completed
research projects, or include some information related to the
research projects, and findings pages that describe recent
research findings (from the present back a few years).
The following simple example illustrates the structure of
the browsing system:
melting glaciers 11.7
Ļ                   Ļ
Link to page A  ĺ
Link to page B  ĺ  project pages  A-C
Link to page C  ĺ
Link to page D  ĺ
Link to page E  ĺ  findings pages D-F
Link to page F  ĺ
Page titles serve as links, and they are categorized
under index terms, such as melting glaciers, climate models,
or sea level rise based on the occurrences of the phrases
related to climate change (keyphrases) on the pages.
The index terms describe the research areas of the
organizations in the field of climate change research, and
their source is the climate change keyphrase dictionary
(Section IV B). Each index term has an importance score,
which reflects the significance of the term in the context of
climate change research. As shown in the example above,
the index term melting glaciers has an importance score of
11.7. The first set of the links (A-C in the example) point to
the project pages while the second set (D-F) point to the
findings pages. In browsing, the user clicks the desired
index term and the system returns the second page through
which the user can access the pages discussing the issue
represented by the index term.
The first implementation of the browsing system (the
pilot system) will be published at [2] in the spring 2012. This
site also contains a climate change search system and the
keyphrase dictionary, both of which were developed in our
earlier project. The search system is described in [3] and the
keyphrase identification and extraction method in [4].
III.
METHOD
Fig. 1 depicts the crawling and page processing stages
involved in constructing the pilot browsing system. In the
first stage, relevant pages were crawled for the search system
from the scientific Web sites using a focused crawler
developed in our earlier project. The crawler is described in
Section IV A. Focused crawlers are programs aiming to fetch
Web pages that are relevant to a pre-defined domain or topic
[5, 6, 7]. The crawled pages were indexed using the Apache
Lucene programming library (http://lucene.apache.org/). The
constructed search system covers 95 819 (public version 73
194) Web pages.
Figure 1.
The crawling and page processing when constructing the browsing system.
A set of keyphrases contained in the keyphrase dictionary
were run as queries in the search system. The purpose of this
stage was to retrieve pages dealing the issues represented by
the keyphrases. For findings pages, the keyphrases were
required to appear in the titles or URLs of pages. In other
words, if the title or URL contains the keyphrase, the page is
regarded as a findings page. These restrictions were not
applied for project pages because their titles and URLs may
only be loosely descriptive. If the keyphrase appears in the
title or URL we can be highly confident that the page deals
with the issue represented by the keyphrase. A drawback of
this method is that it excludes part of relevant documents.
However, it includes highly relevant documents, which
usually are the most important for the user.
The search results were processed to separate the
thematic pages from non-thematic pages and to separate the
two  types  of  the  thematic  pages  from  each  other.  The
identification of the thematic pages is based on the fact that
Index the
pages and
compile the
system
Identify and
fetch pages on
climate change
Scient.
Web
sites
Index the pages
for the search
system
Focused
crawling
Extract thematic
pages from the
search results
Run dictionary
keyphrases in
the search system
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

different organizations apply descriptive and similar names
for similar items in URLs. Specifically, the URLs of the
project pages typically contain the word research, project, or
science, e.g.,
research-highlights,
current_projects, or
research.php. The URLs of the finding pages in turn often
contain 
the 
word
news, 
sometimes
press 
(e.g.,
press_release). We also applied a stop-list of some 50 words
indicating non-thematic content (such as student, course,
contact, and grant) for the URLs to exclude such pages as
www.university.edu/research_grants.
In the next stage in constructing the browsing system, the
URLs of the thematic pages were extracted from the search
results, and each page was indexed under the query
keyphrase that returned the page (now the keyphrases are
called index terms). Finally, the browsing system was
compiled by creating appropriate links.
In the keyphrase dictionary, different variant forms of the
phrase are grouped together into the same synonym set
(Section IV B). Synonymy was taken into account, so that
pages containing synonymous keyphrases are under the same
index term in the browsing system (i.e., the keyphrase with
the highest IS among the synonyms).
IV.
THE CRAWLER AND THE KEYPHRASE DICTIONARY
 This section presents the crawler used to collect pages
for  the  search  system  and  for  source  data  for  the  climate
change keyphrase dictionary, and describes the dictionary.
A.
Crawler
We developed a focused crawler that is used to fetch
pages dealing with climate change and that can be easily
tuned to fetch pages on other topics. The crawler determines
the relevance of the pages during crawling by matching a
topic-defining query against the retrieved pages using a
search 
engine. 
It 
uses 
the 
Lemur 
search 
engine
(http://www.lemurproject.org/) for this purpose. The pages
on climate change were crawled using the following search
terms in the topic-defining query: climate change, global
warming, climatic change, research. We used the core
journals in the field to find relevant start URLs. When pages
on some other topic are fetched only the search terms and the
start URL set need to be changed. So, applying the crawler to
a new topic is easy.
To ensure that the crawler fetches mainly scholarly
documents its crawling scope is limited, so that it is only
allowed to visit the pages on the start URL sites and their
subdomains (for example, research.university.edu is a
subdomain of www.university.edu), as well as sites that are
one link apart from the start domain. If needed, this
restriction can be relaxed so that the crawling scope is not
limited to these sites.
A focused crawler does not follow all links on a page but
it will assess which links to follow to find relevant pages.
Our crawler assigns the probability of relevance to an unseen
page v using the following formula, which gave the best
results in an experiment where we compared four different
methods [3]:
Pr(T|v) =  (Į * rel(u) * (1/log(Nu))) + ((1 – Į) * rel(<u,v>)), Į = 0.3
where Pr(T|v) is the probability of relevance of the
unseen page v to the topic T, Į is a weighting parameter (0 <
Į < 1), rel(u) is the relevance of the seen page u, calculated
by Lemur, Nu the number of links on page u, and rel(<u,v>)
the relevance of the link between u and the unseen page v.
The relevance of the link is calculated by matching the
context of the link against the topic query. The context is the
anchor text, and the text immediately surrounding the
anchor.  The context is defined with the help of the
Document Object Model (DOM): all text that is within five
DOM tree nodes of the link node is considered belonging to
the context. The Document Object Model is a convention for
representing and interacting with objects in HTML, XHTML
and 
XML 
documents 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Document_Object_Model).
 As can be seen, Pr(T|v) is a sum that consists of two
terms: one that depends on the relevance of the page, and one
that depends on the relevance of the link. The relative
importance of the two terms is determined by the weight Į.
Based on our crawling experiment we apply for the Į
parameter the value of Į = 0.3. Also, the number of links on
page u inversely influences the probability. If rel(u) is high,
we can think that the page “recommends” page v. However,
if the page also recommends lots of other pages (i.e., Nu is
high), we can rely less on the recommendation.
B.
Keyphrase Dictionary
To be able to systematically explore a given scientific
topic, a necessary requirement is to have a terminology
assistance (e.g., ontology, dictionary, thesaurus) that is used
to divide the topic into meaningful subtopics or concepts.
We constructed the keyphrase dictionary of climate change,
which is used to index the organizations for the browsing
system. Originally, the dictionary was developed for use as a
search assistance to support query formulation in Web
searching, but it can be used in document indexing as well.
The dictionary contains some 5 500 phrases related to
climate change. Most of the phrases represent different
aspects or research areas of the climate change research,
some are more technical in nature. The phrases were
extracted from the Web pages of scientific organizations
discussing climate change issues fetched by the crawler
described in Section IV A.
Each phrase is assigned a frequency-based importance
score, which reflects the significance of the phrase in the
context of climate change research. Different variant forms
of the same phrase, such as sea level rise, sea level rising,
and rising sea level, are grouped together into the same entry
(synonym set) using approximate string matching.
When devising the dictionary the first challenge was to
determine which sequences of words are phrases in the
crawled pages. Here we applied the phrase identification
method by Jaene and Seelbach [8]. The main point of the
technique is that a sequence of two or more consecutive
words constitutes a phrase if it is surrounded by small words
(such as the, on, if) but do not include a small word (except
for of).
The other main challenge besides phrase identification
was to develop a method to identify the keyphrases among
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

all phrases in the relevant pages and prune out out-of-topic
phrases. To address this problem, we calculated the
importance scores (ISs) for phrases as described below. The
most obvious out-of-topic phrases receive a low score and
are not accepted in the dictionary. The remaining phrases are
regarded as keyphrases and are included in the dictionary.
The IS is calculated on the basis of the frequencies of the
phrases in the corpora of various densities of relevant text,
and in a non-relevant corpus. We determined the IS using
four different corpora. The relevant corpora are built on the
basis of the occurrences of the topic title phrase (i.e., climate
change) and a few known keyphrases related to climate
change in the original corpus crawled from the Web.
Assumedly, a phrase which has a high frequency in the
relevant corpora and a low frequency in the non-relevant
corpus deserves a high score. Therefore, the importance
score is calculated as follows:
IS(Pi) = ln(FDC(1)( Pi) * FDC(2)(Pi) * FDC(3)(Pi) / FDC(4)(Pi));  (FDC > 0)
FDC(1)(Pi)... FDC(4)(Pi) = the frequencies of the phrase Pi in the four
corpora.
DC(1) = Highly dense corpus
DC(2) = Very dense corpus
DC(3) = Dense corpus
DC(4) = non-relevant corpus
The presented method allows us to indicate the
importance of the phrase in the Web texts discussing the
topic in question, and separate between the keyphrases and
out-of-topic phrases based on the fact that the relative
frequencies of keyphrases decrease as the density decreases.
Synonyms were identified using the digram approximate
matching technique. Phrases were first decomposed into
digrams, i.e., substrings of two adjacent characters in the
phrase (for n-gram matching see [9]). The digrams of the
phrase were matched against the digrams of the other phrases
in the list of the relevant phrases generated in the phrase
identification phase. Similarity between phrases was
computed using the Dice formula, and the phrase pairs that
had the similarity value higher than the threshold
(SIM=0.75) were regarded as synonyms.
Table 1 presents three example entries in the dictionary.
The dictionary is organized alphabetically, and each phrase
acts as a head phrase in its turn.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we developed a method to construct a
scholarly Web browsing system. The system allows a
systematic exploration of a particular scientific topic through
browsing the pages of the scientific organizations, and is also
a helpful tool in goal-oriented browsing.
Our plan is to extend the existing (but not yet published)
pilot browsing system and construct similar systems for new
topics. We also want to evaluate the browsing system in a
user study. Naturally, many important pages cannot be
included in the browsing system if pages are only collected
using a crawler. We therefore also plan to implement an
upload option for the system, so that the users can suggest
and upload URLs to be added to the system.
TABLE I.
THREE EXAMPLE ENTRIES IN THE KEYPHRASE DICTIONARY
Head phrase
IS
Synonyms
IS
permafrost thaw
7.3
thawing permafrost
7.9
satellite observation
6.3
satellite observations
11.0
greenhouse gas
25.3 
green house gases
7.8
 
greenhouse gases
23.9
 
greenhouse gasses
13.7
 
greenhouses gases
8.1
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was funded by the Academy of Finland
(research projects 130760, 218289).
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Ingwersen and K. Järvelin. The Turn: Integration of
Information Seeking and Retrieval in Context. Heidelberg:
Springer, 2005.
[2]
http://searchclimatechange.com/
[3]
A. Pirkola. "A Web search system focused on climate
change." Digital Proceedings, Earth Observation of Global
Changes (EOGC). Munich, Germany, April 13-15, 2011.
[4]
A. Pirkola. "Constructing topic-specific search keyphrase
suggestion tools for Web information retrieval." Proc. of the
12th International Symposium on Information Science (ISI
2011). Hildesheim, Germany, March 9-11, 2011, pp. 172-183.
[5]
T.  Talvensaari,  A.  Pirkola,  K.  Järvelin,  M.  Juhola,  and  J.
Laurikkala. "Focused Web crawling in the acquisition of
comparable corpora." Information Retrieval, 11(5), 2008, pp.
427-445.
[6]
S. Chakrabarti, M. van den Berg, and B. Dom. "Focused
crawling: a new approach to topic-specific Web resource
discovery." Proc. of the Eighth International World Wide
Web Conference. Toronto, Canada, May 11-14, 1999.
[7]
T. Tang, D. Hawking, N. Craswell, and K. Griffiths. "Focused
crawling for both topical relevance and quality of medical
information." Proc. of the 14th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM '05). Bremen, Germany, October 31-November 5,
2005, pp. 147-154.
[8]
H. Jaene and D. Seelbach. Maschinelle Extraktion von
zusammengesetzten Ausdrücken aus englischen Fachtexten.
Report ZMD-A-29. Beuth Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[9]
A.M. Robertson and P. Willett. "Applications of n-grams in
textual information systems." Journal of Documentation,
54(1), 1998, pp. 48-69.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

