Trust Metrics for Services and Service Providers
Zainab M. Aljazzaf, Mark Perry
Department of Computer Science
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
{zaljazza, mperry}@uwo.ca
Miriam A. M. Capretz
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
mcapretz@uwo.ca
Abstract—Trust is as signiﬁcant a factor for successful online
interactions as it is in ofﬂine communities. Trust is an important
factor that is used as a criterion for service selection. There is a
need to know information about services and service providers
to establish trust and identify their trustworthiness. Most trust
studies focus on trust establishment for services without clearly
identifying trust information for services and service providers.
Services and service providers traverse many domains with
different properties and requirements. Identifying a uniﬁed
trust information (trust metrics) for such an open environment
is a challenge. This paper proposes a uniﬁed trust metrics
classiﬁcation for services and service providers. The proposed
trust metrics can be extended and used in an open environment
or within speciﬁc domains to establish trust for services and
service providers.
Keywords - Trust; trust metrics; service; service provider.
I. INTRODUCTION
In human communities, there is uncertainty about the be-
haviour of strangers. People avoid interacting with others who
they do not trust. Trust plays a signiﬁcant role in facilitating
the interaction in such uncertain environments. A Trustor is the
subject that trusts a target trusted entity known as a Trustee.
We deﬁne trust as the willingness of the trustor to rely on a
trustee to do what is promised in a given context, irrespective
of the ability to monitor or control the trustee, even though
negative consequences may occur [1].
Building a distributed software system requires the interac-
tion and use of resources from diverse organisations through-
out the Web. In such diverse systems, different entities spread
around different domains and organizations, and pass the
boundary of a particular physical community, which may have
clear security and trust preferences. Service Oriented Archi-
tecture (SOA) is “an architectural style for building enterprise
solutions based on services” [2]. There are three roles in SOA
as shown in Figure 1 [3]: service provider, an organization
or platform that owns, implements, and controls access to
the services; service requestor, an application, services, or the
client who is looking for and invoking a service; and service
registry, a searchable directory where the description of the
services is published by the providers and searched by the
requestors.
There are many services with similar functionalities. The
non-functional properties of a service can be a differentiating
factor between the similar services and as a criteria for service
selection. Quality of Service (QoS) is the quality aspect of a
Service 
Requestor
Services
Service 
Provider
Find
Bind
Publish
Service Registry
Service 
Broker
Fig. 1.
Services roles and operations in SOA [3].
service [4], and is considered as a non-functional property of a
service. Trust has been used as a criteria for service selection
[5][6][7][8]. The trustworthiness of a service is considered
as a non-functional property of a service. Service requestor
(trustor) may select a service/provider (trustee) based on its
trustworthiness.
The trustworthiness of a service provider can enhance the
requestor’s trust in its services [9]. A requestor can select
a service from providers of the highest level of trust [10].
Considering trustworthiness of service providers supports trust
bootstrapping (rating new comers) the providers’ new services.
For example, if a provider is known to be a trustworthy,
requestors will trust the provider’s services and encourage to
select its new services. Therefore, it is important to establish
trust for service providers and select a service based on its
provider’s trustworthiness in addition to the service’s own
trustworthiness.
Trust is based on information [1], but it is difﬁcult to
determine the information that should be used. In the ofﬂine
world, traditional forms of communication allow people to
assess a wider range of cues related to trustworthiness than is
currently possible through online communication. The Internet
gives little evidence about the solidity of the entity behind it.
The challenge is to ﬁnd sufﬁcient online substitutes for the
traditional cues to trust, which are obvious in the physical
world and identify new information elements, which are
appropriate for deriving measures of trust [11].
195
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

Trust Metrics (TM) is a new term and is deﬁned in this
paper as the information of an entity that is required and used
to evaluate the trustworthiness of the entity. An entity, in this
work, can be a service or service provider. TM is the ﬁrst party
(i.e., a service or provider) information provided by a service
or service provider to evaluate its trustworthiness [1]. For
example, a service can present its reliability as a trust metric
for the requestors to trust the service based on the reliability
trust metric. To identify trust metrics, it is important to explore
what information is required to build trust for services and
service providers.
Information has many dimensions and each service/provider
sets its own information. In SOA, transaction may span a range
of domains and organization. Services and service providers
may traverse many domains with different properties and
requirements. For example, a requestor of a service has many
requirements and each seeks for different services’ properties.
Therefore, a domain may need to support a range of trust
metrics and this requires to identify a uniﬁed trust metrics for
such an open environment. Some studies try to overcome this
problem by deﬁning a notion of community [12] or address
trust in speciﬁc domains [5][13][14]. This paper proposes a
uniﬁed trust metrics classiﬁcation for services and service
providers that is suitable for SOA environment.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II
presents related work. Trust metrics and trust principles is
presented in Section III. Section IV presents trust metrics
and QoS. The proposed trust metrics for services and service
providers is presented in Section V. Section VI concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In the literature, there is no clear identiﬁcation of trust
metrics for services. In addition, there is no deﬁned trust
metrics for service providers.
A. Trust Services
Zhengping et al. [15] deﬁned domain speciﬁc trust infor-
mation that is limited. The work monitors the behaviour of
a trusted Web Service in case it has bugs during operation,
which will drop the trust degree of the Web Service. The
authors deﬁne properties to establish trust for services such
as functions and run time environment, and for recommender
who recommend a service such as popularity and authenticity
of the description. Different domain characteristics deﬁned by
the system analyst. Kim and Doh [16] propose the selection of
the optimal path to compose a number of Web Services based
on QoS information and trust type (the computed trust level
based on aggregated ratings from the consumer of the services,
which indicate the estimation of the reliability of the service
provider). The authors assume that trust type is associated with
each service where the assignment of trust types performed by
the clients themselves or trust authority. Trust metrics are not
speciﬁed and trust is based on assumed trust type.
Maximilian and Singh [10] made a distinction between trust
and QoS and presented the selection of a Web Service based
on non-functional attributes such as QoS and trust. Wang
and Vassileva [9] stated the importance to deﬁne information
needed for trust and reputation mechanism. They stated the
use of QoS to build trust where trust and reputation are built
for each quality property of a service and the overall trust and
reputation depend on the combination of trust and reputation
for each property.
Other researchers address trust as a QoS [5][6][8][17], build
trust based on a set of QoS [8][17][18][19], or build trust
based on a set of QoS related to speciﬁc system, application, or
domain [5][17][18][19]. Dragoni [5] mentioned that evaluation
of trust is a key QoS aspect of Web Service selection. The
author used security features of the service to establish trust
(satisfying the provider’s trust security requirements). Ying-
Feng and Pei-Ji [6] specify trust or reputation as one of the
QoS of Web Service. Kalepu et al. [8] identiﬁed a new QoS
attribute, verity, as an important contributor to the quality
driven selection and composition of Web Services and to be a
measure of trustworthiness of a Web Service. Verity refers to
the degree of variance in the compliance levels of the services
and assesses the reputation of the provider based on local and
global rating. They identify verity for Web Services and verity
for Web Services providers. However, trust is not a QoS and
there is a clear distinction between the two terms.
In [18], reputation is modelled as a vector of QoS attributes
such as performance and reliability. Jin-dian et al. [19] es-
tablish trust based on whether it is secure enough to access
a service or how to choose a more reliable provider. They
measure the possibilities of providing cheating or malicious
behaviour and satisfaction values to measure how satisﬁed a
user feels about a given interaction (both are real numbers in
[0,1] and a high rate reﬂects a high interaction quality). The
trust evaluation can take many aspects (QoS requirements)
into account such as process time and access speed. Vu et
al. [17] rank services according to its prospective level of
satisfying user’s QoS requirements. However, building trust
should consider other properties beside QoS.
B. Trust Service Provider
In Web Services and SOA, the idea of trusting a service
based on its provider is neglected [9]. Trust in the Internet has
a clear distinction between the two and has identiﬁed quality
requirements for providers to assist their trustworthiness and
help users in their decision to use providers’ services [20][21].
Jin-Dian et al. [19] presented the idea of assigning trust
provider rate to its new Web Services. They mentioned that
assigning trust rate to the provider is an interesting research
problem. They stated that a registry that has past experiences
with the Web Service’s provider initializes the rate of the new
Web Service to be equal to its provider’s rate.
The work in [18] assesses the trustworthiness of a Web
Service provider by measuring its reputation based on the
rate given by the user. However, identifying trust informa-
tion supports the trust bootstrapping process (i.e., rating new
services and service providers). Maximilien and Singh [10]
mentioned that if service provider is already determined to be
196
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

trustworthy, then the selection of services will be based on
their provider’s rating. The authors stated that determining the
trust level to be assigned to providers is a nontrivial process.
However, identifying trust metrics helps to establish trust.
III. TRUST METRICS AND TRUST PRINCIPLES
In our previous work [1], we identiﬁed the trust principles.
This work follows the trust principles to identify TM. The TM
addresses the following trust principles :
• Trust and risk: Requestors have no control over services
that advertise only their interface. Less perception of con-
trol increases the risk. Under a risky exchange situation
it is important to include penalties, rewards, insurance,
and other risk remedies in case something goes wrong.
Risk remedies can be identiﬁed as a TM.
• Trust development phases: Trust goes through three de-
velopment phases: trust building, stabilising trust, and
dissolution [21]. Most studies assume a system where
trust and reputations already exist (i.e., stabilising trust
phase). In trust building phase, it is important to initialize
a trust rate for a new service or a new service provider.
Identifying TM is important in the initialization process,
where the TM are rated and the overall trust for a service
and service provider can be the average of trust for each
TM.
• Trust relationship properties: Trust is usually speciﬁed in
terms of a relationship between a trustor and a trustee.
Trust relationship can be one-to-one between a requestor
and a service and one-to-many between a requestor and a
group of services (i.e., a provider who provides a group
of services). By identifying trust metrics the system can
support the context speciﬁc characteristic of trust (trust
a service to perform a speciﬁc action within a speciﬁc
context), where a requestor can select a service based on
a set of trust metrics.
• Trust is based on information. There is a need to know
information about the services and service providers to
establish trust.
• First party information: First parties (i.e., services/service
providers) should provide the information to develop
trust. For example, QoS properties and other informa-
tion (e.g., delivery methods, insurance, privacy, security,
pricing, and availability) can be considered as important
information on which to build trust.
• The distinction between trust and QoS: Trust is not a
QoS aspect of a service or a service provider. There
is a clear distinction between the two terms’ deﬁnitions
as presented in the introduction. QoS properties can be
identiﬁed as TM to establish trust.
• Security and privacy: Security and privacy are important
factors to consider in the trust establishment process.
Security and privacy can be considered as important TM.
• Provider’s trustworthiness: Trust ratings of a service and
its provider are related and each one affects the other.
Therefore, it is important to identify providers’ trustwor-
thiness and deﬁne TM for service providers.
IV. TRUST METRICS AND QOS
QoS can be identiﬁed as an important TM to establish trust.
This work deﬁnes QoS as TM. To identify TM for an open
system, it is important to generalize a list of TM applicable
for most services. As a part of generalization process, it is
required to generalize QoS for diverse services and service
providers. To deﬁne a uniﬁed TM classiﬁcation, we need to
extract diverse QoS from the literature. Some QoS can be
measured and some are not. It is important to include and
quantify the non-measurable QoS to be used in trust rating
algorithm and calculation.
There are many research efforts to deﬁne and cate-
gorize QoS and how to express, quantify, and model
them [4][16][22][23]. In [4][8][9][22][24][25][26][27][28][29]
generic and business QoS requirements for services are pre-
sented. Lee and Shin [26] deﬁne a set of major Web Services’
QoS attributes. Menasce [28] presents the QoS issues in web
services. Yu et al. [23] present a list of QoS and how to
calculate each. They specify that security is not quantiﬁable
QoS but they present a formula to test the security of Web
Services based on the number of attacks detections. Rahman
and Meziane [27] present ﬁve essential QoS requirements
based on the most used QoS from the literature. These are:
readiness, transaction, reliability, speedy, and security.
O’Brien et al. [24] deﬁne other QoS requirements for
SOA such as: modiﬁability, testability, and usability. Ran
[22] identiﬁed other QoS, which are: supported standard,
stability/change cycle, and completeness. In addition, there are
a domain or application speciﬁc QoS. Hoyle [29] identiﬁes
other quality characteristics for services such as courtesy,
comfort, competence, credibility, dependability, efﬁciency, ef-
fectiveness, ﬂexibility, honesty, promptness, responsiveness.
Larson [30] identiﬁed serviceability and user satisfaction as
performance measurement of service delivery.
Moorsel [25] discusses quantitative metrics and a framework
for evaluating internet services. Three metrics are deﬁned that
should be emerged to evaluate Business to Consumer (B2C),
Business to Business (B2B) and service provider systems. The
metrics are: QoS, Quality of Experience (QoE), and Quality
of Business (QoBiz). QoE and QoBiz are claimed to quantify
the user experience and business return, respectively.
Based on the aggregated QoS in the literature, we propose a
classiﬁcation of QoS into objective QoS and subjective QoS,
as shown in Figure 2. Objective QoS are the QoS that can
be measured. Subjective QoS are the QoS that cannot be
measured. This classiﬁcation helps to deﬁne and classify TM.
V. TRUST METRICS
In this work, TM overcome other trust information in the
literature to include information of diverse domains (govern-
ment, online marketing, bank, etc), QoS, and different possible
services and service providers’ information and properties.
Some TM may not be applied to all services and it is possible
to add other TM. Figure 3 shows the proposed TM for services
and service providers which is classiﬁed into Services Trust
Metrics (STM) and service Providers Trust Metrics(PTM).
197
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

QoS
Objective QoS
Subjective QoS
Response Time
Latency
Execution Time 
Throughput
Transaction Time
Reliability
Scalability
Capacity
Robusteness
Accuracy
Accessability
Availability
Timeliness
Domain/application 
specific QoS
Security
Execution Price
Transaction ACID
Regulatory
Exception Handling
Modifiability
Interopability
Usability
Testability
Stability
Supported 
Standards
Integrity
Other measurable 
QoS
Domain/application 
specific QoS
Other non-
measurable QoS
Fig. 2.
A classiﬁcation of QoS.
A. Trust Metrics for services (STM)
STM is classiﬁed into Objective STM (OSTM) and Subjec-
tive STM (SSTM) as follows:
1) Objective Services’ Trust Metrics (OSTM): OSTM are
the TM that can be measured. OSTM for services are their
objective QoS properties such as response time, latency, execu-
tion time, throughput, reliability, domain speciﬁc measurable
properties, and other services’ measurable properties. In the
following, a number of OSTM is presented:
• Execution Time OSTM, OSTMe(s): Is the time taken by
a service to execute and process its sequence of activities.
• Latency OSTM, OSTMl(s): Is the delay time between
sending a request and receiving the response, i.e., the time
the message needs to reach its destination.
• Response Time OSTM, OSTMr(s): Is the time required
to process and complete a service request.
• Throughput OSTM, OSTMthp(s): Refers to the number
of requests a service can process per unit of time.
• Availability OSTM, OSTMAv(s): Is the probability that
a service is up and accessible to use.
• Reliability OSTM, OSTMR(s): Refers to the ability of
a service to perform its function correctly with either
‘no fail’ or ‘response failure to the user’. It is related
to OSTMAv(s).
2) Subjective Services’ Trust Metrics (SSTM): SSTM are
the TM that are hard to measure directly. SSTM include
functional properties, subjective QoS properties, and other
properties of services such as remedies, payment satisfaction,
output/item satisfaction, delivery satisfaction, domain speciﬁc
non-measurable properties, and other non-measurable services
properties. The following presents some SSTM. Because
SSTM are not measurable TM, it is important to quantify them.
• Remedies SSTM, SSTMrem: Is the most important
metric that should be provided by a service provider for
each of its services. Services should provide remedies in
case any thing goes wrong. Each service has different
remedies. For example, if the service is shipment service
and there was a delay in shipment, lower the shipment
price can be offered as a remedy. Another example is
that if a service provides a video and the video was slow
referred to the subscribed level of a customer, the service
should increase the bandwidth for that customer.
• Security SSTM, SSTMsec: A requestor can trust a ser-
vice or service provider based on security. Security is an
important factor to be considered in trust establishment.
• Privacy SSTM, SSTMprv: A requestor can trust a ser-
vice or service provider based on privacy. Privacy is an
important factor to be considered in trust establishment.
• Payment Satisfaction SSTM, SSTMpym: Refers to the
degree of the user satisfaction on the offered service based
on the payment, if any. For example, do the service charge
the user the same or extra amount, do users pay extra
unexpected fees, etc.
• Output/Item satisfaction SSTM, SSTMout: Refers to the
degree of the user satisfaction on the offered service based
on the output/item provided. For example, do they get the
same output/item they ordered/expected, are they satisﬁed
with the output/item, the quality of the output/item they
received, etc.
• Delivery satisfaction SSTM, SSTMdelv: Refers to the
degree of the user satisfaction on the offered service
based on the delivery of the item. For example, do they
deliver the item on time, do they return the item in case
of dissatisfaction, etc.
3) Trust Metrics Collection for services: OSTM and SSTM
are rated for each service and can be stored in a registry to be
used for rating services and service providers. The following
is the collected STM in a matrix format. Each row represents
a service and each column represents one of the STM (m:s
and n:STM). STM = OSTM + SSTM
STM =


STM11
STM12
. . .
STM1n
STM21
STM22
. . .
STM2n
...
...
...
...
STMm1
STMm2
. . .
STMmn


Trustworthy services support remedies, security and privacy;
provide high throughput, fast response time, high availability
and reliability; provide lower execution, response and latency
times. In addition, trustworthy services get high rates for the
execution cost, output, payment, and delivery STM.
B. Trust Metrics for service Providers (PTM)
A good provider rate can enhance the requestor’s trust in the
provider and its services. If a requestor has an alternative to
choose between many services from different providers, he can
select a provider with a higher trust rate. Rating providers help
to encourage providers to behave well, increases the opportu-
nities of the providers to be selected by consumers, encourage
competition between providers, inﬂuence the economic growth
of the providers positively, increase the usage of the Internet
technologies such as e-markets, and evolve commerce online.
198
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

OSTM: Objective 
Service Trust Metrics
SSTM: Subjective 
Service Trust Metrics
Trust Metrics: TM
STM: Service Trust 
Metrics
PTM: Service Provider 
Trust Metrics
Response Time
Latency
Execution Time 
Throughput
Transaction Time
Reliability
Scalability
Capacity
Robusteness
Accuracy
Accessability
Availability
Timeliness
Domain/application 
specific OSTM
Security
Execution Price
Transaction ACID
Regulatory
Exception 
Handling
Modifiability
Interopability
Usability
Testability
Stability
Supported 
Standards
Integrity
Other OSTM
Domain/application 
specific SSTM
Other SSTM
Contact 
Information
Physical Location
Order Progress
Other PTM
Privacy
Payment 
Satisfaction
Output/Item 
Satisfaction
Delivery 
Satisfaction
Remedies
Brand name
Web Site
Other clues
Domain/application 
specific PTM
Competence
Honest
Privacy
Security
Other 
applicable STM
Other properties
Ability
Benevolence
Predictability
Credibility
Dependability
Remedies
STM
Provider’s Properties
Important clues
Fig. 3.
Trust Metrics.
Trustworthiness of a service provider is based on the
trustworthiness of its services and the rates of its properties.
Service providers have many properties that can be consid-
ered as useful PTM to build trust. A trustworthy service
provider should behave upon its advertised properties and
its services advertised properties (i.e., STM). In addition to
providers’ properties, a provider can provide important clues
for requestors to assess its trustworthiness. In the following, a
number of important PTM are presented.
1) Providers’ services’ properties: A service provider trust-
worthiness is based on the trustworthiness of its services.
Therefore, STM are implicitly included as metrics to evaluate
providers. Any STM can explicitly be identiﬁed as PTM to
emphasize its importance and can be used as PTM such as
security PTM, PTMsec; privacy PTM, PTMprv; remedies
PTM, PTMrem; and other applicable STM such as reliability,
integrity, robustness, accessibility, availability, timeliness, pay-
ment satisfaction, output/item satisfaction, delivery satisfac-
tion, transaction ACID, supported standards, interoperability,
and stability.
2) Provider’s properties:
Competence, honesty, ability,
benevolence, predictability, credibility, dependability, courtesy,
comfort, efﬁciency, effectiveness, ﬂexibility, promptness, and
responsiveness are properties to be considered as PTM. These
properties can be evaluated by long term interactions with a
provider based on other TM. In the following, competence and
honest PTM will be presented.
• Competence PTM, PTMcomp: Shows a provider’s ability
and capability to provide a service and perform the
function expected from it (i.e., compliance). Competence
is more relevant term for the environment related to
services and computing system [31].
• Honest PTM, PTMhons: The provider that continuously
shows its competence will be honest.
3) Important clues: Service providers can provide impor-
tant clues to support their trustworthiness. The more clues
a provider provides, the more the provider can support its
trustworthiness, and the more is the opportunity for its services
to be selected by the requestors. Some clue information may
suit some requestors but not others especially if the requestor
is an application which dynamically bind to services. The fol-
lowing presents some important providers’ clue information,
as follows:
• Brand name PTM, PTMbrand: A service provider who
has a brand name, popular name that is established by
a long term interactions with consumers, may encourage
the requestors to use its services. A brand name can help
in the assessment of service providers’ trustworthiness,
and this will inﬂuence the economic growth of the service
providers positively. Trust-based systems can play an
important role on the establishment of brand names for
service providers. A service provider can provide a name
and the system can brand the name based on the level of
the trustworthiness of the service provider.
• Web site PTM, PTMwsite: A service provider who has a
web site may give an important clue for the requestor to
trust the provider and use their services. Web sites may
contain information that can assess the trustworthiness of
a service provider.
• Contact information PTM, PTMinf: Contact information
such as telephone number and e-mail has a great impact
in the assessment of the trustworthiness of a service
199
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

provider. Having contact information allow the requestors
to contact providers to, for example, resolve any issues.
• Retail location PTM, PTMloc: Having physical location,
such as physical store, may increase a provider’s trustwor-
thiness.
• Order progress PTM, PTMord: While order progress is
more clear ofﬂine, it should be provided online, and this
may increase a provider’s trustworthiness.
4) Trust Metrics Collection for service Providers: The
evaluated PTM rates for each service provider are stored in
a registry to be used for rating purposes. The following is
the collected PTM in a matrix format. Each row represents a
service provider and each column represents one of the PTM
(m:provider and n:PTM).
PTM =


PTM11
PTM12
. . .
PTM1n
PTM21
PTM22
. . .
PTM2n
...
...
...
...
PTMm1
PTMm2
. . .
PTMmn


Trustworthy service providers support remedies, security,
and privacy and provide trustworthy services. In addition,
trustworthy service providers provide important clues to sup-
port its trustworthiness. By the time, a service provider will
become competence and then honest by acting as a trustworthy
provider.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a uniﬁed trust metrics classiﬁcation for
services and service providers. Trust metrics cover different in-
formation and properties of services and service providers. The
trust metrics are extendible and can support domain speciﬁc
properties. Trust metrics support the trust principles. Each trust
metric may require different techniques to gather and evaluate
its trust rates. As a next step, trust models to rate the trust
metrics, services, and service providers will be established.
In addition, there is a need to build a trust framework that
establish trust for services and service providers and supports
trust-based service selection in SOA.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. M. Aljazzaf, M. Perry, and M. A. Capretz, “Trust online: Deﬁnition
and principles,” ICCGI 2010: The Fifth International Multi-Conference
on Computing in the Global Information Technology, 2010.
[2] M. Rosen, B. Lublinsky, K. T. Smith, and M. J. Balcer, Applied SOA:
Service-Oriented Architecture and Design Strategies. Wiley Publishing,
2008.
[3] M. Papazoglou, Web Services: Principles and Technology.
Prentice
Hall, 2008.
[4] K.
Lee,
J.
Jeon,
W.
Lee,
S.
Jeong,
and
S.
Park,
“QoS
for
web services: Requirements and possible approaches,” W3C, Web
Services Architecture Working Group, Tech. Rep., November 2003.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3c.or.kr/kr-ofﬁce/TR/2003/ws-qos/,
last accessed Jan, 2011
[5] N. Dragoni, “Toward trustworthy web services - approaches, weaknesses
and trust-by-contract framework,” IEEE/WIC/ACM International Con-
ference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, vol. 3,
pp. 599–606, 2009.
[6] Z. Ying-Feng and S. Pei-Ji, “The model for consumer trust in C2C
online auction,” ICMSE ’06 International Conference on Management
Science and Engineering, pp. 125 –129, Oct. 2006.
[7] M. N. Huhns and M. P. Singh, “Service-oriented computing: Key
concepts and principles,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 9, pp. 75–81,
2005.
[8] S. Kalepu, S. Krishnaswamy, and S. Loke, “Verity: a QoS metric for
selecting web services and providers,” Proceedings Fourth WISEW, pp.
131 – 139, Dec. 2003.
[9] Y. Wang and J. Vassileva, “A review on trust and reputation for web ser-
vice selection,” in ICDCSW ’07: Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops. Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 25.
[10] E. Maximilien and M. Singh, “Toward autonomic web services trust
and selection,” in ICSOC, M. Aiello, M. Aoyama, F. Curbera, and M. P.
Papazoglou, Eds.
ACM, 2004, pp. 212–221.
[11] A. Jøsang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and reputation
systems for online service provision,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 43, no. 2,
pp. 618–644, 2007.
[12] Z. Malik and A. Bouguettaya, “Reputation bootstrapping for trust
establishment among web services,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 40–47, 2009.
[13] T. A. Khopkar, “Provision, interpretation and effects of feedback in
reputation systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, School of Information, The
University of Michigan, 2008.
[14] G. Zacharia, A. Moukas, and P. Maes, “Collaborative reputation mech-
anisms for electronic marketplaces,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 29,
no. 4, pp. 371–388, 2000.
[15] L. Zhengping, L. Xiaoli, W. Guoqing, Y. Min, and Z. Fan, “A formal
framework for trust management of service-oriented systems,” in SOCA
’07: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Service-
Oriented Computing and Applications.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 241–248.
[16] Y. Kim and D. Doh, “A trust type based model for managing QoS in
web services composition,” International Conference on Convergence
Information Technology, vol. 0, pp. 438–443, 2007.
[17] L.-H. Vu, M. Hauswirth, and K. Aberer, “Qos-based service selection
and ranking with trust and reputation management,” vol. 3760 LNCS,
Agia Napa, Cyprus, 2005, pp. 466 – 483.
[18] E. Maximilien and M. Singh, “Reputation and endorsement for web
services,” SIGecom Exchanges, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 24–31, 2002.
[19] S. Jin-Dian, G. He-Qing, and G. Yin, “An adaptive trust model of web
services,” Journal Wuhan University Journal of Natural Sciences, 2005.
[20] R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An integrative model
of organizational trust,” The Academy of Management Review, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 709–734, 1995.
[21] T. Kautonen and H. Karjaluoto, Eds., Trust and New Technologies:
Marketing and Management on the Internet and Mobile Media. Edward
Elgar, 2008.
[22] S. Ran, “A model for web services discovery with QoS,” ACM SIGecom
Exchanges, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2003.
[23] W. D. Yu, R. B. Radhakrishna, S. Pingali, and V. Kolluri, “Modeling the
measurements of qoS requirements in web service systems,” Simulation,
vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 75–91, 2007.
[24] L. O’Brien, P. Merson, and L. Bass, “Quality attributes for service-
oriented architectures,” in SDSOA ’07: Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Systems Development in SOA Environments.
Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 3.
[25] A. Moorsel, “Metrics for the internet age: Quality of experience and
quality of business,” 5th Performability Workshop, 2001.
[26] S. Lee and D. Shin, “Web service QoS in multi-domain,” vol. 3, feb.
2008, pp. 1759 –1762.
[27] W. Rahman and F. Meziane, “Challenges to describe QoS requirements
for web services quality prediction to support web services interop-
erability in electronic commerce,” in Proceedings of the 10th IBIMA
Conference on Innovation and Knowledge Management in Business
Globalization, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 30 June - 2 July 2008, 4 (6) ,
pp. 50-58.
[28] D. Menasce, “QoS issues in web services,” Internet Computing, IEEE,
vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 72 – 75, Nov/Dec 2002.
[29] D. Hoyle, Automotive Quality Systems Handbook, 2nd ed.
Elsevier
Ltd, 2005.
[30] K. Larson, “The role of service level agreements in it service delivery,”
Information Management and amp; Computer Security, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 128 – 32, 1998.
[31] T. Grandison and S. Sloman, “A survey of trust in Internet applications.”
IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 3, no. 4, 2000.
200
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

