Paving the Way to Industry 4.0: an Approach based on Multi-Agents System and 
Complex Event Processing 
 
Meftah Zouai 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering 
University of Cádiz 
Puerto Real, Spain 
Email: mef.zouai@alum.uca.es 
Guadalupe Ortiz 
UCASE Software Engineering Group 
University of Cádiz 
Puerto Real, Spain 
Email: guadalupe.ortiz@uca.es 
Okba Kazar 
Department of Computer Science  
University of Biskra 
Biskra, Algeria 
Email: o.kazar@univ-biskra.dz
Abstract— The Internet of Things (IoT) industry has gone 
through several stages called industrial revolutions with the 
spread of the Internet and future-oriented technologies, this 
has led to a qualitative leap in the field of industrial production 
that depends on the machines communicating with each other, 
in order to control the manufacturing process accurately and 
with less cost towards the so-called Industry 4.0. However, two 
main difficulties are found: the massive collection of data from 
the industrial sensors and the real-time processing of the 
collected data which might be in heterogenous format due to 
the lack of standards. In this paper, we pave the way towards a 
cooperative Industrial IoT architecture using the agent 
paradigm and complex event processing techniques. This will 
permit benefiting from both agent features, to enrich the 
devices with autonomy, coordination and cooperation qualities 
between a set of manufacturing chains, and complex event 
processing, for a fast real time processing to improve decision 
making. 
 
Keywords-Industry 
4.0; 
complex 
event 
processing; 
multiagent systems; manufacturing chain. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) industry has gone through 
several stages called industrial revolutions thanks to the 
spread of the Internet and the advances in future-oriented 
technologies. This has led to a qualitative leap in the field of 
industrial production that depends on the machines 
communicating with each other, in order to control the 
manufacturing process accurately and with less cost a new 
version of an industry emerged: it is called Industry 4.0. 
The seamless integration and interconnection of all the 
different production processes and steps in a production 
chain, gives more transparency in its production processes as 
well as reducing the effort required. By using sensors at 
every stage of production, to identify the causes and quality 
issues, scrap and rework should be reduced. As a result of 
interconnecting different systems, production metrics and 
new daily business can be available in real time and provide 
the information needed to change and modify processes or 
resources without delay. In addition, it should enable 
network-related processes and mechanisms to act proactively 
in the event that unwanted events approach. As a result, the 
responsible persons should be notified immediately of 
problems in the manufacturing workflow and the causes of 
the problems should be easily identified based on the new 
data collected and the information through narrow 
networking of all machines and products.  
Quality related information about faults and problems 
can be shared between machines and machines can inform 
the operator immediately. This should address the common 
problem of information exchange between people who work 
different shifts. Industry 4.0 motivated a transformation 
process of “regular” factories into smart factories based on 
digitization from singular production units, over whole 
productions 
floors 
towards 
globally 
interconnected 
production lines. Smart factories, factories of the future, or in 
general smart production environments apply building 
blocks such as sensor-based modules and systems, 
ubiquitous computing, IPv6, IoT and cloud computing to 
establish a cyber–physical (production) system (CP (P) S) 
infrastructure [1]. 
Our goal is to propose a system that links all the elements 
that depend on the production chain by connecting all 
production machines and sensors through the IoT, by 
connecting its Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system to 
the control system in manufacturing, operations, marketing, 
storage, distribution and delivery. Through this integration, 
the entire production chain becomes transparent; from raw 
material to delivery to the customer, which facilitates the 
normalization and auditing process. We expect to go one 
step further in this matter by facilitating the communication 
between the Industrial IoT elements through Multi-Agent 
Systems (MAS), and real-time processing of the acquired 
data with Complex Event Processing (CEP), among other 
technologies. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
introduces the background in the area of our research work. 
Then, in Section 3, we briefly discuss related works. 
Afterwards, Section 4 describes the proposed structure and 
its features. Finally, some conclusions and perspectives are 
presented. 
II. BACKGROUND 
This section provides some background firstly on 
Industrial IoT, secondly on software agents and finally on 
CEP. 
A. 
Industrial IoT 
The first three industrial revolutions are characterized as 
being  driven by mechanical production relying on water and 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-861-7
ICIW 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

steam power,  use of mass labor and electrical energy, and the 
use of electronic,  automated production respectively [2]. 
Whilst the supposed fourth industrial revolution (‘Industry 
4.0’) was first proposed in 2011 in the  context of the goal of 
developing the German economy [3]. This revolution is 
characterized by its reliance on the use of CPS capable of 
communication 
with 
one 
another 
and 
of 
making 
autonomous, decentralized decisions, with the aim of 
increasing industrial efficiency,  productivity, safety, and 
transparency. 
There is a considerable overlap between the concept of 
Industry 4.0  developed in Germany and the Industrial 
Internet concept, which originated in the United States. The 
definition of the latter now  encompasses change for both 
business and individuals: 
“…the industrial internet is an internet of things, 
machines, computers and people enabling intelligent 
industrial operations using  advanced data analytics for 
transformational business outcomes,  and it is redefining the 
landscape for business and individuals a  like” [4]. 
B. 
Software Agent 
The agent concept was essentially inspired by the fields 
of philosophy and psychology. Several definitions have been 
given throughout the years, where each definition addresses 
one or more aspects of this paradigm: 
The agent is a software system [5][6] that has a specific 
purpose [7] in being able to react with a certain degree of 
independence [5] and autonomy [6] in a complex and 
dynamic environment [8]. This agent is characterized from a 
conventional software by its size and by the objectives and 
agendas on which it is based to accomplish its tasks [7] 
based on a set of knowledge and representation of 
predetermined objectives [5]. 
1) 
Characteristics of an Agent 
An agent can also be distinguished from other software 
entities by holding the following features [9]: Autonomy, 
Social behavior , Reactivity, Pro-activity. 
2) 
Interactions between Agents 
An interaction is a dynamic linking of two or more 
agents through a set of reciprocal actions to achieve a 
specific goal. In this scope, an interaction situation is called a 
set of behaviors resulting from the grouping of agents who 
must act to meet their objectives, taking into account the 
constraints resulting from the more or less limited resources 
available to them and their individual skills. 
In interactions between agents we sometimes fall into 
conflict situations, which are cases in which the objectives 
(intentions) of the agents are not compatible and / or the 
resources and the capacities of the agents are insufficient 
[10]. 
Interactions between agents are expressed in various 
forms; cooperation is the most commonly studied form of 
interaction in MAS. An agent avoids conflict situations to 
solve a problem through coordination or negotiation [10]. 
• 
Coordination: In the case of coordination, the agents 
work on problems whose solutions are useful for the 
other agents, so the work must be coordinated over 
time [11]. 
• 
Negotiation: The activities of agents in a distributed 
system are often interdependent and result in 
conflicts. Conflict resolution involves considering 
the points of view of the agents, negotiating between 
them, and using decision-making mechanisms 
regarding the purposes on which the system focuses 
[12]. 
3) 
Agent Types 
The properties that characterize an agent determine its 
type. The main types of agents are as follow:  Reactive 
Agent, Cognitive Agent, Proactive agents. 
C. 
Complex Event Processing 
CEP [13] is a technology that allows the capturing, 
analyzing and correlating of a large amount of heterogeneous 
data (simple events) with the aim of detecting relevant 
situations in a particular domain [14].  
What we do is defining a series of event patterns that 
specify the condition that must be met from the content of 
the events of one or more incoming data streams for a 
situation of interest to be detected. This situation of interest 
detected by an event pattern is named complex event.  
The software that permits the analysis of streaming data 
according to the defined patterns in real time is the CEP 
engine. Among the complex event engines, Esper stands out 
due to its maturity and performance, as well as the wide 
coverage of its EPL event pattern definition language [15]. 
III. RELATED WORKS 
With linking all the elements of the production chain 
together, it leads to the creation of a large volume of data 
related to the production stages, the status of the product, the 
state of the production machines, the follow-up of the 
product quality and the state of stocks. In other words, this 
system provides information about the product, from the 
time it was raw material to the marketing stage, and to follow 
up on customer feedback after receipt and use. The volume 
of this information is called Big-Data, In turn, next to this 
term, the '3V' of Big-Data appeared, which refer to the 
Volume, Speed and Variety of the data generated by these 
systems [16], The first 'V' (Volume) refers to the huge 
amounts of information generated. The second 'V' (Velocity) 
refers to the speed with which said data is generated. Finally, 
the third 'V' (Variety) refers to the heterogeneity of these 
data that are generated. The ingestion and processing, 
analysis of this Big-Data is the one on which we are going to 
focus the main objectives of our research. 
In general, many of the currently existing solutions for 
processing heterogeneous data sources [17]-[19] are forced 
to carry out a normalization process [20] or a pre-processing 
of the data to be able to analyze said information. In most 
cases, the normalization stage requires a lot of processing 
load, consuming resources and time. In addition, it is quite 
common in these systems to store the information to later 
reuse it in the analysis systems, thus causing storage costs. 
Some works have tried to solve this problem by carrying 
out homogenization in data sources [21], which is not very 
efficient if we consider large networks of IoT devices with a 
multitude of devices as data sources. Others, such as in [21], 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-861-7
ICIW 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

process batches of this heterogeneous information in order to 
normalize it, however, that means that we are not processing 
the information in real time, then situations of interest can go 
unnoticed and not be detected in time. 
Among the various solutions currently in place, in [22] 
the author proposes to use MAS to process and analyze the 
large amount of information produced for the various 
interests of the factories, and this solution relies on the use of 
agents interacting with each other, applying the features of 
MAS overall system. The MAS cleans and monitors, collects 
data, and makes group decisions, and machine learning for 
Prediction and Health Management (PHM) of devices. 
Therefore, in order to tackle this problem consisting of 
the need to collect this huge data from IoT, process it and 
analyze it in real time; in this paper, we propose a research 
plan based on the use of agent-based architectures, artificial 
intelligence and CEP to achieve agility and flexibility, as 
explained in the following section. 
IV. PROPOSAL 
In order to address and try to solve this problem, which is 
to collect this Big-Data from Industrial IoT, and process and 
analyze it in real time, in this thesis we propose to apply 
different models to those used or proposed by the above-
mentioned works: agent-based architectures and artificial 
intelligence for manufacturing systems with the delivery of 
ERP to the production chain and to the manufacturing and 
process control system. Besides, create a self-organizing, 
cloud-supported architecture that includes cloud computing 
and smart agents to communicate and negotiate across 
networks using CEP. Ontological representations of the 
knowledge base are created and Machine Learning 
techniques are incorporated to provide an advanced 
information basis for decision-making by agents, thus 
enabling dynamic reconfiguration between agents in a 
collaborative way to achieve agility and flexibility. 
As previously explained, an agent is a software robot 
[23][24] with a specific purpose and the ability to interact 
and make decisions with a certain degree of independence 
and autonomy in a complex and dynamic environment and 
has the ability to control its own behaviors. The agent is 
distinguished by its size and the goals and agendas on which 
it is based to accomplish his tasks based on his knowledge 
and the representation of the pre-determined goals. When the 
system contains a group of agents, it becomes a MAS and 
the goal of this system is the collective goal of the agents that 
is achieved through each agent performing the assigned tasks 
for him and to carry out joint tasks with other agents through 
communication, coordination and cooperation among them. 
MAS will be of great utility in our proposal because they 
will permit to manufacturing chain to coordinate, negotiate, 
and plan operations between them to achieve a global goal. 
JADE is a platform implemented with the JAVA 
language. This framework is intended for developers who are 
interested in creating MAS, and which provides a language 
of communication predefined and represented in the FIPA-
ACL standards. Among the advantages offered by the JADE 
platform we can mention unlimited interoperability for the 
applications they take support, and the independence of this 
platform from the operating system or hardware on which it 
is implemented [25]. Therefore, with JADE we will be able 
to simplify communication between agents integrated in 
manufacturing chain.  
On the other hand, once we are able to receive and 
process huge amounts of data from the Industry 4.0, it is 
necessary to carry out an analysis on these data in order to 
detect situations of interest in real time. For this purpose, we 
are going to apply CEP [13]. As previously introduced, CEP 
allows us to process, analyze and correlate large amounts of 
information in the form of events - a simple event is a 
representation of a change in state - with the aim of detecting 
situations of interest (complex events) in real time [14]. 
Our main objective with CEP is to analyze the 
information from the Industry 4.0 as soon as it reaches our 
system, so that we do not need to store it in any persistence 
system if it is not necessary [15]. With CEP we are going to 
analyze, process and react to event streams from Industry 
4.0, which makes it an ideal technology to be combined with 
the previously mentioned Jade platforms. We will define the 
situations of interest that we want to detect through the use 
of complex event patterns, whose syntax depends on the 
CEP solution to be used. The information, in the form of 
events, will be compared with these previously defined 
patterns and complex events (an event representing a 
situation of interest) will be detected when the conditions 
specified in the pattern are satisfied. 
We plan to integrate agents into all elements of the 
production chain so that each production chain becomes a 
MAS and the production chains communicate with each 
other through the cloud. this proposal allows to improve 
product quality through real-time chain communication and 
data sharing. 
Figure 1.  Our proposal architecture. 
We propose an industrial collaborative architecture, as 
shown in Figure 1, which allow a set of manufacturing 
chains to collaborate between them and offer a high degree 
of autonomy, coordination and cooperation thanks to the use 
of MAS and doing the real-time processing of all the 
heterogeneous data collected with CEP. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have shown our work-in-progress 
proposal 
for 
a 
cooperative 
Industrial 
IoT 
architecture using the agent paradigm and CEP. We will 
benefit, on one hand, from agent features to enrich the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-861-7
ICIW 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

device with autonomy, coordination and cooperation qualitie
s between a set of manufacturing chains, while on the other, 
we will benefit from CEP to process the collected data in real 
time to improve the decision making and have a competitive 
advantage. Besides, once the proposed architecture is fully 
implemented, we expect to test it in a real manufacturing 
scenario. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation and the European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under project FAME 
[RTI2018-093608-B-C33]. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T, Booij., M., Chiscop., I., Meeuwissen., E, Moustafa., N., and H, 
Den., F. T. “ToN IoT-The role of heterogeneity and the need for 
standardization of features and attack types in IoT network intrusion 
datasets”. IEEE Internet of Things Journal. , pp. 1-21, 2021. 
[2] Lee, J., Davari, H., Singh, J.,  and Pandhare, V. “Industrial Artificial 
Intelligence 
for 
industry 
4.0-based 
manufacturing 
systems. Manufacturing letters”,vol. 18, pp. 20-23, 2018. 
[3] R. S, Peres., X, Jia.., J, Lee., K, Sun.., A, Colombo.,J, Barata.. 
“Industrial Artificial Intelligence in Industry 4.0-Systematic Review”, 
Challenges and Outlook. IEEE Access, 8, pp. 220-221. 
[4] H, Boyes., B , Hallaq., J, Cunningham., andT, Watson.. ”The 
industrial 
internet 
of 
things 
(IIoT): 
An 
analysis 
framework”. Computers in industry, 101, pp. 1-12.  
[5] P. Maes, “Agents that reduce work and information overload,” 
Commun. ACM, vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 30–40, 1994. 
[6] J. C. Brustoloni, “Autonomous Agents: Characterization and 
Requirements,” Comput. Sci. Tech. Rep., no. November, pp. 91–204, 
1991. 
[7] D. C. Smith, A. Cypher, and J. Spohrer, “KidSim: programming 
agents without a programming language” Commun. ACM, vol. 37, no. 
7, pp. 54–67, 1994. 
[8] P. Maes, “Agents that Reduce work and information Overload,” in 
Readings in Human–Computer Interaction, Elsevier,  pp. 811–821, 
1995. 
[9] M. Duma, “Agents, agent architectures and multi-agent systems” 
Comput. Sci., vol. Master of, no. September, pp. 132, 2008. 
[10] R. S. Gray, G. Cybenko, D. Kotz, R. A. Peterson, and D. Rus, 
“D’Agents: Applications and performance of a mobile-agent system” 
Softw. - Pract. Exp., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 543–573, 2002. 
[11] S. Bouchenak, “Mobilité et persistance des applications dans 
l’environnement Java” Institut National Polytechnique de Grenoble-
INPG, 2001. 
[12] D. Johansen, “Operating system support for mobile agents”Oper. 
Syst. …, no. 100413, pp. 1–6, 1995. 
[13]  Weisenburger, P., Luthra, M., Koldehofe, B., and  Salvaneschi, G. 
“Quality-aware runtime adaptation in complex event processing”. 
In 2017 IEEE/ACM 12th International Symposium on Software 
Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS) ). 
IEEE (pp. 140-151, 2017. 
[14] F, Bellifemine,., A, Poggi., and G,Rimassa. “ JADE–A FIPA-
compliant agent framework”. In Proceedings of PAAM ,Vol. 99, No. 
97-108, p. 33,1999. 
[15] S, Tragatschnig.,S, Stevanetic., and U, Zdun.. “Supporting the 
evolution of event-driven service-oriented architectures using change 
patterns”. Information and Software Technology, 100, pp 133-146, 
2018. 
[16] S, Gupta.,S, Modgil., A, Gunasekaran.. “Big data in lean six sigma: a 
review and further research directions”. International Journal of 
Production Research, 58(3), pp 947-969, 2020. 
[17] G, Aceto.,V, Persico., and A, Pescapé. “Industry 4.0 and health: 
Internet of things, big data, and cloud computing for healthcare 
4.0”. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, vol . 18, pp 100-
129,2020. 
[18]  R, Sahal.,J. G, Breslin., and  M, I, Ali. “Big data and stream 
processing platforms for Industry 4.0 requirements mapping for a 
predictive 
maintenance use 
case”. Journal of 
manufacturing 
systems, vol. 54, pp 138-151, 2020. 
[19]  C, Zhang., Y,  andChen.. “A review of research relevant to the 
emerging industry trends: Industry 4.0, IoT, blockchain, and business 
analytics”. Journal of Industrial Integration and Management, vol 5 
no. 01,pp.165-180, 2020. 
[20] K,  Demertzis.,L, Iliadis.,N, Tziritas., and P,  Kikiras. « Anomaly 
detection via blockchained deep learning smart contracts in industry 
4.0”. Neural Computing and Applications,vol. 32, no. 23, pp 1-27, 
2020. 
[21] R. S, Alonso., I, Sittón-Candanedo.,O, García.,J, Prieto., & 
Rodríguez-González, S. “An intelligent Edge-IoT platform for 
monitoring livestock and crops in a dairy farming scenario”. Ad Hoc 
Networks, vol. 98, pp 1-54, 2020. 
[22] N. M, García.,.. “Multi-agent system for anomaly detection in 
Industry 4.0 using Machine Learning techniques”. ADCAIJ: 
Advances in Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence 
Journal, vol. 8, no. 4,pp. 33-40, 2019. 
[23] A, Kaushik.,V, Bhat Ramachandra., and  G. J, Jones,. ”An Interface 
for Agent Supported Conversational Search”. In Proceedings of the 
2020 
Conference 
on 
Human 
Information 
Interaction 
and 
Retrieval,pp. 452-456, 2020. 
[24] S, Kraus.,A, Azaria.,J, Fiosina.,M, Greve.,N, Hazon, ,L, Kolbe.,et all. 
“AI for explaining decisions in multi-agent environments”. 
In Proceedings 
of 
the 
AAAI 
Conference 
on 
Artificial 
Intelligence ,Vol. 34, No. 09, pp. 13534-13538, 2020. 
[25] F, Bellifemine.,A, Poggi., G,  Rimassa. ”JADE–A FIPA-compliant 
agent framework”. In Proceedings of PAAM ,vol. 99, no. 33, pp. 97-
108,1999. 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-861-7
ICIW 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

