Towards Validation of IFC Models with IfcDoc and SWRL 
A Comparative Study 
 
Muhammad Fahad 
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment 
290 Route des Lucioles,  
Sophia Antipolis 06904, France 
fahad.muhammad@cstb.fr 
Nicolas Bus, Franck Andrieux 
Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment 
290 Route des Lucioles,  
Sophia Antipolis 06904, France 
{firstname.lastname}@cstb.fr
 
 
Abstract—Recent years have witnessed the need of automatic 
verification requirements to warn the non-conformities with 
the associated 3D visualization, or to provide access to the 
technical documentation for a given digital model based on its 
sophisticated contextual information. In this paper, we study 
two approaches for the validation of IFC Models, i.e., with 
IfcDoc and SWRL. The traditional approach is by using 
IfcDoc tool developed by buildingSMART International to 
improve the consistent and computer-interpretable definition 
of Model View Definitions. On the other hand, Semantic Web 
technologies, especially Semantic Web rule language, allow the 
semantic validation of IFC models to enable the compliance 
checking of IFC construction models with unmatchable query 
performance and flexibility. Therefore, we present and 
compare IfcDoc and Semantic Web rule language technologies 
for the model instance verification and conformance checking 
of IFC models, and demonstrate various important aspects and 
their limitations. We conclude that both technologies have 
their specific significances, but Semantic Web technologies 
provide a better hand over the traditional approach. The 
Semantic Web approach with the goal of combining the 
strengths of an ontology and IFC technologies makes 
information retrieval from an IFC model faster, flexible and 
also enables interoperability between IFC documents. 
Keywords-Validation of IFC models; SWRL; Ontology; BIM; 
Querying IFC models; MVDXML. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
To understand a building through the usage of a digital 
model which draws on a range of data assembled 
collaboratively before, during and after construction is 
referred to as Building Information Modeling (BIM) [1]. It 
brings together all the information about every component of 
a building, in one place. BIM with its interoperability 
properties is intended to facilitate exchanges and handovers 
between different stakeholders. While the visualization and 
geometric representation are intrinsic to the digital building 
model, the fields of quality requirements, evaluation and 
regulatory contextualization (destination, named areas, 
threshold values, certified data, evidence of compliance, etc.) 
need higher level of maturity [2]. Industry Foundation 
Classes (IFC) is the complete and fully stable open and 
international standard for exchanging BIM data [3]. Building 
SMART organization aims at publishing IFC and related 
buildingSMART data model standards. The buildingSMART 
data model standards are developed by the Model Support 
Group, and the implementation activities are coordinated by 
the Implementation Support Group [4]. Together, both 
groups organize the IFC software certification process. It 
aims to be a global standard for the BIM data exchange. The 
subset of the IFC schema needed to satisfy one or many 
Exchange Requirements of the Architecture, Engineering 
and Construction (AEC) industry is called Model View 
Definitions (MVD). The XML format used to publish the 
concepts and associated rules is MVDXML and it is 
regarded as an open standard [5]. MVDs provide additional 
rules for the IFC validation and focus on extracting integral 
model subsets for the IFC implementation purposes. There 
are many drawbacks of MVDXML for extracting building 
views such as: lack of logical formalisms, solely 
consideration of IFC schema and MVD-based view 
constructors are not very flexible and dynamic [6]. Although 
IFC is an open standard, its complex nature makes the 
information retrieval difficult from an IFC model, and thus 
affects the validation process by MVDXML rules. Many 
tasks for IFC model such as information retrieval, model 
validation, etc., do not achieve real-time performance in the 
real-world BIM scenarios.  
Our enterprise, Centre Scientifique et Technique du 
Bâtiment (CSTB), through its research and development 
efforts, aims at automatic validation requirements to warn 
the non-conformities with the associated 3D visualization, or 
to provide access to the technical documentation for a given 
digital model based on its sophisticated contextual 
information. To achieve these goals, our research adopts a 
traditional approach using MVDXML [5] and, in addition, 
focuses on the Semantic Web rule language SWRL [7] for 
the validation of IFC construction and building models. The 
traditional approach by using IfcDoc tool developed by 
buildingSMART International is to improve the consistent 
and computer-interpretable definition of MVD as true 
subsets of the IFC Specification with the enhanced definition 
of concepts. Therefore, first, we present background 
knowledge about both these approaches and then compare 
IfcDoc and SWRL technologies for the model instance 
verification and conformance checking of IFC models. In 
addition, we demonstrate various important aspects and their 
limitation as well. We also performed experiments via 
queries by the traditional approach via IfcDoc and the 
ontology-based Resource Description Framework (RDF) 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

approach IFC-to-RDF via SPARQL queries [8]. IFC-to-RDF 
is a set of reusable Java component that allows parsing IFC-
SPF files and converts them into RDF graphs. Our approach 
uses IFC to RDF conversion and then stores RDF triples into 
Stardog [9] knowledge graph that gives unmatched query 
performance. We investigated that IFC; although is an open 
standard, it has a complex nature which makes information 
retrieval difficult from an IFC model. On the other hand, 
Semantic Web technologies, especially SWRL, allow for the 
semantic verification of IFC models to enable the 
compliance checking of IFC construction models with fast 
querying performance.  
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
provides the background knowledge of the domain. Section 3 
presents the  related work. Section 4 presents two approaches 
for the validation of rules and conformance checking. 
Section 5 discusses our experimental findings via MVDXML 
validation rules on IfcDoc and SPARQL queries. Section 6 
concludes this paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In this section, we provide some background about the 
two approaches that can be used for the validation of IFC 
models. 
A. 
IfcDoc Tool and MVDXML 
The subset of the IFC schema needed to satisfy one or 
many 
Exchange 
Requirements 
of 
the 
Architecture, 
Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry is called 
Model View Definition (MVD). The XML format used to 
publish the concepts and associated rules is MVDXML and 
it is regarded as an open standard [5]. MVDs provide 
additional rules for the IFC validation and focus on 
extracting integral model subsets for IFC implementation 
purposes. The buildingSMART is willing to support 
construction domain developers in reusing its leading 
openBIM standard IFC as a baseline to set up specific data 
exchange protocols to satisfy exchange requirements in the 
industry. The buildingSMART International has developed 
IfcDoc tool for creating Model View Definitions. Based on 
the newly developed mvdXML standard, just Model View 
Definitions can now be easily developed using the IfcDoc 
tool. The tool and methodology can be applied to all IFC 
releases (IFC2x3, IFC4, etc.). For the validation of an IFC 
file against a particular model view, IfcDoc tool user 
interface displays a pane on the right side containing object 
instances within the file matching definitions selected in the 
tree view. The end-user can generate a report in the HTML 
format indicating if the file is valid according to the specified 
model view, and detailing what passes or fails. However, it 
does not show the cause or provide mechanisms for 
reasoning the inconsistencies or anomalies.  
B. 
 SWRL and SQWRL 
The Semantic Web technologies, SWRL and SQWRL, 
are widely being used for the inference of new knowledge, 
validation and querying ontologies [7]. Ontologies, although 
they are best for knowledge modeling, have limitations and 
may not suffice for all applications. There are statements that 
cannot be expressed in Ontology Web Language; therefore, 
Semantic Web Rule Language is designed on top of 
ontologies to be an alternative paradigm for the knowledge 
modeling that adds expressivity to the OWL. Besides this, 
SWRL rules infer new knowledge from the existing 
knowledge modeled in the ontologies. SQWRL is the query 
language of the Semantic Web for querying the RDF data 
[10]. Along with query language SQWRL, it has more access 
to characterize on RDF graphs. SWRL rule engine employed 
with an ontology-based on IFC specifications can be used for 
the information retrieval process from an IFC model and is 
the focus of our research. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
To achieve the benefits of ontologies, there are many 
efforts to build an ontology for the IFC construction industry. 
One of the outcomes can be seen as an IFC-based 
Construction Industry Ontology and Semantic Web services 
framework [11]. With simple reasoning built over the 
ontology, their information retrieval system could query the 
IFC model in XML format directly. The BuildingSMART 
Linked Data Working Group has developed IfcOWL 
ontology to allow extensions towards other structured data 
sets that are made available using Semantic Web 
technologies [12]. There are many versions of IfcOWL 
ontology since the work has been started. We have been 
working on an ontology IFC4_ADD1.owl that was launched 
on 25 Sept. 2015. We have enriched this ontology with 
English-French and IFC vocabulary (synonyms, descriptions, 
etc.) from bSDD semantic data dictionary in our research 
project where we map regulatory text and certification rules 
over BIM [13]. In addition, we assigned concepts of IfcOWL 
ontology with Global Unique Identifier (GUID) to serve as a 
unique language-dependent serial number from the bSDD. 
Data 
models 
formally 
define 
data 
objects 
and 
relationships among data objects for a domain of interest. 
EXPRESS is a standard data modeling language for product 
data [25]. There are some research projects that bring BIM to 
the Web, to overcome drawbacks due to several limitations 
of EXPRESS, by converting IFC models into RDF graphs. 
Then, the RDF models become accessible from the Web; 
they can be processed and queried in more flexible ways, and 
they can be interlinked using the Linked Data technologies. 
This way of bringing BIM to the Web allows to take 
advantage of the fast evolution of the Web and the emerging 
services and data sources. Hoang and Torma [14] developed 
an open-source Java based IFC2RDF tool that performs 
multilayer conversion from IFC schemas developed in 
EXPRESS into OWL2 ontologies [26] and IFC data from 
STEP physical file format (SPFF) into RDF graphs aligned 
with the ontologies. Through the multi-layer model, users 
can get three ontology layers according to the requirements 
of an application, where each ontology layer is compatible 
with essentially the same IFC-derived RDF data. There is 
another tool named IFC-to-RDF-converter developed by 
Internet & Data lab at Aalto University and Ghent University 
[15]. They provide with an EXPRESS-to-OWL and IFC-to-
RDF conversion service. The converter can be accessed in a 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

number of ways: using a command line tool (written in 
Java), using a RESTful Web interface, or using a Graphical 
User Interface (GUI). 
Besides these projects that build an ontology for the IFC, 
recent years revealed some contributions based on Semantic 
Web technologies. SWOP-PMO project is one of recent 
contributions that use formal methodology based on the 
Semantic Web standards and technologies [16]. It uses 
OWL/RDF to represent the knowledge, and SPARQL 
queries and Rule Interchange Format (RIF) to represent the 
rules. The RDF/OWL representation is not derived from the 
written knowledge but has to be remodeled in accordance 
with the rules of OWL/RDF. There are some other works for 
the semantic enrichment of ontologies in the construction 
and building domain. Emani et al. proposed a framework for 
generating an OWL Description Logic (DL) expression of a 
given concept from its natural language definition 
automatically [17]. Their framework also takes into account 
IFC ontology and the resultant DL expression is built by 
using the existing IFC entities.  
Pauwels and Zhang [18] listed three ways for the 
conformance checking of IFC models. First, we have the 
hard coded rule checking, which is similar to the approach 
adopted by Solibri Model Checker [19]. This tool loads a 
BIM model, considers rules stored natively in the application 
and performs rule checking against BIM for the architectural 
design validations. This approach is fast as rules are 
integrated inside the application, but there is no flexibility or 
customization possible as rules are not available outside the 
actual application. Another solution, the traditional approach 
of compliance checking is with the IfcDoc tool developed by 
buildingSMART International for generating MVDXML 
rules through a graphical interface [20]. It is based on the 
MVDXML specification to improve the consistent and 
computer-interpretable definition of Model View Definitions 
as true subsets of the IFC Specification with enhanced 
definition of concepts. This tool is widely used as AEC 
specific platform in the construction industry. 
The second approach is ‘rule checking’ by querying the 
IFC model. In this approach, BIM is interrogated by rules, 
which are formalized directly into SPARQL queries. As an 
example, K. R. Bouzidi et al. [21] proposed this approach to 
ease regulation compliance checking in the construction 
industry. They reformulated the regulatory requirements 
written in the natural language via SBVR, and then, 
SPARQL queries perform the conformance checking of IFC 
models.  
The third is a semantic rule checking approach with 
dedicated rule languages such as SWRL, Jess [27] or 
N3Logic [28]. There are few projects in AEC industries that 
use this approach for the formal rule-checking, job hazard 
analysis and regulation compliance checking. H. Wicaksono 
et al. [22] built an intelligent energy management system for 
the building domain by using RDF representation of a 
construction model. Then, they formulated SWRL rules to 
infer anomalies over the ontological model. Later, they also 
developed SPARQL interface to query the results of rules. 
Pauwels et al. [23] built acoustic regulation compliance 
checking for BIM models based on N3Logic rules. They use 
N3logic rules with an ontology to reason whether a 
construction model is compliant or not with the European 
acoustic regulations. Another project that was built on the 
ontological framework for the rule-based inspection of 
eeBIM-systems was developed by M. Kadolsky et al. [24]. 
They used rules to query an IfcOWL ontology that captured 
a building.  
IV. 
VALIDATION OF CONSTRUCTION MODELS VIA 
IFCDOC AND SWRL 
The validation of IFC building models is vital in the 
BIM-based collaboration processes. The aim of validating 
Models is to align several specialized indexations of building 
components at both sides, assuming that they deal with the 
same abstract concepts or physical objects, but according to 
their separate representation prisms. We have adopted two 
methods for the verification of rules. Firstly, we use IfcDoc 
tool (MVDXML checker) which performs three step 
automatic control sequence. The IfcDoc engine loads the IFC 
file and MVD files, and then executes the defined rules. 
Finally, it generates a report indicating compliance 
(compliant/non-compliant) of each item under the rule. It 
assigns each rule a green or red depending on whether the 
item is/is-not in compliance to the defined rules. Secondly, 
we have built a SWRL-based rule engine to verify our rules. 
For this, we have converted our IFC model into RDF which 
is the input of the rule engine by using IFC-to-RDF-
Converter. Each method has its own pros and cons and 
should be used according to requirements of the research 
project. The following subsections present these two 
approaches of verification, and also present a comparison 
between two technologies MVDXML and SWRL side by 
side. 
A. 
Verify the presence of an Attribute Value  
When we need to access the name/label of an IfcSpace, 
we can simply access the name attribute of the IFC schema.  
Figure 1 shows the MVDXML template and Figure 2 
illustrates how we can access it with the help of SQWRL. In 
addition, SQWRL provides a lot of built-in functions which 
we can apply on the name to get results more appropriate 
according to their order, size, etc. For example, Figure 2 also 
illustrates how the names of IfcSpaces are obtained with the 
help of built-in ordered function (sqwrl:orderBy). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Accessing attribute of IfcSpace in IfcDoc 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Figure 2.  Accessing attribute of IfcSpace in SWRL 
B. 
Verify the presence of an Element 
When there is a need to restrict the relation between the 
elements of IFC, we can use the IfcRelAggregates relation in 
MVDXML to specify relating objects. For example, Figure 3 
illustrates when we want to check IfcProject should contain 
an IfcBuilding as represented by the cardinality involved 
between IFC objects. On the other hand, in case of ontology, 
we can restrict IfcProject by a restriction: IfcProject contains 
some IfcBuilding, (i.e., IfcProject   contains.IfcBuilding) 
as illustrated in Figure 4. We can also check this with the 
help of SQWRL by counting the number of buildings related 
to IfcProject and verifying whether their number is greater 
than one. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Verify the presence of an element in IfcDoc 
 
  
Figure 4.  Verify the presence of an element in SWRL 
C. 
Verify the value of a Simple Attribute 
In MVDXML and SWRL, we can create various types of 
conformance checking conditions on the attributes of objects. 
For example, consider a case when we need to check the 
value of overAllWidth attribute of a door to be greater than 
0.8. Figures 5 and 6 illustrate how we can verify this in these 
technologies.  Both technologies support a lot of operators 
for 
the 
implementation 
of 
conditions 
(such 
as: 
). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Condition on OverAllWidth attribute of an IfcDoor in IfcDoc  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Condition on OverAllWidth attribute of an IfcDoor in SWRL 
D. 
Verify Attributes of Element relative to the 
Classification 
Both technologies allow us to verify attributes of 
elements relative to the classification. Figures 7a and 7b 
illustrate how MVDXML and SWRL support various 
representations of IFC objects with respect to the classifying 
element. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Selection of the concept by ‘Fenêtre’ in (a) IfcDoc (b) SWRL 
 
Identifier of 
concept in 
classification 
Name of  
the 
classification 
Name of 
concept in 
classification 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

E. 
Verify the cardinality of an Element 
Both MVDXML and OWL schema allow verifying the 
cardinality of an element. For an example, they allow to 
verify whether IfcGroup has two WCs. Figures 8 and 9 
illustrate how these technologies support the verification of 
the cardinality of an element. There can be many ways to 
perform this semantically, as depicted in the Figure 9. 
  
 
Figure 8.  Verifying IfcGroup should have two WC in IfcDoc 
 
Figure 9.  Verifying IfcGroup should have two WC in SWRL 
F. 
 Composition of Simple Rule to build complex rules 
MVDXML and SWRL allow building complex rules 
which are formed from basic rules. We can concatenate 
simple rules with operators to form more complex rules. 
Figures 10 and 11 show an example of building complex 
rules with the composition of simple rules. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Composition of complex rules based on simple rules in IfcDoc 
 
 
Figure 11.  Composition of complex rules based on simple rules in SWRL 
G. 
 Beyond MVDXML – More functionalities in SWRL 
As SWRL is a W3C [29] recommendation, a lot more 
functionality is added to meet the requirements of the real 
world scenarios. For example, one can perform calculations 
in SWRL, which we cannot do in MVDXML. For instance, 
volume of a door can be calculated given the length, width 
and height of a door. In SWRL, we use multiply function to 
get LxWxH to calculate and display the volume of a door. In 
addition to a mathematical library (e.g., add, subtract, 
multiply,..,sin, cos, tan), we have a large number of functions 
for the string manipulation (e.g., stringConcat, stringLength, 
substring, normalizeSpace, etc.), and for the DateTime, 
Duration, URIs and Lists as well. In addition, we can also 
define new attributes and elements and give them values 
based on the initial axioms in the repository and store them 
back in our repository for further processing. This is a very 
interesting feature of semantic technologies as we cannot 
define everything in the repository at the initial stage. Some 
information which is missing, evolving, or new, can be 
inserted in the repository during the later stages of design 
and processing. For example, if we want a new attribute 
isWheelChairAccessible associated with the water closet 
(WC) based on the dimensions of its door, then we can 
verify its width and height, and assign a value to the attribute 
isWheelChairAccessible and store its value back in the 
repository to judge the accessibility of a WC. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS ON IFCDOC AND SPARQL 
We also performed experiments via different queries on 
different sizes of IFC models by the traditional approach via 
IFCDoc and the ontology-based approach via SPARQL. We 
have used IFC-to-RDF-Converter developed by Pauwels and 
Oraskari [15]. The IFC file needs to follow the IFC4_ADD1, 
IFC4, IFC2X3_TC1, or IFC2X3_Final schema. Once IFC 
document is converted into RDF, then we stored it into the 
Stardog triple store. Stardog is the enterprise knowledge 
graph used for querying, searching, and analyzing enterprise 
data, wherever it is, using scalable, cutting-edge knowledge 
graph technology. We found that SPARQL queries are 
flexible for retrieving data and do the validation in an 
optimized way giving better run-time as compared to the 
traditional approach. But conversion from IFC to RDF and 
then storage of triples into stardog takes time. But, once the 
stardog triple store is loaded with the data, it is much faster 
querying and validation of IFC document. SPARQL queries 
and SWRL rules can be modified easily with the new or 
customized conditions and constraints for the conformance 
checking against the stored triple store. Besides flexibility, 
reasoning is another advantage of Semantic Web technology, 
as the IfcDoc tool does not provide any justification. With 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

queries and rules, we can identify the reason of inconsistency 
and anomalies. Therefore, each approach has its own pros 
and cons. The traditional approach is simpler as there are no 
conversion tasks. On the other hand, Semantic Web 
technologies require a conversion layer to be integrated for 
the validation tasks for IFC models. But, it can enable 
interoperability and fast information retrieval once the triple 
store is ready. Table 1 summarizes file and schema features 
of both approaches, where 1 represents the traditional 
approach via MVDXML and 2 represents the Semantic Web 
approach via SWRL. 
TABLE I.  
FILE AND SCHEMA FEATURES OF BOTH APPROACHES 
      
Data File 
 
Rule File 
 
Rule Schema 
 
Data Schema 
 
1 
IFC 
.mvdXML 
.XSD 
.step 
2 
RDF  
(IFC converted) 
.SWRL, 
.OWL 
.OWL 
IfcOnt 
   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper addresses the need of automatic verification 
requirements to warn the non-conformities with the 
associated 3D visualization as a hot challenge. We studied 
two approaches for the validation of IFC Models, i.e., with 
IfcDoc and SWRL. Each approach has its own pros and cons 
and should be used according to requirements of a research 
project. Some of major points are: 
 
IfcDoc tool and traditional conformance checking by 
MVDXML technology is a good candidate for the 
simple rules on small IFC models. Verification by 
SWRL requires a prior conversion of the IFC model in 
to the RDF, which is an extra task to achieve. 
 
Although IFC is an open standard; its complex nature 
makes information retrieval from an IFC model 
difficult as the size of IFC model grows. Querying 
semantic model is faster and gives a good run-time. 
One can customize queries easily and according to 
requirements.  
 
There is no intermediate state and IfcDoc tool gives no 
explanation for the reason of non-compliance. Whereas 
the Semantic Web technology is a good compromise 
between development efforts and opportunities. The 
graphical representation of RDF allows rules to be more 
intuitive and more efficient to reason and execute. 
As a future direction, we are going to present a 
comprehensive quantitative comparison between the two 
approaches, and also investigate other triple stores which are 
competitors of stardog for the storage and querying of IFC 
models.  
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Rebekka, J. Stengel, and F. Schultmann, "Building 
Information Modeling (BIM) for existing buildings—
Literature review and future needs." Automation in 
construction, vol.  38, pp. 109-127, 2014.  
[2] C. Eastman, P. Teicholz, R. Sacks, and K. Liston, “BIM 
Handbook: A Guide to Building Information Modeling for 
Owners, Managers, Designers, Engineers, and Contractors”, 
Hoboken, New Jersey, Wiley, 2008. 
[3] V. Thein, Industry Foundation Classes (IFC), BIM 
Interoperability 
Through 
a 
Vendor-Independent 
File 
Format, A Bentley White Paper, September 2011. 
[4] E. Jönsson, 
"Consequences 
of 
Implementing 
the 
buildingSMART Data Dictionary From a construction 
company’s perspective", Stockholm, May 2015. 
[5] T. Chipman, T. Liebich, and M. Weise, “mvdXML 
specification of a standardized format to define and 
exchange MVD with exchange requirements and validation 
Rules”,  version 1.0, May 2012. 
[6] T. Mendes de Farias, A. Roxin, and C. Nicolle, “A 
Semantic Web Approach for defining Building Views”, 
buildingSMART Summit Jeju, Korea, 28 Sept, 2016. 
[7] I. Horrocks, P.F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S.  Tabet, B. 
Grosof, and M. Dean, “SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule 
Language Combining OWL and RuleML”, 2004.  
[8] SPARQL 
Query 
Language 
for 
RDF, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/, 2008. [last access: 
June 2017] 
[9] Stardog, http://stardog.com/  [last access: June 2017] 
[10] D. Brickley, R.V. Guha, and B. McBride, (2004). “RDF 
vocabulary description language 1.0: RDF Schema”. W3C 
Recommendation 2004. [last access: June 2017] 
[11] L. Zhang and R.R. Issa, “Development of IFC-based 
Construction Industry Ontology for Information Retrieval 
from IFC Models”, International Workshop on Computing 
in Civil Engineering, Netherlands, Vol. 68, 2011. 
[12] W. Terkaj and P. Pauwels, “IfcOWL ontology file for 
IFC4”, 2014. Available at: 
http://linkedbuildingdata.net/resources/IFC4_ADD1.owl 
[13] M. Fahad, Nicolas Bus., and F. Andrieux, “Towards 
Mapping Certification Rules over BIM”, Proc. of the 33rd 
CIB W78 Conference, Brisbane, Australia, 2016. 
[14] N. Vu Hoang, and S. Törmä, “Implementation and 
Experiments with an IFC-to-Linked Data Converter”. Proc. 
of the 32nd CIB W78 Conference, Netherlands, 2015. 
[15]  P. Pauwels and J. Oraskari, “IFC-to-RDF Converter” 
https://github.com/IDLabResearch/IFC-to-RDF-converter 
[16] F. Josefiak, H. Bohms, P. Bonsma, and M. Bourdeau, 
“Semantic product modelling with SWOP’s PMO, eWork 
and eBusiness in AEC”, pp. 95-104 
[17] C.K. Emani, C. Ferreira Da Silva, B. Fiès, P. Ghodous, and 
M. Bourdeau., “Automated Semantic Enrichment of 
Ontologies in the Construction Domain”. Proc. of the 32nd 
CIB W78 Conference, Netherlands, 2015. 
[18] P. Pauwels and S. Zhang, “Semantic Rule-Checking for 
regulation compliance checking: An overview of strategies 
and approaches”. Proc. of the 32nd CIB W78 Conference, 
Netherlands, 2015. 
[19] L. Khemlani, “Solibri model checker”, AECbytes Product 
Review March 31, 2009 
[20] IfcDoc Tool, available at: http://www.buildingsmart-
tech.org/specifications/ 
specification-tools 
/ifcdoc-
tool/ifcdoc-help-page-section/IfcDoc.pdf, 2012. 
[21] K. R., Bouzidi, B., Fies, C., Faron-Zucker, A. Zarli, and N. 
Le Thanh, “Semantic Web Approach to Ease Regulation 
Compliance Checking in Construction Industry”. Future 
Internet. 4 (3). pp. 830-851, 2012. 
[22] H. Wicaksono, P., Dobreva, P. Häfner, and S. Rogalski, 
“Ontology development towards expressive and reasoning-
enabled building information model for an intelligent 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

energy management system”. Proc. of the 5th KEOD,  
pp. 38-47. SciTePress, 2013. 
[23] P. Pauwels, D. Van Deursen, R. Verstraeten, J. De Roo, R. 
De Meyer, R. Van de Walle, and J. Van Campenhout, “A 
semantic 
rule 
checking 
environment 
for 
building 
performance checking”. Automation in Construction. 20 
(5). pp. 506-518, 2011. 
[24] M. Kadolsky, K. Baumgärtel, and R. J. Scherer, An 
ontology framework for rule-based inspection of eeBIM-
systems. Procedia Engineering. vol. 85, pp. 293-301, 2014. 
[25] EXPRESS, ISO 10303-11:2004 Industrial automation 
systems and integration - Product data representation and 
exchange - Part 11: Description methods: The EXPRESS 
language 
reference 
manual, 
https://www.iso.org/-
standard/38047.html, [last access: June 2017] 
[26] OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Document Overview 
(Second Edition), W3C Recommendation 11 December 
2012, https://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/ [last access: 
June 2017] 
[27] E. Friedman-Hill, “Jess in Action: Rule Based Systems in 
Java”. Manning Publications. ISBN 1-930110-89-8, 2003 
[28] T. I. M. Berners-Lee, D. A. N. Connolly, L. Kagal, Y. 
Scharf, and J. I. M. Hendler, "N3Logic: A logical 
framework for the World Wide Web", Theory and Practice 
of Logic Programming. vol. 8 (3),  2008. 
[29] World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), https://www.w3.org/ 
[last access: June 2017] 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

