Ontology for the Context of E-Mobility: Charging
Station Recommendation based on the EV Trip
Dimeth Nouicer
LaRINa, ENSTAB, University of Carthage
ENSIT, University of Tunis
Nabeul, Tunisia
dimethnoucer@gmail.com
Ikbal Chammakhi Msadaa
LaRINa, ENSTAB
University of Carthage
Tunis, Tunisia
ikbal.msadaa@ensta.u-carthage.tn
Khaled Grayaa
LaRINa, ENSTAB
University of Carthage
Tunis, Tunisia
khaled.grayaa@ensta.u-carthage.tn
Abstract—Electromobility (E-Mobility) is a disruptive technol-
ogy that would facilitate the transition from highly polluting
transport systems to carbon neutral mobility. However, for a
mass adoption of this technology, several barriers need to be
addressed. In this paper, we propose an ontology intended to
cover a large variety of applications related to E-Mobility, ensure
the semantic interoperability between the different stakeholders
of the electromobility ecosystem, and ease their collaboration.
We have made the choice in this paper to validate our ontology
through a trip planning application as a start. This use case
is particularly relevant as it helps the Electric Vehicles (EVs)
drivers plan their journeys and overcome the hurdle of range
anxiety in their minds by offering them the possibility to choose
and book in advance the most appropriate charging points
for recharging their EVs batteries. The proposed ontology is
developed under Prot´eg´e framework using the Web Ontology
Language (OWL) and validated through SPARQL queries with
GraphDB. It is based on Smart Applications REFerence (SAREF)
ontology adopted by European Telecommunication Standardiza-
tion Institute (ETSI) to ensure semantic interoperability in the
Internet of Things (IoT) domain.
Index Terms—e-mobility; electric vehicles; trip planning; seman-
tic web; ontology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Electromobility has emerged as one of the most promising
technologies that would facilitate the transition from highly
polluting transport systems to zero-emission systems partic-
ularly when powered by Renewable Energies (RE). Indeed,
as part of Paris agreement, the 197 signatory countries are
committed to reduce their GreenHouse Gas (GHG) emissions
and become carbon-neutral by 2050. Nevertheless, substantial
technical, socio-economic, and regulatory barriers must be
addressed to achieve the widespread adoption of EVs. As
highlighted in [1], one of the key barriers to mass EVs
adoption is ”the informational barrier” which mainly refers
to the range anxiety in the minds of EV drivers. Lower
driving ranges, long charging times, and the need for charging
infrastructure have been identified (in addition to the EV cost)
as the main key factors that are slowing down a widespread
use of EVs. To address this issue, we believe that providing
services and applications such as trip planning and charging
stations booking would help overcome the hurdle of range
anxiety and encourage consumers to adopt EVs as alternative
to the conventional internal combustion engine vehicles.
To reach the above goal, it is necessarily to share a common
understanding of the information structure among the main
stakeholders and domain-related software agents [2]. In this
context, ontologies emerge as a powerful tool to set agreed-
upon definitions that capture the main concepts of a domain
knowledge and enable its reuse. For instance, ontologies
will ease the complexity of the E-Mobility ecosystem, e.g.,
heterogeneity, multidisciplinary aspect and the multitude of
systems and parties involved, and enable the collaboration
and interoperability between the different stakeholders, e.g.,
EV owners, Charging Stations (CS), grid suppliers, payment
and third-party services providers. Thus, ontologies will not
only profit the electromobility services development such as
trip planning and Charging Points (CPs) booking (which
are the main use cases considered in our paper), but also
to facilitate the mass adoption of other disruptive transport
technologies such as Mobility as a Service (MaaS) applications
and Connected and Autonomous Electric Vehicles (CAEV)
[3]. MaaS is an innovative mobility paradigm that offers to
consumers the possibility to get from A to B, using different
transportation modes in a flexible and seamless way, through a
single interface [4]. It relies on a digital platform that integrates
services allowing the booking and payment of services across
public and private transportation systems in a flexible, on-
demand and seamless way.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section
II gives a brief literature review about the use of ontologies in
the transportation domain in general with a particular focus on
works related to E-Mobility and eMaaS services. Section III
provides an overview of the E-Mobility domain through the
identification of its key stakeholders and the main technical
terms that need to be introduced. Section IV is dedicated to
the description of the main use case addressed by our ontol-
ogy, namely the trip planning and CPs booking applications.
After explaining in Section V the adopted methodology used
in developing our ontology, we describe in Section VI the
proposed ontology. Several usage scenarios are proposed in
this section to showcase the use of the ontology in the trip
planning context. The results of the ontology evaluation via
the OOPS! scanner are reported in the same section. Section
VII concludes the paper and sheds light on the possible future
directions.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

II. RELATED WORK
The complexity of the transportation domain in general
and the E-Mobility in particular has triggered the need to
develop ontologies that would represent the related concepts
and the relations between them in a formal and explicit way,
thus facilitating the domain knowledge sharing and reuse.
After explaining the methodology of developing an ontology,
Yazdizadeh and Farooq [5] survey the main existing ontologies
related to the smart mobility domain. They classify these
ontologies into two main categories: (i) foundation ontolo-
gies related to domains such as weather, trip, etc., and (ii)
transportation physical networks ontologies where we find
for instance pedestrian network, cycling network, and railway
network ontologies. As future directions, the authors identify
MaaS as one of the most important and disruptive mobility
technologies for which no ontology has been proposed yet.
Garcia et al. [4] introduce the concept of eMaaS where
E-Mobility Systems (EMS) are combined with the MaaS
concept with a particular focus on Shared Electric Mobility
Services (SEMS). The authors propose, through a combination
of these three modules, an eMaaS system architecture with
integrated smart services such as seamless trip planning and
booking, payment services, fleet management and monitoring,
etc. The authors however do not refer to the format of the
exchanged data neither to the mechanisms that ensure its
interoperability. [6] and [7] are among the rare works that
have proposed an ontology that considers EVs. Nevertheless,
the ontology remains generic in the sens that it addresses green
energy in general and uses EVs as an example of ”devices”
that consume energy. Households are also addressed in this
work as consumers or producers of green energy. Moreover,
the whole ontology has been built from a Business Model
(BM) perspective which objective is to ensure an automated
reasoning for evaluating BMs and green behaviours. Scrocca
et al. developed an interesting ontology called ”Urban IoT
ontologies” [8], [9] (UIOT) to solve interoperability issues
especially for Milan Municipality. Their goal was to harmonise
the data flows between service suppliers and the city of Milan.
Their solution consists of a core ontology and two extensions:
one for sharing mobility and one for e-mobility. Due to the
specific needs of Milan Municipality, the ontology proposed
is dedicated to serve the service suppliers and the government.
There is no mention of what the EV drivers need or how to
assist them in planning their journeys which we consider as
one of the most important issues to tackle in e-mobility. Damaj
et al. [3] consider the electromobility domain from a QoE
perspective. They survey the quality indicators in Connected
and Autonomous Electric Vehicles domain and propose a rich
taxonomy that would facilitate the development of QoE-centric
systems for the CAEV context.
Despite the increasing popularity of E-Mobility, current
research works on ontologies for this domain remain either
too generic by dealing with ontologies addressing the trans-
portation science [5] or the smart city context [10] in general,
or they tend to show EVs only as an example of a green device
[6], [7]. In this paper, we propose an ontology that captures
the main concepts related to electromobility and integrates
the key technical features that have often been overlooked in
previous works. We adopt in our ontology design a user-centric
approach where the whole reasoning is made in a way to
facilitate the development of services such as the trip planning
service or the Charging Points (CP) booking applications,
thus addressing the needs of the EV driver. Moreover, and
to ensure high interoperability for the proposed ontology, we
rely on the Smart Applications REFerence ontology (SAREF)
adopted by the European Telecommunications Standard Insti-
tute (ETSI) as standard framework for smart applications. The
core ontology is complemented by a set of extensions that
are particularly relevant is our context, such as SAREF4CITY
the SAREF extension for smart cities, SAREF4SYST, the
extension for systems, connections and connection points
and mainly SAREF4AUTO, the extension for the automotive
domain. While being still under development, the latter, com-
bined with the core ontology and other extensions, represent a
solid starting point for our ontology as it has been validated by
a standardization body and is candidate to be the core ontology
in smart transportation domain.
III. E-MOBILITY BACKGROUND
Before tackling the ontology development part, it is im-
portant to have a common understanding of the key aspects
and challenges related to E-Mobility. First, we highlight the
main actors involved in the E-Mobility ecosystem and then we
define the technical terms and explain the technical features
that would influence our ontology design.
A. E-Mobility Stakeholders
One of the main challenges when dealing with E-Mobility
is the heterogeneity and complexity of its ecosystem. The
involved parties in this domain include EV drivers, charging
points operators, grid and renewable energies suppliers, and
other actors such as the standardization and regulation bodies.
Other stakeholders like the policy makers, i.e., government
and local authorities, are also part of this ecosystem as they
play a major role in setting the E-Mobility strategy and
services. EV manufacturers, payment operators and other 3rd
party and maintenance service providers are also needed to
assist EV drivers and EV fleet managers through their services.
Note that what makes this ecosystem even more complex
is that these stakeholders usually have conflicting interests
and different QoE expectations. EV drivers, for instance, are
motivated by finding available CPs and 3rd party service
providers, decreasing the time of charge, and reducing its
cost. The grid providers however, are more concerned by the
stability of the grid and the increase of their profit.
B. E-Mobility Technical Terms
Before diving into the ontology development, some E-
Mobility technical terms should be defined. In IEC 61851
[11], the international standard for electric vehicle conductive
charging systems, 4 modes of charging are defined. Modes 1,
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

2, and 3 are based on Alternative Current (AC) while mode
4 corresponds to the case where the EV supply Equipment
(EVSE) at the charging point delivers Direct Current (DC).
In terms of speed, only mode 4 (DC) is classified as fast to
ultra-fast charging. In the other modes, power is delivered at
slow to normal speed.
Depending on its model, an EV has at least one AC charging
inlet port to plug the vehicle to a power supply with optionally
a second DC port for fast charging or even a single port for
both AC and DC charging. From the EVSE side, there exists
several types of connectors to plug the charging cable to the
vehicle port. The type depends not only on the charging mode,
but also on the car model and the country of use. For example,
type 1 connector (SAE J1772) is an AC connector. While being
mainly used in USA and Japan, it is also accepted in Europe.
Therefore, it is crucial to ensure the compatibility between the
EV port and the connector of the charging cable. In the rest
of the paper and for the sake of simplicity, we refer to both
the EV inlet port and the EVSE connector as ”connector”.
The charging time, which is one of the main concerns of
EV drivers, can be roughly defined as the ratio between the
EV battery capacity (in kWh) and the charging power (in kW).
The latter is limited to the power that the CP can deliver and
that the EV can accept.
To compensate the energy losses in the different equipment,
an augmentation of at least 20% is necessary to reach a better
approximation of the charging time.
To give an example, if we consider an EV with a battery
capacity of 44.5 kWh and on-board charger of 6.6 kW, the
charging time is ˜8 hours with an 11 kW AC charging point
((44.5/6.6)*1.2) as it is limited by the onboard AC charger rate.
However, with an ultra-fast charging station of 250 kW, the
charging time goes down to ˜13 min ((44.5/250)*1.2). The last
technical property we need to introduce at this level is the State
of Charge (SoC) of the EV battery. It is usually expressed as a
percentage and it corresponds to the ratio between the battery
remaining energy and the total capacity of the battery.
IV. A TRIP PLANNING APPLICATION FOR EV DRIVERS
The ontology we propose in this work is intended to cover a
large variety of applications related to E-Mobility, ensure the
semantic interoperability between the different stakeholders,
and ease their collaboration when sharing knowledge. Never-
theless, we have made the choice in this paper to validate it
through a trip planning application as a start. This use case
is particularly important as it helps the EV drivers plan their
journeys and overcome the hurdle of range anxiety in their
minds by offering them the possibility to choose and book in
advance the most appropriate CPs to be used for recharging
their EVs’ batteries.
Figure 1 shows the input and output parameters of such
an application and the decision criteria based on which the
most appropriate CPs are recommended. As the figure sug-
gests, before starting his/her journey, the EV driver enters the
source and destination positions of his/her trip, the estimated
departure time and the targeted SoC at arrival. We suppose
that the current SoC of the EV battery can be automatically
retrieved by the application via a sensor placed at the EV
battery. Based on the input, the application checks one by one
the following criteria:
1) Availability: This step corresponds to identifying the
CPs that belong to the geographical area matching the
EV driver’s path. We only list the CPs that are within
the time slots of the driver’s estimated time of arrival.
2) Compatibility: Once the available CPs are identified,
only those compatible with the EV are considered el-
igible (in terms of power, connector, etc.), as shown in
Figure 2.
3) Charging Time: In addition to the availability per time
slot, the EV driver has access to the estimated charging
time that would enable him/her to reach the targeted SoC
(cf. Figure 2.b). As explained in Section III-B, several
parameters are considered to estimate this duration.
4) Cost: The EV driver can check the applied cost rates
at a specific CP within a given time interval. Note
that several pricing models can be implemented at this
level to avoid the grid overloading at peak time or to
encourage EV drivers to take alternative paths, etc.
5) Carbon Footprint: The last criteria we consider to rec-
ommend the most appropriate CP, is how ”green” is a
given CP. The latter is considered green if it is supplied
by renewable energy sources (solar power, wind power,
etc.).
Obviously, it is possible to give access to other information
that might influence the EV driver decision such as the offered
facilities at a given CP, e.g., cafe, restaurant, shopping center,
etc., as suggested in Figure 2.d. All these criteria might also
be coupled with the driver preferences and ranked accordingly.
Based on all the provided information: availability, cost,
charging time, etc., the EV driver can make his/her choice
and book the CP that fits the most his/her plan.
During the recommendation phase, the application identifies
the area within which the EV SoC remains above a certain
threshold, e.g., 20%. The zone is delimited based on the initial
SoC, the consumption rate of the EV and the distance from the
departure point where charging becomes inevitable and urgent
beyond this area. Therefore, it would be recommended to the
driver to pick a CP preferably within the that area to avoid
reaching values of SoC that would harm the EV battery and
impact its lifetime.
The integration of the EV driver preferences and coupling
Fig. 1: Trip Planning App Reasoning.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

(a) CS availability interface
(b) CS info interface
(c) Pricing interface
(d) Facilities interface
Fig. 2: EV Trip-planning Mobile App Interfaces.
them with these criteria and more is beyond the scope of this
paper. Yet, it is envisioned as a perspective for this work.
Figure 2 illustrates the design of the proposed application via
its main user interfaces.
V. ONTOLOGY ENGINEERING METHODOLOGY
In this section, we summarize the main phases we went
through when developing our ontology.
The first step was to identify the scope of our ontology and
its purpose. Therefore, we conduct an analysis to understand
the general context of E-Mobility and to identify the different
stakeholders, as explained is Section III; namely by answering
several basic questions, e.g., Who are we creating value for?
and For what we are going to use the ontology?, etc. This
analysis helped us define the terms and concepts associated
with the e-mobility domain. Then, we determined the set of
facts and specific terminology, e.g., the different attributes and
properties that describe each concept, etc.
After gathering the necessary requirements, the second step
is the implementation. During this phase, we identified the
technologies we need for the development of the ontology such
as OWL language. Further details can be found in Section VI.
The output was validated thanks to reasoners, and the SPARQL
queries were performed to answer the use cases and scenarios
we defined in the requirements phase.
VI. ONTOLOGY IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
After we gathered the necessary requirements, we moved
to the implementation phase. In this section, we explain the
concepts and showcase examples of our ontology.
A. Ontology reuse
As mentioned above, we considered re-using existing rele-
vant standards.
Through our literature review, mainly reported in Section
II, we chose SAREF as a core ontology for our solution.
First, it is an application-oriented reference ontology. Second,
it encompasses several concepts related to the automotive
domain namely through its extension SAREF4AUTO (s4auto),
as already explained in Section 2. Other existing ontologies
like Time, Geo ontology, and Opengis geosparql are also
integrated to cover most of our requirements.
B. Ontology development
In this section, we use prefixes for each term and we refer
to our own terms using the prefix Renewable energy-based
Electro-MObility (REMO), as illustrated in the diagrams in
Figures 3 and 4.
Fig. 3: Ontology main concepts.
The
main
concepts
are
modeled
by
extending
the
SAREF
vocabulary,
as
described
in
Figure
3.
Both
the
remo:ElectricVehicle and
remo:Elect-
ricVehicleSupplyEquipment have been introduced
and
are
modeled
as
a
s4syst:System,
which
s4syst:connects at the s4syst :Connection-
Point. The
remo: ElectricVehicle is also an
s4auto: AutomativeObject that remo:chargesIn
the
s4auto:ElectricChargingParkingSpot.
It
has
a
remo:
ElectricVehicleBattery
with
few
properties
(e.g.,
hasMaxRange,
hasSta-
teOfCharge
and
hasStateOfHealth).
The
concept
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

s4auto:ElectricChargingParkingSpot
remo:hasEVSE
remo:
ElectricVehicleSup-
plyEquipment. The latter has two types:
remo:AC
and remo:DC. We also have
remo:ChargingSession
remo:performedBy the EV in the EVSE, and extends
from saref:Service.
The EV and EVSE both connect at
remo:Connector
which extends from s4syst:ConnectionPoint. It also
extends to three different types:
remo: NormalPlug,
remo:PlugHighVoltage,
remo:Three PhaseCon-
nectionPoint. It is important to distinguish between the
different types since EVs have different connectors and not
all EVSE offer all types. Each EVSE connects to at least a
connection point.
Fig. 4: Path planning concepts.
To address the path planning requirements, we need
the
s4auto:Route of the EV, as described in Figure
4. The remo:ElectricVehicle SupplyEquipment
should be either on the s4auto:RoutePoint or at the
s4auto:EndPoint. Also, we need the s4auto:State
to verify if the CP is available for charging or not: e.g.,
s4auto:free and s4auto:occupied. Another impor-
tant aspect is the time. For instance, each state saref:has
timestamp at which it has started. For example, the CP can
be free at 10:00 am and then occupied at 10:30 am.
C. Ontology usage examples
In this section, we showcase how our ontology answers
the different criteria of our trip planning application using
SPARQL query language.
1) Availability: We start with availability questions. As
explained in Section IV, a CP is available when it is both
on the EV route and has an ”available” state.
Is there a CP at the EV destination? For this, we need the
EV route and its destination. Then, we check if there exists
a CP point at the destination. In Figure 5a, we showcase the
SPARQL query answering this first question.
Are there any CP on the EV route? To compose the query,
we ask for the CPs that are on the route points of the EV route.
In Figure 5b, we showcase the corresponding SPARQL query.
What are the CPs that can be reached from the EV start
point within its maximum range? When the EV leaves its
start point and is heading to the destination, it might need
to recharge on the way. Therefore, it is important to know
the CPs that can be reached before the EV Battery State Of
Charge (SOC) drops below 10%, as explained in Section IV.
In Figure 6a, we showcase the SPARQL query. Note that the
EV maxRange property is measured by an on-board sensor
available on electric vehicles.
When is the CP available? To answer this question, we
need to know each state of the CP and its timeStamp and
let the app user decide when to book a CP depending on the
result. In Figure 6b, we report the corresponding SPARQL
query.
2) Compatibility: This is the second criteria to be checked
in our trip planning app. The EVSE of the CP has to be
compatible with EV connector, as shown in Figure 7.
D. Ontology evaluation
To evaluate our ontology, we used OOPS! scanner [12]
to detect pitfalls. Since we imported and reused existing
vocabularies, the results show only one critical issue which is
that our ontology is not deployed online. However, our project
is still under development and this is not its final state, so we
did not deploy it on the web yet. Additionally, to evaluate the
consistency of the ontology, we used reasoners (Pellet reasoner
in Prot´eg´e) and we found no issue. For further evaluation and
maintenance, our ontology is available here [13].
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
E-Mobility and eMaaS have been identified among the most
promising disruptive technologies that would help migrate to
carbon neutral transportation systems. Nevertheless, a lot of
research issues are yet to be addressed to ensure their mass
adoption. In this paper, we have proposed an ontology that
covers the most relevant concepts related to E-Mobility and
facilitates knowledge sharing among different actors. The work
mainly addresses EV drivers and particularly the development
of trip planning and charging points booking services to avoid
the range anxiety. Further extensions are envisioned for a
better coupling of EV drivers’ preferences and for answering
the needs of other stakeholders in the E-Mobility ecosystem.
Moreover, we plan to integrate features that would ease the
monitoring of the grid resources and optimize their use.
While currently relying on datasets to populate the ontology,
introducing APIs and data collected from sensors for the
ontology population is the next step to consider.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the German Academic Ex-
change Service (DAAD), Federal Ministry for Economic
Cooperation and Development (BMZ), Germany, within the
framework of the REMO project (Renewable Energy-based
E-Mobility in Higher Education) ID 575455.
REFERENCES
[1] Organization, U.N.I.D., Best Practices in Electric Mobility, 2020.
[2] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness, ”Ontology development 101: A guide
to cre- ating your first ontology”. Stanford Knowledge Systems Labo-
ratory Technical Report KSL-01-05 and Stanford Medical Informatics
Technical Report SMI-2001-0880, March 2001.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

(a) SPARQL query to check CP in destination.
(b) SPARQL query to check CP on the EV route.
Fig. 5: SPARQL queries to check CPs on the EV route and destination
(a) SPARQL query to check EV maximum range.
(b) SPARQL query to check available CPs on the EV route.
Fig. 6: SPARQL queries to check reachable available CPs.
Fig. 7: SPARQL query to check compatibility between EV and EVSE.
[3] I.
W.
Damaj,
D.
K.
Serhal,
L.
A.
Hamandi,
R.
N.
Zantout,
and
H.
T.
Mouftah,
”Connected
and
autonomous
electric
ve-
hicles:
Quality
of
experience
survey
and
taxonomy,”
Vehicu-
lar
Communications,
vol.
28,
2021,
100312,
ISSN
2214-2096,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vehcom.2020.100312.
[4] J. R. Reyes Garc´ıa, G. Lenz, S. P. Haveman, and G. M. Bonnema,
”State of the Art of Mobility as a Service (MaaS) Ecosystems and Ar-
chitectures—An Overview of, and a Definition, Ecosystem and System
Architecture for Electric Mobility as a Service (eMaaS).” World Electr.
Veh. J. 2020, vol. 11, no. 7, https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj11010007.
[5] A. Yazdizadeh and B. Farooq: ”Smart mobility ontology: Current trends
and future directions.” CoRR abs/2012.08622, 2020, arXiv:2012.08622
[6] B. Di Martino et al., ”Semantic and knowledge based support to business
model evaluation to stimulate green behaviour of electric vehicles’
drivers and energy prosumers.” J Ambient Intell Human Comput, 1-23,
2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-021-03243-4
[7] B. D. Martino, L. C. Cante and S. Venticinque, ”An ontology framework
for evaluating e-mobility innovation.” In: Proceedings of the 14th
International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive
Systems (CISIS-2020), pp. 520–529. Springer, Switzerland, 2020.
[8] Comune di Milano. Urban IoT Ontologies - Electric Mobility Module
(v1.0.1). http://www.w3id.org/urban-iot/electric [accessed June 2022]
[9] M. Scrocca, I. Baroni and I. Celine, ”Urban iot ontologies for sharing
and electric mobility”. Semantic Web Journal, 2021.
[10] M.
Katsumi
and
M.
Fox,
”icity
transportation
planning
suite
of
ontologies.”
Technical
report,
June
2020,
Version
1.2
.
http://icity.utoronto.ca/Project/Project1.1.html [accessed June 2022]
[11] Power/energy transfer systems for electrically propelled road vehicles,
I.E.C.-T..E., industrial trucks, Iec 61851-1:2017 electric vehicle conduc-
tive charging system - part 1: General requirements 28, 287, 2017.
[12] M. Poveda-Villal´on, A. G´omez-P´erez, and M. C. Su´arez-Figueroa.
”OOPS!(Ontology Pitfall Scanner!), An online tool for ontology evalu-
ation.” International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems
(IJSWIS), vol. 10, no. 2, 7-34, 2014. https://oops.linkeddata.es/index.jsp
[accessed June 2022]
[13] Remo project. Ontology for the Context of E-Mobility: Charging Station
Recommendation based on the EV Trip. https://github.com/REMO-
Project-LaRINa/E-mobility-ontology [accessed June 2022]
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-957-7
ICIW 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

