Cloud Computing: Issues in Data Mobility and Security 
 
Zaigham Mahmood 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of Derby 
Derby, UK 
e-mail: z.mahmood@derby.ac.uk 
Harjinder Singh Lallie 
School of Computing and Mathematics 
University of Derby 
Derby, UK 
e-mail: h.s.lallie@derby.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Cloud Computing is a generic term for anything 
that involves delivering hosted services over the internet, based 
on a pay-as-you-go approach. Cloud Computing offers 
numerous benefits and, therefore, many large enterprises have 
embraced the cloud technologies and infrastructures. Vendors 
are also developing tools and applications to fulfill the demand 
and tap into the growing market. Like any new technology and 
paradigm, there are also numerous issues and concerns, 
including security and availability of data. This paper explores 
some of the security issues surrounding data location, mobility 
and availability as well as issues relating to the security of data 
at rest. The aim is to provide some useful background 
information for enterprises preparing to take advantage of 
Cloud Computing paradigm. 
Keywords- cloud computing; enterprise computing; cloud 
security; data privacy; data security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud Computing is a generic term for anything that 
involves delivering hosted services and computing resources 
over the Internet. It is ‘a style of computing where 
massively scalable IT-enabled capabilities are delivered as 
services to external customers using Internet technologies’ 
[1]. According to NIST (National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, US), it provides ‘a convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of computing resources’ [2, 
3]. Here, resources refer to computing applications, software 
services, platforms and computing infrastructures. Forrester 
[4] suggests that Cloud Computing refers to ‘a pool of 
abstracted, highly scalable and managed infrastructure 
capable of hosting end-customer applications and billed by 
consumption’. It is the latest paradigm in distributed 
computing that promises to revolutionize IT and business by 
making computing available as a utility over the World 
Wide Web. 
General public have been using Cloud Computing in the 
form of Internet services like Hotmail (since about 1996), 
YouTube (since about 2005), Facebook (since about 2006) 
and Gmail (since about 2007). Hotmail is probably the first 
cloud computing application that allowed the general public 
to keep their data in the form of text and files at the vendor’s 
servers. Since then, many other services have emerged that 
allow users to store information (such as text files, 
photographs, video clips and music) and perform processing 
without paying any upfront fees. Some well known 
examples include: Twitter, Myspace, Wikipedia and Google 
docs. These are typically consumer oriented services, 
different from enterprise-oriented tasks, but the underlying 
principles are the same i.e. to provide the storage space and 
processing 
capability. 
In 
the 
commercial 
arena, 
Amazon.com was one of the first vendors to provide storage 
space, computing resources and business functionality 
following the cloud computing model. Salesforce.com, 
founded in 1999, pioneered the concept of delivering 
enterprise applications as services to enterprises. In 2002, 
Amazon Web Services provided a suite of cloud-based 
services and, later in 2006, it launched Elastic Compute 
Cloud (EC2) that allowed companies and individuals to rent 
computers on which to run their own enterprise 
applications. The number of cloud services providers and 
the applications, platforms and infrastructures are increasing 
at such a rate that, in 2009, Gartner listed Cloud Computing 
as number 1 in its top 10 strategic technology areas for 2010 
[10, 11]. The reasons why more and more companies are 
planning to take advantage of IT Cloud Computing 
solutions include: 
 reduced costs associated with delivering IT services 
 reduced management responsibilities  
 increased business efficiency and agility 
 easy access to software and hardware resources 
available elsewhere 
 no long term contracts with vendors. 
A report on Cloud Computing published in Jan 2010 
[12] suggests that: 1) Enterprises are now moving beyond 
experimentation; 2) they are beginning to develop and 
deploy management software to deal with scaled Cloud 
environments; and 3) they are beginning to develop 
enterprise-level policies and standards for dealing with 
Public and Hybrid Clouds.  
In the rest of this paper, we first outline the benefits that 
Cloud Computing offers and briefly discuss the deployment 
approaches. Then, in Sections III and IV, we discuss, in 
some detail, the inherent issues with respect to mobility and 
security of data held on Clouds. The last section presents a 
brief conclusion.   
255
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

II. 
CLOUD COMPUTING 
A. The Promise 
Large vendors like IBM, Dell, Oracle and Sun have 
started to take strong positions with respect to Cloud 
Computing provision [5]. The essential features of this latest 
paradigm include [2, 6]: 
 On-demand services: to enable users to avail of 
computing capabilities as and when required 
 Resource pooling: to allow dynamically assigned 
computing resources  to serve multiple consumers 
 Rapid elasticity: to allow services, resources and 
infrastructures to be automatically provisioned 
 Measured provision: to provide a metering capability 
to determine the usage for pricing purposes 
 Effective management: to provide and facilitate easy 
monitoring, controlling and reporting. 
Cloud Computing is an attractive paradigm that can be 
massively scalable. It provides benefits of efficiency, 
flexibility and high utilization that, in turn, can result in 
reduced capital investment costs and lower operational 
expenditure. The Cloud offerings from service providers 
and vendors are continuing to mature and increase in 
number. With this, the cost savings are becoming 
particularly attractive. There is no doubt that Cloud 
Computing is making supercomputing available to the 
masses.   
B. Deployment Approaches 
Cloud Computing can be classified and deployed in a 
number of ways e.g. as public, private or hybrid clouds.  
Public Clouds are networks where services are provided 
by third parties and hosted and managed by the service 
providers. The Cloud providers take on the responsibilities 
of installation, management, provisioning and maintenance. 
Consumers are charged only for the resources they use 
following a pay-as-you-go model.  
Private Clouds are proprietary networks normally 
residing within the enterprises for the exclusive use of the 
organization or for a known group of consumers. In case of 
Private Clouds, the enterprise is in charge of maintaining the 
Cloud and also responsible for security and regulatory 
compliance issues. The issues of data security are, therefore, 
somewhat reduced.  
Hybrid Clouds are a combination of Private and Public 
Clouds. In this case, the management responsibilities are 
often split between the enterprise and the Public Cloud 
providers, which can often become an issue of concern. For 
mission critical processes, this type of Cloud infrastructure 
is much more effective because of enhanced control and 
management by the enterprise itself.  
The 
Cloud 
model 
consists 
of, 
typically, 
three 
components which refer to three types of services: Software 
Services, Platform Services and Infrastructure Services. 
These services may be defined as follows:  
 Software as a Service (SaaS): referring to prebuilt 
and vertically integrated applications available for 
purchase or use by customers as services. Here, 
customers are looking to ‘hire’ easy-to-consume 
functionality.  
 Platform as a Service (PaaS): referring to application 
development toolkits and deployment tools (e.g. 
application servers, portal servers and middleware) 
which clients make use of to build and deploy their 
own applications. Here, customers are looking to buy 
time and cost savings in deploying applications.  
 Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): referring to 
hardware (e.g. servers, storage space, network 
devices, etc) to enable Cloud Platforms and 
Applications to operate. Here, customers are looking 
to hire computing. Since, the infrastructure is offered 
on pay-for-what-you-use basis, it is sometimes 
referred to as utility computing.  
C. Inherent Issues 
Notwithstanding the benefits that Cloud Computing 
offers, there are numerous issues and challenges for 
organizations embracing this new paradigm. Zhen [8] lists a 
number of major challenges with respect to the following: 1) 
governance, management and updating of data; 2) 
management of software services; 3) monitoring of products 
and processes; 4) reliability and availability of systems and 
infrastructure and 5) security of information and data. The 
Expert Group Report [9] mentions a number of issues 
including: 1) concerns over security with respect to valuable 
knowledge, information and data placed on an external 
service; 2) concerns over availability and business 
continuity; and 3) concerns over data transmission across 
anticipated broadband speeds. Other shortcomings, as 
mentioned by various researchers, include: 1) no native 
security attributes; 2) inadequate or no security provisioning 
by providers; 3) lack of understanding of cloud legal issues; 
and 4) the failure to recognize potential liability from either 
legal issues or a lack of security. Issues with respect to 
"control" are also real concerns. A closer examination 
reveals that the major concerns may be broadly classified as 
those relating to the following:  
 Security, including reliability and availability 
 Governance and Management.  
 
In this paper, we discuss issues with respect to data 
mobility, security and availability. Other issues are 
discussed in a companion papers which is under preparation.  
III. 
DATA MOBILITY AND SECURITY 
Cloud Computing provides services with respect to 
enterprise applications (software components and systems), 
computing 
platforms 
(development 
tools) 
and 
infrastructures (hardware including servers). Befits are huge 
but the inherent issues are also many. Some of the major 
issues refer to the security of data. In this respect, there are 
256
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

many dimensions including: data security, data privacy, data 
protection, data availability and data transmission. Forrester 
[22] combines these into three groups: 1) Security and 
Privacy; 2) Compliance; and 3) Legal and Contractual. 
Some of these are now discussed in some detail. 
A. Data Mobility 
Cloud Computing offers a high degree of data mobility 
in the sense that data stored on the Cloud may reside on a 
location geographically a long way away from the 
organization that owns the data. In a majority of cases, the 
owners and the users know where the data resides; however, 
this may not be true in all cases. Unless there is a 
contractual agreement that data should stay in a particular 
location or reside on a given known server, the Cloud 
providers may decide to keep it moving from one location to 
another. There are several reasons for this, including: 1) 
reducing the cost of storing data; 2) efficiency of retrieval of 
data; 3) easy availability of data; 4) efficient linking of 
different data resident on different locations; and 5) resource 
optimization. Security risks and issues are already big 
concerns. When data mobility is at a high level then the 
risks and issues increase many folds especially when data is 
transferred to another country with different regulations. 
High levels of data mobility also have negative implications 
for data security and data protection as well as data 
availability. 
Many factors influence the choice of location for data 
centres including the cost as the cost of running a centre is 
high on the list of priorities [19]. The attraction of co-
location and distribution of data is particularly justifiable 
due to the bandwidth efficiencies that this could provide. 
For instance Amazon’s CloudFront data centres are located 
in the following cities: Ashburn Virginia, Dallas/Fort 
Worth, Los Angeles, Miami, Newark New Jersey, Palo 
Alto, California, Seattle, St. Louis, Amsterdam, Dublin, 
Frankfurt, London, Hong Kong and Tokyo. This does not 
necessarily mean that data stored on the Amazon Cloud may 
be split across any number of these data centres. 
Another influencing factor is the cost relating to high 
capacity internet access. 
B. Data Availability 
Data availability is a major legitimate reason for the data 
to be stored in multiple locations on the Cloud. This 
answers a core business requirement: that of an 
uninterruptible service and seamless provision. Furthermore, 
data availability is such a crucial issue that it is common for 
Cloud providers to credit customer accounts if the system 
downtime duration drops below that specified in the SLA 
(service level agreement). The related issue is that, often, 
such measures are not specified in the SLAs. 
The issue of data availability is exemplified by the 
outages suffered by Google's Gmail service in February 
2009 which resulted in embarrassing headlines for the 
company [17]. In the subsequent service agreement for its 
Premier Apps range of products which also covers Gmail, 
Subsequently, Google promised that customer data 
availability will be at least 99.9% of the time in any 
calendar month [18]. 
C. Cost Relating to Data Mobility 
Another reason for data mobility is to reduce the cost of 
running data centres (by reducing the electricity bills, for 
example). In Public Clouds, data is often routed to other 
locations at certain times of the day or year, or when there is 
a huge climatic temperature fluctuation [20]. The main 
factor in such considerations is the cost of provision. 
Qureshi [21] has conducted research into the dynamic 
routing of data based on the cost of electricity in various 
regions. This research shows that it is possible to reduce 
electricity costs by up to 40%. However, as electricity costs 
rise, Cloud service providers may look for more effective 
ways of reducing their overheads – at the same time, 
hopefully, ensuring that there is no compromise on 
performance and service availability. In this respect, 
Qureshi's method [21] of dynamically routing data would 
become an attractive solution. From the point of view of 
data security and data availability, this would exacerbate the 
security issues, which are already a major concern when 
data is being moved between locations. As mentioned 
before, data mobility or dynamic data routing is also 
considered as a result of resource optimization. This, in turn, 
also helps to reduce costs. 
Enterprises consuming Cloud services may not be aware 
of this, however, as they become more knowledgeable, they 
may decide to request appropriate data relocation and, thus, 
negotiate lower contract prices for such data services. 
D. Data Location Assurance 
Data mobility and location concerns, including those 
relating to security, have been partially addressed by Cloud 
providers, and two of the largest vendors in the field have 
started offering solutions to customers. Amazon’s AWS 
(Amazon Web Services) provides an option within its S3 
(Simple Storage Service) package to allow customers to 
specify the regions for the storage and location of their data. 
It also provides assurance that data will not leave the 
customer selected regions [23]. Although, the available 
locations are currently restricted to just three regions: US 
(Standard), 
EU 
(Ireland) 
and 
US-West 
(Northern 
California), the company has plans to expand into the Asia-
Pacific region in 2010. Amazon is marketing this as a way 
of improving performance and providing a better customer-
centric service.  
In 2009, Microsoft announced that its Windows Azure 
system would provide its users with the option to specify 
where in the world they would wish their data to be stored. 
As well as performance gains, Microsoft also stated legal and 
regulatory reasons for this facility. This is an attractive 
facility as different countries have different laws with respect 
to data privacy and confidentiality and some clients may 
wish to exploit such differences to their advantage, although 
257
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

there may be legal implications.  However, as with AWS, 
Microsoft has a very restricted choice of geographical 
locations, currently only two: both within the US. Microsoft 
has plans to expand this and is especially interested in sites 
outside the US. 
E. Cross Border Data Transition 
Cross border data transition can lead to potential legal 
risks due to different locations having varying policies, 
regulations and legislation. This means that data protected 
by legislation in one country may not have the same, or 
even similar, protection in another country [24]. In an 
example of this, that appears in Jaeger [19], it is noted that 
the European Union and United States of America have 
differing definitions of privacy as a result of disparate 
privacy policies. Their Data Protection Laws are based on 
the assumption that the location and responsibility of data is 
known and understood. Cloud Computing however 
challenges this presumption.  
Presently, a vast majority of data centres are located in 
the United States [25]. A consequence of this is that data 
protection and privacy concerns are influenced by the USA 
Patriot Act 2001, the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
(FISA 
amendments 
act 
of 
2008), 
the 
Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act (1986), the Privacy Act 
(1974) and the Homeland Security Act (2002). Under the 
ruling of these acts, the FBI and similar agencies have the 
regulatory power to demand access to any data stored on 
any computer within the USA, even if it is stored on behalf 
of another jurisdiction [25]. 
F. Organisations’ Response 
One of the key recommendations made by Gartner [26] 
suggests that assurance should be given guaranteeing that 
customer data will be stored and processed within a certain 
jurisdiction and that the local laws within that jurisdiction 
would apply. However, this may conflict with the concept of 
data privacy particularly in countries such as the US. This 
means that consumer data stored within the US may be 
highly vulnerable to disclosure [24] which may pose a 
potential business and/or economic risk. 
World governments and organizations are developing 
strategies to counter these concerns e.g. the Canadian 
Government does not allow the use of hosting services that 
are based in the US [25]. Similarly, SWIFT, an international 
banking firm, are locating data centres in Switzerland where 
the data protection regulations are based on EU laws 
providing specific conditions for the transference of 
personal data to third parties or abroad [27]. 
The UK Data Protection Act 1998 requires that personal 
information is handled in a manner that ensures that key 
principles and legal obligations are properly adhered to. 
These principles also include the restriction on transferring 
data to countries outside of the European Economic Area 
(the EEA) unless there is a clear and adequate data protection 
mechanism [28]. The act also makes it an obligation for 
companies to clearly state where customers’ data is being 
held. However, this may be difficult when providers 
themselves are unaware of the exact locations. 
IV. 
SECURING DATA AT REST 
A valid question with respect to security of data on the 
Cloud is: how to ensure security of data at rest. The obvious 
answer 
suggests 
that 
data 
should 
be 
encrypted. 
Unfortunately, this is not as simple as it appears. If the data 
is being stored by an IaaS service (such as Amazon's Simple 
Storage Service, also known as S3), that is not associated 
with a specific application, then encryption is appropriate 
and indeed possible and a valid solution. However, data on 
the Cloud being processed by SaaS or PaaS applications 
(such as Salesforce.com or Google Apps) is generally not 
considered suitable for encryption. This is because 
encryption prevents indexing or searching of data, which 
has implications on availability and access of such data. 
Finding an appropriate mechanism that is secure, and 
allows both addition and multiplication, has proved elusive 
and many respected cryptologists have suggested that it may 
not even be possible. However, a number of techniques and 
schemes have subsequently been put forward favoring the 
full homomorphic encryption [29]. A fully homomorphic 
cryptosystem is one where the performance of a 
mathematical operation on ciphertext is found to have a 
regular effect on the corresponding plaintext. 
One such scheme, developed by Gentry [30], allows data 
to be processed without being decrypted. This means that a 
Cloud service provider can perform computations on 
client’s data without exposing the original data. Gentry’s 
proposal has caused great interest amongst cryptographers 
who have been trying to develop a practical manifestation of 
the concept of privacy homomorphism for over thirty years 
[16].  
Other research efforts are focusing on methods to limit 
the amount of data that needs to be decrypted for processing 
in the Cloud. An example is predicate encryption, a type of 
asymmetric encryption where different individuals or 
groups can selectively decrypt some of the encrypted data 
instead of decrypting all of it [22]. Methodologies are being 
developed. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Cloud Computing is ‘essentially on-demand access to a 
shared pool of computing resources’. It helps consumers to 
reduce costs, reduce management responsibilities and 
increase business agility. For this reason, it is becoming a 
popular paradigm and increasingly more companies are 
shifting toward IT Cloud Computing solutions. Advantages 
are many but there are also challenges and inherent issues. 
Generally, these relate to data governance, service 
management, process monitoring, infrastructure reliability, 
information security, data integrity and business continuity. 
This paper focuses on the mobility and availability of data 
held on the Cloud and discusses the security issues of such 
data.  
258
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In spite of the limitation and issues as discussed in the 
previous sections, Cloud Computing is becoming an 
attractive paradigm for large enterprises. In 2008, Forrester 
[5] predicted that ‘cloud computing initiatives could affect 
the enterprises within 2 to 3 years as it has the potential to 
significantly change IT’. In 2009, Gartner listed Cloud 
Computing as number 1 in its top 10 strategic technology 
areas for 2010 [10, 11]. In another report, Gartner suggested 
that ‘by 2012, 80% of Fortune companies will pay for some 
cloud computing service and 30% of them will pay for 
cloud computing infrastructure’ [4]. Enterprises are excited 
about the opportunities that Cloud Computing presents and, 
as the evidence suggests [4, 5, 10-12], Enterprise Cloud 
Computing is firmly poised to be the next big thing for 
businesses, large and small. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
David W Cearley, Cloud Computing: Key Initiative Overview, 
Gartner Report, 2010 
[2] 
Peter Mell and Tim Grance, The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing, version 15, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology 
(NIST), 
Information 
Technology 
Laboratory, 
www.csrc.nist.gov, 7 Oct 2009 
[3] 
Dustin Amrhein and Scott Quint, Cloud Computing for the 
Enterprise: Part 1: Capturing the Cloud, DeveloperWorks, IBM, 8 
Apr 2009,  
[4] 
John Rhoton, Cloud Computing Explained: Implementation 
Handbook for Enterprises, Recursive Press, 3 May 2010 
[5] 
John M Willis, Cloud Computing and the Enterprise, IT 
Management 
and 
Cloud, 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
www.johnmwillis.com/ibm/cloud-computing-and-the-enterprise/, 13 
Feb 2008 
[6] 
Caroline Kvitka, Clouds Bring Agility to the Enterprise, [Online] 
Available at: http://www.oracle.com/technology/oramag/oracle/10-
mar/o20interview.html 
[7] 
Michael Sheehan, Cloud Computing Expo: Introducing the Cloud 
Pyramid, Clod Computing Journal, Aug 2008 
[8] 
Jian Zhen, Five Key Challenges of Enterprise Cloud Computing, 
Cloud computing journal, 16 Nov 2008 
[9] 
Lutz Schubert, The Future of Cloud Computing, Expert Group 
Report, 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/executivesummary-
forweb_en.pdf 
[10] Dustin Amrhein & Scott Quint, Cloud Computing for the Enterprise: 
Part 1: Capturing the cloud, Understanding cloud computing and 
related technologies, DeveloperWorks, IBM, [Online] Available at: 
www.ibm.com/developerworks/websphere/techjournal/0904_amrhei
n/ 0904_amrhein.html 
[11] Stephen Shankland, Brace yourself for Cloud Computing, CNET 
News, Oct 2009 http://news.cnet.com/8301-30685_3-10378782-
264.html 
[12] Ravi Mhatre, Top 5 trends for enterprise cloud computing in 2010, 
Lightspeed Venuter Partners, Jan 2010 
[13] Sharon Sasson, Seven Best Practices for Cloud Computing, 
Enterprise 
Systems, 
August 
2008, 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://esj.com/articles/2009/08/18/cloud-best-practices.aspx 
[14] David Linthicum, Cloud Computing? Thank SOA, [Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.thecloudtutorial.com/cloud-computing-
soa.html 
[15] David Linthicum, Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in Your 
Enterprise: A Step-by-Step Guide, Addison Wesley, 2009 
[16] Katz J., Sahai, A., & Waters, B. (2008) Predicate Encryption 
Supporting Disjunctions, Polynomial Equations, and Inner Products, 
Proceedings of the theory and applications of cryptographic 
techniques 27th annual international conference on Advances in 
cryptology [Online] Available at http://eprint.iacr.org/2007/404.pdf. 
(Accessed 6th December 2009) 
[17] BBC, Google users hit by mail blackout, BBC News, 24 February 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/7907583.stm 
(Accessed: 
November 2009). 
[18] Google. Google Apps Service Level Agreement, 2009. [Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.google.com/apps/intl/en/terms/sla.html 
(Accessed: November 2009). 
[19] Jaeger, P. T., Grimes, J. M., Lin, J. & Simmons, S, ‘Cloud 
Computing and Information Policy: Computing in a Policy Cloud?’ 
Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 5(3), 2008 
[20] Knight, W, Energy-Aware Internet Routing, 2009. [Online]. 
Available at: www.technologyreview.com/business/23248/page2/ 
(Accessed: November 2009) 
[21] Qureshi, A, Plugging Into Energy, 7th ACM Workshop on Hot 
Topics in Networks (HotNets). Calgary, Canada, October 2008 
[22] Wang C, Cloud Security Front and Centre, Forrester Report, Nov 
2009 
[23] Amazon Web Services, Amazon Simple Storage Service FAQs, 
2009. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://aws.amazon.com/s3/faqs/#Where_is_my_data_stored 
(Accessed: 9 December 2009)  
[24] European Network and Information Security Agency, (2009) Cloud 
Computing, Benefits Risks and Recommendations for Information 
Security, [Online] Available at: http://enisa.europa.eu/ 
[25] Thompson, B, Storm warning for cloud computing, BBC News, 17 
May 
2008 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/7421099.stm (Accessed: November 2009) 
[26] Gartner, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Computing,  
2008,[Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.gartner.com/DisplayDocument?id=685308 
Last 
accessed: 7th December 2009 
[27] Economist, Computers without borders, 2008, [Online] Available at:  
Economist (23 October), at http://www.economist.com/ , Last 
accessed: 6th December 2009 
[28] ICO, Review of EU Data Protection Directive: Summary, 2009, 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.ico.gov.uk/upload/documents/library/data_protection/det
ailed_specialist_guides/review_of_eu_dp_directive_summary.pdf 
Date of access: (28 November 2009) 
[29] Benaloh J., Verifiable Secret-Ballot Elections. PhD thesis, Yale 
University, 1987. 
 
 
259
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

[30] Gentry, C, Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices, 
Annual ACM symposium on theory of computing, Proceedings of 
the 41st annual ACM symposium on theory of computing, Bethseda, 
MD, USA, 2009, Session: crypto, pp 169-178, ACM, New York, 
NY, USA. 
[31] Rivest, R., Adleman, L., & Dertouzos, M., On data banks and 
privacy homomorphisms. In Foundations of Secure Computation, 
pp. 169–180, 1978. 
260
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

