Search Query Share for Enhancing Communication in a Small Community
Tatsuya Ogawa, Nobuchika Sakata, and Shogo Nishida
Engineering Science
Osaka University
Osaka, Japan
e-mail: {ogawa, sakata, nishida}@nishilab.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Queries entered into search engines, such as Google,
are used for a variety of purposes, such as satisfying user
interests and finding some solutions. Some researchers focus
on the search queries in order to extend the user interaction
and information support. This is because the search queries
include user intentions and circumstances. We assume that
sharing the search queries can be applied not only to the online
virtual world, but also to the real world; in particular, we focus
on applying these in a small community. The opportunity of
conversation is increased by sharing search queries, which
show the user's interests and intentions in a closed community.
Keywords-search query; communication; small community;
search query share.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Queries entered into search engines, like Google, are
used for a variety of purposes, such as satisfying user
interests and finding some solutions. Some researchers focus
on the search queries in order to extend the user interaction
and information support. This is because the search queries
include user intentions and circumstances. Matsui et al. [1]
support information exchange among people who have the
same interests. It provides online chat conversation to the
people who use the same query at the same time on the
Internet.
Previous
studies
[2][3][4][5]
show
that
the
efficiency of web search activity is improved when referring
to the browsed history of other people who used the same
search queries. These existing researches support online
communication, collaboration retrieval, and other online
collaboration. In this research, we assume that sharing the
search queries can be applied not only to the online virtual
world, but also to the real world; in particular, we focus on
applying these in a small community.
Shared spaces, such as lounges, corridors or kitchens, are
important areas for informal communication and sharing
information. Some researches provide opportunities for
communication
in
order
to
utilize
specific
informal
communication [6][7]. Although those researches support
incidental encounters and provide opportunities for a starting
point of a conversation, they do not provide the conversation
topic. HuNeAS and Cyber-IRORI intend to provide the
conversation topics [8][9]. However, these studies focus their
attention on the method of how to express information
among community participants. Also, there is no mention on
how to start a conversation topic.
We assume that starting a conversation from incidental
encountering happens quite often in small communities, such
as a university laboratory or a small office. Also, we assume
that events in daily lives, interests and thinking among
participants of small communities tend to be shared as
conversation
topic.
Therefore,
the
opportunity
of
conversation is increased by sharing search queries which
show user's interests and intentions in a closed community.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II describes related researches. Section III describes
search queries and conversation topic. Section IV shows an
architectural overview of our system and the user study
conducted by our system. In Section V, we discuss our
findings. Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we describe related researches of
enhancing communication among the community.
A.
Provide an Opportunity for Conversation
Meeting Pot matches the timing of people to meet each
other [6]. This system detects the presence of people in a
break room by monitoring the state of a coffee maker. When
it detects people gathering, the system informs the colleagues
in personal offices by using a coffee aroma generator as
implicitly communication.
Also, communications tend to be neglected in office
work spaces by partition panels that make up a personal
cubic space. A psychological barrier not to visit other
personal space tends to be caused by the physical partition
panels
without
any
special
reason.
TravelingCafe
compensates the psychological barrier in such an office [7].
This system monitors the remaining amount of coffee in their
cup with pressure sensors. By displaying the remaining
amount of all member’s coffee cups beside the coffee maker,
this system give a reason to visit some colleagues to "come
to pour some coffee", and that might start a conversation.
The psychological barrier of hesitating to visit other personal
space is reduced by that system. Furthermore, they supposed
that the subjects became tolerant to "visit" and "being
visited." Also, they reported that the system can create new
communication because the communication between two
persons is extended to communication among multiple
people at the same rate as the one used in a break space.
This research shows that synchronizing break time
among
people
can
cause
a
chance
of
occurring
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

communication. However, a common topic of conversation
is not provided in the system. We assume that providing a
common topic among colleagues is important as well as the
synchronization of break time.
B.
Conversation Support in a Shared Space
HuNeAS studied encounters of people in a shared space
[8]. HuNeAS promotes information sharing by indicating the
required information on a large display placed in a common
space such as a corridor or a lounge. At the same time, to
enhance
the
information
sharing
in
that
community,
HuNeAS gathers information from all users and places it on
the large display.
Cyber-IRORI showed that coziness is important for
supporting informal communication [9]. It provides a reason
and the justification to visit/stay at the shared space. Cyber-
IRORI consists of a touchable table-top display, a vertical
display, and imitated hearth. This system displays news and
web pages read by the community members on the touchable
table-top display as articles. Also, when a member choses a
certain article, the article is displayed on another larger
display which can be seen from anywhere in the community
room. They described that Cyber-IRORI encouraged the
users to stay/visit the shared informal space and was able to
enhance conversations.
III.
SUPPORT CONVERSATION WITH SEARCH QUERY
As mentioned before, queries input to search engines like
Google are used for a variety of purposes, such as satisfying
user interests and finding some solutions. Some researchers
focus on the search queries in order to extend the user
interaction and information support. This is because the
search queries include user intentions and circumstances.
Matsui supports communication among people who search
the same query [1]. Yamaguchi, Tan, Tanaka, and Takeda
made online-searching more efficient by using searched
queries used before as reference [2][3][4][5]. According to
existing studies, we assume that the advantage of sharing
query for people in a small community is increases the
opportunities of conversation.
A.
Search Query and Conversation Topic
Our research focuses on a certain community where
people are acquaintances and talk to each other quite often,
such as a university laboratory and a small office. We
assume that conversation topics tend to be about events in
daily lives, interests and thinking among participants of a
small community. When the conversational partner has no
interest in a topic, the communication tends to become a one-
sided conversation or the conversation is over in a minute.
As we know, it is very important how much the partners of a
conversation are interested in the topic in terms of having
comfortable conversations. As we have described previously,
search queries reveal user interests. There is a possibility that
the search query is able to be the topic. Therefore, it is
expected that opportunities of conversation are increased by
sharing search queries as conversation topics.
In this research, to enhance communication among
members of a small community, we propose a new query
sharing system which indicates that queries searched by
community members are available on large display in a
shared space. Hence, we designed a system to increase the
amount of conversation by sharing queries which someone
are interest in when they visit a shared space. Fig. 1 shows
the basic concept of the system. Fig. 2 shows the actual
display placed in shared space in this experiment. Note that,
at this time, we place the display in a shared space because
we suppose to observe face to face communication in real
space, and it is easy to sample data of people behavior in a
shared space. Also, we did not want to interfere with
someone's work by sharing queries in personal space.
Basically, we can realize the query sharing system on each
PC in a personal space, such as an office cubicle space. We
believe that our proposed system can be applied to full online
style and can produce same or more effect when queries that
are shared only on one display.
IV.
USER EXPERTIMENT
In this paper, we defined "search query shared among
small community" as "closed query". We want to measure
the effect of a closed query. This section describes the details
Figure 1.
Concept of proposed system
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

of
the
experiment
and
evaluation
gathered
from
a
questionnaire.
A.
"Global" and "Local" Query
We conducted a user study to compare a closed query
with a "hot word", which is a word used in lot of people
searches. We thought that a hot word cloud be regarded as a
global query which is symmetrical about closed query. This
way, we investigated whether a closed query is more
effective to increase opportunities of conversation than any
queries. This section describes the design and the result of
the comparative experiments.
The system indicates list of "closed query" on a large
LCD (SONY KDL-40EX500:40-inch LCD TV) in 7 days, as
shown in Fig. 2. The list is composed of 35 “closed query”s
and the name of the person who searches “closed query”, as
shown in bottom of Fig. 2. After that, the system indicates
the list of "hot words” for 7 days as well. In this situation, we
believe that the order effect was negligible. We conducted a
questionnaire
investigation
after
each
period.
In
this
experiment, hot words were displayed one week after the
queries were closed. Closed queries were obtained from
search form implemented Google Chrome extension (Fig. 3).
Therefore, participants can adopt inputting the search query
to the implemented form or usual form whether or not they
want to share the query. Also, we deploy a video camera
beside the display to observe whether subjects are interested
in displayed queries when they visit the shared space. This
experiment was conducted with 17 subjects (gender: 16 male
and 1 female; age: 22 to 25). Also, trend words of Yahoo!
Japan Search data are displayed as hot word [10]. The trend
words are updated every hour and 3 words are added on that
screen.
Figure 4. Evaluation of closed query
TABLE I.
QUESTIONNAIRE ABOUT SHARING CLOSED QUERY
P1
Did you check the search query frequently when you were
in the shared space?
P2
Did you have interest in search queries?
P3
Did you incline to talk about the search query?
P4
Did you try to talk about query with the searcher?
P5
Did you talked about search query?
P6
Did you feel uncomfortable sharing own queries?
P7
Did you have interest in other's queries before
experience?
P8
Did you have interest in other's queries after experience?
P9
Did you feel conversation was increased in small
community?
P10
Did you feel conversation is efficient for small
community?
P11
Do you want to use this system in future?
Figure 3. Search form implemented Google Chrome extension
Figure 2. Large display placed in shared space and displayed closed
query and part of list of queries.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

B.
Influence on Communication in Closed Query
We carried out a questionnaire survey on an absolute
scale from 1 to 7 (1: Negative 7: Positive) to 17 subjects after
experiments. Table I shows the questionnaire items and Fig.
4 shows the results after the closed queries were shared.
Almost all subjects who visited the shared space checked
the closed queries (P1), and they were interested in the
closed queries (P2). They said that "It was interesting that I
was able to see other's new side, such as interests, thinking,
and progress of work." According to the user comments,
almost all subjects had a good impression about the closed
queries of others. Also, they shared their closed queries (P3,
P4, P5). Even subjects who did not like to share their search
query were interested in the closed queries and had
conversations about the closed query. Also, there were
variable comments about sharing closed queries. Some
comments were on the negative side, such as "I didn't want
to be known that I searched something very basic. I do not
want others to think I am not very knowledgeable.", "Sharing
my hobby makes me feel ashamed". In addition, as the
opposite opinion, "I share the queries about my hobby
mainly because I thought that it was boring even if a serious
conversation with queries about research." All subjects
tended to be aware that queries cloud be shared as topic.
Subjects who were not interested in other's queries, became
interested in closed queries. We suppose that their decision
to share search queries increased because they could obtain a
variety of information from closed queries.
Also, we observed that some people searched the same
query at the same time. This means that they had deep
interest and conversations with those close queries.
C.
Comparison between "Closed Query" and "Hot Word"
We deployed a video camera beside the display to
observe whether subjects are interested in the displayed
search queries when they visit the shared space. Therefore,
we counted the frequencies of visiting the shared space and
checking queries at that time. Table II shows the number of
times that subjects have visited by subjects shared space.
Also, we have compared search queries during the most
crowded four hours between 15:00 to 19:00 on each day of
displaying closed query and hot word. In addition, the date of
the observation was chosen when it seemed that enough time
has passed since the start of the experiment. This was done in
order to compensate for the initial curiosity of deploying the
new system. However, this data seems to be just for
reference because we analyze only one day.
When subjects visited the shared space, they checked the
display at a frequency of 34.8% in case a closed query was
displayed. They checked display at a frequency of 18.3% in
case a hot word was displayed. Also, few subjects checked
the hot word more than once a day. However, almost all
subjects check the hot word just once a day. We can say that
subject who is interested in the closed query does not have
an interest in the hot word. Therefore, it was indicated that
there is a difference in the frequency with which the search
query was seen.
Next we describe comparison experiment of closed query
and hot word. Fig. 5 shows questionnaire item and Fig. 6
shows results after the experiment.
TABLE II.
FREQUENCY OF WATCHING CLOSED QUERY AND HOT WORD
Number of times
Visit shared space
Check display
Closed query
69
24
Hot word
71
13
Using
Wilcoxon
matched-pairs
signed-rank
test,
a
significant difference was found in all items except for Q1
(p=0.08). It means that most subjects had often seen both the
closed
queries
and
the
hot
word
(Q1).
However,
conversations caused by the hot word did not occur so much,
and it was less than in case of sharing closed query (Q2, Q3,
Q4). Closed queries made the subjects determine who was
interested in what topic easily. On the other hand, sharing the
Q1
Is your amount of checking closed query / hot word frequently?
Q2
Did you have interest in closed query / hot word?
Q3
Did you incline talking about closed query / hot word?
Q4
Did you talked about closed query / hot word?
Q5
Did you feel conversation was increased in small community?
Q6
Did you feel conversation is efficient for small community?
Q7
Do you want to use closed query / hot word sharing system in
future?
Figure 6. Result of comparing closed query and hot word .
Figure 5. Questionnaire for sharing closed queries
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

hot word cannot initiate conversation as well as the closed
query. Therefore, conversations caused by the hot word as
topic occurred almost always when some subjects were "in a
shared space" and "at the same time". Also, there were many
comments such as "I was good to know the interest of the
other party before a conversation."
D.
Difference of Queries by Different Communities
Closed queries are classified into two types, such as
"amusing and attractive word" and "word concerning work".
In the previous experiment, a certain group tends to share
"amusing and attractive word". On the other hand, other
groups tend to share "word concerning work". Also, those
two groups are researching difference topics and obeying a
different group leader. Therefore, we divided the subjects
into two groups and conducted the experiment in which
closed queries were shared in each group independently. We
observed the effect of the classification of these groups on
the communication.
As a result, there were some positive comments, such as
“It was easier to share a search query than in the previous
experiment.” On the other hand, many subjects, especially
within the group that tends to share queries of type "word
concerning work", had a bad impression compared to the
case when they shared a query with the entire laboratory.
They said that “It was limited in what I said about the closed
query.” and “It is difficult to talk about the query related
study.” This reason is estimated that it is hard to talk about
query because queries about "amusing and attractive" are
decreased. This result might
show that amusing
and
attractive words tend to be nice topics to start a conversation.
V.
DISCUSSION
As a result of our system, conversation is promoted by
sharing search queries in a small community. Indicating the
closed queries and the user names who searched the closed
query at the time, the closed query have become interesting
topics for all conversation participants.
In this experiment, words relating to hobby were many in
closed queries. It can be said that subjects who searched
about hobby tended to use the proposed query sharing
system. On the other hand, subjects who did not share the
query much said "It was difficult to synchronize a timing to
talk." or "I abstained from sharing queries about a hobby."
These differences in type and amount of closed query were
observed by groups. We consider that there is a difference of
viewpoint in members of each group how to regard closed
queries as. In future work, by conducting experiments in
another community, there is a possibility that usage of the
system and the type of closed query becomes different. We
believe that we can obtain a significantly different result
from this experiment when applied to a more intimate
community such as friends, family members, and lovers. In
addition, these experiments were conducted in collegial
relationships. However, search queries were shared in
reporting relationships like superiors, subordinates and
supervisors, it is supposed that the proposed system become
a useful tool in order to help with some projects.
Table III shows certain moments of closed queries in the
experiments. We describe the searcher's conditions which
can be estimated from those words. In this example, we
classify those words by hand, not automatically. When the
query is about a hobby, the news, or a topic word such as
"football match Serbia schedule", "Entrance examination
disestablish", or "LEGAL HIGH (TV drama in Japan)", it is
supposed that subject is resting. Some subjects presumed to
talk about fast-reading of English because they searched
"English fast-reading" at the same time. When searching this
type of words, the condition of the user can be categorized as
"Resting". While in this condition, it is easy to start the
conversation with the person who searches the same kind of
words without feeling that you disturb them. Also, when the
subjects search solutions, such as "c++ log file input/output",
"opencv plane detection", especially when the subject
searches the same or similar words repeatedly, such as "php
js function", "php function", this may seem like a problem
occured while working. These conditions are categorized 'In
need'. Besides, in case queries are titles of paper and English
words, the searcher is working. These searchers conditions
are categorized 'Busy'. We assume that indicating closed
query and user condition at the same time make starting
communication more smoothly. For example, when someone
is interested in closed query noticed with the 'Resting'
condition, they might start communication without any
hesitation. Also, by noticing 'in need' condition to people
during a break, there is a possibility that a problem is
resolved soon in case another person in the community
knows the solution. We supposed that sharing search queries
with
searchers'
conditions
is
efficient
for
enhancing
opportunities of conversation start. Also, we suppose to
consider and implement a classifier for deciding user’s
condition.
TABLE III. CERTAIN MOMENT OF THE SEARCHER’S CONDITION
ESTIMATED FROM THE SEARCH QUERY
Search Query
condition
football match Serbia schedule
Entrance examination disestablish
English fast-reading
Grave of the Fireflies Kobe
Resting
PE line leader
LEGAL HIGH
Osaka brass band regular concert
c++ log file input/output
opencv plane detection
php js function
In need
php function
boost::serialization
PocketTouch
Skinput
Busy
Large-scale learning of word ~
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed query sharing system to
encourage conversations in a small community. Also, we
studied whether there is a possibility that shared queries
become trigger of conversation. By sharing closed queries
and hot words in a small community, we observed that
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

members of small community are more interested in their
closed query. Finally, we discuss and suggest that indicating
a closed query and search condition at the same time make
starting a communication smoother.
In future work, by conducting the experiment with
another community, there is a possibility that usage of the
system and type of closed query becomes different. We
believe that we can obtain a significantly different result
from this experiment when applied to a more intimate
community such as friends, family members, and lovers. For
example,
search
queries
were
shared
in
reporting
relationships like superiors, subordinates and supervisors.
Also, the authors believe that the proposed system becomes a
useful tool in order to help with some projects.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Matsui, Y. Kawai, and J. Zhang, “Page as a Meeting Place:
Web
Search
Augmented
with
Social
Communication”,
Intelligent Control and Innovative Computing, Lecture Notes
in Electrical Engineering Volume 110, pp. 303-317, 2012.
[2]
T. Yamaguchi, A. Niimi, and O. Konishi, “A Method of
Organizing the Group to Improve Search Efficiency with
Sharing History of Web Browsing”, The 71th National
Convention of IPSJ, pp. 1-681-1-682,
March, 2009 (in
Japanese).
[3]
H.
Tan,
I.
Ohmukai,
and
H.
Takeda,
“QueReSeek:
Community-Based Web Navigation by Reverse Lookup of
Search History”, in Proceedings of the 2008 International
Workshop on Information-Explosion and Next Generation
Search, pp. 31-38, 2008.
[4]
Y. Tanaka, Y. Suhara, N. Hiroshima, H. Toda, and S. Susaki,
“Snippet generation by Identifying Attribute Associated
Information”. the 9th Asia Information Retrieval Societies
Conference, pp. 50-61, December, 2013.
[5]
T. Takeda and T. Igarashi, “Improving the efficiency of web
search by reusing search history of group members”, IPSJ
SIG technical report HCI 2008(11), pp. 93-98, 2008 (in
Japanese).
[6]
I. Siio and N. Mima, “Meeting Pot ：
Coffee Aroma
Transmitter”, Poster/demonstration in ACM UbiComp 2001:
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, Sep.30-
Oct.2, 2001.
[7]
T. Nakano, et al., “The Traveling Cafe: A Communication
Encouraging System for Partitioned Offices”, ACM CHI2006
Conference on human factors in computing systems, pp.
1139-1144, 2006.
[8]
K. Nishimoto and K. Matsuda, “Informal Communication
Support Media for Encouraging Knowledge sharing Creation
in a Community”, International journal of information
technology and decision making (IJITDM), Vol.6, No.3, pp.
411-426, September, 2007.
[9]
M. Usuki, K. Nishimoto, K. Sugiyama, and T. Matsubara,
“Evaluation of the IRORI: A Cyber-Space that Catalyzes
Face-to-Face
Informal
Communication”,
In
knowledge-
Based Intelligent information and Engineering Systems,
Proceedings of 8th International Conference, KES 2004
volume 3213/2004 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
314-321, Springer, October, 2004.
[10] Trend
Words
of
Yahoo!
Japan
Search
data
，
http://searchranking.yahoo.co.jp/realtime_buzz/
[retrieved:
28th May, 2014].
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

