Investigating Aspects of Visual Clustering in the Organization of Personal 
Document Collections 
 
Hoda Badesh 
Faculty of Information 
Technology 
Misurata University 
Misurata, Libya 
hoda.badesh@gmail.com 
Anwar Alhenshiri 
Faculty of Information 
Technology 
Misurata University 
Misurata, Libya 
alhenshiri@gmail.com  
Jamie Blustein 
Faculty of Computer  
Science 
Dalhousie University 
Halifax, NS, Canada 
jamietab@cs.dal.ca  
Evangelos Milios 
Faculty of Computer  
Science 
Dalhousie University 
Halifax, NS, Canada 
eem@cs.dal.ca  
 
 
Abstract—Organizing personal collections of digital documents 
can be frustrating for two main reasons. First, the effort 
required to work with the folder system on personal computers 
and the possible misplacement and loss of documents. Second, 
the lack of effective organization and management tools for 
personal collections of digital documents. The research in this 
paper investigated specific visualization and clustering features 
intended for organizing collections of documents and built in a 
prototype interface that was compared to a baseline interface 
from previous research.  The results showed that those features 
helped users with: 1) the initial classification of documents into 
clusters during the supervised stage; 2) the modification of 
clusters; 3) the cluster labelling process; 4) the presentation of 
the final set of organized documents; 5) the efficiency of the 
organization process, and 6) achieving better accuracy in the 
clusters created for organizing the documents. 
Keywords- information organization, management, retrieval, 
clustering, visualization, human factors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Personal documents grow in size and number rapidly. In 
the current state, desktop documents can be organized either 
manually in folder hierarchies or using special software such 
as: OpenText[15], IBM’s Document Manager, and Google 
Desktop[16], which has been discontinued). Manual 
organization can be very demanding since desktop 
computers may involve large collections of documents. 
Every type of software has its advantages and disadvantages. 
For instance, Google desktop presented its search results in a 
list provided from searching the index of keywords Google 
built from the user documents. This type of presentation may 
require the user to go through large lists of result hits, 
formulate several queries, and eventually may or may not 
find the intended document. 
When the pile of documents on a user’s desktop grows 
extensively, organizing those documents into folders may 
become very time consuming. The use of software that 
presents lists of results may also be very ineffective. The use 
of clustering for organizing user desktop documents has had 
little consideration. User interfaces for assisting users with 
organizing their documents using aspects of clustering and 
visualization have not been thoroughly investigated. 
Clustering is grouping together documents of the same 
type, genre, topic, etc. A categorization scheme has to be 
defined prior to applying clustering. Topical clustering and 
genre clustering have been investigated [5][15]. The use of 
clustering in document presentation has been investigated for 
desktop retrieval as well as web retrieval [1][14]. Clustering 
makes use of overviews of documents for conveying the 
different topics or genres covered in the document collection. 
Visualization can help the presentation of multiple 
features of search results [1][2]. Document features such as 
its size, last update, and type can be visualized. Features of 
the collection as a whole can also be visualized by showing 
documents of the same type connected or by showing 
documents with similar content under one category. Such 
visual clustering combines the benefits of visualization and 
clustering. Adding clustering and visualization to the 
presentation of search results can help users organize large 
collections of documents and find results more effectively 
and efficiently.  
There are several problems associated with managing and 
organizing personal documents on desktop computers. The 
following summarizes those problems: 
1. The size of the collection of documents on computers 
of personal nature grows very rapidly as users keep 
using their machines. 
2. Manual organization of documents on desktop 
computers necessitates the use of folder structure which 
may result in: 
3. Excessive time consumption in the case of large 
collections. 
4. Losing documents due to the complex structures and 
the difficulties associated with manually searching 
those structures. 
5. Organization tools may drive the user away for one or 
more of five reasons: visibility, integration, co-
adoption, scalability, and return to investment [13].  
6. Search using desktop tools has problems associated 
with the presentation of the search results and the 
interaction with the user. 
The research discussed in this paper attempts to answer 
the following questions: 
1- What is the effectiveness of using three options of 
document views (abstract, text cloud, full content) on 
how users classify their documents for organization? 
2- What is the effectiveness of presenting the initial 
clusters during the classification process as bubbles 
containing 
glyphs 
of 
documents 
inside 
each 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

corresponding cluster with different modification 
capabilities? 
3- What is the effectiveness of having different views of 
clusters, as a list of cluster labels and as labelled 
bubbles? 
4- What is the effectiveness of presenting the final set of 
documents 
clustered 
and 
organized 
in 
bubbles 
representing topics with their documents represented as 
glyphs? 
The features indicated in the questions above were 
investigated in a prototype interface called the Bubbles 
Interface. The prototype was essentially intended to 
investigate these particular visualization features (also shown 
in Table 1) in improving the organization of collections of 
personal documents using clustering. To investigate the 
usefulness of those features, the interface was compared to 
the Pie Interface, another project developed in [9] for the 
same purpose. The results of the research showed that the 
new interface had a better layout and assisted its users with 
the initial classification of documents. Modifying and 
labelling clusters was also enhanced using the new interface. 
The interface improved the final organization of the 
documents by improving the accuracy of the clusters created.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 illustrates the 
study conducted in this research. Section 4 provides a 
detailed discussion of the results. The paper is concluded in 
Section 5.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Managing and organizing information has been explored 
in different directions. Knoll et al. [14] investigated how 
users view and manage desktop information in general. Jones 
et al. [13] investigated important reasons behind giving up on 
certain personal information management tools. The 
strategies users follow to manage web information in order 
to be able to relocate and reuse information previously found 
are discussed in [12]. Their work showed that users follow 
different keeping strategies to re-find and compare 
information later. The variety of managing and organizing 
strategies for personal information can be attributed to the 
fact that current tools lack important reminding, integration, 
and organization schemes [7].  
Jones et al. [14] found that users abandon the use of an 
information management tool for one or more of five closely 
related 
reasons: 
visibility, 
integration, 
co-adoption, 
scalability, and return on investment. Jones [11] reviewed 
research in support of a more general preference for way 
finding methods that depend on a sense of digital location vs. 
direct search as the primary means for access to personal 
information [6]. Bergman and Nachmias [4] indicated that 
direct search becomes the user choice for retrieving personal 
information after attempts for search by navigation fail. 
Jaballah [10] designed a desktop personal library 
manager to overcome the problems associated with the use 
of folder-based organization schemes. Users could browse 
and search their personal collections of documents by the 
document type, title, filename, date of modification, and so 
on. The interface was evaluated using a pilot study (two 
experts) followed by a learnability study and final diary 
study (6 participants). The results showed that even with the 
prototype’s ability to harvest metadata about the files in the 
collection, the users preferred the standard folder system. 
They reported that some actions on the prototype were 
difficult and that users spent most of the time trying to 
familiarize themselves with the interface. 
To further emphasize the value of visual access to 
information 
for 
managing 
and 
organizing 
personal 
collections, Bauer [3] built an interface intended to arrange 
piles of images or PDF documents in portraits. Each PDF file 
in the portrait is shown as one page containing images and 
parts of the text in the documents. Images are shown in their 
own piles. The closer the image to the user, the larger the 
size of the document is. The prototype allowed interactions 
with collections of documents to be logged over long 
periods. The prototype was not evaluated and it was 
expected to improve the user’s experience with managing 
piles of personal documents and images.   
Civan et al. [6] compared the user behavior for 
organizing information using folders and using labels (tags). 
For the purpose of the comparison, Gmail, which is Google’s 
email service, and Hotmail, which is Microsoft’s email 
service, were selected. Users organized their e-mail 
messages using different methods in the two systems.  
Gmail's users labeled or tagged their messages; Hotmail 
users put messages into folders. The two approaches were 
compared with respect to: “retrieval performance, evolution 
in mappings between articles and folders/labels over time, 
and 
limitations 
to 
fully 
express 
one’s 
internal 
conceptualization” [6]. No clear winner was identified 
between tagging and placing. The study concluded that 
“better support for information organization may need to go 
well beyond folders and tags or their artful combination” [6]. 
Managing information is concerned with how people 
store, organize, and re-find information [8]. Information 
management systems are methods by which users find, 
categorize, and re-find information on daily basis. Research 
has considered personal information management. However, 
there is further need for investigating organizing and finding 
information in cases where the personal collection of 
documents grows extensively and when standard folder-
based organization becomes overwhelmingly demanding. 
III. 
RESEARCH STUDY 
The study discussed in this paper compared two 
interfaces, the Pie Interface from the work in [9] and the 
Bubbles Interface designed for the purpose of this study. The 
Pie Interface was selected based on the results of a previous 
study that showed some drawbacks in the prototype during 
the evaluation. The Bubble Interface was designed and 
compared to the Pie Interface for evaluating the features 
embedded in the Bubble Interface to overcome difficulties 
users encountered with the Pie Interface in the previous 
study as discussed in [9]. The interfaces are briefly described 
as follows: 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A. The Pie Interface 
The Pie Interface is divided into four sections: 1) the 
supervision panel, 2) the un-assigned document view, 3) the 
cluster view, and 4) the labeled document view. They are 
shown in Figure 1. 
B.  The Bubble Interface 
This interface was designed to allow users to organize 
their personal collections of documents based on clustering 
and using aspects of visualization in both the classification 
stage, which is the supervised portion of the process, and the 
final presentation stage of the organization process. The 
Bubbles Interface (shown in Figure 2) was designed to 
overcome several disadvantages in the Pie Interface.  
C. Study Design and Population 
The 
study 
design 
was 
complete 
factorial 
and 
counterbalanced. It accounted for the possible effects of 
order using two conditions in a within-subject design. The 
possible main effect of the independent variable (the 
interfaces) was controlled by randomly selecting with which 
interface the participant started. 
 
Figure 1.  The Pie Interface. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Ten participants—all computer science students—took 
part in this study. The small sample was meant to provide 
evidence of effectiveness of the prototype for further studies. 
The participants, even though are few, they represent early 
adopters. Of the participants, eight were males and only two 
were females. The ages of two participants were between 18 
and 22. The ages of the remaining eight participants were 
between 23 and 30. All participants were graduate students. 
D. Study Methodology 
Every participant was given 30 documents (randomly 
selected from the collection used in the previous experiment) 
from which they could select 12 documents as seeds to 
clusters (1–12 clusters). They were given 15 minutes to 
classify the 12 documents into initial clusters. This was the 
supervision stage. The ten participants were split into two 
teams (Team 1 consisted of four participants while Team 2 
consisted of six participants). The two teams met on two 
different days. On the first day of the study, each team had a 
meeting and the evaluation was completed as follows: 
1. The team was divided into two groups (Group 1 and 
Group 2). 
2. Each group was given a training session (approximately 
5 minutes) on how to work on each interface. 
3. Group 1 started working on the Bubbles Interface while 
Group 2 started working on the Pie Interface. 
4. The participants were given the 30 documents used in 
the study two days ahead to familiarize themselves with 
the collection. 
5. Every participant was asked to classify 12 documents 
from the collection of 30 documents into any number of 
clusters 
(1-12 
clusters). 
After 
completing 
the 
classification 
process, 
the 
interface 
called 
the 
underlying clustering algorithm used in the work 
discussed in [9] and the remaining 18 documents were 
assigned by the algorithm to complete the clustering 
stage. 
6. Every participant was asked to evaluate the clustering 
process by deciding whether or not each of the 
documents was assigned to the correct cluster from the 
participant’s point of view. 
7. Every participant was asked to complete a post-testing 
questionnaire about the interface they used.  
8. The groups were then switched to follow the same steps 
5 through 8 as described above.  
9. A focus group discussion took place after completing 
the task on both interfaces.  
 
 
Figure 2.  The Bubble Interface. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A background questionnaire was used to gather 
demographic data about the participants. It was also used to 
collect information about the size of the participants’ 
personal collections of documents and any tools they use to 
organize their documents. 
The study was meant to evaluate the effectiveness, 
efficiency, and enjoyment of each interface and compare the 
two interfaces. The efficiency was measured using the time 
and the number of mouse clicks needed to complete the 
study. The perceived effectiveness and the engagement of 
the interfaces were measured through the data accumulated 
in the questionnaires and the accuracy of the clustering 
process.  
The design of the experiment in [9] influenced the design 
of the current experiment in many ways. First, both studies 
used the same collection of documents. Second, the current 
study gave users the documents in advance since they were 
unhappy about the time they took to familiarize themselves 
with the documents in the study illustrated in [9]. The design 
of the Bubbles Interface attempted to change the 
visualization used in the Pie Interface and provide more 
interaction and display of content features, as seen in Table 
1. 
 
E. Study Results 
1. Efficiency Result 
The number of mouse clicks (left, right, and middle) 
during the study was logged. The number of mouse clicks on 
the Pie Interface was 301.3 on average (SD=66.6). In the 
case of using the Bubbles Interface, the average number of 
mouse clicks was 208.5 (SD=142.41). A two-sample-for-
means z-test showed that no significant difference existed 
between the number of mouse clicks on the Bubbles 
Interface and the number of mouse clicks on the Pie Interface 
(z = -1.86, p = 0.06). However, by removing the outliers in 
the case of the Bubbles Interface, the difference became 
significant (z = -6.22, p<0.0001). 
2. Effectiveness Result 
To measure the effectiveness of the interfaces and 
compare the Bubbles Interface to the Pie Interface, every 
participant was asked to evaluate the accuracy of the final 
clustering of the 30 documents used. Every participant was 
asked to determine which documents were assigned to the 
correct clusters and which documents were assigned to the 
incorrect cluster based on the cluster topic built by the 
participant. The two-samples-for-means z-test results (z = -
TABLE I.  
A COMPARISON OF THE FEATURES ON THE PIE AND BUBBLE INTERFACES 
No. 
Features 
Pie Interface 
Bubble Interface 
1. 
Document representation 
In a circle with a document ID 
As a document title with a document index 
2. 
Mechanism of showing 
documents 
Automatically after classifying the previous 
document 
Using “Previous | Next”  buttons 
3. 
Permanent document content 
view(s) 
Plain text cloud + whole content 
Abstract only + colorful text cloud + full text 
4. 
Other document content view 
None 
PDF format in a new window 
5. 
Creating clusters mechanism 
Drag and drop a document into the “New 
Cluster”  sector to create a new sector (cluster) 
containing a yellow stripe (document) 
Click the “New” button. The new cluster label will be 
added to the Clusters List. A new bubble (cluster) 
with a glyph (document) will appear in the Visual 
Bubbles View 
6. 
The case of creating a cluster 
without a label 
Although it is incorrect, the interface allows 
users to do so. 
An error massage will pop up asking the user to create 
a label first. 
7. 
Visual view of clusters 
a) 
Pie chart presentation 
b) 
Stripes (documents) within  a sector 
(cluster) 
c) 
Not zoom-able 
d) 
Visual  bubbles presentation 
e) 
Glyphs (documents) within a bubble 
(cluster) 
f) 
Zooming in and out, and moving the 
bubbles around 
8. 
Viewing one cluster at a time 
Not applicable 
Allowed 
9. 
Skipping document(s) 
Users are allowed to do one of two things to a 
document. 
1) 
Assign it to a cluster. 
2) 
Send it to the “Trash” sector (will 
not be considered in the clustering 
phase). 
Allowed by hitting the “Next” button 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

2.93, p <0.003) indicated that there was a significant 
difference between the two interfaces with respect to the 
number of documents accurately clustered as perceived by 
the participants. 
3. Enjoyment Result 
The study used a post-task questionnaire for each 
interface after the user completed the task. Each 
questionnaire had 16 five-point Likert-scale questions that 
measured engagement factors considered in the study. The 
questions used involved the option of ‘other’ in most cases 
so that the user could provide different answers from the 
choices given. In all of the questions that used Likert-scales, 
the neutral case (i.e. the answer of ‘not sure’) was ignored 
from the analysis. 
The first and second choices of the 5-point Likert-scale 
were merged and considered as one choice. The same 
procedure was followed with the fourth and fifth choices. 
The data was evaluated using the z-test (Downy et al., 2004) 
for comparing two proportions (equivalent to Chi Square).  
The following discussion goes through the results in each 
individual case measuring the engagement of the interfaces. 
a. 
How easy was the selection of documents for each 
cluster? Nine participants chose ‘easy’ and ‘very easy’ 
for the Bubbles Interface, while only three participants 
found the Pie Interface to be ‘easy’ with regard to 
selecting documents for each cluster. The difference 
between the two proportions of participants (9/10 and 
3/10) was significant (z = 2.739, p < 0.007). 
b. How effective (helpful and useful) did you find 
creating labels for a new cluster? On the Bubbles 
Interface, eight participants (8/10) indicated that 
creating cluster labels was ‘effective’. The remaining 
two participants selected the neutral choice ‘not sure’ 
on the Likert-scale. On the Pie Interface, five 
participants chose ‘effective’ while three participants 
selected the ‘not effective’ choice. The difference 
between the two proportions of participants who 
considered the labelling feature on either interface as 
effective (8/10 and 5/10) was not significant (z = 1.41, 
p = 0.16). 
c. 
How easy was modifying a cluster to add or remove 
documents? On the Bubbles Interface, 70% of the 
participants (7/10) found it easy to modify clusters 
created during the supervision stage. Two participants 
indicated that it was difficult while the remaining one 
selected the neutral choice ‘not sure’. On the Pie 
Interface, eight participants (8/10) found modifying 
clusters to be easy. One participant found it to be 
difficult while the remaining one was ‘not sure’. The 
difference between the proportions of participants was 
not significant (z = -0.52, p = 0.60).   
d. How clear did you find the view of your selected 
documents in the initial clusters? On the Bubbles 
Interface and during the supervision stage, six 
participants (6/10) liked the clear presentation of their 
initial clusters. Two participants indicated that it was 
not clear while the rest selected the neutral choice ‘not 
sure’. During the supervision stage on the Pie Interface, 
five participants liked the clear presentation of their 
initial clusters. Three participants found it unclear while 
two participants selected the ‘not sure’ choice.  The 
difference between the proportion of participants who 
found the presentation of the initial clusters clear on 
either interface was not significant (z = 0.45, p = 0.56).   
e. 
How helpful and effective did you find the final view 
of the clusters created by the system? On the Bubbles 
Interface, four participants (4/10) found the final 
presentation of clusters to be helpful and effective. 
Three participants (3/10) indicated that it was neither 
helpful nor effective because of the overlapping of the 
documents’ 
names 
while 
the 
three 
remaining 
participants (3/10) selected the neutral choice ‘not 
sure’. On the Pie Interface, four participants (4/10) 
found the final presentation of the clusters to be helpful 
and effective. Four participants (4/10) considered it 
neither helpful nor effective while two participants 
(2/10) were ‘not sure’. The difference between the 
proportions of participants who found the final 
presentation of the clusters helpful and effective on the 
Bubbles Interface and those who found it helpful and 
effective on the Pie Interface was not significant (z = 0, 
p = 0.99). 
f. 
How do you rate the presentation of elements on the 
interface? 
All 
participants 
(10/10) 
rated 
the 
presentation of elements on the Bubbles Interface as 
effective. 
 
Four 
participants 
(4/10) 
rated 
the 
presentation on the Pie Interface as effective while four 
participants rated it as not effective. There was a 
significant difference between the proportions of 
participants who found the presentation of elements on 
the Bubbles Interface to be effective and those who 
found the presentation of the elements on the Pie 
Interface to be effective (z = 2.93, p < 0.003). 
g. How do you rate the positioning of the document 
view and cluster view on the screen? The positioning 
of the document view and cluster view on the Bubbles 
Interface were considered effective by 70% of the 
participants (7/10). Two participants rated the views as 
not effective while only one participant selected the 
‘not sure’ choice. On the Pie Interface, the positioning 
of the document view and cluster view were considered 
as effective by three participants (3/10). Four 
participants (4/10) rated the view as not effective and 
the remaining three participants (3/10) selected the ‘not 
sure’ choice. There was a significant difference 
between the proportions of participants who rated the 
positioning of the document view and cluster view on 
the Bubbles Interface as effective and those who rated 
the positioning of the document view and cluster view 
on the Pie Interface as effective (z = 2.25, p < 0.02).   
h. How easy was it to undo actions on the interface? On 
the Bubbles Interface, eight participants (8/10) rated the 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

ability to reverse actions as easy. One of the remaining 
two participants rated it as difficult and the other one 
selected the ‘not sure’ choice. On the Pie Interface, 
three participants (3/10) rated the ability to reverse 
actions as easy while three other participants (3/10) 
rated it as difficult. The remaining four selected the 
neutral choice of ‘not sure’. The difference between the 
two proportions of participants who found reversing 
actions to be easy on either interface was significant (z 
= 2.25, p < 0.02). 
i. 
Was the feedback from the interface helpful to you? 
The feedback from the Bubbles Interface was 
considered as clear and helpful by eight participants 
(8/10), not clear or helpful by one participant (1/10), 
and not applicable by one participant (1/10). The 
feedback from the Pie Interface was considered as clear 
and helpful by only three participants (3/10), not clear 
or helpful by two participants (2/10), and not applicable 
by one participant (5/10).There was a significant 
difference between the proportions of participants who 
found the feedback from the Bubbles Interface as clear 
and helpful and those who found the feedback from the 
Pie Interface as clear and helpful (z = 2.25, p < 0.02). 
j. 
How helpful and effective do you think the interface 
will 
be 
with 
organizing 
your 
collection 
of 
documents? Seven users (7/10) predicted that the 
Bubbles Interface will be helpful and effective with 
organizing their own collections of documents. Two 
participants (2/10) anticipated that it will neither be 
helpful nor effective. Two participants predicted that 
the Pie Interface will be helpful and effective with 
organizing their own collections of documents. Four 
participants (4/10) anticipated that it will neither be 
helpful nor effective. There was a significant difference 
between the proportions of participants who expected 
the Bubbles Interface to be helpful and effective and 
those who expected the Pie Interface to be helpful and 
effective (z = 2.24, p < 0.02). 
F. Study Limitations 
The study had volunteers who were computer science 
students. The population of the study was very limited with 
regard to the number of participants involved due to limited 
resources. The number of documents used in the experiment 
was also limited because of the time required to manage 
more documents and investigate the effectiveness of the final 
clustering. The accuracy of clustering was manually 
examined which would have required more time and funding 
if more documents had been used. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The study showed that users worked more efficiently on 
the Bubbles Interface than they did on the Pie Interface. The 
Bubbles Interface required significantly fewer mouse clicks 
by the user than the Pie Interface to complete the same task. 
However, there was no significant difference between the 
times needed to complete the task on the Bubbles Interface 
and the times needed by users to complete the same task on 
the Pie Interface.  
Performing more clicks on the Pie Interface can be 
attributed to the user’s need for very frequent scrolling in 
order to see the document content. This kind of scrolling was 
not needed as frequently on the Bubbles Interface. The 
reason for completing the tasks on both interfaces with no 
significant difference in the time needed can be attributed 
either to the nature of the task itself or to other factors that 
were not measured in the study.  
Users achieved higher clustering accuracy with the 
Bubbles Interface than they did with the Pie Interface. One 
participant indicated that “navigation among the document 
content views was much easier with the Bubbles Interface”. 
The Bubbles Interface may have helped users with assigning 
the appropriate documents together to represent a topic 
(cluster). It may have also helped users with identifying the 
documents in each cluster in the final results. The labelling 
process on the Bubbles Interface may have also helped with 
identifying the accurate topic of both the documents during 
the supervised classification stage and the clusters during the 
final presentation stage. One participant mentioned that “I 
did very well in assigning documents into correct clusters.” 
Several engagement factors have been addressed in the 
study. For example, the difference between the number of 
participants who found the process of selecting documents 
for clusters to be easy on the Bubbles Interface and those 
who found it easy on the Pie Interface was significant. This 
may indicate that the approach that was used to show the 
document content to the user was more effective on the 
Bubbles Interface. It may also indicate that users found it 
easier to perceive the cluster content and see where the new 
document 
belonged 
during 
the 
supervised 
initial 
classification.  
Users also found the presentation of elements on the 
Bubbles Interface to be more effective than the presentation 
of elements on the Pie Interface. Users commented that the 
layout was intuitive and easy to understand and that no 
confusion or frustration was caused with the organization of 
the Bubbles Interface elements. During the group discussion, 
one participant stated “I had some difficulties viewing the 
document content both with the text cloud and the whole 
content view. The area customized for displaying the content 
was not sufficient. It should be larger on the Pie Interface.” 
Another participant indicated “I got really lost with the Pie 
Interface because I always forget how to review the 
document and cluster content.”  
The positioning of the document view and cluster view 
on the display was considered effective and helpful by 
significantly more users of the Bubbles Interface than users 
of the Pie Interface. The participants reported that they 
“found the interaction with the Bubbles Interface easier 
because of the nice layout that was easy to understand.” 
The feedback given by the interfaces was different. 
Significantly more users favoured the feedback given by the 
Bubbles Interface. For example, all the messages given by 
the Bubbles Interface were clear and were given to serve 
many purposes. However, the only feedback message given 
to the user while using the Pie Interface was the delete 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

conformation message when the user attempted to delete a 
cluster or a document. The users stated that the feedback of 
the Bubbles Interface was more helpful and reduced the need 
for asking the researcher questions to clarify the reactions of 
the interface. Two participants stated that they liked “to have 
something on the interface indicating how many documents 
have already been classified and how many remain.” 
Users favoured the Bubbles Interface for future use with 
organizing their collections. Moreover, participants preferred 
the categorization of documents in the final results provided 
by the Bubbles Interface over the categorization provided by 
the Pie Interface. They indicated that in the case of the Pie 
Interface, there was little information about the documents in 
each cluster. The interaction with the interface to obtain 
more information about the clusters and the documents was 
hard.  
Even though the Bubbles Interface has promising 
features in the organization of documents, it may have issues 
of clutter with very large collections. Different design 
parameters may need to be adjusted such as the glyph size 
for the document and the size of the bubble representing the 
cluster. The quality of clustering of a large collection of 
documents can be evaluated in the case of using the Bubbles 
Interface by evaluating the seeds selected for the clusters. It 
will be almost impossible (very time consuming) to ask users 
in a laboratory experiment to measure the accuracy of the 
final results in the case of very large collections of 
documents. However, the seeds chosen by the users to be 
given to the clustering algorithms can be evaluated by 
comparison to a ground truth. 
There are several guidelines that can be drawn from the 
findings of the study. First, visualization through the use of 
intuitive bubble clusters would assist users in isolating 
clusters to locate documents in retrieval-based interfaces. 
Second, the use of labeled bubbles representing documents 
within clusters eases the process of identifying documents 
within clusters. Third, the interactive clustering in which 
changes are applied immediately to the visual view of 
clusters during the classification stage makes organization 
more effective. Fourth, providing different views of clusters 
may help in allowing users to continuously modify the 
groups of documents assigned to clusters according to 
changes in the observed topics. Finally, the use of intuitive 
clustering such that of the bubble interface would improve 
the user judgment of the documents assigned to each cluster. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The investigation compared specific features in a 
prototype interface against a baseline interface from previous 
research [9].  The results of the investigation showed that the 
new prototype interface had a better layout and helped users 
with: 1) the initial classification of documents into clusters 
during the supervised stage; 2) the modification of clusters; 
3) the cluster labelling process; 4) the presentation of the 
final set of organized documents; 5) the efficiency of the 
organization process, and 6) the actual accuracy of the 
cluster for the organization process. 
Further work will focus on the use of visualization and 
clustering parameters for more effective retrieval of 
documents in personal and even larger collections of 
documents. Studies will focus on improving the current 
prototype to provide efficient environment for organizing 
and managing in addition to retrieving documents. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alhenshiri, and J. Blustein,”Exploring visualization in web 
information retrieval,” International Journal for Internet 
Technology and Secured Transactions, vol. 3, issue 3, July 
2011, pp. 320-330. 
[2] H Badesh, and J. Blustein, “VDMs for Finding and Re-
finding Web Search Results,” iConference, Feb. 2012, pp. 
419-420, Toronto, ON, Canada: ACM. 
[3] D. F. Bauer, “Spatial Tools for Managing Personal 
Information Collections,” HICSS2005, 2005, pp. 104-106, 
Hawaii, USA: IEEE Computer Society. 
[4] O. R. Bergman, and R. Nachmias, ”The project fragmentation 
problem in personal information,” SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, April 2006, pp. 271-
274, Montréal, QC, Canada. 
[5] C. Carpineto, S. Osiński, G. Romano, and D. Weiss, “A 
Survey of Web Clustering Engines,” vol. 41, issue 3, ACM 
Computing Surveys, July 2009. 
[6] A. Civan, W. Jones, P. Klasnja, and H. Bruce, ”Better to 
organize personal information by folders or by tags?: The 
devil is in the details,” Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, vol 45, issue 1, 2008, 
pp. 1-13. 
[7] E. Cutrell, S. Dumais, and J. Teevan, “Searching to Eliminate 
Personal Information Management,” In Communications of 
the ACM (Special Issue: Personal Information Management), 
Jan. 2006, pp. 58-64. 
[8] D. Elsweiler, and I. Ruthavan, “Towards Task-based Personal 
Information Management Evaluations,” the 30th Annual 
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval, 2007, pp. 23-30, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: ACM. 
[9] Y. Hu, E. Milios, J. Blustein, and S. Liu, “Personalized 
Document Clustering with Dual Supervision,” the 12th ACM 
Symposium on Document Engineering, 2012, pp. 161-170, 
Paris, France: ACM. 
[10] I. C. Jaballah, “Managing Personal Documents with a Digital 
Library,” 9th European Conference, Research and Advanced 
Technology for Digital Libraries, 2005, pp. 18-23, Vienna, 
Austria. 
[11] W. Jones, “Keeping Found Things Found: The Study and 
Practice of Personal Information Management,” 2007, San 
Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
[12] W. Jones, H. Bruce, and S. Dumais, “How do People Get 
Back to Information on the Web? How Can They Do It 
Better? 9th IFIP TC13 International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, 2003, Zurich, Switzerland. 
[13] E. Jones, H. Bruce, P. Klasnja, and W. Jones, “I Give Up! 
Five Factors that Contribute to the Abandonment of 
Information Management Strategies. 68th Annual Meeting of 
the 
American 
Society 
for 
Information 
Science 
and 
Technology (ASIST 2008). 2008, Columbus, OH. 
[14] S. H. Knoll, A. Hoff, D. Fisher, S. Dumais, and E. Cutrel, 
“Viewing Personal Data Over Time,” CHI 2009 Workshop on 
Interacting with Temporal Data, 2009, pp. 1-4, Boston, MA, 
USA. 
[15] M. Santini, and S. Sharoff, “Web Genre Benchmark under 
Construction,” Language Technology and Computational 
Linguistics (JLCL), vol. 25, issue 1, 2009. 
[16] OpenText, http://www.opentext.com  
[17] Google Desktop, http://desktop.google.com  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

