 
 
Virtual Web and Experimental Vibration Laboratory Coordination as an 
Educational Tool for Mechanics Teaching in Engineering  
 
Martínez Valle, José Miguel, Balcaza Bautista, 
Teresa y Martínez Jiménez, José Miguel 
 Mechanics Department  
UCO, Polytechnic School  
Córdoba, Spain 
 e-mail: jmvalle@uco.es 
Martínez Jiménez, Pilar, Pedrós Pérez, Gerardo 
Applied Physics Department 
UCO, Polytechnic School   
Córdoba, Spain 
e-mail: fa1majip@uco.es
Abstract—The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the 
effectiveness of using virtual laboratory as a complementary 
tool for mechanic teaching. The use of Virtual Oscilloscope 
Web and Virtual Damped Oscillations Laboratories, together 
with the study of the vibration of beams Experiment in a real 
Laboratory in the university teaching system, are explained. 
The computer programmes can be used from the online and 
download areas of the Applied Physics and Mechanics 
Departments internet server, in order to be executed via web. 
These computer applications permit one to simulate practice 
behavior, and the users can work step by step in the same way 
as they do in the real laboratory, obtaining the corresponding 
calculations and plots. The Virtual Laboratory Web has been 
developed by our research team and the main objective is to 
familiarize the student with the oscilloscope and the Damped 
Oscillations experiment for its later handling in a real 
laboratory. The aim of these tools is to help students to learn, 
to study, and to investigate on their own. Furthermore, 
students can prepare their experiment lessons before going into 
the laboratory and revise them whenever, and as many times 
as they want to. Consequently, in using the computer as a 
complementary educational tool, the quality of university 
teaching is greatly improved. 
 
Keywords–Education; Technology; Simulation Software; 
Multimedia; Oscillations; Virtual Laboratory. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the past twenty years, there has been widespread 
experimentation with computer-assisted didactic models in 
the training of highly qualified experts such as aircraft 
pilots, astronauts and engineers specialized in controls. The 
same has happened in teaching centers using models, which 
allow the computer to emulate the working of different 
laboratory equipment and to instruct students, how to use it.      
The carrying out of these experiments in the Mechanics 
teaching laboratory is very costly and requires students to 
devote considerable time to the study of each of the 
experiment facilities and to the handling of the equipment. 
In the Laboratory of the Mechanics Department at Córdoba 
University, we have two real vibration bench practices that 
we use to study the natural frequencies of simple beams 
(Isostatic beams as cantilevers, articulated beams, etc.) with 
or without damping vibrations. 
However, due to severe overcrowding in classrooms and 
not enough necessary time, we have been developing and 
using a virtual lab that shows the real practices to the student. 
This paper presents a new learning experience of the 
coordination between the virtual laboratories and the real 
experiment in the beams vibration practice.  
Firstly, we describe two virtual laboratories developed by 
our research team: the virtual web oscilloscope and the 
virtual Damped Oscillations laboratory.   
Furthermore, we present their application to the practice 
in the Mechanics Laboratory and we analyze the results 
obtained by the students in the practice classes. 
II. STATE OF THE ART  
Currently, a lot  programmes for the simulation of 
certain important Physics experiments have been created 
[1], whose worth lies in contributing to the students’ 
capacity to perform, in a simplified manner, those mental 
actions which are similar to those that they might have to 
carry out in a traditional laboratory, with the aid of these 
models.   
From a general point of view, numerous applications 
exist whose main objective is education and the transmission 
of knowledge [2]. The use of the computer for such an aim 
accelerates the learning process of the concepts dealt with, 
since the interaction with the user allows them to be 
assimilated in a more rapid and easier way [3]. 
In the field of scientific and technological education, the 
computer can be used as a reflective tool, where the student 
is a protagonist of his own learning process   [4] [5]. 
From this perspective, our line of work has focused on 
the development and evaluation of applications that include 
different modules: diagnoses of knowledge and previous 
ideas, resolution of problems, numerical simulations, virtual 
laboratories, interactive tutorials, etc. From an educational 
point of view, the principal didactic usefulness of the tool 
presented is that simulations of the phenomena and virtual 
experiments offer a certain degree of realism so that the 
student can modify the independent variables or the initial 
conditions and can analyze the changes that take place in the 
systems [6]. 
The development in the Departments of Applied Physics 
and Mechanics at the Polytechnic School of Córdoba 
University (Spain) of computer applications for didactic 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
purposes began during the academic year of 1988-1989. 
From the 1991-1992 academic year onwards, the imparting 
of practices simulated together with the experimental 
practices has been generalized. This methodology is applied 
in the learning of Physics and Mechanics in the first years of 
Industrial Engineering and Computer Engineering [7]. 
For all these reasons, our group has been involved in the 
development, 
application 
and 
evaluation 
of 
virtual 
laboratories and their utilization, with a series of encouraging 
results that have been described in other works [8]. 
III.  OBJECTIVES  
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness 
of using virtual laboratory as a complementary tool for 
mechanic teaching. For that, an objective is to coordinate 
virtual web and experimental laboratories. 
 Also, another objective is to familiarize the student with 
the oscilloscope and the Damped Oscillations experiment 
for its later handling in a real laboratory. 
 These tools help students to learn, to study, and to 
investigate on their own.  
The computer applications include Interactive tutorials, 
and Questionnaires, which give students the possibility of 
evaluating themselves.  
IV. TEACHING EXPERIMENT DESCRIPTION 
Before doing the practices, the student downloads the 
programme guide from the learning web of the Mechanics 
Department, in which a brief  introduction is given on the 
theoretical fundamentals, recommending the student to 
consult the virtual laboratories [9] [10],  the tutorials [11], 
the apparatus, and the operating mode of the experiment. 
On the day that the experiment takes place; the student 
has to take a brief summary to the laboratory to be handed 
in the moment the experiment begins. If possible, the 
student is recommended to take a portable computer to the 
laboratory so that there is one per 2 students (one for each 
work post). The teachers also provide them with two 
computers.  
The students carry out the experiment processes by 
consulting the operating mode in the virtual laboratories and 
checking the results obtained experimentally with those that 
they would obtain by simulation. Finally, students have to 
hand in a final report of the practical, in which they include 
the data treatment, results obtained and conclusions. 
V. SOFTWARE TECHNICAL DETAILS ON THE TOOL/SYSTEM 
The damped oscillation software  has been created 
using Visual Basic 5.0 language, with the aim of making the 
user feel that he/she understands and has a good command 
of it since we have tried to make it very intuitive and easy to 
use. The Oscilloscope programme has been created with 
Action Script and it permits user-software maximum 
interaction via web.  
Both programmes are in research team VLC web 
server   [10] [11]. 
VI. SOFTWARE PROPERTIES  
The interface of the computer applications must be the 
simplest, most intuitive and most attractive possible, so that 
it allows the user to interact with the machine and to obtain 
an ideal execution of the presentations that the application 
developed offers [12]. The characteristics of our system are 
described as follows: 
*It facilitates the user's browsing for the different 
parameters included in the application; presenting them in a 
form arranged in such a way as to avoid confusion. 
*The elements of the interface are accommodated so that 
their position on the screen facilitates the transition between 
the thought of the user and the action to be carried out.  
*The application is intuitive and attractive.  
*There is an exhaustive control of erroneous information 
so that mistaken results cannot be returned to the users 
without providing informative messages about the mistake 
committed. 
VII. OBJECTIVES  OF THE IMPLEMENTED SOFTWARES  
The primary target of this work has been to remedy the 
deficiencies of Technical Studies students at the time of 
acquiring knowledge.  Concretely, in doing practice work in 
laboratories, 
especially 
in 
that 
corresponding 
to  
experimentation with beam vibrations , for which it is 
necessary to know how to use with ease an oscilloscope and 
the experimental handling of damped oscillation equipment. 
By means of the virtual oscilloscope, which  is included 
within a more global project of virtual laboratories   
encompassing different Physics and Engineering problems, , 
the student can become familiar with the handling of an 
oscilloscope (Figure 1).   Other objectives   achieved are: 
•Objective 1: Multimedia has been developed for a 
system that includes sample information necessary for 
students in the Vibrations field. 
• Objective 2: It allows the user to become familiar with 
some of the devices used in the oscilloscope.  
• Objective 3: “Multiplatform” works in surroundings; in 
addition, the application can be used under any platform, or 
Linux, Windows, etc.  
• Objective 4: To reproduce schemes of the real systems 
so that the students can visualize the problems created.   
VIII. DESCRIPTION OF THE VIRTUAL LABORATORY 
A. Oscilloscope Virtual Laboratory  
The Software [10] is structured in three different 
sections: Tutorial, Simulation, and Help. 
General Interface. The interface of a computer system 
must be as simple, intuitive and attractive as possible, so as 
to allow the user to interact with the machine. 
Theoretical Tutorial Module. The tutorial is clear and 
concise, using pictures and diagrams, the basic concepts of 
the subject matter, the study's scope and its application to 
the vibrations of simple beams. 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Figure 1. Virtual Oscilloscope 
Simulation. The main objective of this lab is to learn to 
use the analog oscilloscope to display and measure periodic 
signals in time. For this, as shown in the image of the virtual 
oscilloscope, we have different switches and controls that 
allow us to modulate the frequency, the amplitude of the 
signal, and so on. 
B. Damping Oscillation Simulation Lab 
The study of the vibrations in beams is implemented by 
an experimental bench with springs. 
The practice laboratory that we have implemented in the 
computer basically consists of a frame on which springs 
with different elastic constants can be suspended and loads 
also added. A piston is placed in a vessel which is filled 
with liquids of different viscosities and a recorder equipped 
with a pen traces the different types of motion: quasi-free, 
under damped, critically damped and over damped 
oscillations. In actual fact, we have tried to simulate the real 
vibration bench practice shown in Figure 2.   
The essence of this application consists of the design and 
creation of interactive software incorporating the most 
important experiments that can be done by students with a 
free and damped vibration bench. This comprises four parts, 
which can be accessed from the main menu: Tutorial, 
Simulation, Introduction and on-line Help. 
In the simulation module, a study can be made of the 
motion of a load suspended vertically from a spring in terms 
of the following parameters: viscosity, system load and 
elastic constant of the springs. This module is a virtual 
representation of the instruments necessary for the student 
to be able to have it recognized and learn how to use the real 
vibration bench when he/she has completed this practical.  
In order to create the multimedia system, a video camera 
film was made. It displayed both the components of the 
practical (loads to attach, springs, oils, etc.) and the 
experimental process itself. The application generates 
graphic and numerical results. The button “Print” enables 
the student to print the register of the corresponding motion. 
The button “Following” makes it possible to go on to any 
new motion resulting from having modified the conditions 
of the system.  (Figure 3) 
 
Figure 2. The real vibration bench practice 
 
Figure 3. Screen for damped motion generation 
IX. EDUCATIONAL APPLICATIONS 
We 
have 
used 
these 
virtual 
laboratories 
as 
complementary tools to traditional teaching methods, with a 
view to obtaining more personalized teaching to counteract 
the present overcrowding of university classrooms.  
With the aim of checking the degree of influence of the 
coordination of virtual and experimental laboratories on the 
learning process, the results of the didactic experiments 
carried out during the last two academic years were 
compared. 
Of the 160 students enrolled in each academic year, 
approximately 100 signed on for the laboratories web. This 
was an indispensable condition for carrying them out.  
Of the 100 students who began the course, approximately 
90% did the real and virtual experiments, subsequently 
handing in their reports.  This is also an indispensable 
condition 
for 
passing 
the 
subject 
“Mechanics 
in 
Engineering”. 
The assessment of the programmes used was made by 
evaluating the individual reports of the students at the end of 
the experiment and some complementary questionnaires on 
the topics tackled.  
    This evaluation was analyzed by classifying the results 
obtained by the students and establishing three categories of 
knowledge, i.e., abandonment of studies, fails and passes.   
The results obtained show (Table 1) that, in the past two 
years, the number of students abandoning the experiment 
and virtual laboratories, and, therefore, the subject has 
dropped. What is more, in the same period during which the 
virtual Laboratories were increased and coordinated (2010 
and 2011), the percentage of students failing diminished, 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
and the amount of students with improved results in 
practical works rose. Thus, it can be concluded that the 
putting into practice and implementation of virtual 
laboratories in coordination with experimental ones triggers 
a great improvement in teaching. 
   
 
Table 1. Comparison of overall results for subject of Mechanics  
X. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has presented the computer applications 
designed for didactic purposes in university teaching of a 
scientific and technological nature, which are currently 
being used and evaluated – in real education contexts – with 
first-year students of industrial engineering studies at 
Cordoba University (Spain).  
The programmes are equipped with complete tutorials, 
presented with hypertext and images in order to help 
students to understand the concepts. These tutorials include 
animations, sound and videos, which increase their appeal to 
students, who can browse through the different parts of the 
Tutorial by means of hyperlinks and buttons  connecting 
different parts of the system.  
The simulation and virtual laboratories of real 
experiments are undoubtedly the most important items of 
these applications. Using them, students can actively 
interact: by incorporating data into the independent 
variables, in the observation of experiments, in the analysis 
of the results obtained, and in other aspects related to the 
solution of any problems encountered.  
These computer applications are compact, intuitive, and 
easy-to-use tools, which combine, in a single application, 
the main elements involved in the education process: 
theoretical contents, practical activities (solution of 
problems, simulations, and virtual experiments), and the 
evaluation of previous or acquired knowledge.  
The computer applications have been used as a learning 
tool incorporating it into the tasks of the course. 
The evaluation of the results of student grades has 
shown that the use of computer simulation tools encourages 
students' interest in the subject and improves their marks 
helping to raise their level of knowledge of theoretical 
concepts and practical teaching techniques and problem 
solving. 
Finally, in future projects we hope to develop 3D Virtual 
Labs as a relevant solution to immerse the students in a 
realistic experimental environment.   
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Li and P. E. D. Love “Use of Visual Simulation in 
construction technology education” , Computer Applications 
in Engineering Education, vol.  6, no.  4,  Dec. 1998,  pp. 
217–222,  doi: 10.1002/science1099-0542. 
[2] V.M. Becerra,  “Solving optimal control problems with state 
constraints using nonlinear programming and simulation 
tools”, IEEE Transactions on education, vol. 47 no. 3, Aug. 
2004,  pp. 377-384, doi: 10.1109/TE.2004.825925. 
[3] E. Ras, R. Carbon, B. Decker, and J. Rech “Experience 
Management Wikis for Reflective Practice in Software 
Capstone Projects” , IEEE Transactions on education, vol. 50, 
no. 4, Nov.2007,  pp. 312-320, doi: 10.1109/TE.2007.904580.  
[4] WJ. Lee, JC. Gu, and RJ. Li, “A physical laboratory for 
protective relay education” IEEE Transactions on education 
vol. 
45, 
no. 
2, 
May 
2002, 
pp. 
182-186, 
doi: 
10.1109/TE.2002.1013885. .  
[5] M. Stefanovic, M. Matijevic, and V. Cvijetkovic, “Web-
Based Laboratories for Distance Learning”, International 
Journal of Engineering Education , vol. 25, no. 5, Dic. 2009,   
pp. 1005-1012. 
[6] P. Martínez-Jiménez, M. Varo, MC. García, G. Pedrós Pérez,  
JM. Martínez-Jiménez, R. Posadillo, R., and EP. Varo-
Martínez,  “Virtual web sound laboratories as an educational 
tool in physics teaching in engineering”, Computer 
Applications in Engineering Education, vol. 9, no. 4, Dic. 
2011, pp. 759-769,  doi: 10.1002/science1099-0542. 
[7] J. Leon Alvarez, P. Martínez-Jiménez,  and A. Pontes-
Pedrajas,  “Simulación mediante ordenador de movimientos 
bidimensionales en medios resistivos” Enseñanza de las 
Ciencias, Vol. 1, Dic. 1994,  no. 12  pp. 30-38. 
[8] MD. Redel-Macias; P. Martínez-Jimenez, and A. Cubero-
Atienza, “E-learning applied for training on safety and 
hygiene in electronics engineers degree”, Proc. 3 The 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education ,  
(CSEDU 2011) ,  may 2011, pp. 258-263  ISBN 978-989-
8425-49-2. 
[9] http://www3.uco.es/m1112,  March, 2012 
[10] http://rabfis15.uco.es/osciloscopio/  March, 2012 
[11] http://rabfis15.uco.es/lvct/index.php?q=node/22 March, 2012 
[12] N.M. Avouris, N. Tselios, and E.C. Tatakis, “Development 
and evaluation of a computer-based laboratory teaching tool”; 
Computer Applications in Engineering Education, vol.9, no.1, 
April 2001, pp.  8-19, doi: 10.1002/science1099-0542.  
 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

