 
 
OLAP-based Sustainability Report Auditing 
Daniela C. Souza 
Master in Systems and Computing 
Universidade Salvador (UNIFACS) 
Salvador, Brazil 
dannyscosta@msn.com 
Márcio Alexandre P. Silva 
Master in Systems and Computing 
Universidade Salvador (UNIFACS) 
Salvador, Brazil 
marcio.alexandre83@gmail.com 
Paulo Caetano da Silva 
Master in Systems and Computing 
Universidade Salvador (UNIFACS) 
Salvador, Brazil 
paulo.caetano@pro.unifacs.br 
Abstract — In the last decades, companies have adopted 
environmental control and protection systems and have also 
been encouraged to demonstrate their results through the use 
of indicators in which the efforts made are presented. The 
adoption of XBRL by the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) in 
the disclosure of sustainability reports contributes to the 
increase of their quality. However, the great heterogeneity of 
enterprise information systems is an obstacle to the use of the 
GRI guidelines in the corporate setting and for efficient 
auditing. In this paper, a service framework to audit 
sustainability reports based on the GRI rules is proposed. We 
also present operators that are called GRI operators and are 
implemented in an OLAP server, which aims to conduct 
analytical processing of sustainability reports to validate their 
compliance with the GRI guidelines. 
Keywords: Sustainability Report Auditing; OLAP; Global Report 
Initiative; SOA; XBRL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
For decades, sustainable development has been an 
important topic in companies, mainly for those that are 
market leaders. Each company establishes its own 
sustainability approaches, seeking to develop better 
practices in order to create competitive advantages. 
Therefore, the disclosure of non-financial data has gained 
great importance for company success and sustainability 
reports have become a divulgation tool for acquiring 
competitive advantages and increasing the organizational 
image. Many companies use a specific model for building 
sustainability reports; however, the proposed standard by 
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) has relevant and 
acceptable representation worldwide. According to GRI, the 
elaboration of Sustainability Reports is a measuring and 
divulgation practice, which is a responsibility of each 
company, whose results must be sent to stakeholders so they 
may analyze its performance in environmental, social and 
economic terms. 
Although the adoption of GRI guidelines has contributed 
to the standardization of sustainability data, companies have 
been facing challenges, such as (a) diversity of computer 
systems and (b) the difficulty to perform an audit that is able 
to monitor data continuously, given it may not be trivial to 
capture large data in different systems and formats. In this 
context, the adoption of a Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA) is a solution to mitigate flexibility and integration 
problems in software applications. SOA should be 
considered to improve (i) company productivity, (ii) 
alignment with business, (iii) agility for attending new 
demands, and (iv) service reuse [9].  
Continuous Auditing is a technology innovation of the 
traditional audit, which is based on automation and, though 
its concepts have been established for almost two decades, 
in practice it is still something new [4]. Currently, 
technologies allow continuous auditing; however, some 
challenges must still be overcome, such as data acquisition 
in real time, as well as the scope and flexibility of audits. To 
solve this problem, a service-based framework is proposed 
in this work, in which analytical processing can be executed 
on eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) 
documents, allowing continuous auditing based on GRI 
sustainability guidelines. 
    After the introduction, this paper is structured as 
follows: Section II introduces a review of related literature; 
in Section III, the proposed model based on SOA is 
discussed; Section IV presents an analysis of the compliance 
of sustainability reports with GRI guidelines; Section V 
discusses Link Based Multidimensional Query Language 
(LMDQL) [19]-[23] operators (based on GRI rules), which 
can perform analytical processing on XBRL/GRI data; 
Section VI includes the conclusions and future work and, 
finally, the references are presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A model for continuous auditing is proposed to help 
stakeholders in decision-making processes in companies 
[25]. The integrity of data in financial reports is currently 
questionable; however, continuous auditing is an effective 
way to ensure safety and to facilitate early detection of fraud 
in financial reporting [14]. 
A study about integration on information systems and 
auditing which revealed several future challenges for audits 
due to business information systems is shown in Kanellou 
and Spathis [13].  These authors also state that continuous 
audit and monitoring can help stakeholders in the detection 
of errors and financial fraud. 
A model is proposed for auditing through software 
systems called Continuous Auditing Web Service (CAWS), 
which is based on Web Service and XML technologies [16]. 
This model has been developed in order to reduce 
complexity in the transmission of data and to aggregate 
security to software systems, and for that the following 
technologies have been used: XML, WS-BPEL (for the 
composition of new services) and Web Service (for 
avoiding incompatibility in data access and exchange).  
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
A collaborative model based on SOA for audit systems 
is proposed, which uses XML standards and data 
transformation applications (developed by companies and 
software vendors) [6]. 
The adoption of XBRL by GRI provides greater facility 
in the collection and analysis of sustainability data, besides 
significantly influencing the improvement of quality of data 
that composes the report is discussed in Leibs [24]. 
Recent advances in information technology have 
encouraged the search for means which are able to verify the 
integrity of transactional data, which brings many benefits to 
auditing particularly through continuous monitoring, in order 
to guarantee operations are made in an environment where 
information technology is intensively used [1]. 
Regarding the standardization of sustainability reporting, 
GRI has strong representation, to be considered an 
international standard widely accepted, which allows 
organizations to inform their sustainable practices in relation 
to environmental, social and economic dimensions. Many 
organizations use the GRI standard; however, studies show 
that although organizations declare themselves strategically 
sustainable, there are attempts to camouflage the indicators 
that are disclosed in sustainability reports, as well as the 
omission of relevant negative information, which puts at risk 
the interpretation of corporate performance and the impact of 
the company's programs. Therefore, this article seeks to fill a 
gap that previous studies have left, with regard to the lack of 
automated controls that allow the audit of reports issued by 
organizations. Then, it is also intended to verify if the reports 
are in compliance with the guidelines proposed by the GRI. 
To address this issue, a service framework is presented to 
audit sustainability reports with operators that evaluate the 
compliance of sustainability reports to the GRI guidelines, 
which can be seen in section V. 
III. 
A SERVICE FRAMEWORK FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
REPORTS 
The framework proposed in this paper is divided into 
two conceptual layers: (1) integration infrastructure, which 
is intended promote the access and retrieval of data within 
the informational structure of the company. In this layer we 
can find the corporative environment, extraction services 
and standardization services; and (2) Global Reporting 
Initiative, whose function is to integrate the architecture 
proposed by the GRI to the informational scenario of the 
organization. In this layer we can find persistence, auditing 
and distribution services. The services are materialized in 
the form of Web Services to meet the necessary integration 
in order to design the collection environment and the 
recovery of sustainability data. Thus, all adjacent layers of 
the model can consume this data. Figure 1 illustrates the 
framework proposed using SOA, XBRL, GRI and 
Continuous Auditing. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Service Framework for Sustainability Report. [5] 
 
A physical and logical infrastructure is proposed to 
provide effective communication among the many layers of 
the model. The physical one is based on a service bus and 
the logical one is responsible for the representation of data 
using XBRL technology. 
 Service Bus XBRL: Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) has 
the function of granting access to resources provided among 
the layers, which allows the exchange of messages. The 
implementation of service bus enables the connection of 
software systems developed on different platforms, 
integrating them as services. The communication interface 
of the services on the bus is made through their WSDL 
documents. In ESB, through the SOAP protocol, the 
consumption and provision of services of all layers of the 
framework are allowed. 
 XBRL-GRI Taxonomy: The XBRL-GRI taxonomy 
standardizes the representation of data, as well as how to 
perform its exchange, which facilitates the connection of all 
layers in the proposed model. This allows all layers to have 
the necessary infrastructure to use the facts reported in 
XBRL instances [12]. 
From 
this 
physical 
and 
logical 
communication 
infrastructure, six layers are defined. 
 Corporate Environment: The corporate environment 
layer is composed of information systems that store data 
related to the scope of sustainability. It is understood as the 
scope of sustainability the set of data required according to 
the GRI guidelines.  
 Extraction Services: The extraction services layer 
gathers the necessary services for the integration of data. 
These services are responsible for collecting the data that is 
available in the corporate environment to be converted into 
XBRL format, according to the guidelines proposed by the 
GRI. 
 Standardization Services: This layer is intended to 
standardize the form of the representation of data in the 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Extraction Services and Corporate Environment layers 
through the XBRL-GRI taxonomy. This layer is connected 
to extraction services layer through Enterprise Service Bus 
(ESB), where data is retrieved and organized, creating the 
XBRL instance with the data related to sustainability 
performance. 
 Persistence Services: The function of this layer is to 
store the sustainability reports of the organization through a 
data repository. This will allow retrieving and analyzing 
data of specific reports. From the several XBRL instances 
stored, queries can be executed, providing the use of 
analysis techniques and knowledge discovery (e.g., OLAP, 
data mining, trend analysis) to support decision-making 
related to sustainability. 
 Audit Services: the Audit Services layer consists of two 
components: Web Services Auditing and OLAP/LMDQL 
Server. In the former, are the services that are designed to 
audit the sustainability reports based on the GRI guidelines. 
The latter is a tool that will allow stakeholders to generate 
queries for the analysis of sustainability data [20]. 
 Distribution Services: In this layer, the sustainability 
data of the organization is made available. It is conceptually 
subdivided into two categories: (1) internal stakeholders, 
whose function is to carry out a continuous monitoring of 
sustainability indicators and (2) external stakeholders, 
who1ª avaliação11se focus is on the use of reports in order 
to know the sustainable practices of the organization. Thus, 
the distribution layer is of fundamental importance in the 
process of engagement and performance maintenance of the 
organization sustainability, benefiting all stakeholders, since 
it is an important feature to track the organization's 
sustainability initiatives. 
It is expected that through this architecture it will be 
possible to provide the necessary means to mitigate 
problems of access and standardization of data on the 
sustainable performance of organizations. In the next 
section the analysis of sustainability reporting compliance is 
presented. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF SUSTAINABILITY REPORTS COMPLIANCE 
This section presents three analytical levels of 
compliance of reports based on GRI guidelines, which are 
GAPIE (Degree of Full Compliance), GEE (Degree of 
Effective Disclosure) and GRIConformity (Degree of 
Compliance). Through these indices it is expected to 
evaluate the level of disclosure of sustainability data in 
organizational reports issued based on the GRI guidelines. 
The GRI guidelines are developed through a process that 
involves a network of stakeholders, including company 
representatives, workers, financial markets, auditors and 
specialists in several areas. One of the main aspirations of 
GRI is that sustainability reporting reaches the same level of 
accuracy, 
comparability, 
credibility 
and 
verifiability 
expected of a financial report. To define the content of 
reports, GRI uses three main principles called Indicators, 
Aspects and Categories to describe two types of content: 
general and specific [2]. 
The "Core" option contains the essential elements of a 
sustainability report. It provides grants for the organization 
to report the impact of their economic, environmental, social 
and governance performance, requiring a report of at least 
one indicator related to each material aspect identified. The 
"comprehensive" option requires disclosure of additional 
information about the strategy, analysis, governance, ethics 
and integrity of the organization. 
According to the GRI, indicators are qualitative or 
quantitative information associated with the organization. 
This provides information about the performance or 
economic, environmental and social impacts of the 
organization related to material aspects; Aspects relate to 
topics that each Category covers; and Categories represent 
each of the three macro-elements that comprise the GRI 
guidelines, which represent the dimensions of sustainability 
[12]. From these definitions, two are the types of GRI 
reports:  General Standard Disclosure and Specific Standard 
Disclosure. Based on the GRI guidelines, the authors Dias 
[7] and Carvalho and Siqueira [3] propose two indices for 
the analysis of compliance of sustainability reports: the 
degree of effective disclosure (GEE) and the degree of full 
compliance (GAPIE). The degree of effective disclosure 
(GEE) is intended to measure the percentage of the amount 
of data reported by the organization in relation to all data 
according to the GRI guidelines [3]. The degree of full 
compliance allows establishing the percentage of compliance 
of each company in relation to what was required by GRI 
[3]. For the treatment of data, first the data that organizations 
report on sustainability reports are classified according to the 
information required by the essential indicators of GRI; then, 
the calculations of GAPIE and GEE are made. For this 
classification, the criteria defined by Dias [7] and Carvalho 
and Siqueira [3] are followed, as shown in Table I and II. 
TABLE I. BASIS FOR INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION 
CATEGORY: SHOWN  
 
CLASSIFICATION 
 
ABREVIATION 
 
DEFINITION 
 
FULL 
COMPLIANCE 
 
 
FC 
When all the data 
required by the GRI-G4 
guidelines is provided 
by the organization. 
 
PARTIAL 
COMPLIANCE 
 
 
 PC 
When only part of the 
data required by the 
GRI-G4 guidelines is 
provided by the 
organization. 
 
 
DUBIOUS 
 
 
D 
When the data provided 
is not enough for the 
user to evaluate if the 
compliance is full or 
partial. 
 
 
INCONSISTENT 
 
 
I 
When the data provided 
by the organization is 
different from that 
required by GRI-G4 
guidelines. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
TABLE II. BASIS FOR INFORMATION CLASSIFICATION  
CATEGORY:  NOT SHOWN 
 
 
NOT 
AVAILABLE 
 
 
NA 
When the organization 
recognizes that the data 
required is relevant to its 
activities, but it still does 
not have conditions to 
provide it. 
 
 
NOT 
APPLICABLE 
 
 
 NAP 
When the organization 
recognizes that the data 
required is not relevant to 
its activities or business 
field. 
 
 
OMITTED WITH 
A REASON 
 
 
OR 
When the organization 
omits the data required by 
GRI-G4 guidelines, 
presenting a reason for 
such omission. 
 
 
OMITTED 
 
 
O 
 
When nothing is 
commented about the 
indicator, as if it did not 
exist. 
 
To calculate GAPIE, the total number of Full 
Compliance indicators ("FC"), i.e., the total indicators that 
had their content reported according to what is required by 
the GRI guidelines, is added to the total number of indicators 
omitted with a reason ("OR"), i.e., the indicators that the 
organization omitted from its report, but presented a reason 
for the omission, and divided by the total number of Core 
indicators (which are essential indicators for sustainability 
reporting) subtracted by the total number of indicators that 
are Not Applicable, "NAP", i.e. indicators that do not apply 
to the organization. Figure 2 shows the formula for the 
calculation of this index. 
 
 
Figure 2. GAPIE Formula. 
To calculate GEE, the total number of Full Compliance 
indicators ("FC") is divided by the total number of Core 
indicators subtracted by the total number of Not Applicable 
indicators "NAP", as shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. GEE Formula. 
Another way of assessing compliance is through the use 
of the GRIConformity index. This index is intended to 
compare the data reported by organizations to the data 
required by the GRI guidelines. Through the use of this 
index, the analyst/auditor can analyze and assess whether 
organizations disclose sustainability data in accordance with 
the guidelines. 
The next section presents the analytical processing 
operators based on these three indices, which will allow the 
auditing of sustainability reports based on the guidelines 
proposed by the GRI and the studies proposed by Dias [7] 
and Carvalho and Siqueira [3]. 
V. OPERATORS FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
The use of tools for the analytical processing of data 
(OLAP) to perform strategic analyses of an organization 
allows assisting stakeholders in identifying trends and 
patterns in order to better conduct their business.  
A language called LMDQL was proposed and aims to 
conduct analytical processing of multidimensional data 
expressed in XML documents connected by links [20]. 
  LMDQL is a language derived from Multidimensional 
Expression (MDX) [15][26] and executes OLAP queries on 
relational databases and XML-based documents. OLAP 
queries executed in the Mondrian server generate SQL 
queries, which are translated into XQuery with the 
Sql2Xquery driver [20]. The Sql2Xquery driver enables the 
suitability of relational OLAP servers to XML environments. 
LMDQL is designed to run on a data cube, i.e. a 
multidimensional structure of data representation [20] - 
constructed from a relational database or an XML database, 
defined by XBRL Dimensions documents [27]. 
Therefore, the Audit Services layer was designed to 
perform analytical processing (OLAP) on sustainability 
reports [20]. This paper proposes the use of Mondrian server 
to execute OLAP queries through an extension of LMDQL 
language, in order to manipulate sustainability data issued in 
GRI/XBRL reports. To make this possible, a Web Service to 
access the Mondrian server is proposed [18]. 
LMDQL has financial analytical operators, which allow 
(a) the acquisition of data in linkbases, which is a 
characteristic of XBRL taxonomies; (b) to execute analytical 
queries in a set of XML documents; (c) to execute queries 
based on the value or structure of the XML document; (d) to 
create operators based on other operators created at run time, 
(e) to perform horizontal, vertical and separatrix analyses 
and also analyses based on the proximity of data values [19] 
[20] and (f) fraud analysis (i.e. forensic analysis) in financial 
reports based on Benford's Law, 3-Sigma Rule, Z Test and 
Chi-Square [22] [23]. 
For the analytical processing of a sustainability 
document, considering the GRI guidelines and GAPIE, GEE 
and GRIConformity indices, three operators were specified: 
GRIConformity, GRIGapie and GRIGee. The LMDQL 
operators for sustainability auditing are presented In Figure 
4. The three operators (i.e. GRIConformity, GRIGapie and 
GRIGee) have a MemberSet type as a parameter, which 
refers to a member set of a data cube, according to the 
specifications of LMDQL operators.  
 
Figure 4. LMDQL Operators for Sustainability Auditing. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
To execute an LMDQL query based on these operators, a 
parameter is provided referring to the sustainability element 
(or a set of elements) contained in the sustainability report to 
be assessed, that we call Element. To analyze the chosen 
operator, a specific element can be used according to the 
needs of the analyst/auditor, such as [Element].[Aspect 
BoundaryLimitationOutsideOrganizationDescription]). If the 
auditor/analyst wishes to make the analysis of a set of 
elements, the keyword "children" must be used (which is 
native to the Mondrian server [18]), referencing all children 
members of the "Element" dimension (contained in the 
database), i.e. "[Element].children". In the tests carried out in 
this paper, the following dimensions were specified: (i) 
Entity, which refers to the name of the companies that issue 
sustainability reports; (ii) Document, which corresponds to 
sustainability documents that the company issues; (iii) 
Element, which refers to the elements that correspond to the 
sustainability indicators contained in these documents and 
(iv) Time, the time period to which the document belongs. 
An example of an LMDQL query is shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. OLAP query using an LMDQL operator for sustainability 
auditing 
 
In this query, the auditor informs which document he 
aims to analyze, which is specified in the Document 
dimension. Two types of documents have been defined, i.e. 
G4 Report and 10-Q, which refer to a sustainability and 
financial report, respectively. It is also necessary to specify 
the company that issued the financial report (e.g. 
[Entity].[hkpc], which is the company Hong Kong 
Productivity Council). The options "relational" and "XML" 
are attributes of the extension of the Mondrian server, which 
implements LMDQL, with which the analyst chooses on 
which database paradigm he wishes to execute the query [20] 
[22] [23]. 
To illustrate the use of operators in relational and XML 
environments, two databases are used to store sustainability 
reports: MySql [17], a relational  
database, and Exist [8], a 
native XML database; both were chosen for being open 
source and free. The logical model schema stored in the 
database must be informed in a mandatory XML 
configuration file of the Mondrian server [18]. 
In this example, in Figure 5, the GRIConformity operator 
executes a query to assess the compliance of the 
sustainability elements contained in XBRL/GRI documents 
with the elements specified by GRI as important indices for 
enterprise sustainability issues [10]-[12]. After executing the 
query, the operator classifies the elements as "yes" if they are 
in compliance, and "no" if they are not, as shown in Figures 
6 and 7, which respectively show the result of the 
compliance of the documents contained in the database 
which belongs to the company Hong Kong Productivity 
Council, and the non-compliance of the documents of 
Facebook company. Fields containing the character "-" 
indicate that there are no results for the query executed by 
the GRIConformity operator. 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of compliance of an LMDQL query with the 
GRIConformity operator  
 
Figure 7. Example of noncompliance of an LMDQL query with the 
GRIConformity operator. 
From the presented operators, it is possible to perform 
analytical processing of sustainability reports based on the 
XBRL-GRI taxonomy. They are therefore expected to assist 
in the continuous audit process of those reports, which will 
provide 
stakeholders 
with 
greater 
integrity 
of 
the 
organization’s sustainability information. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we presented a service framework to audit 
sustainability reports based on the GRI rules. This 
framework can contribute to the development of a model that 
is able to simplify the collection, analysis, comparison and 
disclosure of data related to the sustainability performance of 
organizations. For the analysis of reports an OLAP tool was 
presented, an extension of the Mondrian server [18] and 
LMDQL language [20], which allows the audit of XBRL 
reports based on the GRI guidelines, assessing their 
compliance, that is, if they meet the guidelines proposed. 
Continuous 
monitoring 
of 
sustainability 
reports 
of 
organizations can be performed with this tool. It is expected 
that through this work and the use of technology involving 
SOA and XBRL, the framework can bring greater reliability 
and security to stakeholders in decision-making, with regard 
to the fundamental dimensions of corporate sustainability 
that are: social, environmental and economic. This 
framework is a scale model that grows as the organization 
establishes excellence in sustainability, internationalization 
and standardization of data. For future work, we intend to 
raise the level of detail of the framework presented, in 
addition to implementing the GRIGapie and GRIGee 
operators. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C.E. Brown, J.A. Wong, and A. A. Baldwin, "A review and analysis 
of the Existing Research Streams in continuous auditing, " Journal of 
Emerging Technologies in Accounting, vol. 4, pp. 1-28, 2007 
[2] M. R. Camargos, “Análise do uso do modelo Global Reporting 
Initiative para elaboração do relatório de sustentabilidade das 
empresas de energia elétrica no Brasil,” Campinas, SP, 2012. 
[3] F. M. Carvalho, and J. R. M. Siqueira, “Análise da Utilização dos 
Indicadores Essenciais da Global Reporting Initiative nos Relatórios 
Sociais e Empresas Latino-Americanas”. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.atena.org.br/revista/ojs-2.2.3-
08/index.php/pensarcontabil/article/view/113/ 2016.04.14. 
[4] D. Y .Chan and, M. A. Vasarhelyi , “Innovation and practice of 
continuous 
auditing”. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Accounting 
Information Systems, 12(2), pp.152-160, 2011. 
[5] E. M. Cruz,  D . Costa,  and  P.C . Silva , “ Sustainability reports 
based on XBRL through a service-oriented architecture approach”. 
In: 3rd International Conference on Challenges in Environmental 
Science and Computer Engineering (CESCE 2014), 2014, London. 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Challenges in 
Environmental Science and Computer Engineering (CESCE 2014). 
[6] C. Qiushi, H. Zuoming, and H. Jibing , “A Collaborative Computer 
Auditing System under SOA-based Conceptual Model,” CFO, 2013. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/258814902_A_Collaborativ
e_Computer_Auditing_System_under_SOA-
based_Conceptual_Model/ . 2016.01.20 
[7] L. N.  S. Dias. “Análise da Utilização dos Indicadores do Global 
Reporting Initiative nos Relatórios Sociais em Empresas Brasileiras, ”  
2006. Dissertação (Mestrado em Ciências Contábeis) - FACC/UFRJ, 
Rio de Janeiro, 2006. FIBRIA. Relatórios de Sustentabilidade. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://livros01.livrosgratis.com.br/cp030028.pdf/ 2016.04.02 
[8] ExistDB. The Open Source Native XML Database. [Online]. 
Available from: http://exist-db.org/exist/apps/homepage/index.html. 
2016.04.03 
[9] F. P. Marzullo, “SOA na Prática Inovando o seu negócio por meio de 
soluções orientadas a serviços”. Novatec, 2009. 
[10] GRI, 
“Directrizes 
para 
a 
Elaboração 
de 
Relatórios 
de 
Sustentabilidade, ” Amsterdam, 2006.  
[11] GRI™ (2013). G4 XBRL Schema. [OnLine]. Available from: 
http://xbrl.globalreporting.org/2014-12-01/Forms/AllItems.aspx/ 
2016.04.03 
[12] GRI (2014) .  For the Guide Lines and Standard Setting - G4. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx/  2016.04.03 
[13]  A. Kanellou,  and  C. Spathis, “Auditing in enterprise system 
environment: 
a 
synthesis”.Journal 
of 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, 24(6), pp.494-519, 2011. 
[14]  C. C. Lin, F. Lin,  and  D. Liang  , “An analysis of using state of the 
art technologies to implement real-time continuous assurance, 
”.Proceedings - 2010 6th World Congress on Services. Miami, 
Flórida,  2010, pp. 415-422, ISBN: 978-1-4244-8199-6 
[15]  MDX.  Multidimensional Expressions (MDX) Reference. [Online].  
Available 
from: 
https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ms145506.aspx/ 2016.04.03 
[16] U. S Murthy, and S. M Groomer, “A Continuous Auditing Web 
Services Model for XML-based Accounting Systems,” International 
Journal of Accounting Information Systems, No.5,  pp. 139-63, 2004. 
[17] MySQL.  [Online]. Available from: https://www.mysql.com/. 
2016.04.03 
[18] Pentaho. 
Logical 
model. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://mondrian.pentaho.com/documentation/schema.php#Cubes_and
_dimensions/ 2016.04.03 
[19] P. C. Silva, and V. C. Times, “LMDQL:Link-based and 
Multidimensional Query Language”. World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C) 
Website 
(2009). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/2009/03/xbrl/soi/LMDQL.pdf/ 2016.04.03  
[20] P. C. Silva,  and V. C. Times ,  “LMDQL: Link-based and 
Multidimensional Query Language”. In: DOLAP 09 - ACM Twelfth 
International Workshop on Data Warehousing and OLAP, 2009, 
Hong Kong. ACM Twelfth International Workshop on Data 
Warehousing and OLAP, 2009. 
[21] P. C. Silva,  and V. C. Times, R. R. Ciferri and C. D Ciferri , 
“Analytical Processing Over XML and XLink. International Journal 
of Data Warehousing and Mining (IJDWM)”. Volume 8, Issue 1. IGI 
Global, 2012. 
[22] M. A. P Silva, and P. C. Silva , “Financial Forensic Analysis”.13th 
IADIS International Conference WWW/INTERNET (ICWI). Porto, 
Portugal, 2014. ISBN: 978-989-8533-24-1.[Online].  Available from: 
http://www.iadisportal.org/digital-library/financial-forensic-analysis/. 
2016.04.03 
[23] M. A. P. Silva,  and  P. C. Silva  ,  “Analytical Processing for 
Forensic Analysis”. In: 1st International Workshop on Compliance, 
Evolution and Security in Cross-Organizational Processes (CESCOP 
2014), Ulm, Germany. 18th IEEE International EDOC Conference 
Workshops (EDOCW’14). DOI: 10.1109/EDOCW.2014.60. 
[24] S. Leibs, “Sustainability reporting: Earth in the balance sheet,” CFO, 
2007. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cfo.com/article.cfm/10234097/ 2016.04.03 
[25] P. Sikka, S.  Filling, and P. Liew ,  “The audit crunch: reforming 
auditing”. ManagerialAuditing Journal, 24(2), 135-155, 2009. 
[26] G . Spofford ,  “MDX solutions: with Microsof SQL Server Analysis 
Services”. New York: J. Wiley,  p.163, 2001.  
[27] XBRL International Inc (2012).  XBRL Dimensions 1.0.[Online].  
Available from:  http://www.xbrl.org/specification/dimensions/rec-
2012-01-25/dimensions-rec-2006-09-18+corrected-errata-2012-01-
25-clean.html/ 2016.04.03 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

