Context Factors for Situational Service Identification Methods 
 
René Börner, Matthias Goeken 
Process Lab, IT Governance Practice Network 
Frankfurt School of Finance & Management 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany 
[r.boerner;m.goeken]@fs.de 
Thomas Kohlborn, Axel Korthaus 
Information Systems Discipline 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
[t.kohlborn;axel.korthaus]@qut.edu.au
 
 
Abstract—Service identification is one of the earliest and very 
crucial activities in a service engineering lifecycle and requires 
adequate methodological support in order to be successful. 
Although there are numerous service identification methods to 
be found in the literature, most of them take a one-size-fits-all 
approach that fails to acknowledge the broad variety of 
concrete circumstances that can form the organizational 
context in which these methods need to be applied. In this 
paper, we argue that there is a need for configurable service 
identification methods that can be tailored to their particular 
application contexts using situational method engineering. As a 
first step towards this goal, we analyze two explorative case 
studies and related literature to derive a basic set of relevant 
context factors that can influence and determine the final 
configuration of situational service identification methods from 
available method fragments. Adapting service identification 
methods to concrete project situations will improve their 
applicability and lead to a better service design.  
Keywords 
- 
Service-oriented 
architectures; 
service 
identification; service analysis and design; situational method 
engineering; context factors  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Service orientation is a highly recognized paradigm in 
enterprise architecture. There are a number of expected 
benefits related to service-oriented architectures (SOA) in a 
technical and in a business-oriented sense. Although the 
business-oriented benefits, like flexibility, reusability and 
standardization, are of high importance [1], up to now, 
development of SOAs is mainly technically driven so that 
most approaches consider technical aspects in the first place 
[2]. 
The Organization for the Advancement of Structured 
Information Standards (OASIS) defines service-oriented 
architecture as a “paradigm for organizing and utilizing 
distributed capabilities that may be under the control of 
different ownership domains” [3]. Since the generic term 
“capabilities” can refer to both business functions and 
application functionalities, this definition supports a holistic 
SOA view that accommodates for two specific types of 
services: 
The 
term 
business 
service 
describes 
an 
autonomous, transformational capability that is offered to 
and consumed by external or internal customers for their 
benefit [4]. These services can have different levels of 
granularity ranging from comprehensive offerings (e.g., 
purchasing services) to fine-granular services (e.g., address 
verifications) [5]. While flexibility and reusability usually 
increase when services become smaller, performance tends 
to deteriorate [6]. The second type, software services, 
enables a close business and IT alignment in order to support  
business services and thus the agility of organizations [7]. 
Software services expose application functionalities that can 
be re-used and composed based on business needs. In order 
to implement SOAs successfully, an adequate identification 
of these services is essential. 
For the last couple of years many authors have been 
looking at the identification of services. A distinctive feature 
of identification approaches is the direction of the analysis. 
Some authors start from a Business Process Management 
perspective and follow a so-called top-down approach [8, 9]. 
Business processes are identified and subsequently broken 
down to activities. Finally, IT services are designed to 
support business functionality. In contrast, [10] start from a 
technical point of view and identify services bottom-up. 
Based on an asset analysis, e.g., the invocation frequency of 
certain applications can be analyzed to identify potential 
services. 
Usually, 
neither 
bottom-up 
nor 
top-down 
approaches are used in their pure form. Thus, many authors  
advocate hybrid service identification approaches that utilize 
techniques covering the analysis of both business processes 
and existing IT infrastructure [11, 12]. A comparison of  
further approaches can be found in [13]. 
Interestingly, most existing methods to identify services 
are based on a “one-size-fits-all” approach (for an overview 
see [14, 15]), i.e., they do not consider a configuration of 
methods depending on different circumstances such as the 
goals or various context factors of an SOA implementation. 
Even if context factors are considered, the scope of possible 
configurations is usually very limited [16]. Situational 
method engineering (SME) offers an opportunity to engineer 
service identification methods depending on situation-
specific context factors of the project at hand. For this 
purpose, so-called method fragments are configured to 
methods that are adaptable to different situations. 
The objective of this paper is to explore, which context 
factors affect the selection of method fragments for service 
identification and how they influence the development of 
situational methods. A qualitative analysis approach was 
chosen to analyze data from two case studies inspired by the 
constant comparative analysis method of grounded theory 
[17] in order to identify relevant context factors for service 
identification methods. 
35
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In 
Section 2, scope and methodology of this paper are 
discussed. Section 3 describes the conducted case studies. 
The fourth Section will identify relevant context factors and 
their influence on fragment selection. Finally, Section 5 
concludes the paper with a summary, current limitations and 
an outlook for further research. 
II. 
SITUATIONAL METHOD ENGINEERING IN SERVICE 
IDENTIFICATION 
This paper can be seen as part of a broader research 
program. The latter results in a comprehensive meta method 
to configure situational methods for service identification 
including the description of possible situations and available 
fragments. Following [18], we assume that “a richer 
understanding of a research topic will be gained by 
combining several methods together in a single piece of 
research or research program” (p. 241). Thus, in our research 
process, we combine the two research methods case study 
research and design science research. Within this context, 
the identification of context factors through case studies and 
the construction of a method supported by principles from 
SME can each be seen as separate research projects. Jointly, 
they are part of the research program, i.e., the development 
of a meta method for the configuration of situational 
methods for service identification (Fig. 1). 
Despite the popularity of SOA, there is only little 
understanding of how to convey all advantages frequently 
mentioned in related literature. Moreover, little is known 
about how context factors impact service identification 
approaches in SOA. This corresponds to a low uptake of 
empirical research in systems and software development in 
general [19]. 
Against this background, we believe that qualitative case 
study research can make a useful contribution. Case studies 
are particularly relevant for research in its “early, formative 
stages” [20, 21] which applies to the field of SOA (see also 
[22] and [23]). As case studies can be descriptive and 
explorative in nature, they are supposed to give insights into 
how context factors influence service identification.  
Service identification is one of the earliest activities in a 
service engineering process, which covers the whole 
lifecycle of a service. It is of particular importance, as any 
errors made during this activity can flow through to and 
build up in the design and implementation phases, which 
results in increased cost due to necessary rework [24]. A 
review of service analysis methods in general and service 
identification in particular by [14] reveals that none of the 
recently published methods is comprehensive and integrated 
enough to cover both SOA concepts (business and software 
services) to an adequate extent. However, as pointed out by 
the authors, different methods can complement each other 
and may have specific characteristics that make them more 
suitable in certain contexts. 
 
Scope of this paper
Situations determined
by context factors
Method fragments
Situational method for service identification
Case study
research project
Design science
research project
Research program: Development of a meta method for the configuration 
of situational methods for service identification
 
Figure 1.  Research projects and research methods 
For several years there have been efforts to guide the 
development of such methods in order to guarantee a high 
level of quality. To give this guidance is the task of method 
engineering (ME). ME is a discipline in information systems 
research meant to “design, construct and adapt methods (…) 
for systems development” [25]. The most popular 
approaches to ME [26-29] all identify activities, roles, results 
and techniques as important elements of methods [30].  
Based on the fact that a given method m constructed at 
the time t1 cannot fit all conceivable conditions and 
circumstances when it is used at a future time t2, the concept 
of 
situational 
method 
engineering 
emerged. 
The 
configuration of methods in SME is based on situations, i.e. 
once a situation is identified, a suitable method is configured. 
Reference [31] discusses how situations can be described 
satisfactorily. It concludes that context factors of concrete 
service identification projects are important for identifying 
situations in order to configure situational methods. 
To provide for the configurability of a method, so-called 
fragments are constructed and afterwards configured 
depending on the situation [32, 33]. Reference [34] defines 
method fragments as “standard building blocks based on a 
coherent part of a method. A situational method can be 
constructed by combining a number of method fragments” 
(p.360). For the purpose of this paper, the notion of method 
fragment will be defined as any reasonable combination of 
method elements, i.e., activities, roles, results and 
techniques. 
The 
development 
of 
method 
fragments 
particularly for the purpose of service identification is part of 
our research program but out of the scope of this paper (Fig. 
1). However, Table 1 will give indications on how the 
selection of appropriate method fragments is influenced by 
the context factors identified in Section 4. 
Based on two case studies, this paper elaborates on 
relevant context factors for service identification projects and 
their influence on the configuration of situational methods.  
Identifying situations through context factors is thus on 
important pillar of a meta method that supports the design of 
methods for service identification.  
36
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

III. 
CASE STUDY DESCRIPTIONS 
The following case studies describe two SOA 
implementation projects conducted in Australian companies, 
namely Suncorp and the Securities Industry Research Centre 
of Asia-Pacific (SIRCA). The explorative nature of the case 
studies was meant to discover relevant context factors for the 
identification of services. At the same time, the significantly 
diverse settings of both cases opened up a continuum of 
instantiations for these context factors [35]. At Suncorp, 
researchers from the Queensland University of Technology 
(QUT) conducted an action research study. They actively 
participated in the project and helped test and apply a service 
analysis and design methodology developed by the 
researchers. In the second case study, several research 
methodologies were used. One of the most important sources 
of evidence have been interviews with SIRCA’s employees 
and researchers from the University of New South Wales 
(UNSW), which were conducted shortly after the project had 
been completed. The interviews have been transcribed and 
analyzed afterwards. 
A. Suncorp 
In the context of an Australian ARC Linkage project 
titled “Service Ecosystems Management for Collaborative 
Process Improvement” (ARC Linkage Grant: LP0669244), 
some of the authors have developed a comprehensive service 
analysis and design (SAD) methodology for both business 
and software services. Thus, the SAD methodology used in 
this case study follows a hybrid approach to service 
identification. The first part covers the identification and 
analysis of business services by detailing, adapting, and 
consolidating existing service analysis approaches that focus 
on the business domain of an organization. This part is 
structured into four distinct phases, each comprising a 
specific set of activities that may use the outputs of previous 
phases as inputs. Subsequently, the second part of their 
approach describes how software services can be identified 
and analyzed that support business services in order to 
achieve close business and IT alignment. Similar to the first 
part of the consolidated approach, this part is structured into 
distinct phases, each comprising specific activities. A 
detailed description of the methodology is provided in [36]. 
The experiences gained through this exercise will build the 
foundation for the following discussion.  
Suncorp is a diversified company in the financial services 
sector. As one of Australia’s leaders in banking, insurance, 
investment and superannuation focusing on retail customers 
and small to medium businesses, the Suncorp Group is 
Australia’s sixth largest bank and third largest insurer. The 
Suncorp case study can be subdivided into three phases as 
the organization went through different change programs 
related to their take on service orientation.  
The first phase (1) focuses on service identification for 
integrating different systems. Suncorp had started a Claims 
Business Model Program some time ago with the intent to 
identify process improvements that would result in reduced 
leakage, reduced payments of ineligible claims, and lower 
handling costs. Suncorp’s current systems were not flexible 
enough to support the required changes [37]. It was then 
decided that the new claims process should be implemented 
in a new insurance claims management system from 
Guidewire Software, the ClaimCenter application [38]. 
While the initial implementation was in support of personal 
home claims, implementation projects for claims in worker's 
compensation, personal motor, commercial property and 
others followed. In the ClaimCenter project, integration with 
a large number of external systems was required and thirteen 
development teams (including the external vendor and an 
offshore team) using different development methods had to 
be coordinated. The project team decided to use an SOA 
approach to integrate diverse systems such as policy, 
payments, receipting and claims. A standardization of 
interfaces was ought to improve reusability [37].  
Against this background, the QUT project team came in 
and presented the consolidated SAD methodology to a 
solution architecture team from Suncorp’s Business 
Technology group, which started the second phase (2). 
Suncorp had found that their approach to SOA and service 
analysis and design was rather ad-hoc and very much driven 
by bottom-up integration requirements of their pilot projects, 
potentially lacking strong alignment of the service designs 
with the business processes:  
“The current process that we follow tends to be driven by 
the functional requirements and data requirements of the 
consumer. This results in a very entity-driven service in 
which the consumer of the service needs to understand a lot 
more about the state and context of the call that they are 
making.” (Suncorp Solution Architect) 
A study protocol specified the objectives and the scope of 
the collaboration as well as the timeframe and the planned 
deliverables. In a first step, the AR study primarily focused 
on the identification of software services. The “motor 
claims” business process was chosen as input for the 
software service preparation and identification steps of the 
SAD methodology developed by QUT. To keep the scope 
manageable, two sub-processes, namely “claims intake” and 
“assessment” were selected. The researchers were provided 
with Suncorp’s “motor claims” process models on different 
levels of hierarchy and additional business artifacts including 
the SOA Roadmap, the Insurance Domain Model and the 
ClaimCenter Hub System Architecture Specification. Based 
on this input, the researchers used the service preparation and 
identification steps prescribed by the SAD methodology for 
the two sub-processes and produced two reports that 
included the resulting service designs.   
The third phase (3) with Suncorp extended the work that 
has been done previously, by applying the complete SAD 
methodology [36]. In particular, as part of a collaboration 
project between industry and university, three industry 
students applied the SAD methodology to derive business 
and software services starting from Suncorp’s business 
strategy and capabilities. The project was driven by the 
desire to identify software services that not only support 
processes but also represent constituent elements of business 
services, which in turn needed to be identified first. 
Consulting QUT researchers along the project, the three 
students were able to apply the prescribed methodology and 
present their results to the business and IT audiences within 
37
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

Suncorp who largely benefited from the lessons learned of 
this exercise. A detailed report was provided at the end of the 
project. 
B. SIRCA 
In the context of the project “Ad-hoc DAta Grids 
Environments” (ADAGE), researchers at the UNSW 
implemented a service-oriented architecture for SIRCA. The 
project aimed at providing researchers an easier retrieval and 
analysis of heterogeneous data from different sources (grid 
environment) spontaneously in an unforeseeable fashion (ad-
hoc). Neither business processes nor SOA were the core 
focus of the project. The former were hardly considered at all 
whereas the latter was chosen as the preferred architectural 
paradigm of this project. However, services (and their 
identification) were used as a means to meet SIRCA’s 
requirements rather than being the subject of analysis 
themselves. 
In ADAGE, services were created based on the available 
data. This implied a technical understanding of services, 
which is also reflected by the synonymous use of the terms 
“service” and “web service” by project team members. 
Hence, the scope of service identification in this project was 
limited to software services.  
SIRCA provides a huge data repository containing 
historical financial market data such as news and trading 
data. Their aim is to supply this data to researchers especially 
at Australian and New Zealand universities. Thus, their 
business model is fairly simple and is covered by one 
business process only.  
“Our processes are fairly (…) atomistic. In that way, we 
are very simple outfit, we are a data repository, we collect 
lots of data, we do fairly substandard processing to it to 
normalize it and make it easily accessible. And then people 
access the data with some fairly straight-forward enterprise 
in that regard.” (Representative of SIRCA) 
SIRCA employees were not thinking in terms of business 
processes, so that no model was delivered that could have 
been analyzed in the course of service identification. 
SIRCA’s management however had some requirements in 
mind that should be fulfilled by services. Unfortunately, 
these were not documented, which makes traceability 
difficult. Requirements were communicated to the project 
team in scheduled weekly meetings and workshops. Service 
candidates were identified on the basis of these meetings and 
prototyped. In an iterative and incremental approach the 
functionality of these candidates was adjusted to finally meet 
SIRCA’s requirements. In some cases, services were 
completely dismissed and new ones had to be created. A 
close 
collaboration 
between 
SIRCA’s 
research 
and 
development department and UNSW’s project team was a 
key to ensure the successful identification of services. 
SIRCA’s management did not aim at the implementation 
of an SOA in particular. The idea of services was basically 
advocated by UNSW’s project team. Thus, there was no 
know-how on SIRCA’s side as far as SOAs are concerned. 
On the outset of the project, a funding for three years was 
provided. At the end of the project in December 2009, funds 
for further six months were provided to implement the 
prototype and make it accessible to SIRCA’s customers. 
First and foremost, the search for services was driven by 
the idea to retrieve and integrate data from different sources. 
In a second step, project members came up with ideas, which 
services could support researchers in analyzing data. This 
included, for example, building time series of financial data, 
merge data from different sources and visualize events. Only 
after that the identified and implemented services should be 
offered to third parties to support their business processes. 
Clearly, this was a requirements-driven bottom-up approach. 
Goals included the provision of a graphical user interface 
(GUI) to customers enabling them to directly invoke services 
in an ad-hoc fashion to analyze financial market data. This 
implies a distinct degree of customer interaction which 
influences the identification of services significantly. 
Certainly, SIRCA’s case is not a typical example of service 
identification projects. Because of its rather extreme 
character it helps to identify possible instances of context 
factors that usually cannot be found in typical cases. 
IV. 
CONTEXT FACTORS IN SERVICE IDENTIFICATION 
In order to engineer situational methods, relevant context 
factors that determine different categories of situations have 
to be identified. Hence, in this section we build on the case 
studies described previously to identify these context factors. 
The presentation of each context factor is structured as 
follows. Firstly, observations from the case studies are the 
basis for identifying context factors. Secondly, findings in 
related literature are briefly discussed where applicable to 
support the relevance of the encountered factors. Thirdly, an 
analysis of how these context factors influence the selection 
of fragments is conducted. Table 1 summarizes the results. 
In SIRCA’s case, all services were clearly meant to be 
exposed to researchers from associated universities, i.e. to 
external service consumers. A graphical user interface 
(GUI) provides the opportunity for users to combine these 
services. Thus, users can choose themselves which services 
they need to use in order to analyze their data. In Suncorp’s 
first phase services were identified to integrate system 
functionalities. Hence, service consumers were purely 
internal. Functionalities that had to be accessed by using 
different applications were wrapped and can now be invoked 
as services. Conversely, the second and third phase aimed at 
both internal and external service consumers as certain 
services were intended to be used by end-consumers, internal 
systems and/or entities such as departments within Suncorp. 
As shown in the case studies, services can be provided 
for different service consumers, e.g. other divisions 
(internally), third parties (externally) or both. Services can be 
used to integrate heterogeneous enterprise applications [9, 
39] and simplify the access to certain functionalities for staff, 
i.e. for internal customers only. If this is known a priori, a 
number of activities and results such as the creation of an 
inter-organizational service map are not applicable in this 
situation. Moreover, there might be legal constraints that 
only apply if services are offered to third parties. Passing on 
customer data for instance must be permitted by the 
customer in some countries.  
38
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

TABLE I.  
CONTEXT FACTORS AND THEIR INFLUENCE ON FRAGMENT SELECTION 
Context Factor 
Parameter Value 
Influence on Fragment Selection 
Service consumer 
- internal 
- external 
- both 
- inter-organizational service maps are not applicable for purely internal services 
- “line of visibility” particularly important for external consumers 
- data flow analysis combined with legal check for externally provided services 
Budget 
- restrictive budget 
- generous funding 
- fragments supporting strategic aspects might not be used due to a restrictive budget 
- a generous funding enables comprehensive use of fragments 
- restrictive budgets often result in the selection of IT-oriented fragments that demand less 
resources 
SOA concepts 
- business services 
- software services 
- hierarchy of services 
- BPM techniques and respective fragments are essential for a business service-oriented 
identification 
- technical fragments such as asset analysis might be sufficient for the identification of software 
services 
- a comprehensive, hybrid approach using fragments with both top down and bottom up 
techniques is necessary for a hierarchy of services 
SOA maturity level 
- SIMM level 1-3 
- SIMM level 4-7 
- fragments focused on SOA governance have only little meaning for maturity levels 1-3 
- for SIMM levels 4-7 e.g. inter-organizational service maps can be important 
Compliance 
- general laws 
- industry-specific 
regulations 
- internal policies 
- all organizations have to ensure compliance with general laws such as consumer data privacy 
and must use respective fragments when service consumers are outside the company 
- a fragment that analyzes the necessity of industry-specific approaches should always be used 
- depending on the industry, additional fragments are needed 
- if there are internal policies, fragments that e.g. ensure consistent naming of services have to 
be applied 
IT department 
- existent 
- not existent 
- inputs like architectural concepts are only available from IT departments and restrict the use of 
method fragments 
- in the absence of an IT department, fragments are not applicable if they demand roles such as 
IT administrator 
Interaction 
- customer interaction 
- employee interaction 
- for the interaction with employees, roles prescribed by fragments have to be available 
- fragments delivering swim lane diagrams and analyzing the “line of visibility” are particularly 
useful if customer interaction is pivotal 
Thus, fragments that demand an analysis of respective 
laws and regulations are only necessary where such data is 
passed on to third parties. An analysis of consumer 
interaction can be important for internal and external service 
provision. A fragment analyzing the “line of visibility” is 
much more important if services are exposed to external 
customers [11] and would add lots of value in cases like 
SIRCA’s. However, they are less relevant in a context as 
given in Suncorp’s first phase. 
In both projects the budget seemed to play an important 
role and we perceived that budgeting has a significant impact 
when it comes to choosing necessary fragments of a method 
for service identification. Generally, a setting as encountered 
in SIRCA’s case with a budget that allows for an extensive 
time frame of three years provides the opportunity for a 
thorough and systematic application of identification 
methods. You would expect the utilization of many 
techniques in order to ensure a high quality of implemented 
services. A detailed analysis of all available strategic and 
technical documents would be typical in such circumstances. 
However, in SIRCA’s case the absence of such documents 
naturally dominated the generous time scope and made the 
application of many techniques impossible. Again, the head 
of research and development certainly devoted enough 
resources in SIRCA’s case but still failed this broad analysis. 
The following citation is an excerpt of an interview 
conducted for the analysis of the ADAGE project. 
“We didn’t do the asset identification, because we didn’t 
have anyone who knew about that, but if we had then, we 
would have done it. So you are constrained by the cost it 
takes to develop, but also you were constrained by people’s 
skills.” (Researcher at the UNSW) 
While the first project was funded internally, the second 
and third phases at Suncorp were basically developed in a 
collaborative environment between Suncorp and QUT based 
on mutual in-kind contributions. As such, the phases could 
be treated as pilots and were not associated with any costs 
other than research and development project budget for 
Suncorp. Budget information about the first phase is 
confidential and cannot be reported here. However, due to 
the partly academic character of these projects, funding 
restrictions were not a problem. At Suncorp, this availability 
of resources was used to apply QUT’s identification method 
diligently.  
Literature broadly confirms that the budget has 
implications on the number of available staff, the time 
pressure and the possibility to incorporate external help from 
consultants [40].The higher the project sponsor’s position in 
the company’s hierarchy, the more likely is a generous 
funding. This allows for a proper analysis especially of 
strategic aspects and the inclusion of business processes and 
a comprehensive use of fragments. An initiation of a service 
identification project by the middle management (which is 
commonly accompanied by smaller budgets) often results in 
more pragmatic or technically-driven SOA implementations. 
Fragments dealing with Business Process Management as 
well as business process driven approaches (top down) are 
likely to be omitted in such cases. Instead, technically-
oriented 
fragments 
analyzing 
applications 
and 
IT 
functionalities (bottom up) are used since they often promise 
quicker results. To make up for limited employee skills, a 
39
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

larger budget is necessary because the company has to rely 
on external support. If funding is limited, certain fragments 
cannot be used due to this lack of skills. 
Indeed, it is worth discussing if the budget is a factor as 
such and can be put on the same level as the other factors. In 
some cases, services might be identified without considering 
the budget available for their implementation. Only after the 
service identification process, a prioritization (depending on 
budget restrictions) is conducted [41]. However, we argue 
that fragments dealing, e.g., with value analyses are parts of 
the service identification method. These fragments are more 
likely to be selected if budget restrictions are tough which 
qualifies the budget as context factor. 
The case studies showed clearly that different 
understandings of services based on different SOA concepts 
influence 
the 
proceeding 
of 
service 
identification 
significantly. In Suncorp’s first phase aiming at the 
integration of different systems, the underlying technical 
SOA understanding implied a focus that lay purely on 
developing reusable software services. As part of the second 
phase – with a Business Process Management perspective in 
mind – software services that support business processes or 
at least sub-processes were the goal of the analysis. The third 
phase at Suncorp focused on identifying software services 
that support business services. Rarely, the focus on software 
services is as clear as in SIRCA’s case.  
A system integration approach like in Suncorp’s first 
phase concentrated on software services, so that method 
fragments 
reflecting 
a 
more 
business-related 
SOA 
understanding and targeting the identification of business 
services were not considered. In the second phase, service 
identification had to include activities related to the analysis 
of process models and involved such fragments with not only 
IT-related, but also business-related staff roles. In Suncorp’s 
third project both SOA concepts have been addressed. If the 
service identification is limited to a rather technical point of 
view like in SIRCA’s case, the set of method fragments to be 
considered will be limited. Frequently, a hierarchy of 
services is the outcome of an identification process [42]. 
Higher-level services that support business processes 
compose finer-grained software services that adhere to the 
technical preconditions of underlying systems and data. In 
order to achieve this more complex type of an SOA, a 
broader range of method fragments has to be used 
complementarily. This is reflected in many hybrid (or “meet-
in-the-middle”) approaches that can be found in related 
literature [13, 15].  
We observed different degrees of previous experience in 
the examined cases as far as SOA and service orientation is 
concerned. Based on this observation, we concluded that the 
SOA maturity level a company has achieved plays a role in 
the configuration of methods for service identification. 
SIRCA did not have any services at all when the project was 
initiated. At Suncorp, SOA maturity can be considered as 
relatively low. First projects had been conducted in the area 
of implementing software services. However, these projects 
did not aim at understanding business requirements and their 
impact on service-orientation but rather understanding the 
integration requirements of existing applications. It can be 
conjectured that the maturity related to the adoption of 
service-oriented concepts will increase over time, which will 
change the scope of the SOA understanding and 
consequently the way service identification has to be 
conducted, as can be seen in the two latter Suncorp phases. 
The SOA maturity level can be distinguished following 
the Service Integration Maturity Model (SIMM) by [43]. 
Levels 1-3 describe a rather low service orientation whereas 
companies with a SIMM level of 4-7 are more advanced in 
the field of SOA. If the latter is the case, an analysis of 
service maps among different divisions of a company can be 
essential to build an enterprise-wide SOA [44]. A fragment 
providing such an analysis cannot be sensibly used if there is 
no service orientation and subsequently (almost) no services. 
The same is true for all fragments dealing with SOA 
governance and inter-organizational aspects of SOA. If the 
SIMM level is low, fragments that deliver, e.g., inter-
organizational service maps cannot reasonably be applied. 
Thus, the selection of appropriate fragments is influenced by 
the SIMM level of a company. 
Compliance issues can arise from both legal obligations 
and regulatory restrictions as well as from internal policies 
and may require corresponding service identification method 
fragments that address these issues. In SIRCA’s case no 
particular regulatory or legal requirements had to be 
considered. However, the Reuters market data provided by 
SIRCA must not be used by everyone. It might only be used 
for academic purposes. The academic institution has to pay a 
subscription fee to SIRCA to give their employees access to 
the data. Hence, restricted access to data and the intended use 
of services must be considered when services are identified. 
As far as Suncorp is concerned, for example the general 
insurance reform act and related laws and regulations issued 
by the Treasury Department of the Australian Government 
are industry-specific requirements. Since implemented 
services in Suncorp’s case are exposed to customers, 
confidential treatment of sensitive customer data had to be 
guaranteed by a proper service design. Furthermore, as 
already indicated, Suncorp generally follows an agile 
approach to developing services. Thus, methods related to 
the identification, design and implementation of services 
have to comply with the agile paradigm.  
In case services are provided to third parties, a fragment 
that guarantees customer data privacy and security has to be 
applied. Therefore, interactions with and data flows towards 
all service consumers have to be analyzed. Certain industries 
such as banking, insurance or pharmaceuticals have to 
adhere to additional, stricter regulations and should use 
respective fragments. Internal policies – such as restrictions 
on software development methods – can make some 
fragments inapplicable. Other fragments may be necessary to 
fulfil for instance internal naming conventions. 
In a small company that lacks an IT department (like 
SIRCA), methods have to be adapted to accommodate for 
this circumstance. Responsibility for IT is commonly 
distributed all over the company and departments tend to 
implement isolated IT solutions or so-called silos. Larger 
organizations like Suncorp are usually structured along the 
lines of business but have an IT division that takes care of a 
40
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

company-wide IT architecture and infrastructure. Hence, the 
existence of a designated IT department and thus the degree 
of centralization of the IT infrastructure is an important 
context variable. 
On the one hand, a high degree of centralization or the 
existence of a central division supervising and governing IT 
implementation throughout a company usually leads to more 
transparency. Frequently, at least some information on 
applications and data is readily available. This can be used as 
input for service identification method fragments. On the 
other hand, some fragments demand certain roles such IT 
administrators or newly designed units consisting of business 
and IT employees (see also [45]). In a small company that 
lacks an IT department, these method fragments are often not 
applicable. The company size (frequently considered to have 
an important influence on SOA implementations [46]) and 
the geographic scope of operations are thus closely linked to 
the existence of a central IT department and subsequently not 
considered as context factors themselves. 
Due to the fact that in all cases participation, exchange 
and contribution of service consumers differed notably, we 
hypothesized that varying degrees and forms of interaction 
with both customers and employees necessitate the use of 
different method fragments. In SIRCA’s case, for instance, 
employees are not directly involved in service delivery 
because the services are very fine-grained and fully 
automated. The coarser-grained services are, the greater is 
the possibility that they are only semi-automated or manual 
and subsequently interact with employees. Customer 
interaction is of high importance in SIRCA’s case because 
the ad-hoc composition of services is a primary goal. 
However, due to their fine-grained nature, services 
themselves are executed independently from users, i.e., no 
customer interferes directly in a service. At Suncorp, 
employees were only involved to showcase the developed 
methodology and gain information about current practices at 
Suncorp. As part of the third project, different employees at 
Suncorp were involved to identify business services. 
Getting access to and involvement of business roles was 
difficult in Suncorp’s case but required by the used method 
fragments. Where this is impossible, a different method 
configuration is necessary. In general, a customer interaction 
can be obligatory in some places or can happen “on demand” 
if required by the service or desired by the customer [47]. In 
automated services possible customer interaction has to be 
foreseen and planned for. If customer interaction is a major 
issue for the identification of services in a situation at hand, 
related method fragments are crucial for a successful 
implementation. One example are swim lane diagrams that 
show interfaces to customers. 
All context factors described above were found in the 
two case studies. Their effect on the selection of method 
fragments for service identification is summarized in Table 
1. Particularly the case study at SIRCA revealed some more 
potential context factors. Since their relevance could not be 
observed in the phases at Suncorp, these factors were omitted 
from the discussion in this paper. Probably, there are 
interdependencies and relationships between the identified 
context factors. Analyzing these relationships and identifying 
relevant combinations that determine the situational 
configuration of methods is out of the scope of this paper and 
will be the focus of future work. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Not only literature but also experience shows that 
methods in information systems research should be 
configurable depending on the situation at hand, i.e., in a 
situation-specific way. This is also true for service 
identification methods in service-oriented architectures. In 
order to support a situation-specific configuration of such 
methods, situations have to be defined by context factors. 
The latter determine which method fragments should be used 
in the course of an identification process. Based on 
qualitative research using grounded theory, the data of two 
case studies was analyzed in this paper to identify seven 
context factors, compare them with existing literature and 
describe how actual instances of these factors can influence 
the selection of method fragments. Due to the explorative 
nature of the two case studies, there is no guarantee that the 
derived list of factors is comprehensive. Further case studies 
might reveal other relevant factors. Moreover, the relevance 
of the identified factors cannot be proven by our case studies. 
Only the application of a complete situational method to a 
service identification project could attest their relevance. 
As a prerequisite for situational methods, method 
fragments that can be combined have to be created. Thus, 
either parts of existing methods have to be identified as 
feasible method fragments or new fragments have to be 
created [48]. Designing these fragments to meet the 
requirements of situation-specific service identification is left 
to future research. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate 
which activities, techniques, roles, results and sequences can 
be combined reasonably. The so designed method fragments 
have to be configured to suit concrete situations that can be 
characterized by the context factors identified in this paper. 
Hereby, interdependencies and influences among context 
factors have to be analyzed. As mentioned previously, a 
concrete instantiation of one context factor can dominate 
other factors in the selection of one fragment over another. 
When exactly this is the case or how to weigh situational 
factors to come to a best possible selection of fragments must 
be elaborated in more detail. 
Finally, a comprehensive situational method for service 
identification needs to be developed. It should define how to 
configure existing method fragments depending on the 
situation at hand. The herein identified context factors are 
critical to identify these situations. In order to evaluate the 
quality of so configured methods, more case studies should 
be carried out. In contrast to the two explorative case studies 
used to derive situational factors, further case studies should 
apply a newly created situational method to prove its 
applicability and evaluate its concept. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Parts of this research have been funded by a research 
project within the Australian Research Council Linkage 
Schema (grant code LP0669244), including financial support 
from SAP Research and the Queensland Government. 
41
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Durst and M. Daum, "Erfolgsfaktoren serviceorientierter 
Architekturen," HMD - Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 44, no. 
253, 2007, pp. 18-27. 
[2] 
E.G. Nadhan, "Seven Steps to a Service-Oriented Evolution," 
Business Integration Journal, no. 1, 2004, pp. 41-44. 
[3] 
OASIS, "Reference Model for Service Oriented Architecture 1.0," 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/soarm/v1.0/soa-rm.pdf, 2006. 
[4] 
M. Rosemann, E. Fielt, T. Kohlborn, and A. Korthaus, Business 
Service Management, in: Smart Services CRC White Paper no 1: 
2009. 
[5] 
A. Sehmi and B. Schwegler, "Service-oriented modeling for 
connected systems - part 1," The Architecture Journal, vol. 7, 2006, 
pp. 33-41. 
[6] 
J. 
den 
Haan, 
"SOA 
and 
Service 
Identification," 
http://www.theenterprisearchitect.eu/archive/2007/04/26/soa-and-
service-identification, 2007. 
[7] 
L. Cherbakov, G. Galambos, R. Harishankar, S. Kalyana, and G. 
Rackham, "Impact of service orientation at the business level," IBM 
Systems Journal, vol. 44, no. 4, 2005, pp. 653-668. 
[8] 
V. Winkler, "Identifikation und Gestaltung von Services. Vorgehen 
und beispielhafte Anwendung im Finanzdienstleistungsbereich," 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 49, no. 4, 2007, pp. 257-266. 
[9] 
A. Arsanjani, S. Ghosh, A. Allam, T. Abdollah, S. Ganapathy, and K. 
Holley, "SOMA: A method for developing service-oriented 
solutions," IBM Systems Journal, vol. 47, no. 3, 2008, pp. 377-396. 
[10] T. Böhmann and H. Krcmar, "Modularisierung: Grundlagen und 
Anwendung bei IT-Dienstleistungen." in Konzepte für das Service 
Engineering. 
Modularisierung, 
Prozessgestaltung 
und 
Produktivitätsmanagement, T. Herrmann, U. Kleinbeck, and H. 
Krcmar, Eds., Heidelberg: Physica, 2005, pp. 45-83. 
[11] K. Klose, R. Knackstedt, and D. Beverungen, "Identification of 
Services - A Stakeholder-Based Approach to SOA Development and 
Its Application in the Area of Production Planning," Proc. 15th 
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), 2007, pp. 
1802-1814. 
[12] F. Kohlmann and R. Alt, "Business-Driven Service Modeling - A 
Methodological Approach from the Finance Industry," Proc. Business 
Process & Service Computing: First International Working 
Conference on Business Process and Services Computing, 2007, pp. 
180-193. 
[13] D. Birkmeier, S. Glöckner, and S. Overhage, "A Survey of Service 
Identification Approaches," Enterprise Modelling and Information 
Systems Architectures, vol. 4, no. 2, 2009, pp. 20-36. 
[14] T. Kohlborn, A. Korthaus, T. Chan, and M. Rosemann, "Service 
Analysis - A Critical Assessment of the State of the Art," Proc. 17th 
European Conference on Information Systems, 2009. 
[15] R. Börner and M. Goeken, "Methods for Service Identification," Proc. 
7th International Workshop on Modelling, Simulation, Verification 
and Validation of Enterprise Information Systems (MSVVEIS), 2009, 
pp. 76-84. 
[16] R. Börner, "Applying Situational Method Engineering to the 
Development of Service Identification Methods," Proc. 16th 
Americas Conference on Information Systems, 2010, Paper 18. 
[17] B.G. Glaser and A.L. Strauss, "The Discovery of Grounded Theory: 
Strategies for Qualitative Research," Chicago: Aldine Publishing 
Company, 1967. 
[18] J. Mingers, "Combining IS Research Methods: Towards a Pluralist 
Methodology," Information Systems Research, vol. 12, no. 3, 2001, 
pp. 240-259. 
[19] M. Jarke, "Perspectives in the Interplay Between Business and 
Information Systems Engineering and Computer Science," Business 
& Information Systems Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, 2009, pp. 70-74. 
[20] I. Benbasat, D.K. Goldstein, and M. Mead, "The case research 
strategy in studies of information systems," MIS Quarterly, no. 11, 
1987, pp. 269-386. 
[21] M.D. Myers, "Qualitative Research in Business & Management," 
London: Sage Publications, 2009. 
[22] H. Luthria and F.A. Rabhi, "Building the Business Case for SOA: A 
Study of the Business Drivers for Technology Infrastructure 
Supporting Financial Service Institutions." in Enterprise Applications 
and Services in the Finance Industry, D. Kundisch, D.J. Veit, T. 
Weitzel, and C. Weinhardt, Eds.: Springer, 2009, pp. 94-107. 
[23] R.A. Stebbins, "Exploratory Research in the Social Sciences," 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 2001. 
[24] S. Inaganti and G.K. Behara, "Service Identification - BPM and SOA 
Handshake," BPTrends, vol. 32007, pp. 1-12. 
[25] J. Ralyté, S. Brinkkemper, and B. Henderson-Sellers, "Situational 
Method Engineering: Fundamentals and Experiences." in Situational 
Method Engineering: Fundamentals and Experiences, J. Ralyté, S. 
Brinkkemper, and B. Henderson-Sellers, Eds., Boston: Springer, 
2007, pp. V-VI. 
[26] T.A. Gutzwiller, "Das CC-RIM-Referenzmodell für den Entwurf von 
betrieblichen, 
transaktionsorientierten 
Informationssystemen," 
Heidelberg: Physica, 1994. 
[27] M. Heym, Methoden-Engineering - Spezifikation und Integration von 
Entwicklungsmethoden für Informationssysteme. St. Gallen: Institut 
für Wirtschaftsinformatik, Universität St. Gallen, 1993. 
[28] S. Brinkkemper, "Method engineering: engineering of information 
systems development methods and tools," Information & Software 
Technology, vol. 38, no. 4, 1996, pp. 275-280. 
[29] F. Karlsson, Meta-Method for Method Configuration - A Rational 
Unified Process Case. Linköping: Linköping University, Faculty of 
Arts and Sciences, 2002. 
[30] M. 
Goeken, 
"Entwicklung 
von 
Data-Warehouse-Systemen. 
Anforderungsmanagement, 
Modellierung, 
Implementierung," 
Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitäts-Verlag, 2006. 
[31] T. Bucher, M. Klesse, S. Kurpjuweit, and R. Winter, "Situational 
Method Engineering - On the Differentiation of "Context" and 
"Project Type"." in Situational Method Engineering: Fundamentals 
and Experiences, J. Ralyté, S. Brinkkemper, and B. Henderson-
Sellers, Eds., Boston: Springer, 2007, pp. 33-48. 
[32] N. Arni-Bloch and J. Ralyté, "Service-Oriented Information Systems 
Engineering," Proc. 20th Conference on Advanced Information 
Systems Engineering (CAiSE), 2008, pp. 140-143. 
[33] J. Ralyté and C. Rolland, "An Approach for Method Engineering," 
Proc. 20th International Conference on Conceptual Modelling, 2001, 
pp. 471-484. 
[34] P.J. Agerfalk, S. Brinkkemper, C. Gonzalez-Perez, B. Henderson-
Sellers, F. Karlsson, S. Kelly, and J. Ralyté, "Modularization 
Constructs in Method Engineering: Towards Common Ground?" in 
Situational Method Engineering: Fundamentals and Experiences, J. 
Ralyté, S. Brinkkemper, and B. Henderson-Sellers, Eds., Boston: 
Springer, 2007, pp. 359-368. 
[35] R.K. Yin, "Case Study Research - Design and Methods," Thousand 
Oaks London New Delhi: SAGE Publications, 2003. 
[36] T. Kohlborn, A. Korthaus, T. Chan, and M. Rosemann, 
"Identification and Analysis of Business and Software Services - A 
Consolidated Approach," IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 
vol. 2, no. 1, 2009, pp. 50-64. 
[37] J.A. Couzens, "Implementing an Enterprise System at Suncorp Using 
Agile Development," Proc. 20th Australian Software Engineering 
Conference 2009. 
[38] Guidewire, 
"Guidewire 
Claimcenter 
- 
the 
Flexible 
Claims 
Management 
System 
for 
Property 
& 
Casualties 
Insurers," 
http://www.guidewire.com/our_solutions/claimcenter, 2009. 
[39] T. Erl, "Service-Oriented Architecture - A Field Guide to Integrating 
XML and Web Services," Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2004. 
[40] J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, D. Pfeiffer, and C. Janiesch, "Configurative 
Method Engineering," Proc. 13th Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS), 2007, Paper 56. 
[41] G. Stewart and A. Chakraborty, "Service Identification through Value 
Chain Analysis and Prioritization," Proc. 16th Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, 2010, Paper 70. 
[42] N. Josuttis, "SOA in der Praxis - System-Design für verteilte 
Geschäftsprozesse," Heidelberg: dpunkt.verlag, 2008. 
[43] A. Arsanjani and K. Holley, "The Service Integration Maturity 
Model: Achieving Flexibility in the Transformation to SOA," Proc. 
IEEE International Conference on Services Computing (SCC'06), 
2006, pp. 515. 
[44] F. Kohlmann and R. Alt, "Aligning Service Maps - A Methodological 
Approach From the Financial Industry," Proc. 42nd Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2009, pp. 1-10. 
[45] R. Börner, S. Looso, and M. Goeken, "Towards an Operationalisation 
of Governance and Strategy for Service Identification and Design," 
Proc. 13th IEEE International EDOC Conference, 2009, pp. 180-188. 
[46] D. Sedera, "Does Size Matter? Enterprise System Performance in 
Small, Medium and Large Organizations," Proc. 2nd Workshop on 
3rd Generation Enterprise Resource Planning Systems, 2008. 
[47] M. Leyer and J. Moormann, "Facilitating operational control of 
business services: A method for analysing and structuring customer 
integration," Proc. 21st Australasian Conference on Information 
Systems, 2010, Paper 42. 
[48] B. Henderson-Sellers and J. Ralyté, "Situational Method Engineering: 
State-of-the-Art Review," Journal of Universal Computer Science, 
vol. 16, no. 3, 2010, pp. 424-478. 
42
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

