A Personalized Recommender System Model Using Colour-impression-based Image 
Retrieval and Ranking Method 
 
Ana Šaša, Marjan Krisper  
Faculty of Computer and 
Information Science 
University of Ljubljana  
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
{ana.sasa, 
marjan.krisper}@fri.uni-lj.si  
 
 
 
Yasushi Kiyoki,  
Shuichi Kurabayashi,  
Faculty of Environment and 
Information Studies, 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Kanagawa Japan  
{kiyoki, 
kurabaya}@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
Xing Chen 
Department of Information & 
Computer Sciences 
Kanagawa Institute of 
Technology 
Atsugi, Kanagawa 
chen@ic.kanagawa-it.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— This paper points out that achievements in the field 
of multimedia analysis and retrieval represent an important 
opportunity 
for 
improvement 
of 
recommender 
system 
mechanisms. 
Online 
shopping 
systems 
use 
various 
recommender 
systems; 
however 
a 
study 
of 
different 
approaches has shown that they do not exploit the potential of 
information carried by multimedia product data for product 
recommendations. 
We 
demonstrate 
how 
this 
can 
be 
accomplished by a personalized recommender system model 
that is based on analysis of colour features of product images. 
We present an approach for extraction of colour-properties of 
images in order to represent impressions related to the human 
perception of images. Colour-properties are based on image 
colour histograms, psychological properties of colours and a 
learning mechanism. Based on the extracted colour-properties, 
the method retrieves and ranks the images corresponding to 
the desired impressions. The architectural framework of the 
model is based on service-oriented architecture in order to 
promote its flexibility and reuse, which is important when 
applying 
the 
model 
to 
existing 
recommender 
system 
environments. An experimental study was performed for 
decorative photography domain.  
Keywords- product recommendation; image retrieval; E-
business; service-oriented architecture.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Online shops provide different Web-based services for 
customer-product matching and product data representation 
in order to support customers at their decisions when buying 
the products. Customer-product matching mechanisms differ 
greatly based on the amount of effort the customer has to 
invest in order to find the desired product. The most basic 
approach that requires the most effort from the customer is 
catalogue browsing. As customers are often unable to 
evaluate all available alternatives in great depth, they tend to 
use two-stage processes to reach their purchase decisions 
using product catalogues: firstly they screen a large set of 
available products and identify a subset of the most 
promising alternatives; secondly they evaluate the latter in 
more depth, perform relative comparisons across products on 
important attributes, and make a purchase decision [1]. Other 
types of approaches are known as recommender systems. 
Recommender systems help customers find the products they 
would like to purchase by producing a list of recommended 
products for each given customer [2]. Schafer et al. have 
developed a taxonomy of e-commerce recommender systems 
[3][4] based on two key dimensions: a) the degree of 
automation, which depends on the effort the customer has to 
invest in order to get the recommendation, and b) the degree 
of persistence in recommendations, which depends on 
whether the recommendations are based on data regarding 
previous customer sessions with the system or not. One of 
the most common partially automated recommender systems 
are product search services where customers enter desired 
product attributes (search query) and search results comprise 
those products that correspond to the search query or are the 
closest match for the search query. An example of a 
completely automated recommender system is an implicit 
customer-product matching system. They do not require 
explicit customer actions, and autonomously recommend 
selected products to individual customers, for example in the 
side frame of the Web page. 
There are many research contributions in the field of 
recommendation techniques; examples are [2][5][6][7][8][9] 
[10][11]. They range from very basic, such as presentation of 
the most popular products, to more advanced, such as web 
mining techniques [5], collaborative filtering [12], decision 
tree induction [2], association rule mining [13], etc. 
However, a study of different recommendation techniques  
([2],[5-11],[14-21]) that existing recommender systems 
techniques do not take into consideration information 
contained in the multimedia product data. The multimedia 
product data is used mainly to present the product to the 
customer after the products to be presented have been 
selected. We observe that there is an important potential to 
improve the customer-product matching mechanisms using 
not only text-based data about the products, but also product 
multimedia data. In the recent years, advances in the field of 
multimedia have provided several important results and the 
potential is there to improve existing customer-product 
matching mechanisms.  
 
124
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In this paper we present an innovative model for 
improvement of recommender systems, using product image 
data. We have applied the colour-impression-based image 
retrieval and ranking method [25] to the design of this model. 
In [25], the colour-impression-based image retrieval method 
and its system architecture have been proposed for realizing 
image-colour processing dealing with emotion-aspects of 
human senses to images.  The purpose of our model is not to 
replace the existing recommender system techniques, but to 
enhance them by utilizing image based information about 
products. The presented model uses a method for product 
image analysis which can automatically determine colour-
properties of product images. The extracted colour-properties 
are used in order to improve the product search results and 
product recommendations. Colour-properties are extracted 
based on image colour histograms, psychological properties 
of colours and a learning mechanism. The method that 
implements this behaviour has been presented as the colour-
impression-based image retrieval and ranking method in [24] 
and [25]. As far as we know, there is no other product 
recommendation system that exploits colour-impressions 
contained within product images in order to improve 
recommendation results. An important characteristic of this 
approach is that colour-impressions based on image 
perception are subjective and pertain to individual customers. 
Therefore, one of the requirements of this approach is to take 
into consideration different 
perceptions of 
different 
individuals. The proposed model can be valuable for 
different companies, especially for those where colour and 
subjective properties of their products play an important role 
in product selection for the customer, for example fashion 
and art domains. We show an example implementation of the 
model for decorative photography domain.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In 
section two, we briefly review the colour-impression-based 
image retrieval and ranking method [24] [25]. In section 
three, we discuss the image-based recommender system 
model and how the colour-impression-based image retrieval 
and ranking method is applied to a recommender system. In 
section four, we represent an experimental study from the 
domain of decorative photography. In section five, we give 
concluding remarks.   
II. 
COLOUR-IMPRESSION-BASED IMAGE RETRIEVAL AND 
RANKING METHOD [24][25] 
In this section, as an image retrieval method for realizing 
our personalized recommender system model, we briefly 
review the colour-impression-based image retrieval and 
ranking method which has been proposed in [24][25]. In this 
paper, we apply this method to the design of our 
recommendation system model with product image data. The 
main feature of the colour-impression-based image retrieval 
and ranking method is how to deal with the colour features in 
products. A knowledge base is used to compute the 
relevance between a specific colour and a set of impression 
concepts, such as “sharp” and “cool”, by using a dictionary 
that defines abstract semantics of colours [24][25]. A colour-
impression association knowledge base provides a matrix 
(colour impression definition matrix; CID matrix) that 
defines colour features of colour schemas related to 130 
colour 
variations 
(Figure 
1). 
Each 
colour 
schema 
corresponds to a specific impression in human’s perception 
[26]. In [25], the colour-impression space has been created, 
using 120 chromatic colours and 10 monochrome colours 
defined in the “Colour Image Scale” [27], which is based on 
the Munsell colour system [28], as shown in Figure 2. Figure 
1 shows several examples of the colour-emotions defined in 
“Colour Image Scale” [27]. The colour-emotions are 
expressed in 120 chromatic colours and 10 monochrome 
colours which are based on the Munsell colour system. Each 
colour schema, which corresponds to a specific emotional 
perception of humans, is described by using a combination 
of several colours from the 130 basic colour set. Each 
colour-emotion, such as vivid(cs2) and sweet(cs5), defines 
colour features in 182 sets of colour schema related to 130 
colour variations. Each colour schema corresponds to a 
specific emotion in human’s perception. 
…
 
Figure 1.  Colour-impression association for defining colour features in 
182 sets of colour schema related to 130 colour variations defined in 
“Colour Image Scale” [27]. Each colour-impression definition, such as 
“vigorous (cs1)” defines a set of weight for colours 
 
Figure 2.  130 Munsell Basic Colour Variations defined in “Colour Image 
Scale” [27]. 
The system converts RGB colour values to HSV colour 
values per pixel of each image. HSV is a widely adopted 
space in image and video retrieval because it describes 
perceptual and scalable colour relationships. The system 
clusters HSV pixels into the closest colour of the predefined 
130 Munsell basic colours [1], and calculates the percentage 
of each colour to all pixels of the image. And then the 
system creates 130 HSV colour histogram. The image 
metadata generation function fimage_metadata(D) is 
defined as follows: 
 

[129]
[0]
_
,
,
:
i
i
I
D
f
image metadata



 
where D denotes an image data, and i[n] denotes a i-th colour 
feature value. The method analyzes images to generate a 
colour-impression based metadata vector. The method 
extracts the colour-impression features of the image and 
125
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

inserts them into the metadata cache database. The system 
analyzes the colour-impression features by performing the 
following four steps as described in Figure 3: 
 
 (Step-1) The system decodes an input image file such 
as JPEG and PNG. 
 
(Step-2) The system converts RGB colour values to 
HSV colour values per pixel of each image. HSV is a 
widely adopted space in image and video retrieval 
because it describes perceptual and scalable colour 
relationships. 
 
(Step-3) The system clusters HSV pixels into the 
closest colour of the predefined 130 Munsell basic 
colours[1], and calculates the percentage of each colour 
to all pixels of the image. And then the system creates 
130 HSV colour histogram. 
 (Step-4) The system extracts the colour-impression 
for the image by correlation calculations between 182 
colour schemas (182 impression word sets) and 130 
basic HSV colours. 
 
Figure 3.  The process of colour-impression based metadata extraction 
[24][25]. 
III. 
ARCHITECTURAL 
FRAMEWORK 
OF 
THE 
PERSONALIZED 
RECOMMENDER 
SYSTEM 
MODEL 
USING 
COLOUR-IMPRESSION-BASED 
IMAGE 
RETRIEVAL 
AND 
RANKING METHOD 
Figure 4 illustrates the architectural framework overview 
of our personalized recommender system model. It is based 
on service-oriented architecture (SOA) due to several 
important SOA characteristics, especially flexibility and 
reuse. These allow for easier adaptations of the model to 
different environments. To address the service orchestration 
principles of SOA [34][35][36][37], the key business process 
of the online shopping domain (i.e., the Online purchase 
process), is implemented with the Web Service Business 
Process Execution Language (BPEL) [38].  
A high level overview of the process and its main 
subprocesses is given in Figure 4 using the standard Business 
Process Model and Notation 2.0 (BPMN) [39]. The 
recommender model concerns its Product search and 
selection subprocess, as shown in Figure 5. It is important to 
note that the model is generic and that the proposed SOA 
framework allows that BPEL processes are extended with 
existing 
recommender 
system 
services. 
Figure 
6 
demonstrates the BPMN model of the Product search and 
selection subprocess and how the architectural components 
relate with the colour-impression-based image retrieval and 
ranking method.  
 
Figure 4.  Architectural framework overview 
 
Figure 5.  Online purchase process overview 
Swimlanes are used to show which services are invoked 
by the BPEL process for execution of the corresponding 
process tasks and which tasks are performed by the user. For 
clarity and understanding of our work, the process models do 
not show details that are irrelevant for the research presented 
in this paper. One can observe that the model is based on 
interactivity with the user and that the presentation of the 
products to the user is updated for every main user action 
(interactivity loop). There are three main types of user 
activities when searching for desired products: 
 
The 
customer 
may 
select 
impression 
words 
appertaining to the desired products. In this case the 
colour-impression-based image retrieval and ranking 
function returns products that are the most relevant for 
the given impression words based on the product 
images. The presentation of the products for the 
customer changes and shows the resulting products. 
 
The customer may select a product, for example to see 
more details about it. In this case, the colour-
impression-based image retrieval and ranking is 
performed based on the images of the selected product. 
Products with similar-impression images are returned 
and are presented to the customer in the side frame.  
 
The model also allows for the standard product attribute 
selection, such as type of the product, colour, size, 
material etc. In case the customer changes the attributes 
and if the customer has already chosen the impression 
words, products are first filtered in order to retrieve the 
products that correspond to the selected attributes. Then 
the colour-impression-based image retrieval and 
ranking function performs the search based on the 
filtered product images. The presentation of the 
products for the customer changes and the resulting 
products are shown. 
126
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

The colour-impression-based image retrieval and ranking 
function is integrated in all interactivity loops. However, the 
process differs if the customer is logged or not. If the 
customer is logged in, their personal CID matrix is used. 
Otherwise, the common domain CID matrix is used as the 
basis.  
Colour-impression-based learning is performed every 
time a user selects the product and every time the user 
confirms a product for purchase. Based on the impression 
words specified by the customer and the selected/confirmed 
products, product image analysis is performed to obtain the 
colour features of the images. The corresponding CID matrix 
is adjusted in order to give a stronger association between the 
impression words and selected product images. If the 
customer is not logged in and the common domain CID 
matrix is used, the adjustments are performed on a copy of 
the common domain CID matrix. If the customer later logs 
in, the adjustment is applied to the adjusted CID matrix. 
Thus the CID matrix implements the personalization based 
for specific customers. Otherwise, the matrix is used only 
during the customer session.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY 
We have performed an experimental study of the model 
for the decorative photography domain. The corresponding 
online purchase business process was implemented based on 
the architectural framework discussed in the previous 
section. For the use cases examples presented in the 
remainder of this section, the selected product attributes 
were: category: scenery, landscapes, places; size: 4:3 and 
16:9. 205 images corresponded to this attribute selection. 
Table I demonstrates photograph images of three result sets 
of the colour-impression-based image retrieval and ranking: 
first for the impression word “earnest”, second for the word 
“exact”, and third for the words “earnest, exact”. The 
impression word query “earnest, exact” returns those images 
that are semantically the closest to both impression words. 
Correlation values are given for the resulting product images.  
TABLE I.  
PRODUCT IMAGES PRESENTED TO THE CUSTOMER BASED 
ON AN AJUSTED CID MATRIX AND THREE EXAMPLE IMPRESSION WORD 
SETS 
 
Table II demonstrates two image result sets for the 
impression word “crystalline”. Table II (A) represents the 
results based on the common domain CID matrix. Let us 
consider the example where after the customer is presented 
with the resulting 10 photographs. The customer then selects 
the product with the last image in the result set (image with 
the correlation 0,035 in Table II (A)). When the product is 
selected, colour-impression-based learning is performed. 
Besides the product details for this photograph, the customer 
is presented the image result set of the Table II (B) without 
the first photograph (as it is the same as the selected 
photograph). One can easily notice the difference in the 
results and the adaptation to the customer’s perceptions. 
Furthermore, next time the customer performs the search for 
the word “crystalline”, the resulting photographs would be 
 
Figure 6.  Product search and selection process overview 
127
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

refined and adjusted to the customer. For the same input set 
of images the result would be as presented by Table II (B).   
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE IMAGE RESULT SETS FOR THE IMPRESSION WORD 
"CRYSTALLINE"  
 
(A) Before learning 
 
(B) After learning 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented a recommender system model 
based on the colour-impression-based image retrieval and 
ranking method in [24][25]. This paper has demonstrated 
how the colour-impression-based image retrieval and 
ranking method can be applied to recommender systems for 
online shopping. The method is based on extraction of 
colour-impression features from images based on images’ 
colour features. The presented model is very useful, 
especially for domains where colour-based impressions play 
an important role in customer decisions for product selection 
and purchase, for example fashion and decoration domains. 
It is based on service-oriented architecture for greater 
flexibility and easier adaptation to different environments.  
Other important multimedia and image analysis methods 
exist that can be applied to recommender systems, such as 
[40][41]. In our further work we shall extend the model with 
some of these methods in order to improve the model and 
extend the target domains by taking into consideration other 
information carried by images, such as combination of 
colour, shape and structure features, and other types of 
multimedia, such as video and sound. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank The Matsumae International 
Foundation for their support and funding of this research.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Haubl and V. Trifts, “Consumer Decision Making in Online 
Shopping Environments: The Effects of Interactive Decision Aids,” 
Marketing Science, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 4-21, 2000. 
[2] 
Y. H. Cho, J. K. Kim, and S. H. Kim, “A personalized 
recommender system based on web usage mining and decision tree 
induction,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 
329-342, 2002. 
[3] 
J. B. Schafer, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Recommender systems in 
e-commerce,” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on 
Electronic commerce  - EC '99, pp. 158-166, 1999. 
[4] 
J. B. Schafer, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “E-Commerce 
Recommendation Applications,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 5, 
pp. 115–153, Jan. 2001. 
[5] 
E. Suh, S. Lim, H. Hwang, and S. Kim, “A prediction model for the 
purchase probability of anonymous customers to support real time 
web marketing: a case study,” Expert Systems with Applications, 
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 245-255, 2004. 
[6] 
R. D. Lawrence, G. S. Almasi, V. Kotlyar, M. S. Viveros, and S. S. 
Duri, “Personalization of Supermarket Product Recommendations,” 
Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 5, pp. 11–32, Jan. 2001. 
[7] 
T. Y. Lee, S. Li, and R. Wei, “Needs-Centric Searching and 
Ranking Based on Customer Reviews,” in 2008 10th IEEE 
Conference on E-Commerce Technology and the Fifth IEEE 
Conference on Enterprise Computing, E-Commerce and E-
Services, pp. 128-135, 2008. 
[8] 
O. Papaemmanouil, K. Pramataris, G. Prassas, and G. Doukidis, “A 
Recommender System for Online Shopping  Based on Past 
Customer Behaviour,” BLED 2001 Proceedings, Dec. 2001. 
[9] 
Junzhong Ji, Zhiqiang Sha, Chunnian Liu, and Ning Zhong, 
“Online recommendation based on customer shopping model in e-
commerce,” in Proceedings IEEE/WIC International Conference 
on Web Intelligence (WI 2003), pp. 68-74. 
[10] 
J. K. Kim, Y. H. Cho, W. J. Kim, J. R. Kim, and J. H. Suh, “A 
personalized recommendation procedure for Internet shopping 
support,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 1, 
no. 3, pp. 301-313, 2002. 
[11] 
Y. H. Cho and J. K. Kim, “Application of Web usage mining and 
product taxonomy to collaborative recommendations in e-
commerce,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 
233-246, 2004. 
[12] 
J. B. Schafer, D. Frankowski, J. Herlocker, and S. Sen, 
“Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems,” in The adaptive 
web, P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, and W. Nejdl, Eds. Springer-Verlag 
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 291-324. 
[13] 
J. Li, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, and C. Chu, “Strongest Association Rules 
Mining for Personalized Recommendation,” Systems Engineering - 
Theory & Practice, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 144-152, 2009. 
[14] 
W. Yang, H. Cheng, and J. Dia, “A location-aware recommender 
system for mobile shopping environments,” Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 437-445, 2008. 
[15] 
L. Chen, F. Hsu, M. Chen, and Y. Hsu, “Developing recommender 
systems with the consideration of product profitability for sellers,” 
Information Sciences, vol. 178, no. 4, pp. 1032-1048, 2008. 
[16] 
H. Wang and C. Wu, “A strategy-oriented operation module for 
recommender systems in E-commerce,” Computers & Operations 
Research, 2010. 
[17] 
S. Huang, “Designing utility-based recommender systems for e-
commerce: Evaluation of preference elicitation methods,” 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, pp. -, 2010. 
[18] 
P. Symeonidis, A. Nanopoulos, A. Papadopoulos, and Y. 
Manolopoulos, “Collaborative recommender systems: Combining 
effectiveness and efficiency,” Expert Systems with Applications, 
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 2995-3013, 2008. 
[19] 
B. Jeong, J. Lee, and H. Cho, “An iterative semi-explicit rating 
method for building collaborative recommender systems,” Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 6181-6186, 2009. 
[20] 
P. Chou, P. Li, K. Chen, and M. Wu, “Integrating web mining and 
neural network for personalized e-commerce automatic service,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 2898-2910, 
2010. 
[21] 
X. Zhang, J. Edwards, and J. Harding, “Personalised online sales 
using web usage data mining,” Computers in Industry, vol. 58, no. 
8, pp. 772-782, 2007. 
[22] 
A. Harada, Report of modeling the evaluation structure of KANSEI. 
128
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

University of Tsukuba, 1997. 
[23] 
Y. Kiyoki and X. Chen, “A semantic associative computation 
method for automatic decorative-multimedia creation with 
"Kansei" information,” in Proceedings of the Sixth Asia-Pacific 
Conference on Conceptual Modeling - Volume 96, pp. 7–16, 2009. 
[24] 
S. Kurabayashi, T. Ueno, and Y. Kiyoki: "A Context-Based Whole 
Video Retrieval System with Dynamic Video Stream Analysis 
Mechanisms," In Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International 
Symposium on Multimedia (ISM2009), pp.505-510, San Diego, 
California, USA, December 14-16, 2009. 
[25] 
S. Kurabayashi and Y. Kiyoki, “MediaMatrix: A Video Stream 
Retrieval System with Mechanisms for Mining Contexts of Query 
Examples,” in Database Systems for Advanced Applications, vol. 
5982, H. Kitagawa, Y. Ishikawa, Q. Li, and C. Watanabe, Eds. 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 452-455. 
[26] 
S. Sasaki, Y. Itabashi, Y. Kiyoki, and X. Chen, “An Image-Query 
Creation Method for Representing Impression by Color-based 
Combination of Multiple Images,” in Proceeding of the 2009 
conference on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases XX, 
pp. 105–112, 2009. 
[27] 
S. Kobayashi, Color Image Scale, 1st ed. Kodansha International, 
1992. 
[28] 
A. H. Munsell, Munsell Book of Color. Baltimore: Munsell Color 
Company, 1929. 
[29] 
P. Valdez and A. Mehrabian, “Effects of color on emotions.,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 123, no. 4, pp. 394-409, 
Dec. 1994. 
[30] 
S. Kobayashi, “The aim and method of the color image scale,” 
Color Research & Application, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 93-107, 1981. 
[31] 
Y. Kiyoki, T. Kitagawa, and T. Hayama, “A metadatabase system 
for semantic image search by a mathematical model of meaning,” 
SIGMOD Rec., vol. 23, pp. 34–41, Dec. 1994. 
[32] 
Y. Kiyoki, T. Kitagawa, and Y. Hitomi, “A fundamental 
framework for realizing semantic interoperability in a 
multidatabase environment,” Integr. Comput.-Aided Eng., vol. 2, 
pp. 3–20, Mar. 1995. 
[33] 
T. Kitagawa and Y. Kiyoki, “A mathematical model of meaning 
and its application to multidatabase systems,” in Third IEEE 
International Workshop on Research Issues in Data Engineering: 
Interoperability in Multidatabase Systems, pp. 130 - 135, 1993. 
[34] 
M. B. Jurič, B. Mathew, and P. Sarang, Business Process Execution 
Language for Web Services, 2nd ed. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2006. 
[35] 
K. Pant and M. B. Jurič, Business Process Driven SOA using 
BPMN and BPEL. Packt Publishing Ltd, 2008. 
[36] 
T. Erl, SOA Principles of Service Design, 1st ed. Prentice Hall, 
2007. 
[37] 
M. B. Jurič and M. Križevnik, WS-BPEL 2.0 for SOA Composite 
Applications with Oracle SOA Suite 11g. Packt Publishing Ltd, 
2010. 
[38] 
OASIS, “Web Services Business Process Execution Language 
Version 2.0, OASIS Standard,” http://docs.oasis-
open.org/wsbpel/2.0/wsbpel-v2.0.html, 2007. [Online]. Available: 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/wsbpel/2.0/wsbpel-v2.0.html. 
[39] 
OMG, “Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN), Version 
2.0 beta,” 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.omg.org/cgi-
bin/doc?dtc/09-08-14. [Accessed: 20-Mar-2010]. 
[40] 
A. R. Barakbah and Y. Kiyoki, “Image Search System with 
Automatic Weighting Mechanism for Selecting Features,” in The 
6th International Conference on Information and Communication 
Technology and Systems, 2010. 
[41] 
A. R. Barakbah and Y. Kiyoki, “An Image Search System with 
Analytical Functions for 3D Color Vector Quantization and 
Cluster-based Shape and Structure Features,” in Proceeding of the 
2010 conference on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases 
XXI, pp. 169–187, 2010. 
 
 
129
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

