 
A Sub-topic Partition Method Based on Event Network 
Wei Liu, Dong Wang, Wenjie Xu, Xujie Zhang, Zongtian Liu 
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University 
Shanghai, China 
{liuw, ming123, jiex, annie4sh, ztliu}@shu.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract—In TDT (Topic Detection and Tracking) of news 
stories, a topic usually contains lots of events. Because of small 
granularity of events, the relationships between events and 
topic are not closely enough to be distinguished. In this paper, 
topic and news stories are described by using event networks, 
and a network clustering algorithm EN-MST based on 
minimum spanning tree is proposed to discover event 
communities in the network. Each community is considered to 
be a sub-topic which could represent an aspect of the large 
topic as a coarse-grained concept. The experimental results 
show accuracy and reasonableness by using our method. In 
our further study, sub-topics obtained by the method proposed 
in this paper will be adopted to represent news stories in order 
to distinguish whether a news story belongs to a certain topic. 
 
Keywords-TDT; topic tracking; event network; community 
discovery;  topic model; EN-MST  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Topic detection and tracking (TDT) is a research hotspot 
on information recognition, data mining and organization of 
news stories, so as to improve the efficiency of useful 
information acquisition on the Internet. A large topic usually 
contains 
many 
events, 
and 
there 
exist 
semantical 
relationships between event pairs, such as casual relations, 
accompany relations and follow relations. A network of 
events be formed based on the event relation information to 
represent the topic. By analyzing  the network of events, 
some events which have more closely relationship are likely 
to describe one aspect of the topic, so, event clusters in the 
network are considered to be sub-topics. It is known that 
VSM (vector space model) is the main text representation 
method in TDT; however, the main shortcoming of this 
method is the lackness of semantic information. In this paper, 
VSM is replaced by event network to represent topics and 
news stories. A topic hierarchy structure is proposed 
including topics, sub-topics and events. Events with close 
relationships are put together by using network community 
discovery algorithm, to find sub-topics. The sub-topics will 
be a bridge connecting events and the topics to improve the 
accuracy of TDT in further study. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II introduces the related work on TDT and network 
community discovery method. Section III discusses the 
definitions about event and event network and how to 
construct an event network. Section IV discusses a 
community discovery method based on MST to obtain sub-
topics from an event network. Section V compares 
experiment results between the objective function in our 
method and other objective functions. Finally, the 
conclusions are given in Section VI. 
II. RELATED WORK 
TDT was proposed in 1996 [1] by the U.S Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Then, 
researchers from DARPA, CMU, Dragon system company 
and Umass [2] began to define the main content of topic 
detection and tracking, and developed some initial 
technologies for the solution to these problems. TDT mainly 
focuses on three tasks[3]: topic tracking, topic detection and 
new event detection. A topic is considered to be only a 
collection of news stories. Although hierarchy was proposed 
for TDT in TDT-2003 [4], the subject of more fine-grained 
information extraction problems have not yet been 
considered. In [5], every news story was considered to be an 
event, and a news probability generation model was 
proposed. News event generated model including person, 
places, content and time was automatically built in a unified 
framework. In [6], a set of sudden outbreak lexical items 
were extracted in a concentrated time window, and further 
emergency was identified according to lexical items. In [7], 
W. Lam extended related words according to the statistical 
results of vocabulary in news stories, and events were 
identified by a method similar to Single-Pass cluster. A topic 
model based on event and event developing relations was 
proposed by Makkonen [8], but the detail for the method was 
not provided. Nallapati [9] gave a more specific concept of 
event identification and event relation extraction with a given 
topic, in addition, provided the corresponding evaluation 
methods and test data. Anicic introduced the concept of 
Event Processing (EP) and a stream reasoning method based 
on a language called EP-SPARQL [10], which provided 
syntax and formal semantics to detect compound events. 
Another related research hotspot is network community 
discovery. Girvan-Newman algorithm was proposed by 
Girvan and Newman [11], whose method was to get 
communities by finding the edge with the highest score of 
betweenness and remove it from the network. Newman [12] 
proposed a weighted network community discovery method 
based on edge betweenness. He proposed that weighted 
graphs be mapped into multi-graphs, the betweenness of all 
the edges be calculated and the largest one be removed in 
turn until it reaches a reasonable structure. Noack [13] 
introduced two energy models whose minimum energy 
layouts represented the cluster structure, one based on 
repulsion between nodes and the other based on repulsion 
between edges. Grygorash proposed a graph cluster method 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
based on MST (minimum spanning tree) [14], and removed 
the edges whose weights were above the threshold to get the 
community structures.  
However, most of the TDT methods were based on 
traditional VSM which lacks semantic information and the 
above community discovery algorithms should be improved 
to be used in our research. In this paper, the content of text is 
described by using event network instead of the traditional 
VSM method, and the event network is divided into event 
clusters by a method based on MST to extract sub-topics 
from a large topic. 
III. EVENT AND EVENT NETWORK 
A. Definitions 
In the field of the TDT, a topic is a collection of several 
related events, including a central event and some other 
events related to it. A story is a news report closely related to 
the topic, which contains two or more independent clauses 
for stating an event. A story is usually a statement of some 
aspects of a certain topic, while a topic contains all the 
content of the related stories. An event involves some 
participants, environment and some other elements. So we 
introduce the definitions of event, event class and event 
ontology in [15] which is the foundation of our work. 
Definition 1 (Event): event is defined as a thing happens 
in a certain time and environment, which some actors take 
part in and show some action features.  Event e can be 
defined as a 6-tuple formally: 
::
, , , , ,
def
e
A O T V P L


  
where A means an action set happen in an event; it 
describes the process of the event happens. O means objects 
taking part in the event, T means the period of time that the 
event lasting. The time period includes absolute time and 
relative time. V means environment of the event, such as 
location of the event; P means assertions on the procedure of 
actions execution in an event; L means language expressions. 
In this paper, we use the event elements A, T and V to 
represent events. Different events have different elements. A 
word or a phrase which expresses an event happening can be 
called the denoter of the event. Each event has an event 
denoter in text. However, it is not adequate to distinguish 
events. Such as the Sichuan earthquake and Japanese 
earthquake. Although the event denoters earthquake are the 
same, they do not mean the same event due to the different 
places they occurred in. Therefore, action, time and location 
are important to represent events. 
Definition 2 (Event Class): event class is a set of 
common characteristics of the event. It can be expressed by 
EC.    
1
2
6
( ,
,
,
,
)
EC
E C C
C

; 
where E is the set of events, which is an extension of the 
event class. 
1
2
{
,
,
}
i
i
i
im
C
c c
c

…, ,… (1
6,
0)
i
m
 

 is 
the intension of event class, and is the set of common 
characteristics in the ith element of E; 
cim
is one of the 
common characteristic in the ith element of each event. 
In this paper, the definition of event network is proposed 
as follow. 
Definition 3 (Event Network): an event network (EN) is 
a directed acyclic graph that consists of a set of nodes and 
edges. The nodes are events, and the edges are event 
relations. 
EN::= (Events, Edges) 
Events ={e1,e2,…,en} 
Edges ={<ei, ej, rij >, <ex, ey, rxy >,…} (1
, , ,
)
i j x y
n


 
r = {Correlation, Causal, Accompany, Follow } 
where, EN denotes event network, which contains the set 
of event nodes Events and event relations Edges. In Events, 
ei represents an event, rij represents the relation between ei 
and ej. We define four different relations between events in 
our event network model, including: 
Correlation Relation：if two events appear in the same 
story and have common event elements, such as time, 
location or objects, they are correlated.  
      Causal Relation： if event e1 causes event e2, there exists 
causal relation between e1 and e2. Causal is the most 
important relation between two events. It not only reflects 
the interaction between events, but also reflects the time 
sequence of events. For example: 
June 1, in the Afghan city of Kandahar, at least 40 people 
were killed and 60 wounded in an explosion at a mosque.     
where explosion caused killed and wounded, so they have 
the relation of causal. 
      Accompany Relation：if two or several events almost 
happen at the same time, they have the relation of 
accompany. They are often series of actions caused by the 
same event. For example: 
A large truck overturned in the corner, then the electrical 
tools are knocked out, and clips are thrown out to the ground. 
      where overturned, knocked out and thrown exist relations 
of accompany. 
      Follow Relation: two events have the relation of time 
sequence, such as earthquake and rescue, wake up  and teeth 
brushing. 
Definition 4 (Event Ontology). An event ontology is a 
formal, explicit specification of a shared event model that 
exists objectively, denoted as EO. The structure of event 
ontology can be defined as a 3-tuple： 
:{
, ,
}
EO
ECs R Rules  
where ECs is the set of all events, R indicates all relations 
between events. Rules are expressed in logic languages, 
which can be used to describe the transformation and 
inference between events. 
In this paper, by using event relations, we connect event 
instances that appear in text and construct an event network 
to represent the text. In contrast to word frequency method of 
VSM, the event network contains more semantic information: 
events and their relations.  
B. Transmission rules of event relationship 
The implicit relations will be extracted between events 
according to the transmission rules in the above event 
relations.  
Causal Relation: The causal relation is transitive. If event 
B is caused by event A and event C is caused by event B, 
then, A causes C. 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Accompany Relation: If the relationship between event A 
and event B are accompany, event B and event C are 
accompany, then there exists accompany relation  between  
event A and event B. 
Follow Relation: If event B follows event A and event C 
follows event B, then C follows A. 
In CEC corpus [16] (An emergency corpus which 
contains 200 Chinese news stories annotated in Semantic 
Intelligence Lab of Shanghai University.), obvious relations 
between events have been annotated, and it is difficult to 
extract all the relationships manually. In order to extract 
event relations as many as possible to construct an event 
network, some implicit relations will be annotated by using 
these transmission rules above. 
C. Quantified the relationship between events 
While an event network with semantical relationships has 
been constructed, it is necessary to transform the event 
network into a weighted network in order to discovery 
communities of events. The method is introduced in Section 
IV. Each of the relationship will be mapped into a 
corresponding weight in the weighted graph, such as the 
causal relationship, events with causal relations usually 
describe the developing situation of the topic, which are 
more important to represent the theme of news stories. 
Therefore, the weight of causal relation should be larger than 
other types of relations.  
In order to quantify the event relations with weights, The 
method in article [17 ] is introduced which was used to 
calculate the weights between event classes: Choose 200 
stories as sample corpus, then add up each pair of event 
classes on the frequency and calculate the impact factor of 
them. For one text d in the text collection N, 
ie
F means the 
frequency the event class ei appears in d, 
je
F  means the 
frequency the event class ej appears in d. The formula for 
calculating impact factor between ei and ej is defined as 
follows: 
               




j
i
i
i
e
e
d ij
e
e
F , if F
0
w
=
F
0,
if F
= 0
                   (1) 
If 
wd ij
>1, it is normalized, 
wd ij
=1. 
For the whole text collection N, the formula for 
calculating impact factor between ei and ej is defined as 
follow:  
                    

d ij
d
M
ij
w
w =
| M |
                                    (2) 
M is the text collection where each text contains event 
class ei. 
The steps of calculation are: ① Calculate the impact 
factors of event class pairs in the same text; ②Normalize 
and calculate the average impact factors of event class pairs 
in the text collection, which will avoid unreasonableness 
caused by the large impact factors in a single text. 
IV. COMMUNITY DISCOVERY ALGORITHM BASED ON 
MINIMUM SPANNING TREE 
A. Three-layers model structure of topic 
In this paper, a three-layers model structure which 
contains Event, Sub-topic and Topic is proposed. In contrast 
to a large topic, a news story contains only a few sub-topics 
(usually less than 4 sub-topics). Therefore, a coming news 
story can be represented by some event communities and 
similarity degree between topic and new stories in the sub-
topic level, thus to improve the accuracy in TDT. 
Topic: a seminal event or activity, along with all directly 
related events and activities.  
Sub-topic: one aspect of the whole topic. A large topic 
usually contains some sub-topics and each sub-topic focuses 
on a small aspect of the topic. 
Event: a thing happens in a certain time and environment. 
In news stories, most of the events have implicit elements. 
 
Event
Sub-topic
Topic
 
Figure 1.  The three-layers model structure of topic. 
As Figure 1 shows, a topic contains a lot of events. The 
granularity of events are too small to describe a topic. 
Therefore, the sub-topic level which is represented by event 
communities is proposed to connect events and topic.  
B. Communities in network 
Community is a description of  the close relationships 
between events. A property of community structure, in 
which network nodes are joined together in tightly-knit 
groups and between which there are only looser connections. 
Currently, there is no recognized evaluation criteria for the 
community structure. In 2003, Newman proposed the 
concept of modularity (which is also represented by Q-
function) [12]. This quantity is defined as the fraction of 
edges that fall within communities minus the expected value 
of the same quantity if edges are assigned at random. 
Partitioning result depends on the given community 
memberships and the degrees of vertices. Q-function is 
defined as follow: 
            







i j
ij
i
j
ij
1
kk
Q =
A -
δ(c, c)
2m
2m
         (3) 
As to undirected and unweighted graph, if there is 
connection between node i and node j, 
ij
A =1, otherwise, 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Aij
=0. 

ij
ij
m= 1
A
2
means the edge number in the 
network. 
ic is the community which node i belongs to. If 
ic =
jc , the value of δ function is 1, otherwise, the value of 
δ function is 0. 
i j
k k
2m
means the probability of an edge 
existing between vertices i and j. Where
ik is the degree of i. 
Although the Q-function is biased, most of the 
community partitioning algorithms choose Q-function as a 
measure means of the clustering quality. A weighted network 
can be mapped into a multi-graph, and 
ij
A can also represent 
the weight between i and j. That means Q-function is also 
suitable for weighted network. However, Q-function is 
difficult to obtain the optimal community structure in the 
sparse graph. 
C.  Communitiy discovery algorithm based on minimum 
spanning tree 
Most of the community discovery algorithms are for 
undirected graphs which can not be utilized in event 
networks. In this paper, an improved algorithm based on 
minimum spanning tree (MST) is proposed for event 
clustering. 
The traditional clustering based on MST is a splitting 
algorithm. In the traditional algorithm, the edges with larger 
weights are removed to form a forest, and every tree in the 
forest is a cluster. The time complexity of the algorithm is 
O(mlogn) (m is the number of edges, n is the number of 
vertices). Any shape and high dimensional data clustering 
problem can be processed. However, the MST algorithm has 
a great complexity, and it is difficult to determine when the 
algorithm reaches the optimal community structure. 
Therefore, an algorithm EN-MST (Event Network MST) 
using the event relation information of event network for 
event clustering is proposed. By querying the event ontology, 
an event network may contain the four types of relations in 
Definition 3. Because causal relation is the most important 
relationship, event network will be simplified as follow: 
remove the relations which are not causal relation and if they 
have common neighbors, the edges between them can be 
removed.  While utilizing MST algorithm, a simplified 
network will be faster. An example is shown in Figure 2： 
 
Figure 2.  Simplify the event network 
In the event network, the greater the weight, the 
relationship between the two events is more close, and the 
probability they are in the same community is greater. 
Therefore, the initial step of the algorithm is to construct a 
tree with the largest weights which is opposite to MST, that 
is, the edges with larger weights will be chosen rather than 
the smaller ones. The adjacent nodes in the tree have close 
relationship and they may be put in the same community. 
There exists several branches in a tree and nodes in the same 
branch are also probably in the same community. However, 
the granularity of community is too small just by using 
branch as the criteria, furthermore, the edge weight is not be 
considered. Perhaps, the community obtained is not accuracy. 
In this paper, Q-function method is improved by 
considering the branches information in the MST, which is 
defined as follow to avoid the shortcomings of Q-function: 







i j
branch
ij
i
j
i
j
ij
1
kk
Q
=
A -
δ(c, c)μ(b, b)
2m
2m
(4)       
where 
ib means the branch that node i belongs to. In MST, if 
there are not nodes whose degrees are more than 3 in the 
path from i to j, node i and j are in the same branch, 
i
j
μ(b, b)=1, otherwise, 
i
j
μ(b, b)=0. 
In the community discovery algorithm EN-MST, there 
are two main processes. The first one is to generate a 
minimum spanning tree and the second one is to remove the 
edges in the tree to get event communities based on the 
Qbranch function.  
The steps of EN-MST are described in the TABLE I: 
TABLE I.   STEPS OF EN-MST ALGORITHM 
Algorithm： EN-MST 
Step 1. Remove the edges with accompany relation and 
follow relation; 
Step 2. For the edges with causal relation, query the 
impact factors between two corresponding event classes from 
event ontology, and assign them to these edges, thus，get a 
weighted event network EN’; 
Step 3. Calculate all the paths between event pairs. A 2-
dimensions matrix B is to save status whether the two events are 
in the same branch. If node i and j are in the same branch, 
Bij=1, otherwise, Bij=0; 
Step 4. Generate a minimum tree ENTree from EN’ by the 
method of Prim. 
Step 5. Remove the edge with the lowest weight, query the 
matrix B to calculate the value of Qbranch and save the previous 
network condition.  
If (the value of Qbranch is higher than before) 
        Set Qbranch as the largest one;  
Else  
        Recover the previous network condition and the next 
edge is set as the lowest weight ; 
Step 6. Repeat Step 5 until all the edges are checked. Each 
sub-graph is a community in the event network. 
 
Figure 3 shows a minimum spanning tree which is generated 
from an event network. Three event communities are 
partitioned by EN-MST is shown in Figure 4. 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Figure 3.  A minimum spanning tree by using prim algorithm 
 
Figure 4.  The communities of earthquake event network generated by the 
EN-MST algorithm 
D. The efficiency of EN-MST 
In event network, semantic information is considered and 
unimportant edges are removed, which will improve the 
efficiency of minimum spanning tree algorithm. Compared 
to Girvan-Newman algorithm whose complexity is O(m2n), 
EN-MST only removes the edges according to their weights 
rather than calculates the edge betweenness, and the number 
of the edges is the number of nodes minus 1. Therefore, EN-
MST have higher efficiency. The time complexity of the 
algorithm in generating a minimum tree is O(mlogn) (m is 
the number of edges, n is the number of vertices). In the 
process of initializing the matrix B, the time complexity is 
O(n2), and the time complexity in the removal of edges is 
O(m). 
V. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS ANALYSIS 
A. Experimental corpus 
Impact factors between event classes are calculated by 
CEC corpus including different types of emergencies such as 
earthquake, traffic accident, bromatoxism, fire disaster and 
terrorist attack. Each of the stories from the corpus is 
considered to be a single topic. For each emergency, four 
stories are selected to be samples, and sub-topics are 
partitioned manually according to them. The rest of the 
stories in the corpus are selected as test corpus. 
TABLE II.  
SUB-TOPICS IN SAMPLES AND THEIR CORRESPONDING 
NUMBER OF EVENTS 
Sub-topics 
The number of events 
Emergency scene 
58 
The rescue 
41 
Remedial work 
19 
Cause of the incident 
16 
International concern 
10 
The donation 
7 
B. Experimental results and analysis 
In the test corpus, an event network is constructed for 
each story, and EN-MST algorithm is used for sub-topic 
partition. In the experiment, the result of the sub-topic 
partition is  represented by a relation between event nodes, 
that is,  two events are either assigned to the same sub-topic 
or different sub-topics. In a data set with n events, there are 
n(n-1)/2 event pairs. RI is to evaluate the performance of the 
algorithm according to the correct event pairs which is 
defined as follow: 
                      
#CD
RI = n(n - 1) / 2
                       (5) 
where #CD is the number of the correct decision on the 
event pairs. #CD = A+C. A is the number of the events pairs 
in which the two events belongs to the same sub-topic both 
according to the sample and the algorithm result. C is the 
number of the event pairs in which the two events belong to 
the different sub-topics both according to the sample and the 
algorithm result. It can be seen that 0<RI<1，The value of 
RI is larger，the performance of the algorithm is better. 
In the test set of the emergency corpus, 20 events are 
selected at random. The result of the sub-topic partition 
algorithm is compared to the sample corpus and the RI 
values are calculated by formula (5). In the step of 
generating a minimum tree, according to MST algorithm, the 
MST results are not unique, which may cause the variation 
of community discovery results. Therefore, we repeat this 
process 10 times, then take the average of RI values.  
 
Figure 5.  The result of sub-topic parition based on three methods. 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
TABLE III.  
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF SUB-TOPICS USING THE 
THREE OBJECTIVE FUNCTION 
Topics 
The average number of sub-topics 
TreeBra   Q-function 
Qbranch 
Earthquake 
5.6 
  2.3 
2.8 
Traffic accident  
5.4 
  3.1 
3.9 
Bromatoxism 
4.8 
  2.5 
3.4 
Fire disaster 
5.8 
  3.3 
3.7 
Terrorist attack 
6.2 
  3.6 
3.9 
 
In Figure 5, the X-coordinate represents the five kinds of 
emergency corpus, the Y-coordinate represents RI values. 
The RI value by using the method of TreeBra is the lowest. 
Although it is reasonable to partition community by 
removing the edges connecting two branches in a MST, the 
size of each sub-topic is too small,. Sub-topics contain less 
event nodes compared to the sample sub-topics. Thus, the 
objective partition result only by choosing the branches in 
the tree is not corresponding to the sample. Considering the 
edge weights, the Q-function method has higher RI values 
than TreeBra, because in an event network, the weights of 
edges play an important part in the removal of node edges 
and distinguishing whether two events are in the same 
community. However, the sub-topic partition result by the Q-
function is not very reasonable due to ignoring the 
information of nodes in the same branch. Compared to the 
above two methods, the algorithm using the objective 
function Qbranch reaches the highest RI value, in which the 
advantage of TreeBra and Q-function are taken.  
Besides RI value, TABLE III shows the average number 
of sub-topics in each event network. A sub-topic may either 
be the core event which can represent a topic, or the 
collection of some related events. The granularity of sub-
topic is a important factor to evaluating the partitioning 
result. In the method of TreeBra, the sub-topic number is the 
most, which means the granularity of the sub-topics is the 
smallest. In contrast to TreeBra, the size of the sub-topics 
obtained by the Q-function method is the largest, that means 
a sub-topic usually contains some events which do not 
belong to it. In comparison with TreeBra and Q-function, in 
the method of Qbranch, the number of events in each sub-topic 
is reasonable, and it is the most corresponding to the reality. 
Therefore, the EN-MST algorithm has the best performance 
in sub-topic partition.  
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, topics and news stories are represented by 
event networks, which are divided into event clusters by EN-
MST to extract sub-topics. A topic hierarchy structure is 
proposed, which includes topics, sub-topics and events. In 
comparison of the experiment results, EN-MST gets the 
highest RI values, and the granularity of the sub-topics are 
the most close to the sample. However, the MST is variation 
which will influence the results. In our further research, we 
will find a method to take the place of MST. Similarity 
calculation using sub-topic information will also be studied 
to improve the accuracy in TDT. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is supported by the Internal Natural Science 
Foundation of China, No. 60975033 and No.61074135, and 
Postgraduate Innovation Fund of Shanghai University 
(SHUCX112161). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Allan, J. Carbonell, G. Doddington, J. Yamron, and Y. Yang, 
"Topic detection and tracking pilot study: Final report," in 
Proceedings of the DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and 
Understanding Workshop, 1998, pp. 194-218. 
[2] 
J. Allan, V. Lavrenko, D. Frey, and V. Khandelwal, "UMass at TDT 
2000," TDT 2000 Workshop Notebook,2000, pp. 109-115. 
[3] 
Y. Hong, Y. Zhang, T. Liu, and S. Li, "Topic Detection and Tracking 
Review," Journal of Chinese Information Processing, vol. 21, pp. 71-
87, 2007. 
[4] 
J. Fiscus, "Results of the 2003 Topic Detection and Tracking 
Evaluation," in Proc. LREC, 2003. 
[5] 
Z. Li, B. Wang, M. Li, and W. Y. Ma, "A probabilistic model for 
retrospective news event detection," In Proceedings of SIGIR, 2005, 
pp. 106-113. 
[6] 
G. P. C. Fung, J. X. Yu, P. S. Yu, and H. Lu, "Parameter free bursty 
events detection in text streams," In VLDB, 2005, pp. 181-192. 
[7] 
W. Lam, H. Meng, K. Wong, and J. Yen, "Using contextual analysis 
for news event detection," International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 
vol. 16, pp. 525-546, 2001. 
[8] 
J. Makkonen, "Investigations on event evolution in TDT," In 
Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the North American Chapter 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics on Human 
Language Technology, 2003, pp. 43-48. 
[9] 
R. Nallapati, A. Feng, F. Peng, and J. Allan, "Event threading within 
news topics," In Proceedings of the Thirteenth ACM conference on 
Information and Knowledge Management, 2004, pp. 446-453 
[10] D. Anicic, P. Fodor, S. Rudolph, and N. Stojanovic, "Ep-sparql: a 
unified language for event processing and stream reasoning," in 
Proceedings of The 20th International Conference on World Wide 
Web, New York, 2011, pp. 635-644. 
[11] M. Girvan and M. E. J. Newman, "Community structure in social and 
biological networks," Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, vol. 99, p. 7821, 2002. 
[12] M. E. J. Newman, "Analysis of weighted networks," Physical Review 
E, vol. 70, p. 056131, 2004. 
[13] A. Noack, "Energy models for graph clustering," Journal of Graph 
Algorithms and Applications, vol. 11, pp. 453-480, 2007. 
[14] O. Grygorash, Y. Zhou, and Z. Jorgensen, "Minimum spanning tree 
based clustering algorithms," IEEE International Conference on Tools 
with AI, 2006, pp. 73-81. 
[15] W. Liu, W. Xu, J. Fu, Z. Liu, and Z. Zhong, "An extended description 
logic for event ontology," Advances in Grid and Pervasive 
Computing, pp. 471-481, 2010. 
[16] J. Fu, W. Liu, Z. Liu, and S. Zhu, "A Study of Chinese Event 
Taggability," IEEE Computer Society 2010, 2010, pp. 400-404. 
[17] Z. ZHONG, "Event Ontology and Its Application in Query 
Expansion," [PhD thesis] Shanghai University, 2010. 
 
 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

