Proposal of Continuous Audit Model
Data Integration Framework
Mauricio Mello Codesso
Graduate Program of Accounting
Federal University of Santa Catarina - UFSC
Florianopolis, Brazil
mmcodesso@gmail.com
Rogerio Joao Lunkes
Graduate Program of Accounting
Federal University of Santa Catarina - UFSC
Florianopolis, Brazil
rogerio.lunkes@ufsc.br
Paulo Caetano da Silva
Graduate Program of Information Systems
University of Salvador – UNIFACS
paulo.caetano@pro.unifacs.br
Abstract—The approximation of business areas with the
use of new technologies, real-time savings, transactions
with several countries and on several continents with
different law guarantees are necessary. These warranties
can be acquired through Continuous Audit (CA). Some
research
contributions
may
be
listed
as:
provide
a
standardization of data and nomenclatures for the data
used by Continuous Audit procedures; re-use of previously
developed detection and analysis algorithms; reduction of
the development and implementation costs of the processes
of
continuous
audit
in
organizations
due
to
the
standardization of data and the reutilization of algorithm;
encouragement for the creation of a repository of public
access algorithms. The paper also aims to contribute to the
literature with the deepening of ways to access, structure
and collect critical and / or necessary data for CA. With the
deepening of Audit Data Standard and eXtensible Business
Reporting Language (XBRL), as well as creating a basis for
future research with the integration of extraction, analysis
and exception detection algorithms that are used by CA.
Keywords-Continuous
Audit;
XBRL;
Audit;
Audit
Framework
I.
INTRODUCTION
Real-time economics and globalization have caused an
increase in the amount of data that is captured and stored.
This change is also facilitated by lower costs of storage, e-
commerce, and increased use of information technology in
business, such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
systems, which generate huge amounts of transactional data
for users. Various business systems have been developed to
support decision making, planning and control, as well as
monitoring organizational performance [1][2]. However, this
phenomenon of high data volume requires a different
approach to audit.
After conducting a global fraud research, the Association
of Certified
Fraud
Examiners found
that
fraud
costs
organizations 5% of their annual income. The average time
to detect and report frauds was 18 months. Confidence has
been in traditional external audits as the primary fraud
detection technique, however, these have only accounted for
3% of frauds. On the other hand, the implementation of
controls to detect frauds has been proven effectiveness in
reducing costs and extent of fraud [3].
Companies are increasingly dependent on computerized
systems, such as ERPs, to handle their business processes.
This process of business computerization, coupled with real-
time economics, encourages and requires companies to
generate data in a timely manner. To extract useful
information, and finally knowledge that can support decision
making [4], it is essential to ensure the quality and reliability
of this data [5].
Advances in technology enable real-time or near-real-
time monitoring; however, audit services have evolved at a
much slower pace. Most of these services are still performed
manually, an approach that is time-consuming and costly [6].
This comes in contrast to the technology currently available,
which can offer ongoing credibility support.
Various aspects of the audit need to be reviewed. While
traditional audit takes a sample-based approach, mainly due
to time constraints and budgets, continuous audit examines
the entire population of record. Companies can benefit from
the use of automation and technology to improve the
efficiency
and
effectiveness
of
auditing
through
the
implementation of continuous auditing systems. Companies
can lower the cost of work associated with audits by taking
advantage of computerized technology and systems. In
addition, this can increase the efficiency of their production
[7][8].
Continuous Audit is an audit process that produces audit
results simultaneously or in a short time after a relevant
event occurs [9]. The continuous auditing implementation is
only feasible as a fully automated process and with
immediate access to relevant events and their results. To
meet these requirements, systems must be permanently
connected, for both auditors and auditees.
Continuous auditing begins to gain more space as
organizations
gain
more
automation
in
their
business
processes and, therefore, the requirements for monitoring
business risk [10]. However, the development of continuous
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

auditing has enormous technological and organizational
challenges. The wide variety of software used in companies
makes it difficult for auditors to develop integrated auditing
systems. Many pieces of such software were designed as
stand-alone
systems,
with
little
or
no
network
communication capability. However, the current stage of
ERP development demonstrates a greater tendency for
standardization and better integration with other subsystems
[11].
Traditional audits and
the use of small
sampling
techniques are progressively less effective when dealing with
large
volumes
of
data.
Unlike
traditional
auditing,
continuous auditing does not work with samples, it analyzes
the entire transaction population, which allows the change
from manual detection to the development of prevention
capabilities [12]. O’Reilly [13] points out the benefits
generated using CA methodologies:
•
Make the audit process faster, cheaper, more
efficient and more effective;
•
Reduce the time needed for audit cycles, providing
better response times for risk control and reliability of
operations;
•
Increase the coverage of audit work
without
increasing the amount of resources needed;
•
Enable the conduction of audits daily, monthly or in
the interval of time that is deemed appropriate;
•
Automate periodic audit testing, improving audit
execution time;
•
Test 100% of the data population in the audit work
and not just a sample;
•
Improve the quality of the audit and its speed.
CA allows corrective action to be taken sooner than
traditional approaches. The focus of the audit will shift from
manual detection to technology-based prevention [14]. The
CA allows the auditor to analyze the data more frequently by
performing control and risk assessment in a real-time
environment. It allows the opportunity to go beyond
traditional auditing approaches, such as sampling and
analyzing at a specific point in time, providing automatic and
timely detection of failures in controls and exception
situations, directing efforts to find the facts and remedies
needed [12].
Real-time monitoring techniques can reduce errors and
fraud, increase operational efficiency and profits [12].
Sarbanes & Oxley (SOX) defines rules and conditions for
auditing and controlling operational risks, which has created
complex demands for companies. The legal requirement of
financial statements to be published in real time led to the
need for transactions to also be audited in real time [14].
The required control for compliance with legislation has
forced companies to look for ways to meet this requirement
at acceptable costs. The CA has been gaining strength due to
the possibility of automating risk control through the early
perception of possible problems, by using internal control to
act in a preventive and no longer detective way [12].
Continuous auditing and monitoring can improve the
efficiency of auditing work through automation and adoption
of an audit-by-exception approach. In this approach, the total
population is analyzed and only exceptions are investigated.
This is a type of audit that can be done more often, in which
exceptions are identified, and alarms are sent to those
responsible to correct these errors. If they fail to correct the
errors in a timely manner, the internal audit department may
be notified to act [15].
In the literature, there are numerous studies that use
statistical tests and techniques to identify exceptions [16]
[17]. The proposed methodologies are efficient in helping
auditors to identify anomalies and exceptions [18] [19].
However, these studies do not integrate with each other, and
do not address the issue of data availability and extraction
ways.
Flowerday
et
al. [14]
describe
problems
affecting
continuous auditing solutions is the variety of data formats
and records, including legacy systems that are crucial to
creating continuous audit system. For this, it is necessary that
there is an evaluation and standardization of this data so that
there are no processing errors.
The standardization of data format is the most complex
and challenging aspect for building CA capabilities, which
may entail high costs and complexity due to the need to
collect information from different systems [20].
In light of the exposed issues and the difficulties pointed
out by previous studies, the following problem question
arises: How to standardize the data of the various systems so
that it is possible to implement continuous audit?
A.
Research Objetives
The general objective of the paper is to propose the
development of a framework for integration of different
systems for continuous auditing.
B.
Specific Objetives
•
Identify the structure of XBRL and Audit Data
Standard templates;
•
Define methodology and definition of classes and
attributes;
•
Identify flowchart of processes and data;
•
Test the model and framework
II.
BACKGROUND
Continuous Audit studies present as difficulties the
availability
and
high
cost
of
data
access
for
the
implementation of monitoring routines. As a consequence,
what is lacking in the academic and professional literature is
a deeper analysis of how to collect, structure, and elaborate
sampling of critical data for Audit analysis. This omission of
methods and standards can undermine the work of the
auditor by multiplying his sample bases beyond what is
necessary, which will lead to auditing in a larger number of
substantive tests as well as too many analytical procedures
[21]. The ability to access and retrieve information from a
variety of sources, including legacy systems, is a crucial
point in creating a CA system. This makes it important to
standardize data. However, this can be a complex and costly
process [14].
The high investments required for CA implementation
are pointed out in [14] as a difficulty to be overcome for
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

adoption. Similarly, the financial scandals that occurred in
large organizations over the last decade, due to the execution
of internal frauds, have amplified the performance of the
audit, which needs to carry out analyzes in an instantaneous
way and in opportune moments. In addition, the rigidity of
regulatory requirements, such as the Sarbanes & Oxley
(SOX) Act and Corporate Governance principles that offer a
high level of transparency and an organized and well-
managed internal control environment, have increased the
importance of Auditing, be it internal or external [21].
The need for instant and steady security about the
efficiency of risk management and the internal control
environment
is
critical.
Organizations
are
exposed
to
significant errors, fraud and inefficiencies that can lead to
financial losses and increased risk exposure [22].
A.
Research Contributions
The paper aims to contribute empirically, with the
development of a framework for the application of CA in
organizations. This will help companies in their projects of
Continuous Audit.
The approximation of the business areas with the use of
new technologies, real-time savings, transactions
with
several countries and in several continents with different
law guarantees. are necessary. These warranties can be
acquired through AC. Some research contributions may be
listed as:
•
Provide a standardization of data and nomenclatures
for the data used by Continuous Audit procedures;
•
Re-use
of
previously
developed
detection
and
analysis algorithms;
•
Reduction of the development and implementation
costs of the processes of continuous audit in the
organizations due to the standardization of data and
the reutilization of algorithm;
•
Encourage the creation of a repository of public
access algorithms.
The paper also aims to contribute to the literature with
the deepening of ways to access, structure and collect
critical and / or necessary data for CA. With the deepening
of Audit Data Standard and XBRL, as well as creating a
basis for future research with the integration of extraction,
analysis and exception detection algorithms that are used by
CA.
REFERENCES
[1]
Bernhard, A. How Big Data brings BI, predictive analytics
together,
2012.
Disponível
em
http://www.cio.com/article/716726/
How_Big_Data_Brings_BI_Predictive_Analytics_Together.
[2]
Vijayan, J. (2012). Finding the business value in big data is a
big
problem.
Disponível
em
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/
9231224/
Finding_the_business_value_in_big_data_is_a_big_proble m
[3]
Ratley, J. Report to the Nations: On occupational fraud and
abuse.
2012.
Disponível
em
http://www.acfe.com/uploadedFiles/ACFE_
Website/Content/rttn/2012-report-to-nations.pdf.
[4]
Elliott, R., Kielich, J. Expert systems for accountants. Journal
of Accountancy,1985.
[5]
Vasarhelyi, M., Chan, D., Krahel, J. (2012). Consequences of
XBRL standardization on financial statement data. Journal of
Information Systems. v. 26, n. 1, 2012, p. 155-167.
[6]
Vasarhelyi, M., Alles, M., Williams, K. Continuous assurance
for
the
now economy.
Sydney,
Australia:
Institute
of
Chartered Accountants in Australia, 2010
[7]
Elliott, R. Assurance services and the audit heritage. CPA
Journal, 68(6),1998, p. 40.
[8]
Menon, K., Williams, D. Long-term trends in audit fees.
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory, 2001.
[9]
Vasarhelyi, M., Romero, S., Kuenkaikaew, S., Littley, J.
Adopting
Continuous
Audit/
Continuous
Monitoring
in
Internal Audit. ISACA Journal vol. 3, 2012, P. 31
[10] Vasarhelyi, M.; Alles, M; Kogan, A. Principles of analytic
monitoring for continuous assurance.
Journal of Emerging
Technologies in Accounting, v.1, p.1-21, 2004
[11] Kogan, A., Sudit, E., Vasarhelyi, M. Continuous online
auditing: a program of research. Journal of Information
Systems, 13(2), 1999, p. 87–103.
[12] Li, Y. et al. Achieving Sarbanes-oxley compliance with
XBRL-based
ERP
and
Continuous Auditing.
Issues in
Information Systems, v. VIII n. 2, 2007, p. 430-436
[13] O’Reilly, A. Continuous auditing: wave of the future?.
Corporate Board, set./oct. 2006.
[14] Flowerday, S.; Blundell, A.; Von Solms, R.
Continuous
auditing technologies and models: A discussion. Computer &
Security. n. 25, 2006, p. 325-331.
[15] Alles, M., Kogan, A., Vasarhelyi, M. Putting continuous
auditing
theory into
practice:
Lessons
from two
pilot
implementations. Journal of Information Systems, 22(2),
2008, p. 195–214.
[16] Dull, R., Tegarden, D., Schleifer, L. Actve: a proposal for an
automated continuous transaction verification environment.
Journal of Emerging Technologies, 3(1), 2006, p. 81–96.
[17] Groomer, S., MURTHY, U. Continuous auditing of database
applications: An embedded audit module approach. Journal of
Information Systems, 3(2),1989, p. 53–69.
[18] Alles,
M.,
Brennan,
G.,
Kogan,
A.,
Vasarhelyi,
M.
Continuous monitoring of business process controls: A pilot
implementation of a continuous auditing system at Siemens.
International Journal of Accounting A42Information Systems,
7(2), 2006, p. 137–161.
[19] Debreceny, R., Gray, G., Tham, W., Goh, K., Tang, P. The
Development
of Embedded
Audit Modules to
Support
Continuous Monitoring, Electronic Commerce Environment,
185, 2003, p. 169–185.
[20] Rezaee, Z. et al. Continuous auditing: Building Automated
Auditing Capability. Auditing. Journal of Practice & Theory.
v. 21 n. 1, 2002, p.147-163.
[21] Silva, W. Auditoria contínua de dados como instrumento de
automação do controle empresarial. 2012. Tese (Doutorado
em Sistemas Digitais) - Escola Politécnica, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo, 2012.
[22] Bumgarner, N., Vasarhelyi, M. Continuous Auditing - A New
View, Audit Analytics and Continuous Audit: Looking
Toward The Future, AICPA, New York, 2015.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

