A Study of the Effects of Scaffolded Assessment on the Learning Effectiveness in 
Network Peer Assessment Activities 
 
Chien-I Lee , Ya-Fei Yang, and Shin-Yi Mai 
Department of Information and Learning Technology, 
National University of Tainan,  
Tainan, Taiwan 
e-mail: {leeci@mail.nutn.edu.tw, cillia55@gmail.com, maitz3@hotmail.com} 
 
 
Abstract—Peer assessment has been considered an important 
process for learning, However, students may not offer 
constructive feedback due to lack of expertise knowledge in 
network assessment activities. Scaffolding can be offered to 
students timely to assist in peer assessment. Therefore, to 
address this issue, this study proposed a scaffolded assessment 
approach accordingly. To evaluate the effectiveness of the 
proposed 
approach, 
the 
quasi-experimental design 
was 
employed to investigate the effects of scaffolded assessment for 
self-critiques and peer assessment on students’ learning 
effectiveness in the network assessment activities. A total of 
ninety 7th graders participated in the experiment, and divided 
into three groups with or without the scaffolding critique. The 
results show that the validity in the network peer assessment 
has been well demonstrated, indicating scaffolded assessment 
could enhance the validity of the network peer assessment. 
Moreover, the participants’ learning effectiveness is also 
enhanced. In addition, the participants showed a positive 
learning attitude toward the network assessment activities and 
agreed that the network assessment activities could enhance 
the participants’ interactions between the peers and instructor. 
All in all, the proposed scaffolded assessment enables the 
participants to offer constructive feedback in the assessment 
activities. 
Keywords-Network Peer Assessment; Scaffolding; Validity; 
Learning Effectiveness; Learning Attitude 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Research on network peer assessment had been 
extensively studied and indicated that network peer 
assessment has positive effects on learning [11]. Due to rapid 
development of network technologies, disadvantages of 
paper-pencil based peer assessment have been gradually 
corrected and then replaced by network assessment. 
Individuals who share common interests, feelings, or ideas 
over the Internet form a virtual community in which learners 
evaluate peers' works, receive feedback from peers, modify 
their original works based on peer assessment, and then 
make their works become better [14][18].  
Peer assessment enables learners to gain diverse ideas 
and inspiration, enhances their higher order thinking skills, 
and offers peers opportunities to learn from each other, 
which can promote learners' learning motivation and 
achievements [7][16][17][22]. Network peer assessment 
defined as students are given the needed knowledge to tasks 
review and feedback in peer assessment process through the 
Internet. Basically, network peer assessment is similar with 
peer assessment [12][13]. 
However, the lack of expertise may result in weak 
feedback and comments due to student incomprehension and 
misunderstanding of works during the peer assessment [5]. 
Thus, the appropriate support and scaffold given to student is 
needed, in which facilitate students to offer proper comments 
for their peers works [21]. Learners can observe peers’ works, 
understand their learning progress, reflect on self-learning, 
and then provide feedback to peers for further improvement 
[1]. In addition, peers may gain more feedback from diverse 
backgrounds of peers understanding toward the works than 
that from teachers [2]. Previous research have proved the 
effectiveness of the scaffolded assessment. For instance, Cho, 
Schunn, and Wilson [3] stated that scaffolded assessment 
could facilitate evaluators to assess given tasks precisely.  
Thus, this study proposes the scaffolded assessment for 
self-critiques and peer assessment by using self-critiques 
and peer feedback as an evaluation basis. To evaluate the 
effectiveness of the proposed approach, the quasi-
experimental design was employed to investigate the effects 
of scaffolded assessment for self-critiques and peer 
assessment on students’ learning effectiveness and learning 
attitude in the network assessment activities. 
In this paper, a survey of related work will be studied in 
Section II. Section III is our research framework. The 
experimental process and activities will be given in Section 
IV. Section V describes the research tools. Section VI shows 
the experiment results. Finally, the conclusions and some 
future work are given in Section VII. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Peer Assessment 
The concept of peer assessment is from Peer Assisted 
Learning (PAL) and multiple assessments. Types of PAL 
include peer tutoring, peer modeling, peer education, peer 
counseling, peer monitoring, and peer assessment [15]. 
Topping [14] stated that peer assessment is performed by 
students with similar degree of knowledge or background. 
Students not only have to learn knowledge and accomplish 
their assignments but also play a role as a tutor to observe 
and evaluate peers’ works. Then, students receive peer 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

feedback and modify their original assignments. Isaacs [6] 
mentioned that peer assessment is an activity in which 
students demonstrate their own works to peers for 
assessment. Peers who participate in assessment activities 
must have the same educational background or be in the 
same class, and they play roles of being an author, evaluator, 
and evaluatee. Students have to observe, evaluate, and 
compare by playing different roles in multiple activities 
which can enhance their diverse thinking abilities and 
learning effectiveness. 
B.  Network Peer Assessment 
Network peer assessment is also called as web-based 
peer assessment, in which students can facilitate contacts, 
assist in brainstorming and generate meaningful learning 
[10]. With the application of the Internet, students can 
observe and evaluate peers' assignments on a network 
teaching platform and receive feedback from peers, and then 
they can modify their original works based on the received 
feedback [8][14][18]. Knoy, Lin, Liu, and Yuan [9] stated 
that the three advantages of network peer assessment are: 1) 
to ensure anonymity and enhance peers' willingness to 
evaluate, 2) easy for teachers to monitor learning and 
evaluation process which reduce paper waste and copying 
cost, and 3) convenient for students to demonstrate their 
assignments for peer assessment. 
C.  Saffolding 
The concept of scaffolding is based on Vygotsky's 
learning theory. Scaffolding is the process of teaching 
children, which is similar to the construction of a house, by 
realizing children's characteristics, offering appropriate 
assistance, and ensuring that children have full support. 
When children are able to independently solve specific 
problems, support or assistance may be gradually reduced to 
develop their own problem solving ability. Once they can 
independently solve various problems without assistance, 
then scaffolding can be removed. Vygotsky [19] indicated 
development is the transformation of socially shared 
activities into internalized processes. The concept of 
scaffolding is similar to the Zone of Proximal Development 
(ZPD), in which instructors or peers with better academic 
performance can provide scaffoldings to assist students to 
develop their learning ability and achieve the goal of 
transferring learning. As learners’ ability is enhanced, they 
can learn independently and construct their own knowledge 
which is the time to gradually reduce scaffolding. Thus, with 
scaffolded 
assessment, 
students 
can 
construct 
new 
knowledge and enhance their ability through peer feedback. 
III. 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
This study aims to investigate the effects of scaffolded 
assessment on the students' learning effectiveness and 
validity of the network peer assessment. Since Modular 
Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment (Moodle) 
[23] is a free software e-learning platform with three 
functions: management of website, learning, and course, it 
can run on Windows and Mac and is easy to access and 
manage. Thus, this study uses Moodle to construct a network 
peer assessment system in which the instructor can upload 
and manage course content, and students can upload their 
assignments, conduct peer assessment, and view their scores. 
The students’ assignments, scores, and behaviors are 
recorded in the database. After the network peer assessment 
activities are completed, this study uses the SPSS 17.0 
statistical software [24] to analyze the data.  
This study investigates the effects of different scaffolded 
assessment approaches on the learning effectiveness, 
learning attitudes, and validity of the network peer 
assessment. The variables include independent, dependent, 
and control ones, which are specified as follows: 
1) The independent variable: Providing the scaffolded 
assessment.  
a) The experimental group I is given the scaffolded 
assessment for self-critiques.  
b) The experimental group II is given the scaffolded peer 
assessment.  
c) The control group would not receive any scaffolded 
assessment when evaluating the other members’ assignments 
in the network peer assessment activities. 
2) The dependent variable:  
a) Validity on the assessment: The validity refers to the 
consistency between the earned scores from the peer and 
instructor in this study.  
b) Learning effectiveness: A student's final score on his or 
her assignment is the mean of the earned scores from the 
three network peer assessment activities.  
c) Learning attitude: The leaning attitude indicates that the 
students’ attitudes toward the network peer assessment 
activities. 
3) The control variable:  
a) Instructor: The instructor is a full-time computer 
instructor.  
b) Course hour: The instructor would complete the 
teaching instruction in a 45-minute class in the first week of 
the network peer assessment activities.  
c) Course content: The 5th and 6th chapters, which are 
“my creative photos” and “my creative photo frames”, 
respectively, of the textbook.  
d) Same softwares, PhotoCap 6 and Photo Magician, used 
to complete the course assignment in a computer lab. 
The students of the two experimental groups and the 
control group would have the same course hours, learn the 
same content, and be taught by the same computer instructor 
in the same learning environment. 
A. Participants 
The participants of this study were from three classes of 
the 7th grade, with a total of 90 students who participated in 
the network peer assessment activities. They possess basic 
computer ability to implement the software, PhotoCap 6, and 
access computers, such as collection information, uploading 
and downloading data from the Internet. The participants are 
normally grouped by age in the junior high school. Three 
classes of the 7th graders are randomly selected and labeled 
as the experimental group I with 30 students conducted with 
self-critique for reference, the experimental group II with 29 
students conducted with other peers' critique for reference, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

and the control group with  31 students conducted without 
any reference.  
B. Network peer assessment 
Moodle is an open Course Management System (CMS) 
based on the theory of social construction. Moodle is 
supported by a large international community of educators 
because of the three main functions: management of website, 
learning, and course. It has an easy to learn user interface 
which enables instructors to manage their courses, and 
students can learn course content independently by opening a 
web browser and linking to the teaching platform. The 
proposed network peer assessment system is constructed by 
Moodle 2.4.1 and AppServ software. AppServ can configure 
Apache, PHP, and MySQL to form an integrated 
environment for the experimental activities. MySQL is used 
to construct the backend database.  
The interfaces of the proposed network peer assessment 
system shows in Figure 1. The network peer assessment 
system is installed on the serve host system. The instructor 
and students have to access the Internet, link to the server, 
and enter the network peer assessment system. Student 
account and password required based on the course 
enrollment by teachers. Figure 2 shows the peer assessment 
activities announce and assessing records in the system. 
Students can observe and evaluate peers' assignments on a 
network teaching platform and receive feedback from peers.  
 
Figure 1.  Student entry interface of the network peer assessment system 
 
Figure 2.  Peer assessment activity announced in the System 
IV. 
THE DESIGN OF THE EXPERIMENTAL 
ACTIVITIES 
A. The experimental implementation phase 
After the preparation phase of the first four weeks, the 
experimental activities would be carried out for seven weeks. 
The details of the experimental activities are described in 
Table I.  
TABLE I.  
THE DETAILS OF THE EXPERIMENTAL ACTIVITIES 
  
1st week 
Experimental groups I and II. The control group 
1. Explanation of  the course assignment and grading policy 
2.The participants are required to upload their assignments to 
the system after the instructor delivered instruction 
2nd week 
Experimental groups I and II. The control group 
Completed the assignments, evaluated the other peers' 
assignments, offered feedback.  
3rd week 
The experimental group I 
Modified their original assignments based on the received 
feedback from their peers, provided self-critiques on their 
modified assignments,  and then uploaded them to the 
proposed system in the first activity 
3rd week 
Experimental group II. The control group 
Modified their original assignments based on the received 
feedback from their peers and then uploaded them to the 
proposed system in the first activity 
4th week 
Experimental group I 
Read the evaluatees’ self-critiques and evaluated the 
assignments in the second activity. 
4th week 
Experimental group II 
Read the other members’ feedback, which was offered in the 
first network peer assessment activity, and then evaluated the 
assignments in the second activity. 
4th week 
The control group 
Evaluated the peers’ assignments in the second activity. 
5th week 
Experimental groups I  
Modified their assignments again based on the received 
feedback from their peers, provided self-critiques on their 
modified assignments, and uploaded them to the system 
5th week 
Experimental groups II. The control group 
Read the other members’ feedback, 
modified 
their 
assignments again, and uploaded them to the system 
6th week 
Experimental group I 
Read the evaluatees’ self-critiques and evaluated the 
assignments in the third activity. 
6th week 
Experimental group II 
Read the other members’ feedback on the assignments, 
which was offered in the first and second assessment 
activities, and then evaluated the third activity. 
6th week 
The control group 
Evaluated the peers’ assignments. 
7th week 
Experimental groups I and II. The control group 
After completing all the three assessment activities, the 
participants are required to fill in the network peer 
assessment attitude scale in the system 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

B. The result analysis phase 
After the experimental activities are completed, the 
instructor and the teaching assistant would also evaluate the 
participants’ assignments. The mean of the two given scores 
from the instructor and teaching assistant would be the 
earned score from the instructor on each participant's 
assignment. The scores from the instructor and peers would 
be incorporated for further analysis and investigation. The 
instructor has been a computer instructor for five year and 
fully familiar with the course content. The teaching assistant 
is also familiar with the necessary knowledge and skills 
required in this computer course. 
V. 
RESEARCH TOOLS 
This study uses the peer assessment score sheet as a tool 
for the participants to score the other members' assignments 
during the network peer assessment activities. The instructor 
has to explain the scoring criteria to the participants in the 
first week of the experimental activities. The scoring 
guidelines are developed based on the discussion between 
the teacher and participants. The peer assessment score sheet 
is used to evaluate the participants’ assignments based on 
accuracy, expression, and completeness. The lowest score is 
1, and the highest score is 100 on the peer assessment score 
sheet.  
This study modifies the Wen and Tsai’s [20] 
questionnaire, which originally had 34 items with five-point 
Likert scale (1: strongly disagree, 5: strongly agree), with an 
aim to investigate students' perceptions of network peer 
assessment. The instrument contains four subscales: positive 
attitude (PAS), online attitude (OAS), understanding-and-
action (UAS), and negative attitude (NAS). The analysis 
results showed that the reliability of the four individual 
subscales took values more than 0.63 and 0.8 for the overall 
reliability. Thus, the questionnaire has high reliability which 
can be used to evaluate the students' attitudes toward 
network peer assessment.  
The modified questionnaire contains 20 items. One of the 
three classes was randomly selected to evaluate the reliability 
and validity of the modified questionnaire. The results show 
that the Alpha coefficient takes a value of 0.6 for the four 
individual subscales and 0.86 for all the four subscales, 
indicating that the modified questionnaire is adequately 
reliable [4].  
VI. 
RESULTS 
The participants are required to complete the three 
assessment activities in this experiment. The valid sample 
size of the experimental group I is 25, making the 
completing rate of 83.3%. The valid sample size of the 
experimental group II is 26, making the completing rate of 
89.7%. The valid sample size of the control group is 25, 
making the completing rate of 90.3%. 
A. The reliability analysis 
This study investigates the reliability between the 
scaffolded and non-scaffolded assessment activities. The 
experimental group I is given the scaffolded assessment for 
self-critiques. The experimental group II is given the 
scaffolding peer assessment. The control group would not 
receive any scaffolded assessment when evaluating the other 
members’ assignments in the network peer assessment 
activities. This study uses the Pearson’s correlation 
coefficient to measure the reliability between the scores from 
the instructor and teaching assistant. The results show that 
the reliability between the scores from the instructor and 
teaching assistant on the participants’ assignments are 
positively correlated in the three assessment activities. The 
Pearson's correlation coefficient takes values more than 0.8, 
indicating that the scores from both the instructor and 
teaching assistant are adequately reliable and can be an 
external criterion for the validation of the network peer 
assessment. 
B. The validity analysis of the scaffolded assessment for 
self-critiques in the experimental group I. 
 This study uses the scores from both the instructor and 
teaching assistant as the external criterion to examine 
whether the validity of the scaffolded assessment for self-
critiques is enhanced in the network assessment activities. As 
can be seen in Table II, the results show that the scores from 
the instructor and peers are significantly positively correlated 
in the three network assessment activities, and the correlation 
coefficients, which take values between 0.5 to 0.7, gradually 
increase.  
TABLE II.  
THE PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THE  
SCORES FROM THE INSTRUCTOR AND PEERS IN THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP 
I 
Assessment 
activities 
Evaluator 
n 
Mean 
SD 
r 
The 1st 
Instructor 
25 
73.44 
8.905 
0.525** 
Peers 
76.68 
12.284 
The 2nd  
Instructor 
25 
77.14 
5.467 
0.624** 
Peers 
79.04 
7.738 
The 3rd  
Instructor 
25 
84.25 
5.592 
0.695** 
Peers 
83.96 
6.465 
** p<0.01 
 
The consistency between the scores from the instructor and 
peers are enhanced after the second network assessment 
activity. 
C.  The validity analysis of the scaffolded peer assessment 
in the experimental group II 
This study uses the scores from both the instructor and 
teaching assistant as the external criterion to examine 
whether the validity of the scaffolded peer assessment is 
enhanced in the network assessment activities. As it can be 
seen in Table III, the results show that the scores from the 
instructor and peers are significantly positively correlated in 
the first network assessment activity when p < 0.05.  
The scores from the instructor and peers are significantly 
positively correlated in the second network assessment 
activity when p < 0.01, and their correlation coefficient takes 
values between 0.4 to 0.8. Thus, the consistency between the 
scores from the instructor and peers is enhanced. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

TABLE III.  
THE PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THE 
SCORES IN THE EXPERIMENTAL GROUP II 
Assessment 
activities 
Evaluator 
n 
Mean 
SD 
r 
The 1st 
Instructor 
2
6 
67.23 
8.823 
0.478* 
Peers 
67.35 
10.737 
The 2nd  
Instructor 
2
6 
71.43 
7.407 
0.694** 
Peers 
71.35 
11.788 
The 3rd  
Instructor 
2
6 
82.60 
8.404 
0.713** 
Peers 
83.31 
9.388 
*p<0.05; ** p<0.01 
D. The validity analysis of the control group 
This study uses the scores from both the teacher and 
teaching assistant as the external criterion to investigate the 
consistency between the earned scores from the instructor 
and peers on the same assignment in the network assessment 
activities. As it can be seen in Table IV, the results show that 
the scores from the instructors and peers are significantly 
positively correlated in the first and second network 
assessment activities.  
TABLE IV.  
THE PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THE 
SCORES IN THE CONTROL GROUP 
Assessment 
activities 
Evaluator 
n 
Mean 
SD 
r 
The 1st 
Instructor 
28 
70.82 
8.147 
0.684** 
Peers 
79.36 
11.656 
The 2nd  
Instructor 
28 
76.11 
6.632 
0.417* 
Peers 
80.86 
10.302 
The 3rd  
Instructor 
28 
87.19 
4.865 
0.117 
Peers 
82.18 
10.890 
*p<0.05 ; **p<0.01 
 
However, the results show that the scores from the 
instructor and peers are not significantly correlated in the 
third network assessment activity. The process of repeatedly 
turning in, evaluating, and modifying assignments reduce 
the validity of peer assessment due to the lack of patience 
and motivation. 
E. The comparison between the validity analyses of the 
two experimental groups and control group 
As it can be seen in Table V, in the condition of no 
scaffolded assessment, the Pearson correlation coefficients 
between the scores from the instructor and peers are 
significantly positively correlated in the experimental group I 
and control group when p < 0.01 in the first assessment 
activity. The Pearson correlation coefficient between the 
scores from the instructor and peers is significantly 
positively correlated in the experimental group II when 
p<0.05. The results show that the validity of the network 
assessment activities is significantly enhanced in the two 
experimental groups, and the validity of the network 
assessment activities is significantly reduced in the control 
group. Moreover, the validity of the network assessment 
activities in the experimental group I is higher than that in 
the experimental group II, indicating that the consistency of 
the scores from the instructor and peers in the experimental 
group II is higher than that in the experimental group I. 
F. The analysis of learning effectiveness of the three 
groups 
This study investigates the effects of scaffolded 
assessment on the students' learning effectiveness by 
comparing the results of the three assessment activities from 
the three groups. Since the three groups are not provided 
with the scaffolded assessment in the first assessment 
activity, this study performs the one-way ANCOVA where 
the students' scores in the first assessment activity are treated 
as a covariate to investigate the effects of the scaffolded 
assessment on the students' learning effectiveness in the 
second and third assessment activities. With regard to the 
second network assessment activity, since the assumption of 
the homogeneity of regression coefficient within groups was 
satisfied, the ANCOVA test was then performed. As it can 
be seen in Table VI, there is no significant difference among 
the three groups in the second assessment activity (F = 1.603 
and p= 0.208 > 0.05), indicating that the students' learning 
effectiveness does not have a significant difference among 
the three groups in the second assessment activity.  
TABLE V.  
THE PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN THE 
SCORES IN THE THREE GROUPS 
Assessment 
activities 
Group 
n 
r 
The 1st 
Experimental groups I  
25 
0.525** 
Experimental groups II 
26 
0.478* 
Control group 
28 
0.684** 
The 2nd   
Experimental groups I  
25 
0.624** 
Experimental groups II 
26 
0.694** 
Control group 
28 
0.417* 
The 3rd 
Experimental groups I  
25 
0.695** 
Experimental groups II 
26 
0.713** 
Control group 
28 
0.117 
*p<0.05; **p<0.01 
 
The results also show that the effects of providing the 
scaffolded assessment on the students' learning effectiveness 
in the second assessment activity are not significant. As it 
can be seen in Table VII, there is no significant difference 
among the three groups in the third assessment activity (F = 
2.625 and p = 0.079 > 0.05), indicating that the students' 
learning effectiveness does not have a significant difference 
among the three groups in the third assessment activity. The 
results also show that the effects of providing scaffolded 
assessment on the students' learning effectiveness in the third 
assessment activity are not significant. Therefore, the 
students' learning effectiveness is enhanced in the three 
assessment activities, but the effects of providing the 
scaffolded assessment on the students' learning effectiveness 
are not significant in the three assessment activities. 
TABLE VI.  
SUMMARY OF ANCOVA FOR THE THREE GROUPS IN THE 
SECOND ASSESSMENT ACTIVITY 
Source 
of 
variation 
Sum 
of 
Squares 
df 
Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 
Covariates 
1770.434 
1 
1770.43 
22.109 
0.000 
Within 
Groups  
256.790 
2 
128.395 
1.603 
0.208 
Error 
6005.839 
75 
80.078 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

TABLE VII.  
SUMMARY OF ANCOVA FOR THE THREE GROUPS IN THE 
THIRD ASSESSMENT ACTIVITY 
Source of 
variation 
Sum of 
Squares 
df 
Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 
Covariates 
1384.810 
1 
1384.810 
20.674 
0.000 
Within 
Groups  
351.730 
2 
175.865 
2.625 
0.079 
Error 
5023.795 
75 
66.984 
 
 
 
G. The analysis of learning attitude of the three groups 
To investigate the degree to which an individual agree or 
disagree the network assessment activity in the study, 
ANOVA was employed to analyze four dimensions of the 
attitude questionnaire. The analyzed result was shown in 
Table VIII. Table VIII shows both dimensions "positive 
attitude" and "online attitude" take values of significant 
difference among three groups (F = 4.95, p < .05 and F = 
3.76, p < .05, respectively). The post hoc of positive attitude 
shows the mean of experimental group II significantly higher 
than that of control group, indicating that students of 
experimental group II have positively higher level of degree 
to the network peer assessment than those of control group. 
In addition, The post hoc of online attitude shows the mean 
of experimental group II significantly higher than that of  
control group, indicating that students of experimental group 
II have higher level of acceptance to the network peer 
assessment than those of control group.  
TABLE VIII.  ANOVA OF LEARNING ATTITUDE TOWARD NETWORK 
PEER ASSESSMENT FOR THREE GROUPS 
Dimension 
Group 
SD 
Mea
n 
F 
Post hoc 
Positive Attitude 
(PAS) 
(1) 
0.61 
3.90 
4.95
* 
 
(2)>(3) 
(2) 
0.57 
4.32 
(3) 
0.70 
3.55 
Negative Attitude 
(NAS) 
(1) 
0.98 
2.36 
0.78 
 
(2) 
0.66 
2.59 
(3) 
0.58 
2.59 
Online Attitude 
(OAS) 
(1) 
0.75 
3.94 
3.76
* 
(2)>(3) 
(2) 
0.74 
4.29 
(3) 
0.66 
3.57 
Understanding 
and 
Action 
(UAS) 
(1) 
0.67 
4.06 
0.98 
 
(2) 
0.76 
3.92 
(3) 
0.57 
3.80 
*p<0.05, (1): Experimental groups I, (2): Experimental groups II,  
(3): Control group  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Scaffolding provided by teachers or peers can assist students 
to develop their learning ability and achieve the goal of 
transferring learning. This study uses the scaffolded 
assessment which provides scoring guidelines to investigate 
whether the students are benefited from the peer assessment 
activities. The results show that the learning effectiveness of 
the participants in the two experimental and control groups is 
not significantly enhanced during the first and second 
network peer assessment activities. However, the learning 
effectiveness of the participants in the two experimental 
groups is significantly enhanced, but the learning 
effectiveness of the participants in the control group did not 
show a significant difference. 
The use of the scaffolded assessment in the network peer 
assessment activities did not show a significant difference in 
the students' learning effectiveness. Even though the results 
show that learning effectiveness of the participants in the two 
experimental groups is significantly enhanced, there is no 
significant effect of providing the scaffolded assessment on 
the participants' learning effectiveness in the three groups. 
Thus, the effects of the use of the scaffolded assessment on 
students' 
learning 
effectiveness 
should 
be 
further 
investigated. 
The participants all have a positive attitude toward the 
network peer assessment activities. The results of the 
questionnaires which address the participants' perceptions of 
network peer assessment show that the participants agree that 
network peer assessment is beneficial for learning, enhances 
the sense of participation and motivation, increases 
interactions 
among 
peers 
and 
improves 
learning 
effectiveness. The participants with other peers' evaluation 
highly agree the network assessment in compared to those 
without scaffolded assessment in the network peer 
assessment activities. In addition, the scaffolded assessment 
provides a solid basis for the participants when evaluating 
the peers' assignments. The participants could also gain more 
diverse ideas and insights in the network peer assessment 
activities. In the future, to enhance the validity of the 
research, the number of the subjects would be increased. 
Furthermore, learning retention can be considered to 
investigate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C.-C. Chang and K.-H Tseng, "Using a web-based portfolio 
assessment system to elevate project-based learning 
performances," Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 19, 
no. 3, 2011,  pp. 211-230.  
[2] 
C.-H. Chen, "The implementation and evaluation of a 
mobile self-and peer-assessment system," Computers & 
Education, vol. 55, no.1, 2010, pp. 229-236.  
[3] 
K. Cho, C. D. Schunn, and R. W. Wilson, "Validity and 
reliability of scaffolded peer assessment of writing from 
instructor and student perspectives," Journal of Educational 
Psychology, vol.  98, no.4,  2006,  pp. 891.  
[4] 
J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral 
Sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 1988. 
[5] 
M. Freeman, "Peer assessment by groups of group work," 
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, vol. 20, 
1995, pp.  289-300. 
[6] 
G. Isaacs, "Brief briefing: Peer and self assessment," The 
Effective Assessment Conference, University of Queensland, 
1998. 
[7] 
A. Jaillet, "Can online peer assessment be trusted?," Journal 
of Educational Technology & Society, vol. 12, no. 4,  2009.  
[8] 
R. L. Johnson, F. McDaniel and M. J. Willeke, "Using 
portfolios in program evaluation: An investigation of 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

interrater reliability," American Journal of Evaluation, vol. 
21, no. 1,  2000, pp. 65-80.  
[9] 
T. Knoy, S.-J. Lin, Z.-F. Liu, and S.-M. Yuan, "Networked 
peer assessment in writing: Copyediting skills instruction in 
an ESL technical writing course," 2001, Unpublished 
dissertation, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan.  
[10] 
E. Z. F. Lin, C. H. Chiu, S. S. J. Lin,  and S. M. Yuan,  
"Student participation in computer science courses via the 
Networked 
Peer 
Assessment 
System 
(NetPeas)," 
Proceedings of  the  ICCE' 99,  1999,  pp. 774-777.  
[11] 
C. Rushton, P. Ramsey, and R. Rada, "Peer assessment in a 
collaborative hypermedia environment: A case-study," 
Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, vol. 20, 1993, pp. 
75-80. 
[12] 
P. M. Sadler and E. Good, "The impact of self-and peer-
grading on student learning," Educational assessment, vol. 
11, no. 1,  2006,  pp. 1-31.  
[13] 
Y.-T. Sung, K.-E. Chang, S.-K. Chiou, and H.-T. Hou,  
"The design and application of a web-based self-and peer-
assessment system," Computers & Education, vol. 45, no. 2, 
2005,  pp. 187-202.  
[14] 
K. Topping, "Peer assessment between students in colleges 
and universities," Review of Educational Research, vol. 68, 
no. 3,  1998, pp. 249-276.  
[15] 
K. J. Topping and S. W. Ehly, "Peer assisted learning: A 
framework for consultation," Journal of Educational and 
Psychological Consultation, vol. 12, no. 2,   2001, pp. 113-
132.  
[16] 
C.-C. Tsai and J.-C. Liang, "The development of science 
activities via on-line peer assessment: The role of scientific 
epistemological views," Instructional Science, vol. 37, no. 3, 
2009,  pp. 293-310.  
[17] 
C.-C. Tsai, S. S. Lin, and S.-M. Yuan, " Developing science 
activities through a networked peer assessment system," 
Computers & Education, vol. 38,  no. 1,  2002, pp. 241-252.  
[18] 
S.-C. Tseng and C.-C. Tsai, "On-line peer assessment and 
the role of the peer feedback: A study of high school 
computer course," Computers & Education, vol. 49, no. 4, 
2007,  pp. 1161-1174.  
[19] 
L. S. Vygotsky, Thought and language: MIT press, 2012. 
[20] 
M. L. Wen and C.-C. Tsai, "University students’ perceptions 
of and attitudes toward (online) peer assessment," Higher 
Education, vol. 51, no. 1,  2006, pp. 27-44.  
[21] 
D. Wood, J. S. Bruner, and G. Ross,  "The role of tutoring in 
problem solving," Journal of child psychology and 
psychiatry, vol. 17, no. 2,  1976, pp. 89-100.  
[22] 
Y.-F. Yang and C.-C. Tsai,  "Conceptions of and approaches 
to learning through online peer assessment,"  Learning and 
Instruction, vol. 20,  no. 1,  2010,  pp. 72-83.  
[23] 
Dougiamas, M., & Taylor, P. (2003). Moodle: Using 
learning communities to create an open source course 
management system. In World conference on educational 
multimedia, hypermedia and telecommunications (Vol. 
2003, No. 1, pp. 171-178). 
[24] 
George, D. & Mallery, P. (2010). SPSS for Windows step 
by step: A sample guide and reference 17.0 update. Boston, 
Mass. : Allyn & Bacon. 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

