Cloud Computing in SMEs
Ileana Hamburg
Institut Arbeit und Technik, WH Gelsenkirchen
Gelsenkirchen, Germany
e-mail: hamburg@iat.eu
Sascha Bucksch
Institut Arbeit und Technik, WH Gelsenkirchen
Gelsenkirchen, Germany
e-mail: bucksch@iat.eu
Abstract – Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) assure
economic growth in Europe. Generally, many SMEs are
struggling to survive in an ongoing global recession and are
often reluctant to use research results and new technologies for
business
and
learning.
Cloud
Computing
offers
many
opportunities and could help companies to improve their
business and use technology more efficiently. In this paper a
short presentation of Cloud Computing and advantages for
SMEs are given. The work in progress within the European
project IN-CLOUD is presented in the paper. The results show
that 70% of SMEs which answered to our research used Cloud
services but they need more qualified staff in this field.
Keywords-SME; Cloud Computing; European Cloud Computing
Strategy; E-Learning; Erasmus +
I. INTRODUCTION
Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) assure
economic growth in Europe, but the last financial crisis and
the economic recession have hit SMEs hard in the EU28 and
some of them have difficulties to survive and less resource
to invest in new technologies [1].
Cloud Computing [2] offers many opportunities and can
help
companies
to
improve
their
business
and
use
technology more efficiently. Some features i.e. on-demand
services, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid
elasticity and measured service distinguish Cloud from
other computer networking models [3].
Cloud
Computing
could
support
SMEs’
growth
encouraging entrepreneurial practices at all levels [4]. But
European SMEs are not making the best of the cost-
effective solutions Cloud Computing has to offer i.e.
avoiding large investments into hardware and software,
entering the market more easily due to the cost-efficiency,
attracting new customers by using new integrated Cloud
Computing services. Universities/research can also benefit
from cloud computing, as its storage capacity and economic
viability
ensure
more
efficient
research
management
techniques in all fields. Cloud computing is thus an optimal
solution
for
the
innovation-driven
alliance
between
universities and companies.
Cloud Computing reach interest in the corporate sector
but some evidence a lack of professionals able to work in
this field. According to the analyst firm IDC [5], in 2012
more than 1.7 million cloud computing jobs have remained
unoccupied and the trend should lead to more than seven
million cloud-related vacancies worldwide The European
Commission has started several initiatives supporting the
investment
in
entrepreneurship-boosting
ICT
and,
in
September 2012 has adopted a strategy for “Unleashing the
Potential of Cloud Computing in Europe”. The European
Cloud Computing Strategy [6] includes three key actions;
the most relevant is the creation of a “European Cloud
Partnership” providing strategic options to turn Cloud
Computing into an engine for sustainable economic growth,
innovation and cost-efficient public and private services.
In this paper, after a short presentation of Cloud
Computing and advantages for SMEs, the objectives of the
European project IN-CLOUD and the progress work within
this project are described.
The general objective of the project IN-CLOUD is to
foster a partnership between research, higher education
institutions and the corporate sector, in order to help SMEs
to use Cloud Computing and to qualify new professionals
able to support competitiveness and growth of European
Companies and Universities, thanks to the advantages
offered by the Cloud Computing technology. The eight
partners
of
the
project
are
education
and
research
institutions, SMEs organisations, public administrations
coming from Germany, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and
UK. IN-CLOUD uses the results of the project Smart PA ()
oriented
to
the
use
of
Cloud
Computing
in
public
administration and coordinated by one of the authors.
In this paper, after a presentation of cloud computing in
SMEs, the research methods used and some conclusions of
the work done so far within the project IN-CLOUD are
given.
II. CLOUD COMPUTING IN SMES
By
using
Cloud
services
SMEs
can
avail
of
opportunities that allow them to compete in an innovative
ICT environment, and give a level playing field required to
succeed in business [8][9]. In the discussion with experts
and SMEs, the following advantages of Cloud Computing
emerged [10] – Figure 1:
•
Up-to-date low-cost software solutions
•
Unlimited data storage
•
Access to data from anywhere and anytime
•
High levels of security protocol that ensures business
and data protection
•
Improved business performance
•
Simplified data management
Examples of services SMEs could offer to their clients
could be a combination of Business Services, Application
Software Services, Infrastructure Services, Integration and
Development Services – Figure 1.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 1.
Advantages of Cloud Computing
There are also a number of limitations or issues with
Cloud Computing. One of the main issues is the reliability,
security, private and ownership of data [11][12] as well as
the accessibility of this on a 24/7 basis, particularly when
the Cloud service Provider (CSP) has an outage. Many
companies will have problems about the lack of control over
their ICT systems and the impact of a CSP on these
[13][14].
These issues may inhibit an SME’s decision to migrate
to a Cloud Computing environment. In addition, there are
other factors which may influence the decision which the
authors discuss with companies like the followings:
•
The lack of understanding of the infrastructure, cost,
and appropriateness to the needs and scenarios of
several
companies
from
different
business
environments.
•
Inadequate skill levels of users, managers, and
entrepreneurs to use Cloud.
•
The readiness of SMEs to adopt Cloud Computing
from a business perspective.
•
Less time to test Cloud services.
Cloud computing requires also new skills which are the
bases for the development of didactic units within our
project IN-CLOUD i.e.,:
•
Business and financial skills
•
Technical skills: depending on how much of the
cloud will be built and managed in-house
•
Enterprise architecture and business needs analysis
•
Skills to work with the business, speak the language
of business, as well as work with IT professionals
•
Project management skills
•
Contract and vendor negotiation working with CSP
•
Security and compliance
•
Data integration and analysis skills
•
Mobile app development and management, being
driven by the need to provide services that can be
accessed by any and all devices, be they laptops or
smartphones.
Besides advantages within business, Cloud Computing
can be used for improving learning both in SMEs as well in
Education. In the following we present E-Learning. E-
Learning could address issues of time and cost in SMEs, by
allowing employees to access learning resources remotely.
The learning material is easy to keep updated; the trainers
can
integrate
multimedia
content
which
facilitates
understanding and motivate the participants, but this form of
learning is not used efficiently in SMEs.
Masud and Huang presented in [15], besides the general
characteristics
of
an
E-Learning
system,
a
system
architecture that combines the capabilities of learning with
advantages of Cloud Computing services. Some aspects
which could be improved by using Cloud Computing to
implement E-Learning are scalability of E-Learning systems
at the infrastructure level, development and assigning of
resources only for determined tasks, need to configure and
add
new
resources
making
the
costs
and
resource
management less expensive [15].
Pocailu and Vetrici described in [16] a plan for
implementing an E-Learning system based
on Cloud
Computer architecture and the positive effects of using
Cloud Computer technology are discussed.
Two main characteristics of Cloud Computing which
could be an alternative to traditional ICT centres and could
improve the E-Learning approaches in SMEs are the use of
resources “on demand” and the transparent scalability so
that the computational resources are assigned when they are
necessary
without
the
necessity
of
infrastructure
understanding by the users. Costs related to computer
infrastructure maintenance disappear [17]. The authors of
the paper coordinated national and international projects
about E-Learning methods and platforms. The experience of
these projects will be used in the following projects.
Figure 2 shows the architecture of a platform for E-
Learning with integrated Cloud services [18].
Figure 2.
The architecture of a cloud computing platform for E-Learning
[16]
III. RESEARCH METHODS
The IN-CLOUD project intends to operate pursuing the
objectives of the European Cloud Computing Strategy [4]
with the general objective of – fostering a partnership
between 2 research institutions, 4 Universities, and 3 SMEs
associations from 5 European countries, in order to qualify
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

new professionals able to boost the competitiveness and
growth of European Companies and Universities, thanks to
the advantages offered by the cloud computing technology.
The
advantages
of
working
in
cooperation
with
companies are:
•
The needs of the companies and the requirements for
qualifications could be taken into consideration at
the beginning of the developments
•
Testing of the didactic units and platform developed
in the project could be conducted during the project
period
•
Exploitation of the results is ensured.
The used methods in the project IN-CLOUD to reach the
objectives are the following:
•
Analysis of the situation of the use and desire of ICT
and Cloud Computing methods in SMEs of partner
countries
•
Analysis of the labour market requirements and of
the necessary skills for SME staff in order to use
Cloud Computing
•
Development of qualification profiles for SME staff
and Cloud Professionals
•
Pilot actions to train SME staff based on the
qualification profiles.
The first output of the IN-CLOUD, which started at the
end of 2015, consists of a report that is the basis for the
development of the other project activities. It includes a
description of the Cloud Computing, an analysis of the
awareness of the existing cloud computing technologies and
services in the private and public sectors, a needs’ analysis
of technologies and services connected to Cloud Computing
in the public and private sectors, an analysis of the
professional skills required in the area of Cloud Computing
and an analysis of the labour market actual situation and
prospective of employability. The first design of didactic
units that can satisfy the identified didactic needs will be
also proposed as a result of this output.
The sent questionnaire contains questions about general
company information, software usage and cloud computing.
It was created with the help of Survey Monkey, an online
survey development cloud-based company. It provides free,
customizable surveys, as well as a suite of paid back-end
programs that include data analysis, sample selection, bias
elimination and data representation tools. Each partner
searched for studies, publications, reports and projects about
cloud computing.
We will present some results of the questionnaire
including answers of all partner countries. 70% of 260
SMEs which answered use private or hybrid Cloud services.
The following diagrams show some answers.
Figure 3.
Results from the questionnaire on cloud computing made in all
partner countries
Security stands as the top barrier for Cloud adoption
which reflects that business are reluctant to trust in Cloud
security capabilities.
Another problem is that also due to lack of information
SMEs are not familiar with benefits of Cloud.
Figure 4.
Results from the questionnaire on cloud computing made in all
partner countries
Scalability, flexibility and Cost efficiency seem to be the
top motivators for companies to use the Cloud.
The project IN-CLOUD also researches the economic
impacts of cloud computing on different types of SMEs.
The first conclusion is that it depends on region and sector;
the IT sector mainly will have the most advantages. This
impact in Europe will depend on how service providers,
governments and managers understand it. European cloud
services providers need to offer competitive prices.
A set of didactic units and a set of VET Qualifications
with instruments to validate them are in the development as
well as an E-Learning platform with Cloud Computing
Services
and
training
material
including
practical
applications for companies.
The qualifications are:
•
Certified Cloud Professional for Business
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

•
Certified Cloud Professional for Public
Administrations
•
Certified Cloud Professional for Education
•
Certified Cloud Technology Professional
The profiles include core units of learning outcomes,
ECVET points acquired, the related performance description/
occupational standard, key activities, knowledge and skills,
competences to be achieved during the qualification process.
For the qualification process different methods will be
used based on the experience of the project partners:
•
E-Learning
platform
with
online
modules,
forum, exercises
•
Videos with staff from companies
•
Showcases
with
successful
cloud
implementations in SMEs
The IN-CLOUD project partners would like to cooperate
with national governments in order to ensure an appropriate
legal environment, procurement practices and energy prices.
It will also depend on the willingness of managers to adopt
the new practices necessary to exploit the technical and
economic advantages of cloud computing.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Small and medium sized companies remain vital for
grow and innovation in the European economy but need
support
i.e.
cooperation
with
research
and
education
institutions in this context. Such cooperation is important to
ensure the survival of these companies and encourage them
to grow. In today’s business world, SMEs are competing
with a larger number of companies, many of these are
multinationals; they have a greater number of staff and a
wider pool of skills. SMEs should be helped to acquire the
relevant strategic skills as quickly as possible to remain
ahead of the competition by using latest technologies such
as Cloud Computing for business and learning because most
of them would like to use Cloud services.
In this context the steps within this project will cover the
testing of the qualification units and the development of the
E-Learning platform. The E-Learning platforms developed
by the authors within other projects aimed at SMEs like
ReadiSME and Archimedes will be the basis for it.
We are convinced that the project developments will
help SMEs to increase innovation. The companies proved
high motivation to qualify in the use of new technologies
like Cloud Computing and E-Learning methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper describes work within the on-going European
project IN-CLOUD.
REFERENCES
[1]
European Commission, “Annual Report on European SMEs
2013/2014:
A
Partial
and
Fragile
Recovery”,
p.
10.
http://ec.europa.eu/growth/smes/business-friendly-
environment/performance-review/files/supporting-
documents/2014/annual-report-smes-2014_en.pdf,
2014.
Accessed on December, 28, 2015
[2]
National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST, “The
NIST
Definition
of
Cloud
Computing,”
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-
145.pdf, 2011. Accessed on December, 28, 2015
[3]
Lucchetti, R. and Sterlacchini, A. “The adoption of ICT
among SMEs: Evidence from an Italian Survey”. In: Small
Business Economics 23, pp. 151-168, 2004
[4]
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-cloud-
initiative. Accessed April 2016
[5]
IDC Report, “1.7 Million Cloud Computing Jobs Remain
Unfilled,
Gap
Widening”.
http://cloudtimes.org/2013/01/
09/idc-report-1-7-million-cloud-computing-jobs-remain-
unfilled-gap-widening/. 2012. Accessed on December, 28,
2015
[6]
European
Commission,
“European
Cloud
Computing
Strategy,”
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-
cloud-initiative/. 2012. Accessed on December, 28, 2015
[7] www.smartpuba.eu
[8]
Layo, I. “Cloud computing advantages for SMEs,” http://
cloudtimes.org/2013/09/18/cloud-computing-advantages-for-
smes/. 2013. Accessed on December, 28, 2015
[9]
Ouf, S. and Nasr, M. ”Business intelligence in the cloud,” in
IEEE Third International Conference on Communication
Software and Networks (ICCSN2011). pp. 650-655, 2011.
[10] Hamburg, I. “Improving e-Learning in SMEs through cloud
computing and scenarios”. In: Gradinarova, B. (ed.): E-
learning – instructional design, organizational strategy and
management. Rijeka: InTech: pp. 481-498, 2015
[11] Cavalcanti, G. “Barriers to implementation of information and
communication technologies among small- and medium-sized
enterprises,” The digital divide through the business lens,
MBA., California State University, Fresno, pp. 57, AAT
1444963, 2006
[12] Shiels, H., Mclvor, R. and O‘Reilly, D. “Understanding the
implications of ICT adoption: Insights from SMEs, Logistics
Information Management,” 16 (5), pp. 312-326, 2003
[13] Hamburg, I. and Marian, M. “Supporting knowledge transfer
and
mentoring
in
companies
by e-learning
and
cloud
computing,” ICWL 2012 International Workshops, KMEL,
SciLearn, and CCSTED, Sinaia, Romania, September 2-4,
2012; revised selected papers. Heidelberg: Springer: pp. 231-
240, 2012
[14] Fernández, A., Peralta, D., Benítez, J.M. and Herrera, F.
”E-learning and educational data mining in cloud computing:
an overview,” Int J Learning Technol, 9(1), pp. 25-52. 2014.
[15] Masud, A.H. and Huang, X. ”Esaas a new education software
model in e-learning systems.” in M. Zhu (ed.), ICCIC 2011,
Vol. 235 of CCIS, pp. 468-475, 2011
[16] Pocatilu, P. and Vetrici, M. “Using Cloud computing for E-
Learning
Systems,”
Proceedings
of
the
8th
WSEAS
International conference on data Networks, Communications,
computers, Italy, 2009
[17] Hamburg, I. “Learning as a service – a cloud-based approach
for
SMEs.”
Service
computation
2012:
The
Fourth
International Conference on Advanced Service Computing,
pp. 53-57, 2012
[18] Sulistio, A., Reich, C. and Doelitzscher, F. “Cloud infra-
structure and applications – cloudia”. In: Jaatun, M.G. , Zhao,
G. and Rong, C. (Eds.): CloudCom, Vol. 5931 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer, pp. 583-588, 2009
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

