Requirement Analysis and Extending CSS3 Specification  
for Polar Coordinate Text Layout in Web Documents 
Soon-Bum Lim,  Seung-Min Shim 
Dept. of IT engineering  
Sookmyung Women’s University 
Yongsan-gu, Seoul, Korea 
e-mail sblim@sm.ac.kr, undervine@naver.com 
Abstract— This study extends the Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) 
specification in order to place the text along circles or circular 
sectors in web documents with CSS3 stylesheet. We propose a 
fan-shaped layout model and define the text layout 
specifications that are not in the conventional Cartesian 
coordinates system but in the polar coordinate system, and 
checked the conformity of the proposed extension specification 
by implementing the preprocessor that allows checking out the 
sample contents created by the extended CSS3 specification in 
the existing web browser. 
Keywords-polar-coordinate; text layout; fan model; HTML; 
CSS3 stylesheet. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the recent introduction of various devices with 
round displays, the need for circular text arrangement is 
increasing. Furthermore, with the advent of the age of big 
data, the demand of circular arrangement of information is 
on the rise as the data visualization field is getting attention. 
Also, we often see examples of text arranged in a circle or 
curve on logos, posters and publications in everyday life. 
However, the existing web standards such as Cascading 
Style Sheet (CSS) and Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG), 
which are based on Cartesian coordinate system, are very 
inconvenient when placing polar-coordinate system text, 
since you have to separate all the letters from the text and set 
the coordinates of the individual letters in order to place it. 
Thus, a concise and standardized approach is needed to 
handle various cases of polar-coordinate text layout. 
There was a study how to determine automatic character 
arrangement and orientation when placing text vertically in 
the existing CSS specification which became the standard 
module of CSS3 writing-mode [1]. New CSS3 modules of 
round displayed text for circular display devices [2] and 3D 
stereoscopic contents [3] were proposed, but the layout 
concept was not generalized to place any text in polar-
coordinated space.  
We analyzed related works in Section 2, and case studies 
and user requirements in Section 3. Then, we proposed a fan 
model and extend the CSS3 specification for the various 
types of text layout in polar coordinate system in Section 4. 
In Section 5, we checked the feasibility of the extended 
specification by implementing a preprocessor in the existing 
web browser. And we described the conclusions in Section 6. 
II.
RELATED WORK
In the previous CSS standard, Elika J. Etemad 
researched an automated arrangement and orientation 
method for situations where there are multiple characters 
with different typesetting in a vertical layout [1], which 
became the standard module of CSS3 Writing-mode. This 
study shows how a CSS standard is designed: firstly, the 
text layout styles of different cultures are researched and the 
user’s needs are analyzed; then the needed concept for text 
layout is modeled by referencing terms from the previous 
vertical layout; and finally, the CSS standard is expanded. 
Furthermore, there is a study of expanding the CSS 
standard: CSS Extensions for a Round Display [2]. This 
study consists of multiple proposals for supporting web-
based platform devices with circular display, such as a 
method to detect the circular screen and drawing an outline 
along the edge, a method to place the contents right inside 
of the edge, and a method to draw the outline without 
breaking while the contents is being rendered on the screen. 
As shown in Fig. 1, polar properties, such as polar-angle, 
polar-distance, and position, are extended, in order to use 
the polar coordinate for contents layout.   
III.
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS OF POLAR COORDINATE 
TEXT LAYOUT
In order to design a standard for implementation of polar 
coordinate text layout on the web, various previous cases of 
layout were studied, then the user’s need was analyzed. 
Figure 1. Examples of polar coordinate layout on the round display. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A.
Case Studies of Polar Coordinate Text Layout  
In the existing cases of polar coordinate text layout, there 
were some needs of paragraph layout, while most were a 
single line text layout. Fig. 2(a) shows a case of paragraph 
layout in polar coordinate.  
Furthermore, the direction of text layout appeared 
differently in polar coordinate. There were both cases where 
the sentences flowed in clockwise and counter-clockwise, 
and similar cases with inward and outward. Also, there were 
few cases where the character orientation was changed, 
instead of sentences or paragraphs, like shown in Fig. 2(b) 
It turned out that a single line sentences were mostly in 
horizontal writing. However, in data visualizations or 
infographics, vertical writing was often applied to show a 
repeated list of data, despite the text being in a single line. 
Also, in vertical writing, sentences flow to inward or 
outward, while paragraphs were placed in clockwise or 
counter-clockwise direction. By contrast, in vertical writing, 
there were some cases of varying text orientation, as shown 
in Fig. 2(c), unlike in horizontal writing.  . 
B.
Requirement Analysis 
As discussed above, in the practical cases of polar 
coordinate text layout, there are more varying cases than 
what is possible with the traditional layout. By analyzing the 
requirements for polar coordinate text layout, it turns out 
that these points have to be defined in order to place text in 
polar coordinate.  
(1) Text Placement Area 
A format model for the area in which the text block is to 
be placed in the polar coordinate system is needed. In the 
existing CSS Visual Formatting Model [4], the CSS box 
model is presented. However, in order to arrange text in the 
polar coordinate system, an area setting method for a fan-
shaped layout model must be prepared. 
(2) Sentence and Paragraph Layout 
As a result of case studies indicated a high demand for 
placement of both individual sentences and paragraphs. Like 
the Cartesian coordinate system, the polar coordinate system 
requires two types of display: inline and block; see Fig. 3(a). 
 (3) Placing Text in Various Directions 
In the Cartesian coordinate system, there are two types of 
sentence direction: right and left. In case of paragraph 
direction, horizontal text always flows from top to bottom, 
and vertical text flows from left to right. Directionality in 
the polar coordinate system is more variable and flexible 
than in the Cartesian coordinate system, and thus a new 
model is required for polar coordinate system text 
directionality; see Fig. 3(b). 
(4) Placing Text in Vertical Writing 
Compared to that of the Cartesian coordinate system, 
orientations in the polar coordinate system are more 
variable. According to the CSS3 Writing-mode module, in 
the Cartesian coordinate system, the sentence directions are 
either left to right or right to left, and the paragraph 
directions are always top to bottom for horizontal writing, 
and either left to right or right to left for vertical writing. 
Furthermore, the text orientation is limited to top, left, or 
right. However, in the polar coordinate system, the text 
could be flipped, or have a varying orientation depending on 
the degree within the coordinate. Therefore, orientation in 
the polar coordinate system is more complex than that of the 
Cartesian coordinate, thus text orientations should be 
modeled accordingly; see Fig. 3(c). 
 (5) Placing Text in Different Coordinate Systems in the 
Same Area 
Since general documents assume the use of the Cartesian 
coordinate system, the polar coordinate system element is 
located in the Cartesian coordinate system. Conversely, in 
the case of Fig. 3(d), the Cartesian coordinate system is 
located within the polar coordinate system. As in this case, 
it is necessary to define a standard for element arrangement 
when the two coordinate systems are mixed.  
(a) Cases of polar text paragraphs. 
(b) Case of changing text orientations in horizontal writing 
(c) Case of changing text orientation in vertical writing 
Figure 2. Case studies of polar coordinate text layout 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

IV.
EXTENDED CSS SPECIFICATION FOR POLAR-
COORDINATE TEXT LAYOUT
In the existing CSS, all HTML elements are placed in a 
rectangular area, in a so-called the box model. In this paper, 
we propose a fan shaped layout model in polar-coordinate 
system as shown in Fig. 4, which is called a fan model. 
According to the CSS visual style model definition [4], the 
box layout following the CSS box model [5] is defined by 
box type, box area, position method etc. Likewise, we 
designed the fan model to be described with fan type, fan 
area, and position type. 
The types of the fan model are divided into fan-block and 
fan-inline that correspond to block and inline elements of the 
box model. The positioning method uses the position 
attribute same as in the box model, because the fan model 
also specifies the element positioning within the Cartesian 
coordinate system. The difference is that the box area is 
placed based on its left-top corner, while the fan area is 
placed from a reference point, which is the center of the fan 
shape. Fig. 4 shows the detail attributes of the fan model. 
The CSS3 writing-mode module has properties that 
describe the inline direction, the block direction, and the 
glyph orientation. While box model has left to right (ltr), 
right to left (rtl), and top to bottom (tb) directions, the fan 
model has directions of clockwise (cw), counter-clockwise 
(ccw), outward to inward (inward), and inward to outward 
(outward). Therefore, the horizontal writing and vertical 
writing in fan model can be described as in Fig. 5. 
As shown in Table 1, the fan-shape layout specification 
is divided into three parts: fan model setting, direction 
setting, and typographic setting, where the prefix ‘-fan-’ is 
used 
to 
distinguish 
extended 
attributes. 
The 
basic 
information for the fan model setting is display type, width, 
and height. The direction setting attributes include sentence 
direction, paragraph direction, and text orientation. The 
typographic setting attributes contain indentation, spacing, 
horizontal alignment and vertical alignment. 
(a) Examples of paragraph layout
(b) Examples of various directions
(c) Text layout in vertical directions 
(d) Mixed coordinate system 
Figure 3. Examples for requirement analysis 
Figure 4. Definition of the fan model 
Figure 5. Definition of directions in polar coordinate system 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

V.
FEASIBILITY TEST
Since the proposed CSS3 extension is not working in the 
current web browser, we developed a preprocessor [6] to 
translate the extended CSS3 specification into the current 
CSS3 properties. Using the preprocessor, we evaluated the 
feasibility of the CSS3 fan model specification whether the 
extension can efficiently represent the polar-coordinate 
system text.  
For the feasibility test, we developed PowerPoint sample 
contents that can cover the various cases of polar 
coordinated text layout as in Fig. 6. Then we compared the 
results from the code described with our CSS3 fan model 
with the results from the code using JavaScript library 
CssWarp.js [7]. From the results, we found out that the 
results from our CSS3 extension were the same as 
PowerPoint results, but some of them were not able to be 
represented with the CssWarp.js library(⑤⑥ in Fig. 6).  
Also, we counted the number of tokens in the sample 
codes, and compared those written in CssWraps.js and 
CSS3 fan model. While the average number of codes in 
CssWraps was 78.0, the average in CSS3 fan model was 
20.5 where the reduction rate is 26.3%. Therefore, we 
assessed that we could express the user requirements for 
polar-coordinate text layout well by using the CSS3 fan 
model specification proposed in this study. 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we proposed a CSS3 extension in order to 
place text in a polar-coordinate system in web documents 
expressed in HTML. This allows the text to be placed in a 
polar-coordinate system by only using the CSS3 stylesheet 
in the HTML standard documents. The proposed CSS3 fan 
model can place sentence and paragraphs, text in multiple 
directions, and vertical text in polar-coordinate system. 
The future plan is to implement the extended CSS3 
module as a Javascript library to be easily imported by 
general users, and to standardize it as a regular W3C CSS3 
specification module so as to be implemented eventually 
within the existing web browsers.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. 2016-0-00166)  
REFERENCES
[1]
E. J. Etemad, "Robust vertical text layout," The 27th 
Internationalization & Unicode Conference, 2005,  pp. 15-16. 
[2]
S. Han, H. Song, and J. Hong, "CSS Round Display Level 1," 
W3C WD 22, Dec. 2016. [Online] Available from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/css-round-display-1/ 
(accessed 
10 
April 2018) 
[3]
S.B. Lim, H.J. Lee, W.Y. Jin, and S.M. Shim, "CSS3 
extensions for setting web content in a 3D view volume and 
its stereoscopic 3D display," Computer Standards & 
Interfaces. vol.50, pp. 65–75, Feb. 2017. 
[4]
B. Bos, T. Celik, I. Hickson, and H. Lie, "Cascading Style 
Sheets Level 2 (CSS 2.1) Specification-9 Visual formatting 
model," W3C Recommendation, June 2011,  [Online] 
Available from: http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS21/visuren.html 
(accessed 10 April 2018) 
[5]
B. Bos, "CSS basic box model," W3C Working Draft, 9 
August 
2007, 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/css3-box/ (accessed 10 April 2018) 
[6]
S.M. Shim, “CSS3 Extension for Polar-Coordinate Text 
Layout and its Preprocessor,”. Master Thesis. (in Korean) 
Sookmyung Women’s University, Feb. 2016  
[7]
D. Weber, “CSSWARP, CSS Text to Path Generator,” 2011 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://csswarp.eleqtriq.com/ 
(accessed 10 April 2018) 
TABLE 1: SPECIFICATION OF CSS3 FAN SHAPE LAYOUT 
Category 
Extended CSS Specifications 
Fan Model 
Setting 
display type 
display : -fan-inline | -fan-block 
width 
-fan-angle : <angle> | auto 
height 
-fan-radius : <number> | auto 
Direction 
Setting 
sentence  
direction
-fan-direction : cw | ccw | v-inward | v-
outward
paragraph 
direction
-fan-writing-mode : horizontal-auto | v-cw | 
v-ccw
text orientation 
direction
-fan-text-orientation : upright | sideways-
cw | sideways-ccw | sideways
Typesetting
Properties
indentation 
-fan-indent : <length>
alignment 
-fan-align : start-edge | end-edge | center 
white-spacing -fan-white-space : normal | pre-wrap | pre-
line
vertical-
alignment 
-fan-vertical-align: <length> | <percentage>
| baseline | sub | super | text-top | 
text-bottom 
① Sentence 
② Paragraph 
③ CW horizontal text-1 
④ CCW horizontal  
 text-1 
⑤ CW horizontal 
text-2 
⑥ CCW horizontal 
text-2 
⑦ Mixed coordinate system’s text 
⑧ Typesetting applied text 
Figure 6. Sample text for the feasibility test of CSS3 extension
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

