A Study of Dragon-lab Federal Experiment Cloud and Network Contest 
Tongrang Fan  
School of Information Science and 
Technology , 
Shijiazhuang Tiedao University 
Shijiazhuang, China 
Fantr2009@126.com 
 
 
Zhanwei Liu  
School of Information Science and 
Technology , 
Shijiazhuang Tiedao University 
Shijiazhuang, China 
Liuzhw @stdu.edu.cn 
 
Liping Niu  
School of Information Science and 
Technology , 
Shijiazhuang Tiedao University 
Shijiazhuang, China 
niuliping666@163.com 
Abstract—Through the research and analysis on the contests of 
the IT organization management mode, operation platform 
and the trend of Network Contests (NC) development , the 
paper explores the issue about Dragon-lab federal experiment 
cloud 
and 
network 
contest 
environment 
construction, 
furthermore, it proposes a comprehensive solution for network 
contests layered management model based on the cloud 
computing. The solution has the following novel features: (i) a 
hierarchical level of contest management model based on cloud 
computing resources; (ii) design for network framework based 
on the Dragon-lab federal experimental cloud; (iii) service 
operation mode in Dragon-lab experiment cloud; (iv) 
scheduling strategy for the contest management platform. The 
advantages of scheme lie in: (i) eliminating the limitations of 
contestants, physical location, match point location and 
hardware/software resource space in the maximum; (ii) 
promoting the scheduling and sharing of device resource 
among the different NC areas; (iii) reducing the NC cost and 
improving the efficient utilization of the tournament game 
equipment. Finally, the solution had been verified, in Dragon-
lab experiment cloud, by successfully hosting network skills 
competition in four NC regional sites.  
Keywords- cloud computing; dragon-lab federal; Network 
Contest; experiment cloud; contest management model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The contest based on computer use and development 
started from 1970. Since the Texas A&M university held the 
first games, this new discovery and the way of developing 
top students majoring in computer science, responded 
positively by some U.S. and Canadian universities 
immediately[1]. In 1977, the international collegiate 
programming contest (ACM/ICPC) organized by ACM has 
become a classic event-an annual session of multinational 
international computer programs. 
With the booming of Internet technology and rapid 
development, contests about network equipment use skills 
have appeared in recent ten years. Among those the most 
famous are: ICTF UCSB Contest[2], Collegiate Cyber 
Defense 
Competition[3], 
NTU 
Network 
Security 
Competition[4], and China university NOC description 
activity network security competition, network skills contest 
sponsored by education ministry[5], etc. Competition 
contents of Network Contests mainly focused on the design 
and implementation of network security solution in LAN of 
the enterprises, campus and government which emphasizes 
network attack and defense technology. The purpose of NC 
is to test contestants’capabilities in understanding and 
manipulating Internet infrastructure and business information 
system security. This kind of competition demands large 
amount of network equipment, meanwhile, the management 
of the contest is a little complex.  
The competition management of computer program 
mostly use the following systems: Programming Contest 
Control (PC2) and Mooshak system[6]. Both are based on 
C/S structure of competition system which only support 
single regional sites competition, while do not support 
division online competitive[7][8]. This system cannot 
directly 
support 
network 
tournament 
organization 
management.  
In recent years, with the increasing number of 
participants in Network Contests, the competition modes are 
also developing toward the trend of multi participant areas 
and multi participant spots. Obviously, the existing local 
contest 
organization 
management 
cannot 
meet 
the 
requirement of the of network tournament’s development. 
Therefore, how to eliminate the limitations of physical 
location of the traditional tournament mode, how to take the 
advantage of network environment in maximum in order to 
satisfy the demands of the network contests which includes 
depending largely on network equipment, large quantities, 
variety types, complex requirements and high requirement of 
hardware and software environment, becomes the major 
problem of our study. In the process of research, we propose 
the Dragon-lab federal experimental environment and 
construct experimental cloud network to solve the problem 
of effective use of network equipment; Using cloud 
computing technology in order to develop contests 
management system based on cloud service environment, 
promoting the scheduling and sharing of device resource 
among different NC areas, and verifying the effective of this 
idea by holding a four areas of the joint tournament. The 
value of this study lies in expanding the application field of 
cloud computing.  
The use of cloud computing in contests has not been 
reported yet[9~13]. The construction of contests is 
developing rapidly, therefore, the unity resource platform 
and regulation rules will be benefit to network contests. For 
some contest sponsors, the cost of building contests 
computing center is too high which does not match with the 
fast development of contests and diversification of services. 
The cloud computing mode supply contests sponsor with 
249
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

appropriate schemes, using cloud computing can coordinate 
the network infrastructure, network equipment and the tasks 
of date center based on contests. This mode can effectively 
reduce the cost and the work of maintain, upgrade and 
update equipment can be done less.  
Maximize the resources sharing. Using the stronger 
management mechanism, automation deployment and high 
level of virtuality function of cloud computing techniques, to 
realize the maximization of network virtual environment 
resource sharing and co-work. 
II. 
THE BASIS OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
This section illustrates the key technologies currently 
used in cloud computing which lay a foundation of contest 
organization management based on cloud computing that 
proposed in the next section. 
A. The types of cloud computing service 
The types of cloud computing service have three 
mainstream types according to the types of classification 
approach[10]: infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform as a 
service (PaaS), software as a service (SaaS). 
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) is the basic facilitate. 
Service providers offer servers, storage and other hardware, 
so users’ application system and software can be managed by 
the Service providers. 
B. The application of cloud computing 
Cloud computing, based on virtualization and web, 
providing services such as basic architecture, platform, and 
software, integrating the large-scale extensible computation, 
storage, data, and application of distributed computing 
resources to carry on the work together. As a brand new 
Internet application mode, this paper mainly discusses the 
following points. 
(1) Virtualization technology 
Virtualization technology provides an effective solution 
to resource management in cloud computing. By sealing the 
service in virtual machine and rejecting to each physical 
server, virtualization technology can remap the virtual and 
physical resource according to the change of loading, as a 
result, the balance load of the whole system can be realized. 
(2) Security technology 
It includes the following six areas: (i) The security about 
access control of cloud. (ii) Data security and privacy 
protection. (iii) Audit Security. (iv) Storage security. (v) 
Defense security. (vi) Safety laws and regulations.  
(3) Storage technology 
The data storage layer of cloud connects the different 
types of storage devices to achieve the goal of unified 
management of massive data and centralized management of 
storage devices, status monitoring, and dynamic capacity 
expansion. In essence, it is a service-oriented distributed 
storage systems to meet the need of performance and storage 
capacity requirements under the conditions of multi-user.  
(4) Scheduling and allocating technology 
The scheduling and allocating in cloud computing 
supports three levels management: (i) It specifies how much 
processing power per core in a host should be assigned for 
each virtual machine. (ii) The virtual machine allocates an 
available amount of processing power to independent unit of 
the task. (iii) It must decide to choose which data center for 
the user and use the strategies of resources management and 
model of cost about access in the data center for cloud 
services.  
III. 
NETWORK CONTEST ORGANIZATIONAL MANAGEMENT 
MODE 
The whole contest is generally managed by three 
institutions. Its management system adopts B/S structure, 
and running on the Dragon-lab federal experiment cloud 
network platform which based on CERNET, supporting fast, 
efficient communication command and control, so it can 
avoid congestion caused by all the participants access to a 
site simultaneously.  
The three levels of management institutions are: 
organizing committee, executive committee and sub-regional 
contests. (i) The organizing committee is responsible for 
managing the affairs of information center about contest. (ii) 
The executive committee is responsible for the management 
of the business center in sub-regional contests. (iii) The sub-
regional contest is only responsible for the competition in the 
LAN and monitoring the competition, checking the 
eligibility and marking the features for contestants online. 
The number and the position of the centers for information 
and business management can be dynamically arranged 
based on the actual demand.  
The service target of the contest management system are 
contestants, judges in review committee, staff of the centers 
for business in executive committee, staff of the centers for 
information management in contest organizing committee 
and visitors who have not registered. The jury, the 
organizing committee and the executive committee are 
related to the management of organizations, in the 
management system for contest, they are called the judges, 
staff of the centers for information management, staff of the 
centers for business separately.  
The management system of the network contest is 
divided into two corresponding subsystems which are the 
management systems of the business and information. The 
management system of business manage sub-regional contest 
and be responsible for competition device resource 
scheduling 
and 
judging 
sub-regional 
contest. 
The 
management system of information includes events 
proposition and event information openness. By using the 
strategy of cloud computing, the contest management 
platform can resolve the problem of space limitation in the 
contest user, location, hardware and software resources. The 
model of hierarchical architecture about contest was shown 
as Fig. 1. 
250
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

 
Figure 1. Example of a model of hierarchical architecture about contes 
IV. 
CONTESTS MANAGEMENT BASED ON DRAGON-LAB 
FEDERAL EXPERIMENT CLOUD 
A. Contests management based on Dragon-lab federal 
experiment cloud 
Federal is a unique form of cooperation. It mainly 
consists of two meanings: autonomy and cooperation. 
Autonomy means that the resources of the federal are 
invested, 
maintained 
and 
cooperated 
by 
members 
autonomously and voluntarily. The federal of  network 
infrastructure is a loose coupling form, resources invested by 
members may not be stable, but with a certain level, the 
effects of random will gradually decrease, while the 
advantage is obvious, that is, low operating costs and strong 
sustainable development. 
 Dragon-lab[14] is the research platform of CNGI-
CERNET2 which is a large-scale IPv6 Internet’s backbone 
network belongs to China Education and Research Network. 
It is the only large-scale next-generation Internet 
technology cooperative research platform that based on 
federal structure. 
B. Key characteristics of Dragon-lab experimental cloud 
network 
The network is run in multi space-time environment. 
Dragon-lab will integrate all kinds of network application 
environments including  the center of internet exchanges, 
international backbone networks, national backbone network, 
campus network, satellite, wireless, etc, which can record 
and playback IPv4/IPv6 network flow at any time, and 
import OSPF, ISIS and BGP routing information from 
running network. Therefore, through Dragon-lab long time 
and large space span, real network behavior research and 
running can be carried out. 
Unified 
and 
efficient 
management 
of 
network 
equipment[15].By using Dragon-lab special configuration 
system, it can manage the existing laboratory equipment 
unified, and break the original laboratory situation of isolated 
and inapplicable. By creating a unified experiment platform, 
and making full use of the original equipment, the local 
comprehensive designed network experiment become 
possible.  
Remote 
visualization 
experimental 
configuration. 
Dragon-lab is a remote laboratory, which can customize the 
lab environment remotely by using a dedicated client 
program by means of visualization.  
Programmable experiments. Dragon-lab presents an 
innovative idea about programmable experiments. The 
experimental repeatability is improved by translating the lab 
environment definition into an executable test script. 
C. Dragon-lab Network Contests management 
Network contests management system, running in 
Dragon-lab federation experiment network cloud platform, 
contains three parts: the organizing committee contests 
information 
center, 
executive 
committee 
business 
management centers and area sites. Network infrastructure 
which is used by contests also has three-layer in figure 2. 
Cloud computing mainly supply the following services: (i) 
infrastructure service, namely multi-area management which 
is in charge of the executive committee, supply hardware 
resource, distribute and adjust those network equipment 
resource through virtualization technology. (ii) software 
service, dynamically using resources such as software tool, 
application system. (iii) data service , cloud computing data 
supply data sharing, date storage and data recovery. 
In the Fig. 2, Dragon-lab federal runs in the China 
education online, and the core main node is in Beijing in 
Tsinghua university. The nodes of the first level are 
provincial node, which is the center of the contests 
information, called CCI (including data center, contests 
information management platform, the backbone network 
equipment, etc.). Secondary nodes are division business 
center (division data center), administrating the business of 
the contests and the next level of resources, such as servers, 
host, switches, routers, network security equipment, and the 
equipment of agreements and flow analysis, equipped with 
division competition business management platform. The 
nodes of the third level are tournament competition points 
which connected with many kinds of network equipment. 
Through the above level nodes, scheduling, sharing 
equipment resources can be realized. 
Through login the spots management systems of the 
business, the user can use the resources of each division 
management center to take part in the contest. Area business 
management center is responsible for the division review and 
management. The contact between the contests spots and the 
area management center are randomly composed and 
expanding easily. Business management systems of the 
contests spots which use cloud computing can improve the 
expansibility, maintainability and resources utilization of the 
system, etc. 
251
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

Similar to the left CCI-1 , ellipsis… 
Cernet 
  other DBC-2 
Division Business Center 1
Dragonlab:
Provincial Node 1(CCI-1)
Area sites for user 
 other DBC-n 
…
Division 
Data Center 
Area sites for user 
Dragonlab:
Provincial Node n(CCI-n)
DLN 
DLN
DLG 
NTC 
DLG 
NTC 
RCMS 
Contest: 
Data Center 
Dragonlab: Main Node 
 
Figure 2. Dragon-lab federal experiment cloud Network infrastructure. 
V. 
SHARING CONTESTS RESOURCE IN ENVIRONMENT 
CLOUD 
The contests resource service running in cloud computing 
complete are achieving through running in contests/areas 
data center. This service divide into 5 classes: data discovery, 
resource allocation, resource storage, resource scheduling 
and monitoring. 
A. network resource running Ways in Dragon-lab 
experiment cloud  
•Cloud computing service agents assign the competition 
task which is submitted by area users to appropriate area data 
center. Area data center agent will receive request of all 
kinds of contests application examples, and then change 
these requests into cloud task of contests data center, 
schedule Dragon-lab experiment cloud software/hardware 
infrastructure resource through virtual machine, complete 
tasks of real time monitoring, scheduling and resource 
allocation. The detail flow is shown in Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 3. Example of resources scheduling and management in Dragon-lab 
Experimental cloud 
Balance loading of dragon-lab experiment cloud network 
infrastructure resource is completed through scheduling 
strategy in Fig. 4. The scheduling strategy mainly includes 
creating, using, destroying and so on. 
New contests data center register service information into 
cloud service agent. When cloud service agent receive 
request of area user, it chooses appropriate area data center, 
schedules and arrange cloud resource task based on user 
service quality demand, and then take charge of real time 
coordinate task between user and service.  
The monitor center is located at the data center agent of 
division, in each terminal of network shared device of the 
division data center, there are configuration of monitor nodes. 
The monitor nodes are responsible for monitoring the status 
of computing power resources and usage of the network 
device, the main information is the property of equipment 
resources, IP address, the size and usage of CPU and 
memory, etc real-time information; These information is 
passed to the monitoring center. The monitoring agent uses 
the polling monitor strategies, according to the information 
of the terminal of the monitoring nodes, records the real-time 
situation of each node periodically and dynamically. Each 
division data center adopting disaster recovery technology, 
achieves storage of the important data of network events. 
Fulfill distribute computing resource on demand by 
creating visual machine in the area of data center. Each 
visual machine is correspond to the resource of network 
device. Visual technology can make the visual machine 
remap to physical resource according to the change of load, 
through packaging services in the visual machine and 
mapping to the specific network device. The software of 
visual platform can cut proper size of visual computer pieces 
(including the kind of device, the number of CPU, the 
memory size .etc) according to the demand of the contest. 
The task is running on the visual machine, and data center 
assign visual resource. By creating, destroying and 
transferring visual machine periodically, the load balance of 
cloud network infrastructure resources of Dragon-lab 
experiment can be reached. 
 
Figure 4. Example of Load balance in Dragon-lab resources 
division data center service agent 
User-1
Users list 
in area sites
T1 
T2 
NC 
tasks list
T3 
VM1 
VM2 
Virtual 
Machines 
VM3 
Tn 
VMn 
VM3 
Tasks 
scheduling  
agent 
Host-1
Host-2
Network 
device list
Host-n
Resource 
allocation  
agent 
division data center 
Cloud 
computin
g service 
agent
Monitor 
center agent 
User-2
……
User-n
Virtual Machine 
Software and hardware infrastructure 
resources(Dragon-labExperimental 
cloud network) 
Competition application cases  
(cloud tasks) 
Division Data Centers(DDC) 
Users in area sites 
Tasks 
selection  trategy
DDC 
selection  trategy 
Resources 
 allocation trategy
252
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

B. The scheduling strategy of test management platform  
The strategy execute by contest/area data center service 
agent include: monitor strategy, resource distribution and 
task schedule. It can cluster and divide resource according to 
K-means algorithm. The resource in the data center can be 
divided into several clusters according to Qos in order to find 
the proper resource which matches the task quickly when 
schedule and distribute resource to data center, by this way 
fulfill the common Qos reputation of users, then complete 
this task.  
Work scheduling strategy and resource allocation 
strategy use the way of first come first service, and join the 
general expectation constraint of the user service quality QoS, 
and budget limit and time limit, matching the service tasks of 
the user and the resources of the virtual machine with 
network equipment. The specific methods are: normalizing 
the data of the tasks, making the normalized task data and 
general expectation constraint data as equipment quality, 
CPU, memory, bandwidth, expenses, at last calculating the 
minimum distance of equipment resources according to the 
Euclidean distance equation “(1)” namely the host resources 
which is the most conformed to the user QoS general expect, 
and then making the virtual machine resources of executing 
the tasks and the network equipment resources matched. The 
scheduling algorithm involves 5 aspects. 





n
i
i
i
y
x
y
x
x y
D
1
2)
(
||
||
( , )
 
 

 
The selection function of date center: sequence the 
data registered in the cloud service agent by priority, 
according to user's Qos demand. 
 
Resource Clustering: cluster and device the source in 
data center and sequence it by computing power 
through K-means algorithm. 
 
Function of task parameters and classification: set 
general expectation vector of task QoS, and assign 
parameters of classification when submit task by 
user. Creating visual machine for task execution.  
 
VM resources parameterized algorithm function: 
calculating standardized resources parameters on 
VM host. 
 
Matching task with resources: In accordance with 
the classification of task, the task of each category 
correspond 
to 
the 
general 
expectations 
and 
parameters of the resource vector is matching, 
computing the Euclidean distance algorithm to 
achieve the task with the host VM  resource binding. 
VI. 
PROVING CASES 
The second College Network Skill Contest for Hebei 
Province in China was hold under Dragon-lab federal 
experiment Cloud Network environment. Contest resources 
were distributed in four colleges, which are Tsinghua 
University in Beijing, Shijiazhuang Railway University in 
Shijiazhuang, Hebei Polytechnic University in Tangshan, 
and North China Institute of Aerospace in Langfang. Shared 
network device resources compose of switches, routers and 
servers supporting Ipv6,etc.Using cloud computing service 
mechanisms for this network contest works, it was very 
effective to realize the share of the various types of network 
experiment resource ,and it can also reduce concentrated 
calls of network devices for contests, the players can join 
contests nearby, which greatly reduced the cost of contests. 
The typical applications in this case, which using test bed 
for 
Next 
Generation 
Network--Dragon-lab 
federal 
experiment platform, had proved a number of network 
services for Ipv6.The content IPv6 address configuration and 
planning of  covers routers, switches and servers, such 
as:(i)Router configuration: address translation between IPv4 
and IPv6, configurations of static routers and OSPFv3 router 
protocols, ISATAP tunnel configurations, etc. (ii)Switch 
configuration: switches' IPv6 address configurations, divided 
VLAN and no-state configuration for subnet getting IP 
address. (iii)Parts of system application: configuring the 
ISATAP tunnel on PCs; configuring IIS services on  servers 
which using IPv6 address of servers for access, etc. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
With the development of cloud computing technology, it 
will expand a new development space for the contests field. 
The management and information processing of the contests 
will gradually migrate to the cloud, which will have a 
significant and far-reaching impact on the areas of 
competition. Contest participants can make better use of the 
information resources and services with the cloud computing 
services. Contest management agencies can manage the 
contests resources, organize and operate the contest process 
much better.  
Cloud computing obtained four achievements in the 
application of network contests: 
A. Integrate the resource and improve the service 
functions of the competition  
Through the integration of contests resources, the 
contests cannot be effected by the geographical location, data 
processing ability of server etc. The construction of the 
contests resources need to emphasize the introduction of new 
technology and the construction of contests contents, 
meanwhile, 
emphasize 
the 
utilization, 
retrieval 
and 
sustainable development of resources, improving the service 
consciousness of resource construction, satisfying the 
effective sharing and utilization of information and resources. 
Tournament organizers and contests spot who using clouds 
large-scale server groups, have powerful computation ability 
and high bandwidth, can rapidly respond to the request of 
user.  
B. Reducing the cost of hardware, providing economical 
software service  
Using cloud computing, most tasks of computing is 
carried out by cloud end, the computer is just connected to 
internet. By cloud computing, purchasing cost of hardware 
and software will be reduced greatly. The demand of 
terminal equipment is low by using cloud computing. 
Therefore, cloud computing will be popular in contest field 
for it can reduce purchasing and maintaining cost for the 
contest host. Some commonly used software such as online 
document editing tools, contest software tools can adopt 
253
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

cloud computing. If the contest areas connect to the service 
of cloud computing, the cost of software construction and the 
expense of maintain and update will be reduced. What the 
users do is just open the explorer, use the cloud computing, 
perform the contest management, contest staff management 
and take part in the contest. 
C. Building contest Platform of network competition , 
convenient for contest and study  
With the gradual development and popularization of 
Cloud 
Computing 
pattern, 
processing 
varieties 
of 
information about competition will be gradually transplanted 
to Cloud, which will take a positive influence on network 
competition. Cloud Computing will have an active influence 
on building environment of colonial competition and 
individual autonomy learning and implementing change and 
sharing information. Users can freely choose related methods, 
among those the service, resource and platform are provided 
by Cloud Computing, which provides network competitor 
and learner abundant resource of network competition and a 
favorable platform for competing and studying. That will 
help to launch network competition. 
D. Providing more secure and reliable data center to 
avoid illegal attack and destruction 
With the virus and hacker prevailing, the security and 
reliability of data are becoming more and more important. 
Cloud Computing service is severing for competition which 
uses the most advanced data center in the world to store data. 
There is a powerful technological management team 
managing the committed data, which provides the 
competition reliable and secure data storage center. There is 
no need to worry about the data loss problem caused by 
intrusion of virus and hacker and destruction of hardware by 
using Cloud Computing platform. 
In the Internet era, the virus and hackers are rampant, 
data security and reliability is becoming more and more 
important. Contests which use cloud computing service, can 
store the data by the advanced data center in the world, have 
the strong technical management team to manage the 
submitted data, and provide reliable and safe data storage 
centers for the tournament. By using the cloud computing 
platforms, there is no need to worry about data loss problems 
resulting from viruses and attacks of hackers and hardware 
damage in the future contest areas 
There are many issues that we have to explore because of 
the opening of cloud computing, high efficiency of 
equipment, extendibility, deployment flexibility of the 
business and so on. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work is supported by National Nature Science 
Foundation (No 60873208) and Hebei Natural Science 
Foundation (No F2009000927). The author would like to 
thank the reviewers of this paper for useful comments and 
suggestion. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest.[EB/OL],(2009-
10-16)[2010-09-10].http://cm.baylor.edu/welcome.icpc /. 
[2] 
UCSB International Capture The Flag.[EB/OL],(2007-12-18)[2010-
10-05]. http://ictf.cs.ucsb.edu/. 
[3] 
Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition.[EB/OL],(2005-03-10)[2010-
11-10].http://www.nationalccdc.org/ 
[4] 
NTU Network Security Competition.[EB/OL],(2003-08-01)[2010-09-
05].http://www.lugs.org.sg/pipermail/slugnet/2003-August/006022.ht 
ml. 
[5] 
University NOC activities of network security competition. 
[EB/OL],(2009-06-01)[2010-11-15].http://g.noc.net.cn/. 
[6] 
J. Paulo Leal and Fernando Silva, “Mooshak: a Web-based multi-site 
programming contest system,” Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 
33, May 2003, pp. 567-581, doi: 10.1002/spe.522. 
[7] 
A.Shamsul Arefin, M. Arifur Rahman, S. Anwar Sharna, Samiran 
Mahmud, and Dr. M. Kaykobad, “Secured Programming Contest 
System with Online and Real-time Judgment Capability,” 8th 
International Conferrence on Computer and Information Technology 
(ICCIT) ,  Bangladesh, 2005, pp. 584-586. 
[8] 
A. Trotman and C. Handley, “Programming contest strategy,” 
Computers 
Education, 
vol. 
50, 
April 
2008, 
pp. 
821-837, 
doi:10.1016/j.compedu.2006.08.008. 
[9] 
R. Buyya, S. Pandey, and C. Vecchiola, “Cloudbus Toolkit for 
Market-Oriented Cloud Computing,” Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol 5931/2009, 2009, pp. 24-44, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
10665-1_4. 
[10] Bhathiya Wickremasinghe, Rodrigo N. Calheiros , and R. Buyya, 
“CloudAnalyst: A CloudSim-based Visual Modeller for Analysing 
Cloud Computing Environments and Applications,” 2010 24th IEEE 
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications, April 2010, pp. 20-23. 
[11] Rodrigo N. Calheiros1, Rajiv Ranjan1, César A. F. De Rose, and 
Rajkumar Buyyaetc. “CloudSim:A Novel Framework for Modeling 
and Simulation of Cloud Computing infrastructures and Services”, 
echnical Report, GRIDS-TR-2009-l, Grid Computing and Distributed 
Systems Laboratory ,2009,3. 
[12] Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: state-of-the-
art and research challenges”, Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, vol. 1, Appl. 2010, pp. 7-18, doi:  10.1007/s13174-010-
0007-6. 
[13] Luis M. Vaquero, Luis Rodero-Merino, Juan Caceres, and Maik 
Lindner, “A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Definition”, ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review. New York, vol 39, 
pp. 50-55, January 2009. 
[14] Dragon-lab.[EB/OL],(2006-05-06)[2010-07-10].http://www.Dragon 
lab.org/. 
[15] JiLong Wang, ZhongHui  LI, GuoHan LÜ, CaiPing Jiang, Xing Li, 
and QianLi Zhang, “DRAGON-Lab-Next generation internet 
technology experiment platform”, Science in China Series F: 
Information Sciences, vol. 51, Nov. 2008, pp. 1908-1918, doi: 
10.1007/s11432-008-0149-3. 
. 
 
254
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

