A Tool to Enable Knowledge Management 
A case study at an educational institution  
Maycon Sousa, Inaka Barreto and Cleyton Souza 
Department from the System Analysis and Development Course (CST-ADS) 
Federal Institute of Science Education and Technology of Paraiba - IFPB 
Monteiro, Brazil 
e-mail: maycon.carvalho@academico.ifpb.edu.br, {inaka.barreto, cleyton.souza}@ifpb.edu.br
 
 
Abstract—Federal Institute of Paraiba is a school maintained 
by the government. To enable its operation, it defines and 
adopts hundreds of organizational processes described by 
resolutions proposed and approved by its various superior 
boards. However, unfortunately, the reality is that many 
employees do not know how the institute works and see 
everything as complex and unnecessary bureaucracy. This 
leads to more work and delays due to petitions that are unclear 
and are missing information. To mitigate this problem, in this 
paper, we are proposing an app that will concentrate 
information, in a colloquial language, about petitions, such as 
regulation and mandatory attachments, as well as create a new 
communication channel by grouping, in a virtual community, 
employees from the same Campus. We presented our 
prototype to some course coordinators and directors and they 
agreed about the importance of the app to improve the current 
workflows from the institute and to educate the community.     
Keywords-knowledge 
management; 
federal 
institutes; 
universtity; application; social network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge Management (KM) is an effort to increase 
useful knowledge within the organization [1]. Usually, the 
sources of knowledge are skillful employees and/or the 
documented expertise that was produced over the years. 
Ways to achieve this include encouraging communication, 
offering opportunities to learn, and promoting the sharing of 
appropriate knowledge objects and/or artifacts [1]. To 
support KM policies, organizations can use information 
systems. These KM tools collect, store and share the 
intellectual capital that the organization has. With the help of 
KM tools, organizations start to use their intellectual capital 
to optimize processes, develop innovative solutions, 
stimulate creativity and increase productivity.  
In this paper, we present our proposal to mitigate some 
KM problems that we observed in Federal Institute of 
Paraiba (IFPB) (a Brazilian public educational institution): a 
multi-platform app that promotes the KM in educational 
institutions, regarding the internal rules to start any type of 
petition.  We observed that many employees of the IFPB are 
unaware of the institution's regulations, even due to the 
inherent complexity of these regulations, which often causes 
difficulties and even errors when structuring a petition. Our 
solution helps in maintaining the knowledge in a unique 
place, where employees will be able to educate themselves 
on how to proceed to start a petition and through which 
departments the petition will go. This will also help course 
coordinators and directors, as it will reduce rework resulting 
from returning petitions with problems. In addition, our 
proposal will facilitate communication among employees 
from the same campus. Finally, we presented our proposal to 
course coordinators and directors who gave us a positive 
feedback and suggestions on how to improve the app.  
It is important to highlight that, although our project is 
being developed for IFPB, the scenario that has been 
described may be common to other Federal Institutes and 
also to any educational institution in other countries. For this 
reason, we believe that our solution can easily fit in other 
contexts, mainly due to the architecture that we adopted 
when planning it. The app was developed in Flutter, a 
framework created by Google for building natively compiled 
applications for mobile, web, and desktop from a single 
codebase. In addition, we build a web application that works 
as administration panel and facilitates creating data to our 
platform, as well as delivering to our app, using web 
services.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II details the 
context that motivated our research; Section III presents 
related work, as well the theories related to KM; Section IV 
describes the architecture and stack used to develop the app; 
Section V present our proposal, from the user point of view; 
Section VI reports the impressions that we gathered from 
presenting our prototype to four employees in management 
positions; finally, Section VII closes our article with 
conclusions and future work. 
II. 
CONTEXT AND MOTIVATION 
In Brazil, Federal Institutes are schools maintained by the 
Federal Government that work with a multi-campus structure 
that offer a variety of courses, ranging from high school to 
postgraduate courses, such as Specialization and doctoral 
courses. The main goal of these institutes is offering free and 
high quality professional education. However, they also 
develop Research projects and Extension projects with the 
community. Today, the federal education network has 38 
institutes with 661 campus spread across the country, in all 
its states [2]. The Federal Institute of Paraiba (IFPB) is one 
of oldest units, with 112 years old, and, currently, it has 20 
campuses [3].  
All Federal Institutes follow the same Brazilian federal 
law (law number 11.892 from 2008), but each one creates 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

their own internal statute to guide and to rule their operations 
[2]. It is not different with IFPB. To enable its operation, 
IFPB defines and adopts hundreds of organizational 
processes described by resolutions proposed and approved 
by its various superior boards.  These processes are essential 
for the functioning of the organization and, more broadly, 
they need to be carried out in order for the Institution to exist 
and to guarantee the legality of the acts performed by all its 
employees. 
The knowledge about how and what occurs during the 
flow of a process is essential, especially for those directly 
associated to the success achievement of the main goal of the 
institute: teachers, course coordinators, directors and even 
students. However, unfortunately, the reality is that many 
employees do not know how their institute works and see 
everything as complex and unnecessary bureaucracy. This 
happens for many reasons: (1) there is a high amount of 
regulations and some are written in juridical terms that make 
its comprehension difficult (and others present an inherent 
high complexity); (2) there are only a few employees with an 
in-depth knowledge of these statutes to instruct others; (3) 
the changes in who occupies management positions are 
recurrent. This scenario represents a serious KM problem 
that can lead to a series of bad consequences [4].  
For instance, although a petition can begin and end in the 
same sector, most petitions actually move through many 
departments and require several people authorizations, 
before being granted. Due to this complexity, errors can 
occur when in the structuring of these petitions that can lead 
to delays or even make them unfeasible. Let us take as an 
example a petition for carrying out an excursion. If there is 
any missing document or the motivations are unsatisfying, a 
delay can cause the class and the teachers involved to lose 
the time window for which the visit was planned.  
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Knowledge Management (KM) is the process of creating, 
sharing, using and managing the knowledge and information 
of an organization [4]. It refers to a multidisciplinary 
approach to achieve organizational objectives by making the 
best use of knowledge [5]. Among the advantages of 
applying KM policies, we can cite: improvement of internal 
process and better fluidity, more efficient decision-making 
process and better results, maximization of intellectual 
capital, possibility of identifying organizational problems 
(bureaucracy, slowness, and communication problems) 
[4][5].  
Using KM the knowledge transforms itself and it is 
transmitted. It changes from tacit to explicit and vice-versa. 
A senior employee can write a textbook using his thoughts 
about his work. This book will be read by others employees 
which will develop their impressions about what he does. 
The thoughts from the senior are his tacit knowledge. The 
textbook is an explicit form of his tacit knowledge that can 
be easily absolved by other. The impression from who read 
the book is the tacit knowledge that they developed after 
reading. This is the knowledge cycle. To support this cycle, 
it is common ground to use software based systems. In this 
matter, we believe is worth to mention: Wiki, Bitrix24 and 
AnswerHub and Confluence. 
Wiki is a website that allows collaborative editing of its 
content and structure by its users. There are quite a few web 
sites that can help to create a Wiki (although some require 
payment for the service), for instance, MediaWiki [6], 
SlimWiki [7] and Wikidot [8]. Bitrix24 [9] is a social 
enterprise platform. It is a united work space which handles 
the many aspects of daily operations and tasks and provides 
companies with a full range of team working and social 
networking means. AnswerHub is a KM and community 
application that offers tools to create and manage an online 
knowledge-based community. It is possible collect, organize, 
and share knowledge in a variety of ways including articles, 
ideas, and questions and answers.  
Our proposal reunites some features from all these tools, 
while also include some new. Each campus administrator 
will have easy access to near colleagues, since the tool 
virtually reunites employees of the same campus. Thus, 
likewise Wiki, administrators will also be able to create and 
share articles with their subordinates. Likewise the 
Beatrix24, our solution will improve communication 
channels, since it also include phone push notifications that 
will help to inform everyone from the same Campus about 
meetings and other deadlines. Likewise the AnswerHub, 
users will also find a section with Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQ), where they will be able to share their own 
doubts and administrators will choose if the question is 
worth to be permanently added to the FAQ of the petition 
guide or not. Our solution will offer robust channels to 
concentrate and distribute knowledge inside the Federal 
Institutes’ structure. In addition, we aim to make it available 
for use of other organizations. 
IV. 
STACK AND ARCHITECUTE 
Our proposal was developed using Java with Spring 
Framework (an application framework and inversion of 
control container for the Java platform) [10]. In the client-
side, we used two distinct technologies, one for the mobile 
platform (Flutter) and other for the web platform (Angular). 
Flutter is a free and open-source mobile UI framework 
created by Google to create, using one programming 
language and one codebase, apps for different platforms [11]. 
Angular 
is 
an 
application 
design 
framework 
and 
development platform for building mobile and desktop web 
applications [12]. The software administration will be 
performed by directors and course coordinators using the 
web interface (written using Angular). This will facilitate 
creating data to our platform. Other users will consume these 
data using our mobile app available in both Play Store and 
Apple Store (written using Flutter). Finally, for data storage, 
the relational database chosen for ensuring integrity and data 
management was PostgreSQL [13].  
In addition, we chose the REST (Representational State 
Transfer) Architecture style to structure our proposal, due to 
simplicity, ease of maintenance, high scalability and 
reliability in the resistance to failure. REST is a software 
architectural style that defines the set of rules to be used for 
creating web services. A Restful system consists of a client-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

side who requests the resources and a server who delivers the 
resources.  
In Figure 1, we present the architecture of our proposal as 
a whole, where the client makes HTTP requests to the server. 
 
 
Figure 1. App architecture. 
The user, on the client-side, though a browser or 
smartphone, accesses the system and makes requests for the 
API, in order to display the information about some petition. 
The server interprets the request, makes the necessary 
queries in the database and returns a response in JSON 
format to the client side. Finally, the app or browser displays 
the data contained in this JSON file to the client. 
V. 
PRESENTING OUR PROPOSAL 
The main goal of our proposal is help employees with 
structuring their petitions. Besides that, our app also creates a 
new 
communication 
channel 
that 
virtually 
reunites 
employees of Federal Institute from the same campus and it 
will facilitate notify all about meetings and other updates.  
Regarding the petitions, users will have access to a list of 
commonest petitions that can be opened by teachers. To have 
access to these functions, users will have to register and 
login into the app. Figure 2 shows the Register page (on the 
left side) and the Login page (on the right side). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Register page (left) and Login page (right). 
The system only allows users to register using their 
academic e-mail account. While registering, users will 
inform from which campus they are (the red box in the left 
side of Figure 2). This information is important to virtually 
reunite employees from the same campus in the same 
domain. The final version will enable the domain 
administrator do personalize primary color, icon and title. In 
this paper, we decide to describe the prototype using IFPB’ 
design scheme. After being authenticated, users will 
visualize the list of petitions guides that directors previously 
saved through the web administration panel, as presented in 
Figure 3 (left). Since there is a chance of this list increases, 
they can filter using the text field on the top of the screen. 
They also have access to a sidebar-menu that serves for 
navigation only (right).  
 
 
 
Figure 3. List of petitions guides (left) and Sidebar menu (right). 
The Petition menu directs users for the List of petitions 
page. The Notification menu will direct users to the 
Notifications list, where they can see, for instance, meetings 
call and answers for their asked questions. After clicking in 
one of the petition guides, users are directed to the petition 
guide itself. Figure 4 shows the main elements that compose 
the guide. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Guideline tab (top left), Attachments tab (top right), Related 
regulation tab (bottom left) and FAQ tab (bottom right). 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 4 shows the Guide page for opening a petition to 
request an off campus activities. Each petition guide is 
composed by four elements (four tabs): guideline, 
attachments, regulations and FAQ. The initial guidelines (top 
left) will be a document written with colloquial language that 
will detail the petition, present required attachment, link 
related regulation and help structuring the petition. This 
guide is written by directors or course coordinators, who 
know how the petition works, aiming to help their 
subordinates and even colleagues who come to occupy their 
position in the future. The initial guideline tab also will have 
an optional flowchart. The flowchart will be a visual guide 
that will describe the algorithm to correctly start the petition 
and through which departments the petition will go, before 
being finished. The attachment tab (top right) will group 
documents that must be included in the petition. The 
resolutions tab (bottom left) will group all the internal e 
external legislation related to the petition subject and 
mentioned in the guideline document. Finally, the FAQ tab 
will present questions previously elaborated by the author of 
the petition guide and also questions made by other 
employees and judged as worth to be public by the author of 
the petition guide. Users will be able to expand any number 
of questions from the FAQ to see the answer. In addition, 
they can send the own questions by clicking the “plus” 
button on the bottom right. The petition guide’s author will 
receive and answer the employee; he will judge if he wants 
also to add the question and answer to the FAQ. We claim 
that gathering this information together will reduce the effort 
to learn about how to structure a petition and it will create a 
collective awareness on how organizational processes work. 
VI. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
We presented our prototype to two directors and two 
course coordinators from four different campuses of IFPB. 
All of them have at least two years of experience in their 
respective positions. We demonstrated the app functions and 
explained how it could be used. Our main goal was to gather 
their opinions regarding our proposal, as well as to identify 
other functionalities that could be included in the beta 
version of the app. We asked them basic questions, such as 
“which were the problems that they wish our app would 
solve?” and “what were their thoughts about the 
prototype?”. In this section, we report this preliminary 
feedback. 
One of the course coordinators stated that our app would 
solve at least three problems: (1) the absence of required 
documentation in any petition; (2) forwarding petitions to 
departments 
without the endorsement of immediate 
supervisors; (3) the app can educate people about the legal 
basis for each type of petition and the time required for each 
request, which solves the problem of the employees' lack of 
knowledge of institutional rules and the deadlines involved 
in each type of petition.  
Other respondents emphasized that the app would 
provide agility in the progress of petitions. “In a daily basis, 
many petitions return to the interested party for presenting 
incomplete documentation or for not respecting the correct 
sequence between different departments of the Campus. 
Thus, the app can minimize these basic failures that slow the 
progress of petitions and can allow employees to consult 
information without the need to consult directors”, as stated 
by one of the respondents. “Consistent guidance on how to 
handle a petition will avoid rework and delays, in 
processing”, as stated by other. He also said that these 
mistakes are not fault just of the employees, but the result of 
the complexity and amount of legislation usually involved. 
Regarding the importance of our proposal, one of the 
respondents summarized the general thought: “the first 
impressions are very positive because, with just one click, 
essential information will be available to the community in a 
summarized form”. Other coordinator suggested the 
integration between or app and the academic platform from 
IFPB (called SUAP): “the proposal is very important for all 
employees of the institution, whether they are management 
position or not […] In addition, if the app could be 
integrated with SUAP, it would further expand its potential 
for guidance in the elaboration of processes”. 
Based on the received feedback, we believe that we are 
heading in the right direction. In addition, we were able to 
gather suggestions on how to improve our proposal, for the 
beta release.   
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Knowledge Management (KM) is the process of creating, 
sharing, using and managing the knowledge and information 
of an organization. Improvement of internal process and 
better fluidity are some of the advantages of applying 
effective KM policies. However, in the context of IFPB, a 
Brazilian educational institution, we observed that many 
employees do not know how the institute works and see 
every petition as complex and unnecessary bureaucracy for 
asking for something. In addition, there are only a few 
employees with an in-depth knowledge of statutes associated 
to each type of petition available to instruct others 
colleagues. This scenario represents a serious KM problem 
that can lead to a series of bad consequences, such as rework, 
slowness, communication flaws and even failure to achieve 
organizational objectives. 
To mitigate these problems, we proposed an app that will 
concentrate information about petitions in a colloquial 
language; as well it will create a new communication 
channel by grouping, in a virtual community, employees 
from the same Campus. We presented our prototype to some 
course coordinators and directors and they agreed about the 
importance of the app to improve the current workflows 
from the institute and to educate the community.  
As future work, after finishing the app and releasing it to 
the IFPB’s community, we aim to report the results achieved 
by the app use with in-deep employees and directors 
impressions. In addition, we are working in adding new 
features 
that 
will 
improve 
even 
more 
Knowledge 
Management, such as indexing data for easy recovering and 
the integration of our app with SUAP, the academic platform 
adopted by IFPB. Finally, we want to make a version of the 
app aiming newcomers students to educate them about the 
institute and how it works, as well about how to structuring 
their own types of petitions.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We want to thank IFPB – Campus Monteiro for the 
support to our research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. McInerney, “Knowledge management and the dynamic 
nature of knowledge”, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, vol. 53, pp. 1009–1018, 
C.R. 2002. 
[2] Ministry of Education. Federal Network of Professional, 
Scientific and Technological Education. [Online]. Availbale 
from: http://portal.mec.gov.br/rede-federal-inicial/ [retrieved 
August, 2020] 
[3] G. Rodrigues, “IFPB celebrates 110 years,” Portal IFPB, 
2019. 
 
[Online]. 
Availale 
from: 
https://www.ifpb.edu.br/noticias/2019/09/ifpb-comemora-
110-anos [retrieved August, 2020] 
[4] J. Girard and J. Girard, "Defining knowledge management: 
Toward an applied compendium", Online Journal of Applied 
Knowledge Management, vol. 3,  2015. 
[5] A. Das, “Building Organizational Capabilities: an insightful 
examinatio  of the principles and practices of making great 
organization”, Ebooks2go Inc, 2017.  
[6] https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/MediaWiki 
[retrieved 
September, 2020] 
[7] https://slimwiki.com/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[8] https://www.wikidot.com/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[9] https://www.bitrix24.com/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[10] https://spring.io/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[11] https://flutter.dev/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[12] https://angular.io/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
[13] https://www.postgresql.org/ [retrieved September, 2020] 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

