An Architecture of Virtual Desktop Cloud: Design and Implementation 
Zhan-wei Liu       Tong-rang Fan         Zheng-xu Zhao  
School of Information Science and Technology 
Shijiazhuang Tiedao University 
Hebei, Shijiazhuang, P R China 
e-mails: liuzhanwei@hotmail.com    fantr@sjzri.edu.cn   zhaozhengxu@staff.stdu.edu.cn  
 
 
Abstract—This paper starts with an evaluation over the virtual 
desktop cloud technology and its applications in business and 
forecasts its development in the security and reliability of 
information systems. It then proposes an architecture of 
virtual desktop cloud based on the X86 platform. It finally 
presents the implementation of the architecture and describes 
how the architecture can significantly reduce the maintenance 
costs and upgrading cycle of computing systems and facilities.  
Keywords- virtual desktop cloud; sever virtualization; desktop 
virtualization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the development of computer technology and 
Internet technology, cloud computing is emerging as a web-
based process by which shared resources, software, and 
information are provided to computers and other devices 
such as smart phones on demand over the Internet [1]. As 
terminal users increase rapidly in numbers, the demands for 
both computing resources and shared information are 
becoming diverse, which make the desktop management 
extremely complicated and expensive in system installation 
and maintenance [2].  
Conventional IT systems are developed from a 
centralization paradigm with distributed PCs for independent 
users. Those systems have its advantages of customized 
desktop environments, but are difficult to maintain and are 
vulnerable to errors, risk and disasters. The desktop cloud 
system described in this paper enhances the security of the 
desktop environments. It adopts a centralized computation, 
but relies on the architecture to realize mobile and remote 
user applications, which represents so-call Private Cloud. 
The architecture of this system is explained below.  
The Teaching and Research Center within the School of 
Information Science and Technology at the Shijiazhuang 
Tiedao University has more than 12 computing laboratories, 
with software and hardware being distributed in different 
floors 
and 
buildings. 
This 
computing 
facility 
can 
accommodate about 800 terminal users and is mainly 
equipped for meeting the educational demands such as 
postgraduate and undergraduate courses, tutorials and 
projects. The facility is incorporated with various modern 
computing technologies including .NET, Linux, JAVA, 
Database, 2D/3D engineering, to name only a few. In the 
early days, those computing laboratories relied merely on 
system recovery cards, isolation units and recoverable 
network devices to divide the computing resources 
(including software and hardware) into different sub-systems 
and sections. Tailored for different teaching courses, 
sectional systems had to be set and configured to meet the 
specific requirements.  
In such a scenario, it means that every computing 
laboratory must install a number of different system 
configurations for different demands, which had made the 
overall facility complex and complicated, leading to a 
significant of management and maintenance costs.  At the 
same time, due to the fast development of hardware and 
software, the lifecycle of terminal PCs are becoming shorter 
(upgraded and renewed for every 4 or 5 years), this has 
added on a large annual cost over the  maintenance of the 
facility. On the contrary, as all other large organizations [2, 
3 , 4], the budget for purchasing and maintaining computing 
facilities including PCs at Shijiazhuang Tiedao University 
has been tightly controlled and for some projects it has 
reduced, which has inevitably created a dilemma between the 
system upgrading and the management costs.  
In the summer of 2010, the Institution started the project 
called virtual desktop cloud to bring the state-of-the-art 
technology and solutions to the aforementioned problems. 
The project, via virtual servers, is to integrate a large 
numbers of dedicated severs so that an optimize hardware 
configuration can be established to reduce the computing 
resources. Since the so-called Virtual Desktop Infrastructure 
(VDI) has already been widely implemented on the campus, 
computing resources previously in the user‟s desktops can be 
integrated from the distributed PCs into the data center 
through remote desktop protocol. The merits of such strategy 
are (1) to extend the life of PCs, (2) to improve the customer 
service quality and (3) to generate fast and repaid responses 
to the customer‟s requests.  
The implementation shows that the virtual desktop 
technology has enabled PC customer‟s access their own 
virtual desktop through any network port or equipment and 
the computer lifecycle has been significantly extended. 
Because all virtual desktops have been integrated in the data 
center of cloud computing instead of being distributed over a 
population of single PCs, very little resource is needed for 
installing patch programs or security update in the individual 
PCs. All previously existing system management and 
maintenance tasks can be carried out in a cloud computing 
architecture (within the data center), which provided a much 
more flexibility and robust environment for students and 
enabled them to access their own personal desktop anywhere 
(and with much more mobility). 
243
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

With the aforementioned application example, this paper 
presents a virtual desktop cloud and demonstrates its design 
and implementation as a web-based process by which shared 
resources, software, and information are provided to 
computers and other user-centered devices, proposing an 
architecture that is different from conventional IT 
centralization infrastructure [5, 6, 7].     
In the text to follow, Section II describes the proposed 
system structure and Section III illustrates the work scheme 
of the system and Section IV demonstrates the functionality 
of the architecture. Section V provides a comparative study 
to validate and justify the architecture against the IT 
centralization paradigm. It also provides a brief description 
of user experiences in terms of the design flexibility and 
customization for different applications. Section VI shows 
conclusion and future work. 
II. 
SYSTEM STRUCTURE  
Virtual 
desktop 
cloud 
technology 
integrates 
comprehensive virtualization technologies toward severs, 
OS‟s, desktops, thin client, remote link protocol, and so on 
[1]. Virtual desktop cloud solution differs from others in 
that it can deliver personal desktops to customers by using 
single mirrors. This solution simplifies desktop management 
and improves the service quality, by which system 
administrators are able to choose distributing systems more 
flexibly. This enables the system to distribute desktops to 
individual computing laboratories, remote libraries, staff 
offices and student dormitories. 
With the current installation and configuration of the 
severs in the Teaching and Research Center in the School of 
Information Science and Technology at the Shijiazhuang 
Tiedao University, two virtual partitions are used where 
desktop virtualization platforms and DVC [1, 2] (distant 
visual cluster) software are involved. The first one has the 
capacity of supporting 400 desktop platforms, which is built 
through utilizing desktop virtualization platforms and 
enterprise-level severs and disk arrays. The second one is a 
distant visual cluster system built with high-performance 
computers with distant visual cluster software, which is 
mainly for graphical design and research projects on the 
campus. 
A. Architecture of VisualView Software 
The desktop virtual platform has an architecture that 
includes an end-to-end solution and can deliver desktop 
applications in the form of managed services [1]. This 
architecture is shown in Fig.1. The virtualization platform 
provides a highly scalable, highly reliable and stable 
platform for running virtual desktop applications, which has 
the continuity of services and disaster recovery functions to 
protect the user information and the desktop data [2]. The 
platform provides a guarantee for desktop virtualization, and 
is inexpensive and simple like traditional solutions. The 
management center can completely control and check 
clusters, host computers, virtual computers, memory, 
network connections and other key factors within the virtual 
basic architecture [3, 4]. 
 
 
USER EXPERIENCE
    Print
    Multi-monitor Display
    Multimedia
    Redirect USB
    PCoIP
Management
    View Manager
    View Composer
    ThinAPP    
THINAPP
FATHER IMAGE
CENTRALIZED VIRTUAL DESKTOP
CLONING LINKS
THIN CLIENT
NOTEBOOK
PC
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
VIEW 
MANAGER
PLATFORM
Desktop 
Delivery
 
Figure 1.  System Frame of Virtual Desktop Cloud.  
 
244
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

The virtual manager software can in theory manage 
thousands of virtual desktops from a single memory image 
for controllers, which simplifies desktop management, 
allocation and deployment. At the same time, terminal users 
can access virtual desktops safely and easily through the 
Software-View 
Manager 
[4]. 
In 
an 
educational 
establishment, students are able to establish rapidly a 
desktop image shared with a single up-level image in virtual 
disks through virtual composers. The virtual composer may 
segment the user data and configuration for independent 
management, so it will not affect the user data and 
configuration whenever repairing and updating desktop 
linked with up level images need to be carried out [5]. The 
Virtual ThinApp simplifies the management and distribution 
of applications, which can rapidly dispose the applications 
to users and avoid any data transfer conflicts [2, 3, 4]. 
For software applications, the virtual manager is able to 
manage as many virtual desktops from a single memory 
image for controllers as they are needed. This arrangement 
simplifies desktop management, allocation and deployment. 
At the same time, terminal users can access virtual desktops 
safely and easily through the Software-View Manager [4]. 
Students are able to establish rapidly a desktop image shared 
with a single up-level image in virtual disks through virtual 
composers. The virtual composer may segment the user data 
and configuration for independent management, so it will 
not influence the user data and configuration whenever 
repairing and updating desktop linked with up level images 
need to be carried out [5]. The Virtual ThinApp enhances 
the functionality of management and simplifies the 
distribution of applications. This architecture can therefore 
rapidly dispose the applications to users and avoid any data 
transfer conflicts. 
B. Architecture of Distant Visual Cluster Systems 
The distant visual cluster DVC [6] adopts a C/S 
architecture including server-end and client-end. The server-
end realizes OpenGL to accelerate the rendering cycles of 
user applications and it compresses the rendering image for a 
fast data transmission. For the client-end, it receives the 
compressed images and extracts to display on the monitors. 
The detailed architecture of DVC for these functions is 
shown in Fig 2. The sever-end is connected with the client-
end through specific protocols. Virtual displays are 
virtualized by software in the server which directly sends 3D 
graphic operation commands to the 3D acceleration graphic 
card in the server-end. Test shows that this arrangement can 
significantly improve the rendering efficiency via utilizing 
accelerated rendering of 3D drivers. Events of mouse and 
keyboard can be sent to the client-end through the protocols 
in order to run applications in the server-end. These specific 
processes are list below. 
 
Remote
display
Client
 Keyboard/mouse 
events 
TCP/IP
Process-C
 Virtual display
Uncompress
Compressed
picture
compress
Process-B
Local 3D 
accelerate 
render
Process-E
Process-D
Process-F
Process-A
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
4 U
 
Local graphics
Client
Server
 
Figure 2.  Architecture of DVC sytem.  
 
 
245
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

1) Process-A: The local server-end utilizes the virtual 
display and the process-F to realize the hardware and the 3D 
accelerated rendering process in the server-end and it thus 
forms a 2D rendering graph in virtual displays which is of 
high-resolution and high-capacity [6]. 
2) Process-B: This is to compress the high-resolution and 
high-capacity rendering graph to small-capacity graphs that 
are suitable to transmit data in the network. It utilizes the 
image compression technology with high compression ratio.   
3) Process-C: This process transmits the compressed 
graphs in the server-end to the distant client-end through 
internet. 
4) Process-D: This decompresses the graphs and the 
graphs are received from the distant client-end. 
5) Process-E: The rendering 2D graph and displaying in 
client-end are processed in this phase. 
6) Process-F: The virtual displays send the accelerated 
rendering commands to the 3D accelerated hardware. 
In the transmission between the sever-end and client-end, 
the arrow represents the transmission process of the mouse 
and keyboard events. From the above processes, it is shown 
that the geometric model of the rendering section with huge 
amount of calculation running on high speed graphic card 
and the 2D graphic compressed data packed is extracted and 
displayed on the monitor.  
Data transmitted in the internet includes rendering graph 
and mouse and keyboard event instead of 3D geometric 
model data. This as a result substantially reduces the amount 
of data transmitting in the networks and decreases the 
dependence on networks, thus it improves the operations for 
graphic applications. This is one of the obvious advantages 
in employing DVC to realize distant 3D accelerated rending 
for applications. 
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF SCHEME 
A. Configuration of Virtual desktop Cloud Server 
The configuration of the server used for virtual desktop 
cloud is listed in Table I. The server is a standard 4U rack 
which is an enterprise server whose main configuration can 
be simply summarized as below.  
TABLE I.  
CONFIGURATION LIST OF VIRTUAL DESKTOP CLOUD SERVER 
Standard 4U rack enterprise server 
Processor 
Opteron 6134（2.3GHz，8 cores）*4 
Memory 
128GB ECC DDR3 1333 Registered memory；
supporting advanced management function 
Hard disk 
146GB, hot-swap 2.5 inch SAS *2 
RAID card 
512MB SAS RAID card，with battery，supporting 
RAID0/1/5/6/10/50/60 
NIC 
2 port gigabit-NIC with 5 gigabit network interface 
HBA cark 
single port 8Gb PCI-E optical fiber HBA card *2 
power 
1+1 redundancy hot-swap power module 
fan 
Front 2+1 redundancy hot-swap fan 
Management 
software 
Integrated IPMI、iKVM、virtual media；distant 
management software, condition monitoring software 
for equipments; information management and distant 
access software; backup and recovery software for sever 
systems 
The processor is an Opteron 6134 with 8 cores; the 
memory capacity is 128GB; the hard disk is 2 SAS hard 
disks with 146GB capacity. 
B. Memory Configuration for Virtual Desktop Cloud 
The memory configuration for the virtual desktop cloud 
has three parts which are as follows. 
1) 
Requirements of memory capacity For the proposed 
architecture, each user is allocated with a 20GB disk. This 
capacity is determined for both systems described earlier. A 
30GB disk capacity is used for data storage according to 
literature [6]. In total it needs 20TB disk capacity for 400 
users. 
2) 
Configuration of memory capacity Using a fiber 
channel storage array, a main cabinet and an extended 
cabinet, the configuration and distribution are list below. 
a) The 16 600GB/block disks provide a 8.4TB bare 
space in which one block is used as a hot backup and the 
other 15 bocks constitute the RAID5 module. 
b) The 14 1TB/block SATA disks is able to provide 
12TB bare disk space in which one block is used as a hot 
backup and the others form the RAID5 module. 
c) The system space is placed on the FC disks and the 
data space is placed on the SATA disks. 
3) 
Storage performance The fiber channel storage 
array has 8Gbps channels and is constructed to provide a 
transmission capacity of 20000 I/O per second which is to 
meet the 400 I/O requirements designed for virtual desktop 
applications. 
C. Planning of Network 
The communication networks among severs use an 
independent 1000Mbps Ethernet, which is intended for the 
data transmission between the virtual servers. The design 
details of the network are listed in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
PLANNING OF NETWORK 
Equipment type 
Number 
Detailed configuration 
HPC platform 
case 
1 
Independently supporting 5 nodes，
2 gigabit exchange module， 2 
management modules equipped 
with 2 2000W redundancy power 
modules, supporting UPS modules, 
memory modules and management 
PC modules 
Workstation 
node 
5 
2*XeonE5620 /2*SAS2.5 inch 
10K147G/ 24G/Nvidia Quatra 
FX3800 professional graphic cards 
PC module 
1 
160GB hard-disk，processor and 
1G memory integrated system with 
mouse, keyboard and monitor 
DVC 
1 
Distant virtual workstation (cluster 
system) 
 
This part describes the communication networks between 
the servers and the memories. The networks employ a two-
246
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

link redundancy mechanism with two 8Gbps which are 
capable of preventing all applications from sudden 
shutdowns that may be caused by faulty devices or 
communication units. 
D. Configuration of Distant Visual Clusters 
The distant visual cluster includes one high-performance 
computer platform, five workstation nodes, one PC module, 
one UPS module and the corresponding virtual workstation 
cluster software.   
Table Ш is the details for such a configuration. The 
communication network between server and memory has 
two sections, one has an 8Gbps FC and the other includes 
two link redundancy mechanisms. The communication 
network between server and server is a 1000Mbps Ethernet. 
 
TABLE III.  
CONFIGURATION OF DISTANT VIRTUAL CLUSTER 
Type 
Design 
Communication network 
between server and memory 
A. 8Gbps FC 
B. two link redundancy 
mechanisms 
Communication network 
between server and server 
1000Mbps Ethernet 
 
IV. 
SYSTEM  FUNCTIONS  
The system functions so far have fallen into two 
categories in terms of its structure design. One is based on 
the architecture and the other is on the cluster applications.  
A. Architecture of Virtual Desktop 
The virtual desktop employs an optimized cloud 
computing platform which serves as its underlying 
architecture. This platform provides efficient server virtual 
functions. As a background support, it has following five 
features. 
1) 
Extensibility 
Each management unit supports up to 1000 virtual 
machines, which makes it suitable for a large deployment of 
virtual desktops. By using vMotion [7], the system is made 
more efficient and faster than conventional IT infrastructures 
and the migration time can be shortened significantly. 
Depending on service demands and the priority to compress 
and add desktop applications, the server resource is able to 
distribute in a dynamic module.  
2) 
High performance 
vSphere, equipped with high performance, is able to 
provide a fast and stable platform for the virtual desktop 
applications and to obtain an optimal status of the servers 
and virtual machines by using the monitoring platform [7]. 
3) 
Optimum density  
With the increasing density of virtual desktops, there are 
16 to 20 virtual desktops per core, this can increase the 
numbers of the supporting machines in each sever. 
4) 
High-availability and business connectivity 
vSphere  optimizes the workload of the desktops. The 
performance improves because of the reduction of the 
memory exchange. 
5) 
Rapid disaster recovery 
Both the data recovery technology and the vMotion [7] 
technology are able to provide the safety of the virtual 
desktop platforms. 
The system administrators are able to use the virtual 
desktops as a central controlling node. This node supports 
terminal users for safe and flexible accesses to the virtual 
desktops and is able to deliver the desktops in a style which 
is called the managed security service model. The virtual 
management software possesses an expansibility and 
reliability and utilizes a management interface. This interface 
is formed for the Web services to create and update the 
desktop images, to manage the user data, to implement the 
global strategy and to manage and monitor as many virtual 
desktops 
as 
it 
is 
currently 
needed 
(about 
1000) 
simultaneously. 
B. Distant Visual Cluster Software 
The 2D or 3D software is needed for routine teaching and 
research needs. Those software systems are used to meet 
visual demands for processing the exchanged data. Base on a 
number of tests and experimental tries, the solution of DVC 
has solved the aforementioned problems. The configuration 
of the system is described below. 
1) 
Improving the security of data.  
Distant users are able to access and operate the 
corresponding applications; there is no other data to transmit 
to the distant users except for the distant desktops which 
ensures the safety of the user data. 
2) 
Improving hardware utilization.  
By using the DVC software, one workstation can support 
a number of different users at the same time, thus improving 
the rate of facility utilization. 
3) 
Improving efficiency. 
 Through the DVC software, staff and students are able to 
work anywhere and participate in a virtual environment that 
is efficient and effective. 
4) 
Reducing management cost.  
With the DVC software, the hardware and software can 
be integrated seamlessly, which effectively reduces the 
management costs, improves the operational efficiency and 
extends the life span of the systems that are involved. 
V. 
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF SCHEME 
The above design and implementation has been used in a 
one year teaching and research environment as a testing 
period and the user experience indicates that the virtual 
desktop cloud solution is such an implementation that is able 
to support in an enterprise level the distant dynamic access of 
desktop systems and the unified managed technology of data 
centers. In comparison to the tradition IT systems, it is a new 
module that is based on servers and thin client modules so 
that system administrators and users can take the advantages 
of the two modules simultaneously.  
The results show that all desktop virtual machines are 
trusted and uniformly managed in the data center. The users 
247
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

can have the same user experience as but better results than 
with the traditional IT systems via the thin client, the similar 
equipment in LAN or distant access. Especially under the 
virtual desktop cloud architecture, the openness and zero-
touch of the cloud computing basic architecture can be 
realized. In the transaction process of shift toward the cloud 
computing from the traditional paradigm, robust data 
protection and full utilization of resource can be achieved. 
The vSphere can realize a free migration between the 
servers and the virtual machines. This will help in realizing 
an automatic detection of fault. It can also obtain the 
distributed resource allocation to realize a balanced workload 
among applications. The vMotion can help in achieving the 
real-time migration between running servers, obtaining zero-
shutdown characters, which is able to enhance the 
availability of the servers and to increase data security. 
It is also justified in the testing period that the virtual 
desktop architecture provides a safe and reliable data storage 
center, protecting the users from data loss, virus entry and 
other online hazards. A convenient and fast „could server‟ 
can reduce the workload compared to the old daily 
maintenance work. It is verified that the system 
administrators are able to carry out easily the maintenance 
work including maintaining hardware, installing and 
updating software, preventing virus and network attacks. 
Finally, users only need to type their address or login details 
to access the system and carry out the work exactly the same 
manner as on PCs. Cloud computing provides almost infinite 
space for storing and managing the data and provides the 
most so far capability for completing large applications. 
However, as for information security, user experience, 
existing bandwidth, product type choosing and allocation 
respects, the virtual desktop planning still face many 
technical and commercial challenges. For security and 
privacy of personal data, identity authentication and data 
backup should be enforced to ensure the high reliability and 
availability of data in the implementation phase. Since 
various mobile storage devices are being used today, printing 
and transmission of streaming media data may restrict the 
users to access the virtual desktops and their application data. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In order to realize IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), PaaS 
(Platform as a Service), SaaS (Software as a Service) of 
computing resource and to simplify terminal units, system 
resources should be integrated and managed in cloud units to 
improve the system efficiency and enhance the service 
quality. The architecture of virtual desktop cloud makes it 
possible for different computer systems and computing 
resources to be managed centrally in the data center and 
distributed through the network in service modules. This 
makes it possible meet the user‟s demands. By integrated 
management of computing resources, idle computing units 
and storage can be reduced substantially. 
Future works are needed to (1) carry out further study 
toward empirical validation of the system so that the 
proposed architecture can be justified for its claimed 
functions; (2) the development process needs to be further 
validated and more user experiences need to be gathered to 
examines the merits and failures of the design and 
implementation, especially the design flexibility for new 
required features and the customizing ability for different 
applications. 
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The work carried out in this paper is partially funded by 
the China National Science Funding Council. Funding 
number is 60873208. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cloud_computing. Retrieved 
September 2010 
[2] China Cloud computing net. http://www.cloudcomputing-china.cn/Ar
ticle/ShowArticle.asp?ArticleID=1. Retrieved October 2010. 
[3] VMware official site. http://www.vmware.com/cn/solutions/virtuali 
zation-management/. Retrieved July 2010. 
[4] Dawning official site. http://www.dawning.com.cn. Retrieved August 
2010. 
[5] J. Varia. “Cloud architectures- Amazon web services”. ACM 
Monthly 
Tech 
Talk 
, http://acmbangalore.org/events/monthly-
talk/may-2008--cloud-architectures---amazon-web-services.html, 
Retrieved August 2010. 
[6] I. Foster, C. Kesselman, and S. Tuecke, “The anatomy of the grid 
enabling scalable virtual organizations”.  International Journal of 
High Performance Computing Applications. Vol. 15, No.3, August 
2001,  pp. 200-222 
[7] F. Berman, G. Fox, and T. Hey. “The grid: past, present, and future”. 
“Grid Computing: Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality”. John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2003, pp. 9-50. 
[8] Top 500 supercomputing sites. http://www.top500.org/. Retrieved 
July 2010. 
[9] A. S. Szalay, P. Kunszt, A. Thakar, J. Gray, D. Slutz, and R. J. 
Brunner. “Designing and mining multi-terabyte astronomy archives: 
The Sloan Digital Sky Survey”. SIGMOD International Conference 
on Management of Data Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD 
international conference on Management of data. ACM, Vol. 29, 
No.2, 2000,  pp. 451-462 
[10] L. A. Barroso, J. Dean, and U. H-lzle, “Web search for a planet: The 
Google cluster architecture”. IEEE Micro, Mar/Apr, Vol. 23, No. 2, 
2003,  pp. 22 - 28. 
[11] Google tops translation ranking[N]. News@Nature, http://ww 
w.nature.com/news/2006/061106 /full/news061106-6.html, Nov. 6, 
2006. 
[12] R. E. Bryant, “Data-Intensive supercomputing: the case for DISC”. 
CMU Technical Report CMU-CS-07-128. May 10, 2007,  pp. 1-10. 
[13] S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and P. Leung, “The Google file system”. 
Proceedings of the nineteenth  ACM symposium on Operating 
systems principles. Oct. 2003, pp. 108-114. 
 
248
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

