Social Query: A Query Routing System for Twitter 
Cleyton Souza, Jonathas Magalhães, Evandro Costa, Joseana Fechine 
Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence - LIA 
Federal University of Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
cleyton.caetano.souza@gmail.com, jonathas@copin.ufcg.edu.br, ebc.academico@gmail.com, joseana@dsc.ufcg.edu.br 
 
 
Abstract—Social Query is a new and efficient way to get 
answers on the social networks. However, the popular method 
of sharing public questions could be optimized by directing the 
question to an expert, a process called query routing. In this 
work, we propose a Social Query System for query routing on 
Twitter, currently, one of the most popular social networks. 
The Social Query Systems analyzes the information about the 
questioner’s followers and recommends the most suitable users 
to answer the questions. The use of the system changes the 
usual process, working apart of Twitter and allowing 
questioner and responder exceed the limit of 140 characters. 
Through a qualitative evaluation, we showed promising results 
and ideas for improving the system and the recommendation 
algorithm. 
Keywords- query routing; social query; expertise finding 
systems; community question and answering sites; social 
network; twitter 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Social query consists in sharing a problem (in the form of 
a question) with contacts in social networks and waiting for 
responses. It is an alternative to search engines and 
Community Question and Answering sites. Supported by 
popularity of social networks like Twitter [1] and Facebook 
[2], social query is a new and efficient way to find 
information on Web 2.0. The common strategy is to share a 
public question. However, this way is inefficient because 
after sharing a public question, there are several 
disappointing outcomes: receiving many answers (including 
wrong answers); keep receiving answers after having the 
problem solved; and never receiving an answer because 
people able to respond the question did not see it, since 
social network prioritizes visualization of most recent posts 
in Timeline, or did not feel an obligation to help [3, 4]. 
Horowitz and Kamvar [5] associate social query to the 
process of searching for answers in a village: when an 
individual in a village has a problem, before he goes to the 
library, he asks the most capable person that he knows; he 
does not ask everybody (the village paradigm). The same 
idea can be applied in the context of social networks. If the 
question is previously directed to someone (an expert), the 
social network will ensure that the expert will see the 
question through its notification system. However, choosing 
the right person is complicated and by choosing the wrong 
person, the author of the question may have to wait long for 
answers, may receive a wrong answer or may never receive 
an answer if the expert ignores the question [6]. The addition 
of Expertise Finding Systems to social networks would 
optimize the process and consequently enable quick and 
right answers [5]. The process of identifying an expert and 
directing questions to that expert is called query routing. 
In this work, we present the Social Query System, a tool 
for query routing on Twitter. The system analyzes the 
information made available by the questioner’s followers and 
ranks them based on three criteria: knowledge, trust and 
activity. Then, top users are recommended to the questioner 
who chooses to whom to direct the question. Details about 
the model [7] and the algorithm [6] could be obtained in our 
previous work. Our goal in this paper is to present how the 
system works and to show promising results of a qualitative 
evaluation performed with the first version of the Social 
Query System. 
This remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II presents related work, Section III presents the 
usual process of sharing questions on the social networks, 
Section IV shows or proposal and how it works, Section V 
describes the results of our qualitative evaluation and Section 
VI presents our conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Search engines are not always the best way to find 
information on the Web. Some problems are better solved by 
people 
(e.g., 
high 
contextualized 
questions, 
recommendations request, opinions request, advices request, 
and social connection request) [5]. An alternative to these 
types of problems is Community Question and Answering 
sites like Yahoo! Answers, which consists of online 
communities where users publish and answer questions 
voluntarily. After publishing a question, the user waits for 
answers from other users, who usually are unknown. 
However, people prefer to pose questions to their close 
friends in social networks rather than to unknown persons in 
Community Question and Answering sites [3, 5]. 
Regarding sharing questions on social networks, Morris 
et al. [8] presents statistics confirming that sharing questions 
is a viable method to obtain answers online. In their case 
study, 93.5% of users had their questions answered. In 
90.1% of the cases, responses were provided within one 
day. However, that case study was conducted with 
Microsoft employees only, who possibly know each other 
and also use status messages from chat to ask questions. 
Paul et al. [4] conducted a similar study, but using only 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Twitter users. They conclude that, in this specific context, 
only a only a small percentage of questions received 
answers (18.7%) and receiving an answer or not was 
strongly connected to the number of followers the 
questioner had. However, questions posted on Twitter are 
usually answered quickly. In their study, 67% of the 
responses come within the range of 30 minutes and 95% 
within the range of ten hours. These facts are due some 
features of Twitter: when a user posts questions to all 
followers, only a portion of these followers will view it and 
a smaller portion will respond. Thus, users with more 
followers are more likely to get answers, because there is a 
larger viewing of their messages. And, with respect to 
agility in receiving a response, this is mainly due to the 
nature of Twitter as a real-time social network. Actually, 
these statistics also show that, even as a regular strategy to 
obtain answers online, the social query process could be 
improved. We believe these results could be improved by 
applying query routing: after identifying an expert on the 
topic of the question and directing the question to him, the 
answer could come faster and with higher quality. Horowitz 
and Kamvar [5] establish a correlation between social query 
and the village paradigm: when people in a village are 
looking for information, before consulting the libraries, they 
first ask the most intelligent people they know.  
In fact, the query routing problem could be understood 
as Expertise Finding problem. The query routing consists of 
a recommendation algorithm (or a technique) that finds an 
expert present in a group and directs a question to that 
expert [7]. In [9], it is presented a probabilistic and 
decentralized model for the question routing problem. This 
means that there is not an entity that makes all decisions and 
the routing algorithm works based on the repetition of 
actions taken in past. Probably, it was the first work about 
the query routing problem, but no system is proposed and 
the model is validated using simulated networks.  
Davitz et al. [10] present a centralized model 
implemented in a tool called iLink. In this system, there is a 
global entity that monitors social network and decides who 
will receive questions, named super-node. Sometimes, the 
super-node is also able to offer answers. Other examples of 
systems are Aardvark [5], a social network that belonged to 
Google, and Q-Sabe [11], an academic tool for exchange of 
information focused on education. Both systems consist of 
Community Question and Answering sites where users 
could publish questions (questioners) that were routed to 
other users (responders) and these choose either answering 
or ignoring the question. Another example of query routing 
system is AskWho [12], a Facebook plugin that helps in the 
addition of mentions in the question. Silva et al. [13] 
proposed SWEETS, an Expertise Finding System, to 
AMIGOS, an academic online social network of Federal 
University of Pernambuco. Their recommender system 
monitors users and suggests experts based on a reading and 
writing profile. 
The studies of Andrade et al. [11] and Horowitz and 
Kamvar [5] proposed query routing techniques and 
developed environments where they will work. Our research 
follows the reverse path. Our system works in a pre-existent 
context: Twitter, one of most popular social networks 
currently and that, apparently, will benefit of our technique 
[4]. In [12], it is presented a Facebook plugin, but AskWho 
does not use any special technique to match friends, 
consisting only in a search engine comparing keywords of 
the question with the profile of friends. Davitz et al. [10] and 
Silva et al. [13] also propose a system for pre-existent 
context, but iLink is only available to small communities due 
the computational effort to monitor the entire social network 
and SWEETS was not considered useful by AMIGOS users, 
being rejected by more than half of users [13]. Table I 
presents a comparison between the cited works. 
TABLE I.  
WORKS COMPARISON. 
Reference 
Kind of 
Software 
Recommendation 
Context 
Features of 
Recommendation 
Limitation 
It uses an 
Activity 
criterion 
It uses Relationship 
criterion 
Andrade et 
al. [11] 
Desktop. 
Everyone who downloads 
the software. 
Information Retrieval 
method. 
Looking for people is 
not like looking for 
documents. 
Yes (more 
active users are 
prioritized). 
No. 
Davitz et al. 
[10] 
Web. 
Users from Small 
Communities (e.g., 
forums, blogs). 
Probabilistic method. 
Only available to small 
communities. 
No. 
No. 
Horowitz 
and Kamvar 
[5] 
Web. 
Users from Aardvark (a 
CQA site that belonged to 
Google) 
Probabilistic method. 
The project was closed 
in 2010. 
Yes (more 
active users are 
prioritized). 
Yes (users can 
optionally maintain a 
personal network). 
Liu [12] 
Web. 
Friends on Facebook. 
Keywords Matching. 
Very simple. 
No. 
No. 
Silva et al. 
[13] 
Web. 
AMIGOS Users. 
Information Retrieval 
Method. 
It was bad evaluated by 
the users. 
No. 
No. 
Social Query 
System 
Web. 
Followers from Twitter. 
Multi-criteria decision 
making method. 
The current version only 
is available to Twitter 
users previously 
registered. 
Yes (more 
active users are 
prioritized). 
Yes (based on talks 
and similarities). 
 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Our 
system 
uses 
three 
criteria 
during 
the 
recommendation process: knowledge (captured through the 
vocabulary used by followers), trust (captured through tweets 
exchanged and friends and followers in common) and 
activity (consisting in the mean latency time among 
messages). Besides, the followers are ranked using a multi-
criteria decision making process called Weight Product 
Model (WPM). The use of multi-criteria is the main 
characteristic of the new generation of recommender systems 
and the WPM is the better method for the amount of criteria 
considered by us [14]. While most previous systems consider 
only the expertise of the candidates we use additional criteria 
related to the candidate’s availability and the relationship 
between questioner and expert candidate. The next section 
describes the usual process of sharing questions on Twitter 
III. 
THE USUAL WAY OF QUESTION AND ANSWERING ON 
TWITTER 
Twitter is a microblog, a type of blog with some 
limitation of the content, where users can tweet (post a 
message) about any topic using 140 characters. In less than 
three years, Twitter reached such popularity that became the 
microblog with the largest number of users. Currently, five 
years after its creation, there are more than 200 million of 
users and daily registrations are about 460 thousand new 
users [15]. Another impressive data is the amount of posted 
messages: in January 2009 two million of tweets (messages) 
were sent per day; in January 2010 were 65 million and in 
2011 were sent 200 million daily tweets [15]. According 
with the last numbers released by Twitter, currently, there 
are more than half billion of Twitter accounts and 340 
millions of tweets being published per day [16]. This rapid 
growth has increased the interest of the scientific community 
on this online social network [1]. 
On Twitter, users can follow and be followed by other 
users. In this context, to follow a user means exposing 
interest in the content published by that user. The account of 
a user may be public or not, and in order to follow a 
protected account it is necessary to get the permission of its 
owner. Initially, the tweets (posts) are visible only to 
followers, they see in their timelines the tweets of those who 
they are following. Among the reasons that lead a user to 
follow another are admiration, friendship and reciprocity. In 
addition, a user may want to follow another one who posts 
content which may be considered relevant. Any user is 
allowed to reference others within a tweet and users can filter 
their mentions. Because of these features, many users use the 
microblog as a public chat [1]. 
When a user publishes a public question on Twitter, if it 
is not answered quickly, the chances of being visualized and 
answered in future decrease because the question will fall 
down in the followers’ timeline. In Fig. 1, it is illustrated the 
process of publishing a question on Twitter. 
 
Figure 1. User Twitting a Question 
After publishing a question, probably not all users who 
follow the questioner (the blue user) will see the question. 
Among the users that visualize (the yellow user and the red 
user), only a few will answer (the red user) and there is no 
guarantee that any of these answers will satisfy the 
questioner. Some users will not provide an answer because, 
as the question was posted for all followers, they do not feel 
an obligation to help. As the time passes by, the chances of 
the question being viewed and consequently answered in the 
future decreases, because it will fall positions on the timeline 
of the questioner’s followers.  
When a tweet (question) is previously directed to 
someone, the probability of it being visualized is much 
larger, because the mentioned user can filter the messages 
which mention him/her. In Fig. 2, it is illustrated the same 
process, but directing the question to a specific user (the 
green user). 
 
Figure 2. User Twitting a Direct Question to Someone 
When a user (the blue user) mentions another user (the 
green user), the mentioned user immediately receives an 
email informing about the message. The mentioned user may 
wish to disable these notifications, but any user can filter 
their mentions, as already commented. Given these facts, we 
believe that direct the question to someone, in practice, 
guarantees that the message will be visualized by this person, 
but there is no guarantee that the message will be answered, 
neither about the quality of the response.  
It seems evident that directing a question increases the 
probability of it being visualized, while the probability of 
receiving a good answer depends on whom it will be directed 
to. A query routing model consists in a recommendation 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

algorithm that examines the information available on the 
social network to decide who is able to respond the question. 
In Fig. 3, it is illustrated the query routing process working. 
 
Figure 3. Using Query Routing to Tweet a Question 
The question is formulated without a mention. The query 
routing algorithm (or routing algorithm) analyzes the 
information about the questioner’s followers and ranks them, 
according to their ability to offer a right and quick answer. 
Then, the algorithm adds a mention in the question. In Fig. 3, 
the question is being directed to only one follower (the 
yellow user) but, as the algorithm ranks all candidates, it 
would be possible send the question to the n followers in best 
positions. 
IV. 
THE SOCIAL QUERY SYSTEM 
Our system works outside Twitter. Users access our 
system to ask and answer. Then, they tweet about their 
questions and answers. To exemplify how it works, we are 
considering two basic entities: the questioner (the author of 
the question) and the responder (a user recommended by our 
system and chosen by the questioner to receive the 
question).  
Basically, in the query process, the questioner accesses 
the Social Query System and informs his Twitter account 
and the question (he also could add keywords to improve 
the recommendation process).  The system analyzes 
information 
about 
the 
questioner’s 
followers 
and 
recommends the top 5 users. Then, the questioner chooses to 
whom direct the question and tweets a message informing 
the chosen users (the responder) about the question. After 
clicking on the link informed in the tweet, the responder is 
directed to a page where the question can be answered, or 
someone else can be recommended to respond. Then, 
another message is tweeted informing about what was done. 
Working this way, the system has the advantage that 
questioners and responders could exceed the limit of 140 
characters. Next, we will present in more details how the 
system works. 
Fig. 4 presents the Homepage of our system. In this 
page, it is explained to the user how the system works and 
there is a link to the New Question page. While our system 
is on trial stage, it is only available for users previously 
registered by us. To require access it is needed to contact 
one of the authors. The Social Query System is available in 
two languages: English and Portuguese. 
 
Figure 4. Homepage of the Social Query System 
When the user clicks the “I HAVE A QUESTION” link, 
he is directed to the New Question page. This page is 
presented in Fig. 5. As already commented, there are three 
text fields: the questioner’s account name on Twitter, the 
question and keywords (optionally). 
 
Figure 5. New Question Page of the Social Query System 
When the questioner clicks the “Search for Responders” 
button, the system checks if the required text fields were 
filled and if the questioner is authorized to use the system. 
Then, if it is all right, the system analyzes information about 
the questioner’s followers and ranks them based on three 
criteria: knowledge (an attribute that relates follower and 
question), trust (an attribute that relates follower and 
questioner) and activity (an attribute that relates followers 
and the social network). The top five candidates are 
recommended as responders on the Show Recommended 
List page, as presented on the left side of Fig. 6. If no user is 
a good recommendation, we suggest the questioner to 
reformulate the question or change the keywords. 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 6. Show Recommendation List Page 
Fig. 6 presents the recommendations. When the user 
clicks someone’s name, a modal appears to confirm the 
questioner’s intention to send the question to that person. 
When the questioner confirms, pressing the “OK” button, a 
new window is opened asking him to tweet the message 
“@questioner has a question for u @responder. Access 
http://short.link to answer. Thank u”. The tweet has the 
following information: mention to the questioner, mention 
to whom was chosen by the questioner and a link to answer 
the question. After tweet the question, the questioner can 
repeat the process with the other users that were 
recommended or just close the page and wait for the answer. 
Someone who clicks the short link in the tweet will be 
directed to the New Answer page of the Social Query 
System, presented in Figure 7. In this page, the responder 
can give an answer (left button), inform that he/she does not 
know the answer (mid button) or recommend someone else 
to answer the question (right button). 
 
Figure 7. New Answer Page of the Social Query System 
If the responder prefers to suggest someone else to 
answer the question, he clicks the “I know someone” button 
and informs his recommendation in a text field, and then 
tweets a message alerting the recommended user and the 
questioner about what this. The person recommended by the 
responder will click on a link in the tweet and will be 
directed to the New Answer Page. A responder who does 
not know the answer will press the “I don’t know” button, 
and then will be directed to a page to confirm that he/she 
does not know the answer. The responder will be asked to 
tweet a message to the questioner informing about it. A 
responder who knows the answer clicks the “I Want 
Answer” button and is directed to the page presented in Fig. 
8. 
 
Figure 8. New Answer Page – Answering the Question 
The responder writes the answer and clicks the “Send 
Answer” button. Then, a new window is open asking 
him/her to tweet the following message informing the 
questioner that the question was answered: “@questioner, 
@responder 
answered 
your 
question. 
Access 
http://short.link to see his answer. Thank u”. After clicking 
the short link, the questioner is directed to the “New 
Evaluation” page, where the answer can be seen and have its 
quality evaluated. This page is presented in Fig. 9. 
 
Figure 9. New Evaluation Page 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The questioner clicks the “Evaluate” button and the 
evaluation is saved, ending the Question and Answering 
process. If the questioner sent the question to other 
responders, each responder will give an independent answer 
and the questioner will evaluate them individually. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
To validate our purpose, a qualitative evaluation was 
conducted. The goal of the evaluation is to analyze the 
opinion of volunteers about the recommendations made by 
the Social Query System. We used the following questions to 
perform the recommendations: 
a) Looking for a new band to listen during weekend, 
does anyone have an indication? 
b) Going to the movie theater after years LOL.  What is 
the best movie in theaters? 
Then, nine volunteers evaluate ten recommendations for 
each question. Each recommendation was labeled as good, 
bad or neutral. A recommendation was good, if the 
questioner believes that a relevant answer will be received. 
A recommendation was bad, if the questioner believes that 
an answer will not be received or an irrelevant answer will 
be received. A recommendation was neutral, if the 
questioner has no clue about the recommended person. For 
each question and each volunteer we calculate the percentile 
of good recommendations and compute the Normalized 
Discounted Cumulative Gain (nDCG), by considering good 
recommendation with a relevance of “1” and neutral and 
bad with “0”.  
In Table II, we present the main results of the 
evaluation. 
TABLE II.  
SUMMARY OF RESULTS 
Cases 
Amount of 
Followers 
% of 
good 
%of 
bad 
nDCG 
Best case for 
Question “a” 
192 
50% 
10% 
0.63 
Worst case for 
Question “a” 
129 
30% 
60% 
0.25 
Best case for 
Question “b” 
121 
60% 
0% 
0.74 
Worst case for 
Question “b” 
68 
30% 
0% 
0.18 
Average for 
Question “a” 
110 
41% 
28% 
0.41 
Average for 
Question “b” 
110 
50% 
20% 
0.51 
 
According to Table II, the recommendations for 
Question “b” were better evaluated by volunteers. That 
happens due the way as the Question “b” was formulated: 
while Question “a” is composed by few words that express 
its subject (e.g., Band), Question “b” has more significant 
words and they are repeated (e.g., Movie and Theaters). 
This fact affects the knowledge model.  
With respect to the worst cases, both users who 
classified most part of recommendation as bad or neutral 
informed that they are followed by many unknowns and 
they do not use Twitter to interact with friends but, mostly, 
to read and share news. With respect to the best cases they 
informed that they interact often with their followers and 
that follow back when they are real world friends. All these 
comments let us to add a new filter to recommendations 
related to the following back condition. Anyway, the mean 
performance of the Social Query System was considered 
very promising, almost half of recommendations were 
labeled as good and the good recommendations are better 
positioned in recommendation list. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main contribution of this work was the development 
of a tool to help people finding answers on social networks 
by improving the conventional social query process. This is 
a new and interesting research field with many limitations, 
mainly related to evaluation methods. Datasets provided by 
Community Question and Answering sites do not have all 
information available on social networks (e.g., relationship 
between users, messages directed to specific users, etc.) 
what hinders the use of a quantitative evaluation method. 
Qualitative 
methods 
have 
been 
used 
to 
evaluate 
recommender systems for a long time, but their results are 
very subjective and hard to compare. To evaluate our tool 
we used a qualitative evaluation method and we achieved 
promising results: more than half of recommendation list 
was considered useful by the volunteers. In addition, based 
on the opinion of volunteers, we added new features to the 
Social Query System, for instance, a filter to recommend 
only followers who are followed by the questioner and the 
inclusion of a new temporal and non-uniform criterion in 
recommendation that we call Availability.  
As a future work, we are planning a quantitative 
evaluation of our model. We are creating a dataset and a 
quantitative method for evaluate our approach and compare 
with some previous work. In addition, another future work 
is a new qualitative study about real data collected with the 
mobile version of the Social Query System. Currently, we 
still projecting this app, but, probably, such application will 
be used by hundreds or thousands of users. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We want to thank all the volunteers who agreed to 
participate in this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Huberman, D. Romero and F. Wu, “Social networks that matter: 
Twitter under the microscope,” First Monday, vol. 14, 2009, pp. 1-8. 
[2] Y. Mui and P. Whoriskey, “Facebook passes Google as most popular 
site on the Internet, two measures show,” The Washington Post, 2010. 
[3] M. Morris, J. Teevan and K. Panovich, “Comparison of information 
seeking using search engines and social networks,” Proc. 4th 
International AAAI Iternational Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media (ICWSM), AAAI Press, 2010, pp. 291-294. 
[4] S. Paul, L. Hong and E. Chi, “Is twitter a good place for asking 
questions? a characterization study,” Proc. Fifth AAAI International 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM), 2011, pp. 578-
581. 
[5] D. Horowitz and S. Kamvar, “The anatomy of a large-scale social 
search engine,” Proc. of the 19th International Conference on World 
Wide Web (WWW), ACM Press, 2010, pp. 431-440. 
[6] C. Souza, J. Magalhães, E. Costa and J. Fechine, “Predicting potential 
responders in twitter: a query routing algorithm,” Proc. 12th 
International Conference on Computational Science and Its 
Applications (ICCSA), Springer, 2012, pp. 714-729. 
[7] C. Souza, J. Magalhães and E. Costa, “A formal model to the routing 
questions problem in the context of twitter,” Proc. IADIS 
WWW/Internet (ICWI), IADIS Press, 2011, pp. 153-160. 
[8] M. Morris, J. Teevan and K. Panovich, “What do people ask their 
social networks, and why?: a survey study of status message Q&A 
behavior,” Proc. 28th International Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI), ACM Press, 2010, pp. 1739-1748. 
[9] A. Banerjee and S. Basu, “A social query model for decentralized 
search,” Proc. 2nd Workshop on Social Network Mining and 
Analysiss, ACM Press, 2008. 
[10] J. Davitz, J. Yu, S. Basu, D. Gutelius and A. Harris, “iLink: search 
and routing in social networks,” Proc. 13th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 
ACM Press, 2007, pp. 931-940. 
[11] J. Andrade, J. Nardi, J. Pessoa and C. Menezes, “Qsabe-um ambiente 
inteligente para endereçamento de perguntas em uma comunidade 
virtual de esclarecimento,” Proc. First Latin American Web Congress 
(LA-WEB), IEEE press, 2003, pp.1-7. 
[12] C. Liu, “AskWho: finding potential answerers for status message 
questions in social networks,” unpublished, 2010. 
[13] E. Silva, R. Costa, L. Schmitz and S. Meira, “SWEETS: um sistema 
de recomendação de especialistas aplicado a uma plataforma de 
gestão de conhecimento a introdução,” Revista de Informática 
Teórica e Aplicada (RITA), vol. 18, 2011, pp. 153-160. 
[14] E. Triantaphyllou and S. Mann, “An examination of the effectiveness 
of multi-dimensional decision-making methods: A decision-making 
paradox,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 5, 1989, pp. 303–312. 
[15] Twitter 
Blog. 
“#numbers”, 
2011. 
Available 
at:  
http://blog.twitter.com/2011/03/numbers.html. [retieved: May, 2013] 
[16] Twitter 
Blog. 
“Twitter 
turns 
six”, 
2012. 
Available 
at: 
http://blog.twitter.com/2012/03/twitter-turns-six.html. [retieved: May, 
2013] 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

