Visual Storytelling with Snapshots applied to Official Statistics 
 
Patrik Lundblad, Tobias Åström, Mikael Jern 
1National Centre Visual Analytics, NCVA 
Linköping University, Sweden 
e-mail: patrik.lundblad@liu.se, tobias.astrom@liu.se, mikael.jern@liu.se 
 
 
Abstract—The paper focuses on “visual storytelling” – 
exemplified through telling stories about official statistics 
development over time that could shape economic growth and 
well-being. Discoveries are made that draw the user into 
reflecting on how life is lived - and may be improved - from 
one region to another. In addition, the user can interactively 
participate in the web-based process, which is important to the 
education 
and 
dissemination 
of 
public 
statistics. 
A 
demonstrator World eXplorer with storytelling and an 
integrated snapshot mechanism is introduced, programmed in 
Adobe’s ActionScript and is based on the geovisual analytics 
paradigm.  An interactive visual story mechanism assists the 
author to improve a reader’s visual knowledge through 
reflections on how life is lived by using a variety of 
demographics, 
such 
as 
healthcare, 
environment, 
and 
educational and economic indicators. Educators can develop 
interactive teaching material based on this storytelling 
mechanism 
and 
avoid 
boring 
statistics 
presentations. 
Integrated snapshots can be captured at any time during an 
explorative data analysis process and they become an 
important component of an analytical reasoning process. 
Students can access geovisual applications and explore 
statistical relations on their own guided by the stories prepared 
by the teachers. With the associated science of perception and 
cognition in relation to the use of multivariate spatio-temporal 
statistical data, this paper contributes to the growing interest 
in geovisual statistics analytics. 
Keywords-Visual Storytelling, Geovisual analytics, web-based 
learning, statistics visualization, statistics database 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The “participative web” is increasingly utilised by 
intelligent web services, which empower developers to 
customise web-enabled visualization applications that 
contribute to collaboration and communicate visual content 
(Figure 1). In this context, we introduce a collaborative 
geovisual analytics framework, based on the principles for 
Visual Analytics [1], for public statistics based on interactive 
statistics visualization [2] and its increasing role in sharing, 
collaborating and communicating gained knowledge. The 
collaboration and publication process facilitates storytelling 
aimed at producing statistical news content in support of an 
automatic authoring process. The author simply presses a 
button to publish the knowledge gained from a visual 
interactive discovery process. Storytelling, in our context, is 
about telling a story with associate snapshots about the 
statistics data and the related analytics reasoning processes 
on how knowledge was obtained. Storytelling within an 
interactive web context could more engagingly draw the user 
into reflections and sometimes change a perspective 
altogether. The story is placed in the hands of those who 
need it, e.g., policy and decision makers, teachers and also 
informed citizens. Stories enable a leap in understanding by 
the user in order to grasp how statistical indicators may 
influence society. The conceptual approach and framework 
of the geovisual analytics storytelling implementation is 
based around three complementary characteristics: 
 
Authoring (eXplorer): data provider and manager, 
several motion visual representations, coordinated 
views, map layers, analytic tools (dynamic query, 
filter, regional categorization, profiles, highlight), 
and dynamic colour scale.  
 
Tell-a-story: snapshot mechanism that captures an 
interactive scenario (active views and indicators, 
attributes, time step, regions), and metadata with 
hyperlinks.  
 
Publisher (Vislet): import stories and create HTML 
code for embeddable interactive motion visual 
representations for publishing on a web site, 
interactive report or blog. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In section II 
related work is presented followed by our work on 
storytelling in section III.  The paper is concluded with 
section IV presenting our conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The importance to snapshot exploration sessions and then 
reuse them for presentation and evaluation within the same 
environment was demonstrated by MacEachren [3] and Jern 
[4] in geovisualization, and incorporated features to integrate 
them into electronic documents. 
A variety of software is now available for creating 
snapshots. One of these is CCMaps [5], which is a 
conditioned choropleth mapping tool where the user can 
create snapshots of events and then reuse them for 
presentation. Another method is called “Re-Visualization” 
[6] and is used in the tool ReVise, which captures the 
analysis sessions and allows them to be reused. The Web-
based Analysis and Visualization Environment (Weave) [7] 
is a Framework that uses session states and stores them on a 
server for later reuse. Another application that uses a similar 
approach where the user stores the data online is Many Eyes 
[8], which is a public website where novice users can upload 
their own data, create dynamic visualizations and participate 
in discussions. But, Many Eyes seems limited to showing
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 1.  World eXplorer [9] based on the geovisual analytics concept “Where-What-When-Why” based on 3 time-linked views showing a worldwide 
ageing population during 1960-2010; map (age 65+), scatter plot (age 65+ vs. age 0-14) and time chart (65+); comparing 4 countries Nigeria, China, Japan 
and Germany. The story is published to the right side and includes linked snapshots. Users learn that Japan followed by Germany represents the countries 
with highest elderly population, while Niger has has not changed. The users can interact and change indicators to discover reasons behind this trend.
only one visualization at a time and has no animation 
facilities for time sequences. For many of these systems, the 
snapshot has to be loaded into the same application 
environment as the one that created it, which puts a 
restriction on usage and sharing if the application requires a 
software licence.  Such applications may not be easily 
accessible to team members without installing external 
software [10]. In this context, we introduce a web compliant 
layered component toolkit with a snapshot mechanism that 
captures, re-uses and shares active properties for individual 
functional components. We have demonstrated [11] that such 
an implementation could provide a more open and 
collaborative geovisual analytics framework for public use. 
Collaborative geovisual analytics tools have been proved to 
work well with statistics data [12].  Initial tests have also 
shown significant potential [13, 14] when making them 
accessible to educators and their students. With the 
availability of current web enabled geovisual analytics tools 
it is appropriate to explore the possibilities of using these 
tools within schools and allow educators to use these tools in 
different application areas [15]. There is significant future 
potential for educators to present and explore scientific data 
sets together with students. 
III. 
STORYTELLING 
Storytelling within a participative web context, could 
more engagingly draw the user into exciting reflections and 
sometimes change a perspective altogether. The story is 
placed in the hands of the users as an interactive guided 
learning 
experience 
to 
achieve 
a 
more 
complete 
understanding of the knowledge using descriptive metadata 
integrated with “memorized interactive visualization views” 
or “snapshots” and external web links to relevant 
information. Visual storytelling is in this scenario an 
approach of telling more vital and engaging stories through 
interactive 
web-enabled 
visualizations. 
The 
snapshot 
mechanism helps the author of a story to highlight data 
views of particular interest and subsequently share or guide 
others to significant visual discoveries. These interactive 
events in an analytical reasoning process can be captured at 
any time during an explorative data analysis process and 
represent an important part of an analytical storytelling 
process (Figure 2). 
A. Snapshots 
When exploring and making sense of comprehensive 
statistics data there needs to be a way of storing discoveries 
in a coherent and cognitive workspace, which can be 
organized, navigated and maintained within the application 
so that discoveries may later be loaded. The GAV Flash 
toolkit [16, 17] includes such means by giving the analyst the 
option of capturing, saving and packaging the results of an 
exploration “gain insight” process. The insights are captured 
in a series of “snapshots” that could help the analyst to 
highlight views of particular interest and subsequently guide 
other analysts to follow important discoveries. Snapshots are 
created as a series of visualization captures during the 
exploration process and form the foundation for a story. 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 2.  The analyst is the author in this storytelling loop 
In a typical scenario the author selects relevant attributes 
for a snapshot, e.g., time step, highlighted regions for 
comparisons, class values for colour legend, filters inquiry 
conditions for a reduced dataset and finally highlights the 
“discoveries” in the world map view from a certain angle. 
When the analyst presses the capture button all the 
components within the application stores their properties, 
thus creating a state, which can later on be recreated (Figure 
3). The snapshot is then inserted in the story by creating a 
hyperlink in the text that is highlighted. When the reader 
follows the story the reader can click the highlighted link and 
the state of the visualization when captured is recreated so 
the reader has the same view as the author. The reader may 
then also make changes to the application such as changing 
filter values or highlighting other areas of interest. This new 
discovery may then be stored as a new snapshot, which can 
be inserted into the story or replace the old snapshot. 
In our story editor (Figure 6) the author has access to all 
stored snapshots in a list on the left side and can easily go to 
one of them and change the parameters. The author can also 
format the text and insert url links to other resources on the 
web. A story may also contain multiple chapters so that 
multiple discovery processes can be stored in the same story. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The snapshot tool creates series of captures during an 
exploration process that form the story. 
B. Publish Vislets 
Publisher is the tool that takes a story created by World 
eXplorer and generates the HTML code that can be used to 
publish a Vislet on the web (Figure 4).  A Vislet is a 
standalone Flash application (widget) that has been 
assembled from low-level GAV Flash components in a class 
library (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 4.  The Exploration and Publishing process 
When the user has a finished story that they want to 
publish they login in to the publisher portal and upload their 
story to the server. In publisher the user first chooses the 
layout of the Vislet to be used for the visualizations. This 
may be everything from a single view layout up to a divided 
area with multiple visualizations linked to each other. The 
user then chooses for each view the appropriate visualization 
to be used. After that the user has some extra options for 
functionality within the Vislet. When the user is ready the 
publisher then deploys the story as HTML code, which has 
all required links to geographic and data sources. The code 
can then be pasted into the user’s favourite web site. A Vislet 
is created and can now be opened inside the reader’s Web 
browser and communicates the story. 
 
Figure 5.  Example of standalone Vislets for publication 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 6.   Story Editor with the associate Snapshot pointing to  “Inner London” in all three views in this regional European visual analytics. The author has 
access to all stored snapshots in a list on the left side and can easily go to one of them and change the parameters. The Snapshot is linked to the metatext “On 
the other extreme, in Inner London the elderly population represented only 10% of the total population”. Clicking on this Snapshot in a published Vislet 
immediately initiates all eXplorer views to the state given by the Snapshot. 
C. Interactive document 
An interactive document is based on a wider storytelling 
concept, where Vislets play the role of images and figures. 
This adds another depth to the report or publication by 
making diagrams interactive, which allows the reader to 
reach a deeper understanding and further explore the subject. 
Readers can run animations, change indicators and view 
more details on specific figures. 
One such publication where an interactive document has 
supplemented the normal paper version is Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Regions 
at a Glance (RaG) [18]. This bi-annual report now has an 
interactive version where selected chapters have been 
transferred from the publication to an interactive state and 
published on the web (Figure 7). 
The OECD analysts created stories and snapshots from 
the RaG data, wrote new or edited existing text and collected 
interesting links. The stories where used to create chapters in 
the interactive document, where visualizations reside 
together with the analysts text, relevant links, the 
corresponding chapter in the publication as a pdf and access 
to the source data 
The interactive document platform used in this case is 
built to be simple, flexible and portable. Chapters are stored 
as eXtensible Markup Language (XML) files with lists of 
their internal sections, the text to display, and the settings for 
the visualization. These chapters are transformed to html 
using EXtensible Stylesheet Language (XSLT). This setup 
might sound simplistic, as using a data base would allow for 
more advanced and easier updates, but the choice was made 
with portability in mind. The aim was to allow for very 
simple installation, no creation of data bases and very limited 
configuration. In fact, the only setup needed is writing base 
urls and switching between using Hypertext Preprocessor 
(PHP) and Active Server Pages (ASP) for running the XSLT. 
 
 
. 
 
 
Figure 7.  OECD interactive visualization report 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Although the choice was made to not use an elaborate 
system for this publication, different approaches are 
available. The Vislet technology can be fully integrated into 
any existing content management system to achieve similar 
results. 
The main benefit of making the report interactive is that 
it enables the user to visualize the data that is of interest to 
them, and also to show the variation over time using 
animation. The analysts at OECD have chosen snapshots that 
are of interest, but the user can interact with the visualization 
and change the indicators and select what they find 
interesting, and thus enhance the user experience. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The primary objective of the introduction of visualization 
is to avoid boring statistics. We want official statistics to be 
exciting so that they invade people’s minds and create 
knowledge, thus allowing users to apply new insights as a 
basis for decisions. In order to do this the visualization 
should highlight structures and patterns in the data and 
allow the users to play around and test their own hypotheses 
and ideas. It is well known that interactive web based maps 
speak to the minds of many people. In addition to maps 
showing the data, we want to highlight interesting 
correlations through our snapshot mechanism between 
several indicators across the geographic areas, as well as 
dynamics over time. If users are to devote interest to 
statistics, gain knowledge, and use the information for 
decisions, the statistics must clearly convey a message. The 
visual analytics storytelling technique applied to statistics 
visualization therefore is essential. 
Focus has historically been on text and picture 
comprehension but given the explosion of representations 
made available since the introduction of graphical interfaces, 
the field now considers all forms of representation including 
but not limited to, text, pictures, graphs, diagrams, concept 
maps, animations, equations, virtual reality, information-and 
scientific visualization, haptics, multimedia, hypermedia, and 
simulations. Research on learning, when using these aids, is 
essential. There is research of learning with multimedia 
environments in different experimental studies but there is 
hardly any research done of this in real school contexts i.e., 
in a socio cultural perspective. NCVA is also engaged in a 
project about social science education in Swedish schools 
[19]. 
Within an international perspective our research builds 
upon collaborating work with many world-leading statistical 
organizations including the Eurostat, European Commission, 
OECD [20], [21], Statistics Denmark, Finland, Sweden [22] 
providing innovative geovisual analytics technology to these 
organizations. We have also been involved in the 
development of visualization for the PISA2009 profiles [23]. 
The national Italian bureau (ISTAT) provides another very 
interesting and sophisticated learning material [24] about the 
development and progress in Italian regions in (Figure 8). 
To ensure that users would come forward and contribute 
to a good implementation of geovisual analytics methods 
applied to statistics, NCVA established a small group 
consisting of users with different profiles including experts 
from international and national statistics organizations 
(OECD, ISTAT, Sweden Statistics), regional researchers, 
municipal planners and in 2011 was extended to also include 
school teachers and students. The group met first time 
already in 2010 and was invited to test and evaluate solutions 
based on Statistics eXplorer. The feedback has been very 
positive, as most user categories found that services along 
these lines would greatly help them understand and use the 
proposed visualization and storytelling methods. They also 
gave useful input regarding aspects of the web-enabled 
presentation, some asking for additional and more complex 
methods and interactive features, others for simplifications. 
This confirms the expectation that we must have different 
levels of service for different segments of users. This type of 
customization is possible to manage with our fundamental 
component 
based 
tools 
to 
assemble 
the 
eXplorer 
applications. 
 
 
Figure 8.  ISTAT – the Italian national statistical bureau has developed 
this innovative Vislet web site providing an interesting example of a 
sophisticated learning material. 
This test and comprehensive evaluation practice has then 
continued over several new improved versions. Here are 
some key features that are highlighted by our partners: 
 
Mechanism for Storytelling and Snapshots for 
creating dynamic Web documents; 
 
Identify what’s meaningful in the data in ways that 
your eyes can see and brain can understand and keep 
focused on what’s important; 
 
Support large spatio-temporal and multi-dimensional 
regional data using a data cube; 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Established information visualization technology for 
multivariate data is adapted and customized to the 
statistics domain e.g., histogram with fish eye 
technique, table lens, parallel coordinates with 
profiles, scatter matrix linked to the scatter plot, 
choropleth map linked to a treemap; 
 
Data is simultaneously explored through multiple-
linked and coordinated views;  
 
Map layer architecture - overlay several types of 
maps such as coloured statistical regions, country 
boundaries, background maps e.g., Google, pie chart 
– control transparency level for each layer;  
 
Dynamic 
state-of-the-art 
colour 
legend 
with 
integrated statistical methods such as percentiles;  
 
Visual inquiry and conditioned statistics filter 
mechanisms highlighting important discoveries or 
detecting outliers; 
 
Interactive time animation simultaneously visualized 
in all active views;  
 
Screen space usage is optimized for visualization– 
no unnecessary visible GUI panels;  
 
Support for categorical data and visual classification 
of, for example, urban, rural and intermediate 
regions; 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research and case studies were carried out by NCVA 
in close collaboration with OECD and Statistics Sweden who 
supplied data and comprehensive evaluation of the statistical 
storytelling system. The research is in part supported by 
funding from the Swedish Agency for Innovation Systems 
(VINNOVA), the “Visualization Program” coordinated by 
the Swedish Knowledge Foundation and the Swedish 
foundation “Marcus och Amalia Wallenbergs Minnesfond” 
for the educational project VISE "Visual Storytelling in 
Education". The authors thank the entire research team at 
NCVA, Linkoping University for valuable contributions and 
Linnéa Stenliden VISE. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Andrienko G., Andrienko N., Demsar U., Dransch D., Dykes 
J., Fabrikant S. I., Jern M., et al. (2010). “Space, Time and 
Visual Analytics”. International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science, 24(10), 1577-1600. Taylor & Francis.  
[2] Jern M., Thygesen L., Brezzi M. “Storytelling – “How to 
visualize statistics”, Reviewed paper, NTTS 2011 (New 
Techniques and Technologies for Statistics), international 
scientific conference on the impact of new technologies on 
statistical collection, production and dissemination systems, 
Brussels, February 2011. 
[3] Maceachren 
A. 
M., 
Brewer 
I., 
Steiner 
E. 
(2001). 
“Geovisualization to mediatate collaborative work”. Tools To 
Support 
Different-Place 
Knowledge 
Construction 
and 
Decision-Making. Environment, (3), 2533-2539. ICA.  
[4] Jern M., “Smart Documents for Web-Enabled Collaboration”, 
Published in “Digital Content Creation”, Vince J. A. and R. 
A. Earnshaw (Eds) Springer Verlag, June 2001 
[5] Carr D., White D., and MacEachren A.M., “Conditioned 
choropleth maps and hypothesis generation”. In Annals of the 
Assoc of Am. Geographers, vol 95, no. 1, 2005. 
[6] Robinson A., “Re-Visualization”: Interactive Visualization of 
the Progress of Visual Analysis, workshop proceedings, 
VASDS. 2006. 
[7] Baumann A., The design and implementation of Weave: A 
session state driven, web-based visualization framework, 
University of Massachussets Lowell, 2011 
[8] Vie´gas FB., Wattenberg M., Ham FV., Kriss J. and McKeon 
M. “Many eyes: A site for visualization at Internet scale”. 
IEEETrans Vis Comput Graph 2007; 13(6): 1121–1128 
[9] World Statistics eXplorer with ageing population in the 
world: http://www.ncomva.se/v4/world/alt.html#story=1 
[10] Jern M., Rogstadius J., Åström T., and Ynnerman A: ”Visual 
Analytics presentation tools applied in HTML Documents”, 
Reviewed proceedings, IV08, London, July 2008, published 
by IEEE Computer Society. 
[11] OECD web site for visualization of regional development: 
http://www.oecd.org/GOV/regionaldevelopment 
[12] M. Jern, “Collaborative Educational GeoAnalytics applied to 
large statistics temporal data”, Reviewed proceedings, 
CSEDU 2010, Conference on computer supported education, 
Valencia, April 2010 
[13] Jern M, “Educating students in official statistics using 
embedded 
geovisual 
analytics 
storytelling 
methods”, 
Reviewed Proceedings in Eurographics 2010, Norrköping, 
May 2010. 
[14] Stenliden L., Jern M., “Educating official statistics using 
geovisual 
analytics 
storytelling 
methods”, 
Reviewed 
proceedings, 
International 
Technology, 
Education 
and 
Development Conference INTED, Valencia, 2010. 
[15] Kinzel M., Wright D., “Using Geovisualizations in the 
Curriculum: Do Multimedia Tools Enhance Geography 
Education?” Paper Number 1290, Environmental Systems 
Research Institute Education User’s Conference, 2008. 
[16] Quan H., Lundblad P., Åström T., and Jern M., “A web-
enabled visualization toolkit for geovisual analytics”. Journal 
Information Visualization. Published online before print 
November 9, 2011, doi: 10.1177/1473871611425870. 
[17] Quan H., Lundblad P., Åström T., and Jern M., “A Web-
Enabled Visualization Toolkit for Geovisual Analytics 
Visualization and Data Analysis”, Awarded best paper, SPIE: 
Electronic Imaging Science and Technology, Visualization 
and Data Analysis, Proceedings of SPIE, San Francisco Jan 
2011 
[18] OECD 
interactive 
report 
of 
regional 
development 
http://rag.oecd.org/ 
[19] Stenliden L., Jern M., “Visual Storytelling – Understanding 
and Knowledge in Education”, Awarded best paper, 
International Symposium on Academic Informing Science & 
Engineering: isAISE 2011 in the context of The 2nd 
International Multi-conference on Complexity, Informatics 
and Cybernetics: IMCIC 2011, Orlando, Florida, USA. ISBN-
13: 978-1-936338-21-4. 
[20] Jern, M., Thygesen L., Brezzi M., “A web-enabled Geovisual 
Analytics tool applied to OECD Regional Data”, Reviewed 
Proceedings in Eurographics 2009, Munich, March 2009 
[21] OECD web site for visualization of regional statistics: 
http://stats.oecd.org/OECDregionalstatistics/ 
[22] The 
Statistic 
Atlas 
from 
Statistics 
Sweden 
http://www.scb.se/Kartor/Statistikatlas_KN/index.html 
[23] OECD 
PISA 
2009 
profiles 
by 
country/economy: 
http://stats.oecd.org/PISA2009Profiles/ 
[24] Our italy, by the national Italian bureau ISTAT:  http://noi-
italia.istat.it/ 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

