Measuring Heart Rate with Mobile Devices for Personal Health Monitoring
Toon De Pessemier and Luc Martens
imec - WAVES - Ghent University
Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 15
9052 Ghent, Belgium
Email: toon.depessemier@ugent.be luc1.martens@ugent.be
Abstract—The growing availability of mobile devices, such as
smartphones, ﬁtness trackers, and smart watches, induce an
increased interest in personal health monitoring. These devices
are equipped with the necessary sensor hardware, such as
accelerometer and heart rate sensor, for measuring physical activ-
ities and heartbeat. However, the accuracy of these measurements
is still unclear. In this paper, we evaluate heart rate monitoring
with four different device types: a specialized device with a chest
strap, a ﬁtness tracker, a smart watch, and a smartphone using
plethysmography. The results show similar measurements for
the four devices in a state of rest. In contrast, during physical
activities the ﬁtness tracker, smart watch, and smartphone may
register sudden variations in heart rate with a delay, due to
physical movements of the wrist or hand. The specialized device
with chest strap shows the most accurate heart rate, highly
correlated with measurements obtained with a blood pressure
monitor that is approved for medical purposes. These results are
important for developers who use data of heart rate for mobile
applications and services.
Keywords–Wearable computers; Health information manage-
ment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Obesity and insufﬁcient physical activity are an ever grow-
ing problem in modern society. Obesity can induce amongst
others, heart diseases and stroke, diabetes, gallbladder disease,
and gallstones. Research has shown that the majority of health
care costs [1] are due to physical inactivity [2]. Recent research
in health care supports the theory that regular physical activity
and a healthy diet are much more effective than traditional
medication to cure diabetes [3]. Nutrition and training sched-
ules can be downloaded from the Internet, but are often
inadequate for users’ personal needs or physical capacities and
static without taking into account users’ progress.
Therefore, new efforts are made to decrease national obe-
sity levels [4], thereby using technology, such as multi-modal
sensors, web frameworks, and data mining. Multi-modal sen-
sors enable real-time monitoring of physical activities, such as
exercises performed by the user. In the domain of public health
monitoring, most applications of these sensors keep track of
energy expenditure while performing daily activity [5][6]. The
resulting data can be used in a lifestyle recommender that
encourages users to adopt a more healthy way of life. With
the evolution of Web 2.0 [7], more formal and informal health
information has become available, with the perspective of a
new generation of well-informed, healthy individuals. This
phenomenon is often referred to as eHealth 2.0. eHealth 2.0
turns users into health information producers and consumers
by offering a multitude of health information data [8][9].
To cope with the problem of information overload incurred
by Web 2.0 and its eHealth 2.0 counterpart, recommender
systems are used as an effective information ﬁlter and at the
same time as a tool for providing personal advice through
suggestions [10][11]. Recommender systems can e.g. suggest
a speciﬁc ﬁtness activity or a running trail out of the many
available physical activities. Suggestions for physical activities
should be tailored to the physical capabilities of each indi-
vidual. Measuring the physical activity of a person through
sensors, such as accelerometers, is insufﬁcient to estimate
that person’s physical capabilities. Heart rate measurements
combined with motion sensors can be used to assess the
intensity of physical activities for a person and his/her physical
limits [12].
Although specialized devices exist for measuring heart rate,
most people do not have these at their disposal. Nowadays,
popular mobile devices and wearables are equipped with sen-
sors that promise to measure heart rate as well. However, the
accuracy of these heart rate measurements is still unclear. Man-
ufacturers choose not to assert claims regarding the accuracy
of the detection of (abnormal) beating patterns; otherwise their
gadget would get classiﬁed as a medical device and would have
to undergo FDA (Food and Drug Administration) regulatory
scrutiny [13]. Therefore, the research question of this paper is:
how accurate are heart rate measurements of these devices for
physical activities with different intensity? This is investigated
by an application (developed on Android for this research)
for monitoring heart rate of test subjects simultaneously with
different devices, during various physical activities. These
results are important for all (mobile) applications and services
that rely on heart rate data from these devices.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II gives an overview of related work in the domain of
eHealth and mobile health apps. Section III discusses existing
methods for heart rate measuring. The various types of mobile
devices for heart rate measuring are listed in Section IV.
In Section V, details about our measuring method and our
experiences with the various devices are discussed. The results
of the measurement experiments are provided in Section VI.
In Section VII, conclusions are drawn and future work is
mentioned.
II.
RELATED WORK
The domain of eHealth has been evolved by two major
inﬂuences: on the one hand by the increasing availability of
sensors for tracking physical activities, not only in smartphones
but also in other devices, such as smart wearables; on the
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

other hand by the easy accessibility of health information,
stimulating the users’ interest for monitoring their physical
condition. This evolution has brought the problem of informa-
tion overload [14] to the healthcare sector. For example, too
many diet plans and sport schedules are available, but only a
minority are tailored to the speciﬁc needs of a person. This
emphasizes the need to personalize the health information,
which is ongoing since the mid-90s [15] and is demonstrated
in Computer-Tailoring Health Education Systems [14].
Personalization can be achieved by a recommender system.
Personalized recommendations, customized information, and
tailored messages have shown to be far more effective than the
non-personalized alternative [11][16]. Health promotion and
wellness driven applications often use collaborative ﬁltering
techniques to cope with the overload of health info and
identify the most relevant data [17]. The selection is not made
by a central agency or individual, but based on actions of
the community. As a result, the quality of the selection is
depending on the size and engagement of the community.
Various Health Information Systems (HIS) have been pro-
posed in recent years. These HIS may have three primary
goals: inform, assist in the decision making, or convince the
end-user. In the HOMEY project, technology for innovative
tele-medicine services is developed [18]. The goal of these
services is to effectively manage an incremental dialogue
between a tele-medicine system and a patient, taking into
account user needs, preferences, and the time course of her/his
disease. More speciﬁcally, the focus was on an automated,
telephone-based home monitoring service for chronic hyper-
tensive patients [19]. Patients are regularly asked to specify
their blood pressure values and heart rate. Based on these
data, suggestions for physical activities are provided e.g., “Are
you still swimming two times a week?” or health advice is
offered, such as “You should stop smoking”. The personalized
dialog with the patient is based on goals and rules speciﬁed
by medical staff. A clinical trial involving 300 hypertensive
patients showed a blood pressure decrease in the group of
patients exploiting the Homey service. This study emphasizes
the importance of the usability of the HIS to stimulate an
intensive use. In contrast to our Android application, the
Homey service is not able to automatically measure heart rate.
On the mobile platform, tens of thousands health apps are
available [20], often called mHealth (Mobile Health) apps [21].
Sometimes, the offer of health apps is even considered as
an overload for medical professionals and consumers [22].
Both continue to express concerns about the quality of
many apps [20]. Moreover, the importance of personalization
strengthens the need to automatically acquire personal data,
such as performed physical activities or heart rate.
However, tracking physical activities or measuring heart
rate is complex and maybe insufﬁciently accurate with general-
purpose wearables. For commercially available breast belt
measuring devices, evaluations in terms of accuracy have
been performed [23]. However for newer wearable devices,
the actual accuracy is still unclear. A limited number of
studies investigated the accuracy of heart rate monitoring using
wearable devices. Heart rate monitoring using a wrist-worn
personal ﬁtness tracker has been investigated in non-moving
conditions (with patients in the intensive care unit) [24]. The
heart rate values obtained using the personal ﬁtness tracker
were slightly lower than those derived from continuous elec-
trocardiographic monitoring. The authors argued that further
evaluation is required to see if personal ﬁtness trackers can be
used in hospitals, e.g. as early warning systems. Another study
has investigated the accuracy of step counts and heart rate
monitoring with wearables [25]. Test subjects were asked to
walk a number of steps during the measurements. The accuracy
of the heart rate measurements with the tested wearable devices
showed to be very high. In contrast, our paper investigates
the accuracy of heart rate monitoring during intense physical
activities and with various types of wearable devices.
III.
MEASURING HEART RATE
Various methods to measure heart rate exist. Two important
methods will be discussed in more detail: electrocardiography
and photoplethysmography. Others are echocardiography, and
measurements based on carotid pulse or radial pulse.
A. Electrocardiography (ECG)
Electrocardiography is the process of recording the elec-
trical activity of the heart using electrodes placed on the
skin [26]. These electrodes detect the tiny electrical changes on
the skin that arise from the heart muscle’s electrophysiologic
pattern of depolarizing during each heartbeat. In professional
environments, such as hospitals, this technique is applied
with 10 electrodes, placed on the patient’s limbs and on the
surface of the chest. The signals of the various electrodes
are combined into an electrocardiogram [27], a record of the
electrical activity of the heart over a period of time.
B. Photoplethysmography (PPG)
Photoplethysmography is the scientiﬁc name of Optical
Heart rate Sensing (OHS). It is a technique to monitor heart
rate based on the combination of photo diodes and LEDs [28].
Blood absorbs green light (hence its red color). As a result,
the photo diode detects a reduction in green light intensity
during a pulse of the heart. A low intensity of the green light
corresponds to a pulse; a high intensity is measured during
periods between two pulses. A green LED provides the most
accurate results. However, an infrared LED is often used since
this consumes less energy. A disadvantage of this method
is that motion artifacts have been shown to be a limiting
factor. This hinders accurate readings during exercise and
free living conditions. In addition, person-dependent variations
may also cause distorted readings. For example, a different
blood perfusion induces a different absorption of light, thereby
registering a deviated reading.
Since the hardware of a smartphone camera is very similar
to a pulse-oximeter, it can be used for measuring heart rate
by PPG. This works as follows. The index ﬁnger is covering
the camera lens and the LED. The light from the LED is
reﬂected by the skin of the ﬁnger through diffusion; then this
light is captured by the camera lens. Contrary to traditional
OHS, the red spectrum is often used on smartphones, because
the device-speciﬁc distribution of red pixels varies less than
the distribution of green pixels. Still, this technique relies on
hardware-dependent parameters, such as the number of pixels,
the LED, etc.
IV.
MEASURING DEVICES
Four types of devices for measuring heart rate can be
distinguished.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A. Specialized devices
The main purpose of this type of devices is measuring.
Therefore, these devices often have only a limited number of
sensors and a limited number of features. Examples are heart
rate chest straps, pulse-oximeters, and blood pressure monitors.
These devices are often approved for medical use and can
therefore be used as reference devices.
In this study, the Polar H7 was used. This is a popular
heart rate chest strap, which produces very accurate readings
(correlation of 0.97 with true heart rate [29]). To test its
accuracy, we compared the measurements of the Polar H7 to
the ones of the Omrom M6 Comfort [30]. The Omrom M6 is a
blood pressure monitor that is approved for medical purposes,
and can therefore be considered as the correct heart rate.
The measurements with two users, at two different times,
showed that the Polar device produces heart rate measurements
with a precision similar to the Omrom. This justiﬁes the
use of the Polar H7 as specialized device for heart rate
monitoring. Since a blood pressure monitor is rather expensive
and less suitable for sports activities, we chose the Polar H7
as reference device during our experiments.
B. Fitness trackers / ﬁtness wearables
These devices, typically worn around the wrist, measure
motion, such as counting up steps, monitoring sleep, and
calculating the difference between a light jog and a mad sprint.
These devices are packed with multiple sensors, such as a 3-
axis accelerometer to track movement in every direction, and
an altimeter that can measure your altitude, handy for tracking
the height of the mountains you have climbed. Some come with
a gyroscope too, to measure orientation and rotation. These
devices are often not approved for medical purposes, but are
cheaper than the specialized devices. The Microsoft Band 2
was chosen for this study because of two reasons. It allows
the real time analysis of sensor data and Microsoft provides a
comprehensive API. This API allows for example to aggregate
the results of a query thereby shifting the computational load
to the Microsoft servers.
C. Smart wearables / watches
Similar to ﬁtness trackers, smart wearables and smart
watches are equipped with various sensors and are not med-
ically approved. In contrast, ﬁtness trackers their main fo-
cus is on tracking physical activities, whereas the goal of
smart wearables is more general including tracking physical
activities, context recognition, and informing users. The target
group of these devices contains not only sports people but
also a broader group of people who like the design, or the
extra features of a smart watch. Compared to ﬁtness trackers,
smart wearables often have more hardware capabilities (e.g.,
color screen, more processing power), allowing to extend their
functionality with additional apps. In this study, the Huawei
Watch is used because of its popularity and typical smart
watch functionality. To capture heart rate data in real time
from the Huawei Watch, a special Wear app was developed.
The Wear app communicates with our Android app running
on a smartphone through the Wearable Data Layer API.
D. Secondary device feature
This category covers hardware components of devices that
allow measuring heart rate. By using (hardware-speciﬁc) apps,
smartphones are able to measure heart rate using the built-in
camera and LED ﬂash based on PPG techniques. In this study,
the camera and LED of the Google Nexus 6P are used.
V.
MEASUREMENT METHOD
Heart rate measurements are collected and stored on a
smartphone (Google Nexus 6P) by a self-developed Android
app, since most wearables have a direct bluetooth communi-
cation channel. For every device, a service was running on the
smartphone to transfer the raw sensor data to the smartphone.
Since different sensors are differently calibrated, differ-
ences in the measurements can be witnessed for the same
person in the same conditions. Therefore, the heart rate data is
normalized based on three levels: resting, walking at low (≤
4m/s) speed, and walking at high speed. This normalization
method has shown its usefulness for physical activities of
different intensities [31][32]. This normalization is performed
as follows. For each of the activity levels, the heart rate is
measured using the different devices simultaneously and over
a long period of time (> 10 minutes). For each of the devices,
the difference in average heart rate with the reference device
(Omrom M6) is calculated. This difference is compensated in
the measurements during physical activities (Figure 1, 2, 3,
and 4). First, we discuss our practical experiences with the
four devices used for measurements.
A. Specialized device: sensor with chest strap
This device is comfortable during sports, while holding its
position on the chest. After all, this kind of devices is designed
for measuring heart rate during sports.
B. Fitness tracker
Although the Microsoft Band 2 is a ﬁtness tracker designed
for sports, we do not experience it as ideal for heart rate
measurements from a practical viewpoint. The device hinders
when the wrist moves during exercises.
C. Smart watch
During the experiment, we witnessed that motions of the
wrist disturb the measurements, even if the strap is tightened
excessively. The sensor in the smart watch loses the reference
point and measuring the heart rate is interrupted. To cope
with this problem, our developed app starts to recalibrate as
soon as the measuring process is interrupted. Also variations
in light intensity showed to disturb the measurement process.
If the wrist is moved to a position where it absorbs more light,
measurements turned out to be invalid.
D. Secondary device feature: PPG on smartphone
Using the PPG technique on a smartphone to measure heart
rate also has some practical difﬁculties. The PPG technique is
inﬂuenced by personal characteristics of the (blood / ﬁnger of
the) test user. In addition, PPG is very sensitive to motion; so
the user has to keep his/her ﬁnger still on the ﬂash LED. This
complicates heart rate measurements during physical activities.
Moreover, the prolonged use of the ﬂash LED and camera
heats up the phone excessively. The device becomes so hot,
making it impossible to put your ﬁnger in the correct position
on the LED for a long time. The heating of the device is
associated with a drain of the battery. In our experiments,
we witnessed a 4% decrease of the battery level during each
measurement of 5 minutes.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

VI.
MEASUREMENT RESULTS
Table I shows the resulting heart rate measurements for
two test subjects in rest condition (home environment) without
normalization. PPG using a camera is not included, since
this method is highly inﬂuenced by the type of smartphone
that is used. The ﬁrst user (TS1 - female) has a high heart
rate, whereas the other test subject (TS2 - male) has a low
heart rate in rest condition. Measurements are repeated at
two different times for the two persons. For each device, the
average, standard deviation, and median are listed in Table I.
The results show that all devices provide consistent results. So
in rest conditions, heart rate measurements of these devices
can be considered as reliable. The measurements of the Polar
H7 are the most similar to the measurements of the Omrom
M6, which can be considered as the correct heart rate.
Figure 1. Heart rate measured during stair master.
Figure 2. Heart rate measured during leg press.
Figure 1, 2, 3, and 4 show the heart rate measurements
obtained with the four devices for four different exercises,
respectively Stair Master, Leg Press, Dumbbell Curl, and Long
Walking. All exercises are performed in a ﬁtness room by
two persons with similar results. The results of one person
Figure 3. Heart rate measured during dumbbell curl.
Figure 4. Heart rate measured during long walking.
are shown in these Figures. Because of practical reasons, it
was not possible to measure heart rate with the Omrom M6
during physical activities in the ﬁtness room.
For each device, we investigated trend and reactivity. Trend
only judges a scoped-out-view of the heart rate signal based
on the statistics average and correlation. Reactive is more strict
and judges short periods of time. If an intense physical activity
causes a sudden increase in heart rate, it is important that the
sensor registers this increase. If a sensor is able to detect these
sudden changes quickly, then it can be considered as highly
reactive.
A. Specialized device: sensor with chest strap
The Polar H7 is considered as a reference. The output of
the other devices is compared to the heart rate registered with
the Polar.
B. Fitness tracker
The Microsoft Band 2 registers a heart rate that is con-
sistently lower than the reference value of the Polar. This
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

TABLE I. HEART RATE MEASUREMENTS WITH TWO USERS (TS1 AND TS2) IN REST CONDITION AT TWO DIFFERENT TIMES
TS1-1
TS1-2
TS2-1
TS2-2
Device
¯x ± σ
median
¯x ± σ
median
¯x ± σ
median
¯x ± σ
median
Omrom M6
76±2.5
-
84±4.2
-
55±2.8
-
58±2.9
-
Polar H7
77±3.0
76
80±3.7
79
56±1.7
56
59±1.4
59
Huawei Watch
73±3.3
73
72±3.2
71
55±2.0
55
55±2.0
56
Microsoft Band
75±3.3
75
76±1.7
76
50±2.9
60
64±6.0
64
discrepancy varies for different heart rates, which makes it
hard to correct. Moreover, measures of the Microsoft Band de-
viate substantially from the reference during intense activities.
Figure 3 shows that the sensor has a low reactivity. Rapidly
varying heart rates are not detected during the Dumbbell Curl
exercise.
C. Smart watch
Because of interruptions in the measurement process due
to movements, the number of measurement results obtained
with the Huawei Watch is smaller than obtained with the Polar
H7. Time periods without measurements correspond to periods
of sensor (re)calibration due to movements of the wrist. As a
result, this device shows to be less suitable for measuring heart
rate during activities with a lot of movement (of the wrist).
In terms of accuracy, the results show a trend that cor-
responds to the reference of the Polar. The mean value is
5 beats per minute below the mean value of the Polar ref-
erence. But this difference is consistent for different heart
rates which allows a correction by adding the ﬁxed difference
to the measurements. Figure 3 shows this smart watch has
some difﬁculties in detecting physical activities with varying
intensities. Intensive periods are noticeable in the measurement
data; but a delay in the peaks of the data is visible if the Polar
and Huawei are compared.
D. Secondary device feature: PPG on smartphone
Because of the physical movements, PPG on the smart-
phone is not possible during Dumbbell Curl exercises. Because
of the algorithm’s dependency on the hardware, ﬂuctuations
in the measurements can be witnessed, even for a stable
heart rate. The trend of the PPG method matches with the
measurements of the Polar device. The trend of PPG is even
better than the trend of the smart watch and ﬁtness tracker
for an exercise with low variation in intensity, as shown in
Figure 2. In other cases, the heart rate measurements obtained
with PGG may signiﬁcantly differ from the Polar reference, as
visible in Figure 4.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper investigated the accuracy of heart rate measure-
ments with sensors in wearables and smartphones. Experiments
showed that specialized devices, using a sensor with chest
strap, produce very accurate results, similar to devices that are
approved for medical purposes. Measurements with the ﬁtness
tracker and smart watch that were tested, showed very accurate
results in conditions with little physical movement, e.g., in
resting state. However, a discrepancy in measured heart rate
is witnessed during periods with a highly variable heart rate,
e.g., during high intensity interval training. This low reactivity
is often due to physical movements of the wrist. Devices
around the wrist may lose their reference during movement,
and subsequently require a recalibration of the sensor for
a few seconds. Measuring heart rate by using PPG on a
smartphone showed ﬂuctuating measurements, even in case of
little physical movements. This might be due to changes in
light intensity in the environment or movements of the ﬁnger.
Aggregating multiple measurements showed that statistics,
such as average and median, are a good representation of the
real heart rate. Because of hardware dependent characteristics,
algorithms using the PPG technique are often too general. The
general applicability of the algorithms for PPG allows heart
rate monitoring on different smartphone devices, but reduces
the accuracy of the results. Although ﬁtness trackers, smart
watches, or PPG on smartphones are useful tools to get infor-
mation about the heart rate, we experienced some inaccuracies
in the measurements during physical movements or sudden
variations in heart rate. For medical purposes or professional
athletes, specialized devices with a chest strap might be a better
choice because of their higher accuracy. In future work, we
will investigate how to automatically detect physical exercises,
such as squats, and couple these exercises to the heart rate
for further analysis. For the detection of exercises, sensors
of mobile devices, such as the accelerometer, will be used.
Next, we plan to develop an eHealth recommender system
offering personal suggestions for physical activities based on
the measured heart rate and performed exercises.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Enias Cailliau for his
extensive research and implementation work in the context of
this study.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Bodenheimer, E. H. Wagner, and K. Grumbach, “Improving primary
care for patients with chronic illness,” Jama, vol. 288, no. 14, 2002, pp.
1775–1779.
[2]
F. W. Booth, C. K. Roberts, and M. J. Laye, “Lack of exercise is a
major cause of chronic diseases,” 2011.
[3]
S. Hammer, J. Kim, and E. Andr´e, “Med-styler: Metabo diabetes-
lifestyle recommender,” in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference
on Recommender Systems, ser. RecSys ’10.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2010, pp. 285–288.
[4]
S. A. Khan et al., “Gethealthyharlem.org: developing a web platform
for health promotion and wellness driven by and for the harlem com-
munity.” AMIA. Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA Symposium.,
vol. 2009, 2009, pp. 317–321.
[5]
S. Chen, J. Lach, O. Amft, M. Altini, and J. Penders, “Unsupervised
activity clustering to estimate energy expenditure with a single body
sensor,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Body Sensor Net-
works, May 2013, pp. 1–6.
[6]
F. Dadashi et al., “A hidden markov model of the breaststroke swimming
temporal phases using wearable inertial measurement units,” in 2013
IEEE International Conference on Body Sensor Networks, May 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[7]
J. Low, “Consumer health informatics: Informing consumers and im-
proving health care,” D. Lewis, G. Eysenbach, R. Kukafka, P. Z. Stavri,
and H. Jimison, Eds. Routledge, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Books
Ltd, 2007, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 415–416.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[8]
R. J. Cline and K. M. Haynes, “Consumer health information seeking
on the internet: the state of the art,” Health education research, vol. 16,
no. 6, 2001, pp. 671–692.
[9]
G. Eysenbach, “Consumer health informatics,” British medical journal,
vol. 320, no. 7251, 2000, p. 1713.
[10]
V. J. Strecher et al., “The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation
messages in family practice settings,” Journal of Family Practice,
vol. 39, no. 3, 1994, pp. 262–270.
[11]
M. K. Campbell, B. M. DeVellis, V. J. Strecher, A. S. Ammerman,
R. F. DeVellis, and R. S. Sandler, “Improving dietary behavior: the
effectiveness of tailored messages in primary care settings.” American
journal of public health, vol. 84, no. 5, 1994, pp. 783–787.
[12]
P. S. Freedson and K. Miller, “Objective monitoring of physical activity
using motion sensors and heart rate,” Research quarterly for exercise
and sport, vol. 71, no. sup2, 2000, pp. 21–29.
[13]
J.
Kim,
“Wearable
heart
rate
monitors
enter
the
con-
sumer
mainstream,”
2014,
retrieved:
April,
2017,
at
http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/feature/Wearable-device-
heart-rate-monitoring-entering-the-consumer-mainstream.
[14]
L. Fernandez-Luque, R. Karlsen, and L. Vognild, “Challenges and
opportunities of using recommender systems for personalized health
education.” Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 150, 2008,
pp. 903–907.
[15]
K. Binsted, A. Cawsey, and R. Jones, Generating personalised patient
information using the medical record.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 1995, pp. 29–41.
[16]
V. Strecher, M. Kreuter, D. Den Boer, S. Kobrin, H. Hospers, and
C. Skinner, “The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation mes-
sages in family practice settings,” The Journal of family practice,
vol. 39, no. 3, September 1994, pp. 262–270.
[17]
D. Jannach, M. Zanker, A. Felfernig, and G. Friedrich, Recommender
Systems: An Introduction, 1st ed.
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
[18]
M. Beveridge and D. Milward, “Deﬁnition of the high-level task spec-
iﬁcation language. deliverable d11, eu 5th framework homey project,”
IST-2001-32434, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[19]
T. Giorginoll, C. R. Quaglinil, and J. Baccheschi, “The homey project:
a telemedicine service for hypertensive patients,” Personalisation for
e-Health, vol. 21, 2005, pp. 32–35.
[20]
M. N. K. Boulos, A. C. Brewer, C. Karimkhani, D. B. Buller, and R. P.
Dellavalle, “Mobile medical and health apps: state of the art, concerns,
regulatory control and certiﬁcation,” Online journal of public health
informatics, vol. 5, no. 3, 2014, p. 229.
[21]
M. J. Handel, “mhealth (mobile health)using apps for health and
wellness,” EXPLORE: The Journal of Science and Healing, vol. 7, no. 4,
2011, pp. 256–261.
[22]
L. van Velsen, D. J. Beaujean, and J. E. van Gemert-Pijnen, “Why
mobile health app overload drives us crazy, and how to restore the
sanity,” BMC medical informatics and decision making, vol. 13, no. 1,
2013, p. 23.
[23]
M. Weippert et al., “Comparison of three mobile devices for measuring
r–r intervals and heart rate variability: Polar s810i, suunto t6 and an
ambulatory ecg system,” European journal of applied physiology, vol.
109, no. 4, 2010, pp. 779–786.
[24]
R. R. Kroll, J. G. Boyd, and D. M. Maslove, “Accuracy of a wrist-
worn wearable device for monitoring heart rates in hospital inpatients:
A prospective observational study,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 18, no. 9, 2016, p. 253.
[25]
F. El-Amrawy and M. I. Nounou, “Are currently available wearable
devices for activity tracking and heart rate monitoring accurate, precise,
and medically beneﬁcial?” Healthcare informatics research, vol. 21,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 315–320.
[26]
L. N. Katz and A. Pick, Clinical electrocardiography.
Lea & Febiger,
1956.
[27]
A. Anier, J. Kaik, and K. Meigas, “Device and methods for perform-
ing transesophageal stimulation at reduced pacing current threshold,”
Estonian Journal of Engineering, vol. 14, no. 2, 2008, pp. 154–166.
[28]
A. Reisner, P. A. Shaltis, D. McCombie, and H. H. Asada, “Utility
of the photoplethysmogram in circulatory monitoring,” The Journal of
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, vol. 108, no. 5, 2008, pp.
950–958.
[29]
M. Altini, “Heart Rate Variability for Training,” 2013, retrieved: April,
2017, at http://www.marcoaltini.com/blog/heart-rate-variability.
[30]
Omron,
“Automatic
Blood
Pressure
Monitor
-
Model
M6
Comfort
IT,”
2015,
retrieved:
April,
2017,
at
www.omron-
healthcare.com/en/support/manuals/download/m6-comfort-it-hem-
7322u-e-en.
[31]
M. Altini, J. Penders, R. Vullers, O. Amft et al., “Automatic heart rate
normalization for accurate energy expenditure estimation,” Methods of
information in medicine, vol. 53, no. 5, 2014, pp. 382–388.
[32]
P. T. Katzmarzyk, “Physical activity, sedentary behavior, and health:
paradigm paralysis or paradigm shift?” Diabetes, vol. 59, no. 11, 2010,
pp. 2717–2725.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

