Ubiquitous System to Enhance the Supply Chain
C´andido Caballero-Gil, Jezabel Molina-Gil, Pino Caballero-Gil
Department of Statistics, Operations Research and Computing
University of La Laguna
Tenerife, Spain
Email: {ccabgil,jmmolina,pcaballe}@ull.es
Alexis Quesada-Arencibia
Institute of Cybernetic Science and Technology
University of Las Palmas de G.C.
Las Palmas, Spain
Email: aquesada@dis.ulpgc.es
Abstract—Transportation
and
logistics
include
delivery,
movement and collection of goods through roads, and in
the international case also through ports and airports. Con-
sequently, they usually involve many different actors, what
complicates management, reducing efﬁciency and effectiveness.
In particular, time, boundaries, and interdependencies are the
main difﬁculties in any supply chain. Besides, several security
challenges are raised due to unintentional errors or intentional
attacks. Existing technology such as RFID, with its potential
to automate product authentications, makes possible to solve,
or at least to reduce, most of the possible negative effects
caused by the mismanagement of the supply chain process.
In this line, technology included in the Internet of Things
(IoT) can be used to enhance several aspects of the supply
chain management, helping to improve demand management,
customization, and automatic replenishment of out-of-stock
goods while reducing inventory and distribution costs, as well
as counterfeit versions of name-brand items. It also allows
creating new safe and efﬁcient schemes that help enterprises
and organizations to improve quality of service and traceability
to the management of transported goods. This paper proposes
the IoT integration in the transport of merchandise, allowing its
follow-up from the cloud. Preliminary research results indicate
that the combination of ubiquitous technologies provides a
more complete and efﬁcient service.
Keywords-Ubiquitous systems; Internet of Things; wireless
technologies; transportation and logistics services.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robust and real-time information is essential for the
operation of any organization dedicated to the transportation
and logistics sector. In particular, tracking and tracing goods
is a process that can cover the determination of the current
and past locations of items, report of the arrival or departure
of objects and record of the identiﬁcation of objects, and the
location, time, and status where they were observed. Such
pieces of information can be very helpful both internally and
for customers. On the one hand, it can help to design and
manage the Supply Chain (SC), adding value to the products,
and establishing an additional customer service. On the other
hand, internally, it allows examining how customers can get
beneﬁt by improving the use of resources in order to reduce
storage costs, risk of loss or theft, etc.
Changes in customers’ likes have increased the attention
on the performance, design, and analysis of the SC in order
to improve its efﬁciency and effectiveness, and to launch
new products faster at lower costs. The managers of enter-
prises know that competitiveness is not only achieved by
optimizing the manufacturing lines, but it is also important
to improve the SC, enhancing the productivity growth.
According to the RAPEX report [1], the traceability of
consumer products would improve Europe’s ability to ﬁght
fraud and take action against unsafe products. This would be
possible through a comprehensive control of the goods that
reaches countries borders, including details such as date and
place of entry as well as the origin and destination of the
imports. It also stresses the importance of monitoring and
control of goods at any time and place, since this would
decrease the effects of dangerous goods that could enter the
borders or thefts that may arise.
A study from 2004 [2] estimates that in the U.S. there
were excess inventories of more than $117 billion and many
enterprises lost $83 billion due to problems of coordination
between different elements of the chain. In order to have
an efﬁcient SC, it is necessary to provide fast supply, be
responsive to customer demand shifts, and alert about supply
disruption.
In the transportation and logistics industry, automation in
product monitoring and control, inventory, customer rela-
tionship management, ﬂeet tracking, etc., is a typical issue
dealt by the enterprises that offer solutions for the individual
problems. The main goal of this work is to improve such
solutions by making use of the IoT, through managing
ubiquitous information about the transported goods with
different types of communications and devices [3]. This
work describes an innovative solution for the management
of the complete SC process, which makes use of many
different IoT technologies such as RFID, EPC, Wi-Fi, GPS,
QR codes, etc. in a secure and efﬁcient way. First, it provides
the possibility of comparing the transported goods with
the delivery note. Besides, it allows to observe, trace and
check the merchandise from the source to the destination.
In addition to this, the system offers an interface for fast
checking of merchandise for authorities. Such information
will beneﬁt not only the authorities but also the exporters
and importers, who can control their merchandise, ensure its
reliability, optimize its transportation through adaptive travel
route assignment, and provide added value to customers.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

This paper is organized as follows. A brief survey of
related work is given in Section II. Some preliminaries about
security aspects and risk factors in the SC are included in
Section III. Section IV presents the new ubiquitous solution.
Finally, Section V gives conclusions and future works.
II. RELATED WORK
The application of IoT in the transportation and logistics
sector and the SC management [4] [5], requires dealing with
many different problems related to reliability and security. In
[6] the author classiﬁes several existing models to improve
the SC and describes different approaches for every model.
On the other hand, it is known that most security problems
in the SC [7] are related to physical issues happening along
the route, such as breaks in fencing, long stops at night, stops
near residential areas, regular scheduled stops, unlocked
containers and unmanned trains.
The main goal of this work is to improve the productive-
ness and security of the SC by using today’s technologies.
In this regard, [8] performs an analysis of the efﬁciency and
effectiveness after applying different strategies to improve
the SC, and [9] includes a complete review of more than
two hundred papers about green SC management.
In this paper we also analyse an inherent problem of
the used technology, which is the cloning problem [10],
consisting in tampering goods. In order to prevent it, we
propose the use of an authentication P2P solution based on
Zero-Knowledge-Proofs, similar to the one presented in [11].
Solutions sharing speciﬁc characteristics with the pro-
posed app can be found in the Google Play Store, which
facilitate the tracking in the SC [12] [13]. However, the app
proposed in this paper allows tracking packages from many
carriers with a phone or tablet, starting form the delivery
note, and tracing it in a secure way till the destination,
combining different technologies.
III. PRELIMINARIES
Using a combination of international security standards,
industry best practice, regional legislative documentation and
experience, solutions could be provided that would enhance
security in the SC, as well as provide increased visibility and
efﬁciency, by preventing and limiting the amount of cargo
theft. Other recommendations to secure SC systems are to
provide all logistics partners with a set of minimal security
requirements, seal containers with highly secure locks, wrap
all products with non-descriptive plastic in order to confuse
potential criminals, and implement information security sys-
tem to ensure that product information and transportation
routes are not accessible to unauthorized personnel.
All the aforementioned recommendations may be seen as
theoretical because they have sense only if they are applied
in practice. Thus, this paper proposes a practical system
using existing technologies, which allows enterprises, cus-
tomers and organizations to have more robust information of
the SC in real time, and to set up alarms in case of changes
in goods containers in order to reduce risk in the SC.
Measurement is the ﬁrst step that allows facing to the
control and improvement of the SC. It is known that im-
provements in quality lead to lower costs and higher pro-
ductivity because they result in less rework, fewer mistakes,
fewer delays, and better use of time and materials. Therefore,
measuring the performance allows to set goals and evaluate
progress, by identifying key aspects to reﬁne, analyzing the
results of the reﬁnements, and solving possible problems. In
particular, in the SC, to develop an improvement of any area,
it is important to know the starting situation, deﬁne a realistic
goal, determine how to measure the progress in the system
and develop an action plan. This has been the procedure
followed when designing the proposal here presented.
The Japanese philosophy known as Just In Time (JIT)
is a production strategy that strives to improve a business
return on investment by reducing in-process inventory and
associated carrying costs. To meet JIT objectives, the process
has to rely on signals between different points in the process,
which tell production when to make the next part. Imple-
mented correctly, JIT focuses on continuous improvement,
so our proposal can be a useful tool to reach that goal.
Enterprises without centralized SC governance can nega-
tively impact procurement, manufacturing and time to mar-
ket processes in SC, which can impact company’s ﬁnancial
strategy. Security risk management is an essential part of
the SC governance system to ensure that risks are identiﬁed
in the entire value chain and mitigated to deliver ﬁnancial
goals. In particular, the stages of the SC that must be covered
by the system are manufacturing and distribution, suppliers,
transportation, retailers, central warehouse, docks, cranes,
boats and wholesale and retail distribution center.
Different goals can be deﬁned to improve the SC logistics.
Some of them are to reduce costs and maximize prof-
its, improve reliability, minimize inventory, reduce delivery
time, maximize equipment utilization, increase ﬂexibility,
improving simulation, reduce work in process, and reuse.
Practical tools to process the building of a dynamic SC
model allow to have valuable insights and analyse the
behaviour and characteristics of a SC. Most existing models
and tools have been developed to address particular issues
that can be classiﬁed into the following ﬁve categories:
• Optimization: Finding the optimal operational guide-
lines that maximize or minimize a factor, such as
minimizing costs and/or risks and maximizing proﬁts.
• Decision Analysis: Typically involves the quantitative
evaluation and comparison of two or more alternatives.
• Diagnostic Evaluation: It is usually conducted when the
cause of a particular problem is unknown.
• Risk Management: SC dynamics can be severely im-
pacted by unanticipated disruptive events.
• Project Planning: Changes in SC parts can produce
disruptions, and short-term/long-term inefﬁciencies.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

IV. PROPOSED UBIQUITOUS SYSTEM
This paper presents a secure and ubiquitous system to
control the goods from their manufacture until their delivery
to the end customer, which makes the work easier for custom
authorities and all people responsible for goods in transit.
In particular, the new system allows checking whether
the collected goods are correct by detecting any error in the
delivery process, provides on-line checking mechanisms and
keeps a full history of the goods transportation. All this is
done taking into account the security needs required during
the SC process because cryptographic algorithms are used
to detect counterfeit information and to avoid unauthorized
reading, writing or modiﬁcation of labelling goods.
The proposal implies a minimum cost as it is based on
affordable and usual devices such as RFID and smartphones,
so not only minimizes economic costs by using cheap
passive tags, but also reduces the effort to learn to use new
technology because people are familiar with smartphones.
RFID technology is extended in enterprises related to SC
and it allows us validate products easily and locate them
[14] [15] fastly inside the container.
A typical SC consists of ﬁve actors: supplier, manu-
facturer, distributor, retailer, and customer. The proposed
system has different parts according to the ﬁve steps in the
SC where the goods may be: generation and extraction of
QR data of container goods, RFID validation of goods, web
service for ﬂeet tracking and traceability, and Wi-Fi P2P
request for customs check.
There are different kind of relationships in the SC and
each one has different characteristics that must be resolved
in a different way. Fig. 1 shows different technologies
we proposed in order to have the best solutions for these
relationships.
Figure 1.
Related IoT technologies for the SC system
A. QR Container Receipt
The ﬁrst step in the operation of the system is the genera-
tion of the container receipt describing relevant information
about the products available in the container. The speciﬁc
format of such a receipt consists of: receipt ID, 13-character
codes identifying the products and number of each product,
origin and destination places and corresponding dates, and
other important data such as related enterprises and carriers.
The system generates a QR code containing all the
information of the container receipt, and encrypts it so that
the only way to read its content is by using the shared secret
key. Such a QR code is printed in the same data sheet of
the container goods.
The QR code with all information is generated with an
on-line service in [16], to encrypt the information, data must
be ciphered before generate the QR code.
B. QR Data Extraction
The driver who transports the goods executes the second
step of the process. He/she has to use his/her smartphone to
read the QR code with the app (see Step 1 in Fig. 2), and the
content is decrypted with the shared key. After reading the
code, the driver gets all the information of the QR container
receipt.
The implementation in the Android platform for reading
QR code is by using a library called Zxing, after this, data
are saved in local device in a sql database. Information about
origin and destinations are also shown in the device interface
by using Google Maps Android API v2.
C. RFID Validation
With the list of transported products in the smartphone,
the device may be used to read the RFID tags in the
container through an RFID reader and a Wi-Fi interface
to communicate with it. After this reading, the smartphone
checks if every product in the list is in the container, (see
Step 2 in Fig. 2). This is especially interesting not only
in the loading of the goods in the container, but also in
every delivery of goods in order to avoid possible errors.
RFID technology is also useful to know the position where
a product is inside the containter.
D. Web Service for Fleet Tracking and Traceability
On the one hand, ﬂeet tracking allows checking if the
goods are in the place they have to be at every moment.
(see Step 3 in Fig. 2). On the other hand, traceability
allows knowing speciﬁc details about the path of the goods,
detecting possible bottlenecks in order to improve next parts
of the route. The on demand request options enable asking
the driver’s device, which asks to the RFID reader of the
container in order to know if everything is ﬁne at that
moment. The driver’s smartphone returns the answer that can
be either OK or Error, and in this case some details about the
problem are attached. It is remarkable that only users who
are authenticated in the system and with the corresponding
permission can ask to the driver’s smartphone.
This system also allows to conﬁgure goods reception
and when the container is next to the reception place, the
driver’s smartphone will send automatically a message to
the responsible of reception. To ensure the privacy and
security of data, the server in the cloud is secured. For the
implementation of the Web Platform we are using a Node
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

JS server with Mongo DB for data and express, framework
to create the webservices for Node JS. For the front-end we
are use Bootstrap framework and GMaps Api.
E. Wi-Fi P2P Request
In order to facilitate authorities work and merchandise
management, the app includes an authority interface that
agents can use to examine the content of every container
without looking inside. (see Step 4 in Fig. 2). In this way,
they can check easily if all the information about goods,
enterprises and carriers are correct. Otherwise, they do a
physical control so that they can check the content and see
if it corresponds to the information the system provides. This
interface is secured as only authorized people can access to
the information through it. In particular, a lightweight P2P
authentication method similar to the one presented in [17] is
used. This interface will be implemented by using the Wi-Fi
Direct APIs for Android.
Figure 2.
Complete System for Ubiquitous SC.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this work, a new logistics system combining differ-
ent technologies to improve the efﬁciency and security of
the SC is presented. In particular, it allows checking the
merchandize not only in the loading and delivery moments,
where most problems usually happen, but also at any time,
as it offers tracking and tracing of goods. Furthermore, the
system’s interface to control the merchandise facilitates the
authorities’ work to perform the merchandise management
in custom areas. This tool is its Beta version for the Android
platform and will be soon available in the Google play store.
Since this is a work in progress, there are many open ques-
tions such as the analysis of which are the most appropriate
encryption mechanisms for the different communications.
The analysis of the time and risks in the proposed SC tool,
as well as a comparison between the improvement degree
of our proposal and other systems are also future works.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research supported by the MINECO and the FEDER
Fund under Projects TIN2011- 25452 and IPT-2012-0585-
370000, and the FPI scholarships BES-2009-016774, and
ACIISI-BOC Number 60.
REFERENCES
[1] European
Rapex
Report,
2011.
Available
at
http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/safety/rapex/ [retrieved: April,
2013]
[2] ”C investment hot. U.S. companies have begun to attack the
more than $117 billion in excess inventory and $83 billion in
lost sales.” Material Handling Management, 2004.
[3] D. Giusto, A. Iera, G. Morabito, and L. Atzori, ”The Internet
of Things,” 20th Tyrrhenian Workshop on Digital Communi-
cations. Springer, 2010.
[4] A. Brewer, K. J. Button, and D. A. Hensher, ”Handbook of
logistics and supply-chain management,” Emerald, 2001.
[5] M. Christopher, ”Logistics And Supply Chain Management:
Creating Value-Adding Networks,” Financial Times Prentice
Hall; Edicin: 3rd Revised edition, 2005.
[6] B. M. Beamon, ”Supply Chain Design and Analysis: Models
and Methods,” International Journal of Production Economics
55(3), 1998 pp. 281294.
[7] TV Rheinland, ”Case Study: Supply Chain Security Analysis,”
Report, 2007.
[8] B. Borgstrm, ”Exploring efﬁciency and effectiveness in the
supply chain. A conceptual analysis,” The 21st Annual IMP
Conference, 2005.
[9] SK. Srivastava, ”Green supply chain management: a state-of-
the-art literature review,” International Journal of Management
Reviews 9(1), 2007 pp. 5380.
[10] D. C. Ranasinghe, S. Devadas, P. H. Cole, ”A Low Cost So-
lution to Cloning and Authentication Based on a Lightweight
Primitive,” Networked RFID Systems and Lightweight Cryp-
tography, Part IV, Springer, 2008, pp. 289-309.
[11] P.
Caballero-Gil,
C.
Caballero-Gil,
J.
Molina-Gil,
C.
Hernandez-Goya, ”Self-Organized Authentication Architecture
for Mobile Ad-hoc Networks”, 6th International Symposium
on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad-Hoc, and Wire-
less Networks, Berlin, Germany, 2008: pp. 01-03
[12] ”Package Buddy,” Available at play.google.com, [retrieved:
April, 2013].
[13] ”Package Tracker Pro,” Available at play.google.com, [re-
trieved: April, 2013].
[14] M. Bouet, A. L. dos Santos RFID Tags, ”Positioning Princi-
ples and Localization Techniques,” Wireless Days, 2008. WD
’08. 1st IFIP Date of Conference: 24-27 Nov. 2008. pp 1-5.
[15] B. King, X. Zhang, ”Securing the Pharmaceutical Supply
Chain using RFID,” Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering,
2007. MUE ’07. International Conference. April 2007. pp 26-
28.
[16] QR Code Generator, ”http://www.qrcode.es/es/generador-qr-
code/,” [retrieved: April, 2013]
[17] C. Caballero-Gil, P. Caballero-Gil, A. Peinado-Dom´ınguez,
and J. Molina-Gil, ”Lightweight Authentication for RFID Used
in VANETs,” EUROCAST 2011, LNCS 6928, pp. 493-500.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

