eRoDes: a Web-based Framework for the Development of Semantic-Enhanced
Learning Objects
Pedro ´Alvarez, Sandra Baldassarri
Department of Computer Science and Systems Engineering
University of Zaragoza, Spain
Email: {alvaper,sandra}@unizar.es
Abstract—Learning objects are often created reusing multimedia
resources available in the Web. The metadata of these new objects
are usually annotated using semantic technologies. Nevertheless,
some relevant challenges related to the creation of semantic-based
metadata and their use in learning experiences are still open. The
combination of solutions of service-oriented computing, Linked
Data Cloud and semantic technologies allows to tackle these
challenges. The result is eRoDes, a web-based and service-oriented
framework able to semantically annotate learning objects in an
automatic way and that provides services for the development of
learning activities using these objects. eRoDes functionality has
been tested in a subject of Computer Engineering’s Degree at the
University of Zaragoza during 2014-15. The results are reported
and discussed.
Keywords–Semantic annotation; learning objects; web services;
e-learning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet provides a huge amount of multimedia re-
sources, such as videos, audio, web pages, documents, etc.
These resources can be useful in the design and creation
of new learning objects. However, in order to include these
objects in teaching experiences it is necessary to previously
describe their metadata, which consist of annotations that
help users to classify, recover and share the learning objects.
Semantic technologies have been integrated into e-learning
systems to enrich these annotations and allow to improve the
management of the learning objects stored into the repositories.
Nevertheless, in the ﬁeld of e-learning, some open challenges
must be still addressed in relation with: the automation of
semantic-annotation processes, the validation of annotations
from the user’s perspective, the linking of new learning objects
with other Web-accessible resources, and the interoperability
of solutions to access and exchange these objects.
In most of the studied semantic-based systems [1]–[7], the
annotations are manually created by users’ or by domain ex-
perts’. Nevertheless, they differ in the origin of the annotations.
In several systems, annotations are based on the contents of the
learning objects and are created using domain ontologies [3]–
[7]. These systems are only able to work with video while other
works deal only with textual resources [1][2]. Annotations, in
these cases, could be indicators about the complexity for the
learners to understand the concepts related with the learning
objects [2] or pedagogical terms extracted from the text-based
comments and manually added by the teachers to the learning
objects [1]. On the other hand, there are some automatic
annotation tools, but they are not focused in the contents. The
annotations can be generated by assigning categories extracted
from synthatic structures of the text [8] or, instead, they are
generated after processing the multimedia resources in order
to automatically extract visual features that provide knowledge
about the contents [9][10].
Once the learning objects have been semantically an-
notated, it is necessary to validate the usefulness of these
annotations for learners. Most of the manual annotation tools
previously mentioned have not implemented feedback mech-
anisms to improve the annotations since they are supposedly
created by experts. The system presented in [4] is an exception.
There, the system monitors the interactions of the learners with
the objects and with other participants and uses this feedback
information to identify resources that could be improved. On
the other hand, there are other approaches that propose the
use of collaborative techniques to improve their annotations
[11][12]. Learners review peers’ annotations and provide rat-
ings or comments that will be used to re-annotate the learning
objects.
Finally, the annotation systems should use standard ontolo-
gies to describe the metadata of new learning objects. The use
of standards makes the linking of new objects to other online
resources easier. Although the existing systems are prone to
work with proprietary ontologies, some works propose as an
alternative the use of vocabulaires of the Linked Data Cloud
[13] to link their annotations to external data sets [3][6][7].
On the other hand, the standarization also helps e-learning
systems to access and exchange learning objects between them
[14]. Unfortunately, most of the existing e-learning systems
are monolithic solutions that integrate a non-web editor to
create semantic annotations and a web browser or application
to search and recovery the annotated objects.
eRoDes, acronym in Spanish of “crEaci´on participativa
de RecursOs Docentes Etiquetados Sem´anticamente” (collab-
orative creation of semantically annotated learning objects,
in English), is a web-based and service-oriented framework
that allows to semantically annotate learning objects and
stores these objects and their Resource Description Framework
(RDF) based annotations. Unlike other existing approaches,
the annotation process is automatic, without users’ or domain
experts’ interaction, it uses vocabularies of the Linked Data
Cloud (the learning objects are linked to the DBpedia) and
annotations are created from the content of different kind of
resources (the text of a web page, or the audio of a video, for
instance). This process has been implemented by integrating
external web services, Linked Data algorithms and semantic
technologies. Two different voting mechanisms are provided
in order to validate and to improve the annotations that were
automatically created. Moreover, eRoDes integrates a set of
software components to design learning and teaching activities.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

These components are basic functional units that work over the
annotated learning objects and that have been implemented as
services to facilitate their reusability and integration into e-
learning applications or workﬂows.
In order to show the use of this framework, a learning
activity is described. The activity is aimed to involve students
in the creation of new learning objects: searching, classifying
and assessing resources available in the Web. The created
objects have been submitted to eRoDes to be semantically
annotated and afterwards used in the teaching of a subject.
Also, the students provided feedback in order to improve the
annotations of new learning objects created by other students.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents the architecture of eRoDes framework, while in Sec-
tion III implementation’s details are described. In Section IV,
a complete learning-teaching activity is explained, including
its phases and the results obtained. Finally, the most important
conclusions are presented at Section V.
II.
THE ERODES FRAMEWORK
Figure 1 depicts the high-level architecture of the eRoDes
framework. It is a service-oriented system that has been
implemented using web-based and semantic technologies. The
framework provides two types of services: 1) Submission
services that semantically annotate new learning objects and
store them into the knowlegde database of eRoDes, and 2)
Application services that automate some tasks of learning
activities planned by teachers.
Students and teachers can submit new learning objects,
such as text documents, PDF ﬁles, or videos, to the framework
using the Moodle application or the eRoDes web-application.
The submission services are implemented as a semantic anno-
tation process that automatically annotate these objects before
storing them into the knowledge database of the system. These
annotations are generated from the content of each object
and mapped on an ontology which was previously deﬁned by
the teachers or automatically created by the system from the
teaching guide of the subject.
As it can be observed in the left part of Figure 1, this
semantic annotation process consists of a linear pipeline of
three stages: Resource preprocessing stage, Extraction of rele-
vant terms stage and Annotation process stage. This pipe has
been designed following the Pipes and Filters architectural
pattern [15] in order to make easier the exchange and the
recombination of ﬁlters, the rapid prototyping of pipes and
the parallel processing of the different stages. The pipe was
implemented by the integration of web-accessible services and
libraries developed in the ﬁeld of Semantic Web.
From the execution point of view, some stages could be
computing intensive processes (more precisely, the speech-to-
text translation of a video when its duration is long) or an user
could request the annotation of a large collection of learning
objects. Thus, the pipe components have been programmed
to be optionally deployed in some of the distributed com-
puting infrastructures at our disposal. For this purpose, the
HERMES computing cluster hosted by the Aragon Institute of
Engineering Research and the clouds provided by OpenShift
and Amazon have been integrated in the eRoDes framework.
This remote deployment is conﬁgured, executed and monitored
by the mediation layer developed in [16]. This layer provides a
transparent and easy-to-use access to the set of hybrid comput-
ing infrastructures. So that, these heterogeneous infrastructures
are viewed as a whole by end-users.
On the other hand, the right part of Figure 1 shows the
application services offered by the current version of eRoDes.
An application service provides a coarse-grained functionality
that will be used in learning activities by students or teachers.
These services access and use the annotated objects that had
been stored into the knowledge database of eRoDes. Until now,
three student-oriented services and two prototypes of teacher-
oriented services have been implemented in order to provide
the following functionality:
•
the validation of annotations service allows a student
to improve the semantic annotations of a learning
object,
•
the ranking system helps students to assess the quality
and usefulness of the objects submitted by other
students,
•
the understanding system allows to create a mind map
that represents the understanding of a student after
working with a learning object,
•
the quality resource evaluation service is used by
teachers to evaluate the quality of resources created
by students,
•
and, ﬁnally, the learning process evaluation service
provides teachers with feedback about if students learn
what they should when working with a speciﬁc object.
All these services expose their functionality as web ser-
vices in order to make easier their integration in different
applications. As it will be described in next section, the
services for improving and ranking learning objects have
been integrated into PyBossa [17], an open-source framework
for crowdsourcing. With this tool, students will improve the
semantic annotations of objects created during an activity or a
course.
III.
IMPLEMENTATION OF ERODES
In this section, the eRoDes main components involved in
the semantic annotation of learning objects and the validation
of these annotations are described in detail.
A. Semantic annotation process
The skeleton of the semantic annotation pipeline has been
implemented in Java and is based on the Pipes and Filters
pattern: each processing stage has been implemented as an
individual component and the connections between stages as
buffers that synchronize the data ﬂow between adjacent com-
ponents. These components and buffers are called ﬁlters and
pipes, respectively. First, a version of this architectural pattern
based on Java interfaces was programmed. Afterwards, all the
ﬁlters and pipes that compose the pipeline have implemented
these interfaces. The web-accessible services and the semantic
libraries and technologies used in these implementations are
described in detailed in the next paragraphs. This interface-
based implementation makes easier the integration of compo-
nents in the pipeline and their future update and maintenance.
The ﬁrst stage of the pipeline is executed by the resource
preprocessing component. A different preprocessing compo-
nent has been programmed for each kind of input object.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 1. High-level architecture of the eRoDes framework
On the one hand, videos are preprocessed using the Java
Audio Video Encoder (JAVE) library and a speech-to-text
service provided by the IBM Bluemix platform [18]. Different
alternative technologies have been studied in this stage. For
video preprocessing, JAVE was compared with Xuggler [19],
but, alghough both have similar features, JAVE proved to be
simpler. Regarding speech recognition, several web services
and libraries have been considered. One of the most known
web services, Google Speech API was analysed. But the input
audio is restricted to 15 seconds and the daily requests to 50 in
the free version, while IBM Bluemix platform allows 3 minutes
for the input audio time and there is not limit for requests.
The CMU Sphinx library [20] was also considered in order of
not depending on the web or on external services. However,
quality and performance tests shown that IBM Bluemix plat-
form is twice faster and offers 30% better accuracy in word
recognition. In our implementation, JAVE extracts the audio
of an input video and is capable of converting it to different
formats. Then, the resulting audio ﬁle is sent to the IBM Web
service to be transcribed into a text ﬁle. On the other hand,
documents are preprocessed using Apache PDFBox library.
The text of PDF documents is extracted and transcribed to an
output text ﬁle.
Following, the extraction of the relevant terms stage has
been implemented by integrating the Java Automatic Term
Extraction toolkit (JATE). This toolkit provides a set of
Automatic Term Recognition (ATR) algorithms that will be
used to determine the most relevant terms of the text-based
transcriptions [21]. We have selected the ATR algorithms
capable of recognising both single-word and multi-word terms
and that do not discard candidate terms only on the basis of
frequency. The execution of each algorithm generates an output
ﬁle that contains the recognised terms; then, these ﬁles are
processed by an automatic voting component to select the most
relevant terms. In our solution, two different strategies based
on a weighted and majority voting have been combined: ﬁrst,
a weight is assigned for each recognised term based on its
rankings and, then, the terms that received the greatest total
weighted vote are selected.
Finally, the annotation process is responsible for annotating
semantically the most relevant terms. This last stage integrates
an implementation of the ADEGA algorithm [22]. ADEGA
annotates each term by means of a RDF graph created from
those instances of the DBpedia that are relevant in the resource
domain. In our solution, the resource domain is deﬁned from
materials provided by the teachers, the guide or the slides of a
subject, in order to link the annotations of learning objects with
the context where they will be used. An RDF graph is created
for each speciﬁc term and stored into a Virtuoso database
[23]. Then, these graphs are used to classify the input learning
resources, facilitating the search and retrieval of information.
B. Application services
The service for validating the semantic annotations of the
learning objects is one of the most used application compo-
nents. The validation of annotations consists of accepting or
discarding each term that was automatically generated by the
annotation pipeline. A web application, based on the front-end
of PyBossa that allows students and teachers participate in the
validation tasks, was programmed. A PyBossa microtasking
project publishes the list of objects waiting to be validated.
Registered users can access to these objects and check if
the terms associated to a speciﬁc object correspond with its
content. A term can be accepted/discarded or new terms can be
optionally added. These decisions are then sent to the eRoDes
validation service in order to improve the object’s annotations
and update the knowledge database of the platform.
Figure 2 shows the components involved into the validation
system. A bridge component interconnects the web service
with the PyBossa core. It translates the list of unvalidated
objects returned by the service to a set of PyBossa tasks. These
tasks are JSON objects with the information that needs to be
completed by the user during the validation of annotations
process.
A new task creator has been programmed to upload these
tasks into the PyBossa core via its RESTful API. Then, these
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 2. Validation based on the PyBossa framework
tasks are presented to students and teachers through a web-
accessible interface which was previously created in a PyBossa
server. We have reused an existing template for programming
the task presenter, the module in charge of presenting the
pending tasks and submitting the user decisions to the eRoDes
framework. This presenter has been implemented in HTML
and JavaScript. Finally, from the deployment point of view, the
PyBossa server and the eRoDes framework are installed and
run in the same server. Nevertheless, the API-based integration
of services makes easier the possibility of conﬁguring a
distributed deployment.
IV.
A LEARNING-TEACHING ACTIVITY BASED ON THE
USE OF ERODES
In this section, an activity developed during 2014-15 in
the subject Design of User-Centered Interfaces, of Computer
Engineering’s Degree is presented. The activity’s objective is
to involve students in the creation of learning objects. During
the development of this work, students have to search, classify
and assess teaching resources available in the Web and the
resulting learning objects are stored in the eRoDes framework
and used for teaching the subject.
A. Phases of the activity
The phases planned for the learning-teaching activity are
shown in Figure 3. In the Initial phase, the teacher proposes
some speciﬁc topics for the learning objects. These topics,
together with the pdf document of the teaching guide of the
subject, are sent to the eRoDes framework.
The objective of the First phase is the creation of the
learning objects. At the beginning, the students are organized
in groups of three (this number may be modiﬁed depending
the class size) and a different topic is assigned to each group.
This ﬁrst phase consists of two sequential tasks: the resource
searching and the developing of guide notes. In the ﬁrst task
each student individually searches resources and materials that
could be useful to create the learning object. The teacher must
previously deﬁne the maximum number of selected resources.
Subsequently, the second task, performed in groups, involves
the assessment of the resources contributed by each member of
the group, in order to decide those materials that will be more
suitable for the creation of the learning object, and, ﬁnally,
to create it. In our proposal, a learning object consists of a
limited set of resources and guide notes that determine how
to use them for achieving the teaching objective. The guide
notes allow to know, for example, the order in which the
resources must be used, the knowledge that should be acquired
with each one, or the relationship between the content of the
different resources, among others. Finally, each group must
submit the guide notes and the selected and discarded resources
to eRoDes to be semantically annotated and stored into the
knowledge database. Besides, a short explanation to justify the
ﬁnal decision of discarding an speciﬁc resource is required.
The Second phase of the activity consists of two individual
tasks: the evaluation of guide notes and the activity assessment.
In the ﬁrst task, students must download the semantically
annotated learning objects created with eRoDes. Then, each
student must use these objects following the instructions pro-
vided by the guide notes developed by the other groups and
has to evaluate their usefulness for learning the corresponding
topic. This evaluation is based on peer review techniques. A
PyBossa project has been created to interact with eRoDes and
provides students a template to evaluate each learning object.
The template also allows students to add or delete the semantic
annotations of the downloaded resources, in order to improve
these annotations in the eRoDes system. Once the evaluation is
completed, in the assessment task students evaluate the activity
by means of a questionnaire which gathers their opinion about
their involvement in the activity, the experience of working
in group, the strengths and weaknesses of the learning object
created by their group, and about possible improvements in
the planning and development of this kind of activities.
During the two ﬁrst phases students must control the time
dedicated to the planned tasks. A time tracking report is
delivered to teacher at the end of the activity in order to know
the effort dedicated by students. However, this information
does not have inﬂuence over their ﬁnal grades. In parallel,
the teacher also evaluates the set of learning objects creating a
reference evaluation, that will be used in the following phase.
Finally, the Third phase corresponds with the grading of
the activity, in which the teacher determines the ﬁnal marks for
the work done by the students. This grading is based on the
teacher’s reference evaluation and the students’ peer review.
Besides, the teacher analyses the learning process and the
questionnaire results in order to write a ﬁnal report with the
main conclusions and an activity improvement plan.
B. Results
There were 16 students in the subject during 2014-15,
which have been organized in four groups of three persons
and two groups of two persons. The six topics selected by
the teachers were: Agile software methodologies and User
eXperience design (UX Agile), Usability evaluation, Accessi-
bility evaluation, Crowdsourcing methods, Adaptative design
and Wearable interfaces. Each student of a group must search
resources of a speciﬁc format, in order to have at least two or
three different kind of resources.
Figure 4 shows an overview of the results of this experi-
ence. The ﬁrst row represents the number of resources found
by each group after completing the searching task. The teacher
deﬁned that the maximum number of resources per student
was 6. In general, these resources were found using Google
and Google Scholar, DuckDuckGo, and YouTube, being videos
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 3. Phases of the learning activity
Figure 4. Indicators related to the development of the activity
a 30% of resources. 55% of these resources were in English
and 45% in Spanish. It must be taken into account that the
topic had inﬂuenced over the format of found resources. For
example, most of the Usability or Accessibility resources were
tools. Finally, all the groups must select 7 resources to develop
their guide notes. Once the First phase was completed, all
the guide notes and resources were submitted to eRoDes
to be semantically annotated by the framework. Figure 5
shows one of the graphs that were created to semantically
annotate a video about Crowdsourcing methods. This video is
available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-38uPkyH9vI.
The graph corresponds with the term Expertise which is a
relevant concept extracted from the contents of that video. Its
depth was limited to three levels of exploration and all types
of relations were not explored. From the computational point
of view, video annotation was the most compute-intensive
operation. For example, if the speech-to-text service provided
by the IBM Bluemix platform is invoked, the time needed to
extract the text of an audio is proportional to the input video
duration.
On the other hand, also the students’s grading and the
teachers’s grading of each group can be observed at Figure
4 in rows 6 and 7. In general, both gradings are very similar
and have been calculated from the rubric results. The aim of
this rubric is to evaluate, mainly, the suitability of the selected
resources, the usefulness of the guide notes, and the learning
level that a student could achieve using them. Besides, 7
students proposed to modify some of the resource annotations
via the PyBossa application: more speciﬁcally, the semantic
annotations of 16 resources were modiﬁed, 103 resources had
been submitted to eRoDes, and most of these changes belong
to usability and accessibility resources.
Figure 5. Graph example for the Expertise term
Finally, an overview of the time dedicated by the students
is also presented. Rows 8 and 9 show the amount of hours
individually dedicated to complete the ﬁrst and second phase,
respectively, while the hours dedicated in group to complete
the whole activity is in row 10. In some cases the times
reported by the students are below the time expected by the
teachers. For example the time dedicated by the crowdsourc-
ing, the accessibility and the wearable interfaces groups were
insufﬁcient. It is possible that some of these time trackings
were wrong, since the students are not used to monitor
their work hours. Therefore, in future activities, our rubric
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

evaluation must be improved in order to detect these situations.
From the analysis of the results obtained from the question-
naires, the students evaluation and also during the development
of the activity, some changes should be introduced in next
courses. Following, the main proposals included in the activity
improvement plan are summarized. Firstly, students must be
trained in the gathering and assessment of resources and in
the creation of guide notes. Teachers must deﬁne more precise
instructions on how to make these tasks and provide students
with meaningful feedback during the activity. An active role
of teachers will help to improve the quality of guide notes and
learning objects and, therefore, their reusability in this subject
or in other similar subjects. Secondly, all the topics proposed
to students should be equally motivating for them. And, ﬁnally,
the evaluation of learning objects and their usefulness in the
learning process must be students and teachers responsability.
Besides, for the future course teachers have decided to replace
the guide notes by a short-length video which will be created
from learning resources found by the students.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A new service-oriented framework to store and retrieval
semantic-enhanced learning objects has been presented in
this work. Its interface provides functionality to semantically
annotate learning objects from a wide variety of formats. These
annotations are automatically created from the contents of
input learning objects and are expressed as RDF based graphs
built from the DBpedia vocabulary. We selected the ADEGA
algorithm because it obtained better results for precision and
recall values than other semantic and DBpedia based annota-
tion algorithms [22]. The system also provides functionality
to validate the usefulness of these ADEGA-based annotations
from the users’ perspective. Nevertheless, the objective is
not only to support the annotation and validation of learning
objects, but also to facilitate their use in the development of
learning activities. Application services facilitate the integra-
tion of the functionality of eRoDes into different e-learning
applications.
As future work we are interested in improving the inter-
operability of eRoDes by the integration of standards for the
description, discovery and retrieval of learning objects. We will
also study the usability of our application to create new online
learning contents by means of a System Usability Scale (SUS).
On the other hand, another open challenge is to evaluate the
quality of new learning contents and validate their usefulness
in the learning and teaching process. On this regard, a ﬁrst
solution based on semantic technologies and graph algorithms
is being tested in the same subject during this course. Also, a
new eRoDes-based application able to provide feedback about
the students’ learning process is now under development.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by a grant of the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness, Projects TIN2014-
56633-C3-2-R and TIN2015-67149-C3-1-R, and the Univer-
sity of Zaragoza, Project PIIDUZ 15 175.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Dehors, C. Zucker, and R. Kuntz, “Reusing Learning Resources based
on Semantic Web Technologies,” in Proceedings of 6th International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT).
IEEE
Computer Society, 2006, pp. 859–863.
[2]
R. Farhat, B. Defude, and M. Jemni, “Towards a better understanding
of learning objects’ content,” in Proceedings of 11th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT).
IEEE
Computer Society, 2011, pp. 536–540.
[3]
H. Qing Yu, C. Pedrinaci, S. Dietze, and J. Domingue, “Using linked
data to annotate and search educational video resources for supporting
distance learning,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 5,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 130–142.
[4]
J. e. a. Jelena, “Using semantic web technologies to analyze learning
content,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 11, no. 5, 2007, pp. 45–53.
[5]
C. Nithya and K. Saravanan, “Semantic annotation and search for ed-
ucational resources supporting distance learning,” International Journal
of Engineering Trends and Technology, vol. 8, no. 6, 2014, pp. 277–285.
[6]
S. Nayyar and S. Nagadevi, “Digital library service integration of
educational videos using linked data and semantic web,” International
Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology and Security,
vol. 3, no. 2, 2013, pp. 197–201.
[7]
P. Phalle and S. Salunkhe, “Using linked data to context-aware annotate
and search educational video resources,” in Proceedings of 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Emerging Trends in Engineering and Technology
(ICETET-09), 2009, pp. 61–63.
[8]
R. Faiz, B. Smine, and J. Descl´es, “Relevant learning objects extraction
based on semantic annotation of documents,” in Proceedings of 2nd
International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics,
2012, pp. 1–11.
[9]
D. Cernea, E. Del Moral, and J. Labra-Gayo, “Soaf: Semantic indexing
system based on collaborative tagging,” Interdisciplinary Journal of E-
Learning and Learning Objects, vol. 4, no. 1, 2008, pp. 137–149.
[10]
A. Altadmri and A. Ahmed, “A framework for automatic semantic video
annotation,” Multimedia tools and applications, vol. 72, no. 2, 2014, pp.
1167–1191.
[11]
M. Uncik and M. Bielikova, “Annotating educational content by ques-
tions created by learners,” in Proceedings of 5th International Workshop
on Semantic Media Adaptation and Personalization (SMAP 2010).
IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 13–18.
[12]
I. Hsiao and P. Brusilovsky, “Modeling peer review in example anno-
tation,” in Proceedings of 16th International Conference on Computers
in Education (ICCE 2008), 2008, pp. 357–362.
[13]
“The Linking Open Data cloud diagram,” URL: http://lod-cloud.net/
[accessed: 2016-04-12].
[14]
D. Dagger, A. O’Connor, S. Lawless, E. Walsh, and V. Wade, “Service-
oriented E-learning platforms: From monolithic systems to ﬂexible
services,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. May-June, 2007, pp. 28–35.
[15]
F. Buschmann, R. Meunier, H. Rohnert, R. Sommerlad, and M. Stal, A
System of Patterns.
John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 1996.
[16]
J. Fabra, S. Hern´andez, J. Ezpeleta, and P. ´Alvarez, “Solving the
interoperability problem by means of a bus. An experience on the
integration of grid, cluster and cloud infrastructures,” Journal of Grid
Computing, vol. 12(1), 2014, pp. 41–65.
[17]
“PyBossa:
the
ultimate
crowdsourcing
framework,”
URL:
http://pybossa.com/ [accessed: 2016-04-12].
[18]
“IBM Bluemix: Create, Deploy, Manage Your applications in the cloud,”
URL: http://www.ibm.com/cloud-computing/bluemix/ [accessed: 2016-
04-11].
[19]
“Xuggle,” URL: http://www.xuggle.com/ [accessed: 2016-04-11].
[20]
“CMU Sphinx: an open source speech recognition toolkit,” URL:
http://cmusphinx.sourceforge.net/ [accessed: 2016-04-12].
[21]
Z. Zhang, J. Iria, C. Brewster, and F. Ciravegna, “A comparative
evaluation of Term Recognition Algorithms,” in Proceedings of 6th
international conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC
2008), 2008, pp. 2108–2113.
[22]
M. Lama, J. C. Vidal, E. Otero-Garc´ıa, A. Bugar´ın, and S. Barro, “Se-
mantic linking of learning object repositories to DBpedia,” Educational
Technology and Society, vol. 15, no. 4, 2012, pp. 47–61.
[23]
“Virtuoso Universal Server,” URL: http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/ [ac-
cessed: 2016-04-12].
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-474-9
ICIW 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

