A Semantically Enriched E-Tendering Mechanism 
 
Jingzhi Guo and Ka-Ieong Chan 
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau 
Av. Padre Tomás, Pereira, S.J., Taipa, Macau 
{jzguo, ma86522}@umac.mo
 
Abstract—E-tendering is widely used in corporate and 
government purchasing in e-business practice. Existing e-
tendering platforms cannot solve semantic interoperability 
problems between heterogeneous e-tendering systems. This 
paper proposes a novel semantic-enriched e-tendering (SEET) 
approach, which enables heterogeneous e-tendering systems to 
be semantically connected and interoperable by applying 
collaborative conceptualization theory. Based on this approach, 
a SEET platform is implemented and guarantees that e-tender 
inviters and e-tender bidders can exchange their e-tendering 
documents in a semantically consistent manner. 
Keywords-electronic tenderring; tender; inviter; bid, bidder; 
semantic interoperability; semantic heterogeneity; semantic 
consistency; e-tendering document; document engineering 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Tendering is an important means of procurement and is 
intensively researched in traditional business [14]. The 
paper-based method of traditional tendering has been 
common place within the industry for a significant number 
of years. Electronic tendering (or e-tendering), "in its 
simplest form, is described as the electronic publishing, 
communicating, accessing, receiving and submitting of all 
tender related information and documentation via the internet, 
replacing the traditional paper-based tender processes, and 
achieving a more efficient and effective business process for 
all parties involved" [2]. It brings the convenience, saves 
both time and money, eliminates transcription errors, and 
increases speed of bid analysis to the people. 
However, despite the apparent benefits of e-tendering, 
many companies have been slow to adopt electronic 
construction of tendering, and tender industry has not kept up 
with other industries clearly. The BCIS e-tendering survey [1] 
indicated only 13% participants adopt the web-based portal 
in e-tender while the 60% of them still use disks or other 
physical media to distribute tender documents. This 
evidenced that e-tendering is worth studying seriously. 
In e-tender industry, there are many inviters and bidders 
that seek cooperation opportunities in various tendering 
platforms, where the inviters and bidders need to use tender 
documents to exchange tendering information. E-tender 
documents are often ad hoc formatted by different e-tender 
platforms in terms of Request for Information (RFI) [16], 
Request for Tender (RFT), Request for Proposal (RFP), 
Request for Quotation (RFQ) [10], Expression of Interest 
(EOI) [15], Advanced Tender Notice (ATN) [3], and Sale 
Tender (ST). By observation, we found that the exchanged 
documents are often semantically heterogeneous and highly 
need manual processing. Firstly, most documents used in e-
tender are simply monolithic and not computer-interpretable, 
for example, e-mail attachment in Microsoft Word, scanned 
PDF or drawings in picture formats, which are only designed 
for human comprehension. Secondly, e-tender documents 
come from different platforms are not semantically 
consistent in concepts, because they are created in different 
contexts of companies and can only be locally correctly 
interpreted in their individual e-tender platforms. Semantic 
interoperability such as computer readability and computer 
understandability between different bidders and inviters of 
various e-tendering systems is key challenging issues of 
designing e-tendering systems. It require a feasible solution 
to processing inbound and outbound e-tender information. 
Despite semantic interoperability problem of existing e-
tendering platforms, many bidders still use heterogeneous e-
tender documents to send their bids to inviters. In the 
situation of unavailable semantically-enriched e-tendering 
platforms, e-tender inviters have to accept those semantically 
heterogeneous bids that cannot be digitally and automatically 
interpreted. They have to pay high cost to manually read the 
bidding documents or create new forms or schema to store 
the received tender information that are heterogeneous, so 
that they can understand the received documents. These are 
the barriers of using existing e-tendering platforms and 
urgently ask for a feasible solution to the problem.  
This paper aims to solve the above mentioned e-
tendering problem by proposing a novel SEET approach. 
This approach defines a new e-tender information structure 
and apply collaborative concepts to construct e-tender 
documents, which allow e-tendering users to exchange 
tendering information in a semantically consistent way.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the challenging research issue. Section III proposes 
a novel semantically-enriched e-tendering approach. Section 
IV discusses the related work, and finally the conclusion is 
made. 
II. DESCRIPTION OF CHALLENGING ISSUE 
Currently in industrial practice, there are at least two 
types of e-tender documents: one is the type of monolithic 
documents in plaintexts or drawings, and the other is the type 
of structured documents that are computer-readable but 
semantically heterogeneous. While believing that monolithic 
documents can be transformed to structured documents, a 
most important research issue is how an e-tendering platform 
can integrate heterogeneous e-tender document information 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

of different e-tendering systems in a semantically consistent 
manner such that semantically heterogeneous e-tender 
documents can be semantically interoperated. 
TABLE I.  BIDDER DOCUMENT XML (I) (J) 
<投標書> 
   <投標人公司> 
    <名稱>ABC</名稱> 
    <電話>886655</電話> 
    </投標人公司> 
   <投標編號>H0001</投標編號>   
    <物品A> 
      <數量>100</數量> 
      <單價>8</單價> 
      <貨幣>人民幣</貨幣> 
    </物品A> 
    <物品B> 
      …………… 
    </物品B> 
    <交付日期>2012/05/08 
    </交付日期> 
  <付款方式>現金</付款方式> 
</投標書> 
<tenro> 
< p-nome> compra de 
matéria</p-nome> 
< tel> compra de matéria</tel> 
<não>H0001</não> 
<companhia>DEF</companhia
> 
<data>2012-05-20</data> 
<paytype> numerário 
</paytype> 
<material A> 
< não >600</ não > 
<preço>8</preço> 
<Moeda>HK</Moeda> 
</material A> 
<material B>  
…………… 
</material B> 
</tenro> 
 
Consider an example illustrated in TableⅠ where Bidder 
A and Bidder B use e-tender XML schemas (I) and (J) to 
devise their e-tender documents. Respectively, an Inviter 
uses e-tender database schema (K), as shown in TableⅡ,to 
store received bidding information. It obvious that all of 
them use different languages, different terms and different 
schema structure. Thus, the inviter cannot understand the 
concepts and structures received from the bidders and it is 
hard to compare the bidders’ e-tender documents. 
TABLE II.  INVITER DATABASE SCHEMA (K) 
tender no 
company 
phone 
name 
spec 
unit 
price 
H0001 
ABC 
886655 
glass 
…. 
8 
100 
H0002 
DEF 
…. 
…. 
…. 
…. 
 
H0003 
XXX 
…. 
…. 
…. 
…. 
 
H0004 
….. 
…. 
…. 
…. 
…. 
 
 
This example shows that many bidders sending many e-
tender documents with different schemas to the inviter, and 
these e-tender document schemas and used terms are 
unknown to the inviter. It means if bidders and inviter have 
no prior collaboration for schema mapping and term 
integration, the received bidding information cannot be 
interpreted and shall have the following particular problems: 
 
 
The language-different bidding information in English, 
Chinese and Portuguese, etc. are not computer 
understandable. 
 
The meanings of different terms, such as “名稱”，
“投標編號”，“物品 A”，“數量”，“單價”
and“交付日期”from Bidder A and “p-nome”, “tel”, 
“não”, “companhia”, “data”, “paytype”, “preço” from 
Bidder B, are not understandable by the inviter though 
many terms are actually equivalent to “Company”, 
“phone” , “tenderNO”,  “name”,  “unit”, ” price”,  
“Paydate” in the inviter's database. 
 
The above problems can be summarized as a generic 
research problem of semantic interoperability of e-tendering 
systems or e-tender semantic consistency, that is, how a 
newly-designed e-tendering platform can semantically 
integrate 
heterogeneous 
e-tender 
information 
in 
a 
semantically consistent manner. 
III. APPROACH TO SEMANTIC-ENRICHED E-TENDERING  
Aiming at solving semantic interoperability problem of 
heterogeneous e-tendering systems, this paper proposes a 
novel SEET approach, which is a technical solution based on 
CONEX technology [6][7]. It provides novel methods of e-
tender document representation and transfer by applying a 
set of semantically consistent common vocabularies of some 
natural languages. It is flexible for multiple bidders to work 
with any inviter without meaning ambiguity in interpreting 
heterogeneously formed e-tender documents. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Seet Overview Design 
Figure 1 provides an overview of SEET design. This 
approach divides e-tender inviters and bidders into concept 
designers and concept users. In vocabulary system side, 
designers of inviters and bidders first define their local 
vocabularies and then map them onto common vocabularies, 
which are supplied by a special vocabulary provider. In 
document system side, designers of inviters design their own 
e-tender bid templates and publish them in SEET platform. 
When bidders bid a tendering project, they must download 
corresponding e-tender bid templates and then reify them as 
instance bidding documents for bid submission to inviter. 
SEET approach consists of the method development of 
SEET document representation and SEET document transfer. 
The former is used to create and use semantic consistent e-
tender documents by applying common vocabulary and 
LCMap (locIid, comIid) of CONEX [6][7]. The latter is a 
protocol of how an e-tender document is sent, received and 
transformed. In the rest of this section, the methods of SEET 
document representation and SEET document transfer will 
be elaborated. Meanwhile, its theoretical foundation of 
semantic consistency will also be given. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A. SEET document representation method 
 SEET document is a key media to exchange e-tender 
information. In general, many systems are designed only for 
human comprehension, but lack of computer understanding. 
In order to achieve computer understanding, SEET develops 
a document representation method that separates syntax, 
metadata and instance data in different layers by adopting 
XML Product Map (XPM) [7] to develop e-tender document 
syntax, e-tender document templates and e-tender instance 
documents. It skillfully applies the hierarchical structure of 
XPM as document syntax and the collaborative common 
terms (sign of semiotics) [6] as metadata of document and 
individual terms for document instantiation. 
XPM [7] is a sign representation language being 
composed of a set of terms (i.e., signs) in structure and 
concept (i.e., signifier and signified in semiotics [13]), which 
organizes the terms (or signs) in a hierarchy, such that: 
generic sign = (signifier, signified) = (structure, concept) 
(1) 
atomic sign = (iid, term, definition, [options]) 
(2) 
complex sign = sign0(sign1,sign2….signn) 
(3) 
XPM language can be used to directly describe a 
document or transforms a monolithic and/or non-standard 
document into a semantically readable and understandable 
document. SEET document representation by XPM can 
enable e-tender bid documents to be computer-readable and 
computer-understandable. Particularly, an XPM SEET 
document is represented in three separate layers: structure 
layer, pattern (template) layer and instance layer. By this 
representation separation, each layer can be arbitrarily 
designed and work independently.  
Structure layer. It is a document structure (i.e., syntax) 
layer, which establishes a syntax foundation of designing and 
creating personalized templates for each e-tender inviter. The 
syntax of any personalized e-tender document template is as 
the same syntax of any complex sign of Formula (2), in 
which each atomic sign of Formula (1) is a tuple such that 
atomic sign = (tid, term, [interpretation], [context]), where 
tid is a structural sign identifier, term is a word or phrase, 
[interpretation] is a definition or annotation of a term, and 
[context] is a term reference to specify a context where a 
word or phrase is defined. 
Pattern layer. It is a document template layer, which is 
based on the syntax layer and use the collaborative concepts 
(i.e., defined terms as atomic signs) of CONEX vocabulary 
[6][7] to develop personalized templates as abstract complex 
signs (Formula 3) according to the required e-tender 
information. E-tender inviters of e-tendering systems are 
responsible for defining different patterns (i.e., document 
templates) used in e-tendering systems.  
Instance layer. It is a document reification layer, which 
instantiates document templates to reified documents as 
concrete/particular complex signs (Formula 3). During 
document instantiation, users (mostly e-tender bidders) fill in 
e-tender templates with local terms that are mapped onto 
common terms of CONEX vocabularies [6][7]. Since local 
terms are different in natural languages, local reified e-tender 
documents are semantically interoperable via common terms 
between different natural languages and dialects, thus 
maintaining semantic consistency between heterogeneous 
systems. 
With the above-mentioned three layers, an e-tender 
document can be displayed in two modes: computer display 
mode and human display mode. The former is a mode of 
computer-understandable for computer to use, utilizing 
internal identifiers (IID) of atomic signs (Formula 2). It 
mainly 
handles 
computer 
processes 
when 
e-tender 
documents are transformed and stored. The latter is a mode 
of visual and human-readable. It displays e-tender 
documents in human-readable and human-understandable 
natural languages, utilizing terms of atomic signs (Formula 
2). Table III is an example of a simplified XPM file in 
computer display mode and Table IV is an example of the  
simplified XPM file in human display mode. 
TABLE III.  COMPUTER DISPLAY MODE (A SIMPLIFIED XPM FILE) 
 
TABLE IV.  HUMAN DISPLAY MODE (A SIMPLIFIED XPM FILE) 
 
 
B. SEET document transfer method 
SEET document transfer method describes how an e-
tender document is transferred from one local e-tendering 
system to another local e-tendering system, yet maintaining 
semantic consistency in the meaning of e-tender documents. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Seet Document Transfer Method 
Figure 2  illustrates the e-tender document transfer 
protocol, which guarantees that the exchanged e-tender 
documents are semantically consistent without meaning 
ambiguity. It shows the exchange process of e-tender 
document templates and reified documents between an 
inviter and possibly many bidders in different natural 
languages.  
<xpm:sign xpm:term="Requirement"> 
<xpm:sign xpm:term="Object_A"> 
 
 
<xpm:sign xpm:term="Quantity"/> 
 
<xpm:sign xpm:term="UnitPrice" /> 
  </xpm:sign> 
<xpm:sign xpm:term="Payment Date"/> 
<xpm:sign xpm:tid="21:15" xpm:refs="20017"> 
<xpm:sign xpm:tid="22:21" xpm:refs="20045"> 
      <xpm:sign xpm:tid="23:22" xpm:refs="20020"/> 
            <xpm:sign xpm:tid="24:22" xpm:refs="20021 20019" /> 
   </xpm:sign> 
 
<xpm:sign xpm:tid="39:35" xpm:refs="20023 20006"/> 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

SEET document transfer method provides an automatic 
transparent mechanism. It maintains semantic consistency of 
document information through mapping local terms of e-
tendering documents onto terms of common vocabularies 
with same internal identifiers (IID) [6]. During document 
sending in document exchange, all terms of a local e-tender 
document in local natural language will first be transformed 
to local term IDs (locIids) based on local vocabulary, and 
then transformed to common term IIDs (comIids) of 
common vocabulary based on local-to-common term 
mapping datasets of LCMAP(locIid, comIid) at sending 
company. During document receiving in document exchange, 
all terms of a common e-tender document will first be 
transformed from comIids to locIids based on LCMAP 
(locIid, comIid) at receiving company, and then transformed 
to local terms in local natural language for human 
interpretation based on local vocabularies. 
 For example, given two vocabularies and a mapping LV1 
(L_IID: 10017→name), CV1 (C_IID: 20012→name), and 
LCMAP1 (10017, 20012), and two vocabularies and a 
mapping LV2 (L_IID: 10011→名), CV2 (C_IID: 20012→名
稱), and LCMAP2 (10011, 20012), then based on a document 
transfer process of LV1 ↔ LCMAP1 ↔ LCMAP2  ↔ LV2,  
we have (10017, name) ↔ (10017, 20012) ↔ (10011, 20012)  
↔ (10011,名) such that "name" in e-tendering document 1 
of company 1 is semantically consistent with "名" in e-
tendering document of company 2 without meaning 
ambiguity in semantic understanding. 
C. Theoretical foundation of SEET approach  
SEET approach is built on a proven theoretical 
foundation of semantic consistency model of collaborative 
conceptualization theory [6], that is, structure mapability, 
concept equivalence and context commonality. 
First, common terms of common vocabularies in 
different natural languages are collaboratively designed, 
where all common terms in different natural languages share 
a same common identifier (comIid). This guarantees that any 
common vocabulary is identical in meaning interpretation 
and can be unambiguously used by local vocabulary 
designers in meaning when making local-to-common term 
mapping. It further guarantees semantic consistency between 
local terms and common terms, that it, concept equivalence. 
Second, semantic consistency is not only maintained in 
single local-to-common term mapping but also in e-tendering 
document templates. This owes to the generic XPM language 
that is used to design e-tendering document templates such 
that all e-tendering document templates are designed by e-
tendering inviters. E-tendering bidders only apply the e-
tendering document templates to reify the templates to 
produce instance e-tendering documents. This guarantees 
that all e-tendering document processing structures are the 
same, that is, structure mapability onto a same hierarchy of 
sign IDs for executables to have same execution effects in 
computing. 
Third, collaborative common term design, local-to-
common term mapping and common e-tendering document 
templates provide a common context for all natural 
language-different e-tendering systems. Such common 
context guarantees that all meaning interpretations on all 
local receiving e-tendering documents by the receivers are 
exactly the same as the meaning interpretations on all local 
sending e-tendering documents by the senders. 
Following semantic consistency model of CONEX, any 
local e-tendering document of one e-tendering system can be 
semantically represented and transferred to another e-
tendering system for local interpretation without the loss of 
the original meaning. 
IV. SEET COLLABORATION PLATFORM 
Based on the SEET approach designed above, this 
section implements the SEET platform illustrated in Figure 3, 
which consists of a layer of user web-interface and a layer of 
concept collaboration.  
 
Figure 3.  SEET Collaboration platform 
A. Layer of User Web-Interface 
The layer of user web-interface consists of concept editor 
and e-tender manager. 
Concept Editor. It consists of a common concept editor 
(CCE) and a local concept editor (LCE). The former is 
engaged in designing common terms of the corresponding 
common vocabulary (common VOC). The latter is 
responsible for designing local terms for local vocabulary 
(local VOC) and builds local-to-common maps (Common-
Local MAP). 
E-tender Manager (ETM). It consists of document 
manager and tender project manager. The former controls the 
document representation and e-tender process. The latter 
manages tender project for users to be easy to read e-
tendering document and observe e-tender project status. 
B. Layer of Concept Collaboration 
The layer of concept collaboration consists of many local 
vocabularies, many common vocabularies, local-to-common 
mapping repository and concept transformer. 
Local Vocabulary (local VOC or LV). It is designed for a 
company to record its local term information. It is composed 
of local concepts written in XPM and structured in a triple, 
such that: 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

LVXPM = (locIid, AN, FC) 
(4) 
where “locIid” is a unique identifier of a local concept. 
“AN” is the definition of the locIid-ed concept. “FC” is a 
formal concept in the form of a word or a phrase that is 
defined by AN and is readable and understandable by 
human. 
Common Vocabulary (common VOC or CV): It is 
designed for a natural language to record its common term 
information universal to all natural languages. It is formatted 
in XPM and structured in a triple, such that: 
CVXPM = (comIid, AN, FC)LANG 
(5) 
where "comIid" is a unique internal identifier of a common 
concept. “LANG” indicates that AN and FC are written in 
natural language of LANG. 
Common-Local Map repository (Common-Local MAP or 
CLM): It stores local-to-common mapping results that is 
created by local users on local concept editor. It is formatted 
in XPM and structured in a couple, such that: 
CLMXPM = (LocIid, ComIid) 
(6) 
where LocIid is semantically equivalent to ComIid. 
Concept transformer (CT): It implements the SEET 
document transfer method that transforms one local e-tender 
document of one e-tendering system to another local e-tender 
document of another e-tendering system without losing 
semantic consistency. 
The implementation of SEET platform assures that any 
local e-tender bids can be submitted to a corresponding e-
tender inviter for semantically consistent interpretation 
without semantic ambiguity. 
V. FEATURES OF SEET PLATFORM 
SEET platform presents some important features 
comparing with traditional paper-based tendering systems 
and existing e-tender websites. These features are 
information integration, flexibility, availability, semantic 
unambiguity, compatibility, extensibility and maintainability, 
which are shown in Table V. 
TABLE V.  COMPARISON OF PAPER BASE, E-TENDER BOX AND SEET  
Features 
Paper base 
e-tender Box [4] 
SEET 
Main Technology 
Paper base 
Doc, xml, pdf 
XPM 
Information Integration 
none 
part 
whole 
Flexibility 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Cost 
Low 
High 
Medium 
Semantic unambiguity 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Compatibility 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Expansibility 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Maintainability 
Low 
Medium 
High 
 
SEET platform can provide these features because SEET 
approach is designed on a generic method of document 
structuring and term collaborative editing. Firstly, SEET 
focus on the capability of maintaining semantic consistency 
above e-tendering platform. It bases on CONEX technology 
to effectively solve two specific problems. (a) Natural 
language problem: many bidders and many inviters are 
located in different countries and regions and adopt different 
natural languages for bidding and invitation in e-tenders. (b) 
Inconsistent interpretation problem: inviters and bidders 
interpret incoming tendering documents differently from the 
interpretation of the document originators.  
Second, SEET platform emphasizes on semantic 
unambiguity and flexibility features for both bidders and 
inviters such that they share same meaning for a same yet 
differently represented document. For a concept-same e-
tendering document, it can be feasibly represented as 
heterogeneous documents in both forms and terms. 
Architecturally speaking in design, it clearly separates 
document syntax from document templates and separates 
document templates from document instance. By this 
separation, e-tendering documents are easy to be maintained, 
extended, and be compatible with existing language-different 
documents. 
Third, SEET platform pays high attention on contexts. It 
represents e-tendering documents in two modes of computer 
display and human display. This allows contextual 
interpretation of e-tendering documents in heterogeneous 
contexts or system environments and increases compatibility 
of e-tendering documents in different companies. 
VI. RELATED WORK 
A. Electronic Tendering 
Tendering has been gradually transformed from paper-
based tendering into electronic tendering. Companies of 
many countries have already made many efforts of building a 
lot 
of 
e-tendering 
platforms 
on 
Web 
(e.g., 
tenders.nsw.gov.au, 
unitender.com, 
and 
electronictender.com). However, existing e-tender platforms 
are far more than perfect. Most e-tendering systems 
combines drawings and PDF files with computer-readable 
documents. Some provide online tendering information to 
bidders together with terms and conditions. For example, e-
Tender Box (ETB) [4] provides online services for suppliers 
to view tender notices, standard terms and conditions for 
tenders arranged by Government Logistics Department 
(GLD) as well as contract award notices of the bureau and 
departments of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region Government.  
Research on e-tendering focuses on interoperability 
among heterogeneous distributed e-tendering systems. 
Interoperability issue can be divided into sub-issues of 
mapping different e-tender database schemas, intelligent 
integration of e-tendering information, and electronic 
document exchange among different parties [9]. In another 
classification, e-tender interoperability problem can be 
discussed by the aspects of technical interoperability (refers 
to the ability to connect system by defining standard 
protocols and data formats), semantic interoperability (refers 
to the exchange of information in an understandable way 
within and across organizational borders), and organizational 
interoperability (refers to enabling processes to cooperate) 
[11]. Amongst these aspects, semantic interoperability is 
most challenging. 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

B. Semantic Interoperability 
Semantic 
interoperability 
between 
distributed 
heterogeneous systems is one of the most important research 
problems in research areas of database, semantic web and 
electronic commerce. Earlier researches focus on the work in 
heterogeneous database systems (Kashyap and Sheth [8]), 
workflows and service oriented architectures (Nagarajan et al 
[12]). They explore approaches to heterogeneous database 
schemas integration and techniques of XML schema 
mediation (Gomadam et al [5]). Nevertheless, since 
information sources for mediation are mostly created and run 
in different contexts, predefined mediation rules cannot 
cover all heterogeneous source information, particularly the 
information created after the making of mediation rules. This 
leads to semantic conflicts between context-different 
distributed systems. 
Collaborative concept exchange (CONEX) [6][7] is an 
approach to collaborative conceptualization of heterogeneous 
concepts of disparate information sources for consistent 
semantic interoperation. It introduces collaborative editing of 
heterogeneous concepts of different systems as the core 
methodology of resolving semantic conflicts. There are 
advantages of applying CONEX in designing e-tendering 
platform. It can inherit the key feature of semantic 
consistency between documents from CONEX approach. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper has proposed a novel SEET approach to 
solving a challenging issue of semantic interoperability for e-
tendering 
document 
exchange 
between 
semantically 
heterogeneous e-tendering systems, which consist of e-tender 
inviters and e-tender bidders who are located in different 
countries and regions and write e-tendering documents in 
different natural languages. SEET approach enables semantic 
interoperability by integrating heterogeneous e-tendering 
systems of e-tender inviters and e-tender bidders through 
novel SEET methods of e-tendering document representation 
and transfer based on the theory of collaborative 
conceptualization [6]. E-tendering document representation 
method has applied XML Product Map (XPM) to develop e-
tender document universal syntax and utilize collaboratively 
designed common terms of CONEX [7] to build 
semantically consistent mapping between common terms and 
local terms and to construct e-tender document templates.  E-
tendering document transfer method has built a document 
transfer protocol that guarantees that any exchanged 
document is semantically consistent between document 
sender and document receiver. Based on SEET approach, the 
implemented SEET platform has several good features, such 
as semantic unambiguity, flexibility and compatibility, 
comparing with paper-based tendering systems and existing 
Web-based e-tendering platforms. 
Contributions made in this paper are: (1) applied 
collaborative conceptualization theory to design semantically 
consistent e-tendering systems, (2) proposed a SEET design 
approach, (3) implemented a SEET platform of e-tendering 
systems. 
SEET approach in this paper is still evolving. In future, 
more stringent work will be provided in the aspects of 
business model development of e-tendering, technical 
implementation of various patterns of e-tendering process, 
and evaluation matrix development on various e-tendering 
routine processes.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research work reported in this paper has been 
partially supported by University of Macau Research 
Committee research grant number MYRG069(Y2-L2)-
FST12-GJZ. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] BCIS, "2009 e-Tendering Survey Report," RICS, 2009. 
[2] S. Christensen and W. Duncan, "Maintaining the integraity of 
electronic tendering - reflections on the capacity of the Australian 
legal framework to meet this challenge," eLaw Journal, Murdoch 
University Electronic Journal of Law, 13(2) , 2006, pp. 8-36. 
[3] Deirdre, "MIA Consulting Services. Using Advanced Tender 
Notices," 
MIA 
Consulting 
Services. 
20/10/2011. 
http://www.miaconsultingservices.com.au/using-advanced-tender-
notices. 
[4] E-tender box, "Government Logistics Department (GLD)," Hong 
Kong. http://www.gldpcms.gov.hk. Access on 3rd Jun 2012. 
[5] K. Gomadam, A. Ranabahu, L. Ramaswamy, A. Sheth and K. Verma, 
"Mediatability: Estimating the degree of human involvement in xml 
schema mediation," in: Proc. ICSC, 2008, pp. 394–401. 
[6] J. Guo, "Collaborative Conceptualization: Towards a Conceptual 
Foundation of Interoperable Electronic Product Catalogue System 
Design," Enterprise Information Systems 3(1), 2009, pp.423-438. 
[7] J. Guo, "Collaborative Concept Exchange," VDM Publishing, 
Germany, 2008. 
[8] V. Kashyap and A. Sheth, "Semantic and schematic similarities 
between database objects: A context-based approach," VLDB J., 5(4), 
1996, pp. 276–304. 
[9] A. Kayed and R. Colomb, Infrastructure for Electronic Tendering 
Interoperability, 1999, doi:10.1.1.22.4237. 
[10] S. Mhay and C. Coburn, "Request for...Procurement Processes (RFT 
RFQ 
RFP 
RFI)," 
The 
Negotiation 
Experts. 
http://www.negotiations.com/articles/procurement-terms/. 
[11] A. Mondorf and M. Wimmer, "Interoperability in e-Tendering: The 
Case of the Virtual Company Dossier," In: Proc. ICEGOV 2008, 
ACM Press, 2008, pp. 110-115. 
[12] M. Nagarajan, K. Verma, A. Sheth, and J. Miller, "Ontology driven 
data mediation in web services," Int. J. Web Service Res., 4(4), 2007, 
pp. 104–126. 
[13] F. Saussure, "Course in General Linguistics", Open Court Publishing 
Co., Chicago, 1986. 
[14] C. Thorpe and J. Bailey, "Commercial contracts, A practical guide to 
deals, contracts, agreements and promises", Woodhead, Cambridge 
England, 1996. 
[15] UN 
Procurement 
Division, 
"Expression 
of 
Interest". 
http://www.un.org/Depts/ptd/eoi.htm. 
[16] Walmart, 
"Request 
for 
Information". 
http://media.npr.org/assets/blogs/health/images/2011/11/Walmartheal
thpartnerships.pdf. 
 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

