An Eye Tracking Study of the Visual Behavior of Children in Social Interaction
Emad Bataineh
College of Technological Innovation
Zayed University
Dubai, UAE
e-mail: Emad.Bataineh@zu.ac.ae
Basel Almourad
College of Technological Innovation
Zayed University
Dubai, UAE
e-mail: Basel.Almourad@zu.ac.ae
Abstract— The paper presents an eye tracking analysis study
to help us understand the visual behavior and pattern of
normal developing children and autistic children while viewing
a socially rich stimulus consisting of human and social
interactions, as well as the factors that influence their
behavior. Eye tracking is a technology that allows the
assessment of one’s spontaneous visual attention and eye gaze
preference and pattern. An eye tracking experiment consists of
displaying different images with social stimuli (containing
human faces) to the child. The eye tracker captures and tracks
the child’s eye gaze movements, then analyzes the data to
identify where specifically in the stimulus is the child looking
at. Sixty-four participants (normal and autistic) were divided
into two groups. The participants were asked to view a socially
rich information stimulus for a limited and set time. Based on
the data analysis conducted in the study, the findings show a
significant difference between the two groups viewing patterns
and behavior when the subjects were presented with a scene
included material with human and social interaction content.
The study also reveals that a large percentage of autistic
participants expressed minimum interest and time looking at
the face area, evident by a significant time spent fixating on
non-face regions. This is linked to a lack of interest in socially
relevant information, especially the two small areas of interest
which are the eyes and the mouth regions, when compared to
the normal developing children. The results can be used to help
improve the life style of other children who have a potential to
develop autism as well as discover earlier signs of autism
spectrum disorder.
Keywords-
Autism
Spectrum
Disorder;
Eye
Tracking;
Socially relevant information; Visual behavior.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Autism
Spectrum
Disorder
(ASD)
is
a
neurodevelopmental condition defined by impairments in
reciprocal
social-emotional
interaction
and
non-verbal
communication, alongside with restrictive/repetitive patterns
of behavior [1]. Research shows that early diagnosis of ASD
enhances
the
possibility
of
improving
psychosocial
functioning
in
the
following
developmental
years.
Furthermore, recent experiments have proved that eye
movements and reactions to verbal/visual cues can be used to
identify signs of ASD, through an eye tracking software,
allowing an early diagnosis.
An eye-tracker is a software system that allows the
assessment of one’s spontaneous attention and eye gaze
preference [2]. In other words, it tracks and captures what
the users are looking at. One of the most common signs of
ASD is the specific patterns of eye movements and reactions
to verbal and non-verbal cues. That is why, in the recent
years, many medical researchers turned to eye tracking
techniques, as they have the potential to characterize ASD
non-invasively
and
does
not
require
advanced
motor
responses or language when studying young children and
infants [3]-[8].
This research aims to utilize the eye tracking technology
combining different stimuli (pictures, films, interpersonal
and social interactions) and enlarging computational and
analytical capabilities in terms of results – i.e. gaze readings
and plots, heat maps, bee swarm. In collaboration with Dubai
Autism Centre and other UAE national autism related
centers, we have used eye tracking technology in an
experimental group and in a control group, aiming to
significantly contribute to early ASD diagnosis in UAE and
worldwide. The findings may be used to help improve the
life of other children who have a potential to develop autism.
Furthermore, the research will aid in an earlier diagnosis
through an experiment that involves analysis of a child’s
gaze with an eye-tracker system. The paper is organized as
follows: Section 1 presents a broad overview of previous
research studies related to ASD and eye tracking technology;
Section 2 describes the research motivation and objectives,
Section 3 outlines the research methodology; Section 4
presents the data analysis and results; Section 5 discusses the
results and findings; and Section 6 presents the conclusion
and future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
ASD is a neurodevelopmental condition characterized by
impaired social interaction, problems with verbal and non-
verbal communication,
unusual, repetitive, or
severely
limited activities and interests [9]. The number of children
being diagnosed with ASD in the US has risen by 23% since
2009, with one in 88 children affected, according to a report
from the US Centre for Disease Control and Prevention [9].
The number of children with ASD in the UK has also
risen by twelve-fold in the past 30 years and may be 50%
higher than previously suspected, according to a report by
the Autism Research Centre at Cambridge University [2]. In
the UAE, the head of the community service unit, Dubai
Autism Centre [10][11] reported that the UAE is heading in
the same direction and autism is on the rise. She also
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

mentioned that Dubai and Abu-Dhabi centers are not coping
with the large numbers and several hundreds of patients are
on waiting lists. Symptoms are present since early childhood,
but the complex nature of this disorder, coupled with a lack
of biologic markers for diagnosis and changes in clinical
definitions over time, create challenges in monitoring the
prevalence
of
ASD.
Furthermore,
the
evaluation
of
symptoms involves a multi-disciplinary team of doctors
including a pediatrician, a psychologist, a speech and
language pathologist, and an occupational therapist.
Fortunately, it is widely reported that early detection is
essential for early treatment and symptoms’ control and that
is why, in recent years, a large number of medical
researchers are investigating early symptoms of autism
[12][13]. However, most of the research undertaken by
medical researchers were not comprehensive, considering
only a few aspects of the problem and did not go into deep
computational analysis of the data and videotapes recorded
on the behavior of early aged children who were later
diagnosed with autism. Eye tracking research plays a key
role in understanding how individuals view and perceive the
world around them. The scientific study of human eye
movements provides an insight into the cognitive thought
processes and has been established in research domains such
as developmental psychology, psycholinguistics, reading
research and HCI [14].
Eye tracking is an advanced technology that uses high
precision to measure exactly where a user is looking and for
how long. It is used to study the relationships between eye
movement data and cognitive activity of the user. Frequency
of fixations and duration of fixations are two important
factors used to decide different aspects of the quality of
screen contents. Eye movements are tracked and classified
using various significant indicators of ocular behaviors,
namely fixations, saccades, pupil dilation, and scan paths [9].
Eye fixations are considered the most relevant indicator for
evaluating information acquisition and processing in online
search and visualization environment [15]. Fixations are
defined as spatially stable gaze which last for approximately
200-300 milliseconds during which visual attention is
directed to a specific area of content display [16].
III.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
Eye tracking technology has been used in many autism
studies [4]-[8]. The research in [8] found no differences
between gaze behaviors of children with autism and their age
and IQ-matched typically developing peers when viewing
cartoon like scenes that include a human figure. The research
in [4]-[6] contradicted with [7] result as both research studies
reported that individuals with autism fixated less on the eye
region and more on the mouth, body, and object regions than
individuals in the comparison group.
The aim of our research is to exploit the eye tracking
technology by analyzing and comparing autistic and normal
developing children gaze patterns while viewing a human
and social interaction rich material. We have used and
combined different stimuli with four still images, each one
involving a human and social interaction situation including
children and adults, both male and female. The eye tracking
technology has significantly improved over the last decade.
Our research subjects are based in the Gulf Area and they are
a mixture of Emirati and expatriate children. The purpose of
this paper is to present the initial study findings and compare
it with the previous studies. We have used four different
social scenes (each has socially relevant information and
human interaction). The long term objective of the project is
to design and develop an eye-tracker-based computing model
that aims to contribute to early ASD diagnosis. The
immediate aim of this research is to address the following
research questions:

How
do
autistic
children
(AC)
and
normal
developing children (NDC) eye movement visual
patterns differ when processing human faces in a
socially rich context?

What is the first area of the face for the eye gaze
fixation of AC and NDC that grab their attention
when presented with human and social interaction
image situation?

How fast (fixation time) NDC and AC groups spot
the face region?

Are areas of interest in fixating gaze different
between NDC and AC (eye, mouth, ears, body, and
off zones)?

Within the AC group, what are the preferred areas
of fixation on a face/person? (duration time).
IV.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
A.
Participants
Sixty-five children (34 autistic children and 31 normal
developing children) participated in this study. The average
age of participants was eight years old (max=16 and min =
4). The gender representation is (73%) females and (27%)
males.
The
participants
come
from
different
groups,
Expatriates (60%) and Emirati nationals (40%) and come
from families with different ethnic background and various
social and economic classes.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 1. Participants’ demographic information and background.
In terms of schooling system, 72% go to a regular school
(inclusive education system) and (28%) go to special needs
schools. Most participants (80%) come from small to mid-
size families, almost (70%) of children parents’ age between
30 to 50 years old.
Participants were selected from three
different Emirates: Dubai, Sharjah and Abu Dhabi. All
participants’ parents signed a consent form stating the
purpose of the study, risks involved, confidentiality and their
rights as study participants. See Figure 1 for the details of the
participants’ demographic and background information.
B.
Materials and Tasks
An eye tracking experiment was designed using a Tobii
studio environment which consists of a stimulus with four
still images each one involving a human and social
interaction situations including children and adults and both
male and female, as represented in Figure 2. The focus of
this research was to study and analyze the eye gaze pattern
and visual behavior of autistic and normal developing
children while viewing these images. On each image, we
created three areas of interest (AOIs) namely: full human
face, mouth and eyes, which are the focus of human, and
social interactions.
C.
Procedure
The experiment started with the moderator explaining the
main purpose of the study. An unobtrusive eye-tracking
mobile technology and system was used in the experiment,
Figure 2. A stimulus involves human and social interaction.
mobile Tobi X2 model, to collect the eye movement data of
the children participants. The mobile eye tracker provides the
researchers with the flexibility to set up the experiment
anywhere off campus, such as homes, schools, and special
needs centers to meet the situational needs of the children
participants. The eye tracker was calibrated for each
participant by the test moderator before the test and collected
data covering all the tasks during the experiment, as
demonstrated by Figure 3. The experiment consisted of three
sections. The three sections of the experiment and type of
data collected from each section are outlined and described
in Table I. Due to space limitations, this paper will discuss
the results from Test 1 only.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

TABLE I. COLLECTION OF TESTS USED IN THE STUDY
Studio software version 3.6 was used to record all eye
tracking data for later data visualization and data analysis.
This experiment requires the participants to look at a picture
(face, banana, football and tomato). During this time, the eye
tracker will trace the child’s eye gaze, analyzing where
specifically the child looks at in the picture. As so, the child
only needs to be seated at the computer looking at the
different pictures (and can be accompanied by a parent if
necessary).
The
length
of
the
experiment
will
take
approximately between 20 to 30 minutes. For each test, the
participant must also complete an eye tracking calibration, so
a total of 3 calibrations per experiment/participant are
needed.
Figure 3. Experiment environment.
The
experiment
was
conducted
in
a
controlled
environment as throughout the study. The participants had
control of their environment, allowing them to click and to
continue to the next stimulus. Once the test session was
completed,
the
participants
were
thanked
for
their
participation. At the end of the 3rd test, the parents of the
participants were asked to answer 12 demographic, social,
financial, educational level, and physical health status
questions related to them and their child (questions are not
discussed in this paper).
For convenience, the questions
were presented on the screen in both languages Arabic and
English, whereby parents choose their preferred language.
The experiment was conducted and eye tracking data were
collect between November 2016 and September 2016.
V.
DATA ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we analyze and discuss the visual
behavior of autistic and normal developing children when
the stimulus contains four still images each one involving a
human and social interaction situation including children and
adults and both males and females (see Fig 1.). We will
discuss and analyze the gaze behavior when the stimulus
contained all images. We will then discuss the gaze behavior
when the stimulus contained the human’s face only. Within
the human’s face, we have defined three areas of interest
(AOI) which includes the full face, face-eyes and face-
mouth. Various metrics are used to analyze the difference in
the behaviors between the two groups. As mentioned before,
we refer to Autistic Participants as AP and Normal
Developing Participants as NDC. The collected eye tracking
data
were
analyzed
using
three
data
analysis
and
visualization tools to understand and describe the children’s
visual and eye gaze behavior.
A.
Eye Gaze Analysis
The analysis of eye gaze behavior has been used in this
research. Gaze plots showing location, order, time spent
looking (fixation time) at different areas (zones) on the
stimulus are mostly used for a single eye tracking participant
looking at a fixed and dynamic content. It contains a
sequence of numbered circles, each one representing a point
that the children’s eyes fixated on; the larger the circle, the
longer the fixation. The numbers represent the order in which
children look at various items (areas) on the stimulus that
involves human and social interaction used to study. Social
interaction stimulus consists of mainly human faces, marked
by the two most important areas, namely mouth and eyes.
Eye gaze indicates the level of visual activity taking place on
certain areas, especially the face area which is the focus of
the human and social interaction. It is assumed that more
visual activity means higher interest and less visual activity
indicates less interest in the content.
Sections
Instrument used for data collection
Test 1
Eye tracking test to collect quantitative data while
viewing tasks in a sequence of static colored stimuli
created by authors
Test 2
Eye tracking test to collect quantitative data while
viewing a sequence of 28 static black and white
stimuli used in a previous research study in UK
Test 3
Eye tracking test to collect quantitative data while
viewing a sequence of static black and white
dynamic stimuli used in a previous research study in
the US. Each stimulus expressed a different emotion,
followed by a question to determine the type of
emotion presented in the motion stimulus
Post -test
Questionnaire
To collect qualitative data on the participants’
demographics, social status and their physical
conditions
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Intensive visual attention (20 fixations most of them
on face area)
Moderate visual attention (14 out of 18 fixations on
face area)
Low visual behavior (9 fixations on face area)
Low visual attention (2 out of 10 fixations on face
area)
Extremely low visual attention (1 out of 10 fixations
on face area)
No visual attention (0 out of 15 fixations on face area)
Figures 4a and 4b. Eye gaze behavior for normal developing children group vs. autistic children group.
An interesting result has been revealed from the scenes
that involve human and social interactions between two or
more individuals, including children. It was clear that more
visual activity and eye gaze fixations are on areas that are
relevant to human interaction, such as the face represented
by the eyes and mouths. Normal developing children
expressed very high interest in looking and spending more
fixation time at the human face, which is the core element for
human social interaction. Even within the normal group,
there were different levels of fixation intensity on the face
area. It ranged from highly intensive fixation, which
demonstrated strong interest, to minimum fixation, which
indicated low interest in social interaction, as depicted in
Figures 4a and 4b. On the other hand, Autistic children have
expressed minimal interest in looking at the human face as a
result
have
much
lower
fixations
with
extremely
no
fixations, as indicated by the Figures 4a and 4b. The interest
was measured in how many fixation points resulted from the
eye gaze behavior spent looking at various images involving
human and social interaction.
It is worth noting that this
pattern of visual attention is evident in all four images
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

regardless of ages and genders of the persons in the picture.
The results indicate that autistic children avoid looking at the
human faces, including mouth and eyes.
B.
Heat Maps Analysis
Heat maps show how the viewing and looking is
distributed over the given stimulus. Heat maps are a
visualization tool that can effectively reveal the focus (hot
spots) of visual attention and viewing behavior for a group of
participants. Children’s visual attention to socially relevant
information stimulus can be represented with heat maps.
Four heat maps are presented for each group, see Figures 5a
and 5b. Figures 5a and 5b show the heatmap analysis with
the hot spot and fixation areas and patterns on the social
interaction stimulus for the Normal Developing group and
Autistic group. There are 11 different human faces presented
on the social stimulus, which include 3 girl faces, 4 boy
faces, one man face and 3 women faces.
The heat maps show that the
two boy faces looking
sideways did not receive any visual attention from both
groups. A close look at the heat maps in Figure 5a shows
what areas of the stimulus attracted children’s attention
during the entire time that they viewed the content.
The
results in Figure 5a reveal that the Normal Developing
Children group was more visually engaged (they tended to
spend more time looking at the eyes) with the social content,
especially at the human faces compared to the Autistic
group. The finding indicates that the majority of ND children
focused their visual attention on the eyes of the human face.
Figure 5b exhibits more fixation activities on areas away
from the faces. Autistic children tended to spend more time
looking at areas other than the eye regions. This visual
behavior demonstrate that autistic children lack interest in
looking at socially relevant information represented by the
human eyes, evident by the time spent fixating mostly on the
mouth region.
Figure 5a. Heat maps of visual attention for the NDC group.
Figure 5b. Heat maps of visual attention for AC group.
C.
Descriptive Statistical Data Analysis
Eye movement analysis was conducted in the study to
analyze the children’s visual attention. The average total
viewing time (fixation duration) and the average number of
fixations in each social image were calculated and compared
across the two groups. Statistical analysis tools using AOIs
and various metrics data, like time for first fixation, no. of
fixations, fixation duration on specific content area, no. of
visits, etc. were used to measure the child dwelling time and
decision-making behavior activities. To quantify visual
fixations, four regions of interest (eye, mouth, face and non-
face) were created. The areas of interest (AOIs) were defined
on the stimulus and include all human faces for all people
shown on the human and social interaction image. For this
research, we use five different metrics. The types of metrics
and their meaning and description are outlined in Table II.
A minimal difference was found in the time taken by the
AC and NDC groups to have their first fixation on all human
face regions. The average mean time for the first fixation
looking at any of the faces, all combined for the AC group
TABLE II. LIST OF METRICS USED IN THE STATISTICAL
ANALYSIS.
Metric name
Meaning/Description
Time to First
Fixation
This metric measure how long it takes before a
participant fixates on an AOI or object for the first
time.
Total Fixation
Duration
Mean
This metric measures the sum of the duration for
all fixations within an AOI or object
Visit Counts
Mean
A visit is defined as the time interval between the
first fixation on the active AOI and the end of the
last fixation within the same active AOI (Area of
Interest)
Total Visits
Duration
Mean
Total visit duration is defined as the sum of visit
durations of an active AOI
Percentage
Fixated Mean
This metric measures the number of recordings in
which participants have fixated at least once within
the AOI and expresses it as a fraction of the total
number of recordings
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Normal Developing Children
Autistic Children
Figures 6a and 6b. Metrics analysis for normal developing children group vs. autistic children group.
was 2.28 sec whilst it was 2.15 sec for the NDC group. It
indicates that, on average, there was an 0.13 second delay in
the first fixation by the AP group. Another interesting
observation, the first face among the 11 faces that grabbed
the attention of the NDC group was a boy face with 0.35 sec.
mean time to first fixation, while the AP group got fixated
first at a girl face with average of first fixation time 0.90 sec
(see Figures 6a and 6b). It means that there are more boys in
the NDC group than the AP and vice versa. Another area of
minimal difference is that the NDC group expressed slightly
more interest in looking at all faces combined than the AC
group, as demonstrated by the mean total fixation duration
time 0.34 sec vs. 0.30 sec (Figures 6a and 6b).
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

In addition, the NDC group made on average more
fixations on human faces compared to the AC group. The
average fixation counts were 1.34 fixations for the NDC
group vs. 1.28 for the AC group (see Figures 5a and 5b).
These results support the fact that NDC children expressed
more interest in looking at human faces than the AC
children, within a social context.
The number of visits to
human face AOIs were also analyzed. The results show no
significant difference in the average of visits counts on all
faces for both groups, with an average of 1.22 visits for NDC
and 1.21 visits for AC children.
The percentage of
participants of both groups who had at least one fixation
within the faces regions were also analyzed. A significant
difference was noticed between the two groups. The results
show that 30% of the NDC children got fixated at least once
on one of the human faces comparing to only 14% of the AC
children (see Figures 5a and 5b). This indicates that even
though there is a small difference in average fixations
duration on human faces combined between the two groups,
the interest among the NDC group is almost twice that of the
AC group. It also means that a large percentage of the AC
children were not attracted and did not pay any attention to
the human faces in the social stimulus, and that is linked to a
lack of interest in socially relevant information, especially
the face and, more specifically, the eyes.
V.
CONCLUSION
The paper presents a research analysis study using eye
tracking technology in ASD diagnosis which, is the first of
its kind in the region. The aim of the study was to help us
understand the visual behavior and pattern of Normal
Developing children and Autistic children while viewing a
static social stimulus consisting of human and social
interaction. Eye tracking was employed to record children’s
visual attention. An eye tracking experiment was designed
and conducted using social interaction content (human faces)
to collect an eye tracking data on children’s visual behavior.
Sixty-four participants (normal and autistic) were divided
into two groups. The participants were asked to view a static
stimulus for a limited and set time.
Based on the data analysis conducted in the study, the
finding shows a significant difference between the two
groups (NDC vs. AC) viewing patterns and behavior when
presented with a situation including material with human and
social interaction content. The study reveals that a large
percentage of autistic participants expressed
minimum
interest and time viewing the face area, especially the two
Areas of Interests (AOIs) eyes and mouth regions comparing
to the normal developing children. The findings revealed a
significant difference between the two groups which is in
line with the research results found in [4][6]. Autistic
children fixate less on eyes (strong tendency to avoid
fixation on the eyes) and expressed more interest in looking
at the mouth than the normal developing children. The
finding of this study is in line with the majority of
international eye tracking studies indicating that individuals
with ASD exhibited decreased visual attention to social
stimuli relative to NDC. The results also provide quantitative
assessment of how children with potential ASD process
facial regions information when presented with socially rich
context.
The study also provided practical evidences with respect
to the speed of human face visual scanning and recognition.
It appears that autistic children need more time to recognize
and process facial and social information compared to
normal developing children. The findings can be used to help
improve the life style of other children who have a potential
to develop autism as well as earlier ASD diagnosis. As future
research, the results from the study can be used to develop an
eye tracking-based framework to assist specialists to look for
some early signs of potential children with ASD. As a future
work, it would be worth pursuing to include other facial
expression data such as human emotions in the data
collection and analysis to investigate their impact on the
children’s’ visual behavioral patterns in a social context that
were not addressed by this study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Zayed
University
Incentive Grant No. UL1RR024982. We would like to thank
all the children, parents and RAs (Shaikha, Deena, Hessa,
and Tania) who have ensured that accurate eye tracking data
was collected.
Finally, we give our thanks all the local
special needs centers who provided the opportunity to meet
with children and parents.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Susac, A. Bubic, J. Kaponja, M. Planinic, and M. Palmovic, "Eye
Movements Reveal Students' strategies in Simple Equation Solving,"
Int. Jrnl. of Science & Mathematics Education, vol. 12, pp. 555-577,
2014.
[2]
L. Speer, A. Cook, W McMahon, and E. Clark, "Face processing in
children with autism: effects of stimulus contents and type," Autism :
the international journal of research and practice, vol. 11, May 2007.
[3]
A. Rizvi, “Autism being wrongly diagnosed,” Sep. 2017.
[4]
K. Rayner, "Eye movements in reading and information processing:
20 years of research," Psychological bulletin, vol. 124, pp. 372-422,
Nov. 1998.
[5]
K. Rayner, "Eye movements in reading and information processing,"
Psychological bulletin, vol. 85, pp. 618-660, May 1978.
[6]
K. Pelphrey et al., "Visual scanning of faces in autism," Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, vol. 32, pp. 249-261, Aug.
2002.
[7]
B. Pan et al., "The Determinants of Web Page Viewing Behavior: An
Eye-tracking Study," , New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 147–154.
[8]
A. Klin, D. Lin, P. Gorrindo, G. Ramsay, and W. Jones, "Two-year-
olds with autism orient to nonsocial contingencies rather than
biological motion," Nature, vol. 459, pp. 257-261, 2009.
[9]
A. Klin, W. Jones, R. Schultz, F. Volkmar, and D. Cohen, "Visual
fixation patterns during viewing of naturalistic social situations as
predictors of social competence in individuals with autism," Archives
of General Psychiatry, vol. 59, Sep. 2002.
[10] J. Geest, C. Kemner, G. Camfferman, M.
Verbaten, and H.
Engeland, "Looking at images with human figures: comparison
between autistic and normal children," Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, vol. 32, Apr. 2002.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[11] J. Geest, C. Kemner, M. Verbaten, and H. Engeland, "Gaze behavior
of children with pervasive developmental disorder toward human
faces: a fixation time study," Jrnl. of child psychology & psychiatry,
& allied disciplines, vol. 43 ,July 2002.
[12] T. Frazier et al., "A Meta-Analysis of Gaze Differences to Social and
Nonsocial Information Between Individuals With and Without
Autism," Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, vol. 56, pp. 546-555, July 2017.
[13] J. Fedor et al., "Patterns of fixation during face recognition:
Differences in autism across age," Autism: the Int. journl of research
and practice, Aug. 2017.
[14] T. Falck-Ytter, E. Rehnberg, and S. Bölte, "Lack of visual orienting
to biological motion and audiovisual synchrony in 3-year-olds with
autism,"
vol.
8,
2013,
URL:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23861945/ [accessed: 2015-02-
07].
[15] A. Duchowski, “Eye Tracking Methodology - Theory and Practice”
Andrew Duchowski | Springer.: Springer-Verlag London, 2007.
[16] S. Chaudhary, May 2012 “The rise of autism in the UAE,” URL:
http://gulfnews.com/leisure/health/the-rise-of-autism-in-the-uae11/
[accessed: 2014-04-12].
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

