Enhancing Semantic Web Services Discovery Using
Similarity of Contextual Proﬁle
Zahira Chouiref
University Akli Mohand Oulhadj
Bouira, Algeria
Email: zahirachouiref@gmail.com
Abdelkader Belkhir
University of Sciences and Technology
Houari Boumediene, Algiers, Algeria
Email: kaderbelkhir@hotmail.com
Allel Hadjali
Laboratory of Informatique and Automation
Systems - ENSMA, Poitiers, France
Email: allel.hadjali@ensma.fr
Abstract—Due to the proliferation of Web services and to
the complexity and diversity of users’ needs, new efﬁcient
mechanisms to automatically discover Web services are strongly
required and desired. Recent advances have enabled the sup-
ply/consumption of services by suppliers/users of different cate-
gories. Every user has some particular interests and preferences
when searching appropriate services on the Web. Supporting the
”service proﬁle” in the speciﬁcation of Web services becomes then
a paramount important issue. It can especially help applicants
and Web services providers to produce accurate descriptions and
thus improve the degree of relevance of the responses returned in
the process of Web services discovery. In this paper, we present a
novel method in the view of users requirements for Web services
discovery. Especially, we propose (i) a framework to model the
end user and the Web service contextual proﬁle for best search,
(ii) as well as a solution of semantic Web services discovery based
on contextual proﬁle similarity. This similarity is performed using
a hybrid similarity measure we have deﬁned.
Keywords—Semantic Web Services; Context; Proﬁle; Semantic
Web Services Discovery; Hybrid Similarity Measure.
I. INTRODUCTION
The evolution of the IT (Information Technology) tools led
to the development of new paradigms that describe interactions
that exist over IT applications such as SOA (Service-Oriented
Architecture) [15]. Service orientation is a promising paradigm
for offering and consuming functionalities within and across
organizations in the Web. Indeed, SWS (Semantic Web Ser-
vices) allow a homogeneous use of heterogeneous software
components deployed in large networks and in particular the
Internet.
Several studies have already been done in the area of SWS
discovery which is the process permitting to ﬁnd the most
suitable set of Web services that fulﬁll some functionality.
Some of the discovery approaches are syntax based [3][5],
while other are semantic based [7][8][9]. Despite the simplicity
and facility of their implementation, syntactic approaches
exhibit some serious limitations. The predominant problem
is the restrictions posed by keywords matching that do not
allow retrieval of SWS with similar functionalities; two WSDL
(Web Services Description Language) descriptions can be
used to describe the same service but with different words.
However, when modeling Web services using ontologies, the
semantic representation of concepts and their relations can be
exploited and thus semantic matching to be performed. To
enable SWS discovery, the ﬁrst thing we need is a semantic
service description language OWL-S (Ontology Web Lan-
guage for Services) [14]. This development is signiﬁcant since
it seems to be able to approach certain insufﬁciencies of the
syntactic approaches and tackle some of the UDDI (Universal
Description, Discovery and Integration) register inadequacies.
However, with the exponential growth of SWS [17], the
diversity of users and the conditions under which they access
Web services, ﬁnding the relevant SWS that ﬁt the needs
and the context of the user is becoming a challenging task.
With Web 2.0 applications and particularly e-business and e-
commerce applications, SWS discovery is becoming much
more important in a Web context. Our approach aims at
solving queries using the proﬁle of users from a contextual
informational view of the Web where users have several
features such as the client terminal, the client preferences,
his/her location, etc. All these parameters form a particular
context of user called the contextual proﬁle.
The notions of context and proﬁle have been the subjects
of many works. Several meanings of such notions exist in
the literature. For instance, and as pointed out in [21], ”A
proﬁle is deﬁned by a set of attributes, possibly organized
into abstract entities, whose values can be user-deﬁned or
dynamically derived from user behavior. A proﬁle is supposed
to characterize user domain of interest and all his speciﬁc
features that help the information system to deliver the most
relevant data in the right form at the right place and the right
moment”. Since generally a person has several interests, user
proﬁles should be deﬁned to represent the various interests of
the user. In [22], a user proﬁle is proposed to represent the
distinct interests related to a user. Various deﬁnitions of the
context are also given and summarized in [10]. Brown et al.
[23] deﬁne the context as being information about location, the
identity of people in close proximity, physical conditions. Ryan
et al. [24] add to this deﬁnition the notion of time. In [25],
four categories of context {location, identity (user), activity
(state), time} are identiﬁed as the more important parameters
in practice. As stated previously, it is not easy to give a
complete deﬁnition for a context. In fact, the notion of context
is not universal but relative to some situation and application
domain [23].
Challenges. The problem of interest is that the search
engine produces several results in response to a user query,
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

with the consequence that the truly relevant results are often
missed.
• In order to face this unsatisfactory situation, one of the
suggested solutions leverages information related to user
proﬁle. Indeed, the results produced by a search engine
for a given query are not the same, dependent on the
user proﬁle and the context in which the user made
the request. The main idea is to understand what the
proﬁle information is depending on a user context during
a session: How do results depend on proﬁle and change
in context? The service context can group the service
localization (geographical restriction), the implementa-
tion cost, the QoS (Quality of Service) parameters, etc.
The user context can be formed of his/her localization,
his/her devices, etc. Since the user proﬁle can vary
during a session, the system must be able to adapt it
in order to select services according to the new context.
”A contextual proﬁle of an end user consists of a list
of concepts which speciﬁes the user domain of interest,
personal information (age, sex, etc.), data quality, data on
behavior, preferences and security, devices, purpose in a
given temporal context, social context, spatial context and
informative context”. Personal characteristics can strongly
inﬂuence the interaction with a system and security can
distinguish the user from the others, in a given context.
Suppose a doctor is looking for a hotel that is in close
proximity to the airport, with shuttle service, and with at
least one conference room that has Internet connection
and a 3D printer. The doctor is performing his query
via the smartphone. Current search engines provide a list
of all the hotels, but the question remains: which one
to choose? End user context consists of his/her device
(smartphone) from which we can deduce its navigator,
operating system, location and the type of printer that
will be used (wiﬁ printer), etc. The end user is considered
as guest of the secured system; therefore, the access
to the printer and Internet is controlled. According to
the user proﬁle (guest or administrator), the user should
have received a conﬁdential message regarding the access
rights to the resources. This is done to identify the sender
so that the system can determine the user’s access rights.
His/Her proﬁle consists of his/her profession (doctor) and
his/her preferences (hotel with conference room, Internet,
3D printer, close to the airport and shuttle service, etc).
• In addition, the methods available in the UDDI pub-
lication do not contain a formal model describing the
context of services use. Therefore, services discovery
could not be achieved efﬁciently without considering their
contextual proﬁle. When a user requests a Web services
discovery system, (s)he would have services tailored to
his/her context and proﬁle.
Contributions. Our paper speciﬁcally includes the follow-
ing contributions:
• Combining context and proﬁle models in one model
called Contextual Proﬁle Model that takes advantages of
both models. The proposed model provides relevant and
adapted results to the user requirements. It also allows the
representation of all information that characterizes both
the user and the service.
• We allow discovering suitable SWS based on the calcula-
tion of similarity between the user proﬁle and the service
proﬁle according to a given context (the same query
issued by different users may have different results as it
is evaluated using different proﬁles in different contexts).
In the remainder of this paper, we ﬁrst deﬁne in Section II
an overview of existing efforts towards the SWS discovery
and then we provide a critical analysis of these approaches.
In Section III, we set up the contextual proﬁle model ﬁrstly,
so as to present a formalism of service and user in details;
then, we present SWS discovery architecture. Finally, Section
IV depicts a conclusion with the main research directions.
II. RELATED WORD AND DISCUSSION
Our work can be positioned in the new interdisciplinary area
of Web Science which is the effort to bridge and formalize the
semantic and technical aspects of the World Wide Web.
Previous works [7][8][9] have focused mainly on providing
means to describe the functionality of a SWS and to allow
a very expressive language for querying services. However,
none of the works discusses in depth the concept of the
proﬁle and how a publisher/requester should provide context
data about his/her services. The information should have more
user context centric presentation in the discovery system. For
instance, multiple Web services with similar functionalities are
often available, best service(s) among them should be selected.
To achieve this goal, one way is to use context [20] and QoS
parameters which, generally, include performance, usability,
safety, cost, etc.
The studies in [13] focus on QoS in discovery systems.
The service consumer searches UDDI registry for a speciﬁc
service through discovery agent which helps to ﬁnd best
quality service from available services which satisﬁes QoS
constraints and preferences of requesters. Context-Awareness
as proposed in [11] performs the necessary changes in the
service behavior and/or the data handled in order to adapt the
service to the context of the each user. Rong et al. [12] suggest
with an example that context should be domain oriented or
problem oriented in Web services discovery system. They
divide context in two categories as explicit and implicit,
with Personal proﬁle oriented context, Usage history oriented
context, Process oriented context and other context. Chukmol
et al. [6] propose the personal opinion on service functionality
and quality or invocation cost should also be considered by
collaborative tagging-based environment for Web services dis-
covery. The study done in [4] has proposed a novel approach
to enhance Web services discovery based on, among others,
QoS, customer’s preferences and past experiences. The work
in [26] presents an alternative approach for supporting users in
Web services discovery by implementing the implicit culture
approach for recommending Web services to developers based
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

on the history of decisions made by other developers with
similar needs.
The limitation of these approaches is that they make the
system architecture more complicated when new attributes
and constraints are introduced. SWS properties include several
parameters like the functional (Input, Output, Preconditions,
Effects, functionalities, etc.) and non-functional parameters
(QoS, property identiﬁes the technical standards or proto-
cols for implementing services, and categorization). However,
the majority of suggested approaches focus only on some
parameters: QoS, localization, user behavior. Moreover, few
works took into account multiples qualitative and quantitative
parameters to help users to ﬁnd the best service during the dis-
covery process. It is also noticed that the suggested semantic
approaches are based on the same technique, which consists
in calculating the semantic correspondence level between the
functional and non-functional parameters of the services and
those cited in the user request. One of the big problems of
Web search is the deﬁnition of a correspondence function
between the representation of the proposed service and the user
request. In order to ﬁll this gap, we propose a new approach to
improve the automatic SWS discovery, based on the measure
of similarity between the user contextual proﬁle and the one
of the available services.
Thus, Web services that ﬁt better the proﬁle and the context
of end user are retrieved. In our approach, we also indicate the
interest of the proposed similarity measure in order to sort the
candidate services due to the proﬁle and the context attributes.
III. A CONTEXTUAL PROFILE SIMILARITY BASED
SEMANTIC WEB SERVICES DISCOVERY APPROACH
We present in this section the service, the user and the con-
textual proﬁle formalism, as well as the proposed architecture.
Finally, we show how a new similarity measure can be used
to enhance the discovery process.
A. Model of Service/User Contextual Proﬁle
Different attempts have been done to collect and classify
proﬁle’s information. Most of the proﬁle categorization has
been done by Amato et al. [2].
The information of the contextual proﬁle can be static (per-
sonal data, etc), evolutionary (intellectual quality, preferences,
etc) and temporary (localization, devices, etc). These pieces
of information must be captured to match demands to offers
of services, on the syntactic and semantic level in order to
improve the relevance of answers during a discovery session.
In Figure 1, we show the proposed model that contains several
dimensions able to describe the most information characteriz-
ing a proﬁle. This general structure takes the form of a tree that
contains a hierarchy of concepts. Each concept is constituted
of one or several sub-concepts, that contain to their turn one
or several attributes. The structure thus deﬁned is ﬂexible in
the sense that different features can be spread through the
tree structure of the proposed description. It permits to model
the user’s contextual proﬁle soliciting the service as well the
SWS’s contextual proﬁle offered.
Fig. 1. Concepts and sub-concepts of the contextual proﬁle of the service/user.
B. Proposed Discovery Architecture
Our approach supported by the architecture depicted in
Figure 2, is capable of integrating the contextual proﬁle into
the process of SWS discovery. It is composed of: (i) basic
elements of SOA [15] namely: the service requester, the service
provider and the service registry; (ii) Interoperability Module
which comprises an administrator of the proﬁle, an inter ontol-
ogy similarity module and a contextual proﬁle database, (iii)
Discovery and Selection Engine which contains a contextual
proﬁle ﬁltering module of Service/Request and a similarity
measure treatment module.
C. Semantic Web Service, Request and Contextual Proﬁle
Formalism
Formally,
an
SWS
is
deﬁned
as
a
quintuple
{ns, ds, p, op, cpp} such that:
• ns is the name of the SWS.
• ds is the functional description of the SWS.
• p is the set of parameters describing the SWS.
• op is the set of operations of the SWS.
• cpp is the set of concepts constituting the contextual
proﬁle of provided service.
Operation Op is deﬁned as a quintuple {no, do, i, o, pre, ef}
such that:
• no is the name of the operation.
• do is the functional description of the operation.
• i = (i1, . . . in) is the set of input parameters of the
operation
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Fig. 2. Proposed architecture.
• o = (o1, . . . on) is the set of output parameters of the
operation.
• prc speciﬁes the preconditions of the service.
• ef speciﬁes the effects of the service.
Request R is a quintuple {nr, ir, or, cpr, s} such that:
• nr is the name of the request.
• ir = (ir1, . . . irn) is the set of input parameters of the
request.
• or = (or1, . . . orn) is the set of output parameters of the
request.
• cpr is the set of the concepts constituting the contextual
proﬁle of the required service (user contextual proﬁle).
• s (0 < s < 1) is the interest score deﬁned by the user.
Each parameter (i, o) in the list of (inputs, outputs) respectively
is deﬁned as a quadruple {nt, v, t, co} such that:
• nt is the name of the attribute.
• v is the value of the attribute.
• t is the data type of the attribute value.
• co is the concept of the ontology which is connected
to the attribute to improve its semantic quality. Some
approaches use ontologies for the purpose of searching
the context and the interests of the users [18][19].
Contextual proﬁle is modeled through a set of concepts, noted
CPi (contextual proﬁle parameters). Each CPi is characterized
by a set of values and weight associated with each parameter,
CPi = (vi, wi).
D. A New Similarity Measure
As we described above, the proﬁle is modeled as multidi-
mensional attributes through the tree structure of the descrip-
tion proposed in Figure 1. In general, there are two different
approaches for expressing these attributes: a quantitative and
a qualitative one. In our work, we propose to improve the
similarity measure deﬁned in [16] by combining syntactic with
semantic similarity of each qualitative/quantitative attribute
of request/service contextual proﬁle. This hybrid similarity
measure allows us to compute an overall score for each service
retrieved and thus to recommend to the user the best services
that match his/her proﬁle. The similarity measure introduced
can be formalized as follows:
• Let P be a set of objects’ proﬁle (users, documents, Web
services, etc.). An object is described by m contextual
characteristics X = (CP1, CP2, . . . CPm).
• Let N be a set of services. Each service is composed of
a set of contextual proﬁle concept.
• Let CPx, CPy be a contextual proﬁle belonging to P for a
given request and service respectively, and (w1, . . . wm)
is a set of weights associated to each characteristic of
CPx, where P wi = 1 (wi is a real number between 0
and 1).
• We deﬁne a threshold s in order to present only services
that have a rate of similarity with the user proﬁle higher
than the deﬁned threshold .
The quantitative similarity measure QSim [16] is deﬁned as
follows:
QSim : P × P → [0, 1]
QSim(x, y) =
aPa
i=1 wi × sima(xi, yi)
(aPa
i=1 wi) + (bPb
i=1 wa+i) + (cPc
i=1 wa+b+i)
(1)
where xi and yi are numerical values.
As for our similarity measure SimPro, it is given by
the following formula:
SimPro : P × P → [0, 1]
SimPro(CPx, CPy) =
a
a + b ×
aPi=a
i=1 wi × sima(CPxi, CPyi)
(aPi=a
i=1 wi) + (bPi=b
i=1 wa+i)
(2)
• a is the set of common characteristics of CPx (requested
by the client) and CPy (suggested by the service).
• b is the set of characteristics existing in CPx and not
existing in CPy (requested by the client but not suggested
by the service).
• c is the set of characteristics existing in CPy and not ex-
isting in CPx (suggested by the service but not requested
by the client).
• sima is the atomic similarity between each characteristic
of CPx and CPy. It is deﬁned in a universe U and can
be modeled as follows:
sima : U × U → [0, 1]
sima(CPxi, CPyi)=







1
if
c1
0
if
c2
min(CP xi,CP yi)
max(CP xi,CP yi)
if
c3
value ∈ [0, 1]
if
c4
(3)
With:
c1 ⇔ CPxi = CPyi.
c2 ⇔ CPxi = 0 ∨ CPyi = 0 ∨ CPxi = ⊥ ∨ CPyi = ⊥.
c3 ⇔ CPxi, CPyi are quantitative values.
c4 ⇔ CPxi, CPyi are qualitative values.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

if CPxi and CPyi are qualitative values, sima is calculated
(in our example) by using the Jaccard coefﬁcient [1].
SimPro checks the properties of similarity measures de-
ﬁned in [16]. Let us note also that the most powerful strength
of the quantitative/qualitative similarity measure proposed is
its ability to take into account attributes of different natures
(either qualitative or quantitative) both in the contextual proﬁle
of the request and the contextual proﬁle of the Web services.
Other approaches borrowed from information retrieval or
domain ontology [27], can be used for measuring atomic
similarity (sima) between concepts.
Note also that the performance of Web service may depend
on the number of features it was mentioned by the user and
published by the provider, the weighted atomic similarity of
each request’s characteristic and the quantity (a/a+b) that is in
fact the average frequency of all mentioned attributes.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have proposed in this work a new approach to SWS
discovery. The aim of this approach is to automatically dis-
cover relevant services based on measuring the similarity of
user request and SWS using the contextual proﬁle information
during the search and selection steps. A quantitative and
qualitative similarity measure is applied for the management
of the contextual proﬁles. This hybrid similarity allows to
retrieve SWS that better satisfy the user needs. We plan to
conduct thorough experiments to study the effectiveness of
the proposed formula for measuring similarity, to analyze the
quality of SWS from a user point of view, and to consider
the use of ontology for context and proﬁle concepts. Another
idea to improve the quality of the answers is to consider the
parameters of user proﬁle modeled using gradual concepts
which can be represented thanks to fuzzy sets.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Real, ”Tables of Signiﬁcant Values of Jaccard’s Index of Similarity,”
Misc. Zool, 22.1, 1999, pp. 29-40.
[2] G. Amato, U. Straccia, ”User Proﬁle Modeling and Applications to Digital
Libraries,” in Proceedings of the Third European Conference on Research
and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries, Paris, France, 1999, pp.
184-197.
[3] M. B. Blake and M. F. Nowlan, ”A Web Service Recommender System
Using Enhanced Syntactical Matching,” IEEE International Conference
in Web Services ICWS, USA, January.2007, pp.575-582.
[4] R. Benaboud, R. Maamri, and Z. Sahnoun, ”User’s Preferences and
Experiences based Web Service Discovery using Ontologies,” in Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Research Challenges
in Information Science (RCIS), Nice, France, May.2010, pp. 121-126.
[5] P. Palathingal and S. Chandra, ”Agent Approach for Service Discovery
and Utilization,” in Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii Internationnal
Conference on System Science HICSS-37, USA, January.2004.
[6] U. Chukmol, A. Benharkat, and Y. Amghar, ”Enhancing Web Service Dis-
covery by using Collaborative Tagging System,” IEEE 4th International
Conference on Next Generation Web Services Practices, October.2008,
pp. 54-59.
[7] F. Nawaz, K. Qadir, and H. Farooq Ahmad, ”SEMREG-Pro: A Semantic
based Registry for Proactive Web Service Discovery using Publish Sub-
scribe Model,” Fourth International Conference on Semantics, Knowledge
and Grid, IEEE Xplore, Pakistan, December.2008, pp. 301-308.
[8] C. Wu, E. Chang, and A. Aitken, ”An Empirical Approach for Seman-
tic Web Services Discovery,” 19th Australian Conference on Software
Engineering, IEEEXplore, Perth, March.2008, pp. 412-421.
[9] G. Wen-yue, Q. Hai-cheng, and C. Hong, ”Semantic Web Service
Discovery Algorithm and its Application on the Intelligent Automotive
Manufacturing System,” International Conference on Information Man-
agement and Engineering, IEEEXplore, China, April.2010, pp. 601-604.
[10] M. Bazire and P. Brezillon, ”Understanding Context before using it,” in
CONTEXT’05 Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Modeling
and Using Context, 2005, pp. 29-40.
[11] M. Keidl and A.Kemper, ”Toward Context/aware Adaptable Web Ser-
vices,” in 13th international World Wide Web Conference, USA, 2004,
pp. 55-65.
[12] W. Rong and K. Liu, ”A Survey of Context Aware Web Service Dis-
covery: From User’s Perspective,” Fifth IEEE International Symposium
on Service Oriented System Engineering, June.2010, pp. 15-22.
[13] T. Rajendran and P. Balasubramanie, ”An Optimal Agent-Based Ar-
chitecture for Dynamic Web Service Discovery with QoS,” Second
International Conference on Computing Communication and Networking
Technologies, IEEEXplore, July.2010, pp. 1-7.
[14] D. Martin and all, ”OWL-S: Semantic Markup for Web Services,”
W3C Member Submission (2004) http://www.w3.org/Submission/OWL-
S, November.2004 [retrieved:April, 2013].
[15] D.
Booth,
and
all,
”Web
Services
Architecture,”
http
://www.w3.org/TR/2003/WD-ws-arch-20030808/,
Aout.2003
[retrieved:April, 2013].
[16] A. Belkhirat, A. Belkhir, and A. Bouras, ”A New Similarity Measure
for the Proﬁles Management,” in the Proceedings of the 13th Inter-
national Conference on Computer Modeling and Simulation (UKSIM),
Cambridgeshire United Kingdom, April.2011, pp. 255-259.
[17] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, ”The Semantic Web,”
Scientiﬁc American, vol. 284, no. 5, May.2001, pp. 34-43.
[18] C. Bizer, and all, ”A Crystallization Point for the Web of Data,” Web
Semantics : Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, vol.
7, n 3, September.2009, pp. 154-165.
[19] S. Calegari and G. Pasi, ”Ontology-Based Information Behaviour to
Improve Web Search,” Future Internet, vol. 2, n 4, October.2010 pp. 533-
558.
[20] M. Baldauf, S. Dustdar, and F. Rosenberg, ”A Survey on Context-aware
Systems,” International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing ,
vol2 (4), June.2007, pp. 263-277.
[21] M. Bouzeghoub and D. Kostadinov, ”Data Personalization: a Taxonomy
of User Proﬁles Knowledge and a Proﬁle Management Tool,” Reports
of
the
laboratory
PRISM,
http://www.researchgate.net/publication/
228768551 Data Personalization a Taxonomy of User Proﬁles
Knowledge and a Proﬁle Management Tool/ﬁle/9fcfd50cf300649190.
pdf, 2007 [retrieved:April, 2013].
[22] G. Bordogna and G. Pasi, ”A Flexible Multi Criteria Information
Filtering Model,” Soft Comput. DOI: 10.1007/s00500-009-0476-3. Jan-
uary.2010, pp. 799-809 [retrieved:April, 2013].
[23] P. J. Brown, J. D. Bovey, and X. Chen, ”Context-aware Applications:
From the Laboratory to the Marketplace,” IEEE Personal Communica-
tions, October.1997, pp. 58-64.
[24] N. Ryan, J. Pascoe, and D. Morse, ”Enhanced Reality Fieldwork: the
Context Aware Archaeological Assistant,” Dingwall, L., S. Exon, V.
Gaffney, S. Laﬂin and M. van Leusen (eds.), Archaeology in the Age of
the Internet. CAA97. Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in
Archaeology. Proceedings of the 25th Anniversary Conference, University
of Birmingham, (BAR International Series 750). Archaeopress, Oxford,
April.1997, pp. 269-274.
[25] A. K. Dey, G. D. Abowd, and D. Salber, ”A Conceptual Framework and
a Toolkit for Supporting the Rapid Prototyping of Context-aware Applica-
tions,” Human-Computer Interaction Journal 16(2), December.2001, pp.
97-166.
[26] N. Kokash, A. Birukou, and V. D’Andrea, ”Web Service Discovery
Based on Past User Experience,” in Proceedings of the International1
Conference on Business Information Systems (BIS), LNCS Volume 4439,
2007, pp. 95-107.
[27] Y. Tsai, S. Hwang, and Y. Tang, ”A Hybrid Approach to Automatic
Web Services Discovery,” in International Joint Conference on Service
Sciences, IEEEXplore, 2011, pp. 277-281.
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

