Does the Right to be Forgotten Work in Social Machines Context?
Camila Lima, Amanda Nuines, Célio Santana,
Fabiola Queiroz
Science Information Department. Federal University of
Pernambuco (UFPE). Recife. Brazil
{camila.oalima, almeidanunes23, celio.santana,
fabiolaqroz}@gmail.com
Cristine Gusmão
Biomedical Engineering Department. Federal
University of Pernambuco (UFPE). Recife. Brazil
cmgg@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract— This paper presents a reflection about the right to
be forgotten in the context of social machines operating in Web
3.0
and present
this "new" distribution of
information
environment. The reflection was based on a literature review
and suggests the ineffectiveness of how the right to be forgotten
is being applied due the complex structures existing connection
between users, social software and devices (hardware) designed
to work together. Thus, disconnecting more than a right,
becomes a duty for those who choose to be forgotten.
Keywords-Social
machines;
Right
to
be
forgotten;
Connection; forgetting; Internet.
I.
INTRODUCTION
On May 13th, 2014 the Court of Justice of the European
Union (CJEU) has taken a decision that caused a huge
impact, not only in the legal aspect, but also in the
relationship between users and the content related to them on
the Internet. The decision referred to search engines, which,
from that moment, must enable users, in European Union
(EU) territory, to delete their personal information. The court
considered that any person "has the right to be forgotten" on
the Internet under certain conditions [1].
This decision triggered a worldwide debate about the
right to be forgotten and their implications in the current
Internet scenario. The central subject was the existing
conflict between legal aspects related to the right to be
forgotten against freedom of expression and law about data
protection in EU [2].
Another issue was about the request made by a citizen
requiring “only” that his name did not appear anymore in
Google results. But the fact Google hides this information
means that they were indeed forgotten? EU legislation is not
valid in other countries and the search results cannot be
hidden outside EU. This omission indicates that forgetting is
more superficial than real [1].
But, even if Google and Facebook were forced to delete
all data of a specific citizen, would he/she be forgotten? In
this light, this paper presents a reflection on the “right to be
forgotten” and how it will work, if there is no change in the
way of how it will be implemented, in this social machine
context.
Besides this introductory session, this paper presents the
following structure: Section 2 will present concepts about
forgetting. Section 3 will present the concerns about the
“Right to be Forgotten”. Section 4 will present connection
concepts. Section 5 will present social machines concepts.
Section 6 will present a reflection of this whole scenario.
And in section 7 will present final considerations.
II.
FORGETTING (OBLIVION)
When investigating forgetting, we soon realized its
inseparability of the concept of memory. It seems more
logical to begin this Section explaining concepts related to
memory and its connection to oblivion.
Ricoeur [3] suggests that memory can be observed from
two approaches: (i) the cognitive one, which refers to the
ambition to reproduce or forgotten the past and (ii) the
pragmatic approach referred to memory operative side.
Levy [4] also proposes three categories to memory: (i)
biological memory: which is that all knowledge was
transmitted orally to individuals through narrations, rites and
myths. (ii) Support memory: means that facts could be
recorded in physical objects. The human memory is not the
unique support to retain and preserve information. And (iii)
digital memory: these are stored in electronic format using
bits and bytes.
When analyzing these categories proposed by Ricoeur,
we observed that cognitive approach considers important to
determine what are the "traces" left and perceived by
individuals in the reconstitution of the memory. In the
pragmatic approach, Ricoeur states that there are three types
of forgetting: (i) the deep oblivion: which is the one from the
deletion of tracks; (ii) forgetting of reserve: which is
"necessary" for the proper functioning of memory; and (iii)
the manifest oblivion that is exercised intentionally.
Deep oblivion occurs when tracks needed to rebuild
memories are not found. Ricoeur suggests that memory in
the process of "remembering" follows four steps: (i)
persistence, (ii) the remanence, (iii) revival and (iv) detailing.
The deep oblivion occurs when there is a lack of “traces” at
least in one of these four steps.
The
forgetting
of reserve
is
characterized
by
the
deliberate forgetfulness in the everyday life of our memory.
Ricoeur himself says: "there is no memory that nothing
forget ..." and "forgetfulness would not, in all aspects, be an
enemy of memory. The memory should negotiate with
forgetting to find, blindfold, the balance between both". The
lack of balance led to the "Societal Forgetting" [5].
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The last category of forgetting suggested by Ricoeur is
the manifest oblivion, which is exercised with some level of
intentionality. The manifest oblivion presents another three
categories that are: (i) hindered memory, (ii) manipulated
memory manipulated and (iii) controlled forgetting also
called Amnesty.
To address the hindered memory Paul Ricoeur refers to
clinical and therapeutic categories mainly from Freudian
psychoanalysis, seeking to link this "pathology" to human
and fundamental historical experiences.
The manipulated memory is in the field of power
relations. The balance of power, memory and forgetting is
forged suggesting a kind of instrumentalization of the
memory.
Controlled Forgetting, also called amnesty, has in it
something of the reversibility order. The preservation of
memory happens through mechanisms of latency and the
control of physical supports. The controlled forgetting is
related to what the author considered the small miracle of
happy memory that is “the recognition”.
Observing the memory classification of Levy, we should
begin with the investigation of biological memory that
according to Rignano [6] is derived from the connections
between neurons and the contact points receiving the
denomination of synapses. According to Levy, this memory
is more susceptible to forgetfulness.
To minimize the inherent and constant forgetfulness of
biological memory, the humans began to use some kind of
objects to keep records of their memories. This model was
not reflected only in simple transformation of how memories
are preserved, but the constitution of a new way of thinking
about memory. Coulmas [7] states that memory supports not
only mean preservation, but the conditions of memory
creation.
Levy [8] states “inscription supports (clay, wax tablets,
parchment, papyrus or paper), represented an extension of
human biological memory. Thus, writing extended the
biological memory transforming it into large long-term
memory semantic network.
Finally, we have the digital memory, and on it Garde-
Hansen et al. [9] suggests that digital mind is susceptible to
oblivion: “scanning our memories and the production of new
information already in digital media together with the
fragility and complexity of maintenance of the files in a
virtual environment leads us to create a new concept that
threatens the modern world, called digital amnesia.
Cerf [10] suggests that the memory stored in cyberspace
is constantly a threat: Cyberspace is a fickle and virtual
environment in which the data are in endless movement,
succeed,
change,
interact
and
mutually
exclusive.
In
cyberspace the issue of preservation of information and
knowledge is questioned because, being in the virtual
environment, there is no guarantee that this information is
available after a certain time, or, if it is available in which
format or conditions.
Levy [8] suggests that communication networks and
digital memories will incorporate most of the representations
and messages produced on the planet thus becoming the
main form of human memory.
III.
RIGHT TO BE FORGOTTEN
Ambrose [11] states that any citizen has the right to not
belong to a particular memory, whether collective or
individual. In this context, the right to be forgotten, through
the right to informational self-determination begins to be
exercised all over the world, in view of the many violations
committed daily by the media, such as the rights related to
honor, privacy and intimacy, all of them, results of
constitutional protections given to human dignity. The right
to be forgotten comes to guarantee that no one need to be
forced to live forever with a past that no longer represents
the current condition of an individual.
Hornung, and Schnabel [12] state that the first case in
which the informational self-determination was related to
digital data processing was observed in 1983 in Germany.
The
German
government,
after
conducting
a
general
population census, was target of several constitutional
complaints
that
the
census
directly
violates
some
fundamental rights, particularly the right to free development
of personality. The German Supreme Court considers, given
the conditions of the automatic processing of data, it is
needed an effective protection of the free right of personality,
since with electronic data processing, detailed information
about personal relationships can be stored indefinitely and
consulted at any time.
The right to be forgotten in the EU legislative framework
was proposed by the European Parliament on 25 January
2012. Viviane Reding, Vice-President of the European
Commission and responsible for Justice, Fundamental Rights
and Citizenship areas, announced a reform of legislative
framework reserved for personal data protection in EU [13].
Since then, search engines, more specifically Google,
become the center of controversy in the EU. The discussion
lies in the distinction between data storage services and
search engines, and the consequent legal position to which
they are subject. For the EU justice, Google is not just a
storage service that maintains particular content without
liability. Thus, both are similar search engines and data
producers, exercising control over the content presented [13].
Peter Fleicher [14] states that Google is nothing more
than a tool that promotes facility to finding content, but
merely redirects users to the provisions content elsewhere. In
his view, the responsibility to eliminate inappropriate content
published should lie, above all, to the source of information
and not to the search engines.
The EU members believes that any search engines or
social networks has the same legal responsibilities of the
original sources of information when it the right to be
forgotten. This understanding suggests a kind of connection
between the sources of information and Internet services.
IV.
CONNECTION
It is not known exactly when, and in what context, the
word “connection” was created. The earliest reference dates
from the second century AD, in the Chinese book “I Ching,
the Book of Changes”. In it, the phrase "watch what connects
and separate people". This text is applied to a complex
context of social capital.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Barabási and Frangos [15] state that a connection
between
two
elements
happens
when
they
could
be
represented by a graph and any one of them can reach the
other following a path. These objects do not need to know
the existence of these connections to make them real.
Christakis and Fowler [16] suggest that a connection is a
set of links, as well as, particular patterns that provide
meaning to links. These ties are more important than the
people themselves because they determine the existence of
networks that are more complex than a "flat" collection of
"disconnected" people. Connections affect every aspect of
everyday life of an individual. These are links that explain
why the whole (network) is greater than the sum of the parts
(individuals).
Shaviro [17] states that the connections are important for
people to remain visible. If no action is taken to connect, the
tendency is that person disappears, after all, someone
disconnected is someone who is not part of the system.
Castells [18] relates the concept of connection with
network and places. “The network itself cannot suggest a
sense of space, but there is a whole series of connections and
disconnections
of
“places”
on
net.
These
places
are
connected globally and physically locally disconnected and
socially. Megacities are discontinuous constellations of
spatial fragments, functional parts and social sectors, which
are all networked.
Levy [19] states that "The human mind works to
connect"
and
suggests:
“grasp
the
development
of
perception, memory, communication, general connection as
a single organic movement that tends to develop a collective
intelligence of humanity ... The growing connection between
the men is the other side of the world growth”.
Frigyes
Karinthy
conducted
the
first,
documented;
scientific study about connection and it was called "chains".
It suggests that people are far apart, on average, in a degree
of separation of six. This theory was first confirmed by
Stanley Milgram in 1967 and ratified by Duncan Watts [20]
that after receiving data collected from 48,000 members of
157 different countries, found the same number “six”. This
theory is known as the 'six degrees of separation ".
Christakis and Fowler [21] state that our connections do
not end in the people we know, but beyond our social
horizon, friends of friends are part of the chain reaction that
eventually passes us within a network.
V.
SOCIAL MACHINES
The term “Social Machines” was coined by Wade Roush
[21] where it was highlighted the role that Internet exerted on
people's lives. Almost all interactions between people and
electronic devices have Internet involved. Roush pointed the
mobile nature of the connection via smartphones and now,
the "network" follows the individual to “where” and “when”
he wants to. Roush defines a social machine as a mechanism
operated by a human who is responsible for the socialization
of information between different communities.
Meira et al. [22] suggested a more complex definition of
social machine: "A social machine is an entity" pluggable
"containing an internal processing unit and an interface that
waits for requests and responses to other social machines. Its
processing unit receives inputs, produces outputs, have states
and their connections, intermittent or permanent, define its
relations with other social machines ".
Meira [23] suggests that social machines enable any
person to "set" his own network, creating their connections
and deciding who participates, and how to get involved.
Social machines are programmable platforms in the network,
whose function and purpose can be, largely extended and
redefined by those who hold the knowledge to do it.
Now, instead programming computers as in the past,
users will increasingly programming the Internet itself.
Programming social machines, each user will be able to
create their own applications and provide new forms of
articulation and expression network [23].
Burégio et al. [24] suggest that social machine has its
origins in social computing. It would be an evolution of
social software based on the Internet, referred collectively as
"Web 2.0". Social machines are based on three pillars that
are (i) the social software, (ii) software as sociable entities
and (iii) persons as computational unit as shown in Figure 1.
(i) Social Software are those with working on social data,
based on Application Programs Interface (API), Web
Services or Mashups and have the ability to collaborate with
other services and enable users to program "their own
Internet".
(ii) Software as sociable Entities means that software has
the ability not only store social data, but that they are able to
“socialize” autonomously and automatically and thus have
"Social Relations" with other software, people and even
devices (Internet of Things).
And (iii) People as Computational refer to the effort to
integrate people and software in the task of processing of
social data. If the software is able to create, process and store
data, people also are, and this integration promotes greater
social capacity machines. Social machines represent the
intersection of these three categories.
Shadbolt et al. [25] suggest that the power of the
metaphor of social machines comes from the notion that a
machine is not just a computer used by users, but rather
something purposely designed in a socio-technical system
comprising equipment and personnel. Thus, one can view
this ecosystem as a set of social interaction machinery and
studying each machine becomes only part of the story.
Semmelhack [26] states that transformation promoted by
Web 3.0 is deeper than the simple attribution of meaning to
the digital objects. This new Internet generation allows that
several entities could be created online and from there
various services/resources can access these organized and
modularized data. An example of this reality portrayed by
Semmelheck
is
the
interoperability
standard
called
Microformats that has a specific pattern called H-card, which
stores information about people and can be reused on
multiple websites.
VI.
THE RIGHT TO BE FORGOTTEN AND SOCIAL
MACHINES
Before turning our attention to the questions about right
to be forgotten in the current structure of social machines, it
is worth to mention two aspects of the current EU decision in
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

the case of Google that will not be discussed in this section
that are (i) The question of the location of the decision and
(ii) the question of the sources of information do not respond
jointly to Google in the decisions. These matters are related
to legal aspects and not with the structure of the Internet
itself.
Following Ricoeur`s [3] statement about forgetting, the
right to be forgotten, in this context, falls in manifest
oblivion and, more specifically, the manipulated memory
since that one organism (CJEU) exercises its power as a
justice court that refers about legal aspects. In this case, the
manipulation does not have the intention to create a new
image from an individual or even reduces the memories for
any
suitable
purpose.
This
manipulation
towards
the
direction of deep oblivion considering the real intention that
is to erase, deliberately, the tracks.
If we consider the structure of web 1.0, where the content
was only available to users, data erasing, similar to what has
been requested by the CJEU, of a particular service,
determines that the user is in fact forgotten by that company
since the information contained therein do not suffer any
correlation or semantic treatment.
When we consider the web 2.0, also known as "social
web", some social networking services store information
about users, their connections and their behavior on their
networks. Figure 2 shows a fictitious scenario of a user that
uses the services Facebook (a), Twitter (b), LinkedIn (c) and
Whatsapp (d) and their respective, different, connections on
each.
The deletion of data implies, certainly, in forgetting static
data and connections. However, the traces inherent to
collective memory, such as friends’ referrals, demographic
data and others that do not belong necessarily to the deleted
user will be maintained. Most likely, traces that could restore
or reassemble the memory of the deleted user will not exist.
In Web 3.0, the social software enables to use a new kind
of service when using "enter using Facebook" option. Now,
that
service
collects
from
Facebook,
the
necessary
information to carry out the registration. This type of data
sharing, known as data skimming, in most cases, is based on
the transfer (copy) of the data from the original service (e.g.,
Facebook) to the requesting service. The available data that
could be shared with other services changes the connection
structure from several individual networks observed in
Figure 2 to a single network shown in Figure 3.
Figure 1. Social Machines Definition - Retrieved from Burégio et al. [24]
Figure 2. Social Networks of an User in Web 2.0
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

In this new scenario, we can observe that even Facebook
keeps information about User A. Due to the amount of
"places" where he exists on Internet, he becomes, in practice,
an entity on the Internet because his data, as well as his
connections,
are
spread
over
the
Internet,
becoming
structures of "information redundancy" scattered in various
services.
In scenario (a), User A is connected to User B through
Facebook, Twitter and Candy Crush Saga application
running on Facebook. If Google does not find data of this
relationship on Facebook, these can be found or in Twitter or
in Candy Crush Saga. A consideration about this connection
is the situation of Candy Crush Saga. Both users run the
application from Facebook, but it exists out of Facebook.
This means that the Candy Crush Saga also has in its
database information about users A and B, and every time
that they play the game on Facebook there is an exchange of
information between services.
If we consider the connection with User C, we now have
a
new
element
part
of
network
of
both
users:
the
smartphones. Before the emergence of the Internet of
Things, devices such as Tablets, Laptops, Smartphones,
Google Glass among others, were considered only “means”
to access Internet. However, when we consider that Social
machines are also software as entities sociable, the software
running on smartphone also contributes to the network.
VII.
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
The structures of connections and stakeholders in context
of social machines suggest a complex flow of information
scheme in Internet, particularly as regards the distribution
and use of information from social software. Although this
article presents only the reflection of the social machines and
its relation to the right to be forgotten, is still needed
discussion of privacy, connectivity, distribution, use and
other issues relating to information in this context.
The connections of an individual are as important as the
information itself since they determine, not just for who, but,
for what and where information regarding this individual
may move. In part, these connections are invisible or
transparent to users causing a false sense of control and the
naive thought that the data are restricted to that service.
If everything is connected, the right to be forgotten
should not be restricted to the exclusion of data on one, or
more particular services, but suggests the user disconnection
from Internet. This new reality changes the point of view that
to be forgotten is a right, but actually, forgotten should be the
conscious, intentional and voluntary duty of any citizen, who
wants to be forgotten and not return to the Internet. The
oblivion, in this network of social machines, without
disconnection is, at least, paradoxical, since when an
individual connects to the Internet, the network should
remember that he/she is a forgotten one.
More than apparent, this forgetfulness is naive and
imposes penalties on precisely those who would be the main
allies in this task, search engines, which are able to identify
the sources of information and their connections. If, we want
to reflect about the effectiveness of actions taken toward
oblivion we should rethink the role of Internet, as whole, and
the role of its services.
Finally, we believe that the right to be forgotten, in the
way of how it is being promoted, only transformed, in a very
subtle way, how the information is used by Internet services.
The data will no longer be visible to regular users of the
search engines, but may continue to be collected and
interpreted freely to other types of business transactions.
They move the actors, but not change the actual information
flows and the memory built about a particular user. This
information remains unscathed and connected, but invisible.
Aware of all these conclusions we recognize that further
researches should be performed on: how and how much “our
information” is spread on Internet and which are the sources
of this information? This future work is related to the degree
of influence of “robots” that are sharing and collecting our
information. Is our information private? Or they start a viral
process on Internet? Further research is still necessary on
how the user behavior impacts this process of information
sharing on Internet.
Figure 3. The Web 3.0 Network from an user A, before (a) and after (b),
being forggoten by Facebook.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

REFERENCES
[1]
D. Sullivan, “How Google’s New ‘Right To Be Forgotten’
Form
Works:
An
Explainer”.
2014.
Available
in:
<http://searchengineland.com/google-right-to-be-forgotten-
form-192837>. Last access in: Dec, 16th, 2014.
[2]
C. Preece and R. Clark, “Google ‘right to be forgotten’:
Everything
you
need
to
know”.
2014.
Available
in:
<http://www.itpro.co.uk/security/22378/google-right-to-be-
forgotten-everything-you-need-to-know>. Last access on Jan.
12th, 2015.
[3]
P.
Ricoeur,
Memory,
history,
forgetting.
University of
Chicago Press, 2004.
[4]
P. Lévy, Cyberculture. University of Minnesota Press, 2001.
[5]
V. Mayer-Schönberger, Delete: the virtue of forgetting in the
digital age. Princeton University Press. 2011.
[6]
E. Rignano, Biological memory. Routledge, 2013.
[7]
F. Coulmas, The writing systems of the world. Blackwell.
1989.
[8]
P. Levy. Les Technologies de l’intelligence. L’avenir de la
pensée à l’ère informatique. La Découverte. 1990.
[9]
J. Garde-Hansen, A. Hoskins and A. Reading, Save as...
digital memories. Palgrave Macmillan. 2009.
[10] The Guardian. “The Digital Blackhole: Will it Delete your
Memories?”.
2015.
Available
in:
<
http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/16/digital-
black-hole-delete-memories-information-lost-google-vint-cerf
Last access on Feb. 20th. 2014.
[11] M. L. Ambrose, It’s about time: Privacy, information
lifecycles, and the right to be forgotten. Stanford Technology
Law Review, Vol.16. 2012
[12] G. Hornung and C. Schnabel. Data protection in Germany I:
The population census decision and the right to informational
self-determination.
Computer
Law
&
Security
Review
Vol.25. No. 1. 2009, pp. 84-88.
[13] European Union, “The EU Data Protection Reform 2012:
Making
Europe
the
Standard
Setter
for
Modern
Data
Protection
Rules
in
the
Digital
Age”.
Available
in:
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-12-
26_en.htm>. Last Access: Jan. 12th, 2015.
[14] P. Fleicher, “Our thoughts on the right to be forgotten”. 2012.
Available
in:
<
http://googlepolicyeurope.blogspot.com.br/2012/02/our-
thoughts-on-right-to-be-forgotten.html>. Last Access in. Jan.
16th, 2015.
[15] A. Barabási and J. Frangos. Linked: the new science of
networks science of networks. Basic Books. 2014.
[16] A. Christakis and J. Fowler. Connected: The surprising power
of our social networks and how they shape our lives. Little
Brown. 2009.
[17] S. Shaviro, Connected: Or what it means to live in the
Network Society. University of Minnesota Press. 2003.
[18] M. Castells,“The rise of the network society: The information
age: Economy, society, and culture. Vol. 1. John Wiley &
Sons. 2011.
[19] P. Levy, World Philosophie: le marché, le cyberespace, la
conscience. 2000.
[20] D. Watts, Six degrees: The science of a connected age. WW
Norton & Company. 2004.
[21] W. Roush, Social machines: Computing means connecting.
Technology Review-Mancheser, Vol. 108. No. 8. 2005.
[22] S. Meira, et al., “The emerging web of social machines” Proc.
of
Computer
Software
and
Applications
Conference
(COMPSAC), IEEE Press, 2011, pp. 26-27.
[23] S.
Meira,
“O
Meio
é...
Programável!”
Available
in
<http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/fsp/mercado/me2207201026.h
tm.> Last access Jan. 10th, 2014.
[24] V. Buregio, S. Meira and N. Rosa. Social machines: a unified
paradigm to describe social web-oriented systems. Proc. 22nd
international conference on World Wide Web companion.
2013.
[25] N. Shadbolt, D, Smith, E. Simperl, M. Van Kleek, Y. Yang
and W. Hall, Towards a classification framework for social
machines. Proc, 22nd international conference on World
Wide Web companion. 2013, pp. 905-912.
[26] P.
Semmelhack,
Social
Machines:
How
to
Develop
Connected Products that Change Customers' Lives. John
Wiley & Sons. 2013.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

