 
 
The Potential of Blockchain for Transforming the Urgent and Emergency Care 
Daniela America da Silva,   Samara Cardoso dos Santos,   Wilson Cristoni Neto,   Luiz Coura,   Robison Egydio 
Lopes Junior,   Gildarcio Sousa Gonçalves,   Jose Crisóstomo Ozório Junior,   Leonardo Guimarães,   Alyson 
Basilio,   Fabio Kfouri,   Breslei Max Reis da Fonseca,   Juliana F. Pasquini Martinez,   Anderson Gomes,   Paulo 
Diego Barbosa da Silva,   Johnny Marques,   Luiz Alberto Vieira Dias,   Adilson Marques da Cunha,   Paulo 
Marcelo Tasinaffo 
Electronic Engineering and Computing Department 
Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology 
São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil 
Email: stagiho-bd@googlegroups.com 
 
Abstract—During the 1st Semester of 2018, at the Brazilian 
Aeronautics Institute of Technology (Instituto Tecnológico de 
Aeronáutica 
- 
ITA), 
a 
successful 
Collaborative 
Interdisciplinary 
Problem-Based 
Learning 
(Co-IPBL) 
experience took place. At that time, more than 20 undergrad 
and graduate students from 3 different courses within just 16 
academic weeks had the opportunity of conceptualizing, 
modeling, developing, and testing a Computer System based 
upon Big Data, Blockchain Hyperledger, Micro-services, and 
other emerging technologies for government and private  
organizations. This Co-IPBL was performed with the 
participation of a medical technical team from the Hospital of 
Clinics at the Faculty of Medicine of the University of São 
Paulo focusing in Urgency and Emergency Care. The purpose 
of this system was to aggregate data from actors, such as 
External Regulations of Heath Care, Hospital Internal 
Regulation, Hospital Emergency, Urgency Care, and Urgency 
Institutes, by integrating them into just one decision making 
process, to improve Urgency and Emergency Care. This 
academic research project was named in Portuguese Soluções 
Tecnológicas Aplicáveis ao Gerenciamento de Informações 
Hospitalares Ostensivas com Big Data - STAGIHO-DB, meaning 
in English "Technological Solutions Applicable for Managing 
Ostensive 
Hospital 
Information 
with 
Big 
Data 
- 
TSA4MOHIBD.  Differently from other existing university 
systems, Research Centers, Governmental Agencies, Public or 
Private systems, this one was academically developed and 
tested in just 16 calendar weeks, applying Scrum Agile Method 
and Value Engineering. This research work was stored in a 
Google site and implemented as a Proof of Concept (PoC), by 
using 
emerging 
technologies, 
such 
as the 
Blockchain 
Hyperledger, a common database of health care information 
that doctors and providers could access. It represents one 
example of how to address the old problem of teaching, 
learning, designing, and implementing complex intelligent 
systems to solve health care problems, by collaboratively 
working with technical teams facing real problems of Urgency 
and Emergency Health Care. 
Keywords-Health Care System; Big Data; Internet of Things; 
Agile method and testing; Intelligent Systems; Micro-services 
Architecture; Cloud Computing; Blockchain; interdisciplinarity; 
Collaborative problem-based learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper tackles the development of an academic 
project using the Collaborative Interdisciplinary Problem-
Based Learning (Co-IPBL). Two issues are emerging in 
health care as clinicians face the complexities of current 
patient care: the need for applying new technologies in 
health care management and the need for these professionals 
to collaborate with professionals from engineering and 
computer science background.  
Interdisciplinary health care teams with members from 
many professions usually answer calls, by working together, 
collaborating, and communicating closely to digitize patients' 
care [10]-[12].  
This research work provides an integration of 3 different 
courses taught at the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of 
Technology (Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica - ITA): 
CE-240 Database Systems Projects, CE-245 Information 
Technologies, and CE-229 Software Testing. It involved 
some cooperative work with technical Physicians from 
Urgent and Emergency Health Care at the Hospital of Clinics 
from the Faculty of Medicine at the University of São Paulo, 
Brazil.  
It also describes a practical application of collaborative 
and interdisciplinary concepts, by using the Scrum Agile 
Method [1]-[3] and Value Engineering. This academic 
project was driven by ITA to generate expertise on 
developing, integrating, and managing Emergency and 
Urgency Health Care in the Hospital of Clinics [4]. 
This project was named in Portuguese Soluções 
Tecnológicas Aplicáveis ao Gerenciamento de Informações 
Hospitalares Ostensivas com Big Data - STAGIHO-DB, 
meaning in English, "Technological Solutions Applicable for 
Managing Ostensive Hospital Information with Big Data- 
TSA4MOHIBD". It has considered the development of a 
Software System, involving Patients, Doctors, Hospitals, and 
Suppliers, for decision making, by using: Scrum Agile 
method; 
Value 
Engineering; 
Big 
Data; 
Blockchain 
Hyperledger[9], software quality, reliability, safety, and 
testability. Scrum Agile Method, Value Engineering, and its 
best practices were used, in order to develop a computer 
system to satisfy project requirements in a time frame of just 
16 academic weeks.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
This TSA4MOHIBD Project [5] was divided into two 
groups of application: External Regulation and Internal 
Regulation, by sharing its development among four student 
teams, which were responsible for developing different 
functional requirements involving the verification of quality, 
reliability, safety, and testability. 
This research work project was developed by using 
NodeJs[15] for the development of Java Micro-services 
(fine-grained services), NoSQL Databases [16] to stored the 
internal data for the Hospital, Blockchain Hyperledger [9] to 
stored the electronic health records, Kafka [17] for message 
exchanging in the common communication data bus, and 
other emerging technologies. During this collaborative 
project development, more than 20 students have practiced 
the roles of Product Owners (POs), Scrum Masters (SMs), 
and Team Developers (TDs). At the end of this project, a 
total of 48 User Stories (USs) had been planned  to compose 
the Product Backlog. However, only 36 of them were 
developed within 3 monthly sprints.At the end of each sprint, 
reviews and retrospective meetings took place. Moreover, 
the Acceptance Test Driven Development (ATDD) [6] was 
applied by generating a minimum, necessary, and sufficient 
set of artifacts stored at [5]. 
For each User Story (US), more than one test case and 
acceptance test were developed. The integration strategy 
between groups of subsystem components occurred, by using 
Micro-services, a Commom Data Communication Bus, and 
Blockchain Hyperledger, allowing information to be 
available via broadcast to every hospital area and also to the 
External Regulator named CROSS (named in Portuguese 
Central de Regulação de Ofertas de Serviços de Saúde and 
meaning in English the Regulation Center for Health 
Services Offerings). 
An overview of the Urgency and Emergency Care flow is 
presented in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  The Emergency and Urgent Care Overview. 
In Section II, we describe the attributes of Urgent and 
Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP. In Section III we present 
the Proof of Concept and The Proposed System Architecture. 
In Section IV, we present the specific characteristics of 
Blockchain Architecture. In Section V, we state our 
conclusions and suggest possible topics for future research. 
II. 
THE URGENCY AND EMERGENCY HEALTH CARE IN 
THE HCFMUSP 
Before starting the academic year, some students from 
the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology (ITA) had 
a planning meeting with some members of the Emergency 
Care in the Hospital of Clinics from the Faculty of Medicine 
at the University of São Paulo (in Portuguese, Hospital da 
Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina de São Paulo - 
HCFMUSP). 
On that opportunity, the internal members of the hospital 
have presented some details of the internal and external 
regulation and clarified the diagram presented in Figure 1. At 
that time, there was also an on-site visit to some emergency 
areas and hospital sectors and it was agreed that some 
information should be shared with ITA developers, such as  
students and professors, in order to provide requirements 
specifications for the next steps of project development. 
A. Regulations 
Regulations of Hospitals and Health Units attending 
Urgencies and Emergencies are usually carried out by the 
Health Care Supply Regulatory Center (CROSS). Some 
urgencies and emergencies are referred to the CROSS by: the 
Mobile Emergency Response Service (in Portuguese, 
Serviço de Atendimento Móvel de Urgência - SAMU); the 
Military Police Operations Center (in Portuguese, Central de 
Operações Policias Militares - COPOM); the Firefighter 
Operations Center (in Portuguese, Centro de Operações do 
Corpo de Bombeiros - COBOM); and/or Health, Secondary 
Hospitals, and Specialized Hospitals. 
It is through the CROSS that the HCFMUSP use to be 
contacted, in order to respond to urgencies and emergencies. 
An emergency patient may also arrive by the regular 
entrance of the HCFMUSP and after contacting the CROSS 
(usually via email or through the CROSS Web Portal), the 
HCFMUSP will screen through an Internal Emergency and 
Emergency Control Center to filter relevant cases for 
hospital care. Definitions of Urgency and Emergency Health 
Care are described in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
THE PRINCIPLES OF URGENT AND EMERGENCY CARE 
Principles 
Resource utilization 
Universal Access, 
Integrality (end-to-
end view), 
Prioritization 
Regionalization    (Health    Offices, 
Ambulatory   Medical   Assistance, Hospitals);  
Hierarchy  (The  hierarchical division is 
performed by the health care secretary) 
B. The External Regulation 
The Health Care Secretary of São Paulo understood the 
regulation as an important tool for the management of public 
health systems, which has among its objectives the equity of 
the access implemented through dynamic actions executed in 
an equitable, orderly, timely and rational way, creating the 
CROSS, which brings together actions aimed at regulating 
access in hospitals and outpatient areas, contributing to the 
integrality of the assistance, providing the adjustment of the 
available health care supply to the immediate needs of the 
citizen as described at [13]. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Regarding the existing scenario, some characteristics of 
current Urgent and Emergency Care processes are described 
on Table II and Table III. 
TABLE II.  
THE EXTERNAL REGULATION - SUMMARY 
Current 
Details 
About Patient 
Care 
Regional units use paper data; dependence on people; 
patient is directed to the wrong place; lack of 
resources for care; patient late to the correct location. 
About 
Logistics 
Problems mapping criticality versus logistics; manage 
public versus outsourced ambulances;  prioritization 
versus type of illness; and HCFMUSP also receives 
patients from other countries (e.g., from Latin 
America and Africa). 
About the 
Patient 
Behavior 
High demand; everyone wants to come to 
HCFMUSP; after getting treatment in HC, patient also 
does not want to return to the regional hospital. 
About the 
Internal 
Controller 
Hospital can not refuse care; the HCFMUSP internal 
controller evaluates requests and redirect the patient 
to another Hospital; loss of patient history until arrival 
at HCFMUSP; data bad described versus delay in the 
assistance; vacancy zero versus no vacancy in the 
hospital; internal Controller working as "technical 
advisor" for the regulator; patients only for evaluation 
versus how long ambulance needs to wait. 
About the 
Governance 
It is unknown, which professionals are in the Health 
Care Centers; and it is also unknown the availability 
of beds on Health Care Centers. The regulator has the 
bed map and can be confirmed with the regulator if 
the hospital could visualize the availability in other 
hospitals also. It is unknown, why the Health Center 
refuses the care requested by the regulator. 
About the 
Standards 
There are Laws that regulate how the HCFMUSP 
Internal Controller should work; 
there are internal Norms in Hospitals and Health 
Centers; the Regulator has also specific standards; 
knowledge from job description of all professionals 
involved is also required; and 
there are also norms regulating the external transport 
of patients. 
About 
Systems 
Integration 
The HCFMUSP accesses the Regulator System, via 
Portal, and access only requests directed to it; it does 
not have visibility of care from other health centers; 
regulator requests are manually checked in the 
Regulator Portal; regarding the Volume of Orders (as 
an example, an estimation from the month of June 
2017, 2000 applications were received by the 
Regulator, 540 accepted by the Controller of the USP 
and out of them, only around 30 could have a vacancy 
of 0 - which means that the patient has to be accepted; 
there is no integration between data flows; a typical 
flow of data on the HC is: Health Units -> Regulator -
> HC Internal Controller; a typical flow of data within 
the HC is: Regulator + Electronic Record at the 
Reception + Internal Controller; there is a lack of 
synchronism between actions; the regulator, in the 
attendance, needs to obtain data from the patient and 
his illness; and demographic data are needed (from 
where the patient comes, how he is coming, and when 
he is arriving). 
About the 
Management 
of Beds 
Treats how to direct the patient in the internal flow 
(e.g., available beds and specialists); as an example 
from a Real Scenario, the patient has arrived at 03:00 
am to perform an endoscopy, had to stay within the 
ambulance, mainly because the Hospital did not know 
of his arrival and can not do the endoscopy. The 
patient has waited until the morning, because it was 
not possible to direct the patient in the internal flow; 
Current 
Details 
the doctor who was attending the emergency has no 
contact with the HC and the COBOM system also use 
to work separately from the HCFMUSP. The 
COBOM has a manual chart to manage service 
resources (e.g., where vehicles are located); and the 
external systems involved in the service are not 
integrated. 
TABLE III.  
THE EXTERNAL REGULATION - INTERACTIONS 
Current 
Details 
About Data 
Quality 
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and 
Related Health Problems (ICD) has many groupings 
and sub-classifications difficult to use in Emergency 
and Urgency Care; it is necessary to use specific 
fields to quickly reclassify disease and type of an 
emergency (e.g., if it is heart attack, trauma, Glasgow 
(level of consciousness), among others); and 
Diagnosis Related Groups (DRG) should be used to 
speed up case classification. 
About the 
Human 
Factor 
The are many problems with reliability of data and the 
correct use of the systems (e.g., word abbreviations 
are dependent on the form the clerk expresses). 
About the 
Telemedicine 
The doctor attending an emergency does not have 
contact with the HCFMUSP. 
About the 
Hierarchy 
There are some problems in the scheduling of care 
and diagnostic problems that generate unnecessary 
referrals to Specialized Hospitals; and problems in the 
hierarchy, which cause slowness so that the correct 
patient arrives at the HCFMUSP in the correct time. 
C. The Internal Regulation 
The Internal Regulation is the area responsible in the 
Hospital for verifying availability to receive a Patient and 
will also make the contact with the appropriate hospital 
institute to evaluate if a Patient could be transferred to the 
Hospital. With regards to the existing scenario, some 
characteristics of the existing Internal Flow in Urgency and 
Emergency Care process are described on Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
THE INTERNAL REGULATION 
Current 
Details 
About the 
Lobby 
It has only one entrance; the stretchers change places; 
and there is a "virtual bed number" and no "real" fixed 
number. 
About the 
Identification 
There is a bracelet to identify patients; patients who 
arrive in ambulances use open tokens and are also 
screened; 
If a patient is unconscious, he receives a number; and 
The Manchester Protocol Risk classification is used, 
which also defines the maximum time for the first 
service and provides a green / blue classification that 
does not necessarily leads to the opening of a card. In 
this case, the patient may be redirected to another 
region. 
About Patient 
Care  
Many patient cares are provided in the lobby; Nurses 
need to walk between stretchers; doctors can not 
forget to see the patients; and patients can not fail to 
take prescribed drugs. 
About 
Patients in 
the 
Emergency 
Room  
There is no information about what happens, after the 
patient passes the entrance door and arrives at the 
Emergency Room; there are patients who wait for 6 
hours in Emergency Room and have not been 
attended for some reason (e.g., Hospital busy or 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Current 
Details 
unable to attend); there is only one Patient Card; and 
there is an assessment of what patient's risk is. 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Patients 
After screening, patients are referred to an emergency 
or general medical clinic; and 
patients may also require evaluation of multiple 
professionals. 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Physicians 
There are 11 Medical Teams and sometimes Doctors 
need to make an assessment of one Patient in the 
Building of another Institute (e.g., a Neurosurgeon 
may be in another building evaluating a patient or in a 
Surgical Center); Medical Specialists move more; and 
Physicians have mobile, but the signal for mobile 
does not work well inside buildings that do not have 
signals with good intensity of the Telephony 
Operator, but they have a good signal of WiFi. For 
this reason, Doctors have again used the technology 
of Pager. 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Nurses 
Nurses usually stay in more fixed places pre-
determined for them. 
III. 
REQUIREMENTS 
A. The Proof of Concept as an Assigned Mission 
To reduce the scope and complexity of the system to be 
developed, a mission assigned was developed to the rescue 
of motorcycle accident victims, mainly because it is a 
frequent occurrence in the city of São Paulo. On a regular 
work day, every 15 minutes, the SAMU assists a 
motorcyclist in the city of São Paulo. Most of victims are not 
made up of motoboys. Usually, they are drivers who use 
vehicles (motorbikes) to go to work or are weekend drivers. 
Rehabilitation of those who are injured is usually time-
consuming and laborious, as described below: 
- 40\% of motorcycle accident victims need to undergo 
complex surgeries and long physiotherapy treatments; 
- The most serious injuries caused by motorcycle 
accidents are usually in the skull and spine; 
- Most motorcycle riders use the vehicle as transport, 
only for 2 hours a day, usually to move between home and 
work place; 
Most of them have been injured before; 
- Of the total number of accidents initially investigated, 
2% resulted in death of motorcyclists; 
- Of the total number of injuries: 48% had serious 
injuries, 17% in the legs and feet; 12% in arms; and 23% had 
other types of trauma; 
- Most of them were discharged immediately after care 
and only 18% had to be hospitalized; and 
- Considering the annual costs, about R$ 100 million are 
invested by the Orthopedics Institute of the HC, exclusively 
for the recovery of motorcyclists: "These are patients who, in 
the first six months of hospitalization, cost about R$ 300 
thousands to the Hospital, on surgeries, ICU hospitalizations, 
occupations of wards, use of medications, among other 
procedures.  
Based on previously reported motorcycle accident data, 
the development of the TSA4MOHIBD project should be 
able to provide an adequate management for the control of 
victim assistance only considering motorcycle accidents, in 
such a way that: 
- Those motorcycle accident victims (PATIENTS) may 
be appropriately diagnosed, promptly identified and/or 
attended to; 
- PHYSICIANS may have computers and/or computer 
tools capable of providing preventive and appropriate 
planning, scheduling, and controlling of motorcycle accident 
emergency services, for example, identifying the needs of: 
hospitalization time; procedures; medical teams; procedures 
for surgery preparations; as well as the availability of 
operating rooms and Intensive Theraphy Units; 
- 
The 
HOSPITAL 
and/or 
the 
INTERNAL 
CONTROLLER shall have computers and/or computer tools 
capable of using appropriate technologies to provide efficient 
screening methods, prioritization of care, patient and 
physician locations within the HOSPITAL, in order to 
locate, 
if 
necessary, 
other 
HOSPITALS 
to 
attend 
emergencies of motorcycle accident victims, according to the 
criticalities and needs from specialized treatments of the 
PATIENTS; 
- HOSPITAL must have adequate computers and/or 
computer means to collaborate in the process of managing 
large data flows, involving efficient attendance of injured 
motorcycle patients, by using appropriate technologies and 
efficient screening methods for this type of emergency; 
- SUPPLIERS of medicines, devices and/or technologies 
must have appropriate tools to participate in logistics and/or 
supply process to be used in care and/or care for victims 
from motorcycle accidents attended by urgency and 
emergency of HOSPITALS; 
- PHYSICIANS and NURSES must have appropriate 
tools to provide care to victims from motorcycle accidents 
attended by the urgency and emergency of the HOSPITAL, 
for example, to identify them from their entrance hall, by 
verifying and controlling also the movement of the 
stretchers, according to internal flows of required services; 
- Each confirmed case of motorcycle-injured PATIENT 
can and should generate, within the inventory control of a 
HOSPITAL, the release of care kits containing materials and 
medications, according to the size of events. In these cases, 
in addition to medicines, other supplies can and should be 
considered important, such as blood bags for transfusions, as 
accident victims need quick rescue and motorcycle accidents 
kill from blood loss; 
- The population/society should have access to computers 
and/or computer tools of the System Project involving the 
TSA4MOHIBD and/or the Real-time TSA4MOHIBD 
capable of providing appropriate records, management, 
controls, and governance of resources used in the area of 
Health Care; 
- Public administration must have reliable data to provide 
a comprehensive situational awareness to support decision 
making for accidents and/or crises, involving motorcycle 
accidents. 
B. The Proposed System Architecture 
In 
order 
to 
provide 
appropriate 
speed 
in 
the 
communication with the Regulator and also to allow the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Regulator to know in advance the number of bed vacancy in 
the Hospital, it is suggested that the communication between 
the Regulator and the Hospital works similarly to the 
AirBnB model. Then, the hospital will publish in a data bus 
communication 
vacancy, 
physicians, 
and 
specialists 
available and also the Regulator will publish a request for a 
patient to be attended and its initial conditions. On top of 
that, it will run an Artificial Intelligence algorithm to verify 
that the Regulator needs a Patient to be treated and will also 
match the required care with the Hospital that has vacancy to 
receive the Patient. The Artificial Intelligence algorithm, 
after finding the appropriate Hospital, will place in the same 
data bus a message to the Hospital. Some External Flow 
Architecture Details are shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  The External Flow Architecture. 
In the Hospital at the Internal Regulator, the operator will 
analyze the request and through the application system he 
will place a message in the Data Bus, by informing to 
Artificial Intelligence algorithm that the Patient was accepted 
and will inform straight the Urgency Care Unit that a Patient 
will arrive, also informing the date and time of the estimated 
arrival. The patient information will be available in the 
Blockchain Hyperledger, and then, data from the CROSS 
and also data about the Patient will be internally matched in 
the Hospital. 
Some important details about how it will work will also 
be presented in the Blockchain Architecture section. From 
that point onwards, the planning for Patient Care will be 
started prior to the Patient arrival. When the Patient arrives 
the technical team, the bed, and the required examination and 
health care steps will proceed as per suggested planning. 
After acceptance from the Internal Controller, the 
intelligence of the system will place a message to the 
Regulator, by informing that the Patient was accepted by the 
HCFMUSP. Some Internal Flow Architecture Details are 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  The Internal Controller Flow Architecture. 
After a Patient arrived at the Hospital, his Electronic 
Health Record could be read by any Institute from inside of 
the HCFMUSP, and information about patient care steps, as 
all the current bed management in the Hospital, would be 
presented in a dashboard that could be available for the 
governance team, by physicians and nurses looking at the 
next steps of the Patient Care. Some internal management 
information are shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  The Dashboard for Patient Care. 
IV. 
THE BLOCKCHAIN ARCHITECTURE 
A. Blockchain Applications in Health Care 
Blockchain technology and smart contracts have a variety 
of application in Health Care and, as recently reported, there 
are multiple advantages, such as a common database of 
health information that doctors and providers could access, 
no matter what electronic medical system they use, higher 
security and privacy, less admin time for doctors, so there is 
more time to spend on patient care, and even better sharing 
of research results to facilitate new drug and treatment 
therapies for disease, as recently mentioned by a research 
published by Forbes [7]. 
In the open-source landscape map for healthcare-related 
blockchain published in GitHub [8], there are multiple 
companies in the early stage of applying this technology as 
shown in Figure 5. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
Figure 5.  The open-source landscape map for healthcare-related 
blockchain. 
The Blockchain proposed for the Urgency and 
Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP explores how Blockchain 
Hyperledger [9][14] and smart contracts could be used to 
provide an interesting and innovative way to keep references 
of the Patient data, since the occurrence of the emergency 
until the completion of Patient treatment in the Hospital. 
To do this, first we discuss the need of two separate and 
private blockchain networks and then, we propose an 
architecture that is able to use those different networks 
applied to the motorcycle accident Proof of Concept.  
B. The Blockchain Proposal for the HCFMUSP 
For the Urgency and Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP, 
our proposal is to use two separate Blockchain networks: one 
for Patient and other for Attendance. 
The Blockchain Patient network has overall patient 
information and is a private network with information that 
can be accessed by the CROSS and any other Institution that 
would like in the future to access Patient Identification (e.g., 
Single Health System, in Portuguese, named Sistema Único 
de Saúde - SUS). 
The Blockchain Attendance network has detailed patient 
information and all the heath care details performed by the 
Hospital. And it is a private network with information that 
can be accessed only by the Hospital and internal institutes. 
For future work, examination details could be also stored in 
this Blockchain network. The main benefit of isolating 
patient's data from patient's own care is to provide data 
safety, since confidential information will be managed only 
by the hospital. The indirect benefit is to allow that two 
different groups of students learning Blockchain could also 
learn separately and then, the integration has worked 
smoothly during the Sprint 3 of the TSA4MOHIBD project, 
focusing in the Integration.  
The Blockchain Hyperledger implementation also makes 
use of encapsulated micro-services allowing smooth 
funcionalities' integrations, which were developed during 
Sprint 1, focusing in the External Flow implementation, and 
Sprint2, focusing in the Internal Flow Implementation. The 
steps followed to assist a patient using the Blockchain 
Hyperledger architecture are shown in Figure 6, on Table V 
and Table VI. 
 
Figure 6.  The Architecture for the Urgency and Emergency Patient Care. 
TABLE V.  
THE STEPS FOR THE URGENT AND EMERGENCY PATIENT 
CARE – EXTERNAL FLOW 
Step 
Details 
1 
The fire department team receives notification of an accident 
(via process, not system implementation), by updating the 
occurrence of 14:17 Auto x Moto, Rua Coronel João Cabanas, 
650 - Grajaú, 1 vehicle, victim rescued by SAMU # 193R. 
4:14 PM - 27 May 2018 
2 
The SAMU, in contact with the CROSS, informs the details 
about the accident and the patient. The name of the patient is 
informed as well as that the biker's legs, ankles, and feet have 
been affected (via process, not via implementation system). 
3 
The CROSS requests a slot on the message data bus. With the 
message bus, it was created an INTELLIGENCE that reads 
CROSS requests and messages that the HOSPITAL generates 
checking that hospitals have beds available for the care. 
4 
Hospitals, including the HCFMUSP, post a message every 15 
minutes, reporting the total available vacancies and there are 3 
vacancies in the Emergency and Central Institute. 
Current situation: vacancy available (available beds, available 
specialists, available on call), hospital (hospital location 
(geographical or physical address)) 
5 
The INTELLIGENCE reads the message data bus and verifies 
that the HCFMUSP has a vacancy available and sends a 
message directly to the HCFMUSP, informing patient's data 
and his current situation.  
Victim ID, current victim status, severity (from the manchester 
protocol, color scale), type of trauma, and arrival prediction). 
6 
Information about the accident region is also shared with the 
CROSS in the message data bus.  
PATIENT ID (HASH) name, CPF, RG, documents (SUS), 
latitude, longitude 
for example: id132 - (motorcycle accident, injury, body area, 
severity, lat, lon) Rua Coronel João Cabanas, 650 - Grajaú. 
7 
The victim is taken to the Hospital by the SAMU ambulance 
(The communication with the SAMU occurs via the process, 
not through the system). 
8 
At the HCFMUSP, the Control Planner makes the consultation 
to specialists, beds, and through demographic data verifying 
how long the PATIENT will arrive at the HC, and that the 
transportation will be made by SAMU. 
9 
Upon verification by the Controlling Party, a message is posted 
by INTELLIGENCE on the bus to the CROSS, confirming the 
acceptance of the procedure TS03-US103 PATIENT. If the 
CONTROLLING PLANT did not accept the PATIENT, the 
INTELLIGENCE would verify the vacancy in another 
HOSPITAL (This is a recommendation, but not implemented 
yet). 
10 
The CROSS confirms to the SAMU that the PATIENT will be 
directed to the HCFMUSP (implemented via process, not via 
system yet). 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Step 
Details 
11 
Upon confirmation of the PATIENT by the Internal Controller, 
the Internal Controller also advises the Emergency Room to 
prepare the internal flow to receive the PATIENT. 
TABLE VI.  
THE STEPS FOR THE URGENT AND EMERGENCY PATIENT 
CARE – INTERNAL FLOW 
Step 
Details 
12 
In the Emergency Room, the internal flow of activities begins 
to prepare care. PATIENT data, via blockchain, are received 
and some actions for the reservation are initiated. The vacancy 
is reserved. The bed is reserved in procedure TS01-US299b 
and a physician is booked. 
13 
Service planning starts, Exams, Operating room. Patient's 
travel time to the Hospital areas are also calculated and 
estimated. 
14 
The Internal CONTROLLER shows the situation of the 
HOSPITAL after reserving the bed, also verifying available 
specialists, available beds, and the Physician on call. The 
Emergency Dashboard also provides an up-to-date view upon 
reservation and service planning. 
15 
The CROSS may request other vacancies, to refer other 
patients according to the occurrences, if necessary. 
16 
PATIENT arrives at the HCFMUSP. 
17 
The Emergency Unit, through the data of the PATIENT locate 
in the BLOCKCHAIN, finds the his Electronic Health Record. 
/ get (getAll) 
/ get / {hash} (getByHash). 
18 
The necessary identification is made, by using QR Code 
bracelets  (This is also a recommendation, not implemented 
yet). 
19 
All PATIENTS care are performed according to pre-planning. 
20 
According to results from tests, the PATIENT will need 
surgery by the orthopedic team, he is not at risk, and his 
transfer can be done to the Orthopedics and Traumatology 
Institute - OTI (This is also a recommendation not 
implemented yet). 
21 
The PATIENT remains in URGENCY and EMERGENCY for 
one day, and through the internal flow he is transferred the 
next day to the OTI. 
22 
PATIENT records are updated through the blockchain and can 
be consulted by the OTI. 
23 
After the transfer, the vacancy is made available at the 
Urgency and Emergency of the Central Institute. 
24 
New services follow the same flow for receiving motorcycle 
accident victims in the city of São Paulo. According to some 
OTI statistics, every 15 minutes, a motorcyclist suffers an 
accident in the City of São Paulo. 
C. The Blockchain Implementation 
For the Urgency and Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP, 
our proposal is to use two separate Blockchain networks: one 
for Patient and other for Attendance. 
For the implementation, it was identified the four main 
flows for the Blockchain Hyperledger integration. The 
following details are shown in Figure 7. 
 
Register Assets (e.g Physicians, Hospitals); 
 
Authorize a PATIENT Care; 
 
Perform PATIENT Care; and 
 
Register information from the PATIENT Care. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Some Blockchain Integration Activities. 
For the authorization in the Blockchain, two flows were 
identified: the first one to authorize Assets and the second to 
authorize and finalize Patient Care. Some details are shown 
in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8.  Some Blockchain Authorization Activities. 
Some Graphical Interfaces are shown in Figure 9 and 
Figure 10. 
 
Figure 9.  The Hospital Participant. 
 
Figure 10.  The Patient Authorization. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper aimed to describe the development of an 
academic interdisciplinary project using Scrum agile method 
and its best practices, in order to develop a prototype for a 
Proof of Concept (PoC), by using a Computer System based 
on Big Data, Blockchain Hyperledger, Micro-services, and 
other emerging technologies applied to Urgency and 
Emergency Care. 
This academic research project was named in Portuguese 
as “Soluções Tecnológicas Aplicáveis ao Gerenciamento de 
Informações Hospitalares Ostensivas com Big Data - 
STAGIHO-DB", 
meaning 
in 
English, 
"Technological 
Solutions Applicable for the Management of Ostensive 
Hospital Information with Big Data - TSA4MOHIBD", a 
Computer System based on Big Data, Blockchain 
Hyperledger, 
Micro-services, 
and 
other 
emerging 
technologies for governmental organization and private 
sector. 
The purpose of this system was to aggregate data and 
integrate sectors such as External and Internal Regulations 
through its PATIENTS, HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS, and 
HEALTH SUPPLIERS, for the decision making process 
related to Urgency and Emergency Care, involving 
motorcycle accidents. The TSA4MOHIBD project was 
developed by students from three different Computer 
Science courses taught at the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute 
of Technology (Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica – ITA), 
on the 1st Semester of 2018. 
A. Specific Conclusions 
 
The use of interdisciplinarity in 3 courses of Computer 
Science has worked as expected, since students were able to 
know how to work in teams to successfully develop a 
complex computer system. 
The cloud computing environment has been widely used 
by students to enable collaborative work from distance, by 
using remote meetings, personal websites, and an official 
project website. 
The Scrum framework has been adapted to the reality of 
the interdisciplinary academic environment of ITA, helping 
the entire team of more than 20 students to offer value to 
stakeholders at the end of each sprint and also at the end of 
this project. 
The application of Test Driven Development (TDD) and 
Acceptance 
Testing 
Driven 
Development 
(ATDD) 
techniques in the project was closely related to the 
interdisciplinary approach adopted, since acceptance tests 
were created by CE-229 Software Testing course students, 
while the Blockchain and NodeJS applications were 
implemented by CE-240 Database System Project and CE-
245 Information Technologies course students. 
The Blockchain Hyperledger, NodeJs, MongoDB, and 
MySQL Databases were hosted on the AWS Cloud services 
and have represented the main tools applied for integrating 
services from External and Internal Regulations. 
The main results obtained from the use of the 
TSA4MOHIBD project prototype were successful. 
Its operating logic was established and all teams were 
able to perform development integration, by defining and 
accomplishing the phases of an Assigned Mission, mapping 
User Stories to functionalities for the External and Internal 
regulations integration, which variables and detailed 
characteristics would be changed as inputs and/or outputs. 
At the end of this project, in just 17 weeks, it was 
possible to demonstrate the building of the Collaborative 
Interdisciplinary 
Project 
TSA4MOHIBD, 
without 
completeness, but following a model with quality, reliability, 
safety, testability, norms, and standards applicable to a 
product of this nature. 
Finally, students have presented the TSA4MOHIBD 
Academic Project Prototype, as the final project for their 
courses, as a Proof of Concept (PoC) to professors, 
entrepreneurs, and some invited guests from industry and 
academia. 
B. General Conclusions 
The academic development of a critical intelligent system 
is a rewarding experience that can be used in different 
undergrad and graduate courses. 
The use of interdisciplinarity, Blockchain Hyperledger, 
cloud computing, and agile methods seems to be an 
interesting novel and exciting way to achieve academic 
goals, in just one semester of 17 weeks and can also be 
extended to other knowledge domains. 
It is possible to integrate products generated with 
Blockchain Hyperlegder, from different teams and functional 
segments, such as the Internal and External Regulation, with 
different technologies for example Micro-services, NodeJs, 
MongoDB and MySQL Databases, from a minimal 
organization 
between 
teams, 
by 
defining 
separated 
Blockchain networks with medical ostensive data to be 
exchanged between each Blockchain network, allowing 
collective planning among all involved. 
This integration can be extended to participants, running 
on different machines integrated through the Blockchain 
Hyperledger Patient network. 
Hospitals can be considered ledgers and, as proposed in 
this architecture, can have an specific Blockchain 
Hyperledger Attendance network were specific Health Care 
information can be securely and safely stored. 
C. Recommendations 
It is strongly recommended to align expectations and 
results that may be compromised and quickly adjusted to 
review 
deliverables, 
when 
working 
with 
emerging 
technologies. This cycle, in the area of computing science, 
should be repeated all the time we have to deal with new 
technologies. It is important to have on the team participants 
who will face the challenge of learning and preparing a 
legacy. 
It is also fundamental to have participants in the team that 
could identify in advance where the team could fail with the 
new technology, proposing improvements and allowing the 
team to repositioning itself to deliver what is agreed in 
consensus in the appropriate time. Tutorials prepared by the 
team during the Blockchain Hyperlegder learning process 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
can be used to demonstrate for all team members to quickly 
acquire knowledge about this new technology. 
This very important legacy from teams will help the next 
teams to face challenges of using new technologies. It is 
recommended the continuation of this Project, by starting 
from what has already been done, possible to obtain and 
execute, within the courses on the next semesters, on new 
Sprints, 
generating 
the 
possibility 
of 
increasing 
completeness. 
D. Future Work 
It is suggested that the process used in this 
TSA4MOHIBD academic project prototype can be extended 
to other Blockchain Hyperledger projects and predictive 
systems, in order to improve estimation of efforts and 
resources to attend Urgency and Emergency Care. 
It is also suggested the use of some simulation processes 
to measure Urgency and Emergency Care with and without 
the use of Blockchain Hyperledger supporting health 
management. 
Finally, for future work, it is suggested to expand some 
cooperation 
among 
the 
ITA, 
hospitals, 
innovation 
foundations, medical suppliers, industries and public and 
private enterprises, in order to get a selection of academic 
projects aligned to updated needs from the market. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Hospital of Clinics 
from The Faculty of Medicine at The University of São 
Paulo, the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology, the 
Ecossistema Negócios Digitais Ltda for its finantial support 
and scholarships, and  The Casimiro Montenegro Filho 
Foundation 
(FCMF) 
for 
their 
support, 
during 
the 
development of this TSA4MOHIBD Project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Sutherland, "SCRUM Handbook", Scrum Training Institute Press, 
2017 
[2] D. Cohen et al., "An Introduction to Agile Methods", Fraunhofer 
Centerfor Experimental Software Engineering, ADVANCES IN 
COMPUTERS,VOL. 62., 2004 
[3] M. Cohn, "Succeeding with agile: Software development using 
Scrum",1st Edition, Pearson Education, Inc, 2010 
[4] FMUSP,   "Medical   School   of   São   Paulo",   2018,   accessed   
from http://www.fm.usp.br/fmusp/portal/  in June 10, 2018. 
[5] TSA4MOHIBD  Project,  "Technological  Solutions  Applicable  for  
theManagement  of  Ostensive  Hospital  Information  with  Big  
Data", 
 
2018, 
accessed 
from 
https://sites.google.com/site/projetointerdisciplinar2018/  in June 10, 
2018. 
[6] K. Pugh, "Lean-Agile Acceptance Test-Driven Development: Better 
Soft-ware  Through  Collaboration",  Addison-Wesley,  ISBN  978-
0321714084, 2011 
[7] Forbes,  "This  is  Why  Blockchain  will  Transform  HealthCare",  
2017, 
accessed 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2017/11/29/this-is-why-
blockchains-will-transform-healthcare/13be90781ebe in  June  10, 
2018. 
[8] GitHub, 
"Open-source 
landscape 
map 
for 
healthcare-related 
blockchain", 
2018 
accessed 
from 
https://github.com/acoravos/healthcare-blockchains  in June 10, 2018. 
[9] Linux  Foundation  Projects,  "Blockchain  Hyperledger",  2018  
accessed from https://www.hyperledger.org/ in June 10, 2018. 
[10] D.  A.  Silva  et  al.,"Health  Care  Information  Systems:  a  Crisis  
Approach", In 15th International Conference on Information 
Technology: NewGenerations (ITNG 2018), Las Vegas, 2018 
[11] D. A. Silva et al., "Health Care Transformation: An Academic 
Applica-tion System Case Study", In 10TH IFAC Symposium on 
Biological andMedical Systems - International Federation of 
Automatic Control (IFACBMS 2018), São Paulo, Brazil, 2018 
[12] J. C. Martins et al., "Using Big Data, Internet of Things, and Agile for 
Crises  Management",  In  14th  International  Conference  on  
InformationTechnology: New Generations (ITNG 2017), Las Vegas, 
US, 2017 
[13] Cross,  "Health  Care  Supply  Regulatory  Center",  2018,  accessed  
from http://www.cross.saude.sp.gov.br/ in June 10, 2018. 
[14] [14]  A.  Conceicao,  F.  Silva,  V.  Rocha,  A.  Locoro,  J.  Barguil,  
"EletronicHealth  Records  Using  Blockchain",  XXXVI  Brazilian  
Symposium  on Computer Networks and Distributed Systems (SBRC 
2018), 2018, accessed  from  http://www.sbrc2018.ufscar.br/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/07-181717-1.pdf  in June 10, 2018. 
[15] Linux Foundation Projects, "Node.JS Foundation", 2018, accessed 
from https://nodejs.org/en/  in 10.June 2018. 
[16] Apache  Kafka,  "Apache  Kafka  Distributed  Stream  Platform",  
2018,accessed from http://kafka.apache.org/  
[17] MongoDB, 
"MongoDB", 
2018, 
accessed 
from 
https://www.mongodb.com/  
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

