 
 
ICT - based Approaches for Entrepreneurship Education 
 
Ileana Hamburg, Sascha Bucksch 
Institut Arbeit und Technik, Westfälische Hochschule  
Gelsenkirchen, Germany 
hamburg@iat.eu   
Emma O Brien 
University of Limerick  
Limerick, Ireland 
        emma.obrien@ul.ie 
Abstract – Businesses are organised or operated by an 
entrepreneur. It implies creativity, innovation, risk taking 
and the competence to plan and manage projects in order to 
achieve objectives. The role of entrepreneurship education is 
to offer students the tools to be creative, to solve problems 
efficiently, to analyse a business idea objectively, and to 
communicate, cooperate, lead, develop and evaluate 
projects. Approaches like mentoring and Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) supported forms of 
learning like Problem Based Learning (PBL), could be used 
in 
entrepreneurship 
education. 
Mentoring 
supports 
professional development and increases the mentees 
opportunities. PBL is suitable for entrepreneurship 
education i.e., by presenting properly real problems like 
“starting a business” and creates motivation in the students. 
ICT could improve the efficiency of PBL, but this aspect was 
not taken into consideration until now. Mentoring, ICT and 
PBL are used in the on-going European project Erasmus+ 
“Supporting PBL in entrepreneurial education and in Small 
and Medium sized Enterprises (SMEs) through ICT 
facilitated mentoring – Archimedes”. The authors developed 
an ICT platform in frame of this project to support PBL, 
which has been tested with SMEs and is shortly described in 
this paper. 
 
Keywords: 
ICT; 
Entrepreneur; 
Entrepreneurship 
education;  Mentor;  Problem Based Learning; Platforms; 
TikiWiki. 
I.  ENTREPRENEURSHIP EDUCATION 
Entrepreneur usually means an individual who organises 
or operates businesses. Entrepreneurship is the art of 
being entrepreneur, so to be able to turn ideas into action. 
This implies creativity, innovation and risk taking, and 
the competence to plan and manage projects in order to 
achieve objectives [1] [2].  
Some 
of 
the 
qualities 
of 
entrepreneurs 
(http://under30ceo.com/10-qualities-of-a-successful-
entrepreneur/) should be:  
 Discipline to follow the business steps of the 
established strategy to achieve the proposed 
objectives and eliminate obstacles. 
 Confidence in own ability  
 Open minded for new ideas 
 Competitive. 
 Creative and problem solving identifying solutions  
 Determination, not believing that something 
cannot be done. 
 Communication skills to motivate people to work 
and to sell products. 
 Passion, loving work to be done. 
Entrepreneurship education programmes should offer 
students the tools to be creative, to solve problems 
efficiently, to analyse a business idea objectively, and to 
communicate, cooperate, lead, develop and evaluate 
projects. Students can learn to set up their own businesses 
if they can test their ideas in an educational, supportive 
environment. 
Many 
European 
countries 
included 
entrepreneurship in the national curricula for vocational 
education training (VET) programmes and they are very 
different. Reports show that there are some gaps in most 
of these programmes [3] i.e., teaching methods are 
ineffective, student participation is limited, teachers are 
not fully competent, business people are not involved, the 
practical element is missing, entrepreneurship is not 
linked to specific training subjects or professions, 
education is not linked with labour market demands. It is 
important that entrepreneurship education takes these 
gaps into consideration. 
 
Mentoring within entrepreneurship education can 
address some of these gaps as it brings in expertise from 
business; it is practical and can assist in linking the 
training to particular professions and labour market 
demands [4]. 
Mentoring is a human resource development approach 
and a vital aspect of knowledge management which needs 
to be looked by all organizations and education 
institutions wishing to improve their efficiency [5]. 
Educators and practitioners have noted the importance of 
mentorship in promoting leader development and career 
opportunities [6].  
According to Kram’s mentor role theory [5], mentors 
provide career development in order to integrate and 
prosper within the organization, and social advancement, 
contributing to the mentee personal growth and their 
professional development. The literature has found that 
receiving mentorship has been associated with positive 
career outcomes [6]. 
The functions of the mentoring, career advancement 
for beginners, professional development and social 
integration (particularly of mentees with special needs) 
increase the mentees opportunities. Many of these 
methods can be used for mentoring in entrepreneurial 
education. For example, experienced entrepreneur-
mentors could help their mentees to understand that a 
failed 
business 
is 
an 
important 
part 
of 
their 
entrepreneurial training and that they can continue a 
successful career. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Mentorship from an entrepreneur can provide students 
with a greater level of security and inspiration. It can help 
students to know how a business was developed directly 
from its founder, and can be more effective than being 
mentored by an employee or an investor in this case. Also 
the story of an unsuccessful business venture is useful for 
students, particularly if it was a courageous idea, or the 
entrepreneur would like to create other interesting 
ventures.  
For mentors supporting young /future entrepreneurs 
(19-25 years), it is important to focus on developing life 
plans and passion for a career, helping these young 
mentees to keep their vision in sight and to reflect what is 
happening 
[7]. 
Softer 
skills 
such 
as 
listening, 
communicating as well as some including the review of 
business plans and meeting objectives are necessary. 
Mentors 
should 
increase 
mentees 
motivation, 
encouraging them to try to implement their ideas. 
Particularly supporting students/starters in small and 
new business creates a contribution to the local 
community, more jobs and a more attractive place to do 
business. Mentors could gain a better understanding of 
challenges facing small business which could enhance 
their working life or their retirement period. 
Another aspect is that many education institutions and 
companies 
offer 
diversity 
initiatives 
to 
support 
collaboration, understanding and the use of different 
competences and cultures, but most diversity initiatives, 
which are important in a global environment, do not go 
far enough to promote real diversity and improve firm´s 
competitiveness. Particularly within vocational education 
such initiatives are missing. 
Entrepreneurship learning does not relate to a single 
occupation; it covers a variety of occupational skills and 
learners. Students engaged in entrepreneurship education 
should acquire different competences according to the 
focus of their learning [8]. 
The implementation of efficient entrepreneurship 
teaching and learning methods, particularly in schools 
and VET, requires structural changes in most countries. 
In many institutions of higher education and VET, where 
learning approaches are not driven by national policy, 
introduction of entrepreneurial teaching and learning 
depends on the institution which should also make a 
cultural 
change 
including 
diversity 
approaches. 
Knowledge about diversity as well practical training 
should be offered in entrepreneurial education and these 
will be more efficient than large, abstract diversity 
lectures. The main objectives of such training include 
awareness, education and positive recognition of the 
differences among people in the workforce. 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
affects the entrepreneurship education because new 
technologies 
support 
the 
development 
of 
new 
entrepreneurship forms. ICT have the potential to 
improve student competences and skills, to motivate and 
engage students, to help them to link school knowledge to 
work practices. ICT contribute to change and improve 
VET practices. Technology becomes quickly obsolete 
requiring new skills and knowledge and also changes in 
entrepreneurship education.  
In the following we describe shortly Problem Based 
Learning (PBL) as a suitable form for Entrepreneurial 
education and an approach for ICT support developed by 
the authors.  
II.  PROBLEM BASED LEARNING 
Problem Based Learning (PBL) has been proven to 
develop higher order thinking and critical thinking skills. 
There are many different approaches to PBL [9], however 
little research has been done into the most effective 
methods in terms of learner success [10]. PBL should be 
adopted outside academic contexts i.e., as an excellent 
method of training for SMEs, because the staff learns 
solving real problems. It allows the learner to develop 
skills relevant to the needs of the company, it is 
conducted in a work based environment, it provides them 
with the skills to sustain the company beyond the initial 
training, it is low cost and it directly solves problems for 
the SME providing an immediate return [11]. Donnelly 
[12] highlighted that little is known about the use of 
technology in PBL. However after conducting a study in 
an academic context of the use of Communities of 
Practice (CoPs) [13] [14] for PBL it was found that CoPs 
provide an opportunity to enhance collaboration and 
extend face to face time with mentors and peers. In a 
business environment PBL, mentoring, CoPs and social 
media can be used to provide an opportunity for the 
communication between the mentor and mentee and to 
work with peers (or experts inside and outside the 
company) to find potential solutions to the problem or 
approaches to solve the problem. 
PBL is suitable for entrepreneurship education i.e., by 
presenting properly real problems like “starting a 
business”. It creates motivation in the students. 
It is important to have a structured way in PBL, 
because at the beginning the students feel like they know 
nothing but after a short introduction and the guidance 
from the trainer/teacher they realise that they themselves 
can be the drivers in creating their own business. 
In the following list we present steps which could be 
used by teaching PBL, based on methods described in 
PBL step by step [16]: 
 
Clarifying the task – The purpose of the first step 
is to explain the task, to agree on the meaning of 
the various words and terms and on the situation 
described in the problem  
 
Defining the problem 
 
Brainstorming - This should result in ideas to 
structure the problem. Each individual may 
express his or her ideas free and without 
immediate discussion  
 
Rating of Brainstorming outcomes 
 
Formulating 
learning 
objectives 
to 
cover 
knowledge deficits 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
Self-study 
 
Rating of possible solutions and working out a 
final solution 
 
Reflection. 
 
III.  EXAMPLE 
 
The European Erasmus+ project “Supporting PBL in 
entrepreneurial education and in small and medium sized 
enterprises (SMEs) through ICT facilitated mentoring – 
Archimedes” will develop a framework for organisational 
problem-based learning and supports the use of this form 
of learning. It is expected that these approaches will be 
widely adopted in entrepreneurial education and SMEs.  
PBL will be supported by an ICT platform taking into 
consideration the PBL steps described above. The 
platform should help the tutor and the participants during 
the PBL seminars. Figure 1 describes a Flow Chart for 
platform. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Flow chart Source: IAT 
 
The platform is in development by using TikiWiki 
[17]. TikiWiki, also known as Tiki, is an open source 
Content Management System (CMS). It provides many 
rich features like websites, forum, chat, wiki, blogs, quiz, 
calendar, document management, social software and 
many more. It is highly configurable and is mainly used 
in 
companies 
to 
organise 
tasks 
and 
to 
work 
collaboratively. 
 
Tiki was used in some of our former project and has 
proven to be a good ICT solution for collaborative 
working and will be used to support PBL now. The 
following figures show screenshots of the Archimedes 
ICT platform supporting PBL. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Homepage of the Archimedes ICT platform [18]  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Problem overview on the ICT platform [18]  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
Figure 4.  PBL steps visualised on the ICT platform [18] 
 
The first version of the platform has been tested with 
students and staff from SMEs. The results are positive. 
Both students and SME staff consider PBL as a suitable 
form for learning and solving real problems. At two 
academic cooperation partners PBL has been introduced 
in the courses for entrepreneurs. Some SMEs would like 
to have its own platform (a copy of the Archimedes ICT 
platform for solving and saving own problems). The 
improvements, proposed by the users, are taken into 
consideration for further project developments.  
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Development of entrepreneurial attitudes is a complex 
process, an important goal of education and requires 
cooperation of all actors involved.  Within the project 
Archimedes Focus Group Discussions have been 
organised with education experts, students, entrepreneurs 
to discuss about suitable methods in education in order to 
achieve these goals. Intensive cooperation between 
companies, higher and VET institutions its one of the 
future activities of the authors.  
Implementation of PBL requires some changes in the 
curriculum 
of 
entrepreneurship 
education 
and 
trainers/teachers with special knowledge. Rooms should 
be available for group discussions and the libraries should 
contain references which allow students to research for 
their PBL cases. Until now it was not successfully 
realised. Projects should be developed in this context.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper describes work within the on-going Euro-
pean project Archimedes  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D.A. Shepherd, Educating entrepreneurship students about 
emotion 
and 
learning 
from 
failure. 
Academy 
of 
Management Learning & Education, 3(3), pp. 274-287. 
2004. 
[2] I. Hamburg, Improving young entrepreneurship education 
and knowledge management in SMEs by mentors. In: 
World journal of education 4, no. 5, pp. 51-57, 2014.  
[3] European Commission. Enterprise and Industry, Entre-
preneurship in Vocational Education and Training. Final 
report of the Expert Group. ec.europa.eu/.../sme/.../ 
vocational/entr_voca_en.pdf, 2009. 
[4] E. O'Brien and I. Hamburg, Supporting sustainable 
strategies for SMEs through training, cooperation and 
mentoring. Higher education studies 2014, 4(2), pp. 61-69, 
2014. 
[5] K. Kram, Mentoring at work. Developmental relationships 
in organizational life. Scott, Foresman & Company, 
Glenview, ISBN 0-673-15617-6. 1985. 
[6] S.B. Srivastava, “Network Intervention: A Field Experi-
ment to Assess the Effects of Formal Mentoring on Work-
place Networks”. University of California, Berkeley, 
Working Paper. 2013. 
[7] J. Cull, Mentoring Young Entrepreneurs: What Leads to 
Success? International Journal of Evidence Based 
Coaching and Mentoring, 4(2), pp. 8-18, 2006. 
[8] Aarchus Technical College, Standards for Qualifications 
in. Entrepreneurship Learning. An EU-funded project 
managed by the European Agency for Reconstruction 
http://www.masht-gov.net/advCms/documents/Standards_ 
for_Qualifications_in_Entrepreneurship_Learning.pdf, 
2013. 
[9] H.S. Barrows, A taxonomy of problem-based learning 
methods. Medical Education 20, pp. 481-486, 1986. 
[10] W. Huag, Theory to reality: a few issues in implementing 
problem-based learning, Education Tech Research Dev 
(2011), vol. 59, 2011. 
[11] S. Bell, Project-Based Learning for the 21st  Century: Skills 
for the Future, The Clearing House: A Journal of 
Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 83:2, pp. 39-43, 
2010. 
[12] R. Donnelly, Blended problem-based learning for teacher 
education: Lessons learnt learning. Media and Technology, 
31(2), pp. 93-116, 2006. 
[13] E. Wenger, “Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning 
and Identity”. Cambridge MA: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998. 
[14] I. Hamburg and E. O'Brien, Using strategic learning for 
achieving growth in SMEs. Journal of information 
technology and application in education 3(2), pp. 77-83, 
2014. 
[15] I. Hamburg and E. O'Brien, Engaging SMEs in cooperation 
and new forms of learning. In: Computer and information 
science 7, no. 1, p. 9, 2014. 
[16] PBL step by step | UM PBL PREP www.umpblprep.nl/pbl-
step-by-step 
[17] TiKiWiki cms groupware http://www.tikiwiki.org 
[18]Archimedes Tiki http://archimedes-tiki.eu 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

