Trust as an Integral Part for Success of Cloud 
Computing 
 
Felix Meixner, Ricardo Buettner 
FOM Hochschule fuer Oekonomie & Management, University of Applied Sciences 
Chair of Information Systems, Organizational Behavior and Human Resource Management 
Arnulfstrasse 30, 80335 Munich, Germany 
f.meixner@ieee.org, ricardo.buettner@fom.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—Cloud computing has become a hot topic in 
research in the enterprise and consumer sector. It is clear to 
everyone that the opportunities and applications of cloud 
computing are versatile and that cloud computing is an emerging 
computing paradigm. However when decisions on adopting cloud 
computing-related solutions are made, trust and security are two 
of the most critical obstacles for the adoption and growth of 
cloud computing today. We think there are ways to largely 
eliminate concerns of potential cloud users by taking advantage 
of numerous existing technological possibilities, including trust-
building measures, like standardization, cryptography, isolation 
and many more. 
Keywords-cloud computing; security; identity-management; 
encryption; trust 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud Computing can be regarded as the most important 
evolution of the mid 1990’s concept of grid computing [1]. In 
recent years cloud computing clearly became the trend to 
follow in the IT-industry, providing flexible and scalable 
software-, platform- and infrastructure-services on demand [2]. 
However, to fully leverage its potential for cost-savings, cloud 
computing still has to overcome some major obstacles. As 
traditional network borders are breaking down at the same time 
as security threats are increasing, the most important concern 
about cloud computing are issues of security and trust that have 
only been partially solved so far.  
A lot of literature about cloud computing, trust and security 
does exist, though most of it is IT-centric [3] [4] [5] [6]. What 
is less examined and documented is the human perspective that 
examines the shortcomings of cloud computing, people’s 
expectations and anxieties as well as psychological aspects. 
This paper’s objective is to focus on both perspectives, IT and 
human and try to narrow the gap between both by offering a 
state of the art overview of mechanisms that help secure the use 
of cloud computing and thereby create trust in cloud 
computing. The research question is: Can cloud computing 
gain enough trust from its users and customers to be even more 
successful and become an indispensable utility like the power 
grid? 
Our approach to this subject included research on the 
history and state of cloud computing today, thereby identifying 
trust and security as the most critical factors of success for 
future growth and adoption. With these findings in mind, our 
research was refined on trust and security in cloud computing 
and its supporting and control mechanisms. The research 
methodology included investigating multiple of the most 
relevant online scientific journals databases (Springer Link, 
JSTOR, ScienceDirect, Elsevier, IEEE Xplore Digital Library 
and ACM Digital Library). 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In 
Section II we recognize related work. Then the paper gives an 
insight into the history, different types and sources of trust in 
non-technological fields and ways in Section III. These fields 
include trust in general, in psychological and in economical 
aspects. The paper outlines the difference between party trust 
and control trust and sets up a framework for trust that is 
transferred to Section IV, where the framework is mapped to 
cloud computing technology. The paper continues with Section 
V by describing various types of technology aiming to enhance 
user’s and decision makers trust in cloud computing. Finally, in 
Section 
VI, 
we 
draw 
the 
conclusion 
and 
provide 
recommendations for future work and show the need for 
optimizing existing trust infrastructure and mechanisms. 
II. 
 RELATED WORK 
In his article “Cloud Computing”, Brian Hayes discusses 
the trend of moving software applications into the cloud and 
the related trust privacy, security, and reliability challenges [7]. 
E. Pearson focuses on privacy challenges as important issues 
for cloud computing, both in terms of legal compliance and 
user trust and says that it needs to be considered at every phase 
of design. He suggests key design principles for software 
engineers and argues that privacy must be considered when 
designing any aspects of cloud services, for both legal 
compliance and user acceptance [8]. The article “A View of 
Cloud Computing” defines classes of utility and cloud 
computing and creates a ranked list of critical obstacles to 
adoption and growth of cloud computing. The list includes 
availability, data lock-in, data confidentiality and auditability 
as the top three factors for adoption [9]. M. Mowbray and S. 
Pearson of HP Labs in their paper “A Client-Based Privacy 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Manager for Cloud Computing” state that processing sensitive 
user data in the cloud poses a significant barrier to the adoption 
of cloud services and that users fear data leakage and loss of 
privacy. Mowbray and Pearson describe a client-based privacy 
manager that helps reduce this risk as well as providing 
additional privacy-related benefits by reducing the amount of 
sensitive information sent to the cloud [10]. 
III. 
CONCEPTS, TYPES AND SOURCES OF TRUST 
People have been aware of the concept of trust for quite a 
long time. In fact, it is as old as the history of man and the 
existence of human social interactions [11]. The majority of 
literature and studies about trust comes from classic disciplines 
like philosophy, psychology and economics, all of which 
concentrate on exploring a general understanding of trust. This 
paper focuses on trust in cloud computing, by referring to these 
studies that explain classic forms of trust alias offline trust.  
Philosophy traces the concept of trust back to the ancient 
Greek. They believed that people trusted others, only if they 
were confident that the others feared detection and punishment 
enough to deter them from harming or stealing.  
Psychology focuses on interpersonal trust and agrees that it 
was an especially important concept in psychology and vital to 
personality development (Erikson, 1963) [12], cooperation 
institution (Deutsch, 1962) [13] and social life (Rotter, 1980) 
[14]. Rotter gave a frequently cited definition of interpersonal 
trust as “an expectancy held by individuals or groups that the 
word, promise, verbal, or written statement for another can be 
relied on [14].” He has also proven through experiments, that 
trust has positive consequences to people and society overall. 
Economics study trust intensively in organizational 
contexts. Among other factors it is considered a predictor of 
satisfaction in organizational decision-making. It was also 
recognized that trust is able to reduce the cost of both intra- and 
inter-organizational transactions and able to enhance business 
performance [15]. Trust, defined as “a willingness to rely on an 
exchange partner in whom one has confidence”, assumed an 
essential role in establishing and maintaining a long-term 
relationship between sellers and customers [16]. 
It can be stated already, that trust is a complex, subjective 
and abstract concept that is difficult to define. You can find 
many definitions of trust in literature substituting it with 
credibility, reliability or confidence. The Oxford English 
Dictionary in 1971 defines trust as “confidence in or reliance 
on some quality or attribute of a person or thing, or the truth of 
a statement’’. Mainly though it is a mechanism reducing social 
complexity on the one hand, but causing vulnerability towards 
something or somebody on the other hand. 
In an article regarding e-commerce, Tan and Thoen 
considered party trust, control trust and the duality between 
trust and control as important concepts [17]. Party Trust means 
trust in the other party. It is subjective and has both an action 
and an information perspective. Mayer et al. define it as “the 
willingness of a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another 
party based on the expectation that the other party will perform 
a particular action important to the truster, irrespective of the 
ability to monitor or control that other party [18].” Control 
Trust means the trust that is created by a control mechanism. It 
tends to be more objective than party trust. If there is not 
enough party trust in a situation, an instance of control trust 
should be used to increase the overall level of trust. For 
example, getting a receipt at the dry cleaners stating how many 
pieces of clothes you handed in, increases your level of trust to 
get all the pieces back later on. 
Psychology was found to one of the most important aspects 
of trust, which is why it is helpful to have a framework of 
criteria on how trust is generally observed. Using this 
framework it will then be possible to draw comparisons 
between offline trust, in the before described sense, and online 
trust in the field of technology and cloud computing.  
According to the overview of Wang and Emurian [11] most 
researchers study four characteristics of trust: 
1. Trustor and trustee 
A trusting relationship always consists of a trusting party 
(trustor) and a party to be trusted (trustee). “The development 
of trust is based on the ability of the trustee to act in the best 
interest of the trustor and the degree of trust that the trustor 
places on the trustee“[11].  
2. Vulnerability 
The concept of trust only works and is needed in 
environments where vulnerability, uncertainty and risk are 
involved. A trustor relies on the trustee not to exploit his 
vulnerabilities. 
3. Produced actions 
“Trust leads to actions, mostly risk-taking behaviors. The 
form of the action depends on the situation, and the action may 
concern something either tangible or intangible [11].” 
4. Subjective matter 
In every case trust is a subjective matter. Each individual 
regards trust differently on a case-by-case basis being 
influenced by personal and situational factors. 
IV. 
TRUST IN CLOUD COMPUTING TECHNOLOGY 
As the introduction of the paper says, some of the major 
concerns in cloud computing are trust and security. Trust is one 
of the most critical obstacles for the adoption and growth of 
cloud computing. Therefore, in this section we will not only 
refer to the framework with the four characteristics of trust we 
have just laid out in the preceding chapter, but go beyond this 
and include security as an object of study, which interacts 
bilateral with trust. 
1. Trustor and trustee 
The cloud also relies heavily on the concept of trustor and 
trustee parties to establish trusting relationships. The difference 
is that with online trust, the distribution of roles is narrowed 
down to the cloud service provider being the trustee and the 
cloud service customer or end user being the trustor. 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

2. Vulnerability 
The count of vulnerabilities enterprises face in cloud 
computing are innumerable. In the digital age of software bugs 
and ideological hacking groups such as “anonymous” and 
“LulzSec”, the news are full of exploited vulnerabilities in the 
Internet. They reach from inadvertent loss of privacy and data 
theft, to loss of reputation and therefore money. Together, these 
reasons contribute to the necessity of trust in an insecure and 
hostile online world. 
3. Produced actions 
Customer’s trust in cloud service providers can generate a 
couple of desired actions. An enterprise starts using a cloud 
service and shares its private and precious data with the cloud 
computing provider. On top of that, an enterprise might be 
confident to even pay for the cloud service and continue using 
it on a regular basis. 
4. Subjective matter 
Trust in cloud computing and technology is fundamentally 
as subjective as its offline counterpart. Again each individual 
and enterprise has different affections and preferences 
regarding technology that influences the level of trust towards 
cloud computing. 
Meanwhile even more frameworks regarding trust in cloud 
computing exist. For example, a recent study from the 
University of Adelaide showed how to determine the 
credibility of trust feedbacks. In their paper “Trust as a Service: 
A Framework for Trust Management in Cloud Environments” 
they implement the Trust as a Service (TaaS) framework to 
improve ways on trust management in cloud environments 
[19]. 
V. 
CREATING SYSTEMIC TRUST THROUGH IT TECHNOLOGY 
In a world wide web and in clouds of anonymity personal 
trust is a trait that is very hard to find. Therefore, cloud 
computing has to earn the trust of enterprises, decision makers 
and users, by relying on other forms of trust. Fortunately, there 
are many methods to create systemic trust by means of control 
mechanisms and help of modern virtualization and security 
technology. 
The next sections follow and expand a proposal for a 
reference deployment model to eliminate user concerns on 
cloud security by Zhao, Rong, Jaatun and Sandnes [20]. The 
model deals with security related issues in cloud computing 
and proposes five service deployment models to address these 
issues. The proposed model provides different security related 
features to address different requirements and scenarios. While 
some scenarios of the deployment model have multiple valid 
solutions at hand, others have not yet been entirely solved. 
Keeping the model in mind it is used as a basis and expanded 
with some similar, but more practical solutions towards a 
trusted and secure enterprise cloud:  
A. Separation, Isolation and Multi-Tenancy 
B. Availability and Reliability 
C. Data and Service Migration 
D. Cryptography 
E. Contractually Fixed Agreements 
F. Certifications, Standards Compliance and IT Service 
Quality 
G. Transparency 
A. Separation, Isolation and Multi Tenancy 
Some central mechanisms of increasing importance are 
identity management and access control. They fit into the 
category of separation, isolation and multi-tenancy.  In contrast 
to applications and services hosted in-house, proper access 
management is a must-have. As soon as enterprises decide to 
use more than one cloud computing service, the challenge rises 
quickly, due to a couple of issues. Users have to deal with an 
inflation of credentials, thus increasing the risk of simple and 
re-used passwords for multiple services. The responsible IT-
Managers cannot oversee the access rights of employees or 
users that are spread across multiple cloud service providers. 
This fact leads to difficulties in access control management, 
especially if changes in responsibilities or personnel take place, 
or 
an 
employee 
resigns. 
This 
decentralized 
identity 
management also makes central logging of access much more 
difficult. 
A solution to this issue could be to recentralize identity 
management and access control back into the enterprise by 
means of single-credential and single-sign-on solutions. A 
single-credential solution uses a master identity store, either 
replicated to the cloud, or queried by the cloud service 
provider, for example via Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP). A Single-Sign-On solution leverages the 
single-credential solution and requests authentication from the 
user only once at the first login. Subsequent authentications to 
cloud services are automated via asymmetric encryption 
mechanisms such as Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) using the 
trust model of certificate authorities (CA). These underlying 
mechanisms are transparent to the user. Both solutions require 
an effective protection of the central identity store, as a theft of 
those credentials provides potential access to all cloud services, 
granting access based on single-credential or SSO solutions 
[21]. 
In their article “Isolation in Cloud Computing and Privacy-
Enhancing Technologies” N. Sonehara, I. Echizen and S. 
Wohlgemuth discuss the common issues around data leakage 
and loss of privacy [22]. They see isolation as a special kind of 
privacy protection mechanism, which avoids information 
exchange between cloud services through their users. 
Furthermore, isolation should be able to hide the objectives of 
cloud-users from the cloud service provider. They agree with 
Ambrust et al. 2010 [9] that the most current and common 
security mechanism in today’s clouds, to reach the goal of 
isolation, is primarily virtualization. Ambrust states “It is a 
powerful defense, and protects against most attempts by users 
to attack one another or the underlying cloud infrastructure. 
However, not all resources are virtualized and not all 
virtualization environments are bug-free. … Incorrect network 
virtualization may allow user code access to sensitive portions 
of the provider’s infrastructure, or to the resources of other 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

users. These challenges, though, are similar to those involved 
in managing large non-cloud data centers, where different 
applications need to be protected from one another. Any large 
Internet service will need to ensure that a single security hole 
doesn’t compromise everything else [9].” Due to such flaws in 
technology, it is important not only to rely on a single 
mechanism to provide trust and security, but to interlink and 
connect with other mechanisms, as explained in the following 
sections. 
B. Availability and Reliability 
Some of cloud computing’s key requirements for 
information security are availability and reliability. Data 
centers and cloud services should be designed for scalability 
and performance as well, and limit the necessity of human 
interaction [23]. Nonetheless we have seen a number of 
complete datacenters outages in the recent past, including 
market leaders such as Amazon and Google. Undheim, 
Chilwan and Heegaard focus on four different types of failures, 
namely failures in the power distribution or cooling, network 
failures, management software failures and server failures [24]. 
For all types of potential failures there are mechanisms in place 
that help to reduce the availability- and reliability risks to a 
minimum level. Two of the four mentioned types of failures 
were picked, and related work was investigated: 
Regarding network failures, Gill, Jain and Nagappan 
present a large-scale analysis of failures in a data center 
network [25]. Their key observations state that data center 
networks are already reliable, especially because of their highly 
redundant design. Nevertheless, there is room for improvement 
in some areas.  They state that load balancer reliability and the 
effectiveness of network redundancy have to be improved to 
mask the impact of network failures from applications. Further 
they recommend separating the network control plane from the 
data plane to avoid undesirable interference between 
application and control traffic. 
Venkatesh and Nagappan study server failures, hardware 
repairs and reliability for large cloud computing datacenters 
and present a detailed analysis of failure characteristics, as well 
as a preliminary analysis on failure predictors. They state that 
“8% of all servers can expect to see at least 1 hardware incident 
in a given year and that this number is higher for machines 
with lots of hard disks. … Chances of seeing another failure on 
the same server is high. We find that the distribution of 
successive failure on a machine fits an inverse curve. … We 
also find that the location of the datacenter and the 
manufacturer are the strongest indicators of failures, as 
opposed to age, configuration etc. [26].” In ongoing work they 
are working on models for server reliability, including 
replacing hard disk drives (HDD) with solid state drives (SDD) 
for better reliability. 
Now that we have given an insight into various types of 
failures, we want to show a conceptual and simple solution 
design, to circumvent all types of failures that jeopardize 
availability and reliability of cloud services. The reference 
deployment model of Zhao, Rong, Jaatun and Sandnes [20] 
corresponds with the central point on Ambrust’s [9] top ten list 
of obstacles for growth of cloud computing, namely 
availability + business continuity. Their solution is to use 
multiple cloud service providers, as they describe in their 
reference deployment model. The model builds an availability 
model on top of at the best already redundantly designed cloud 
infrastructure, adding an extra layer of redundancy of its own. 
The model achieves this by meeting the following three 
requirements: 
• 
Get two independent cloud service providers offering 
equivalent 
data 
processing 
services 
and 
two 
independent 
cloud 
service 
providers 
offering 
equivalent data storage services. 
• 
Data replication between both data storage providers is 
bidirectional and transparent to the user. 
• 
Both data processing services must have access to both 
data storage services, assumed authorization is granted. 
“The Availability Model imposes redundancy on both data 
processing and cloud storage, hence there is no single point of 
failure with respect to data access. When a data processing 
service, or a cloud storage service experiences failure, there is 
always a backup service present to ensure the availability of the 
data [20].” 
All of the above clearly shows that availability and 
reliability can be established in multiple and redundant ways, 
and, therefore are able to contribute to establishing trust in 
cloud services. 
C. Data and Service Migration 
Another concern of cloud users is potential lack of long-
term service viability and, as a result, the inability to get the 
data, once placed there, out of the cloud, due to data lock-in 
with one cloud service provider. In this scenario users would 
be forced to stay with their cloud service provider, who might 
request premium prices and thus discourage potential 
customers to use the cloud service at all. They would only use 
it, if they really had to, or if they were assured that their data 
could freely be migrated to other cloud service providers. 
Hao, Yen and Thuraisingham consider the problem of 
service selection and migration in a cloud and developed a 
framework that simplifies service migration. It also includes a 
cost model and a genetic decision algorithm to discuss 
tradeoffs of that matter and find the optimal service migration 
decisions. In their opinion the important issues surrounding the 
paper are: “It is necessary to consider the infrastructure support 
in the cloud to achieve service migration. The computation 
resources (computer platforms) in the cloud need to be able to 
support execution of dynamically migrated services. We 
develop a virtual machine environment and corresponding 
infrastructure to provide such support. … It is also essential to 
have a strong decision support to help determine whether to 
migrate some services and where to place them. The 
consideration involves the service migration cost, consistency 
maintenance cost, and the communication cost gains due to 
migration. We develop a cost model to correctly capture these 
costs and help determine the tradeoffs in service selection and 
migration in clouds. Then, we use a genetic algorithm to search 
the decision space and make service selection and migration 
decisions based on the cost tradeoffs... [27].” 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

With their reference deployment model Zhao, Rong, Jaatun 
and Sandnes go a bit further by stating: “a model that can 
ensure the capability of migrating data from one cloud to 
another is imperative… [20].” They demonstrate an abstract 
model where “the migration of data is guaranteed”. The model 
utilizes a data processing service through which users process 
their data and that is capable of migrating data from one cloud 
storage service to another. The model achieves this by meeting 
the following three requirements: 
• 
There is a Cloud Data Migration Service that can 
interact with the Cloud Storage Service that keeps 
users’ data for exporting users’ data. 
• 
There is a second Cloud Storage Service that allows 
users to import and export data. 
• 
Two independent cloud providers should provide the 
two Cloud Storage Services. 
Hirofuchi, Ogawa, Nakada, Itoh and Sekiguchi are 
fulfilling this migration model and believe “the next stage for 
IaaS cloud technology is cloud federation … users can easily 
deploy their applications on any IaaS cloud providers in the 
same manner, and transparently relocate them to other 
providers on demand [28].” They back up their proposal with 
an “advanced storage access mechanism that strongly supports 
live VM migration over WAN. It rapidly relocates VM disks 
between source and destination sites with the minimum impact 
on I/O performance. It is implemented as a transparent proxy 
server for a storage I/O protocol … which can be integrated 
into SAN services in datacenters. This means that the proposed 
mechanism is independent of VMM implementations [28].” 
This counters the risk of data lock-in with a particular provider, 
while still enabling users to select the most appropriate 
provider any time with the framework of Hao, Yen and 
Thuraisingham.  
The solutions and proposals in [20][27][28] correspond to 
the second central point on Ambrust’s [9] top ten list of 
obstacles for growth of cloud computing, namely data lock-in. 
He thinks standardization of APIs and compatible software 
enable a surge or hybrid cloud computing. Offering different 
cloud service selection and migration models, as well as 
standards, can be used to increase trust in cloud computing. 
D. Cryptography 
One common way to preserve key requirements, such as 
confidentiality and integrity in computing, is to encrypt data 
before, during and even after transport through the Internet for 
secure storage. As the cloud service provider has access to the 
data of all its customers, and may offer it, inadvertently or 
deliberately, to third parties, there is an urgent need for data 
encryption. One way to conduct this measure is by using 
combinations of encryption mechanisms. The trust-building 
and underlying technique used is pre-egression or pre-internet 
encryption (PIE). This simply means, encrypting data with 
your own encryption keys before sending it to the cloud. The 
encryption keys are in possession of the data owner only and 
are unknown by the cloud service provider or any 3rd party. 
After the data is encrypted locally it will leave the local 
premises and transit through the Wide Area Network (WAN). 
The cloud service provider should not only offer a tunneled and 
encrypted transit through the network to the storage destination 
in the cloud. He should also offer encrypted storage of the data. 
However, since the cloud service provider knows the 
encryption keys to those tunnels and storage, the only secure 
method of processing data is the aforementioned PIE. 
Pushing the idea of end-to-end encrypted data even further, 
is the concept of homomorphic encryption. It can be used to 
conduct mathematic operations on encrypted data without 
decrypting it [29]. The major and still unsolved downside to 
this approach is the immense computing power needed to 
process the encrypted data and limited support for computing 
operations, which is why this concept is almost unheard of in 
the public discussion about cloud trust and cloud security. 
E. Contractually Fixed Agreements 
As stated earlier in the text, trust can be established by 
establishing control mechanisms. One example of those control 
mechanisms is Security Service Level Agreements (SSLA) 
sometimes also referred to as Protection Level Agreements 
(PLA). They include contractually fixed security restrictions, 
compliance checks, as well as security information and event 
management (SIEM). They can be compared to general terms 
and conditions a company bases its contracts on or to an 
acceptable use policy (AUP) and are the only legal obligation 
of the cloud service provider. However, as of today, besides the 
technical standardization, there are no publicly defined 
standards yet in the field of information rights management, 
secure virtual runtime environments and externalization of 
identities [30][31]. 
F. Certifications, Standards Compliance and IT Service 
Quality 
Online trust needs a solid and justified foundation to build 
upon. There are a number of trust-building measures in the 
field of standards compliance and certifications, three of which 
we find particularly appealing. 
The first trust-building measure that should help choose the 
right cloud service provider is certifications. Looking at 
geographical boundaries, there is the Cloud Security Alliance 
(CSA) in the US and the Federal Agency for Information 
Security (BSI) in Germany. Both support an initiative called 
EuroCloud Star Audit that provides a seal of quality for 
Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), one of the three subdomains of 
cloud computing. It focuses on topics like data security, data 
privacy, drafting of contracts and compliance on the one hand, 
on the other hand, topics such as professional IT management, 
transparent and comprehensible processes, encryption, backup, 
archiving, exit-strategy, service level agreements, performance 
and many more have top priority. By means of a scoring 
system, cloud service providers are rated with one to five stars, 
expressing the degree of fulfillment of aforementioned criteria 
and therefore the trustworthiness. In the near future EuroCloud 
Star Audit will be expanded to the other two subdomains of 
cloud computing, namely Platform-as-a-Service (Paas) and 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), to enable a more complete 
rating of cloud service providers [32]. 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The second trust-building measure that should help choose 
the right cloud service provider is standards compliance. The 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) created a 
series of information security standards, namely the 27000-
series. It provides best practice recommendations on 
information security management, risks and control within the 
context of an overall Information Security Management 
System (ISMS). The series is applicable to all types and sizes 
of organizations and, most importantly, for cloud service 
providers. Among other topics it covers privacy, confidentiality 
and IT or technical security issues. The standards series 
includes ISO/IEC 27001, a standard that specifies requirements 
for 
establishing, 
implementing, 
operating, 
monitoring, 
reviewing, 
maintaining 
and 
improving 
a 
documented 
Information Security Management System within the context 
of the organization's overall business risks. It specifies 
requirements for the implementation of security controls 
customized to the needs of individual organizations or parts 
thereof. It is designed to ensure the selection of adequate and 
proportionate security controls that protect information assets 
and give confidence to interested parties. The succeeding 
standards ISO/IEC 27003, 27004, 27005 and 27006 all refer to 
the requirements defined in 27001. ISO/IEC 72003 focuses on 
the critical aspects needed for successful design and 
implementation of an ISMS. ISO/IEC 27004 provides guidance 
on the development and use of measures and measurement in 
order to assess the effectiveness of an implemented ISMS. 
ISO/IEC 27005 specifies guidelines for information security 
risk management and ISO/IEC 27006 specifies requirements 
and guidance for bodies providing audit and certification of an 
ISMS and is primarily intended to support the accreditation of 
certification bodies providing ISMS certification [33]. By 
implementing an ISO/IEC 27001 information security 
management system, the organization adopts a comprehensive 
and systematic approach to the security of the process control 
systems and can therefore be formally audited and certified 
compliant with the standard. 
The third trust-building measure that should help choose 
the right cloud service provider is IT service quality as defined 
in the IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework. It is 
independent of manufacturers, and describes systematic 
procedures for the strategic development, design, introduction, 
transition, operation and improvement of IT services. It closely 
follows ISO/IEC 20000, which provides a formal and universal 
standard for organizations seeking to have their service 
management capabilities audited and certified. ITIL version 3, 
passed in June 2007, consists of five books: Service strategy, 
service design, service transition, service operation and 
continual service improvement. Cloud service providers that 
have aligned their services to the ITIL framework can increase 
their trustworthiness not only, but mainly because of three ITIL 
building blocks: 
• 
Information Security Management (ISM) 
• 
Availability Management 
• 
Access Management 
ISM ensures most of the information security key concepts: 
Confidentiality, integrity and availability of an organization’s 
assets, information, data and IT services. Information security 
is aligned with business security and ISM ensures that 
information security is effectively managed in all service 
management processes, activities, etc. The ISM process should 
be a focal point for all IT security issues and should increase 
awareness of the need for security within all IT services. A 
main task of ISM is to produce, maintain and enforce the 
information security policy. 
Availability Management focuses and manages all 
availability-related issues and is responsible for defining, 
analyzing, planning, measuring and improving all aspects of 
the availability of IT services. It ensures that the IT 
infrastructure and processes, tools, roles etc. are appropriate for 
the agreed service level targets for availability. This process 
thus secures the level of availability delivered in all services is 
matched to, or exceeds the current and future agreed needs of 
the customers in a cost-effective manner. Availability 
Management is important because availability and reliability 
are highly visible to the customers and can directly influence 
customer satisfaction and the service provider’s reputation. 
Access 
Management 
deals 
with 
protecting 
the 
confidentiality, integrity and availability of the organization’s 
data and intellectual property. It achieves this by ensuring that 
only authorized users are able to access or modify the service 
assets. It provides the right for users to use a service or group 
of services, while preventing access to non-authorized users. It 
may also be needed for regulatory compliance reasons. 
Technologically, Access Management is usually executed by 
means of directory services [14][34]. 
All of the three suggested trust-building measures have one 
thing in common: They prove through examination of a trusted 
third party that the cloud service provider operates with the 
necessary care and accuracy required by the presented 
certifications, standards, frameworks and grants compliance. 
The willingness of the provider to do so creates transparency 
for the cloud users and a chance to make a well-informed 
decision. 
G. Transparency 
As learned, trust is always a subjective matter, which gives 
transparency requirements for trust a soft and elastic touch. 
Transparency has multiple facets though. Trust through 
transparency can be induced by very simple means such as a 
web interface design or by more sophisticated means such as a 
conglomeration of technological factors. 
In [11], a framework of four trust-inducing features is 
proposed by taking existing relevant studies on enhancing 
online trust by web interface design and using them as 
dimensions of the framework. The four dimensions are graphic 
design, structure design, content design and social-cue design. 
Graphic design refers to the graphical design factors on the 
web site that normally give consumers a first impression. 
Structure design defines the overall organization and 
accessibility of displayed information on the web site. Content 
design refers to the informational components that can be 
included on the web site, either textual or graphical. Social-cue 
design relates to embedding social cues, such as face-to-face 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

interaction and social presence into web interface via different 
communication media. 
Compared to a trust-inducing web interface design, 
transparency as add on to technological security mechanisms 
has much clearer and more precise requirements. Contradicting 
the often-used principle of security by obscurity, T. Weichert 
demands security by transparency [31]. He sets up multiple 
factors on how to reach this goal: 
• 
State of the art measures 
• 
Access restricted to entitled users 
• 
Differentiated access management 
• 
Encryption capabilities 
• 
Anonymization tools 
• 
Adequate separation of data by isolating 
• 
Client-side application security 
• 
Documented data privacy management 
His statement is simple to understand: The more of these 
factors are in place, the higher the transparency and therefore 
security for cloud service customers will be. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Cloud computing services will grow further, regardless of 
whether a cloud service provider sells services at a low level of 
abstraction as IaaS, at the medium level as PaaS or at the top 
level as SaaS. Trust and security go hand in hand - one might 
even go as far as saying one induces the other.  
This paper presented a state of the art overview of the role 
of trust in cloud computing. Explaining and mapping offline 
trust to online trust, we showed that the concept of trust does 
also exist and even plays a vital role in the online world. Trust 
and security are an integral part of cloud computing and 
essential for its adoption and growth.  
Our main contribution is showing multiple ways to improve 
online trust and security by leveraging and combining as many 
existing technology and trust building measures as possible, 
and by that, minimizing concerns of potential or existing cloud 
service users. In our opinion, the bottom line of this state of the 
art overview is, that trust in cloud computing can indeed be 
improved by means of technology. 
A. Limitations 
The paper did provide several existing approaches to the 
issue of insufficient trust and security in cloud computing. 
However, there are several limitations that have to be 
acknowledged. The paper did not examine infrastructure issues 
such 
as 
data 
transfer 
bottlenecks 
and 
performance 
unpredictability. Computing, storage and networking must all 
focus on horizontal scalability of virtualized resources rather 
than on single node performance. Infrastructure in all areas has 
to be improved, not only in respect to trust and security, but 
also in respect bandwidth and cost. Furthermore, the paper only 
highlighted a fractional amount of available security and trust 
enhancing mechanisms, which we found most important. There 
are a large number of other efficient mechanisms, standards 
and an even larger number under investigation in research and 
development. 
B. Future Research and Recommendations 
This paper’s examples contribute to the ongoing effort of 
minimizing the challenges regarding trust and security in cloud 
computing. What still remains is the issue that users have to 
trust the presented technology, certifications, standards and 
finally the cloud service provider itself. 
Even though trust per definition remains the willingness of 
a party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party, many 
unsolved technical issues still exist and many solutions can be 
improved in order to reduce this inevitable residual risk. 
Future research on this topic should include the 
simplification of cloud security models, for example by 
standardizing and leveraging protocols, such as the Open 
Authorization Protocol (OAuth) and the Security Assertion 
Markup Language (SAML). With the vision of Inter-Cloud-
Computing 
in 
mind, 
which 
introduces 
an 
additional 
management layer above conventional cloud computing 
systems [35] to reach greater sustainability and availability, 
large IT companies have to work together more intensely in 
taskforces, alliances and foundations to push towards this 
common goal. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from grant 
17103X10 from the German federal ministry of education and 
research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Weinhardt, A. Anandasivam, B. Blau, N. Borissov, T. Meinl, W. 
Michalk, and J. Stößer, “Cloud Computing – A classification, business 
models, and research directions,” Business & Information Systems 
Engineering,  
 5, pp. 391–399, 2009. 
 
[2] 
C. Baun, M. Kunze, T. Kurze, and V. Mauch, “Private Cloud-
Infrastrukturen und Cloud-Plattformen,” Informatik Spektrum, vol. 34, 
no. 3, pp. 242–254, 2011. 
 
[3] 
Cloud Security Alliance, (2009) “Security guidance for critical areas of 
focus 
in 
Cloud 
Computing,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/wp-content/themes/csa/guidance-
download-box.php [retrieved: April, 2012] 
 
[4] 
A. Weiss, “Computing in the clouds,” networker, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 16–
25, 2007. 
 
[5] 
F. Kamoun, “Virtualizing the datacenter without compromising server 
performance,” Ubiquity, vol. 2009, no. August, p. 2, 2009. 
 
[6] 
A. Greenberg, J. Hamilton, D. A. Maltz, and P. Patel, “The cost of a 
cloud: research problems in data center networks,” ACM SIGCOMM 
Comput. Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, p. 68, 2009. 
 
[7] 
B. Hayes, “Cloud Computing,” Comm. ACM, vol. 51, no. 7, p. 9, 2008. 
 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[8] 
S. Pearson, “Taking account of privacy when designing cloud computing 
services,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ICSE Workshop on Software 
Engineering Challenges of Cloud Computing (CLOUD '09), pp. 44–52. 
 
[9] 
M. Armbrust, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, A. Fox, R. Griffith, A. D. Joseph, et 
al., “A view of cloud computing,” Comm. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, p. 50, 
2010. 
 
[10] J. Bosch, S. Clarke, M. Mowbray, and S. Pearson, “A client-based 
privacy manager for cloud computing,” in COMSWARE '09 Proceedings 
of the Fourth International ICST Conference on COMmunication System 
softWAre and middlewaRE, p. 1, 2009. 
 
[11] Y. D. Wang and H.H. Emurian, “An overview of online trust: Concepts, 
elements, and implications,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 21, no. 
1, pp. 105–125, 2005. 
 
[12] E. H. Erikson, “Childhood and society” (2nd ed.), New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1963. 
 
[13] M. Deutsch, “Cooperation and trust: Some theoretical notes, ” Nebraska 
Symposium on Motivation, 10, pp. 275–318, 1962. 
 
[14] J. B. Rotter, “A new scale for the measurement of interpersonal trust,” J  
of Personality, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 651–665, 1967. 
 
[15] B. Uzzi, “Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The 
paradox of embeddedness,” Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 42, 
no. 1, pp. 35–67, 1997. 
 
[16] C. Moorman, R. Deshpande, and G. Zaltman, “Factors affecting trust in 
market research relationships,” J of Marketing, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 81–
101, 1993. 
 
[17] Y. Tan and W. Thoen, “Toward a generic model of trust for electronic 
commerce,” International J of Electronic Commerce, vol. 5, no. 2 
(Winter, 2000/2001), pp. 61-74, 2001. 
 
[18] R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An integrative model 
of organizational trust,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 20, no. 
3, pp. 709–734, 1995. 
 
[19] T. H. Noor and Q. Z. Sheng, “Trust as a service: A framework for trust 
management in cloud environments,” pp. 314–321, 2011. 
 
[20] G. Zhao, C. Rong, M. G. Jaatun, and F. E. Sandnes, “Reference 
deployment models for eliminating user concerns on cloud security,” J 
of Supercomputing, 2010. 
 
[21] P. Laue and O. Stiemerling, “Identitäts- und Zugriffsmanagement für 
Cloud Computing Anwendungen,” Datenschutz und Datensicherheit, 
vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 692–697, 2010. 
 
[22] N. Sonehara, I. Echizen, and S. Wohlgemuth, “Isolation in cloud 
computing 
and 
privacy-enhancing 
technologies,” 
Business 
& 
Information Systems Engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 155–162, 2011. 
 
[23] E. Nygren, R. K. Sitaraman, and J. Sun, “The Akamai network; a 
platform for high-performance internet applications,” SIGOPS Oper. 
Syst., vol. 44, no. 3, p. 2, 2010. 
 
[24] A. Undheim, A. Chilwan, and P. Heegaard, “Differentiated availability 
in cloud computing SLAs,” in Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE/ACM 12th 
International Conference on Grid Computing (GRID ’11), pp. 129–136. 
 
[25] P. Gill, N. Jain, and N. Nagappan, “Understanding network failures in 
data centers,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 
350-361, 2011. 
 
[26] J. M. Hellerstein, S. Chaudhuri, and M. Rosenblum, K. V. Vishwanath, 
N. Nagappan, “Characterizing cloud computing hardware reliability,” in 
Proceedings of the 1st ACM symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC 
’10), p. 193-204, 2010. 
 
[27] W. Hao, I. Yen, and B. Thuraisingham, “Dynamic service and data 
migration in the clouds,” in Computer Software and Applications 
Conference, COMPSAC '09. 33rd Annual IEEE International, pp. 134–
139, 2009. 
 
[28] T. Hirofuchi, H. Ogawa, H. Nakada, S. Itoh, and S. Sekiguchi, “A live 
storage migration mechanism over WAN for relocatable virtual machine 
services on clouds,” in Proceedings of the 2009 9th IEEE/ACM 
International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGRID 
'09), pp. 460–465. 
 
[29] F. Kerschbaum, “Secure and sustainable benchmarking in clouds,” 
Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 135–143, 
2011. 
 
[30] S: 
Paulus, 
“Standards 
für 
trusted 
clouds,” 
Datenschutz und 
Datensicherheit, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 317–321, 2011. 
 
[31] T. Weichert, “Cloud Computing und Datenschutz,” Datenschutz und 
Datensicherheit, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 679–687, 2010. 
 
[32] R. Giebichenstein and A. Weiss, “Zertifizierte Cloud durch das 
EuroCloud Star Audit SaaS,” Datenschutz und Datensicherheit, vol. 35, 
no. 5, pp. 338–342, 2011. 
 
[33] International Organization for Standardization at http://www.iso.org 
[retrieved: April, 2012] 
 
[34] Materna Information & Communications, (2012), ITIL Version 3 Pocket 
Guide 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.materna.de/cae/servlet/contentblob/11600/publicationFile/24
65/Pocketbrosch%C3%BCre ITIL%C2%AE Version 3.pdf [retrieved: 
April, 2012] 
 
[35] T. Aoyama and H. Sakai, “Inter-cloud computing,” Business & 
Information Systems Engineering, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 173–177, 2011.
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

