A Stream-Oriented Community Generation for Integrating TV and Social Network 
Services 
Riho Nakano 
Faculty of Policy Management 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: s10578rn@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
Shuichi Kurabayashi 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: kurabaya@sfc.keio.ac.jp
 
Abstract— This paper proposes a stream-oriented community 
generation that associates real-time TV streams and Web 
resources by analyzing the communication among users on a 
social network service (SNS). The aim of this system is to 
provide a novel media environment for enhanced cross-media 
communication and discussion by dynamically creating social 
communities according to the real-time contexts of TV stream. 
The unique feature of this system is an implicit community 
analysis mechanism that employs the TV stream as a powerful 
and well-organized “context-creator” for SNS users. This 
system extract a group of viewers who have the same or similar 
interests by integrating the term co-occurrence statistics of 
SNS messages and their synchronicity to TV. To detect the 
context-dependent group of users, this system provides a 
dynamic feature keyword selection mechanism to create a 
vector space, which is specifically tailored to the TV context. 
The application scope of this system includes analysis of 
community-level sentiments in SNS messages associated with a 
TV program and the analysis of transitions in the sentiments of 
communities to develop effective advertising strategies. 
Keywords- Community Generation; Social Network Services; 
TV streams; Cross-media Infrastructure; Sentiment Analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the popularization of Internet-enabled TVs and 
smartphones, the demand for integrating synchronous TV 
with asynchronous SNSs has increased because their 
relationship is complementary [1, 2]. TV motivates viewers 
to interact with each other by generating common interests 
among them, and SNS enables this interaction. Integrating 
TV with interactive services increases its value [3]. 
Although TVs and SNSs are popular information 
resources, studies on the implicit community analysis and 
community creation by integrating these media have been 
limited. This is because the current Internet TV (ITV) 
technologies focus on the integration of video streams with 
textual information retrieved from the Web by developing 
screens that are capable of displaying Web contents. 
Therefore, cross-media communication infrastructure is 
essential to get the integrated sentiment information and its 
context which are present in a fragmented and closed manner. 
In this paper, a stream-oriented community generation is 
proposed to create a group of viewers, i.e., a community of 
users, who have common interests by integrating real-time 
TV streams and SNS messages. “Community Generation”, 
which is used to widen the scope of communication by 
adopting a dynamic configuration, is the key concept in such 
communication infrastructure [4]. Community Generation 
enables viewers to broadcast messages about the current TV 
program to the appropriate audience. In order to realize 
community generation, this system extracts an implicit 
structure of viewers who have the same or similar interests 
by analyzing their comments about a TV stream. The 
association between a community of TV viewers and a 
community of SNS users are established according to the 
information appearing on both the TV and the SNS. This 
system automatically extracts a “community of interest” 
(CoI) structure from the SNS messages and TV program 
guides. Unlike Google TV that uses a single display for 
synchronous TV streams and asynchronous SNS messages, 
this system enables cross-media communication between the 
two information resources. 
The aim of this system is to provide a novel media 
environment where a TV stream and related messages are 
exchanged seamlessly according to its context. As shown in 
Figure 1, this system uses the TV stream as a powerful and 
well-organized “context-creator” for SNS users. The context-
creator affects a vast array of users by posting the same 
content at the same time over many SNSs. By introducing 
TV as a context-creator into SNS community analysis, the 
system recognizes the topic in the SNS messages by 
leveraging the powerful context created by the TV. 
 
 
Figure 1. Fundamental Concept of Stream-Oriented Community 
Generation. 
 
The most important advantages of this system are 
recognition of overlapping structures among communities 
and 
tracking 
viewers’ 
transitions 
among 
multiple 
communities by detecting the sentiments expressed in SNS 
messages related to a TV stream. This tracking mechanism 
Programn
Context1
Context2
Contextn
…
Program1
Program2
Selected 
Feature 
Sub-Space
Selected 
Feature 
Sub-Space
Selected
Feature 
Sub-Space
SNS messages
SNS messages
SNS messages
SNS messages
SNS messages
SNS messages
CommunityA
CommunityB
CommunityC
CommunityD
CommunityE
CommunityF
CommunityG
CommunityH
Dynamic
Community 
Generation
2nd Screen: Each user has 
a tablet or a smartphone
CommunityI
1st Screen: TV
Stream
Dynamic
Community 
Generation
Dynamic
Community 
Generation
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

focuses on the community-level viewing history, rather than 
a personal-level viewing history, in order to detect changes 
in a community’s interests. The effect of a TV program can 
be assessed by analyzing the community-level sentiments 
using this tracking mechanism, and this information can be 
used to design TV program guides. This system reveals the 
transitions in the sentiments of communities, i.e., how many 
viewers change their opinion and how drastically they do this 
over the duration of a program. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 presents motivating example of our community 
generation. Section 3 summarizes the related work briefly. 
Section 4 describes fundamental concept and system 
architecture. Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper. 
II. 
MOTIVATING EXAMPLES 
Our community-oriented community generation system’s 
unique 
feature 
is 
community-of-interest-based 
communication mechanism that allows viewers to publish 
their comments about a TV program. This mechanism 
provides a context to the fragmented messages on the Web, 
which is an asynchronous medium, through TV, which is a 
synchronous medium. Thus, in our ITV model, TV —the 
1st screen— provides contexts to the interaction on the 
internet-enabled second screen —smartphone or tablet. This 
mechanism enables the community generation system to 
track the sentiments of viewers about a TV program. This 
feature realizes the following two applications. 
1) Smart advertisement dissemination: The conventional 
advertising strategies can be made more efficient by 
targeting users in a community according to their specific 
and common interests rather than age group or sex. Our 
system recognizes community structures on the basis of 
users’ interests rather than explicitly defined community 
characteristics such as the follower/followee ratio. As our 
implicit community structures are highly dynamic and 
flexible, advertisement publishers can select a target 
community structure community structure such that the 
advertisement is more relevant to the targeted consumers. 
From users’ perspective, the community structure can help 
the users to filter out irrelevant advertisements. 
2) Continuous Sentiment Analysis: This system provides 
an opportunity to investigate the market’s sentiment by 
tracking of viewers’ transition among multiple communities. 
Our system provides “live” feedback from SNS by capturing 
the structure of implicit communities and their sentiment 
continuously. Even if the member of community is changing, 
the system tracks such transition and generates an 
appropriate community. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Since the invention of the Internet TV (ITV), there have 
been many attempts to integrate TV and new media. Tuomi 
[5] modeled the ITV as a substitution for a PC connected to 
Internet. Several methods have been developed for 
simultaneously displaying a TV stream and the related Web 
content by recommending Web resources as per the content 
of 
the 
TV 
stream 
[6][7]. 
As 
an 
advertisement 
recommendation method for Mobile TV, Adany et al.[8] has 
proposed a sequential solution procedure and several 
heuristic algorithms for uncertain personal advertisement 
allocation. TV2Web [9] is a seamless cross-media user 
interface that can be moved between TV screens and Web 
pages by linking units and displaying them smoothly using 
zooming metaphors. Many TV-on-Web methods have been 
proposed for displaying detailed information or service-
related TV programs [9]-[11]. Another approach to integrate 
TV with the Web is the interactive approach, wherein the 
contents or the topic of a specific program are defined by [6] 
exchanging information or chatting [9] with other viewers in 
real time. Further, human-computer-interaction systems for 
TVs, PCs, and mobile devices have been proposed in [12]. 
IV. 
STREAM-ORIENTED COMMUNITY GENERATION 
Figure 2 shows the system architecture of the community-
oriented community generation system. This system extracts 
sentiments and keywords by analyzing a viewer’s messages 
 
Figure 2. System Architecture of Stream-Oriented Community Generation. 
 
--------
----------
----------
----------
------
text1
text2
----------
----------
----------
----------
-----
----------
----------
----------
----------
-----
TV
stream
Time
Window
7:00
…
…
TV
Community of Interest
Community of Interest-
based Messaging 
(Dynamic 
Communication)
Social Graph-based 
Messaging (Static Structure)
Community Generation Process
Stream-Oriented Community Generation
Selecting 
Temporary
Relevant Text
User receives 
message in A or B
Messaging
Boundary
A
B
C
D
E
Implicit & Dynamic 
Community 
Analysis
n
TV Program
Duration
Selecting 
Temporary
Relevant Text
textn
Application
Continuous Sentiment 
Analysis: System provides 
a opportunity to 
investigate market’s 
sentiment by tracking of 
viewers’ transition among 
multiple communities.
Smart advertisement 
dissemination: 
Advertisement publisher 
can modify advertising 
strategy by recognizing 
implicit Community 
structures.
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

about a TV stream. The extracted keywords and sentiment 
information are integrated with the TV stream and its details 
obtained using an interactive program guide (IPG). This 
process provides “contexts” to the Web resources. This 
context information is used to analyze the implicit 
community structure that does not involves any explicit IDs 
or tags such as hashtags in Twitter and group functions 
supported by Facebook. This section describes the 
fundamental architecture and functions of the stream-
oriented community generation. 
4.1 Data Structure 
Our system uses three types of data structures.  
● Text Messages Exchanged on SNS: Text messages are 
contents posted by SNS users. The system analyzes these 
text messages. A text message is a tuple consisting of 
timestamp information, and the user’s identifier, and the text 
content. A set of messages is used as a primary data 
structure for sentiment analysis and consists of messages. 
Each message in a set of message is sequentially ordered 
according to the timestamp information in each message. 
● TV Stream: The TV stream data is prefetched from an 
IPG and has information of the start and end time of a TV 
program respectively and keywords used for annotating the 
TV program. The annotation consists of the title, contents, 
performers, and word groups related to the TV program. 
● Community: The system evaluates the word frequency 
and the sentiment information in each message in order to 
generate this community dynamically according to the 
messages or information posted by users sharing the same 
or similar interests. A community consists of the user ID 
derived from the SNS user set and keywords. Keywords 
include nouns and adjectives that represent users’ 
sentiments. The system deals with the community data and 
text massage data as vectors in a feature vector space. Our 
feature vector space consists of keywords describing the TV 
contents and SNS messages and is a typical high-
dimensional vector space. The system employs a dynamic 
feature selection mechanism to create the appropriate 
context vector space for measuring the distance between (1) 
a community and a message, (2) two communities, and (3) 
two messages.  
4.2 Dynamic Feature Selection for Analyzing Communities 
In order to analyze the implicit communities, our system 
employs a dynamic feature selection mechanism that creates 
a low-dimensional vector space for each community. As a 
fundamental data structure, this system provides a high-
dimensional vector space (e.g., 3,000 dimensions) that 
consisting of the necessary and sufficient number of feature 
keywords. This full-space can be used to represent various 
messages and communities, but it is difficult to precisely 
identify the data items in the space. Each dimension in the 
full-space corresponds to a specific keyword corresponding 
to the topics in TV stream. Our concept of feature selection 
is that a community should be generated by considering its 
own context, because a different context gives a different 
meaning in the social network. The system does not define 
the relevance between a context and a community statically. 
Thus, this system creates sub-space according to the 
community. Figure 3 shows the results of a feature selection 
table that defines a “context keyword” as a trigger for 
selecting features. This table defines the correlation between 
the context keyword with topic made through TV program 
and the feature keyword derived from the messages 
exchanged through an SNS. This function eliminates the 
ambiguity of context that is caused by summarizing an 
entire users’ context into a feature vector.  
 
TABLE I. 
FEATURE SELECTION TABLE 
 
Feature Keyword 1 
Feature Keyword 2 
… 
Feature Keyword n 
Context Keyword 1 
0 
1 
… 
1 
Context Keyword 2 
1 
0 
… 
1 
… 
 
 
 
 
Context Keyword m 
0 
0 
… 
0 
 
 
Figure 3. Feature Selection Operation for Creating Low-dimensional 
Vector Space to analyze Community Structure. 
 
TABLE I shows the feature selection table. Here, the 
feature keyword is generated using a Web dictionary and 
has an enough capability to explain a user’s sentiment and 
interest. Context keywords play a role to define the context 
and to recall a set of feature keywords in a specific context. 
The feature selection process is as carried out follows: 
● Step-1: Find the context keyword from the IPG data, and 
generate a weighted term-frequency context vector. 
● Step-2: Transmit the context vector to the feature vector 
space by using the feature selection table. This transmission 
function           that inputs a context vector v and 
feature selection table x is defined as follows: 
 
           (∑  [ ]   [   ]
 
   
   ∑  [ ]   [   ]
 
   
) 
 
where  [ ] is the value of the   -th context keyword and  [   ] 
is the value of the  -th feature keyword corresponding to 
the  -th context keyword. n denotes the number of context 
keywords in the full-space. The context feature weights are 
converted into feature keyword weights by using this 
function. 
Feature 
Keyword 1
Feature 
Keyword 2
…
Feature 
Keyword  n
Context 
Keyword 1
0
1
1
Context 
Keyword 2
1
0
0
…
Context 
Keyword m
1
0
0
message1
communityA
subspace-a
subspace-b
SNS 
Messages
Mapped to 
the selected 
subspace
Feature Selection Table
Feature Selection by TV content
communityB
message2
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

● Step-3: Select the top-k relevant feature keywords as the 
axis of the subspace, and compute the inner product 
between the vectors of community or SNS messages. This 
function                  that calculates the relevance 
between r1 vector and r2 vector is defined as follows: 
 
                 ∑   [ ]    [ ]
 
   
 
 
where    and    denotes a vector of community or a SNS 
message, and n denotes the number of features in the full-
space. 
● Step-4: Map every SNS message and community in the 
created subspace to compute the community-based 
relevance. The following function                       is 
used to calculate the relevance by using the sub-space: 
 
                       ∑    [ ]     [ ]
 
   
 
 
where     and     denote vectors mapped into the subspace 
and   denotes the number of features in the subspace. 
4.3 Function for Analyzing Implicit Communities 
The main functions of this system can be divided into the 
following four categories: (1) time interval selection 
according to the context of the TV program, (2) community 
generation to create groups of users that share the same or 
similar interests, (3) community-of-interest(CoI)-based 
messaging, and (4) community transition analysis. 
● Time Selection Function: Using the time interval selection 
function, the system extracts a set of messages from all the 
messages according to the time window defined for the TV 
program. 
● Community generation Function: A set of communities is 
generated by morphologically analyzing the keywords for 
the current TV program. The community generation 
function generates communities according to the set of 
messages selected by the time section function and the 
candidate community to be mapped to the vector space. 
● Community-of-Interest-based Messaging-Function: Using 
this function, the system delivers messages about a TV 
program to the relevant users. This messaging function 
involves a rather complex transfer process but provides 
users with an open and easy-to-use messaging platform. In 
concrete terms, the system selects target community from 
the set of all communities, and distributes the target 
community a SNS message. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This 
paper 
proposes 
a 
stream-oriented 
community 
generation that associates real-time TV streams and Web 
resources by analyzing the communication among users on 
an SNS. Our approach realizes a novel communication 
medium that integrates messaging systems and TV streams 
according to viewers’ interests. As a future work, we plan to 
implement this system on the 2nd screen (tablet devices) 
and perform experimental studies to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of our approach. We will also extend a range 
of association by not only focusing on the community but 
also handling other levels of communication scope, such as 
“Community & Individual Viewer,” “TV-Stream & Web-
Resources,” “Individual Viewer & TV-Stream,” and so on. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by SCOPE: Strategic 
Information 
and 
Communications 
R&D 
Promotion 
Programme 
of 
Ministry 
of 
Internal 
Affairs 
and 
Communications, Japan: “Kansei Time-series Media Hub 
Mechanism for Impression Analysis/Visualization Delivery 
Intended for Video/Audio Media.” 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ceasar, P. and Chorianopoulos, L. “Interactivity and user 
participation in the televition lifecycle:creating, sharing and 
controlong content,” Proc.UXTV 2008, pp. 127-128, 2008. 
[2] Jensen, J., Tscheligi, M., Obrist, M., and Lugmayr, A. 
“Changing Television Environments,” LNCS5066. Springer, 
pp.  1-10, 2008 
[3] Ursu, M.F., Sussner, J., Myrestam, U., Hall, N., Thomas, M., 
Kegel, I., Williams, D., Tuomola, M., Lindstedt, I., Wright, T., 
Leurdijk, A., and Zsombori, V “Interactive TV narratives : 
Opportunities, progree and challenges,” ACM TOMCCAP, 
Vol.4, Issue4, pp. 1-39, 2008. 
[4] Donnelly, V. and Merrick, P. “Community portals through 
community generation,” SIGCAPH Comput. Phys. Handicap, 
pp. 9-14, 2002. 
[5] Tuomi, P. “A brief history of social iTV entertainment,” In 
Proceedings of the MindTrek '09, ACM, pp. 15-18, 2009. 
[6] Ma, O. and Tanaka, K. “Webtelop: Dynamic tv-content 
augmentation by using web pages,” In Proceedings of ICME’ 
2003, IEEE, Vol. 2, pp. 173-176, 2003. 
[7] Nadamoto, A. and Tanaka, K. “Complementing Your TV-
Viewing by Web Content Automatically-Transformed into 
TV-program-type Content,” In Proceedings of the ACM 
Multimedia’ 2005, pp. 41-50, 2005. 
[8] Adany, R., Kraus, S., and Ordóñez, F. “Uncertain personal 
advertisement allocation for Mobile TV,” In Proceedings of 
ACM MoMM '10, pp. 159-166, 2010. 
[9] Sumiya, K., Munisamy, M., and Tanaka, K. “Tv2Web: 
generating and browsing web with multiple lod from video 
streams and their metadata,” In Proceedings of ICKS2004, pp. 
158-167, 2004. 
[10] Miyamori, H. and Tanaka, K. “Webified Video: Media 
Conversion from TV Programs to Web Content for Cross-
Media Information Integration,” In DEXA2005, LNCS3588, 
Springer, pp. 176-185, 2005. 
[11] Livingston, K., Dredze, M., Hammond, K., and Birnbaum, L. 
“Beyond Broadcast,” In Proceedings of ACM IUI’2003, The 
Seventh International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces, pp. 260-262, 2003. 
[12] Martin, R. and Holtzman, H. “Newstream: A Multi-Device,  
Cross-Medium,” and Socially Aware Approach to News 
Content. In Proccedings of the ACM EuroiTV 2010, pp. 83-
90, 2004. 
 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

