Animating Information Dissemination Through a Gamified Online Forum 
 
Shueh-Cheng Hu 
Department of Computer Science & Comm. Engineering 
Providence University 
Taichung 43301, Taiwan, ROC 
e-mail: shuehcheng@gmail.com 
I-Ching Chen  
Department of Information Management  
Chung Chou University of Science and Technology 
Chang Hua 51003, Taiwan, ROC 
e-mail: jine@dragon.ccut.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract— Various online forums aim to facilitate information 
dissemination within particular knowledge domains. A 
successful forum needs active participation and contributions 
from individuals. Just like common information systems, most 
online forum systems were designed without consideration of 
motivating users. Gamification works of an online forum is 
presented in this article. The gamification work provides 
several game mechanisms motivating users to participate and 
contribute more actively, which eventually leads to a more 
effective platform for information sharing and opinions 
exchanging. The completed gamification work verified the 
feasibility of gamifying an open-sourced online forum system. 
In addition, a preliminary qualitative evaluation shows that 
diverse mechanisms brought different effectiveness and 
experiences to users. 
Keywords - Forum; information dissemination; motive; 
gamification; servlet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the age of Internet, online forums have being deployed 
widely for people in similar knowledge domains or with 
close interests to share information and exchange opinions. 
Both professionals and amateurs expect to swiftly acquire 
knowledge and experiences via browsing contents in various 
online forums, or they will spend much more time to 
accumulate the same stuff by themselves. Obviously, to 
serve as an effective platform for information dissemination, 
an online forum needs active participation and contributions 
from its users. Many online forums gradually withered due 
to decreasing participation and contributions from users. 
Unfortunately, the presence of these gradually withered 
online forums will be further deteriorated by many search 
engines 
favoring 
Web 
sites 
with 
up-to-date 
and 
intensively-referred materials [1]. Even worse, the lack of 
participation/contribution and deteriorated search engine 
visibility will form a vicious circle. Accordingly, motivating 
users is a critical task for successfully operating an effective 
online forum.  
There are many options for people who are looking for 
an online forum system, and many of them even come with 
free licenses. However, these online forum systems were 
designed by people who applied conventional software 
system development procedure and principles, which results 
in a system with complete and correct functions, but their 
users likely to have no strong motive to actively use these 
functions. 
In light of the significance of an animating online forum 
system and the lack of relevant works, this work tried to 
renovate an online forum system: JForum [2], through 
gamifying it. The anticipated benefit is motivating its users 
to participate and contribute more actively. 
The remaining parts of this article are organized as 
follows: Section II briefs prior works regarding the 
gamification and its applications in information systems; 
Section III describes the analysis and design works of 
gamifying 
the 
JForum; 
Section 
IV 
describes 
the 
corresponding implementation details; and the concluding 
remarks and future directions were provided in Section V. 
II. 
REVIEW OF PRIOR WORKS 
Just like the mentioned online forum systems, most 
information systems were designed without consideration of 
motivating users, because the traditional design philosophy 
only takes functionality and accountability into account, but 
ignore the role that user’s motive play in an individual’s 
overall performance. As a result, the so-called well-designed 
information systems offer complete functions that enable 
users to accomplish their assigned tasks correctly, but did not 
equip any mechanisms to motivate users to perform tasks 
more actively or even enthusiastically. 
The routine tasks bore people; prior study indicated that 
employee’s working quality will degrade if they experience 
boredom 
[3]. 
In 
highly 
informationized 
working 
environments, people heavily rely on various information 
systems to complete their routine tasks. Consequently, 
designers need to take user’s motive into account while they 
are developing an information system. To create a more 
animating 
working 
environment 
in 
the 
age 
of 
informationization, gamification of information systems 
properly emerges as a popular approach.  
Usually, gamification refers to embedding game 
mechanisms into a non-game environment, such as 
information system [4, 5]. The original idea is planting users’ 
engagement and addiction that could be found while they are 
playing various games into their working environments. Its 
purpose is to strengthen users’ motivation, i.e., it makes 
users perform tasks with more fun, stronger motive, and 
deeper engagement. Once each individual is well motivated, 
the overall performance of an organization could be 
improved consequently.  
With widely recognition of its effects, gamification has 
been applied by enterprises to animate their employees, i.e., 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

users of their information systems. According to a report 
from Gartner, over 70% of global 2000 enterprises have used 
gamification to renovate their information system before 
2014 [6]. Among many successful cases, Starbucks gamified 
one of their supply chain management systems by ranking 
suppliers in a leaderboard according to their on-time delivery 
records. The operations of the gamified system motivated 
suppliers in the supply chain to fulfill orders on time, thus 
earned better ranks 
meaning better efficiency and 
administration. The consequence brought to Starbucks were 
higher percentage of on-time delivery of supplies, lower 
logistics cost, and more profits [7]. Delta airlines 
successfully used a mobile application (APP) with a number 
of game mechanisms to enhance its public recognition, 
customer loyalty, and revenue [8]. Not only in traditional 
manufacturing and service industries, gamification also was 
adopted by software developers, who integrated gamification 
components into software development process, and the 
preliminary results indicated that improved quality of 
software and corresponding documents [9].  
Including the mentioned cases, the success of many prior 
experiences [10]-[13] collectively point out an important fact: 
successful gamification of an information system does not 
necessarily rely on complex game mechanisms. By contrast, 
the key factors are identifying the parts that do need 
motivating users, and then embed proper game mechanisms 
to increase users’ motivation and engagement, which usually 
lead to better performance and outcomes [14]. 
III. 
PROCESS OF GAMIFYING AN ONLINE FORUM  
The JForum, an online forum system with Berkeley 
Software Distribution (BSD) license terms, was selected to 
gamify due to its openness and popularity. The gamification 
implies renovating an existing information system rather 
than creating a new one from scratch, thus openness is 
critical. 
Generally 
speaking, 
a 
gamification 
process 
comprises the following key activities before embedding 
game mechanisms into the existing system: understanding 
the users, setting missions, identifying motivations, and 
selecting effective game mechanisms accordingly [15]. This 
section delineates the particular process of gamifying the 
JForum in this work. 
A. Users and Missions Analysis 
Rationally, target users of an online forum share a 
common profile: they are willing to acquire knowledge 
during the course of interacting with others, so they likely to 
be socializers, explorers, and achievers according to the 
Bartle’s player type categorization [16]. Socializers enjoy the 
interactions with peers in the forum, explorers are happy to 
find new information that they never know, and achievers 
can feel satisfaction by observing peers responded or 
recognized the helpful information that they provided. 
Obviously, reasonable target business outcomes of a 
gamified online forum include more active participation and 
more productive contributions from users. Consequently, the 
missions of a gamification work should be to encourage 
people to join the forum, participate the discussions, and 
contribute (raise issues or provide information) more 
valuable contents. 
B. Motivational Drivers Identification 
With clear missions, then we need to identify factors that 
are able to drive people perform what we intend them to do. 
A number of motivational drivers [14] that suits with target 
users are described as follows: 
1) Collecting: For a long time, people enjoy collecting 
of either physical or abstract things such as coins or number 
of friends on social networks, which are meaningful to the 
collectors, in terms of value, security, or social status. 
Furthermore, once a collection starts, people tend to 
complete it, so if a collection could be infinite, the 
collecting activities will keep going. 
2) Connecting: Connecting with people, especially 
those who share common interests or characteristics with us, 
makes our life enjoyable. This explains the foundation of 
various associations, clubs, fellowships, etc. Although being 
a member of a forum itself is making connections with other 
people, users still have motivation to expand the 
connections with people outside of the forum. 
3) Achievement: People get great satisfication from 
achievement, which usually means successfully dealing with  
challenges. The positive psychological feedback makes us  
be willing to rise to the same challenge repeatedly, even we 
know that we probably fail sometimes. 
4) Feedback: The feedback means acknowledgement, 
recognition, or just response to initiators’ actions or 
messages. Feedback enhances the sense of being noticed, so 
not receiving feedback is extremely demotivating to anyone. 
Providing feedback is very important to  encourage 
continuous participation and contributions in a forum. 
5) Autonomy: Just like average people, members of a 
forum does not want the contents quality or atmosphere of 
the forum they join shift to a situation that they dislike to 
see but unable to restrain it. Therefore, if there is a trigger 
available, they tend to take necessary actions when they 
encounter any latency leading to these situations, such as 
offensive or inappropriate contents. 
6) Fear of punishment: Members in a forum, just like 
most members in a society, tend to avoid speech and 
behaviors leading to punishment, this tendency gradually 
develops social norms or the corresponding regulations in 
written. Unlike the other motivational drivers that stimulate 
people to do something, this factor prevents members from 
doing things that are improper in a particular circumstance. 
After setting missions and identifying motivation drivers, 
the next step is to embed proper game mechanisms that are 
able to motivate the users. 
C. Selecting A Set of Suitable Game Mechanims 
A game mechanism refers to a component with which 
users interact during the process of playing games. Besides 
its visible part displaying on the user interface, a mechanism 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

also includes a set of rules that govern how this mechanism 
works. To realize the mentioned missions for encouraging 
users’ participation and meaningful contributions, the 
following 5 game mechanisms were selected to embed into 
the JForum. Each mechanism’s characteristics and the 
motivational drivers it offers were described as follows: 
1) Points: The most popular mechanism in various 
games and have been widely applied in commercial contexts 
to reward customers’ loyalty. Points motivate users due to 
humans’ intrinsic desire to collect things such as money, 
stamps, antiques, etc. Besides, awarding points to users for 
her/his participation and contributions is a rational approach 
to recognizing their activities in the forum. In this work, 
points will be awarded to encourage certain types of actions 
including login, raise new topic, post new message, reply a 
message; as well as will be deducted to discourage other 
types of actions such as posting inappropriate contents, 
abusive reporting, etc. 
2) Leaderboard: This mechanism ranks users according 
to their achievements within a specific context, which 
usually be representable in the form of points. It forms a 
competitive atmosphere, which encourages those who 
dislike following behind peers to engage the forum more 
actively.  
3) Badges: To award memebrs accumelating a certain 
amount of points, specific types of badges will be granted. 
Usually, there are multiple types of badges honoring 
achievements in different levels of difficulty, or with 
different types of works. In the latter case, collecting badges 
will motivate some members. 
4) Facebook likes: To use the plugins Application 
Programming Interface (API) of the Facebook, members’ 
messages could be exposed on the largest social network. 
This allows memebrs to make connections with other 
friends who are not in the same forum, as well as receive 
feedbacks of relevance from friends on Facebook. 
5) Report of inappropriate contents: This mechanism 
echos members’ motivations in two facets; one is autonomy 
and another is fear of punishment. The former one drives 
members to control the quality of contents or the 
atmosphere of the forum through supressing inappropriate 
contents. The latter one holds back members from posting 
contents that are evidently not sutiable in a particular forum. 
To avoid abusive reporting, the reported contents will be 
sent to administrators for judging whether they are really 
inappropriate or not. After judgement, the reported contents 
will be sustained or removed, and the point of the member 
who posted inappropriate contents or the member who 
abusively reported will be deducted accordingly. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 
The JForum is a Java servlet application being able to run 
on Apache Tomcat. Its design generally complies with the 
Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern [17], it 
has the 3-tier structure. Accordingly, planting game 
mechanisms needs to deal with components in different tiers. 
The gamification work needs to deal with a number of key 
components in each tier for accommodating the selected 
game mechanisms. 
To minimize the interrelationship (coupling) between the 
original parts in JForum and the newly parts due to the 
gamification, 
the 
works 
were 
conducted 
with 
a 
loosely-coupled style, as Figure 1 shows. User identifiers 
were taken to serve as foreign keys of the data tables 
persisting mechanisms’ status and records when it is rational. 
Besides, all gaming rules were collectively defined in a new 
package: “game”. Doing so, it will make it easy to expand 
the gamification work, as well as to maintain either the 
original or the new gamification works. 
 
gamification package
game mechanics
player
existing JForum
gaming rules
user
trigger condition
reaction
point
badge
reporting
leaderboard
relationship
 mapping between user 
and player
 
Figure 1.  Loosely-coupled Architecture 
Figure 2 illustrates the major components that need to be 
added and updated for gamifying the JForum, and each 
component is described as follows. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Key Components of the Gamification Work 
A. User Interface (View) 
The JForum uses the FreeMarker package [18] as a tool 
to separate Web pages design (view) and business logic 
programming (controller) works. The FreeMarker engine 
generates textual contents based on a template that contains 
HTML and FreeMarker Template (FTL) tags for dynamic 
Web contents, as well as a data model specifying data 
sources. Consequently, to embed a new game mechanism 
that will bring some new messages and graphics dynamically, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

it is necessary to update both the template and the data model 
of correspondence; the template decides the visual effect and 
format of the new components, and the data model tells 
where the displayed data come from dynamically when a 
particular page being accessed. 
In addition, the JForum uses the I18 internationalization 
package for global users. For that reason, all new textual 
messages for embedding game mechanisms need to be added 
into the property file listing messages for a particular 
language (locale). 
Figure 3 shows a FreeMarker fragment in a HTML file, 
which will display a message consisting of the word “point” 
in a default locale and the numeric value of the points earned 
by a non-administrator user. 
 
 
Figure 3.  A FreeMarker fragment  
B. Game Objects and Corresponding Rules (Controller) 
When thinking in the object-oriented way, each game 
mechanism obviously needs an object for holding its 
attributes and defining how it works. For example, to realize 
the “point” mechanism, a corresponding “Point” class will be 
defined; the attribute “userID” will bind it with a particular 
user, and the attribute “totalPoints” keeps track of the points 
being accumulated by the particular user. A method 
“changePoint” will be defined in the class to adjust the 
amount of points according to what that user did. 
The PostAction object handles all actions for managing 
topics and posts, such as creating new topics or posting new 
messages, replying, deleting messages, etc. In other words, it 
deals with most major actions that the gamification work 
should focus on. So that, it needs linkage with some new 
game mechanisms. For example, when a user post a new 
message, the action of awarding points will be initiated by 
this object. 
The DataAccessDriver abstract class defines the interface 
for linking the game mechanism and the persisting of the 
added game objects. Thus, all game mechanisms except the 
Facebook connection need to rely on one of its realization. 
Generally, the attributes of game objects will be fetched or 
stored via one of the corresponding concrete classes. 
Since the servlet is the container for the JForum 
application, all business logics of the online forum systems  
and the new gaming rules were administrated and executed 
here. 
C. Persistence (Model) 
Taking flexibility of persistent storage into account, Data 
Access Object (DAO) design pattern was applied to separate 
the objects and its underlying storage mechanism. Thus, the 
object codes do not need to be changed due to switching to 
different data sources or APIs. DAOs provide abstraction 
and encapsulate all details for accessing the data source, 
which might be relational database, cloud storage, 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), mainframe 
file systems, etc. The DAOs manage making connections 
with the data sources, as well as to fetch and store data. In 
the JForum system, each object was further divided into two 
layers of DAO for more flexibility, one is entity specific 
DAO, another is the generic DAO. 
Cache mechanism in the JForum speeds up the object 
access operations through storing copies of object contents in 
Java virtual machine. So, many access operations do not 
need to access the database unless it is necessary to do so. To 
make contents of the persistent game mechanisms cacheable, 
addition 
of 
all 
persistent 
mechanisms 
needs 
the 
corresponding update in the cache mechanism. 
All game mechanisms needing persistence require the 
corresponding tables in the database. Besides the properties 
of game mechanism objects, many gaming rules could also 
be encoded and then persisted in the database for more 
flexibility and maintainability. For example, the amount of 
points for awarding users should depend on the type of 
action they performed. However, the point amount for 
awarding a particular action could fluctuate rather than being 
constant for the sake of flexibility. Thus, these dynamics had 
better be encoded and persisted in the database, instead of 
being hardcoded in methods of mechanism class. 
In summary, to illustrate the hierarchical operation of a 
game mechanism, the UML (Unified Modeling Language) 
[19] sequence diagram in Figure 4 shows the process of how 
components collaboratively worked to display the point of a 
user. 
 
Displaying Point
sd 
Persistence
GenericDAO
PointDAO
User
Util
Point
PostAction
Web client
1: Request point info()
1.1: identify user()
1.1.1: fetch point obj()
1.1.1.1: Entity DAO()
1.1.1.1.1: generic DAO()
1.1.1.1.1.1: database access()
1.2: locale charset via I18n()
1.2.1: display point info()
 
Figure 4.  Working Process of the Point  Mechanism 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The success of games relies on the proper application of 
motivational drivers that make players like and then be 
addicted to the game. Aiming to borrow the attractive 
features of various games, gamification techniques were used 
to improve users’ experiences and engagement in non-game 
contexts for working, learning, or commercial purposes. The 
embedding of game mechanisms into an online forum system 
makes the system more engaging to users, who will feel 
animating while they are interacting and sharing knowledge 
with peers. 
This article described the work of gamifying a JForum 
system realizing an online forum, including the work’s 
motivation, process, and outcome illustrations. Besides, the 
present work shows the feasibility of gamifying an 
open-sourced software system by embedding 5 popular game 
mechanisms 
into 
the 
original 
code 
base 
with 
a 
loosely-coupled 
approach. 
A 
preliminary 
qualitative 
evaluation was conducted via interviewing with 8 users. 
They are computer science majored college students and 
usually spend a lot of time on visiting online forums to 
acquire information for completing their homework and 
projects. The responses from these target users of online 
forums indicated that the most significant impact brought by 
the present gamification on users is that they can observe the 
aspiring and competitive atmosphere, which was shaped by 
the badges and leaderboard and to some extent encouraged 
them to play more active roles in the information exchanging 
platform. The Facebook connections enable users to spread 
forum contents to their own social networks where there 
might be some constructive feedbacks regarding the topics in 
the forum. The mechanic of reporting inappropriate contents 
enable users to collectively maintain the quality of forum, 
which is important to the sustainable operation of a forum. 
By contrast, rewarding points made little difference due to 
the lack of redeeming mechanism enabling users to consume 
what they earned.  
Besides studying how to embed other types of game 
mechanisms into an online forum, to better understand the 
effectiveness of particular game mechanisms in the context 
of online information sharing, the works being worthy of 
further investigations include the quantitative analysis of 
users’ perceptions or satisfaction toward specific game 
mechanisms, and the quantitative evaluation of performance 
and productivity impact after particular gamification 
mechanisms being deployed.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work has being funded by the grant from 
the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, ROC, 
under Grant No. MOST 103-2221-E-126-014. We deeply 
appreciate their financial support and encouragement. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. B. Killoran, "How to Use Search Engine Optimization 
Techniques to Increase Website Visibility," Professional 
Communication, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 56, 2013, pp. 
50-66. 
[2] 
T. JForum. (Retrieved: April, 2015). Jforum Is a Powerful 
and Robust Discussion Board System Implemented in Java. 
Available: http://jforum.net/ 
[3] 
J. Watt and M. Hargis, "Boredom Proneness: Its Relationship 
with Subjective Underemployment, Perceived Organizational 
Support, and Job Performance," Journal of Business & 
Psychology, vol. 25, 2010, pp. 163-174. 
[4] 
A. F. Aparicio, F. L. G. Vela, J. L. G. Sánchez, and J. L. I. 
Montes, "Analysis and Application of Gamification," in 
Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on 
Interacción Persona-Ordenador, 2012, p. 17. 
[5] 
S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke, "From 
Game 
Design 
Elements 
to 
Gamefulness: 
Defining 
"Gamification"," presented at the Proceedings of the 15th 
International Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning 
Future Media Environments, Tampere, Finland, 2011, pp. 
9-15. 
[6] 
C. Pettey and R. v. d. Meulen, "Gartner Predicts over 70 
Percent of Global 2000 Organisations Will Have at Least 
One Gamified Application by 2014," Gartner, Barcelona, 
2011. 
[7]  E. Sheely. (Retrieved: April, 2015). Case Study: How 
Starbucks 
Improved 
Supply 
Chain 
Efficiency 
with 
Gamification. 
Available: 
http://www.gamification.co/2013/11/18/fostercooperationga
mfication/ 
[8] 
J. Hendricks. (Retrieved: April, 2015). Case Study: Delta's 
Nonstop Nyc Game That Got 190k Interactions in 6 Weeks. 
Available: 
http://www.gamification.co/2013/11/20/delta-nonstop-nyc/ 
[9] 
D. 
J. 
Dubois 
and 
G. 
Tamburrelli, 
"Understanding 
Gamification Mechanisms for Software Development," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting 
on Foundations of Software Engineering, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia, 2013, pp. 659-662. 
[10] L. F. Rodrigues, C. J. Costa, and A. Oliveira, "The Adoption 
of Gamification in E-Banking," presented at the Proceedings 
of the 2013 International Conference on Information Systems 
and Design of Communication, Lisboa, Portugal, 2013, pp. 
47-55. 
[11] D. Krishna, "Application of Online Gamification to New 
Hire Onboarding," in The Third International Conference on 
Services in Emerging Markets, Mysore, India, 2012, pp. 
153-156. 
[12] O. Korn, "Industrial Playgrounds: How Gamification Helps 
to Enrich Work for Elderly or Impaired Persons in 
Production," presented at the Proceedings of the 4th ACM 
SIGCHI symposium on Engineering interactive computing 
systems, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2012, pp. 313-316. 
[13] B. Gnauk, L. Dannecker, and M. Hahmann, "Leveraging 
Gamification in Demand Dispatch Systems," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2012 Joint EDBT/ICDT Workshops, 
Berlin, Germany, 2012, pp. 103-110.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[14] J. M. Kumar and M. Herger, Gamification at Work: 
Designing Engaging Business Software. Aarhus C., 
Denmark The Interaction Design Foundation, 2013. 
[15] G. Zichermann and C. Cunningham, Gamification by Design: 
Implementing Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps: 
O'Reilly Media, 2011. 
[16] R. Bartle, "Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who 
Suit Muds," Journal of MUD research, vol. 1, 1996, p. 19. 
[17] A. Leff and J. T. Rayfield, "Web-Application Development 
Using the Model/View/Controller Design Pattern," in 
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference, 2001. 
EDOC'01. Proceedings. Fifth IEEE International, 2001, pp. 
118-127. 
[18] B. Geer, M. Bayer, and J. Revusky, "The Freemarker 
Template Engine," ed, 2004. 
[19]  Rumbaugh, James, Ivar Jacobson, and Grady Booch. 
Unified Modeling Language Reference Manual, The. Pearson 
Higher Education, 2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

