About an Architecture That Allows to Become a Mobile Web Service Provider  
Marc Jansen 
Computer Science Institute 
University of Applied Sciences Ruhr West 
Bottrop, Germany 
marc.jansen@hs-ruhrwest.de 
 
Abstract—The role of mobile devices as Web Service 
consumers is widely accepted and a large number of mobile 
applications already consume Web Services in order to fulfill 
their task. Nevertheless, no reasonable approach exists, as yet, 
to allow deploying Web Services on mobile devices and thus 
uses these kinds of devices as Web Service providers. This 
paper presents an approach that allows deploying Web 
Services on mobile devices by the usage of the well-known 
protocols and standards and, at the same time, can overcome 
problems that usually occur when mobile devices are used as 
service providers. Here, we provide both the description of an 
implementation with results of a first performance test. The 
test shows that the described approach provides a reasonable 
way to introduce Web Service provisioning for mobile devices. 
Keywords - mobile devices; Web Services; mobile Web 
Service provider. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, the number of reasonably powerful 
mobile devices has much increased. According to [1], the 
number of smartphones worldwide counts about 300 million 
units.  
On the other hand, this huge number of smartphones 
represents a large number of heterogeneous devices with 
respect to the operating systems smartphones are currently 
using. According to [2], there were at least five different 
operating systems for smartphones available on the market in 
2010, and their distribution is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Distribution of different operating systems for smartphones in 
2010 
 
It thus seems to be necessary to have a platform-
independent mechanism for the communication with services 
provided by smartphones in order to not re-implement each 
service for each of the mentioned operating systems. 
Usually, Web Services are used in order to provide a 
standardized and widely used methodology that is capable of 
achieving a platform-independent way to provide services. 
Unfortunately, in contrast to consuming Web Services on 
mobile devices, providing Web Services on mobile devices 
is not yet standardized due to several problems that occur 
when a service runs on a mobile device.   
This paper presents the description of a framework that 
allows providing Web Services on mobile devices. The 
outline of the paper is as follows: the next section provides 
an overview of related work, after which the scenario - 
together with the problems that usually occur should Web 
Services be provided by a mobile device - is explained. The 
following section explains the implementation of the 
framework in detail and the results of a first performance test 
are presented. The paper is closed by a conclusion. 
II. STATE OF THE ART 
The idea of providing Web Services on mobile devices 
was probably presented first by IBM [3]. This work presents 
a solution for a specific scenario where Web Services are 
hosted on mobile devices. More general approaches for 
providing Web Services on mobile devices are presented in 
[4] and [5].  In [6], another approach, focusing on the 
optimization of the HTTP protocol for mobile Web Services 
provisioning, is presented. 
Importantly, none of the mentioned approaches manages 
to overcome certain limitations of mobile devices, as 
demonstrated in the next section.  
The major difference between previous research and the 
approach presented in this paper is that, to the best of our 
knowledge, previous research focused very much on 
bringing Web Services to mobile devices by implementing 
server side functionality to the mobile device in question. 
The approach presented here follows a different line: from a 
technical and communication point of view, the mobile Web 
Service provider communicates as a Web Service client with 
a dynamically generated Web Service proxy.  
This approach provides an advantage for overcoming 
certain problems with mobile Web Services as described in 
the next section. Furthermore, this approach does not rely on 
an efficient server side implementation of Web Services on 
the mobile device, and thus allows to implement a very 
lightweight substitution to a common application server 
where a common Web Service is running. 
Since nothing comes for free, this approach has some 
drawbacks as well, e.g., it implements a polling mechanism 
that permanently polls for new service requests. Therefore, 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

this approach produces an overhead with respect to the 
network communication and the computational power of the 
mobile device. The computational overhead, though, can be 
dramatically reduced by adjusting the priority of the polling 
mechanism according to the priority of the provided Web 
Service. 
Another drawback of the presented approach is that it 
relies on a publicly available proxy infrastructure for the part 
of the framework that dynamically generates the Web 
Service proxies. This drawback can be overcome if, for 
example, mobile telecommunication companies provide this 
kind of infrastructure centrally. 
In contrast to the before mentioned approaches, the 
approach presented in this paper differs with respect to one 
major aspect: from a network technical point of view there is 
no server instance installed on the mobile device. Therefore, 
a certain Web Service client does not call the Web Service 
on the mobile device directly but calls a centrally deployed 
proxy. The Web Service running on the mobile device polls 
in regular intervals for any new message requests of interest. 
The sequence of the Web Service request from the client 
point of view and from the Web Service point of view is 
shown in the sequence diagram in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 1: Sequence diagram of the Web Service calls in the presented 
approach 
 
The exact sequence of the different messages and events 
will be described in more detail later. Since especially 
polling mechanisms cause a certain drawback, one of the 
major questions concerning the presented approach is the 
question of benefits and drawbacks of the polling mechanism 
and, in particular, whether the benefits justify the drawbacks. 
As already mentioned, one of the major problems of 
dealing with Web Services on mobile devices is the fact that 
mobile devices often switch between  networks. Therefore, 
the Web Service running on a mobile device is usually not 
available under a fixed address, a fact that leads to a number 
of problems for the consumer of a mobile Web Service: 
Besides the usual network switch, the fact that mobile 
devices are usually not meant to provide 24/7 availability, 
but are designed towards providing the user with the 
possibility to exploit certain services, e.g., phone calls, short 
messages, writing and receiving emails, etc., yields the 
problem that mobile devices might get switched off by the 
user. Hence, not only that the provided Web Service might 
be unavailable under different network addresses, but it 
might not be available at all.  
All these drawbacks can be solved by using the approach 
presented here. By using the central proxy, the service 
requests of a certain Web Service client can be stored and if 
the mobile Web Service is running, it can pull for service 
requests that are of interest to it. Since from a technical point 
of view the Web Service provider only acts as a client to the 
Web Service proxy, the potentially changing network 
addresses of the mobile device do not pose a problem at all. 
In addition, one of the major drawbacks of the described 
polling mechanism can be limited by adjusting the priority of 
the Web Service running on the mobile device, resulting in a 
lower frequency of the polling for the service request. 
To conclude, in our opinion, the advantages of the 
described mechanism justify the drawbacks that are inherent 
to the approach. 
III. SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
The major idea behind the implementation of the 
middleware is to provide a Web Service proxy, according to 
the proxy design pattern [7], in order to overcome certain 
problems in mobile scenarios as described by [8]. One major 
problem here is that mobile devices often switch networks, 
e.g., at home the mobile phone might be connected to a WiFi 
network, at work the connection might be established 
through another WiFi network and on the way home from 
work the mobile phone might be connected to a 
GPRS/UMTS-network. Each of these different networks 
provides different IP addresses and possibly different 
network constellations. For example, it can be private IP 
addresses with network address translation (NAT), where the 
Web Services running on the device are not directly 
accessible from the internet, or public IP addresses.  
Frequently switching between IP addresses might raise 
certain problems for the provision of Web Services, since the 
client of a certain service always needs to know the actual IP 
address at which the service can be reached. More than that, 
within a private network the provided Web Services are 
usually not reachable at all from the internet.  
Therefore, the problem, from the client point of view, is 
that the service is not always accessible under the same (and 
constant) IP address. The presented approach provides a 
solution to overcome this problem, with the exception of the 
case when a device is completely switched off. The switch 
off problem can be overcome as well, in which case slight 
modifications to the presented approach, together with an 
asynchronous call of the Web Service, are necessary. 
The approach presented here suggests solving these 
problems by implementing a Web Service proxy that 
dynamically creates a proxy for each Web Service that gets 
deployed on a mobile device. The created proxy allows 
receiving service requests as a representative to the actual 
service and storing a service request along with the necessary 
data. In the next step, the mobile Web Service provider 
continuously polls for requests to its services, performs the 
services and sends the result back to the dynamically 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

generated Web Service proxy. Receiving the result, the Web 
Service proxy can send the result back to the client that 
originally performed the service request. 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION 
The major goal of the work presented here is to provide a 
solution 
to 
the 
described 
scenario. 
Therefore, 
we 
implemented a middleware that allows the provision of Web 
Services on mobile devices. Here, the standard protocols, 
e.g., WSDL for the description of the Web Service interface, 
SOAP/REST as the standard network protocol and http as 
the usual transport protocol, are used such that there is no 
additional effort on the client side for requesting a mobile 
Web Service.  
The following three sections provide a short introduction 
to the services offered by the middleware, followed by a 
description of the communication between the mobile Web 
Service provider and the Web Service client/consumer. Last 
but not least some details are presented about the Java based 
implementation for the test scenario. 
A. Use-Case Analysis 
In order to achieve the goal of implementing a Web 
Service proxy, an analysis of use-cases that this proxy will 
have to support has been performed. The result of this 
analysis is shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 2: Use case description of the developed middleware. 
 
From a technology point of view four different actors 
participate in the scenario. Obviously, a provider for the 
mobile Web Service is necessary. This is a piece of software 
running on the mobile device that provides the Web Service 
itself. This piece of software can best be compared with an 
application server hosting a Web Service in a scenario where 
the Web Service is provided by a common server system. 
The second quite obvious actor is the consumer of the 
Web Service: the Web Service client. This is a piece of 
software running on the client side, performing requests to 
the Web Service. 
As already described, one of the major ideas of the 
presented approach is to provide a proxy for the Web 
Services provided by the mobile devices. Therefore, the Web 
Service proxy is another actor that participates in the 
scenario. The proxy represents a surrogate of the Web 
Service provided by the mobile device. The basic function of 
this proxy is to implement the same interface (same methods 
with identical parameter lists and return values) as the Web 
Service itself. Moreover, the methods provided by the proxy 
(in order to register a service, de-register a service, etc.), 
should be accessible via the standard network protocols of 
Web Services and the description of the proxy interface 
should also be available in WSDL (in the implementation 
here the SOAP protocol was chosen). The proxy’s’ major 
task is to receive client requests, store them in a database and 
wait for the mobile Web Service to provide the result of the 
service request. While in the traditional proxy pattern the 
proxy would directly forward (push) the incoming service 
requests to the Web Service, we have decided to just store 
the requests in a database in order to allow the mobile Web 
Services to pull the requests from the proxy. This change to 
the traditional proxy pattern basically allows handling 
constantly changing network connections (as explained 
before), since within this approach neither the Web Service 
proxy nor the Web Service client need to know the actual IP 
address of the mobile device that provides the actual Web 
Service.  
Fourth and last, the database is taken to be an actor of the 
middleware. Usually, the database would more likely be 
modeled as a system (and not as an actor), but for the sake of 
clarity and consistency, we decided to model the database 
also as an actor in the system. The major task of the database 
is to store the necessary information about the service 
request in order to allow the Web Service running on the 
mobile device to perform the requested task, and to later-on 
store the return values of the service request as well. By 
storing also the return value, the Web Service proxy is able 
to send the result back to the client that made the request. 
This is necessary since the usage of the proxy is transparent 
to the client, in the sense that the client is not aware that the 
actual service request is not answered by the proxy, but by 
the Web Service running on the mobile device. Therefore, 
the Web Service proxy needs to send the result of the service 
to the Web Service client, and not the mobile Web Service 
itself. 
Besides the four actors, a number of use-cases need to be 
implemented in order to fully run the described scenario: 
First of all, a mobile Web Service provider needs to be 
able to register a service to be provided. Besides the Web 
Service provider, the Web Service proxy and the database 
are interacting within this use-case, too. The Web Service 
proxy needs to dynamically implement the interface of the 
mobile Web Service and the storage of the metadata 
(basically the name of the method that should be called and 
its parameter values) of the service requests. The database 
needs to provide certain storage for the parameter values of 
each method (in case of a relational database: a table) and the 
according return values of the mobile Web Service. 
The second, quite obvious, use-case is that the mobile 
Web Service provider needs to be able to receive service 
requests. Besides the mobile Web Service provider, the Web 
Service proxy participates in this use-case also, since this is 
the instance that directly receives the requests from the Web 
Service client and stores the necessary information in the 
database. Two additional use-cases, namely, perform service 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

requests and receive service request results, participate in the 
store service request metadata use-case. 
Additionally, we have identified two other use-cases that 
are necessary for the handling of the service request 
metadata (store service request metadata) and the handling of 
the return values (store service result). The first of these two 
use-cases interacts with two actors: the Web Service proxy 
and the database; the second one additionally interacts with 
the Web Service Provider. 
Beside the fact that the provision of these use-cases 
allows the implementation of the described scenario, one of 
the major advantages of this approach is that the Web 
Service client only interacts with the preformed service 
request and receives corresponding answers from the service 
request result use-case. Therefore, from a client point of 
view, the request to a mobile Web Service is no more than a 
usual service request. No additional effort is necessary on the 
client side in order to receive results from a Web Service 
running on a mobile device. 
B. Communication between the mobile Web Service and 
its clients  
In order to explain the necessary communication for a 
service request from the Web Service client to the mobile 
Web Service provider, we modeled the communication flow 
within the sequence diagram shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Figure 3: The UML sequence diagram for the communication between a 
Web Service provider and its client. 
 
Within the sequence diagram we have modeled an object 
life line for each of the actors, to be discussed later. First of 
all, the mobile Web Service provider needs to register its 
service with the Web Service proxy. As part of the service 
registration process the Web Service proxy creates the 
necessary data structure for storing the service requests in the 
database. 
After the mobile Web Service provider has registered its 
service, it permanently polls the Web Service proxy for new 
service requests. The Web Service proxy asks the database if 
a new service request for the respective mobile Web Service 
provider is available and if so, returns the request’s metadata 
to the mobile Web Service provider. After receiving the 
metadata of a new service request, the mobile Web Service 
provider performs the service and sends the result of the 
service to the Web Service proxy that directly stores the 
result in the database. 
From a client point of view, the Web Service client 
simply calls the service provided by the Web Service proxy. 
While receiving a new service request, the Web Service 
proxy stores the necessary request metadata in the database. 
Afterwards the Web Service proxy directly starts to 
permanently poll the database for the result of the respective 
service request. Once the mobile Web Service provider has 
finished performing the request and has stored the result (via 
the Web Service proxy) in the database, the Web Service 
provider is able to send the result of the service request back 
to the client. 
C. A sample implementation 
In order to test the described approach with respect to its 
performance, we implemented the Web Service proxy in 
Java. Additionally, the mobile Web Service provider was 
implemented for Android. Here, we focused on an intuitive 
and easy way for the implementation of the Web Service, 
and have therefore, oriented ourselves by the JAX-WS (Java 
API for XML-Based Web Services), as described in the Java 
Specification Request 224 (JSR 224). The major idea, 
adapted from JAX-WS, was that a Web Service can easily be 
implemented by the use of two different annotations: the 
@MobileWebService annotation marks a class as a Web 
Service, and methods within this class can be marked as 
methods available through the mobile Web Service with the 
@MobileWebMethod annotation. 
With the help of these two annotations a simple mobile 
Web Service, which only calculates given integer values, can 
be implemented as follows: 
 
@MobileWebService 
public class TestService { 
 
 
@MobileWebMethod 
 
public int add(int a, int b) { 
 
 
return a + b; 
 
} 
 
 
}  
 
The basic relationships between the major classes of the 
sample implementation are shown in Fig. 5. For the sake of 
simplicity and transparency, less important classes (and 
methods of each class) have not been modeled. 
Basically, the implementation consists of two packages. 
Package one is the proxy package which is usually deployed 
on a server that is reachable from the internet via a public IP 
address. Here, we find one class that implements the 
necessary methods for the registration of a new mobile Web 
Service, the permanent polling from the mobile Web Service 
for the service request metadata and the method that allows 
storing the result of the service request in the database. All 
these methods are reachable as Web Services themselves, so 
that the communication between the instance running the 
mobile Web Service and the Web Service proxy is 
completely Web Service-based. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Figure 4: UML class diagram of major parts of the sample implementation 
 
Basically, the implementation consists of two packages. 
One package that is usually deployed on a server that is 
reachable from the internet via a public IP address, this is the 
proxy package. Here, we find one class that implements the 
necessary methods for the registration of a new mobile Web 
Service, the permanent polling from the mobile Web Service 
for the service request metadata and the method that allows 
to store the result of the service request in the database. All 
of these methods are themselves reachable as Web Services, 
so that the communication between the instance running the 
mobile Web Service and the Web Service proxy is also 
completely Web Service based. 
In the provider package we find, as one of the major 
classes, the MobileWebServiceRunner class to which the 
mobile Web Service gets deployed. This class is basically 
comparable to an application server in a common Web 
Service environment, but with a dramatically lower footprint. 
This lower footprint is extremely important to mobile 
devices due to their usually limited resources. Additionally, 
this package also provides the two formerly mentioned 
annotations that allow  an easy marking of a class as a 
mobile Web Service and, accordingly, a certain method of 
such a class as a mobile Web Method. Last but not least, this 
package also implements the ServiceRequestFetcher class. 
This class inherits the java.lang.Thread class since its 
responsibility is to permanently poll the Web Service 
provider for new service requests. 
V. PERFORMANCE TESTS 
Since the communication is a little bit more complicated, 
in comparison to a common Web Service call, one concern 
of this approach is the question of its performance. In order 
to get a first idea of how good or bad this implementation 
behaves with respect to performance issues, we implemented 
a simple performance test. 
 
A. Description of the test scenario 
For the performance test we implemented a very simple 
mobile Web Service. This service only calculates the sum of 
two given integers and returns the respective value as the 
result. The major advantage of such a simple mobile Web 
Service is that almost the entire duration of the mobile Web 
Service call is dedicated to the communication, and almost 
no amount of the round-trip time is used for the calculation 
itself. Since the communication is the complex part of the 
presented approach, we assume that this method of 
performance testing would provide the best overview about 
the communication performance of the presented approach. 
In the test scenario a common client (running on a common 
PC) had to put a number of service requests to the mobile 
Web Service. 
In order to compare the results against the performance 
of common Web Service calls, we implemented the test 
scenario also the other way around: we implemented a 
common Web Service (running on a common server) and 
called this Web Service from a mobile device. Here, the 
basic idea was to use the same hard- and software- 
environment with minimal changes and also to maintain the 
same network environments in all of the tests. 
In addition, we were interested in the communication 
performance in different network settings. Therefore, we 
performed the same tests in four different network settings. 
For each of the tests the (mobile) Web Service and its 
consumer where running: 
 
… in the same (WiFi) network,  
 
… different networks, and the mobile device 
was connected via WiFi, 
 
… different networks, and the mobile device 
was connected via UMTS 
 
… different networks, and the mobile device 
was connected via GPRS 
 We conducted eight different test cases: four for the 
different network constellations with a mobile Web Service 
running on a mobile device and a Web Service client running 
on a common PC, and four test cases where the Web Service 
was running on a common Server and the client was running 
on a mobile device. 
In the test cases where the (mobile) Web Service 
provider and the client were not connected to the same 
network, the central components have been deployed to a 
server running via Amazon Web Services (AWS), as a Cloud 
Computing provider. 
B. Test results 
Within each of these eight test cases, one hundred service 
calls were performed and the duration of each call was 
measured.  
The results for the mobile Web Service in the different 
network scenarios are shown in Fig. 6. 
As expected, the performance for the mobile Web 
Service calls was pretty good and pretty constant in the case 
the mobile device was connected with a WiFi network. If 
both the mobile Web Service provider and the client were 
connected to the same WiFi network, the average duration 
was M = 147.69ms (SD = 76.00ms). Having the mobile Web 
Service provider connected to a different WiFi network, the 
average duration for one service call was M = 339.04ms (SD 
= 61.71ms). 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 5: Results for the mobile Web Service in the different network 
constellations 
 
As expected the performance for the mobile Web Service 
calls are pretty good and pretty constant if the mobile device 
is connected with a WiFi network. The average time if both 
the mobile Web Service provider and the client are 
connected to the same WiFi network was M = 147.69ms (SD 
= 76.00ms). Having the mobile Web Service provider 
connected to a different, still WiFi, network the average time 
for one service call calculates to M = 339.04ms (SD = 
61.71ms). 
Of course, we measured less performance of the service 
calls when the mobile Web Service provider was connected 
to a mobile network, the performance of the service calls was 
lower. The results for the UMTS based network connection 
of the mobile Web Service show an average of M = 
827.55ms (SD = 250.35ms) for each service call, while the 
results for the GPRS based network are even worse. Here, 
the average for a single service call is M = 1355.96ms (SD = 
986.38ms). As can be seen from the values for the standard 
deviation, the performance of single service calls differs 
dramatically as well, e.g., the minimum duration measured 
within the UMTS scenario was MIN = 283ms and the 
maximum was MAX = 2169ms. The results for the GPRS 
based scenario are even worse, with a MIN = 142ms and 
MAX = 5123ms. 
The task of the second step of the test was to compare the 
performance results with the performance of a common Web 
Service call. For that purpose we conducted the same test, 
but this time the Web Service was not running on a mobile 
device but on a common server, while the Web Service client 
was running on a mobile device - again in the four different 
network settings. The results of these tests are shown in Fig. 
7. 
As demonstrated, the results are better from both 
perspectives - the overall performance and the standard 
deviation in the different network settings. A common Web 
Service call, if the Web Service provider and the mobile 
Web Service consumer are connected to the same WiFi 
network, has an average round-trip duration of M = 61.16ms 
(SD = 301.36ms). When the Web Service client was 
connected to a different (still WiFi) network the average 
performance was M = 156.71ms (SD = 15.24ms). 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Results for the usual Web Service calls in the different network 
constellations 
 
Here, again, the values for the Web Service client 
connected to a mobile network are somewhat  lower. In the 
case of the UMTS network, the average service call showed 
a performance of M = 528.55ms (SD = 273.34ms), and the 
results for the GPRS based network even worse with an 
average for each of the service calls of M = 1299.10ms (SD 
= 658.75ms). 
The next step was to compare the different results. The 
major goal of this comparison was to get an idea of how 
good the performance of the presented approach for mobile 
Web Service calls is, in comparison to common Web Service 
calls. Therefore, we calculated the difference in the average 
performance of a single Web Service call in the different 
scenarios first, and as a second step calculated the percentage 
of the performance difference in the different scenarios. The 
results are shown in Table 1. 
 
TABLE 1: COMPARISON OF THE COMMON WEB SERVICE 
CALLS AND THE MOBILE WEB SERVICE CALLS IN THE 
DIFFERENT NETWORK SCENARIOS 
 
 
The table shows that, in comparison to common Web 
Service calls, the performance of the presented approach was 
not too good when the mobile Web Service was connected to 
a WiFi network. The results for the mobile Web Service 
provider and the client connected to the same network 
showed a performance overhead of 137.60 per cent, and 
when the mobile Web Service was provided within a 
different WiFi network the performance overhead was about 
116.35 per cent. But, if the mobile Web Service was 
connected to a mobile network, the performance overhead 
was not that dramatic anymore. In the case of the UMTS 
network the overhead was limited to 56.57 per cent, and for 
the GPRS based network the overhead was even lower at 
4.38 per cent. Therefore, on the basis of our test results, it 
can be said that the performance of the presented approach 
for mobile Web Services (in comparison to common Web 
Services) seems to improve the lower the network bandwidth 
is. This could best be seen by the results for the GPRS based 
network, where the actual overhead in our test was below 5 
per cent.   
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

VI. CONCLUSIONS 
As demonstrated in this paper, today’s modern and 
powerful mobile devices can be used as Web Service 
providers by using well-known and accepted standards and 
protocols. The presented approach is capable of solving 
some of the problems that usually occur while providing 
Web Services on mobile devices, e.g., the problem of 
constantly changing IP addresses. Furthermore, the overhead 
that is inherent in the presented approach does not seem to be 
a show stopper. As shown, the performance in commonly 
available mobile networks, like UMTS or GPRS, is 
comparable to common Web Service calls. 
It can, therefore, be concluded that the presented 
approach provides an interesting alternative to the common 
Web Service provisioning by using mobile devices that act 
as a server also from a technical point of view. It eliminates 
certain problems that usually occur if mobile devices provide 
Web Service provider infrastructures, and the resulting 
drawbacks from the performance point of view are 
acceptable. 
Having in mind the power that the presented approach 
would provide for new approaches and scenarios, it could be 
asserted that bringing Web Services to mobile devices will 
probably become more important in the future and that we 
will most likely see an increasing number of applications 
making use of that kind of technology. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by an Amazon AWS 
research grant. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] IDC Worldwide Quarterly Mobile Phone Tracker, January 27, 
2011. 
[2] Tudor, B. and Pettey, C., 2010. Gartner Says Worldwide 
Mobile Phone Sales Grew 35 Percent in Third Quarter 2010, 
Smartphone 
Sales 
Increased 
96 
Percent, 
Gartner, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1466313, last visited 
19.11.2011 
[3] McFaddin, S., Narayanaswami, C., and Raghunath, M., 2003. 
Web Services on Mobile Devices – Implementation and 
Experience, In: Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Workshop on 
Mobile Computing Systems & Applications (WMCSA’03), pp. 
100-109, Monterey, CA 
[4] Srirama, S., Jarke, M., and Prinz, W., 2006. Mobile Web 
Service Provisioning, In: Proceedings of the Advanced 
International 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications 
and 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services (AICT/ICIW 2006), p. 120,  Guadeloupe, French 
Caribbean 
[5] AlShahwan, F. and Moessner, K., 2010. Providing SOAP Web 
Services and REST Web Services from Mobile Hosts, In: Fifth 
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services (ICIW), pp. 174-179. 
[6] Li, L. and Chou, W., 2011. COFOCUS – Compact and 
Expanded Restful Services for Mobile Environments, In: 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Web 
Information 
Systems 
and 
Technologies, 
pp. 
51-60, 
Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands 
[7] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., and Vlissides, J., 1995. 
Design Pattern – Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented 
Software, pp. 185-195, Addison-Wesley. 
[8] Svensson, D., 2009. Assemblies of Pervasive Services. Dept. of 
Computer Science, Institutional Repository – Lund University.  
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

