Psychology for Predicting Internet Behavior Patterns 
 
Nadejda Abramova¹,  Olga Shurygina¹, Alexander Kondratiev¹, Ivan Yamshchikov¹`² 
¹Yandex, Moscow, Russia  
² University of Applied Sciences Zittau/Goerlitz, Germany 
{abramovanadia, o-shurygina, fefa4ka}@yandex-team.ru , i.yamshchikov@hszg.de  
 
 
Abstract—Yandex[10] is an international search engine with 
more than 19 million users daily only in Russia. In order to 
improve their daily search-experience and make interfaces 
more user-friendly, Yandex carries out a great number of 
research activities. This research was aimed at finding a 
reasonably fragmented audience segmentation that should be 
based on psychological principles and be automatically 
processed. We assume that every person has his search 
behavior characteristics that could be explained by some stable 
psychological type. By search behavior we mean all the actions 
the users undertake to find the answers on the Internet: 
request formulation, quantity, timing and duration of clicks 
and views, returns to the pages visited before, the habitual 
usage of tabs and windows, navigation within the service and 
so on. Using cognitive psychology, we have managed to create 
the segmentation that has certain predictive power and, 
therefore, could be used in industrial applications. Based on 
the qualitative, as well as on the quantitative, analysis of the 
user-behavior, we have developed two binary scales that split 
the audience in four groups. The first scale “Analytic – 
Synthetic” could be roughly characterized as a scale describing 
the style of information processing, that is more natural for a 
user and classifies the attention markers. The second one 
“Logical – Ethical” deals with the informational priorities. We 
describe these two scales and show how they can be found from 
the users’ behavior. We give a brief explanation of how 
interactions with the service could be improved based on the 
knowledge of user’s psychological characteristics. Though all 
results obtained are based on a specific service and can vary 
from country to country due to the cultural differences, we 
strongly believe that these two scales, addressing the 
fundamental priorities of human personality, could be applied 
for other products and services. Moreover, understanding of 
general principles that guide the behavior of each user group 
could help generate user behavior hypotheses to other behavior 
researchers.  
Keywords - user segmentation; cognitive psychology; Internet 
behavior. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 Internet is an information environment that is a part of 
almost every person’s life nowadays. Though every person is 
unique, in order to improve daily user-experience, a 
company needs to classify users according to their 
similarities. When behavior is classified qualitatively, 
somebody needs to find a quantitative metric that would 
allow targeting all the users that share the same 
characteristics. The knowledge of such metrics and the 
understanding of how we can improve the product or the 
service for these specific people could be applied to the 
product and increase user-satisfaction, because it would 
make uses’ lives a bit better and simpler. This approach is 
called user segmentation and our research is carried out 
exactly in this framework for Russian search engine Yandex. 
Our method is based on concepts of cognitive psychology 
and is to give a possibility to track down people of each 
psychological 
type 
automatically, 
without 
any 
questionnaires, which is rather new and interesting. Firstly, 
psychological insights can give a broad and detailed 
description of many different aspects of human behavior; 
thus 
giving 
us 
great 
predictive 
power. 
Secondly, 
psychological theories claim to be universal and therefore, 
applicable to all users. A variety of theories and approaches 
gave us hope, that we could find an insightful idea of a 
segmentation that could be general, stable, measurable and 
weakly dependent on the timely factors such as the user’s 
physical conditions or current mood. 
To find out that, we divided our work into three parts: 
theory and hypothesis setting, qualitative experiments 
deployment and quantitative checking to verify our 
hypothesis. So, this paper is organized as follows: firstly, we 
describe findings of related works and theory behind our 
classification, and then, we will present the hypothesis, 
qualitative and quantitative experiments and findings. The 
conclusion and acknowledgement close the article. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS  
The whole concept of using psychology for Internet 
behavior studies is not really new. A number of researchers 
have applied psychological ideas and principles in their 
research of the Internet behavior. Therefore, we mention the 
most important areas that have a direct connection with this 
paper. 
One of the most successful syncretic areas of psychology 
and IT (Information Technologies) is the area of adaptive 
interfaces. In 2011, Susan Weischenk published a book “100 
Things Every Designer Needs to Know About People” [1], 
where she gives a cookbook of practical advices for the 
interface-designers that is entirely based on psychological 
theories and concepts. The whole industry of usability is 
largely based on the idea of applying empirical psychology 
to the interface-design. The concept of improving the whole 
user experience with the knowledge of the user’s motivation, 
social-demographics and personal qualities is profoundly 
discussed by Anderson in [2]. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Another area is behavior analytics, where one can find 
two major research concepts. The first one could be called a 
unified approach, where one tries to find a psychological 
feature applicable to all human beings. Stecher and Counts in 
[3] studied attention, memory and thinking process and came 
to the conclusion that some characteristics are shared among 
all users. For example, they proved that trait information is 
remembered preferentially to the content. But as noted, such 
patterns are inherent to all people, without going into details 
why some people are more successful at remembering 
context or other type of information. The second approach 
could be called a segment-based approach. The concept 
behind is that there are distinguishing markers - personality 
parameters - that could split people into certain groups with 
the same behavioral patterns. Such approach seems to be 
really useful in the area of targeting, e.g., [4] [5]; therefore, 
we decided to follow this path. While it is typical to use 
segmentation for a specific use-case, we wanted to create a 
psychological segmentation that could be applied to a vast 
majority of cases and, consequently, would be of a great 
industrial interest. 
Since the Internet is an informational environment, we 
decided to focus on the psychological theories covering 
issues of dealing with information. To be more specific, we 
were interested in information perception and processing. As 
a starting point, we used a classical concept of a cognitive 
style that was first introduced by Bieri [6] in 1955. This 
concept is well known and widely used in academic 
psychology, as well as in industrial applications. It was 
profoundly studied and applied to the needs of education by 
Riding in [7], [8] and [9]. Assuming that interaction with the 
Internet is an elementary exchange of information between 
users and environment, we could apply the concept of 
cognitive styles to every user action. Moreover, cognitive 
styles are stable, they are hardly altered by mood or physical 
conditions and they characterize people behavior over the 
long haul. All these advantages make cognitive styles 
extremely promising and interesting for our problem. 
III. 
PSYCHOLOGICAL SEGMENTATION 
Our research is simultaneously carried out in several 
directions. We started with a pure theoretical hypothesis 
based on the classical psychological concepts and our 
demands on the segmentation, such as stability and 
measurability that we have already briefly mentioned. Then, 
we verified this hypothesis in a qualitative as well as in a 
quantitative way and now are trying to apply obtained 
expertise to the products. 
A. Theory and Hypothesis  
Relying upon the ideas and the theoretical background 
mentioned in the Introduction we were looking for a 
segmentation that could correspond to the following 
conditions: 
 
Applicable to a variety of use cases, problem 
contexts and users 
 
Relevant for our target audience 
 
Measurable with some standard face-to-face means 
 
Time-stable 
 
Detectable, leaving digital imprint 
 
Able to find predictable behavior patterns 
applicable to the whole segment 
Finally, we have found two cognitive scales that seem 
especially interesting and promising for us, see Figure 1. The 
first scale is Analytic - Synthetic. It describes how people 
deal with different information. Analytic tends to specify, go 
into details instead of scanning and building up the whole 
picture. Analytic tends to be focused on and act stepwise 
solving one problem at a time. Synthetic, on the contrary, is a 
multitasking person, who tends to generalize and does not 
like to pay any attention to the details. He switches between 
issues quickly and could be easily distracted. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Four psychological types based on the cognitive concept. 
 
Logical - Ethical is the second scale that describes which 
kind of information a person would consider as most valid, 
interesting and reliable. Logical people tend to focus on 
facts, 
measurements, 
depersonalized 
and 
objective 
arguments, while Ethical people value subjective, person-
focused feedback and experience. They also tend to look for 
personal emotional insights, rather than to look at bare facts. 
These two scales with the binary outcome for each split 
the users in four different groups. In our qualitative and 
quantitative research, we tried to find and describe these four 
groups in a greater detail. 
B. Qualitaive experiments 
The aim of this part of research was to develop a portrait 
of each psychological type through the deep interviews of 40 
people. We were going to find out their Internet preferences 
and habitats. Therefore, we have carried out a series of 
interviews with the following procedure: 
• 
At first, a respondent was asked to fill in the forms 
based on the standard questionnaires used for these two 
cognitive styles in the classical psychology to understand a 
person’s type. 
• 
Then, the user was asked to carry out a series of 
simple tasks that involved the usage of the interface. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

• 
We tracked his attention, focus and motor activity 
to compare our expert-based impression with the results of 
the test and with the collected data. 
• 
Afterwards, we tried different user cases with the 
same user varying his level of competence in the area and 
given time for the task. 
Based on these interviews and collected data we have 
managed to see representatives of all four groups and build a 
qualitative description of the typical representative of each 
group. Here is the summary of our results, describing four 
psychological types behavioral patterns: 
 
Logical Analytic type 
o 
searches step-by-step 
o 
plans his actions before doing them 
o 
concentrates on objective facts 
o 
specifies every search parameter 
o 
tends 
to 
fact-check 
and 
compare 
parameters 
o 
eager to solve the problem in the most 
effective way 
 
Ethical Analytic type 
o 
searches step-by-step 
o 
does not perform multi-tasks 
o 
pays attention to any related type of user 
generated content eagerly 
o 
tends to find the most useful solution of 
the problem 
 
Logical Synthetic type 
o 
searches multidimensionally  
o 
performs spontaneous changes in the task  
o 
tends to prefer facts and numbers over a 
personal experiences, but does not bother 
with fact-checking 
 
Ethical Synthetic type 
o 
searches multidimensionally 
o 
sometimes does three or more tasks in 
parallel 
o 
switches easily from one task to another 
one 
o 
can be easily distracted 
o 
focuses on personalized experience 
o 
looks for the most impressive solution of 
the problem 
We have also found some interesting features of the 
behavior that could be attributed just to the Analytic - 
Synthetic scale.  For instance, Analytics tend to do one thing 
at a time. Even if you ask them a question, while they are 
surfing the Internet, they tend to continue browsing only 
after the question is answered. This observation gave us a 
clue that content of the site and advertisement should be 
strictly connected to the query. Synthetics can have more 
objects in their attention at once but they pay for it with some 
negligence and carelessness. They even make more typos. 
That means that content of the web page can contain both 
context information and additional information as well. So, 
the design for Synthetics should be easy enough for them to 
follow several topics or objects they are interested in.  
Moreover, as we tracked eye-paths, we have discovered 
that Analytic people, especially Logical Analytical type 
people are mostly consistent in their actions. They view 
every page slowly, from the top to the bottom and do it very 
attentively. Synthetic type people, on the contrary, are very 
chaotic. They scan the page in a random way. To get detailed 
attention patterns of each psychological type is an aim for 
our future research. However, these findings gave us a clue 
that interfaces design as well as content should differ for 
each type in order to increase convenience for the user.   
Such substantial differences in the behavior of each type 
encouraged us to think of further qualitative experiments. 
Furthermore, all gathered qualitative research results 
motivated us to move on to quantitative experiments and 
gave lots of insights for the calculations and data-analyses 
that we are still doing at the moment. 
C. Qualitative research 
The first and foremost, we decided to focus on the scale 
Analytic - Synthetic as on more promising and more 
insightful one in our quantitative research. We have 
constructed a number of metrics to verify the fact that these 
two groups exist, such as reaction rate, number of entry 
points to start search, query length, regression in navigation 
and change of topics. But, in this paper, we would like to 
focus on only two of them, which are the most illustrative. 
1) Regressions in navigation: Based on the evidence we 
have got from the qualitative experiments that Analytics 
should have more linear navigation patterns in comparison 
with Synthetics, which we believe have more Internet 
navigation recursions and loops, we have constructed the 
following metric.  
 
 
Figure 2: Percentage of the users without and with regressions in the 
monthly audience of Yandex Russia. 
 
Let us assume that the user has opened a certain page A then 
moved from it to the page B. Now, if this user does not show 
any activity on the page B and comes back to the page A 
within a short interval let us call such pattern a regression. 
The time interval was estimated as an average time between 
the click opening the page and the first click on it calculated 
for this user. We have used one month dataset of 
approximately 35 million unique users. As it turned out, 
almost a third of the users did not have any regressions 
within a month; see Figure 2. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

2) Change of the topic: When users search something on 
the Internet, they naturally input search queries. One can 
classify if two queries going one by one within one session 
have the same general topic or are not even slightly 
connected. As we have seen from the qualitative 
experiments, Analytics should have no unconnected queries 
and Synthetics, on the contrary, should change query topics 
from time to time during one session. It turned out, see 
Figure 3, that there is another strong dichotomy with 
approximately 30 percent of the audience not having any 
single change of the topic within a month.  
 
 
Figure 3: Percentage of the users without and with topic changes in the 
monthly audience of Yandex Russia. 
 
3) Further quantitative research: We compared these two 
metrics and got 70% correlation. This fact is extremely 
interesting because metrics are built on different counters 
and describe different activities. Synthetics tend to have 
regressions and changes of the topic and Analytics tend to do 
everything in a more organized step-by-step way.  
We are currently running a number of experiments in 
order to prove the direct connection between the cognitive 
styles and the other metrics found. This proof is extremely 
important for the possible results generalization. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We believe that we have found a very fruitful 
psychological hypothesis that can be a basement of very 
general user segmentation. Segments existence was proved 
by a series of qualitative and quantitative experiments that 
we briefly mentioned, but could not describe in a greater 
detail. Our cross-function approach is new in terms of the 
scalability and generality. It characterizes human personality 
fundamental qualities and can be applied for a great range of 
issues from interface improvements, content customization 
to user targeting. Moreover, we have another series of 
experiments that should produce additional targeting metrics 
and prove behavioral changes dependence on cognitive 
styles and not on some other hidden factor. We also plan to 
apply the results obtained to a specific industrial product in 
the nearest future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Valentina Nochka and 
Denis Popovtsev for their help and support. We also are 
extremely grateful to Andrey Sebrant for his bright ideas and 
guidance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Weinschenk “100 Things Every Designer Needs to Know About 
People”, Pearson Education, 2011. 
[2] P. Anderson, “Seductive Interaction Design: Creating Playful, Fun, 
and Effective User Experiences”, New Riders Pub, 2011. 
[3] K. Stecher and S. Counts, “Spontaneous inference of personality traits 
and effects on memory for online profiles”, in ICWSM 2008 
Conference Proceedings, ICWSM, 2008 
[4] S. T. D. Ryen, W. White, and J. Teevan, “Characterizing the 
influence of domain expertise on web search behavior,” in WSDM 
2009 Conference Proceedings. WSDM, 2009. 
[5] D. S. M. Kosinskia and T. Graepel “Private traits and attributes are 
predictable for digital records of human behavior”, 2012. 
[6] J. Bieri, “Cognitive complexity-simplicity and predictive behavior,” 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, vol. 51, 1955, pp. 263–
268 
[7] R. Riding and I. Cheema, “Cognitive styles - an overview and 
integration,” Educational Psychology, vol. 11, no. 3/4, 1991, pp. 193–
215 
[8]  R. Riding and E. Sadler-Smith, “Type of instructional material, 
cognitive style and learning performance,” Educational Studies, vol. 
18, no. 3, 1992, pp. 323–340 
[9]  R. Riding and E. Sadler-Smith, “Cognitive Styles and Learning 
Strategies: Understanding Style Differences in Learning and 
Behavior”, London,  David Fulton Publishers, vol. 5, no. 4, March 
2002, p. 217 
[10] company.yandex.com [accessed June 2014] 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

