Developing the Mobile Service Applications of a Micropayment Platform(MPP):  
the Perspective of Actor-Network Theory  
Jen Wel Chen 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Dept. of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
d95725009@ntu.edu.tw 
Hsiao-Chi Wu 
Dept. of Information Management  
National Taiwan University 
 Taipei, Taiwan 
hciwu69@gmail.com 
 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract— Service applications for micropayment technology 
have become increasingly accepted among consumers. Current 
research on micropayment primarily discusses issues from 
markets’ and users’ perspectives, but rarely from the 
standpoints of enterprises’. This study examines the joint 
development of micropayment platforms (MPP) by various 
enterprises, asking: (1) why organizations develop MPP mobile 
service applications, (2) how they position the MPP’s role, and 
(3) how they form project alliances. Analyzing an example of 
MPP development at a private Taiwanese university, this 
paper adopts Actor-Network Theory (ANT) concepts such as 
“translation” to explain not only how the different interests of 
stakeholders influence MPP development, but also how the 
identification of MPP solutions reversely conditions the 
selection of collaborators. Finally, this study provides practical 
and theoretical implications for understanding the mutually-
shaping 
complexity 
and 
dynamics 
between 
multiple 
organizations and technology solutions. 
Keywords: Micropayment, mobile payment, Actor Network 
Theory, Near Field Communication 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Service applications for micropayment technology have 
become increasingly accepted among consumers. In the US 
annually, there are now more than four hundred billion 
transactions under US five dollars, for a total as high as one 
trillion US [1]. The economic effects of these micropayments 
are impossible to ignore. 
Micropayment platforms (MPP) are a standard inter-
organization information system, requiring the cooperation 
of 
various 
enterprises 
for 
their 
development 
and 
implementation. They are subject to the interests and 
intentions of the partnering institutions, whose preferences 
are 
also 
conditioned 
by 
the 
group-selected 
MPP 
technological solution. As a result, the MPP development 
process is both highly complex and dynamic.  
Current 
research 
on 
MPP 
primarily 
emphasizes 
technological development[2, 3], consumer equality[4], and 
the connection schemes of various payment systems[5]. 
Research on MPP is diverse however, and other studies  
examine the use of electronic purse systems in different 
countries[6, 7], offer economic analysis of micropayment 
systems[8, 9], evaluate transaction costs[10, 11], explain 
why MPP succeeds and fails[12-14], and identify new 
mobile payment applications [8, 16, 17].  
All of this research however, starts from the perspective 
of markets and users, and thus neglects the standpoint of 
enterprises. In response, this study discusses the mechanisms 
through which stakeholder participants in this technology 
form partnerships, how their respective interests interrelate, 
and how these interests influence the infrastructure and 
functions of MPP. These issues are examined through a 
special case study involving a three-year inter-organization 
MPP that employs Near Field Communication (NFC) to 
develop mobile service applications for a private Taiwanese 
university. Specifically, this study answers the following 
questions: (1) why the enterprise developed MPP mobile 
service applications, (2) how it positioned the MPP’s role, 
and (3) how it formed alliances for the project; i.e., how it 
recruited and negotiated with other organizations to jointly 
develop MPP.  
Adopting Actor-Network Theory (ANT), we analyze the 
project formation and choices of NFC and MPP in order to 
understand why this university developed MPP techniques 
for integrated campus services. 
II. 
MICROPAYMENTS 
A micropayment usually refers to a single transaction of 
less than US five dollars [1]. The proportion of transaction 
fees for micropayments is also much higher than other 
payment channels like credit cards or checks. These 
transaction costs are critical for the acceptance of 
micropayments[10], although the following two features 
transform micropayments into a real payment tool: (1) it 
serves as a unit of accounting or a standard of value, (2) and 
it can be used as an interchangeable medium or payment tool 
to facilitate transactions and reduce redundant transaction 
costs[15]. The current transaction fee for micropayment is 
proportionally high, but the electronic payment system is 
able to provide the advantages of lower transaction costs and 
quicker transaction times. Micropayments would be more 
likely to succeed through the linkage of electronic payment 
system. 
Current techniques for electronic payment processing can 
be divided into three types:(1) credit-based solutions, (2) 
account-based solutions, and (3) value-stored application[1]. 
These 
payment 
solutions 
comfortably 
fit 
into 
the 
micropayment environment due to their cost, speed and 
convenience. Micropayments are smoothly developed into 
electronic payment systems through these three channels.  
98
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In mobile commerce, micropayment is also an important 
and interesting service for mobile financial applications. For 
example, a payer can employ a mobile device through a local 
wireless network to purchase desired goods or services. 
Micropayments can also assist with telephone calls to 
numbers where per-minute charges equal the cost of vending 
items, or with pre-paid purchases from a service provider, 
bank, or credit-card company[16]. Dahlberg et al. [17] note 
that the majority of research on these applications for mobile 
payment focuses on technological development and 
consumer acceptance of technology; few consider the 
perspective of payment service providers. 
Within the current business environment, information 
technology (IT) is a key tool for organizations to promote 
their competitive advantages and differentiate themselves 
from their competitors[18, 19]. The development of MPP 
however, requires collaboration between various partners. 
The intentions and interests of these involved organizations 
increase the complexities of the MPP. Furthermore, the 
social relationships of these organizations affect this 
development process, as does the essential nature of MPP 
technology. These factors prevent the evaluation of MPP 
development by simply looking at the strategies and 
intentions of the involved parties.  
III. 
ACTOR-NETWORK THEORY 
In IT research fields, Actor-Network Theory (ANT) is a 
widely accepted approach for understanding the complex 
social 
interaction 
of 
technological 
changes[20] 
and 
explaining 
the 
socialized 
processes 
of 
technology 
development and introduction in different contexts[21]. ANT 
was developed within the field of sociology of science and 
technology[22, 23]. ANT scholars thought that researchers 
should observe the fusion and relationships among science, 
technology, and society by tracing science in action, i.e., 
boundlessly following the actions of actors[22]. A key 
feature of ANT is that actors can be both human and 
nonhuman, e.g., technological artifacts[20].  
The purpose of ANT is to examine, through the actors in 
a network, the actions and motivations of actors and the 
heterogeneous network that links relationships and aligns 
interests. ANT can explain how actors (human and 
technological) with different interests jointly create a 
relatively stable arrangement of technology[23], so as to 
express and understand the features and approaches of 
information technology development. One notable example 
of this approach is Michel Callon [23], who utilized the word 
“translation” to refer to the creation of actor-networks. Here, 
a focal actor is the key actor driving the process of recruiting 
other actors into the actor-network, transferring its intention, 
purpose, recognition and behavior to them so that they share 
common behavior and viewpoints. In this way, an actor-
network is not just a simple combination of actors, but rather 
the seed of a focal actor, who redefines and rearranges the 
interests, roles, functions and positions of each partner into a 
new actor-network. The process of translation consists of 
four stages: 
• 
Problematization: During the problem-formulating 
stage, the focal actor defines the identification and 
interests of the other actors who share initial 
common interests. By defining problems and 
solutions, concerned actors can be confirmed and 
their roles identified.  
• 
Interessement: The focal actor convinces the other 
actors that the interests defined by the focal actor are 
actually in line with their own interests.  
• 
Enrollment: The focal actor persuades the other 
actors to accept a set of strategies and the definition 
of their roles in the developing actor-network. 
• 
Mobilization: The focal actor, by using a set of 
methods, ensures that the actor-network operates 
according to mutual agreement so the network 
remains stable.  
During the network building process, the focal actor 
aligns the interests of all actors according to the network’s 
interest and recruits recognized actors to establish the actor-
network. Accordingly, the focal actor transforms itself into 
an obligatory passage point (OPP) for all network actors. 
This process of translation is a suitable model for 
understanding the interaction of multiple social groups in the 
development of MPP. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This study employs the case study research method. Case 
studies 
allow 
the 
researcher 
to 
investigate 
the 
interrelationships and dynamics of research phenomena and 
contexts under a natural setting[24]. MPP involves various 
organizations whose actions and interests influence and are 
influenced by MPP development. Thus, MPP development is 
not strictly predetermined, but rather emerges from 
continuous party alignments and negotiations.  
Data were collected from March, 2006 to December, 
2008 through participant observation, semi-structured 
interviews, meeting minutes, and project files, as depicted in 
Table I. These multiple sources helped ensure data 
authenticity and validity.  
TABLE I.  
THE TYPES AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF EMPIRICAL DATA 
Data type 
Illustrations 
Participant 
observation 
Observation period: 2006.3-2008.12 
One of the authors works at CU, he participated in digital 
campus projects 
Semi-
structured 
interviews 
Eight single person interviews.  Each interview lasted 90 
to 120 minutes. Some interviewees were interviewed 
twice depending on the situation. 
Meeting 
minutes 
99 recorded minutes, including discussions on the 
cooperation and negotiation of enterprises, technology, 
managers’ meetings, and technology group meetings. 
Documents 
104 files , including project reports, proposals, technical 
documents, memorandums, official documents, 
presentations, and historical data. 
V. 
CASE DESCRIPTION  
CU (anonymous) was the first university to issue student 
ID smartcards (UPass) in Taiwan. CU invests significant 
resources on IT and aims to develop its digital campus as an 
important characteristic and competing advantage. In 1998, 
CU launched the contact IC card as a student ID smartcard, 
and gradually integrated various campus services. In 2005, 
99
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

CU converted UPass into a RFID (radio-frequency 
identification) stored value card, and integrated twelve 
campus services in three major fields: building access control, 
campus administration services, and payment tools. UPass 
campus services develop in three periods: 
A. The period of digital campus presentation 
In April, 2006, CU held a press conference to 
demonstrate the further development of its digital campus 
vision with a joint program between a transportation 
company(EZCard), 
local 
bank(Bank 
C), 
carbonated 
beverages 
vendor(Vendor 
C), 
international 
software 
company(SWHouse-1), and a system installation hardware 
company(HWHouse-1). More than 40 schools, several high 
technology companies, and related government organizations 
participated in the press conference mentioned above. 
Afterwards, several schools showed their own interest in 
such programs, and asked CU and Bank C to help promote 
the MPP of integrated campus services for their own schools. 
The development team of UPass thus began considering the 
possibility of promotion. 
B.  The period of MPP development  
After the conference, CU discussed its goals for the next 
stage of campus services and its new technology. The school 
regarded MPP as the key development for future campus 
services, and decided that future expansion of MPP was best 
handled by other institutions such as EZCard rather than by 
the university itself.  
CU tried to convince Bank C to develop certain MPP (as 
Solution-2) suitable for its campus. These efforts were 
unsuccessful however, as the bank’s existing MPP features 
(QPay, as Solution-3) were credit card based, which by law 
face certain restrictions on school campuses. Bank C was 
required to adjust its QPay mechanism and supply related 
equipment to interested university campuses—measures the 
Bank eventually abandoned despite university demand, due 
to legal concerns regarding their credit card business. 
Meanwhile, EZCard successfully issued student ID 
smartcards for CU as part of value-stored application 
(Solution-7) jointly supported by Bank C and three other 
local banks. Here however, legal concerns still existed, as 
transportation passes by law may not provide MPP functions. 
Despite these setbacks, CU continued to seek new MPP 
alternatives. It found that the technology scheme of online 
MPP(as Solution-4) issued by local Bank S was quite similar 
to current MPP (Solution-1). CU recruited Bank S as a 
cooperating partner to help expand MPP. Coincidentally, at 
the time a leading retail enterprise (Retail K) also intended to 
seek the cooperation of a bank to promote its own MPP (as 
Solution-5). As a result, Bank S ceased negotiations with CU 
in order to actively focus on courting Retail K—a battle it 
eventually lost to Bank C.  
CU’s latest MPP partnering solution involved SmartPay, 
an account-based system (Solution-8) promoted by a bank 
association (Org-2). SmartPay serves as a account based 
MPP system in collaboration with 22 banks. Its value can be 
stored through ATM transfers, which is convenient for many 
campus applications. Currently however, Solution-8 is still 
under incubation, and not yet officially released.  
It should be noted that during its attempts to expand MPP 
services, the university’s existing MPP system was still 
operating smoothly without urgent need for replacement. 
With the success of its press conference and subsequent 
additional interactions with other enterprises and universities, 
CU simply expected new possible projects to promote 
campus services.  
C.  The emergence of a NFC solution  
Through SWHouse-1, CU discovered the installation of a 
NFC campus application solution at a university (AU) in 
Austria. The IT department dean of CU visited AU in 2007, 
and CU determined that the techniques of NFC were 
compatible with the existing campus system. Encouraged by 
SWHouse-1, CU formed an NFC mobile network and found 
a new banking partner, Bank U. After explaining its existing 
campus services as well as the consumer finance 
opportunities combined in NFC cellular phones, Bank U was 
deeply motivated and willing to offer its cooperation.   
With the MPP-NFC solution (Solution-9) as its target, 
CU and Bank U applied for a government technology project 
encouraging mobile payments as a financial innovation 
(PMPTFI). Bank U also recruited a systems integration 
company, 
SWHouse-2, 
to 
jointly 
develop 
NFC 
micropayment and clearing mechanisms for CU’s campus. 
Still in need of a telecommunications partner, CU 
demonstrated its campus services to Taiwan’s leading 
telecom firm, Mobile K, which was willing to participate in 
the project. CU then invited a professor from AU as a 
consultant, and the NFC mobile payment platform was 
officially established. 
Overall, the 2006 press conference of the CU student ID 
smartcard acted as a catalyst, leading to the involvement and 
competition of as many as six banks, four universities, and 
nine possible MPP solutions. Four groups were formed 
during the process until finally, the governmental technology 
project PMPTFI was established. Figure 1 and Table II 
display the thirty actors and nine MPP solutions involved 
during this MPP development process.  
TABLE II.  
CU MPP SOLOUTIONS 
MPP
Focal actor
Features 
1 
CU 
Account-based, on-line and off-line dollars by CU 
2 
CU 
Account-based, on-line and off-line dollars by Bank 
C 
3 
Bank C 
QPay, credit card based, off-line dollars 
4 
Bank S 
Ecoin, account-based, on-line dollars  
5 
Retail K 
ICash, value-stored application, off-line dollars 
6 
Bank C 
QPay II, top-up solution, off-line dollars 
7 
EZCard 
EazyCard, 
transportation 
ticket, 
value-stored 
application, off-line dollars. Since April 2010, used 
for payment at over 10,000 locations in Taiwan. 
8 
Org-2 
SmartPay, account-based, on-line dollars 
9 
Bank U 
Mobile K
Mobile NFC, value-stored application, on-line and 
off-line dollars 
100
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

VI. 
ANALYSIS 
From the point when CU successfully demonstrated the 
integration of campus services with student ID smartcards, 
the process of seeking the next IT development solution can 
be divided into three periods. Here, we demonstrate the 
changes in relationships between CU and other actors 
through the employment of ANT.  
This study employs ANT as a theoretical lens, treating 
the various MPP techniques as equal actors. Using ANT, we 
can clearly understand the detailed process and dynamics of 
the RFID solution to the NFC mobile payment project. 
Adopting the analysis of the four elements of translation 
proposed by Callon[23], we discuss the phenomena from the 
following three aspects. 
A.  Problematization 
After the press conference, CU defined the problem as 
“innovation diffusion” to attract the participation of other 
actors. However, other actors did not proactively seek a 
partnership. This forced CU to redefine the problem in order 
to find other actors. The recruitment of Bank S is a typical 
example. CU redefined the problem as “MPP development in 
campus” as a way to encourage and engage banks. Thus, 
before the network successfully formed, CU had to redefine 
the problem repeatedly in order to acquire partners. Table III 
presents the ways CU defined its problem at different periods. 
TABLE III.  
PROBLEMATIZATIONS FOR CU 
Time period 
Problematization 
Digital campus 
presentation 
“Innovation diffusion” enables integration 
between payment card and campus services 
MPP development 
“MPP development in campus” implies the 
increasing card volume for banks 
Emergence of NFC 
solution 
Technology innovation of campus services 
keeps CU leading IT in Taiwan 
B.  Interessement and Enrollment 
Under different contexts, CU defined different questions 
in order to attract different actors in various domains. Even 
the actors within the original network, e.g. Bank C, still 
sought other opportunities for linking other actors to form 
new network relationships. Issuing student ID smartcards 
enabled banks to increase their card volume, although it did 
not convince them of further participation. CU did not have 
alternative strategies to attract banks for developing MPP.  
Furthermore, an interesting new target (the MPP of Retail K) 
opened for banks in the MPP market. These consequences 
led to multiple actors and an unstable network relationship in 
the period of MPP development. This situation was not 
resolved until CU discovered its NFC mobile solution and 
recruited partners in Bank U and SWHouse-2. 
C. Mobilization 
Bank U was enrolled into the network owing to the 
interests defined by CU. SWHouse-2 was recruited as well. 
These 
recruited 
actors 
formed 
a 
network 
through 
mobilization through the alignment of their interests. 
Meanwhile, MPP solutions act as an equal actor to filter and 
determine the formation of the actor-network. For example, 
Solution-9 led to the enrollment of telecommunication 
enterprise Mobile K, whereas Solution-3 and Solution-7 
were unable to form stable networks due to legal constraints. 
However, actors may also betray their original network in 
favor of the appeal of other networks, or simply cease to 
invest resources into the original network. For example, 
Bank C escaped from their original network through its 
attraction to Solution-5 with Retail K. This eventually led to 
CU’s association with Bank U, SWHouse-2, and Mobil K in 
the application of their governmental project, i.e. PMPTFI, 
which becomes the OPP in order to form a stable 
relationship of network. This action may prevent the betrayal 
of other actors, help negotiate a precise goal, gain economic 
support, and direct all the interests of actors toward a 
common goal. When more resources are invested, this will 
facilitate the participation of other actors as needed.  
In ANT, CU MPP development is also a process of 
“translation”. The actor’s interests are firstly translated into 
specific needs which will be further translated into the 
system solution. The system solution will then be adopted by 
actors, who translate it into the context of their specific work 
practices. Thus, CU recruits different actors for each specific 
technology solution. After CU recruits actors, i.e. Bank U, 
SWHouse-2, and Mobile K, into the actor-network in the last 
stage, the technology scheme has to be changed in order to 
include their requests. The change of technology scheme 
stimulates the generation of mobile NFC solution which 
turns into the core of MPP application developments. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
This study analyzes the development process of the MPP 
NFC solution, elaborating on the complex relationship 
between multiple organizations and technology. The case 
study above demonstrates how CU MPP development differs 
from the conventional development of information systems. 
The processes of MPP development are emergent and 
unexpected, support Orlikowski’s [25] arguments, and are 
gradually clarified through the contact of various actors. 
Each actor pursues its own interest as well as takes into 
account the common interest of other actors. Through 
interactions among actors, the cooperative relationship for 
inter-organization is formed. Even under this cooperation 
however, actors still seek other opportunities for linking 
other actors to form more beneficial cooperative partnerships. 
CU must continuously recruit other organizations, revise its 
interests and its micropayment solution, and prevent actor 
betrayal. Therefore, the goal of technology development, the 
scheme of the MPP system, and the collaborative groupings 
are not pre-planned but rather emergent and unexpected. 
Through this process, a leading organization may form an 
inter-organization cooperation network.  
From the ANT perspective, MMP technology will have 
some effects on selection and formation network. Therefore, 
these effects trigger interaction among network actors. The 
selecton of network also limited technology choices. Base 
on history of developing NFC platform and the role of 
participants, that can be understand more clearly the nature 
101
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

of this case. This study realizes that CU continuously 
repositioned the direction of MPP development over a 
period of three years. The complexities and dynamics 
presented in the case can be summarized as follows. 
A. MPP development as a process of redefining roles and 
interests 
Requiring multiple partners in the development of MPP 
usually detracts from the original cooperative theme on 
account of opposing thoughts and interests. The CU MPP 
position shifted from original innovation diffusion, to the 
development of MPP, then to the NFC solution. This 
demonstrates that problematization is not a one-time activity 
but a continuous ongoing process [26]. We found that CU 
not only continued discussing possible developments of 
campus services and innovation of their MPP scheme, but 
also sought the cooperation of other actors and redefined 
their actor-network. Thus, the IT developmental processes of 
CU campus services are a mixture of changes and 
eliminations. This process is based on a multi-directional 
model, rather than a linear model. Technology can have 
more than one developmental result. 
B. Each actor as a latent actor-network  
CU actively pursued cooperative organizations to 
develop its campus services, but the final MPP solution 
network was promoted by outside actor SWHouse-1. It 
forced CU to reposition the MPP, i.e. consumers’ services on 
NFC cellular phones. Moreover, the request by several 
universities to Bank C for MPP made Bank C reconsider the 
Solution-2 proposed by CU. To adapt Solution-2, Bank C 
had to upgrade QPay (Solution-3) to QPay II (Solution-6) for 
campus needs. 
Past studies of ANT discuss the development of 
information systems focusing on the actor-network created 
by focal actors [26, 27]. However, Monteiro[29] suggests 
actors may be included into a new, more complete actor-
network. In other words, other actors in the network can also 
play the role of focal actor. According to their own interests, 
they will seek other outside opportunities or link other actors 
to form a new actor-network. This latent actor-network 
influences the interests and stability of the original network.  
This implies that to understand the changing processes of 
MPP development, researchers must not only observe the 
network of CU recruitment, but also the networks of other 
actors. We find that from a macro level (based on 
micropayment markets), each actor can seek other resources 
to form other latent actor-networks that may influence and 
break the existing stable network relationship, and result in 
changes to the MPP solutions. 
C. Temporary actors as the catalyst of actions  
Once CU can not align mutual actors’ interest, the 
network will not be formed and the developments of MPP 
development will not be carried out. In previous research on 
ANT, temporary actors in unformed network are usually 
neglected. Groothuis and Akbar[28] argue that temporary 
actors act as a catalyst, and they can affect actor decisions 
and actions within the network. In case of CU, these 
temporary actors, though not being part actor of the final 
network, did have critical influences and trigger further 
actions by CU. 
For example, when School-2 consults with CU about the 
development of campus smartcards, it stimulates CU to 
actively think how to diffuse its results to other campuses. 
Furthermore, with the contact of the NFC forum, CU is 
inspired to realize the NFC technique, and finally promote 
the NFC solution of MPP. Retail K’s issuance of its ICash 
card quickly disrupts the negotiation and cooperation 
between CU and Bank S. ANT scholars should consider how 
to account for these influential temporary actors. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This study applies the ANT perspective to the 
development of an inter-organization system. We examine 
the complex relationships between organizations and 
technology under the research setting of the development of 
MPP in CU. The characteristics of the technology solution 
filter the choices of participant organizations when an 
enterprise chooses that solution. Meanwhile, when recruiting 
the participant organizations, the alignment of mutual 
interests forces enterprises to continuously adapt the goals of 
MPP and adjust the technology solution before the goal of 
campus services can be set. 
Current research on micropayment primarily discusses 
issues from markets and user perspectives, but rarely from 
the standpoints of enterprises. The main contributions of 
this study are two fold. (1) In practice, the development of 
an inter-organization information system, e.g. MPP, is 
usually an emergent and unexpected process. The 
organization must continuously redefine its own role and 
technology scheme, and also align mutual actors’ interests 
when searching for collaborative organizations. From an 
ANT perspective, our study finds that problematization is 
not a one-time activity but an on-going process. (2) 
Theoretically, there are rare phenomena in previous ANT 
literature. One is that each actor of a network represents 
another latent actor-network, which affects and breaks 
existing stable network relationships. The other is that 
temporary actors do influence the focal actor to redefine the 
problems and roles of other actors. 
Our findings provide two main directions for future 
research. Additional effort is needed to investigate the degree 
of connectivity among various actor-networks.  Furthermore, 
given the results above, more information is needed on how 
temporary actors influence changes in actor-networks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Ching, A. Tai, J. Pong et al., “Don't Let Micropayments Penalize You--
Experience From The City University Of Hong Kong,” The Journal of 
Academic Librarianship, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 86-97, 2009. 
[2] 
S. Jarecki, and A. Odlyzko, “An efficient micropayment system based on 
probabilistic polling,” in Proceedings of Financial Cryptography 
Conference, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer Verlag, 1997, 
pp. 173-191. 
[3] 
R. Rivest, and A. Shamir, “PayWord and MicroMint: Two simple 
micropayment schemes,” in 4th International Security Protocols 
Conference, 1996, pp. 69-87. 
102
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

[4] 
S. Yen, “PayFair: A prepaid Internet micropayment scheme ensuring 
customer fairness,” IEE Proceedings-Computers and Digital Techniques, 
vol. 148, pp. 207, 2001. 
[17] T. Dahlberg, N. Mallat, J. Ondrus et al., “Past, present and future of 
mobile payments research: A literature review,” Electronic Commerce 
Research and Applications, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 165-181, 2008. 
[5] 
R. Parhonyi, D. Quartel, A. Pras et al., “An interconnection architecture 
for micropayment systems,” in Proceedings of the 7th international 
conference on Electronic commerce, Xi'an, China, 2005, pp. 640. 
[18] B. Ives, and G. Learmonth, “The information system as a competitive 
weapon,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1193 - 1201, 
1984. 
[6] 
F. Prior, and J. Santoma, “The Use of Prepaid Cards for Banking the Poor : 
Comparative Study Analysing the Development of Prepaid Systems in the 
United States and Europe,” IESE Research Papers, 2008. 
[19] C. Wiseman, and I. MacMillan, “Creating competitive weapons from 
information systems,” Journal of Business Strategy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 42-
49, 1984. 
[7] 
L. Van Hove, "Electronic purses in Euroland: why do penetration and 
usage rates differ?," SUERF Studies, M. Balling, ed.: Vienna, Austria: 
Société Universitaire Européenne de Recherches Financières, 2004. 
[20] G. Walsham, “Actor-network theory and IS research: current status and 
future prospects,” Lee, AS, Liebenau, J. and DeGross, JI (Eds.) 
Information Systems and Qualitative Research, pp. 466-480, 1997. 
[8] 
Y. Au, and R. Kauffman, “The economics of mobile payments: 
Understanding stakeholder issues for an emerging financial technology 
application,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 7, no. 
2, pp. 141-164, 2008. 
[21] M. Akrich, “The de-scription of technical objects,” Bijker, W. and Law, J. 
(Eds.) Shaping technology, building society: Studies in Sociotechnical 
Change. Mass, MIT Press, pp. 205-224, 1992. 
[22] B. Latour, Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers 
through society: Harvard Univ Pr, 1987. 
[9] 
C. Schmidt, and R. Muller, “A framework for micropayment evaluation,” 
Netnomics, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 187-200, 1999. 
[23] M. Callon, “Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of 
the scallops and the fishermen of St Brieuc Bay,” John Law (Eds)  Power, 
Action and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowledge, vol. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 196-233, 1986. 
[10] B. Neuman, “Security, payment, and privacy for network commerce,” 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 
1523-1531, 1995. 
[11] I. Papaefstathiou, C. Manifavas, and B. Capital, “Evaluation of 
micropayment transaction costs,” Journal of Electronic Commerce 
Research, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 99-113, 2004. 
[24] R. Yin, Case study research: Sage publications Newbury Park, Calif, 1994. 
[25] W. Orlikowski, “Improvising Organizational Transformation Over Time: 
A Situated Change Perspective,” Information Systems Research, vol. 7, no. 
1, pp. 63-92, 1996. 
[12] W. Tan, and S. Chen, “An analysis of the factors influencing success of 
bank-issued micropayment system in Taiwan,” Journal of Systems and 
Information Technology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5-21, 2008. 
[26] S. Sarker, and A. Sidorova, “Understanding business process change 
failure: An actor-network perspective,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 51-86, 2006. 
[13] W. Tan, “Factors Affecting Non Bank-Issued POS E-micropayment 
Choice: A Study of Taiwan Market,” Journal of Internet Banking and 
Commerce, vol. 13, no. 3, http://www.arraydev.com/commerce/jibc/2008-
12/TAN.pdf, 2008. 
[27] B. Ajad, and S. Faraj, “Examining Alignment of Frames Using Actor-
Network Constructs: The Implementation of an IT Project,” AMCIS 2007 
Proceedings, pp. 258, 2007. 
[14] C. Clark, “Shopping Without Cash: The Emergence of the E-purse,” 
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, issue Q IV, pp. 
34-51, 2005. 
[28] A. Groothuis, and Y. Akbar, “Organizational transformation—from 
multinational to global: An early dynamic modeling perspective,” Global 
Business and Organizational Excellence, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 47-61, 2007. 
[15] R. Weintraub, Introduction to Monetary Economics: Money, Banking, and 
Economic Activity: Ronald Press Co., 1969. 
[29] E. Monteiro, "Actor-Network Theory and Information Infrastructure," 
From Control to Drift. The Dynamics of Corporate Information 
Infrastructures, C. C. Associates, ed., pp. 71-83, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000. 
[16] U. Varshney, and R. Vetter, “Mobile commerce: framework, applications 
and networking support,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 7, no. 3, 
pp. 185-198, 2002. 
CU
Vendor C
Clean
Hous e
Bank C
HW
Hous e-1
Group A
SW
Hous e-1
Solution-1
S ta ge A. The P e riod o f Digita l Ca mpus  
P re s e ntation 
 
CU
Clean
Hous e
Bank C
Group A
Solution-2
Stage B. The Period of MMP Development
firs t half of s tage
Failed
Fa ile d
Solution-3
QPay
Failed
Solution-1
Group B
Bank S
Solution-4
Ecoin
Solution-5
ICas h
Failed
Fa ile d
Retail K
 
CU
Bank C
Soution-8
SmartPay
Org-2
Fa ile d
22 Banks
Soution-7
EazyCard
Bank-2
Bank-4
Bank-5
Pending
Soution-1
Soution-6
QPayII
Wa iting
Stage B. The Period of MMP Development
second half of stage
 
C U
NFC
G roup D
Ba nk U
S W
House-2
P roject
P MPTFI
Mobile K
AU
S olution-9
S tage C . The  Emergence of NFC S olution 
F ormation of MMP P roject
 
Bank-2
School-2
SW
Hous e-3
Group C
School-3
Waiting
Other 
School-3
Figure 1.  Change process of developing the NFC solution of MPP in CU 
103
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

