E-Learning with Hands-On Labs in Higher European Education
Fritz Laux
Fakult¨at Informatik
Reutlingen University
D-72762 Reutlingen, Germany
fritz.laux@reutlingen-university.de
Martti Laiho
Dpt. of Business Information Technology
Haaga-Helia University of Applied Sciences
FI-00520 Helsinki, Finland
martti.laiho@haaga-helia.ﬁ
Thomas Connolly
School of Computing
University of the West of Scotland
Paisley PA1 2BE, UK
thomas.connolly@uws.ac.uk
Abstract—”Learning by doing” has incontestably the highest
enduring and motivating effects in learning. It challenges the
exploratory aptitude and curiosity of a person. In higher
education in information technology, exploratory learning is
hindered by technical situations that are not easy to reproduce
and to verify. Technical skills are, however, mandatory for
employees in this area. On the other side, theoretical concepts
are often compromised by commercial implementations. The
challenge is to contrast and reconcile theory with practise.
In two European Union funded projects we designed, imple-
mented, and evaluated a unique e-learning approach, which
realises a modularised teaching concept that provides easily
reproducible virtual hands-on labs. The novelty of the approach
is to use software products of industrial relevance to compare
with theory and to contrast different implementations. Pilot
applications in several European countries demonstrated that
the participants gained highly sustainable and profound un-
derstanding about the learning objects.
Keywords-learning by doing, virtual laboratory, hands-on
lab, e-learning concept.
I. INTRODUCTION
Aristotle already promoted ”learning by doing” in his
eminent work on ethics, the Nicomachean Ethics [1]. The
concept became known in pedagogy through the work of
Comenius [2]. From the perspective of developmental bi-
ology learning by doing is known even from animals [3]
and experimenting (the systematic learning by doing) is
fundamental in the development of the homo sapiens [4][5].
Effective knowledge transfer at Higher Education (HE) in-
stitutions and Vocational Educational Training (VET) should
be tailored to the needs of its clients. Employees are highly
motivated to acquire new skills but are often hindered to
follow a scheduled training programme. Students face a
denser curriculum due to the Bologna process with a high
degree of optional courses whose schedules and prerequisites
are not aligned. Therefore it is essential to provide self study
courses with small module sizes to enable the participants to
learn in their spare time at an individual pace. In addition,
in ﬁnancially difﬁcult times, knowledge transfer should be
highly scalable in terms of costs. E-Learning offers this
capability but has the difﬁculty to keep motivation high.
As consequence, e-learning has to solve a multidimen-
sional problem: The learning content needs to be chunked
into ”digestible” portions while keeping the necessary con-
text. Technological reality has to match with the theoreti-
cal underpinning. Technological aspects in Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) are of particular impor-
tance to empower students and employees for a competitive
labor market. This will stimulate the secondary motivation
of the learners.
In our case we focus on one of the most important areas
in ICT competency for information management profession-
als: database systems. Databases are now the underlying
framework of information systems that have fundamentally
changed the way organizations and individuals structure and
handle information.
One crucial competence within the database domain is
how to structure efﬁciently a database and how to correctly
process the data. For example, in the case of a banking
application the database has to process correctly and reliably
the ﬁnancial transaction under any circumstances.
This requires a sound understanding of the theory and
practical skills of software products at the same time. Such
a highly specialized knowledge cannot be only theoretically
taught neither could it be trained only by examples like
a cookbook. This is the scenario for our e-learning based
concept with hands-on labs.
A. Structure of the Paper
With the following overview on related work in cognitive
science the context for our learning theory will be settled.
In Section II we point out the pedagogical requirements, the
modularization constraints dictated by the learning object
and the stress ﬁeld between industry demands and long
term knowledge for the students. This clariﬁcation is used
in Section III as criterion for developing a unique reference
model for the example learning object database systems.
Section IV describes the supporting technology, in par-
ticular, the environment for the hands-on labs. Our ﬁndings
during pilot runs of the learning modules are presented and
discussed in Section V. We end the paper with a conclusion.
B. Related Work
E-learning is a promising research subject and there is
an abundance of publications on the foundation of on-line
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

learning (e.g., [6][7][8][9][10]) as well as on problems. For
instance, the decreasing motivation was described by Prenzel
[11] and Paechter et al. [12]. It is also conﬁrmed by our own
experience with e-learning.
According to the constructionism [13] the learner gener-
ates knowledge by individual experience (radical construc-
tivism [14]) or by social interaction within a cultural con-
text (social constructivism [7]). As consequence, knowledge
should be acquired by the learner in authentic situations
that keep motivation high [15]. Connolly and Begg [16]
report similar experiences and recommend teaching database
analysis and design in a problem based environment.
Communication with fellow students and team work
supports motivation, too [9]. This makes a communication
and collaboration tool an indispensable ingredient of an e-
learning system.
Multimedia support through E-learning systems is a an
enabler for ﬂexible and scalable HE and VET, but is no
guaranty for a successful on-line course. Critical voices
raised the issue of superﬁcial and routine knowledge that
may easily be transferred. This knowledge refers to the cog-
nitive domains one (knowledge) and two (comprehension)
of Bloom’s taxonomy [8]. Bloom’s knowledge taxonomy
was chosen because it ﬁts well into the evaluation of skills
related learning. But, profound insights (analysis, synthesis,
and evaluation in Bloom’s categories) are difﬁcult to convey
with a computer based learning environment as the study
conducted by Spannagel [17] reveals.
It seems difﬁcult to ensure that theory and the necessary
abstraction are drawn from an example. There are concepts
that try to overcome these problems with the use of multi-
media technology [10].
Blended learning, for example, tries to combine classroom
learning with e-learning ([6], chap. 10 and 29). Classroom
teaching can provide for theory and the e-learning session
practise the knowledge in form of exercises or experiments.
We apply this technique for our virtual laboratory work-
shops described in Subsection III-C. This hybrid learning
does not ensure sustainable and deep understanding, but, a
well thought concept may help to convey deep insights as
Astleitner and Wiesner [9] point out.
Our concept aims further: It contrasts and reconciles
theory with the reality of commercial software products.
This is important because software professionals and experts
need the competence to verify the real behavior of a database
system for instance and compare it with the theory. As
consequence real products are necessary as training tools
and for assessment. No learning concept, so far, has tried to
deal with the peculiarities of commercial software products.
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND CONTRIBUTION
The goal is to provide a highly modularized e-learning
environment for the speciﬁc theoretical and practical needs
of HE and VET in the domain of ICT. For the proof of con-
cept we have chosen the material produced during two EU
funded projects: DBTech Pro (funded by the Leonardo da
Vinci programme) and its successor DBTech EXT (funded
by the EU Lifelong Learning Programme). The content
focus was on in depth knowledge with hands-on labs for
database design, transaction processing, and data mining.
More information about both projects may be found at
http://www.dbtechnet.org.
From the pedagogical view we identiﬁed the following
requirements:
• self controlled learning
• authentic problem oriented learning
• most effective, cooperative learning
• self assessment
• feedback and evaluation
Self controlled learning is important because of the above
mentioned time constraints and with regard to different
precognitions of the learners. For high motivation it is
necessary to pose authentic, real world problems to solve
[16]. This requires state-of-the-art software used in industry.
Cooperative learning has two positive effects, one for the
learner and one for the teacher: Communication among the
students and working in groups keep motivation high and
yield better learning results. From the teacher’s view the
communication provides feedback on the effectiveness of the
teaching and exercise material. In addition, communication
among students reduces teacher intervention.
Memorized knowledge may be assessed easily through
multiple choice tests but constructive tasks and creative work
are a challenge to assess in a automated way.
From the skills and competences demanded by employers
the following requirements need to be taken into account:
• ability to solve real world tasks (problem solving)
• knowledge about state-of-the-art technology
• social skills, so called soft skills
Employees and students have increasing interest in learn-
ing skills that give a fast and easy to see return on their
learning investment in form of directly applicable knowledge
at their working place. This validates the ﬁrst two qualiﬁ-
cation requirements. Problem solving and social skills are
indispensable for highly demanding ICT jobs [18].
In addition to the above requirement, the teaching units
(modules) need to comply with the taxonomy of that domain,
which deﬁnes how to slice the content along the aspects:
• competence level
• subject area
• technology
Cutting the content along the competence level provides
different degrees of detail in line with target competencies
and work proﬁle. Students of HE institutions prefer a
different learning concept than in VET courses. The latter
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

have a tighter time schedule with less time for reﬂection of
theoretical issues than HE students.
So, apart from the challenging content we tried to address
all of the above requirements by slicing the learning content
so that it can be combined and composed in multiple ways.
A. Contribution
The contribution of this paper consists of an integrated
learning concept for e-learning addressing the needs and
constraints of HE and VET. For each learning unit the most
appropriate learning concept was applied. Furthermore, the
framework solves the problem of content modularization.
Exemplary e-learning material that was used in multiple
pilot runs proofed the usefulness and superior knowledge
sustainability compared to traditional university teaching.
The main advantage lies in the practical skills acquired using
real DBMS products in the hands-on labs. The necessary lab
environments are easy reproducible and provide full control
of license restrictions.
III. THE REFERENCE MODEL
The reference model applies different learning concepts
reﬂecting the different aspects and challenges presented in
the previous Section. The interrelation of these requirements
make it difﬁcult to optimise the learning concept. For
better understanding we treat the dimensions content, lab
environment, and project work separately and discuss the
global optimisation in Subsection III-E at the end of this
section.
A. Knowledge Taxonomy
It is common to deﬁne a syllabus for the learning content.
Structuring the syllabus results in a knowledge taxonomy
of the teaching domain. From this structure we are able to
deduct pre-requisites, identify learning elements, and des-
ignate learning outcomes. Structuring the teaching domain
along the knowledge levels deﬁned by Bloom [8] helped
us to modularize the content according to knowledge depth
and to provide teaching units for different target groups.
As an example, Figure 1 shows an cutout of the DBTech
database taxonomy [19] showing the comprehension levels.
From this layering we were able to deduct pre-requisites
for every learning unit. For instance the unit data modeling
(see Silberschatz et al. [20]) requires knowledge about the
relational, hierarchical, and network model.
B. Virtual Laboratory
The most important component of our e-learning model is
the ”learning by doing”. The psychomotoric learning keeps
motivation high and supports a high degree of practical skills
needed by companies. Moreover, the endurance of knowl-
edge is much better and profound than without hands-on
labs. Small, practical exercises and experimenting prepares
the way for problem based learning.
In the case of ICT we have to deal with sophisticated,
interdependent software systems like database management
systems, application servers, data warehousing, OLAP sys-
tems, or business intelligence suites. A student would need
excessive time to install and set up the lab environment. This
is unfeasible, considering only the risk that the system might
be (unconsciously) misconﬁgured.
An other obstacle could be inhomogeneous hardware
that might impede the installation of a certain product.
The only technical solution that works without problems is
the virtualization technology. It provides a lab environment
independent of the physical computer, which can be copied
across the Internet to computers of the learners. Even if a
student accidentally damages the virtual system he can reset
it to its original state. He is also able to save his results
in a snapshot and continue later or at a different computer.
There exist virtual image capturing and playing software that
is freely available.
C. Virtual Laboratory Workshops
The technological complexity of the Virtual Laboratory
makes it necessary to provide detailed, step-by-step tutorials
for experimenting. In order to make the learning more
effective, we decided to use blended learning techniques
and gather students for live workshops using the virtual
laboratory. One trainer for about 10 students was sufﬁcient
to answer questions or to provide help with the virtual lab
environment.
Between workshop sessions and for remote participants
Skype telephone and remote assistance via web conferencing
tools have been available. This allowed interactive help
directly with the laboratory environment.
The students had to submit their deliverables electroni-
cally via the e-learning platform for grading. The e-learning
system was also heavily used as a discussion board and
for feedback from students. The feedback was used for
improvements.
D. Project Work
While teaching theory in a didactic way and practising
or verifying the transferred knowledge in hands-on labs
there is no guaranty that the students really acquire a
problem solving competence. It is necessary to combine
different knowledge pieces, then abstract and apply them
as a whole. This systemic knowledge gap can be easily
seen when students know about the ACID properties [21]
of a transaction, but cannot relate a real world problem
like the concurrent on-line reservation of ﬂights with the
concurrency issue. In the lab with real products it is possible
to test the behavior of the used software also in case of
concurrent clients.
Moreover, students might be skilled in technological as-
pects of application servers but do not realize the danger
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 1.
Mapping of DBTech Database Taxonomy to other CS curricula (partial view) [19]
of compromised transaction due to technological tricks like
pooled connections or disconnected components.
To ensure problem solving competences beyond technical
issues students have to develop their ability to work in teams,
manage tasks, organise releases and orchestrate different
versions. All these knowledge can be learned from real world
projects.
E. E-Learning Model
We believe it is best to decide from the learning content,
which learning concept will be best suited for a speciﬁc
content. The e-learning model we present integrates different
learning concepts (see Issing [6]):
• Learning as behavioral modiﬁcation for practical skills
and veriﬁcation of the theory
• Learning as active information processing using assim-
ilation and accommodation processes to build a mental
model of the theory
• Learning as construction of knowledge used for prob-
lem based learning as in project work
All these concepts are used in an integrative way in order
to get the most effective results in terms of applicable
knowledge and profound cognition that enable abstraction
and problem solving to a large extent. The design of the
e-learning model (see Figure 2) starts with structuring the
learning area guided by a taxonomy. The area is sliced with
a minimum of dependencies and each chunk of learning
content is represented in a theory unit, with examples and
demonstrations of the theory. Hands-on experiments help
Figure 2.
E-Learning Model Overview
to verify the theory. The global optimization task is to put
together all aspects in balance with the target learning group.
Examples and demonstrations explain the theory, making
it easier to understand. Hands-on experiments motivate and
stimulate students to reﬂect the theory. Examples provide
the students with analogous situations that could be applied
and abstracted in the project work. The interrelation of all
these elements provided in a virtual lab environment with
the theory units and the examples are as shown in Figure 2.
The concrete real world problem forces the students to
abstract from examples and construct a model of the problem
world in order to ﬁnd a solution.
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

IV. TECHNICAL FRAMEWORK AND INFRASTRUCTURE
The framework of technologies provides a central, web
based repository for teaching material, lab environments,
multimedia, communication and collaboration tools.
A. E-Learning Portal
We provide all e-learning material through a portal
(see http://dbtech.uom.gr and [22]) using Moodle as soft-
ware platform. It contains all theory units, mostly as
reading material, video lectures, tests, assessments and
experimental lab environments that will be described in
the following subsection. Local versions, like transla-
tions or modiﬁcations that ﬁt the curriculum constraints
are hosted and maintained at the project partners sites
(https://relax.reutlingen-university.de for Reutlingen Univer-
sity, or https://elearn.haaga-helia.ﬁ/moodle/login/index.php
for Haaga-Helia University for Applied Sciences).
B. Virtual Laboratory Infrastructure
The lab environments are available either through tech-
nologies like desktop virtualization or virtual machines run-
ning computer software images. The latter is used when the
image only uses free software. In this case, there is no need
to control the number of downloads or to provide licences.
After downloading the image it can run off-line. Free player
for the image are available, e.g., VirtualBox.
For commercial software products where licenses are
needed, the use of a desktop virtualization is more ap-
propriate as it let easily control the number of remote
application accesses. Citrix XenDesktop or VMware View
are examples that provide a Virtual Desktop Infrastructure
(VDI) for different operating systems.
VDI provides remote access to a pool of virtual machines
through a connection broker. If the license policy is for a
number of concurrent users it is no problem to limit the
concurrent users with this software. Access control may
be enforced by LDAP or Active Directory. The virtual
machines are automatically managed in terms of multiple
and customized instances of computer systems, applications,
and for every users. Independent virtual machines may be
assigned to avoid any resource access conﬂicts. Access to
different operating systems is possible and the assignment
to a client’s PC may be persistent or transient.
As infrastructure for accessing the virtual machines from
a client machine a local or public area network is needed.
Client computers only need a web browser with ActiveX or
Java Applet technology support. Such a support is given by
the most common web browsers.
DBTech EXT uses a VDI operated by the University of
M´alaga. The number of concurrently active virtual machines
depend on the resources (processor cores, memory, and disc
space) provided. In the case of DBTech EXT labs M´alaga
uses two VMware servers with two quad-core processors
and 32 Gigabytes of RAM each [23]. This infrastructure
Figure 3.
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure for virtual labs [23]
has enough power to run 96 concurrent virtual systems,
each with 512 Megabytes of memory. The VDI architecture
is presented in Figure 3 showing the VMware architecture
consisting of a virtual center and two Hypervisor ESX
servers that provide for multiple operating systems running
on a single server. The broker is responsible for dispatching
the connection requests from clients and to control the access
with the help of an authentication service.
V. EXPERIENCES
The experiences mainly stem from two EU funded
projects that were carried out during the years 2002-2005
and 2009-2010 (see http://www.dbtechnet.org). During the
ﬁrst project phase we identiﬁed important knowledge areas
of database systems and syllabi of courses. The syllabi were
later extended to a taxonomy and integrated within a uniﬁed
learning concept.
A couple of example e-learning modules have been de-
veloped as testing material and these courses were used as
teaching material for virtual workshops conducted during
the second project. For the virtual workshop the e-learning
platform was enhanced by communication and collaboration
tools like Skype, discussion boards and upload areas for
deliverables. Teaching material was structured and furnished
with exercises and assignments for the students. The exer-
cises used the previously described virtual infrastructure to
guaranty a predeﬁned and fully functional environment. As-
sessment of the student was done by on-line tests preferably
in form of multiple choice questions.
The methodologies used to evaluate and assess our con-
cept included informal and formal (survey conducted via the
e-learning platform) feedback and self evaluation, discus-
sions with students, and the results of written examinations
(open and multiple choice questions).
The answers to the multiple choice questions were col-
lected and assessed with the help of the e-learning system.
However, the type of questions allowed only to test the
analytical skills and not the construction of knowledge or
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

innovative solutions. As consequence the project work was
only assessed manually at the partner’s institutions.
In Reutlingen study projects of real world problems
are incorporated into the curriculum since more than 10
years. Over many generations of students the feedback was
uniformly positive. Students appraise the real life character
of the projects. In about one third of the projects, the
problem was posed by a company that also collaborated
with the students team. From the didactics point of view the
motivation was kept high if the company or the university
committed itself to use the project results. In most cases this
was a software to be developed by the students.
Problem based learning conﬁrmed the proposed high
motivation if in addition the knowledge background of the
project team was sufﬁcient to master the problem. It was
not necessary that each of the participants was an expert
programmer or had managing competence. It was sufﬁcient
to have at least one with the necessary capability. In most
cases this stimulated the team and resulted in an intensive
team internal learning process. The supervising professor
has the responsibility to make sure that the students with
less knowledge will not become frustrated. The intervention
could be additional training for the ”weaker” students or
to assign a different role to the ”dominant” student. In
individual situations we have been successful if the more
knowledgeable student acts as a trainer for a while.
Comparing student teams that work physically together
outperform teams that only work together virtually. In
feedback discussions the students state a lower motivation
and commitment to the project team if they worked remote
without meeting each other. Asking for reasons the students
named the missing personal contact and commitment. In
contrast the teams that met regularly developed a culture
of responsibility that supported motivation and contributed
to the project success.
VI. CONCLUSION
The outstanding lessons learned of this long term e-
learning experience can be summarized in three statements:
1) A key success factor is the adequate slicing of
the knowledge domain. Only if this requirement is
granted, the necessary small chunks of information
are identiﬁed and can be prepared according to our
e-learning model. If the chunks are not small and
sufﬁciently independent it is hard to provide e-learning
modules that can be worked through without the
constant help of the teacher.
2) E-Learning is not superior to face-to-face teaching.
It is more difﬁcult to motivate the students. The
preparation of study material is much more elaborate
than for traditional teaching.
3) E-Learning scales better only for knowledge and com-
prehension level (Bloom’s taxonomy) and partially
for the application level. For higher level (deeper
understanding) as synthesis, evaluation and analysis
a stronger communication seems to be necessary for
this cognitive levels.
We found no way to automate the assessment of
creative and constructive results like the assessment of
a project or a software. This is a challenge for future
work.
REFERENCES
[1] Aristoteles, Eugen Rolfes, and G¨unther Bien, Aristoteles:
Philosophische Schriften 3: Nikomachische Ethik, Translated
by Eugen Rolfes, revised by G¨unther Bien, Meiner (1995)
[2] Johann Amos Comenius, Didactica Magna, 1657, In: Klaus
Schaller (ed.), Ausgew¨ahlte Werke. vol. 1, Hildesheim: Olms,
1973, p. 82
[3] Gordon M. Burghardt, ”The evolutionary origins of play
revisited: Lessons from turtles”. In M. Beckoff and J. A.
Byers, (eds.), Animal Play: Evolutionary, Comparative, and
Ecological Perspectives, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ.
Press, 1998
[4] Doris Bergen (ed.), Play as a Medium for Learning and
Development, Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1987
[5] Andreas Flitner, Spielen - Lernen : Praxis und Deutung des
Kinderspiels, 3rd ed., 1998
[6] Ludwig Issing, ”Psychologische Grundlagen des Online-
Lernens”, in: Paul Klimsa and Ludwig Issing (eds.), Online-
Lernen - Handbuch f¨ur Wissenschaft und Praxis, 2nd ed.,
Oldenbourg V., M¨unchen, 2011
[7] Andr´e Kukla, Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of
Science, London: Routledge, 2000, ISBN 0415234190
[8] Benjamin Bloom, Max Engelhart, Walker Hill, and David
Krathwohl, Taxonomy of educational objectives: the classiﬁ-
cation of educational goals; Handbook I: Cognitive Domain,
New York, Longmans, Green, 1956.
[9] Hermann Astleitner, Iwan Pasuchin, and Christian Wies-
ner, ”Multimedia und Motivation - Modelle der Motiva-
tionspsychologie als Grundlage f¨ur die didaktische Me-
diengestaltung”, Medienp¨adagogik, Zeitschrift f¨ur Theo-
rie und Praxis der Medienbildung, 22.3.2006, [Online]
http://www.medienpaed.com/2006/astleitner0603.pdf, last ac-
cess: 16.03.2012
[10] Hermann Astleitner and Christian Wiesner, ”An Integrated
Model of Multimedia Learning and Motivation”. Journal of
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 2004, 13(1), 3-21.
ISSN 1055-8896
[11] Manfred Prenzel, ”Sechs M¨oglichkeiten, Lernende zu demo-
tivieren”, in: H. Gruber and A. Renkel (eds.), Wege zum
K¨onnen, Determinanten des Kompetenzerwerbs, Bern, Huber,
pp. 32-44, 1997
[12] Manuela Paechter, Karin Schweizer, and Bernd Weidenmann,
”Lernen in virtuellen Seminaren: Neuigkeitsbonus oder Adap-
tion an ungewohnte Lernbedingungen”, in: F. Scheuermann
(ed.), Campus 2000 - Lernen in neuen Organisationsformen,
M¨unster, Waxmann, pp. 279-288, 2000
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[13] Seymour Papert, Constructionism: A New Opportunity for
Elementary Science Education , Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Media Laboratory, Epistemology and Learning
Group, 1986,
[14] Ernst von Glasersfeld, ”Konstruktion der Wirklichkeit und
der Begriff der Objektivit¨at”; in: Heinz von Foerster:
Einf¨uhrung in den Konstruktivismus, publ. of Carl-Friedrich-
von-Siemens-Stiftung, vol. 5; M¨unchen: Piper, 1992; ISBN
3-492-11165-3
[15] Jochen Gerstenmaier and Heinz Mandl, ”Wissenserwerb unter
konstruktivistischer Perspektive”, Zeitschrift f¨ur P¨adagogik,
41. Jg, Nr. 6, pp. 867-888, 1995
[16] Thomas Connolly and Carolyn Begg, ”A Constructivist-
Based Approach to Teaching Database Analysis and Design”,
Journal of Information Systems Education (JISE), Vol. 17(1),
pp. 43-53, 2006
[17] Christian
Spannagel,
Benutzungsprozesse
beim
Lernen
und
Lehren
mit
Computern,
PhD-Thesis,
Hildesheim,
Franzbecker, 2007, ISBN-10: 3-88120-443-9
[18] Luis Fern´andez Sanz, ”Analysis of non technical skills for
ICT proﬁles”, 5th Iberian Conference on Information Systems
and Technologies (CISTI), Santiago de Compostela, 2010
[19] Dimitris Dervos, Martti Laiho, and Fritz Laux, ”DBTech
Pro Framework Reference Courses and Topics”, [Online]
http://dbtech.uom.gr/mod/resource/view.php?id=592
(Excel-
Format), last access: 16.03.2012
[20] Abraham Silberschatz, Henry Korth, and S. Sudarshan,
Database System Concepts, New York, McGraw-Hill, 2011
[21] Gerhard Weikum and Gottfried Vossen, Transactional Infor-
mation Systems, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2002
[22] Georgios Evangelidis, Evangelos Pitsiougas, Dimitris Der-
vos, Martti Laiho, Fritz Laux, and Jos´e F. Aldana-Montes,
”DBTechNet portal: A Gateway to Education and Training
for the European Database Technology Professional”, in
Proceedings of the eRA-4 International Conference on the
Contribution of I.T. to Science, Technology, Society and
Education, 24-26 September 2009, Spetses, Greece.
[23] Ismael Navas Delgado, Maria del Mar Rold´an Garc´ıa, Jos´e J.
Farf´an-Leiva, Martti Laiho, Fritz Laux, Dimitris A. Dervos,
and Jos´e F. Aldana Montes, ”Innovative Unity in the Diversity
of Information Management Skills Teaching and Training
across Europe”, in IADAT Journal of Advanced Technology
on Education, Vol. 3, No. 3, July 2009, pp. 407-445, ISSN:
1698-1073
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

