A Tool to Assist the Social Search on Facebook 
Cleyton Souza, Jonathas Magalhães, Evandro Costa, Joseana Fechine, Ruan Reis 
Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence - LIA 
Federal University of Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
cleyton.caetano.souza@gmail.com, jonathas@copin.ufcg.edu.br, evandro@ic.ufal.br, joseana@dsc.ufcg.edu.br, 
ruan.victor.amorim@ccc.ufcg.edu.br
 
Abstract— Sharing questions is a new way of getting answers 
on 
social 
networks. 
However, 
the 
usual 
strategy 
of 
broadcasting questions could be optimized. In this work, we 
propose a Social Query mobile app to assist users sharing their 
questions on Facebook. Before publishing the question, the app 
will guide the user through some steps to enhance the 
probability of getting an answer by someone. It is a tool to help 
the users phrasing their problems, restrict the social search to 
a certain demographic group and find people to help them. As 
far as we know, this is the first work to merge these three 
aspects of the social search. To validate our proposal, we run a 
questionnaire so that people could value what we are offering, 
and we received great feedback. 
Keywords-social query; social search; query routing; 
expertise finding; Facebook; system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, the Social Networks (SNs) is the most 
popular service on the Web, surpassing even E-mail [1]. In 
this scenario, Facebook stands out as the most popular 
social network throughout the world: it has more than one 
billion users [2]. If Facebook were a country, it would be the 
third largest country in the world, bigger than the U.S. and 
Indonesia; and if it keeps growing in population, in three 
years, it would be larger than China [3]. Nowadays, one 
sixth of the world has a Facebook account [2]. 
These SN sites were first designed to allow remote 
interaction between geographically dispersed people [4]. 
One of the goals of interacting with other people is the 
knowledge exchange [5]. Thus, naturally, a version of 
knowledge exchange emerged inside these virtual spaces: 
users using the available features to exchange knowledge 
and find information through online SN. 
One of the ways of knowledge exchange is the social 
query: people, trying to take advantage of the crowd’s 
knowledge, share problems with their contacts, usually in 
the form of a question, aiming to find a solution [6]. It is an 
attempt to transform social relationships in practical 
knowledge [4]. This strategy is particularly useful when the 
solution requires a degree of personalization, maybe 
impossible to reach through other channels, because it is 
assumed that the friends of the questioner hold privileged 
information about his/her preferences [6][7].  
In this work, we aim to improve the social query 
process. Broadcasting questions to all contacts has become a 
popular strategy to share problems on SNs. However, this is 
not the best way to benefit from the social capital [8], 
specially, in context of the most popular SN. Facebook feed 
works differently from Twitter timeline; the feed showed to 
each user is based on a personalized algorithm [9]; 
therefore, when users broadcast messages, there are no 
guarantees that these messages will be seen by all their 
contacts. Some studies defend that directing questions to 
experts is more efficient than broadcasting, but knowing to 
who the question should be directed is not always easy [10]. 
In addition, the way the question should be formulated 
could be decisive to receive an answer or not. Teevan et al. 
[11] found that characteristics of the question itself 
predicted the quality, quantity, and speed of responses. 
Thus, it is noticed that turning social relationships into 
practical knowledge is not a simple task and several factors 
could and should be considered in order to guarantee a 
solution to the problem. 
In order to help users, we propose a mobile app called 
Social Query. It will guide the users through some steps 
before the disclosure of the questions on Facebook, 
enhancing their chances of getting answers. We propose a 
system to help people to find other people to help them. It is 
not only an Expertise Finding System (EFS), as most people 
can think, but also a tool to assist users to formulate their 
problems and restrict the social search to a certain social 
group. As far as we know, this is the first work to merge 
these three aspects of the social search. Through this app, 
the users inform their questions and receive suggestions to 
increase the chances of receiving an answer. The 
suggestions range from tips to rephrase the question to 
indications about whom probably might know the answer (a 
person or group), so the user could direct the question to 
specific contacts, ensuring that it will be visualized by them. 
We used a questionnaire to get feedback about our 
proposal. Through the questionnaire people could express 
their opinions about the functions available in the Social 
Query app. The results were excellent; people considered 
useful most of the available functions, but we highlight the 
acceptance of the Expertise Finding mechanism and the 
Filtering mechanism. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First, 
we will present a brief review of literature about the practice 
of sharing questions on SNs; next, we will detail how our 
proposal works; then, in Section IV, the questionnaire results 
are presented; later, we close with our conclusions and future 
work proposals.  
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

II. 
RELATED WORK 
The habit of sharing questions on the web was born on 
Community Questions and Answering (CQA) sites and was 
extended to SNs [12]. Asking a question on Facebook, for 
instance, is an explicit action performed by users in order to 
convert the social relationships maintained on the site into 
actionable information and other social capital outcomes [4].  
The broadcasting feature, a key component of most SN 
sites, allows users to distribute content to their network, 
including requests for informational or emotional support; 
this ability is particularly helpful when the information is 
held by weak ties only available through the SN [4]. Both 
technical and social features made SNs the ideal place to 
share questions: (1) the possibility of contacting a large and 
diverse audience through only one post is quite useful when 
we are looking for information [13], (2) the fact that the 
majority of this audience is composed by people who know 
us [12], and (3) the possibility to reach weak ties [4].  
Morris et al. [6] presented statistics confirming social 
query as a viable method to obtain answers online. In their 
case study, 93.5% of users had their questions answered after 
sharing them (in online SNs or using status update in Internet 
Messengers) and these responses, in 90.1% of the cases, 
were provided within one day. The main motivations pointed 
by the users who practice the social query were (1) their trust 
on their contacts and (2) the hope of a personalized answer. 
These motivations highlight the advantages of posing 
questions on SNs compared to more generic CQA sites; in 
addition, some patterns identified by the research on 
information seeking suggest that certain information needs, 
such as those revolving around quotidian occurrences, are 
more commonly solved by individuals that one already 
knows [14].  
Nichols and Kang [8] confirmed that directing questions 
significantly increases the response rate, while the number of 
the answer depends to who the question will be directed to. 
In this sense, EFSs play an important role: if we identify an 
expert on the topic of the question and direct it to that expert, 
the answer would come faster and with higher quality [15].  
The process of directing questions to appropriate helpers 
is known in literature as Query Routing (QR) and there is a 
vast research about this topic, especially when we looking 
the CQA’s context [5]. However, most work about QR 
concentrates on the Expertise Finding (EF) aspect of the 
problem. In addition, it is usually considered a global context 
of candidates. However, our goal is the detection of 
specialists into the set of the questioner’s friends (local 
context). Thus, the “level” of expertise that characterizes 
someone as “an expert” will constantly change. Moreover, 
EF often considers mainly the expertise about some topic; 
what we propose is taking into account several factors to 
improve the probability of finding relevant information 
through the help of friends.  
In [10], we had proposed a QR system that routes 
questions to followers on Twitter based on three criteria: 
knowledge, trust and activity. However, in this work, we are 
not only proposing a system that recommends someone, but 
that also assists the users in the process of sharing their 
problems. (a) Our app will (a) analyze the question and 
suggest modifications, (b) suggest to restrict the search for 
help to a certain group of friends, and (c) will suggest people 
based in their bounds, availability and expertise. As far as we 
know, this is the first work to merge these three aspects of 
the social search. Next, we will detail how our proposal fits 
into the Q&A process.  
III. 
SOCIAL QUERY ON FACEBOOK: MOBILE APP 
The Social Query app was developed in Android. It helps 
users to use the potential of their social capital to transform 
social connections in practical knowledge. In the next 
sections, we will detail how our app works and the ideas 
behind its views. 
A. First View 
The First View of the app is the Login page, presented in 
Fig. 1 (a), where users must inform their Facebook 
credentials (b).  
 
Figure 1.  (a) First View and (b) Facebook’s Mobile Login Dialog 
After logging in, users must give us permission to access 
the information of their Facebook accounts and to publish 
content in their feeds, as presented in Fig. 2 (a). After that, 
they are directed to the Main Page, as presented in Fig. 2 (b). 
 
Figure 2.  (a) Permission’s Dialog and (b) Main View  
The options in the Main page are Logout of the app (a); 
go to Settings (c); Synchronize again with the Facebook 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

account (d); and Go make a question (b). The Logout option 
directs users to the Login page again. The Settings option 
allows users to choose what EF model to use (currently, 
there are three available) and to define Filters to the EF 
search. The Synchronize option is an opportunity for users 
update the app information about them (catch more recent 
information about them, their contacts and new connections); 
it will start the same thread initiated after the Login. The Go 
button guides the users to the main functionality of the app. 
The next section will detail how it works. 
B. Q&A Process 
After clicking the Go button, users are directed to the 
New Question View, where they can inform their question. 
Fig. 3 illustrates this use. 
 
Figure 3.  New Question View  
In Fig. 3, the user ‘Cleyton Souza’ has a question about 
places to visit in Paris. After typing the question, the user 
will click the Ask button, being directed to the Tips View, as 
presented in Fig. 4.  
 
Figure 4.  Tips View 
Fig. 4 illustrates some of the tips that could be given to 
the user. Basically, we analyze the text of the question 
searching for specific information (e.g., terms or mentions to 
place or people); next, we select some pre-established tips to 
show users, who has the option to follow them or not.  
The decision about which tips will be presented is based 
on the characteristics of the question, determined by our 
Question Analyzer. Teevan et al. [11] found that a concise 
style of question-asking, a defined scope (or audience), and 
the inclusion of a question mark were associated with more 
and higher quality responses within shorter periods of time. 
The Question Analyzer processes the questions and extracts 
their characteristics. Then, it associates these characteristics 
with pre-established tips, which were decided based on 
literature review and interviews conducted by us.  
The chosen tips are displayed to users. If they decide to 
follow any tip, they must to click the Back button (to edit the 
question text) or Settings menu (to turn on some filters). 
After that, they can click the Next button to be directed to the 
Recommendation List View, where they choose who they 
want direct the question to. This view is presented in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Recommendation List View 
Friends of the questioners are ordered according their 
score of utility calculated by the EF model chosen on 
Settings. The users check the people and click the Post 
button. Then, the Social Query app posts on the Facebook 
users’ feed the question, but tagging the friends that they 
checked. 
C. Settings 
In Fig. 6, the Settings View is presented, where users can 
edit the features of the social search.  
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 6.  Settings View 
Currently, the Settings limit to choose the EF model and 
establish filters to the Expert Search. The EF model is the 
technique that will be used to represent the contact’s 
expertise. The filters to Expert Search restrict the 
recommendation to a certain group of contacts.  
In the current version of the app, there are three EF 
models implemented, next they will be detailed and after the 
five Filters available will be explained too. 
1) Expertise Finding Models 
a) Voting Model: Proposed by Macdonald and Ounis 
[17], it considers the task of ranking experts as a voting 
problem. The profile of each expert candidate is associated 
with a set of documents that represents their expertise. The 
request for expert is assumed as a query into a search engine 
that retrieves some of theses documents. Each retrieved 
document is associated with one or many users and counts 
as an implicit vote for them. The ranking of experts is based 
on the total of votes of each candidate. Several strategies 
could be used to retrieve documents, associate the 
documment with the users or weighting the votes. 
b) Vector Space Model: A classical approach from 
Information Retrieval (IR), was originally proposed by 
Salton et al. [18]. The idea behind the model is to represent 
content in multidimensional vectors. In our context, the 
vector represents the content associated with each user, the 
coordinates represent the words, and the coordinate values 
are calculated using TD-IDF. The expertise score is the 
similarity between the expertise profile and the question 
vector using cosine similarity. 
c) PageRank: It is a classical algorithm that measures 
the importance of a node counting the number and quality of 
nodes pointing to it [19]. If we consider that the scenario 
where “a user X, author of question Q, receives an answer 
A, from user Y” represents a graph like X→Q→A→Y, that 
could be simplified to X→Y. One of the goals of PageRank 
is to estimate our probability of randomly getting in a node; 
the higher this probability, the greater the chances the node 
of being a good recommendation. 
 
2) Filters 
The Filters are used to restrict the social search to a 
certain social group. Currently, there are five Filters 
implemented. Restrict by: age, gender, profession, formation 
and location. In the current version of the app, each filter 
restricts the expert search to people with the same 
characteristic of the user. For instance, if the user is a man 
and he checks the “Filter by gender”, it will be only 
recommended men; if he lives in Paris and he also checks the 
“Filter by location”, it will be only recommended men who 
live or lived in Paris too.  
However, for next releases of the app, we are planning 
the improvement of the filter mechanism. One of the 
improvements will be allowing the users to choose the filter 
value (e.g., the hometown city that they want use to restrict 
the search). Another improvement, it is the prediction the 
ideal filter value (e.g., find what would be the most indicated 
hometown city). In literature, there is already some research 
in this direction [16]. In addition, we are constantly thinking 
about new Filters. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
To validate our tool, we shared a questionnaire in 
Facebook groups. The questionnaire was answered by 250 
volunteers. To know our volunteers, the first part of 
questionnaire asked them about their experience with 
SMQA; the second part requested them to value the main 
function of the Social Query app. 
Among the volunteers, 159 confirmed that had already 
shared questions through an SN. For this reason, only their 
answers were considered for the questions about their 
SMQA experience. Regarding their habits before sharing the 
question, most volunteers search for the answer by 
themselves before turning to friends for help, only 5% of 
them admitted that they go straight to SNs. In addition, most 
people (84%) often think carefully about how to phrase the 
problem. It is already known that a short period and a well-
defined audience are associated with better answers [11]. 
However, only 1/3 thinks about people they know who 
probably can help. Moreover, 1/3 of volunteers also make 
the “mistake” of being thorough. Regarding their opinion 
about how easy is finding help through SMQA, 130 (81%) 
consider it easy while 29 (19%) consider it hard.  Moreover, 
94% said that they usually do not need repost their problem 
to receive an answer.  
Then, volunteers evaluate the aspects of the application 
described in previous sections. Initially, we asked them to 
directly value the functions of the app. There was a template 
question like “How useful would be this [function]?” 
followed by one of the functions of the Social Query app. 
The options were “Don’t know”, “Somewhat Useful”, 
“Useful” and “Very Useful”. The results are summarized in 
Fig. 7. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 7.  Results of Questionnaire (A) 
As can be seen in Fig. 7, most of functions were 
considered, at least, useful. We compare these values using a 
one-tailed-right binomial test and we found statistical 
significance in “Useful” percentage for all functions 
(α=0.01). This means that the “Useful” appearance is 
statistically greater than “Somewhat Useful” and this should 
continue regardless of the amount of feedback that we 
received and regardless the function. In addition, the most 
useful functions, according the answers, were the Expertise 
Finding mechanism (84% of aggregate usefulness) and the 
Filtering Mechanism (85% aggregate of usefulness).  
Regarding the Expertise Finding, we asked volunteers 
about what they are looking for in answers from their 
Facebook friends. “Truth” (27%) was the most desired 
characteristic followed by “Detail” (21%). “Personalization” 
was the less desirable characteristic (2%). This, particularly, 
was an unexpected result, because, many appreciated that 
their private SN was familiar with their additional context, 
such as knowledge of their location, family situation, or 
other preferences [6]. The popularity of these characteristics 
that reflect a mastery over a subject (Truth and Detail) results 
in a need to prioritize expertise rather than other more 
subjective criteria (availability, trust, etc.) when estimating 
the utility of each candidate. 
Finally, we asked if they believed that certain questions 
were implicitly restricted to certain kind of people. We used 
a template question like “Do you agree that some questions 
can only be answered by a certain [characteristic]?” followed 
by each Filter option. This question aimed to evaluate the 
volunteer’s perception about the utility of the Filtering 
mechanism and their results are summarized in Fig. 9. 
 
Figure 8.  Results of Questionnaire (B) 
In general, all the Filters were considered useful by most 
of volunteers, except by the gender filter, which was a 
polemic subject. We observe the highest divergence between 
male and female opinion. We believe that this rejection was 
due to the sexist aspect of our question. This may be absurd, 
but men and women may have understood that they were not 
able to answer questions made by the other gender and 
rejected the filter by this reason. But, this is just a guess; we 
could not confirm this without individually interviewing 
each respondent. The fact is that the Gender filter was not 
well received by our audience 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we presented the Social Query app to assist 
users to search for information on SNs. While most part of 
previous work focused on the Expertise Finding mechanism, 
we propose a tool to help the users through several steps of 
the social search process. First, our solution helps the users 
to rephrase the questions enhancing its chances of be 
answered. Second, the app offers three different approaches 
to finding experts. Last, there is an option to filter the expert 
finding search to a certain group with the same demographic 
characteristic of the questioners (age or gender, for instance). 
To evaluate our proposal we run a questionnaire, which 
was answered by 250 Facebook users. Through the 
questionnaire, these users could give their impressions about 
the functional aspect of the Social Query app. The results 
were excellent. The main functions (Expertise Finding 
mechanism, Filtering mechanism and Rephrase mechanism) 
of the app in average were considered at least useful by more 
than 40% of users. In addition, we obtained great feedback 
that allows us to think about improvements to our proposal. 
As future work, we are planning the following 
improvements: (1) use of other Expertise Finding models, 
some of them considering semantics; (2) enhance the 
Question Analyzer, besides suggesting changes in problem 
specification, automatically applying some or all of these 
changes; (3) improve the Filtering use to specify the input; 
(4) allow the user to maintain a list of contacts; (5) allow 
users to maintain lists of friends; (6) considering additionally 
the reputation of the users, based on previous; and (7) make 
friends of friends available as expert candidates. 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We want to thank people who answered our 
questionnaire.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Wayne, “Social networks eclipse e-mail”, May. 2009. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/18/technology/internet/18drill.html 
[retrieved February, 2014]  
[2] M. Ross, “Facebook turns 10: the world's largest social network in 
numbers,” 
Feb. 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-02-04/facebook-turns-10-the-
social-network-in-numbers/5237128 [retrieved February, 2014] 
[3] G. McMillan, “If Facebook was a country, it’d be larger than China in 
three 
years,” 
Feb. 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.digitaltrends.com/social-media/facebook-could-be-larger-
than-china-in-three-years-time/ [retrieved February, 2014] 
[4] R. Gray, N. Ellison, J. Vitak, and C. Lampe, “Who wants to know? 
question-asking and answering practices among Facebook users,” 
Proc. 16th Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW), ACM Press, 2013, pp. 1213–1224. 
[5] B. Furlan, B. Nikolic, and V. Milutinovic, “A survey of intelligent 
question routing systems,” Proc. 6th International Conference 
Intelligent Systems (IS), IEEE Press, 2012, pp. 14–20.  
[6] M. Morris, J. Teevan, and K. Panovich, “What do people ask their 
social networks, and why?: a survey study of status message Q&A 
behavior,” Proc. 28th International Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI), ACM Press, 2010, pp. 1739–1748. 
[7] G. Manoranjitham and S. Veeraselvi, “Mobile question and answer 
system based on social network,” International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer and Communication Engineering, vol. 2, 
September 2013, pp. 3620–3624.  
[8] J. Nichols and J. Kang. “Asking questions of targeted strangers on 
social networks,” Proc. 15th Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), ACM Press, 2012, pp. 999–1002. 
[9] L. Magid, “Facebook tweaks news feed algorithm again,” Jan. 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/larrymagid/2014/01/21/facebook-
tweaks-news-feed-algorithm-again/ [retrieved February, 2014] 
[10] C. Souza, J. Magalhães, E. Costa, and J. Fechine, “Social query: a 
query routing system for Twitter,” Proc. 8th International Conference 
on Internet and Web Applications and Services (ICIW), IARIA Press, 
2013, pp. 147–153. 
[11] J. Teevan, M. Morris, and K. Panovich, “Factors affecting response 
quantity, quality, and speed for questions asked via social network 
status messages,” Proc. 5th International Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media (ICWSM), AAAI Press, 2011.  
[12] C. Souza, J. Magalhães, E. Costa, and J. Fechine, “Routing questions 
in Twitter: an effective way to qualify peer helpers”. Proc. 
International Joint Conferences on Web Intelligence (WI) and 
Intelligent Agent Technologies (IAT), IEEE Press, 2013, pp. 109–
114. 
[13] M. Burke, R. Kraut, and C. Marlow, "Social capital on Facebook: 
differentiating uses and users,” Proc. Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI), 2011, pp. 571–580. 
[14] R. Savolainen, “Everyday life information seeking: approaching 
information seeking in the context of way of life,” Library & 
Information Science Research, vol. 17, 1995, pp. 259-294. 
[15] C. Souza, J. Magalhães, E. Costa, and J. Fechine, “Predicting 
potential responders in Twitter: a query routing algorithm,” Proc. 
12th International Conference on Computational Science and Its 
Applications (ICCSA), Spring Press, 2012, pp. 714–729. 
[16] D. Horowitz and S. Kamvar, “The anatomy of a large-scale social 
search engine,” Proc. of the 19th International Conference on World 
Wide Web (WWW), ACM Press, 2010, pp. 431-440. 
[17] C. Macdonald and I. Ounis, “Searching for expertise: experiments 
with the voting model,” The Computer Journal, vol. 52, 2009, pp. 
729–748.  
[18] G. Salton, A. Wong, and C. Yang, “A vector space model for 
automatic indexing,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 18, 1975, pp. 
613–620. 
[19] S. Brin and L. Page, "The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web 
search engine," Journal Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, vol. 
30, April 1998, pp. 107–117. 
[20] G. Comarela, M. Crovella, and V. Almeida, “Understanding factors 
that affect response rates in Twitter,” Proc. 23th International 
Conference on Hypertext and Social Media (HT), ACM Press, 2012, 
pp. 123–132. 
 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

