FVA: Financial Virtual Assistant
Adalberto Alves Abraão, Paulo Caetano da Silva
UNIFACS - Universidade Salvador
Salvador, Brazil
e-mail: adalbertoabraao@gmail.com, paulo.caetano@pro.unifacs.br
Abstract— Getting information about the current and past
financial situation of a company is important before investing
in
this
company.
Extracting
this
information
from
an
information system that uses taxonomy recognized by the
financial markets using natural language, is a facility for the
investor who has no knowledge and no expertise in computer
science. The virtual assistance software are alternatives to help
people in an area of knowledge. However, it is observed that
there is no information system that interacts with the user
through natural language to answer questions about financial
information of companies, based on data available in electronic
financial disclosures. This paper presents a computational
system of virtual assistance, named Financial Virtual Assistant
(FVA), which recognizes user questions relating to financial
situation of companies, through text, or voice, in natural
language. This system provides answers based on available
information in electronic financial statements represented in
eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) technology.
The
system's
implementation
is
based
on
a
proposed
architecture for specific purpose virtual assistants that uses a
Natural
Language
Processor
(NLP)
and
the
domain
information services. Details of this architecture, the system’s
implementation and the used natural language processing
configuration are presented. During testing, the Assistant
correctly
answered
all
financial
questions
about
certain
companies in a compatible average period with available
generic virtual assistants in the market. Besides that, the
Assistant could to talk to the user, simulating a conversation
between people.
Keywords-Financial
Virtual
Assistant;
FVA;
Virtual
Assistants Architecture; Specific Purpose Assistant; XBRL US-
GAAP.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Usually, financial consulting services provided by an
assistant or a financial advisor are very expensive. For a
small investor with limited resources to hire a financial
professional, a computer system that provides service
virtually through answers to questions using natural language
can be an alternative to this kind of financial advice.
However, the virtual assistant software, usually embedded in
smartphones, e.g., Siri [1], Cortana [2] and Google Now [3],
provides
inaccurate
responses
to
the
questions
about
companies’ financial information. Normally, these answers
correspond to a list of links to financial sites.
Actually, the available financial information to investors
on the market are disclosure by the technology XBRL [4]
that is derived from XML and it was created to facilitate the
exchange data and financial information. Most of the world's
major stock exchanges operate with this technology, e.g.,
US-SEC (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission), the
European market, Tokyo. Therefore, extracting information
represented by XBRL technology is an important source to
support the financial questions for decision-making on
investments.
After conducting a literature review, we did not find any
academic paper, or market solution, related to the financial
virtual assistants of question and answers type. However,
proposed frameworks and architectures for building virtual
assistants have been found. To fill this gap, this paper
presents the FVA, based on XBRL technology, that answers
financial questions using natural language, in different
languages, e.g., English and Portuguese. Therefore, the aim
of
this
paper
is
to
present
the
architecture
and
implementation of a computer system of virtual assistance
question/answer type that interacts with the costumer using
natural language to answer questions about financial state of
companies that provide their financial statements on the
market. This system supports a conversation with the user
too. This paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses
some related works; in Section III, the architecture of the
FVA is proposed; the presentation of FVA implementation is
presented in Section IV; in Section V, the results of the FVA
tests are evaluated and in Section VI the conclusion is
presented.
II.
RELATED WORKS
The architecture for creating specific purpose assistants
in [5] allows the expansion of knowledge and behavior of an
assistant by adding new services. This architecture predicts
the interaction with the user through natural language and
supports the dialog management. However, it was designed
for agents’ technology in [6], which is in disuse. One of the
agents’ disadvantages is the need for a specific environment
for the agents, and many of these environments were
discontinued.
The
architecture
reference
for
a
specific
purpose
assistants in [7] was designed to build assistants that help the
user to explore a specific Web site. So, the created assistants
based on this architecture, do not provide precise and
complete answers. The architecture in [8], which allows the
creation
of
assistants
that
may
have
their
expanded
knowledge
by
third-party
services,
does
not
provide
resources for user interactions in natural language, in
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

addition to the dialogue management being restricted by user
interface applications.
The architecture of the Virtual Assistant [9] allows users
to enlarge your knowledge by adding new plugins. This
feature enables the creation and addition of a financial
knowledge module. This architecture is implemented by Syn
Engine platform [10]. Their drawbacks are it supports only
one language (English), and it is available only for two
software environments that limits the number of users. For
the Assistant.ai assistant [11], only part of its architecture is
available. This part is the area responsible for conversation
maintenance with the user and is based on a NLP. One of the
disadvantages of using this architecture is that it is not
complete, i.e., some sections are not available, e.g., the area
responsible for the selection and extraction of information
domain, the area responsible for the construction of the
answers to the user. Architectures of market assistants, e.g.,
Siri, Google Now and Cortana, are not available.
After the literature review, it is concluded that these
architectures and frameworks do not support the creation of a
FVA based on XBRL technology that answers financial
questions using natural language, in different languages,
simulating a conversation between people.
III. FVA ARHITECTURE
The proposed architecture for the FVA is designed to
create assistants, question/answer type, to distributed and
service-oriented
environment.
This
architecture
is
an
extension of the architecture we presented in [12]. One of the
reasons for this architecture design be service-oriented is to
facilitate the expansion of behaviors and knowledge of the
assistant, through adding new services. This architecture
consists of four layers categorized by their functions:
Presentation, Orchestration, Understanding / Knowledge and
Data, as illustrated in Figure 1.
The Presentation layer is the user interface layer. It is
responsible for interaction with the user and forwarding the
user requests to the Orchestration layer and presenting the
replies that were sent by the Orchestration, to the user in the
proper format, i.e., text or voice. The assistant usability
depends directly on the Presentation layer. The Orchestration
layer is the layer that coordinates the Assistant, manages the
knowledge assistant and manages the dialog with the user. It
is responsible for making the decision of what should be
done in response to the stimuli provided by the Presentation
and Understanding / Knowledge layers, also it is responsible
for the treatment of any services and / or components failure.
In addition to triggering the services of Understanding /
Knowledge Layer and forwarding the responses to the
Presentation Layer, it also verifies whether the information
passed by the user is complete for obtaining an answer or
some additional information is still needed. The Assistant
robustness depends directly on this layer. The Understanding
/ Knowledge Layer is the assistant cognitive center. It
interprets the user information, it provides the recognized
information to decision-making process and it provides the
specialized information services in the financial field to
Orchestration Layer.
Figure 1.
Architecture in layers of the FVA
The Understanding / Knowledge Layer corresponds to
the knowledge domain of the Assistant. The greater the
knowledge represented by this Layer, the more intelligent
and knowledgeable in the financial field is the assistant. The
Data layer is responsible for providing the data to the
Understanding / Knowledge layer. The reliability of assistant
answers is proportional directly for the reliability of the data
provided by this layer. The amount of information provided
by the assistant is directly influenced by the data amount that
this layer has access to.
Although the architecture is designed for the financial
sector, it can be used for another domain. The organization
of its components is such that it allows the incorporation of
multidisciplinary, multilingual and user interaction features.
Figure 2 shows the details of each layer that are discussed in
the next section.
A.
Details of architecture components
The Speech To Text (STT), which is a speech to text
converter, and The Text To Speech (TTS), which is a text to
speech converter, allow interaction by voice between the
Assistant and the user. These components access the
dictionaries that are databases responsible for supporting the
conversions speech to text, and vice versa, for different
languages. The User Interface Manager (UIM) is responsible
for user interaction, it collects user questions and forwards to
the Orchestration layer and waits for the response to present
to the user. It also, with the help of STT and TTS, interacts
with the user using voice. The presentation of the answer to
the user is also the responsibility of the UIM.
The Coordinator is responsible for controlling the life
cycle of each question session initiated by the user and for
managing the assistant’s information flow. The Coordinator
is responsible for collecting user requests sent by UIM, and
forwarding the question text to the NLP, and getting the NLP
answer that is the identification of the user's intention and the
parameters that have been recognized in the user question. In
addition, the Coordinator is responsible for interacting with
Dialog and Knowledge Manager (DKM) for getting the
answer to the user, and forwarding it to the UIM, besides its
responsibility to treat the failures of the layers with which it
interacts. The DKM is the manager of the dialogue with the
user and knowledge manager of the Assistant. The DKM
uses the context information for supportting the maintenance
of the dialogue with the user, simulating a conversation
between people. The knowledge management that is its other
responsability, is the configuration and maintenance of
services belonging to the financial domain in Understanding
/ Knowledge Layer (UK). The NLP has the responsibility to
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 2.
Architecture in layers of the FVA
Figure 3.
Class Diagram of implementation of The Orchestration Layer
recognize the user question, made in natural language, and
extract parameterized information that is processable for a
computer system. For manipulating the knowledge, the NLP
needs the dictionary and grammar of the domain, i.e., after
receiving a sentence, it queries the domain’s dictionary and
grammar in order to understand the sentence. Assistants
based on this architecture will recognize requests that contain
terms of this dictionary that correspond to the standard
questions that were previously defined in the grammar. For
the FVA, the dictionary and grammar domain of the NLP is
financial. However, other domains, with related and proper
dictionary and grammar, may be incorporated. The Domain
Information Services are responsible for handling the
available data in the Data layer and provide domain
information requested by the Orchestration layer. These
services represent the knowledge domain of the assistant,
i.e., the greater scope of the domain information services
available, the greater is the representation of knowledge in
the assistant. For the FVA, they are called the Financial
Information
Services.
Its
ability
to
answer
complex
questions, e.g., financial analyzes and comparisons, depends
on the availability of these services. The services of Data
Layer correspond to repositories that provide data, e.g., a
relational database, a data service delivery on the Web. For
the FVA, the use of XBRL Repositories for providing
financial data, was planned. This repositories can be
composed of XBRL documents in XBRL databases or
financial information services based on XBRL data. The
taxonomy used by XBRL repository is also an item that
interferes with the responses relevance of the FVA in
relation to the financial area, because this taxonomy has to
have representation in the financial domain.
One of the main advantages of the presented architecture
is the prediction of the use of a natural language processing
service, allowing substitution of NLP service for another, or
even to use more than one service of this kind. This feature
facilitates the implementation of multi-language virtual
assistants of specific purpose, or assistants that recognize the
vocabulary of different domains. This feature also facilitates
the use of different natural language processing services that
are available in the market or in the academic community.
The architecture also provides for the dynamic update of the
terms and grammar of domain. The isolation of the layers
responsible for the knowledge domain and cognition of the
assistant, and the voice converter services in the presentation
layer, are characterized as another advantage, because it
allows the maintenance of knowledge domain in a single
layer and also the creation of virtual assistants that interact
with the users exclusively through voice, without requiring
complex coding in the user interface.
One of the limitations of this architecture is that it does
not support the implementation of any specific purpose
assistants, i.e., it is designed to build virtual assistants of
question/answer type. The autonomous virtual assistants that
autonomously perform a task, or a sequence of tasks,
according
to
the
context,
are
not
supported
by
this
architecture.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FVA
The implementation of the layers occurred almost
entirely in a server environment, except for the Presentation
layer that had one of its components implemented in the
customer environment. The UIM was the only implemented
component of the Presentation layer, because it is specific for
the FVA. An Android application that supports voice
recognition using TTS and STT services (provided by the
Google), was coded, and a page javascript / html was coded
too. The Orchestration Layer components were implemented
with Java technology to run on a Web server that allows the
Web client requests to be treated by the Assistant. Several
Java classes were implemented, whose main classes for this
layer are shown in class diagram in Figure 3.
The Coordinator class that was implemented as a Java
Servlet,
has
the
function
of controlling
the
flow of
information and trigger the basic components and services of
the Assistant. The Coordinator class does not handle any
information
related
to
the
financial
domain;
the
AssistantContext class corresponds to the context of the
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

information about the dialogue session with the user; the
RequestParameters class stores all the information related to
the user's query parameters; the NaturalLanguageProcessor
and NLPServiceAdapter classes are the representatives of the
NLP. To replace the NLP by another, just change the
NLPServiceAdapter
class;
the
AssistantResponse
class
corresponds to the Assistant answer for the user's question;
the DialogKnowledgeManager class represents the Dialog
and Knowledge Manager component, whose responsibility is
to manage the knowledge of the Assistant and the dialogue
between the Assistant and the user; the ServiceResponse
class corresponds to the response of the service information
to query submitted.
The
Understanding
/
Knownledge
Layer
was
implemented through Web Services. For the NLP, a
conversational platform was used. This platform, named
Api.ai [13], provides an NLP service for recognizing user
expressions in different languages, e.g., English, Spanish and
Portuguese. This platform enables the creation of services or
components that can be configured to recognize expressions
made in natural language related to different knowledge
domains. The Financial Information Services have been
implemented specifically for the FVA. Two pairs of
dictionary of terms / grammar, one for the Portuguese
language and other for English language, were built to
represent the financial domain. The dictionary of terms is a
database where the synonyms of domain concepts, names,
keywords and the definition of a corresponding default value
are
registered.
Many
groupings
of
terms,
whose
denomination is entity, have been created. These entities
have been divided into financial and generic types. They are
used in grammar rules to indicate, for the NLP, which
position in the user's expression the terms are expected. The
configuration of the grammar rules was according to
grammars’ rules setting of the Api.ai NLP, e.g., for English
version grammar, the question "What are the current
liabilities of Petrobras in 2015" is captured by NLP
according to the following rule:
[@greeting] [@CommandExpressions]
@USGAAP_BalanceSheet:financialConcept [of]
@Company:companyData [company] [in,on]
@YearPeriod:yearPeriod [at, in, on fiscal year, in fiscal
year, of fiscal year, of year, year] @sys.number:year
In this example, the subsequent expressions to @ symbol
correspond to entities of dictionary of terms.
The words or phrases between brackets, inform that the
occurrence of them is optional. To identify the user's
intention, the grouping of grammatical rules has been used.
The performed configuration identifies at least 14 intentions,
e.g., "What is the Financial Concept of Company"; "What is
the Variation of Financial Ratio of Company in the last
period of time"; "Change the company". To represent the
organization of the Financial Information Services, a Web
Service
compatible
with
the
SOAP
protocol
was
implemented. This Web Service has a method that requires
two input parameters: a string that corresponds to the name
of the service and the second string that corresponds to an
instance of the RequestParameters class encapsulated in
JSON format [14]. The answer of this Web Service
corresponds to an instance of ServiceResponse class that is
encapsulated in JSON format. The main function of this Web
Service is to trigger the corresponding financial information
service. One of the services, triggered by this Web Service,
was
implemented
by
CompanyRatioInformationService
class, which provides text responses in natural language
contains the value of index, or concept, of a financial
company in a specified period.
The CompanyRatioInformationService class constructs
messages with the answer of the Assistant, in Portuguese or
English, and for that, it consumes data from another Web
Service
that
represents
the
Data
layer
and
it
was
implemented by XbrlUsgaapWebService class. This Web
Service provides data from the US-SEC [15] through the
SOAP protocol, and supports the following input parameters:
USGAAPElementName that corresponds to the compatible
XBRL element name with the US GAAP taxonomy [16];
cik, which is the CIK code of the company; year that
corresponds to the year of the financial period; period, which
corresponds to the part of year of the financial period. The
result is a text provided in XML with structured financial
data. The data source of the XbrlUsgaapWebService is the
service of XBRL-US that provides the extracted data of the
financial statements of companies provided by US-SEC.
These statements are in XBRL format, in accordance with
US-GAAP taxonomy. For the use of other XBRL taxonomy,
e.g., IFRS, GRI, another configuration of this layer is
necessary.
One of the advantages of the uncoupling, through the
implementation of services, is the ease of maintenance of
each component or service and the independence of the
technology on which the service was implemented. One of
the disadvantages of the implementation by services is the
risk of delay in the construction of responses caused by each
service involved. Figure 4 shows the corresponding sequence
diagram used to build the answer of the Assistant, in
response to the user question "Give me the Current Assets of
Petrobras in 2009".
V.
TESTS AND EVALUATION OF FVA
For testing the FVA efficiency, the financial domain
questions were performed to evaluate the Assistant in
relation to the question understanding, the speed of response
and its accuracy. Another objective was to evaluate the
impact of services in the responses overall time. To
standardize the results and facilitate measurements and
calculations, a javascript script was created, embedded in a
Web page client. This script has submitted a series of 43
questions written in natural language and in English
language to the FVA.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 4.
Sequence Diagram of a succesful transaction
As a premise, the key words embedded in the questions
of the sequences have been previously registered in the
dictionaries of terms and all questions followed the patterns
recorded in the NLP grammar. The responses execution
times were measured with the same group of questions on
different days and at different part of day in order to decrease
the impact of the momentary effects caused by network
congestion, services overload or processing delay on client
computers and/or servers. The tests were performed between
June 7th and August 16th 2016 at different times and
resulted in 16 samples. For each sample, were measured the
individual performance times of the used services and the
overall performance of FVA, as shown below: a) total time
of Assistant response; b) the response time of Api.ai NLP; c)
response time of data service of XBRL-US [17].
The test results showed an average response time equal to
2 seconds, shown in Table 1. These results are compatible
with the assistants more used on the market, e.g., Siri,
Google Now. The impact of NLP and data services on the
average total time Assistant response corresponded to
approximately 97%. Any decrease in response times of these
services has a directly and significantly impact to the global
time, which was evidenced by lower response times recorded
for the repeated questions. This decrease is attributed to the
use of cache on the data service, which provided a reduction
of more than 700 milliseconds on average total time of
Assistant. The submitted questions were understood and
correctly answered by FVA, in contrast to what happened to
the virtual assistants available on the market, which for most
of the answers provided it was only a list of links for
financial Web sites. Something justifiable, as both Siri and
Google Now, do not include the financial domain yet.
To evaluate the management of dialogue with user, a
series of four questions was analyzed, three of them are short
that were submitted in English language to the Siri, Google
Now and FVA. Thus, they were understood and correctly
answered by FVA as follows:
1)
Submitted question: “Show me the current liabilities
of Microsoft in 2014”;
2)
FVA
response:
“The
Current
Liabilities
of
MICROSOFT
CORPORATION
Company
in
2014
is
US$45,625.00”;
3)
Submitted question: “and 2014”;
4)
FVA
response:
“The
Current
Liabilities
of
MICROSOFT
CORPORATION
Company
in
2014
is
US$45,625.00”;
5)
Submitted question: “and 2015”;
6)
FVA
response:
“The
Current
Liabilities
of
MICROSOFT
CORPORATION
Company
in
2015
is
US$49,647.00”;
7)
Submitted question: “and the assets”;
8)
FVA
response:
“The
Assets
of
MICROSOFT
CORPORATION Company in 2015 is US$174,472.00”.
However,
the
other
two
assistants
understood
the
following short questions as new questions, as was the case
with Siri, illustrated in Figure 5.
The FVA was better than the other two assistants,
because it was the only assistant that made the connection
between the questions in sequence and managed the dialog.
The evaluation of dialog management of the FVA was also
considered positive.
VI. CONCLUSION
The positive evaluations of the performance, accuracy
tests and dialogue maintaining test, confirmed the viability of
the FVA that helps users using natural language, with
optional voice support, to obtain information about financial
indexes or financial concepts of companies. The proposed
architecture for Virtual Assistants can be used to build
multilingual virtual assistants for a specific domain that
answers user questions through natural language is a
contribution of this work; the alternative of consulting
financial data that is in electronic reports in XBRL
technology and US-GAAP taxonomy, through by natural
language, is another contribution.
The US-GAAP
taxonomy was used
on the FVA
implementation, but, with minor changes in the Data layer
and changes in the dictionaries and grammar of NLP, it is
possible to use others XBRL taxonomies.
Despite
the
positive
results,
the
FVA
has
some
limitations, e.g., FVA does not recognize any financial
questions that are not configured on the NLP. The questions
used in the tests were compulsorily chosen according to the
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

settings made in the grammars and dictionaries of NLP. Any
question that is not expected by the Assistant does not bring
any relevant information to the user, only a warning that the
Assistant did not understand the question.
As future work to improve the FVA we suggest the study
of
implementation
of
a
component
that
allows to configure the grammar of the Assistant through a
standard language for construction of grammars, e.g.,
JSpeech
Grammar
Format
[18],
and
convert
this
configuration into a proprietary configuration used in NLP.
Another suggestion is the creation of an NLP to recognize
the financial questions and extract the financial parameters
without the need to configure question standards and thus
facilitate the expansion of knowledge of the Assistant.
REFERENCES
[1]
Apple,
SIRI.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.apple.com/siri [retrieved: March, 2017].
[2]
Microsoft,
Cortana.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/cortana
[retrieved:
March, 2017].
[3]
Google,
Google
Now.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.google.com/now/ [retrieved: October, 2016].
[4]
XBRL
International,
“The
Standard
XBRL”.
[Online]
Available from: https://www.xbrl.org/the-standard/ [retrieved:
March, 2017].
[5]
E. C. Paraiso and J. A. Barthès, “A Voice-Enabled Assistant
in a Multi-agent System for e-Government Services,” Proc.
5th International School and Symposium, pp. 495-503.
[6]
D. B. Lange, “Mobile objects and mobile agents: The future
of distributed computing?,” Proc. ECOOP’98 - Object-
Oriented Programming. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
pp. 1-12, 1998.
[7]
E. M. Eisman, V. López, and J. L. Castro, “A framework for
designing closed domain virtual assistants,” Expert Systems
With Applications. Granada, Spain, v. 39, n. 3, pp. 3135-
3144, 2012
[8]
S. P. Zambiasi, “A reference architecture for the personal
assistant softwares based on service-oriented architecture.”
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil.
[9]
SYN, Syn Virtual Assistant. [Online]. Available from:
http://syn.co.in/Syn-Virtual-Assistant.aspx
[retrieved:
November, 2016].
[10] SYN,
Syn
Engine
2.0.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://syn.co.in/Syn-Engine.aspx
[retrieved:
September,
2016].
[11] API.AI,
Assistant.ai.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://assistant.ai [retrieved: October, 2016].
[12] A. A. Abraão and P. C. da Silva, “A XBRL Financial Virtual
Assistant,” Proc. The 11th Conference On Internet And Web
Applications And Services, May. 2016, pp. 64-72. ISSN:
2308-3972, ISBN: 978-1-61208-474-9.
[13] API.AI,
Api.ai.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://api.ai
[retrieved: March, 2017].
[14] ECMA
International,
ECMA-404:
The
JSON
Data
Interchange Format. 1st Geneva, 2013.
[15] U.S.
Securities
And
Exchange
Commission,
Office
of
Structured Disclosure.
[16] XBRL US, “US GAAP Financial Reporting Taxonomy,”
[Online]. Available from: https://xbrl.us/xbrl-taxonomy/2016-
us-gaap/ [retrieved: March, 2017].
[17] XBRL
US,
Data
Analysis
Toolkit.
Available
from:
https://xbrl.us/home/use/data-analysis-toolkit/
[retrieved:
March, 2017].
[18] W3C, JSpeech Grammar Format. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.w3.org/TR/jsgf/ [retrieved: March, 2017].
Figure 5.
Siri's response to subsequent short questions.
TABLE I.
RESPONSE TIMES OF THE FINANCIAL VIRTUAL ASSISTANT
Scope of
Measurement
Global Average of
Assistant (ms)
Api.ai NLP
Average
(ms)
XBRL US
Service
Average
(ms)
Api.ai NLP
%
XBRL US
Service %
Sum of
Serviçes
(Api.ai,
XBRL US)
(ms)
Sum of Serviçes
%
All 43 questions
2011,15
848,29
1115,21
42,18
55,45
1963,50
97,63
Repeated Questions
Only
1291,35
833,20
412,83
64,53
31,97
1246,13
96,50
Diference
719,79
14,99
702,38
-22,35
23,48
717,37
1,13
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-563-0
ICIW 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

