Digital Badges in Informal Learning Environments 
Bradley S. Barker 
Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources,  
University of Nebraska-Lincoln 
Lincoln, NE 
e-mail: bbarker@unl.edu 
 
 
Abstract—	   The awarding of digital badges has become 
pervasive across social media systems.  Digital badges are 
visual representations of individual accomplishments and/or 
competencies and skills.  The Mozilla Foundation is leading an 
effort to standardize the issuing and collection of digital badges 
with the release of the Open Badges Infrastructure (OBI).  The 
OBI provides a framework for educational institutions and 
employers to issue digital badges and for badge earners to 
share their badges across social media systems.  This paper 
discusses the idea of incorporating digital badges into the 
National 4-H Recognition Model (USDA, n.d.). 4-H in the 
United States is a youth development organization that serves 
nearly 6.5 million youth and is administered by the United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA). If done properly, 
the awarding of digital badges may increase the goal setting 
habits and motivate young people to join positive youth 
development organizations like 4-H. 
Keywords-Digital Badges; informal learning environments; 
4-H; Robotics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A diploma is the ultimate outward sign of learning 
accomplishment.  However, some would argue that such 
diplomas do not communicate detailed skills and abilities nor 
do they provide information on those skills learned outside 
of the classroom for learners [1]. Mozilla, a non-profit 
software development company, has developed the Open 
Badges Infrastructure (OBI) for learners to showcase their 
skills and abilities through digital badges. Researchers and 
educators are interested in the unique opportunity to apply 
community-based assessment practices whereby the badge 
issuer authenticates the skills and abilities of the learners that 
lead to the awarding of a digital badge. Community-based 
assessments, unlike formal educational courses, may be done 
by course developers, peers, the content management 
system, or even by learners themselves [5].  There is also 
interest in the role digital badges play in goal setting and 
motivation to pursue additional academic experiences in out-
of-school time learning.   
 
This paper specifically discusses the idea of incorporating 
the Mozilla Open Badges Infrastructure (OBI) into the 
National 4-H Recognition Model [1]. The 4-H organization 
in the United States is a youth development organization 
that serves nearly 6.5 million youth and is administered by 
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Head, 
hearts, hands, and health are the four Hs in 4-H and 
represent the values of the organization.  If done properly, 
the awarding of digital badges may increase the goal setting 
habits and motivate young people to join positive youth 
development organizations like 4-H. The 4-H program in 
the United States was originated by the Smith-Level act of 
1914, which created the Cooperative Extension System, a 
unique partnership with the 109 land-grant universities in 
the United States, the USDA, and the National Institute of 
Food and Agriculture [2].  Currently 4-H is the largest youth 
serving organization with about 6.5 million participants and 
is found in every state and territory of the US.  Educational 
programs are delivered in out-of-school programming, in-
school enrichment programs, clubs and camps.  4-H offers a 
wide variety of science, engineering, technology and applied 
mathematics educational opportunities – from agricultural 
and animal sciences to rocketry, robotics, environmental 
protection and computer science [2].  The rest of this paper 
is organized as follows. Section II presents the current need 
for a digital badging system.  The specific purpose of digital 
badges is presented in Section III. Section IV describes the 
OBI and it’s implementation in the 4-H youth development 
system.  Section V contains the conclusions and future 
work. 
II. 
NEED FOR DIGITAL BADGES 
Beyond 
the 
formal 
classroom, 
there 
are 
many 
opportunities to develop and refine skills and abilities as a 
young person or as an adult.  These experiences include 
visiting informal learning institutions, participating in 
informal focused learning programs, and utilizing media to 
pursue interests [3].    Consider that learning is a lifelong 
endeavor and often is accomplished through self-interest 
projects, self-directed experiences, information gathering, 
and community participation or on-the job experience [4].  
While these learning pursuits can be personally fulfilling, 
often times, employers and educational institutions do not 
recognize or place value on the skills and abilities developed 
through informal learning.  In addition, with the proliferation 
of computing technologies along with the interconnectedness 
of the networked learning environments education has been 
transformed from the classroom to many web-connected 
spaces.  Digital badges can act as a bridge between formal 
education and the larger connected learning environments by 
recognizing skills and competencies across these contexts 
also known as learning ecosystems.    
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

While Mozilla and others advocate the use of digital 
badges to document individual’s discrete skills and abilities, 
there are some concerns with awarding badges. One potential 
consequence of awarding badges is to overemphasize the 
badge as an external reward for learning thereby reducing the 
learners’ intrinsic motivation to learn [5].  This may lead to 
the gameification of the system where the end goal is badge 
collection and not the pursuit of knowledge.  Another 
concern lies in the openness of the badge system.  The open 
badges ecosystem will permit the development of many 
different badges each with a different degree of rigor behind 
the issuance of individual badges.  With such diversity, 
educational institutions and employers may not accept the 
premise that a particular badge truly represent the skills and 
abilities professed.  Finally, a concern for the 4-H system is 
the reliance on community-based assessment and the 
responsibility of adult facilitators to evenly apply the badge 
assessments throughout the system.  The possibility that a 
few educators would make exemptions in the badge 
assessment requirements could jeopardize the outward 
legitimacy of the entire system to employers and educational 
institutions. 
III. 
PURPOSE OF DIGITAL BADGES 
Digital badges have a wide range of purposes from social 
belonging and status to representing individual learning 
achievement.  An example of a social belonging badge 
would be the Google News badge.  Google issues readers 
digital badges at the Google News homepage to help visitors 
learn about their reading habits and to convey shared 
interests through social networking.  Google may also use 
badges as a reward system to keep users coming back to the 
News homepage. The Google News badge is designed with 
multiple levels and is earned by reading articles on certain 
subjects at a rate higher than other readers. Digital badges 
can be found in a number of on-line sites and appear 
frequently in social networking applications.  One example is 
Foursquare, a website that permits users to provide and share 
location-based data using mobile devices.   Within the 
Foursquare community, badges can be earned for a number 
of social interactions including the beginner badges for 
joining and checking in.  While not entirely useful for 
educational purposes, the Foursquare badges may affirm 
ones achievements and promote group identification.   
IV. 
THE OPEN BADGE INFRASTRUCTURE 
The Mozilla Foundation (2012) has proposed a 
framework called the open badges infrastructure (OBI) for 
the digital badges ecosystem, which includes: 1) digital 
badges, 2) assessments, 3) and the open badges cyber 
infrastructure.  In this proposed framework, the digital badge 
represents skills and abilities of learners and may come in 
many different forms.  Badges may be awarded for a narrow 
band of achievement and skills or on the other hand may be 
more comprehensive and awarded for mastery of a set of 
skills.  For example, a badge could be awarded for learning 
how to use variables in a program language or a badge could 
be awarded for mastery of the entire language.  The scope of 
the digital badge is established by the issuing organization, 
which can include educational institutions, training centers, 
or even employers.  Assessment is critical to the badges 
framework to ensure that the badges truly represent the 
knowledge and skills badge earners acquired and to convey 
the information stakeholders.  However, the level of rigor for 
each badge is flexible and it is expected that community-
assessment methodology will be utilized.  Again the badge 
issuer sets the assessment rigor for their badges.  The third 
component of the badges framework is the cyber 
infrastructure. The digital badge infrastructure provides the 
electronic means to store and retrieve the badges and related 
meta-data about the badge.   The Mozilla open badges 
infrastructure provides the electronic means to issue, store, 
display, and endorse on-line digital badges.  For example, for 
institutions that want to issue a badge (issuer) the open-
badges cyber infrastructure provides a JavaScript application 
interface (API) to send an assertion (information about the 
badge recipient) to the individuals backpack.  The backpack 
is the badges repository and is currently hosted by the 
Mozilla Foundation.  The badge recipient is able to access 
their badge collection through the Mozilla backpack and 
push those badges to other networks like Facebook.   
In summary, the open badges infrastructure allows 
organizations to develop and issue their own digital badges.  
Badge recipients can collect digital badges and then display 
them on social networks or job sites.  The badges represents 
knowledge and skills obtained outside of the classroom, 
provides a way for badge recipients to be recognized, and 
unlocks educational and occupational opportunities. 
 
A. Digital Badges for Learning 
Digital badges have been popularized in the gaming 
industry and through social media systems as symbols of 
inclusion and status. However, the current generation of 
digital badges focuses on awards for participation rather than 
learning and achievement.  The transformation of digital 
badges from simple awards to representations of skills and 
abilities is the centerpiece of the National 4-H digital badges 
for learning initiative.  As a major leader in youth 
development 4-H is well positioned to adapt digital badging 
as a part of the overall recognition model.   
According the National 4-H Recognition Model (USDA, 
n.d.), the systematic recognition of learning provides youth 
positive reinforcement and the necessary motivation to 
continue to participate in such learning endeavors and to 
development life skills [6] [7].  Moreover, the existing 4-H 
model includes five types of recognition: 
 
• 
Participation in educational experiences  
 
• 
Recognition of progress toward personal goals  
 
• 
Recognition of the achievement of generally 
recognized standards of excellence  
 
• 
Recognition through peer competition  
 
• 
Recognition for cooperation  
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
The 4-H recognition model is adaptive to meet the 
individual needs of youth and supports a balanced approach 
to encourage recognition from each of the five recognition 
categories. The model is also designed to satisfy both 
intrinsic (internal) and extrinsic (external) motivational needs 
of individual youth [8].  In practice, 4-H awards ribbons, 
medals, conference trips, scholarships and many other 
incentives depending on the state and county of the youth 
participant and promotes the development of internally 
relevant skills and knowledge through program participation 
[9]. 
With the expansion of social media and the use of digital 
badging for learning the 4-H organization has the 
opportunity to expand the current recognition model and 
reach a wider audience [10] [11]. Digital badges also fit in 
each of the five recognition categories and may provide 
individualized motivation for youth. In addition, digital 
badges permit sharing with potential employers and post-
secondary institutions to showcase competencies obtained 
and awarded through the 4-H experience.    
Perhaps the ultimate outward sign of learning today is the 
diploma.  Whether from high school or college the diploma 
is an important signal that an individual has met some 
benchmarks of learning.  However, a diploma may not 
provide a record of skills and abilities obtained in the formal 
classroom.  Digital badges, on the other hand, may provide 
an ideal way for lifelong learners to enhance their learning 
credentials beyond the realm of formal education [12].   
A digital badge for learning can be thought of as a visual 
representation of accomplishments, certified skills and 
abilities [13].  The relative advantage of digital badges is that 
they may provide a more detailed view of what the badge 
recipient has learned when compared to traditional diplomas 
and can signify learning in informal environments [12].  
Under a digital badging system a young person could display 
dozens of badges providing a detailed picture of acquired 
competencies and the skills developed in school and out.  
Moreover, digital badges may be used to show potential 
employers not just an earned degree but also a detailed list of 
demonstrated competences.  Such as 21st century workplace 
skills and important life skills like teamwork, innovation, and 
leadership. 
Digital badges are of great interest to the education 
community because of their potential to motivate youth to 
pursue the development of skills and knowledge [11][12].  
Badges provide an ideal environment for goal setting 
whereby learners are challenged to meet the criteria 
established in the awarding mechanism of the badge. Digital 
badges also provide a blueprint of educational offerings 
within a community for those new to a community [11].  In 
the Boy Scouts for example, badges provide motivation to 
the earners but just as important it is a recruitment tool for 
potential badge earners to understand what experiences 
scouting has to offer. According to Halavais (2012), the 
process of awarding digital educational badges should lead 
others to engage in learning.  
B. Application of Digital Badges in 4-H 
One challenging aspect of the current OBI model is the 
existence of a large spectrum of badge types that can be 
earned from very simple check-in and get a badge to more 
rigorous badges that require comprehensive assessment.  To 
provide outward legitimacy that the 4-H badges represent 
robotics and engineering based skills and abilities the 
devised 4-H badges assessment mechanism is moderately 
robust.  In general, the steps for youth participants to earn a 
badge are: 1) identify an adult facilitator who will conduct 
the assessment, 2) complete the curriculum, 3) complete an 
engineering notebook, and 4) complete and submit an on-line 
survey and provide the adult facilitator the engineering 
notebook for review. 
Following the OBI model the current 4-H Digital Badge 
ecosystem is comprised of five badges all focused on 
robotics including: 1) Robot Hands, 2) Robot Movement, 3) 
Mechatronics, 
4) 
Robot 
Platforms, 
and 
5) 
Robot 
Competitions.  The badges can be earned by youth aged 9 to 
15 that participate in one of the five robotic programs.   
To earn a robotic badge youth must provide evidence of 
progress in four main areas (science abilities, workforce 
skills, science knowledge, and engineering performance). 
Science abilities include skills like observation of a 
phenomenon, prediction, and redesign.  Secondly, youth will 
display improvements in 21st Century Workforce Skills 
including critical thinking and problem solving skills.  Third, 
youth will provide evidence of learning gains in science 
knowledge and big ideas related to the projects including 
friction, balance, circuits, and electricity.  Finally, youth will 
be assessed on the completion of program benchmarks like 
construction and functioning of the robotic system or sub 
components. Performance in all four areas is measured by a 
22-item 4-point Likert-type scale, three to four essay 
questions and a review of engineering notebooks that youth 
complete in the project, and the approval by adult facilitators 
that work with youth in the five badge areas see “Table 1.” 
for a list of criteria and assessment procedure. 
TABLE I.  
ASSESSMENT FOR BADGE ISSUANCE 
Badge Requirements 
Evidence 
Example of Skills 
Measurement 
Science, 
Engineering, and 
Technology 
Abililites 
build/construct, 
communicate results 
16 self-reflective 
Likert-type 
survey questions  
21st Century 
Workforce Skills 
critical thinking, 
decision making 
6 self-reflective 
Likert-type 
survey questions 
Science 
Knowledge 
scientific habits of the 
mind 
engineering 
notebook entries 
Performance 
Benchmarks 
build a robot hand, 
program a robot to 
move forward 
3 to 4 essay type 
self-reflective 
questions 
 
The survey instrument was field tested with 30 youth 
ranging in age from 9 to 15 in two US states.  In addition, 15 
adult facilitators also took part in the piloting of the 
instrument.  The goals of the piloting process were twofold. 
Goal one was to introduce the digital badges issuance and 
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

assessment framework to youth that had recently completed 
one of the five robotic projects.  The second goal of the pilot 
was to test each survey question with respondents thereby 
reducing the overall measurement error. To test each 
question on the survey youth were given instructions to 
answer the questions by circling the corresponding number 
in the 4-point Likert-scale. Next, the researchers read each 
question with the youth and asked their level of 
understanding and what could be done to improve the 
questions.  This was done for all 22-questions and the four 
open-ended questions.   Results of the field test showed that 
12 of the survey questions needed to be reworded with 
simpler words like substituting autonomous with runs by 
itself or additional examples were needed like (why and how 
things work) was added to the questions I can apply basic 
scientific principles to my 4-H robotics project.  In addition, 
the Likert-scale headings were changed for four of the 
survey items.  In addition, a focus group interview garnered 
important feedback on the proposed process to earn and issue 
badges from the youth and adults point of view.  Most 
importantly the adult facilitators felt that they could conduct 
the required assessments to enable the issuance of digital 
badges to youth that they teach.  Upon the completion of the 
pilot process the surveys were incorporated into the 4-H 
digital badges cyberinfrastructure and will be tested with 
additional groups. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
While the OBI is still at the very beginning of 
implementation in industry and educational institutions, it 
has the potential to bridge formal and informal learning 
environments by recognizing skills and competencies 
through learning ecosystems.   Youth serving programs like 
4-H will implement badges for their members with the 
expectation that it will enable youth to compete for 
employment and academic pursuits.   More research is 
needed to determine the role of badges on motivation and 
goal setting.  In addition, developers of the ecosystem will 
have to establish validity and reliability of individual badges 
through assessment processes.   
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Carey, “Show me your badge,” The New York Times, 
Nov. 
2012, 
avaialable 
from  
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/show-
me-your-badge.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 , <retrieved 03, 
2013>. 
 
[2] US Department of Agriculture. “National 4-H recognition 
model,” 
available 
from  
http://www.national4hheadquarters.gov/library/4h_recmo.pdf, 
<retrieved December 2012>. 
[3] National 4-H Council, “4-H History,”  available from 
http://www.4-h.org/about/4-h-history/, <retrieved December 
2012>. 
[4] National Research Council, “Learning Science in informal 
environments: People, places, and pursuits,” Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press, pp. 11-17, 2009. 
[5] E. Goligoski, “Motivating the learner: Mozilla’s open badges 
program,” Access to Knowledge, vol. 4(1), 2012, pp. 1-8.  
 
[6] J. Lindqvist, J. Cranshaw, J. Wiese, J. Hong, and J. 
Zimmerman, “I'm the mayor of my house: examining why 
people use foursquare - a social-driven location sharing 
application,” Proc of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '11). ACM, New York, 
NY, 
USA, 
2011, 
pp. 
2409-2418, 
doi:10.1145/1978942.1979295 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1978942.1979295. 
[7] B. Boyd, D.Herring, and G. Briers, “Developing life skills in 
youth,” Journal of Extension, vol. 30(4), available from 
http://www.joe.org/joe/1992winter/a4.html, 1992, <retrieved 
December 2012>. 
[8] M. Norman and J. Jordan, “Targeting life skills model,” 
University of Florida IAFS Extension, available from 
http://www.csrees.usda.gov/nea/family/res/pdfs/Targeting_Lif
e_Skills.pdf , <retrieved April 2013>. 
[9] E.A. Quarrick, and R.E. Rankin, “Intrinsic motivation in 4-
H,”  Journal of Extension vol. 3(1),  available from 
http://www.joe.org/joe/1965spring/1965-1-a6.pdf, 1965, pp. 
42-50, <retrieved December 2012>.  
[10] S. Forbes, “The 4-H incentive system,”  Journal of Extension, 
vol. 
30(3) 
Article 
3RIB1, 
 
available 
from 
http://www.joe.org/joe/1992fall/rb1.php, 
1992, 
<retrieved 
December 2012>. 
[11] J. Antin, and E. Churchill, “Badges in social media: a social 
psychological perspective,” in proceedings of the 2011 annual 
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI 
2011),” Vancouver, BC, Canada, May, 2011, pp.1-4.  
[12] A. Halavais, “A genealogy of badges:  Inherited meaning and 
monstrous moral hybrids,” Information, Communication, & 
Society, vol. 15(3), 2012, pp. 354-373.  
[13] J. Selingo, “Colleges need some big ideas to drive change 
from within,”  Chronicle of Higher Education, vol. 58(7), 
September 4, 2011, pp. A1-A2. 
[14] J. Young, “Badges earned online pose challenge to traditional 
college diplomas,”  Chronicle of Higher Education, vol. 
58(19), May 11, 2011, pp. A1-A4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

