Synote Discussion 
Extending Synote to support threaded discussions synchronised with  recorded videos 
 
Mike Wald, Yunjia Li, E.A. Draffan, James Brierley, Alyona Ivanova, Robert Streeting, Matthew Tucker  
ECS 
University of Southampton 
UK 
m.wald@soton.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Synote Discussion has been developed as an 
accessible cross device and cross browser HTML5 web-based 
collaborative replay, annotation and discussion extension of 
the award winning open source Synote which has since 2008 
made web-based recordings easier to access, search, manage, 
and exploit for learners, teachers and others. While Synote 
enables users to create comments in ‘Synmarks’ synchronized 
with any point in a recording it does not support users to 
comment on these Synmarks in a discussion thread. Synote 
Discussion supports commenting on Synmarks stored as 
discussions in its own database and published as Linked data 
so they are available for Synote or other systems to use. This 
paper explains the requirements and design of Synote 
Discussion, presents the results of a usability study and 
summarises conclusions and future planned work. 
Keywords- video; synchronise; comment; discussion 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Synote [1] overcomes the problem that while users can 
easily bookmark, search, link to, or tag the WHOLE of a 
recording available on the web they cannot easily find, or 
associate their notes or resources with, PART of that 
recording [2]. As an analogy, users would clearly find a 
textbook difficult to use if it had no contents page, index or 
page numbers. Synote can use speech recognition to 
synchronise audio or video recordings of lectures or pre-
recorded teaching material with a transcript, slides and 
images and student or teacher created notes. Synote won the 
2009 EUNIS International E-learning Award [3] [4] and 
2011 Times Higher Education Outstanding ICT Initiative of 
the Year award [5]. The system is unique as it is free to use, 
automatically or manually creates and synchronises 
transcriptions, allows teachers and students to create real 
time synchronised notes or tags and facilitates the capture 
and replay of recordings stored anywhere on the web in a 
wide range of media formats and browsers. Synote has been 
developed and evaluated with the involvement of users and 
with the support of JISC [6] and Net4Voice [7]. Figure 1 
shows the Synote player interface. The technical aspects of 
the system, including the Grails Framework and the 
Hypermedia Model used, have been explained in detail 
elsewhere [8]. The synchronised bookmarks, containing 
notes, tags and links are called Synmarks (Figure 2). When 
the recording is replayed the currently spoken words are 
shown highlighted in the transcript. Selecting a Synmark, 
transcript word or Slide/Image moves the recording to the 
corresponding synchronised time. The provision of text 
captions and images synchronized with audio and video 
enables all their communication qualities and strengths to be 
available as appropriate for different contexts, content, tasks, 
learning styles, learning preferences and learning differences. 
Text can reduce the memory demands of spoken language; 
speech can better express subtle emotions; while images can 
communicate moods, relationships and complex information 
holistically. Synote’s synchronised transcripts enable the 
recordings to be searched while also helping support non-
native speakers (e.g., international students) and deaf and 
hearing impaired students understand the spoken text. The 
use of text descriptions and annotations of video or images 
help blind or visually impaired students understand the 
visually presented information. So that students do not need 
to retype handwritten notes they had taken in class into 
Synote after the recording, notes taken live in class on 
mobile phones or laptops using Twitter [9][10] can  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Synote Player Interface 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 2.  Synote Synmark Creation 
be automatically uploaded into Synote. Synote builds on 12 
years work on the use of speech recognition for learning in 
collaboration with IBM, and the international Liberated 
Learning Consortium [11] [12]. The integration of the 
speaker independent IBM Hosted Transcription System with 
Synote has simplified the process of transcription giving 
word error rates of between 15% - 30% for UK speakers 
using headset microphones. This compares well with the 
National Institutes of Standards (NIST) Speech Group 
reported WER of 28% for individual head mounted 
microphones in lectures [13]. 
While most UK students now carry mobile devices 
capable of replaying Internet video, the majority of these 
devices cannot replay Synote’s accessible, searchable, 
annotated recordings as Synote was created in 2008 when 
few students had phones or tablets capable of replaying these 
videos. Synote Mobile [14] (Figure 3) was therefore 
developed as an HTML5 responsive design web application 
capable of working in the majority of browsers on mobile 
devices running an Android, Windows, Apple iOS system   
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparing Galaxy and iPad presentation of Synote Mobile 
that can use YouTube’s captioning and transcription service 
to allow for timed stamped data to be annotated and shared 
with 
others 
[15]. 
The 
fall 
forward 
approach 
of 
MediaElement.js [16] means that should the HTML5 player 
fail on the device Synote Mobile will present the user with 
Silverlight or Flash and vice versa in a fall back situation. 
This solution appears to work with most browsers despite the 
lack of player access alongside the transcription on smaller 
mobile devices. It allows for accessibility with captions and 
transcriptions and provides the user with a way of interacting 
with others whilst working with video and audio files.  This 
allows for video captured lectures to be not only more 
accessible to those who have hearing impairments but also 
allows all students to go back over content in a way that may 
suit their learning preferences whether they are in the 
university, at home or when travelling. 
Video sharing sites such as YouTube (RX) allow users to 
discuss the whole video using comments but these 
discussions cannot be linked to a particular part of the video 
Neither Synote nor Synote mobile support threaded 
discussions as their Synmarks are annotations of the 
recording timeline. Synote discussion was therefore 
developed to enable students to have a discussion about a 
topic raised in the recording in such a way that the discussion 
is linked to the particular part of the recording being 
discussed. Section II explains the requirements and design, 
Section III presents the usability test results while Section IV 
summarises the conclusions and future work. 
 
II. 
SYNOTE DISCUSSION REQUIREMENTS & DESIGN 
In order to be able to rapidly prototype a system to 
experiment with the best way of achieving the aims it was 
decided that rather than redesign Synote’s database to allow 
for this new form of discussion annotation a new database 
would be created to hold these discussions and the users’ 
threads and comments. In order to ease the integration of 
Synote Discussion with the original Synote, the comments 
are further published as linked data using Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) [17] Key requirements 
included: 
• 
view Synote presentations as slides or image 
snapshots of video and an associated transcript with 
a link to the video on Synote. 
• 
view a list of Synmarks relating to a particular time 
of the presentation and a list of comments for each 
Synmark  
• 
add Synmarks and add, edit or delete comments to 
Synmarks. 
• 
notifications on comments being posted on 
Synmarks and navigate directly to those Synmarks  
• 
export the discussions as linked data so that it could 
be accessed and reused by other applications, 
especially the original Synote  
• 
support the main mobile devices, web browsers and 
screen sizes in both portrait and landscape modes. 
 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The application was designed to be consistent so none of 
the features become hidden or removed on different screen 
sized devices with each page having the same base design 
and a similar layout for content. Much of the content 
displayed is interactive with components designed to look 
’selectable’ and interactive to makes it easier for the user to 
intuitively navigate the website. 
 
 
 (a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
(f) 
Figure 4.  Wireframe sketches of the design. 
Figure 4 shows sketches of the designs and this section 
provides explanations behind the design decisions. Figure 4a 
shows the menu of the system, which is hidden until the user 
clicks on the menu button (located in the top left corner of 
the screen). When the button is selected, the main screen is 
shifted to the right and the menu bar is shown. This design 
has been inspired by a number of extremely popular web 
applications used by the target audience of students, 
including Facebook Mobile [18], which has a similar sliding 
menu feature. These menu indicators have become a mobile 
standard, with this design approach being featured in most 
major utility mobile applications, not just Facebook. 
Figure 4b demonstrates the design of the main detailed 
view of a presentation in the application. This shows the 
transcript - a feature taken from Synote - in the bottom half 
of the screen. As the presentation’s slides are being changed, 
the transcript is kept synchronised with the displayed slide so 
it is easier for users to follow the lecture. 
Figure 4c also shows the main detailed view of a 
presentation, however, this time in the ’Annotations’ tab. 
This tab holds the Synmarks and Discussions (the top layer 
of threads). Like the transcript, the Synmarks are 
synchronised for every time frame (slide) of the lecture. The 
Synmark’s appearance has been made visibly obvious to 
show that a Synmark is ’clickable’ for the user to be 
redirected to the comments page for that Synmark (not 
shown in any of the wireframe figures). The page is where a 
user can view a list of their own Synmarks that they have 
started in the first tab, and their own comments in the other 
tab. Every Synmark and Comment in the list is ‘selectable,’ 
and directs the user to the presentation page that the content 
is related to and the Synmark within that presentation. 
A very similar design is used for Subscriptions and the 
users Notifications pages (Fig, 4d & 4e) If the user has any 
notifications, these are highlighted to the user in the sliding 
menu, with the number of notifications is in brackets in the 
menu. 
A. Discussions 
In the system, users can make two levels of annotations 
to a presentation, similar to the way an online forum works. 
At the top level are”discussions”, which are associated with 
part of a presentation. These are considered to be equivalent 
to Synmarks, which are comments on the presentation made 
in Synote. In order for the discussion to relate to a certain 
presentation, it stores a presentation ID. However, a 
discussion should only relate to a certain section of the 
presentation, so that it can be displayed when the user is 
viewing that part of the presentation. In order to allow this, a 
start time and optional end time are stored with the 
discussion. Since each presentation is split up into a number 
of sections with their own IDs, this could have been 
implemented by storing the section ID rather than the 
presentation ID. However, by implementing it with a start 
and end time, this allows a discussion to relate to multiple 
sections, thereby implementing a many-to-many relationship 
between sections and discussions without having to represent 
this in the database. Discussions also store an author ID and 
a timestamp, so that the application can determine when the 
discussion was created for ordering purposes and who 
created it. 
B. Comments 
Comments are the second level of annotations, and can 
be posted in relation to either existing discussions or 
Synmarks. Since these two types of comments have to store 
different IDs, the database allows for this by implementing 
these two types as two different objects, which inherit from a 
generic Comment object. Therefore, three tables are 
required: a table for Synmark comments, which stores a 
generic comment ID and a synmark ID, a table for 
Discussion comments, which is the same but stores a 
discussion ID, and finally a generic comment table, which 
stores the content of the comment, author and various other 
data about the comment. Rather than allowing users to 
actually delete comments completely, a deleted field is 
included instead, which allows a comment to be marked as 
deleted. This is so that a placeholder can be put in place of 
the comment so that users can see it is deleted. 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

C. Subscriptions 
Users can subscribe to presentations, Synmarks and 
discussions to receive notifications when other users 
comment. Since subscriptions are allowed on all these 
different entities, a similar inheritance structure to that 
described for comments is required to make this possible. 
Even though the general subscription entity only contains a 
user ID and a primary key, it was decided that the inheritance 
was still necessary in case it became apparent that more 
fields were required in the general entity. 
D. Notifications 
Users need to be notified when either a discussion is 
posted to a presentation they are subscribed to or a comment 
is posted to a discussion/Synmark they are subscribed to. 
Therefore, there are different notifications related to 
discussions and to comments; this means that inheritance is 
used once again. The user navigates across the website using 
a sidebar (Figure 5) that appears on the left of the screen 
when a button is clicked. The sidebar also displays an 
indicator showing the number of notifications a user 
currently has. By only appearing when the user wants to 
navigate to a new page, this allows the front end to fully 
utilise the limited space available on a mobile device. The 
sidebar has its own template which is included in the other 
templates, allowing it to be changed easily and ensuring it 
remains consistent across the website. 
 
E. Navigation and Display 
The front end uses a mobile-optimised navigation system 
where, when the user tries to navigate to a new page, the 
front end fetches the information from the back end and 
creates it in a page hidden from the user, which then slides 
into view upon completion, replacing the original page. A 
loading animation is presented to the user while the page is 
loaded (Figure 6), and notifies the user if an error has 
occurred that has prevented the new page from being loaded 
correctly.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshot of the menu sidebar bar.. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Screenshot showing loading the new page, the menu button can 
be seen in the top left of the menu sidebar bar. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Screenshots showing the presentations displayed in landscape 
mode. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Sketches Screenshots showing the presentations displayed in  
portrait mode. 
The main page of the website, the details page, which 
displays the presentation has two different display modes, 
one designed for a landscape aspect ratio (Figure 7) and one 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

designed for a portrait aspect ratio (Figure 8). This is to 
allow the website to be displayed in an optimal fashion when 
a user rotates their mobile device. The presentations are 
designed to be displayed in as responsive a way as possible. 
Switching between slides will automatically scroll the 
transcript to the appropriate section for that slide, and 
selecting a Synmark will automatically scroll to the image 
that applies to that Synmark. Users can subscribe to 
presentations and Synmarks, allowing them to receive 
notifications when a new Synmark or comment is added. 
There is also a subscriptions page, where the user can see a 
list of all their current subscriptions, and remove or navigate 
to each individual subscription. There is a page where users 
can view a list of Synmarks and comments that they 
themselves have added and there is a page where users can 
view all their notifications, with options to remove individual 
notifications or clear all notifications. 
III. 
USABILITY TESTS 
Usability testing involved 10 university students, the 
target group for the system, participating remotely. The 
participants were asked to test the application on any mobile, 
tablet or desktop web browser of their choosing. They were 
given directions as to where the application was located and 
were asked to use it freely for as long as they needed to get 
acquainted with it. Following this, they were each asked to 
perform a range of specified actions/tasks. After completing 
the tasks, they were each asked several questions about their 
experiences and were asked to give some feedback about the 
application. 
Tasks they were asked to perform were: 1. Login; 2. 
Explore the home page and navigate to a presentation; 3. 
Navigate through the presentation and leave a comment on 
one of the slides; 4. Create their own discussion; 5. Subscribe 
to that presentation; 6. Subscribe to one of the discussions 
and leave a comment there; 7. Someone has left a comment 
on their discussion, how would they quickly find out about 
it?; 8. From the subscriptions page, quickly navigate to one 
of the discussions they are subscribed to and unsubscribe 
from it; 9. Navigate to one of the discussions they have left a 
comment on; 10. Try to edit and delete some of their 
comments 
IV. 
USABILITY TEST RESULTS 
Most of the users said that initially they were not sure 
what the purpose of the application was. After they logged in 
and browsed around, it was slightly clearer that the 
application was a media store, although it was not clear what 
types of the media were stored (e.g., whether it was 
YouTube entertainment videos, or educational recordings 
from lectures). This may have been due to some of the test 
content used on Synote being unrelated to educational 
material. Some of the participants also expressed their 
hesitation with using their external authentication details, 
even though they had been explained how to revoke the 
access from the application to their details later on. All the 
participants said that it would have been more convenient for 
them to at least to have an option of being able to register 
with the system separately and hence not to give away their 
external details. Some participants found it was irritating that 
on some of their devices they encountered loading errors and 
the only fix offered was reloading the application. Although 
it did not cause any major test disturbance, it was concluded 
that this issue could put off the potential users from using the 
application. Most of the participants did not understand (until 
they were told) what the Synmarks were and why they could 
not add comments to a presentation without selecting a 
Synmark related to a slide. It was concluded that because 
most of the participants were not familiar with the original 
Synote system and terminology, they could not have been 
expected to understand this initially. The participants also 
expressed a slight confusion with the fact that the Synmarks 
were moving the presentation slides, although all of the 
participants agreed that synchronizing transcript and 
Synmarks according to the time frame of the related slide 
was one of the most useful features. However, according to 
the users the confusing comments tab when no Synmark is 
selected, should not appear. All of the participants agreed 
that because of the lack of distracting information, it was 
easier to perform the tasks and the application was very 
straightforward and intuitive to use. All of them also 
concluded that because the application has a very typical 
mobile platform look, it was very easy to learn how to 
navigate around whilst performing the tasks. It was agreed 
that none of the features were hidden from the view or were 
awkward to uncover in order to complete the test. One of the 
participants did, however, find it slightly irritating to keep 
checking the (hidden) menu bar for the notifications. It was 
suggested that the notifications should constantly be visible 
to a user, no matter whether the sliding menu was in its 
hidden or visible state. All of the participants gave positive 
feedback on the design layout and overall design 
consistency. It was agreed that the layout of the items and 
colours was generally reasonable and intuitive. It was 
admitted, however, that because the application was 
designed to be mainly served as a mobile application, its 
layout and components are more pleasant to the eye on 
tablets and mobiles rather than desktop browsers. The 
application also received positive feedback on how 
visually”adaptable” it was as the screen size and platform the 
participant used did not have an effect. Most of the 
participants also agreed on the usefulness of such an 
application and its features in their studies, although some of 
them said that the unfamiliarity with the original Synote 
would put them off. Almost all of the participants agreed that 
there would not be any situations when the application would 
be hard or impossible to use. Only one participant suggested 
a weak point was the requirement to have a constant Internet 
connection in order to access and manipulate the data. There 
could be potential issues with the connection availability due 
to the content being available only online. All of the test 
participants concluded that the reason they had some 
difficulties with understanding what the system was for and 
what they were to do to complete the set tasks, was that there 
were no help messages provided for their learning. 
Participants also suggested there should be different user 
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

groups for the resource owners and so separate the 
lecturers/uploaders from the student resource users. In 
particular that feature would be useful during the discussions 
as it would be easier to distinguish lecturers from the 
students. 
Overall the users had a positive experience with the 
system, referring to it as friendly, straightforward and, best 
of all, compatible with several platforms. The feedback 
proved useful and influenced the development of the system. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Synote Discussion has been developed as an accessible 
cross device and cross browser HTML5 web-based 
collaborative replay, annotation and discussion extension of 
the award winning open source Synote which has since 2008 
made web-based recordings easier to access, search, manage, 
and exploit for learners, teachers and others. While Synote 
enables 
users 
to 
create 
comments 
in 
‘Synmarks’ 
synchronized with any point in a recording it does not 
support users to comment on these Synmarks in a discussion 
thread as Synmarks are annotations of the recording timeline. 
Synote discussion was therefore developed to enable 
students to have a discussion about a topic raised in the 
recording in such a way that the discussion is linked to the 
particular part of the recording being discussed. 
Synote Discussion supports commenting on Synmarks 
stored as discussions in its own database and published as 
Linked data so they are available for Synote or other systems 
to use. Synote Discussion provides an extension to Synote 
with 
discussion 
commenting 
and 
Facebook 
style 
notifications that work effectively on iOS and Android 
mobile operating systems and common mobile web 
browsers. The key requirements were met to enable Synote’s 
data to be displayed and augmented with discussions and 
comments while Synote Discussion’s stored discussion 
threads and comments can be accessed as open linked data.  
The usability tests showed that once users understood the 
purpose of the application, they found all of the features 
easily to use but accessing Synote Discussion through a link 
from Synote would make the relationship between the two 
applications clearer.  
It is planned to introduce this link from Synote and 
undertake further trials of Synote discussion in real classes 
with a larger number of users and including a wider range of 
mobile, tablet or desktop web browsers. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Wald, et. al, ”Synchronised Annotation of Multimedia,” 
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning 
Technologies, 2009, 594-596. 
[2] S. Whittaker, P. Hyland, and M. Wiley, “Filochat handwritten 
notes provide access to recorded conversations,” Proceedings 
of CHI, 1994, 271-277. 
[3] http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/about/news/2598 
last 
accessed 
24/03/2013 
[4] http://www.eunis.org/index.php/en/jens-doerup-award.html 
last accessed 24/03/2013 
[5] http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/about/news/3874 
last 
accessed 
24/03/2013 
[6] http://www.jisc.ac.uk  last accessed 24/03/2013 
[7] http://spazivirtuali.unibo.it/net4voice/default.aspx 
last 
accessed 24/03/2013 
[8] Y. Li, et. al, “Synote: development of a Web-based tool for 
synchronized annotations,” New Review of Hypermedia and 
Multimedia, 2011, pp. 1-18. 
[9] http://twitter.com last accessed 24/03/2013 last accessed 
24/03/2013 
[10] http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/about/news/2812 
last 
accessed 
24/03/2013 
[11] D. Leitch, and T. MacMillan, “Liberated Learning Initiative 
Innovative Technology and Inclusion: Current Issues and 
Future Directions for Liberated Learning Research,” Saint 
Mary's 
University, 
Nova 
Scotia, 
2003 
http://liberatedlearning.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/05/2003_Year_IV_Research_Report.pd
f  last accessed  24/03/2013 
[12] M. Wald, and K. Bain, “Enhancing the Usability of Real-
Time Speech Recognition Captioning through Personalised 
Displays and Real-Time Multiple Speaker Editing and 
Annotation,” In Proceedings of HCI International 2007: 12th 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 
Beijing, 2007, pp 446-452. 
[13] J. Fiscus, N. Radde, J. Garofolo, A. Le, J. Ajot, and C. 
Laprun, “ The Rich Transcription,” Spring Meeting 
Recognition Evaluation, National Institute Of Standards and 
Technology, 2005 
[14] http://linkeddata.synote.org/  last accessed 24/03/2013 
[15] http://linkeddata.synote.org/synote/recording/replay/52593     
last accessed 24/03/2013 
[16] http://mediaelementjs.com  last accessed 24/03/2013 
[17] T. Berners-Lee, “ Linked Data - Design Issues.” 2006 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html 
last 
accessed 24/03/2013 
[18] http://m.facebook.com 
last 
accessed 
24/03/2013
 
 
 
 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

