Applying a Shared Decision Making Platform to Improve I-131 Patients Medical
Care Quality
Jui-Jen Chen
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taiwan (R.O.C.)
Email:china111@ms57.hinet.net
Yu-Ting Lai
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical Center, Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taiwan (R.O.C.)
Email:yutinglai@cgmh.org.tw
Abstract—This paper provides post-operative thyroid cancer
patients with assessment and health education about the
radioactive iodine (I-131) treatment and proposes a platform
where
information
technologies
are
applied
to
facilitate
effective physician-patient communication to ensure optimal
treatment for patients. A questionnaire survey was conducted
in the Department of Nuclear Medicine of Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taiwan, from September 2017 to May
2018. Before implementation of Shared Decision Making
(SDM), the 1 to 7 questions mean score was 1.3; after the
implementation of SDM, the 1 to 7 questions mean score
increased to 4.89. We conclude that applying SDM establishes
a standardized and effective communication process for
physicians and patients, and offers each patient a personalized
and most appropriate treatment method.
Keywords—Shared Decision
Making
(SDM);
patient
safety; medical quality; nuclear medicine.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Patient safety is the foundation of medical quality and
also the common goal of care providers and patients. The
Ministry of Health and Welfare's Taiwan Patient Safety
Goals for Hospitals for 2018-2019 outlines eight goals.
These goals are meant to build consensuses on patient safety
among medical institutions and serve as a guideline for
Taiwan's medical institutions and personnel. The underlying
purpose
of
these
goals
is
to
drive
a
simultaneous
improvement of all institutions rather than to audit them. The
eight goals are as follows: (1) Improve communication
among health care personnel; (2) Reinforce management of
patient safety events; (3) Improve surgical safety; (4) Prevent
falls and reduce the degree of injuries in patients; (5)
Improve medication safety; (6) Ensure effective control of
infections; (7) Improve tubing safety; (8) Encourage patients
and patient families to participate in patient safety tasks. As
to the goal of encouraging patients and patient families to
participate in patient safety tasks, the strategy has been
modified from its 2017 predecessor as follows:
provide
multiple
channels
for
participation
in patient safety
practices, increase awareness of patient safety, implement
Shared Decision Making (SDM), and improve the care
knowledge among primary caregivers in hospitalization and
post-hospitalization settings [1][2]. The 2016 annual report
of Taiwan Patient-safety Reporting System (TPR) provides
an analysis of communication-related causes of safety events
among 10,749 cases that occurred in 2016 [3]. The analysis
shows that 41 out of 100 cases were related to “poor
communication between the care team and patients or
patient families”, making this factor the primary cause. The
second cause was “poor communication within the care
team”, accounting for 29.8 cases per 100 cases. As shown in
Figure 1, these statistics highlight the importance of
communication.
The term “shared decision making” was first mentioned
in a U.S. patient-centered care program in 1982 to promote
mutual respect and communication between physicians and
patients[4]. In 1997, Cathy Charles proposed an operational
definition of SDM, suggesting that SDM is where at least
two participants, namely physician and patient, are involved;
the physician provides evidence of various treatment options
available to the patient; both parties share and discuss
information; an agreement is reached on the treatment to
implement [5]-[7]. SDM is a patient-centered clinical process
characterized
by
three
elements,
namely
knowledge,
communication, and respect. As shown in Figure 2, the
objective of SDM is to allow clinicians and the patient to
share evidence on treatment outcomes, consider the patient’s
preferences and values, provide treatment options to the
patient, involve both parties in the care process, create a
consensus over the care decision, and support the patient’s
choice
of
treatment
based
on
personal
preference.
Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM) is an attempt to confirm
the medical outcome of a treatment based on scientifically
obtained
evidence
[8].
EBM
is
also
defined
as
the
conscientious, explicit, and judicious use of best available
evidence in making decisions about the care of individual
patients [9]. The underlying principles of EBM include: (1)
the clinical decision should be made based on the most up-
to-date and best available scientific evidence; (2) from which
domain to seek scientific evidence depends on the clinical
problem; (3) the best available evidence is determined based
on epidemiology and biostatistics; (4) the conclusion derived
from EBM needs to be implemented in the clinical decision
(i.e., it should be able to influence the physician’s treatment
of the patient); and (5) how it is implemented should be
continuously evaluated [10].
In Section 2.1 Patient’s and Family’s Rights and
Responsibilities of 2017 Hospital Accreditation Standards
and Evaluation Criteria (for Medical Centers), Article 2.1.2
describes that it is necessary for hospitals to communicate
with patients and explain the medical condition, suggested
treatment, and therapy to the patients. Hospitals should also
have a code of practice and require patients to sign a letter of
consent when an invasive examination or treatment is
needed.
Developing
characteristic
and
effective
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

communication
and
explanation
methods
suitable
for
patients with diverse needs is considered of great importance
[11][12]. Article 2.1.3 indicates that hospitals should explain
to hospitalized patients and their families about the necessity
of hospitalization and the physician’s treatment plan, and
also have measures to assist and encourage their engagement
in
the
medical
process
and
decision
making.
The
requirements for compliance include providing adequate
assistance to patients and allowing their families to access
care
information
and
participate
in
decision
making.
Developing policies and guidelines,
promoting
active
participation
in
decision making among patients and
patients’
families,
and
building
consensuses
between
physicians and patients are indicators of high performance
[13][14]. Article 2.8.15 indicates that all inspection and
examination procedures shall be effectively and safely
carried out. The requirement for compliance is that each
inspection and examination shall be conducted following a
standardized
operating
procedure
that
applies,
and
if
necessary, before the inspection or examination is due to
begin, hospitals should arrange for a patient assessment
and explain to the patient or the patient’s family about the
procedure [15].
Mayo Clinic is a healthcare system focused on integrated
clinical practice, education and research [16]. The Mayo
Clinic Shared Decision Making National Resource Center
aims to advance patient-centered medical care by promoting
shared decision making through the implementation and
assessment of patient decision aids and share decision
making techniques. The philosophy of the center is “the best
interest of the patient is the only interest to be considered”.
Patients and physicians have different expertise when it
comes to making consequential clinical decisions. While
physicians know information about the disease and how to
treat it, patients know information about their physical
conditions, goals for life, and healthcare. Only collaboration
in decision making ensures that the ideal of EBM can come
true [17].
On Shared Decision Making platform, patients and their
families are guided to express their concerns following a
structured procedure. Through discussion, physicians and
patients can minimize their cognitive gap. Meanwhile,
attending physicians can
also
demonstrate
to
resident
physicians and medical interns how to interact with patients
based on a learning by doing approach. This allows resident
physicians to learn from the most comprehensive and
practical SDM. The rest of the paper is structured as follows.
In Section 2, we present the SDM system analysis and design.
In Section 3, we have the results and evaluation. Section 4
discusses the process improvement and limitations. We
conclude the work in Section 5.
II.
METHOD
A. SDM Resources Platform for Nuclear Medicine I-131
Treatment
In this study, we used the nuclear medicine I-131
treatment provided in Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital as an example. Based on EMB and SDM, we
Figure 1.
The 2016 report of the Taiwan Patient-safety Reporting System
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 2.
The steps for shared decision making proposed by National
Health Service Source: Newsletter – June, 2016, Joint Commission of
Taiwan
developed
an
SDM
resources
platform
for
nuclear
medicine I-131 treatment. This platform consists of five
components, including Patient Search System (PSS), Shared
Decision Making System (SDMS), Health Education System
(HES), Evidence-based Medicine Agent (EBMA), and Data
Repository
System
(DRS).
We
input
physician’s
explanations about thyroid cancer related diagnoses, goals
and effects of the treatment, implementation methods,
potential complications, and their occurrence rate and coping
methods,
success
rate
and
risks
from
non-treatment,
alternative
treatments,
post
treatment
reminders,
and
patients’ basic data and health conditions that we had
collected into the repository. With this database, the
proposed system can directly display information related to
the
examination
result
as
the physician explains the
diagnosis to a patient. The system also takes into account
the concerns and questions that patients are likely to have
to assist them with making the best decision. The tools
used for developing this system include JSP, JSP server
Tomcat, MySQL database system, and ontology editor
Protégé, all of which are freeware. The system structure is as
illustrated in Figure 3. The decision tree is shown in Figure 4
[18]-[20].
B. EBM analysis of I-131 treatment
Figure 5 shows the characteristics according to the
American Thyroid Association (ATA) and American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system that may
impact post-operative I-131 decision making. The general
suggested dose of I-131 is 30~150mCi. Administration of
30mCi I-131 is called a low-dose remnant ablation therapy,
while administration of a dose greater than 30mCi is called
a high-dose remnant ablation therapy. According to Atomic
Energy Council, Executive Yuan, an oral dosage of I-131
greater than 30mCi should be administered only in a
hospitalization setting [21][22].
In the current practice, when a patient is not at ATA low
risk or not at ATA intermediate risk, but exhibits low risk
characteristics or is classified as intermediate risk, the I-131
dose for the patient will be directly determined by the
physician. In this study, we integrated patient’s data, physi-
cal
conditions and
considerations, examination related
information, and points to note in the system analysis to
make the decision making mechanism more conscientious
and careful, facilitate consensus building over medical
decisions, and support the patient to make a decision based
on personal preferences. We continuously collected articles
addressing the impact of pharmaceutical characteristics on I-
131
treatment
from
various
sources,
including
the
hospital’s electronic journal systems, the journals and
magazines available in the hospital’s library, out-of-hospital
electronic journal systems, and out-of-hospital journals and
magazines. We invited Director Shu-Hua Huang and Dr.
Yen-Hsiang Chang of Department of Nuclear Medicine to
analyze these articles based on their professional knowledge
and expertise. Their analysis results were manually inserted
into the database by the research assistant.
C. The principles for I-131 treatment
Because
the
accuracy
and
integrity
of
treatment
principles affect the SDM result for the patient, the principles
should be established by a domain experts. Thus, we invited
Director Shu-Hua Huang and Dr. Yen-Hsiang Chang of
Department of Nuclear Medicine to be the co-directors of
this study, providing domain knowledge and assisting in
analyzing the rules of keywords. For example, for patients
who are at ATA low risk or who are at intermediate risk but
exhibits low risk characteristics (e.g., metastasis of small-
sized central lymph nodes, no residual disease or other
abnormal characteristics visible to the naked eye), a low-
dose I-131 remnant ablation therapy (approximately 30mCi)
is more commonly accepted after they undergo a total thyro-
Figure 3.
The system structure
Figure 4.
The decision tree
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

idectomy. Finally, based on the analysis results, we used
the ontology editor Protégé to develop
I-131
treatment
principles, is shown in Figure 6.
III.
EASE OF USE
This study was intended to use an information system to
assist patients in understanding the examination items
involved in the I-131 therapy. The proposed SDM resources
platform for I-131 treatment provide a standardized and
effective communication procedure for physicians and
patients, allowing each patient to receive a personalized and
appropriate
type
of
treatment.
Besides,
through
the
standardized procedure of this system, attending physicians
can also step-by-step guide their resident physicians through
interactions with their patients based on the concept of
learning by doing. This allows resident physicians to learn
from the most comprehensive and practical SDM. The
original procedure was that the patient had completed
thyroidectomy in the general surgery to the metabolic
department to receive radioactive iodine 131 treatment. But
in the outpatient clinic, if you encounter health education or
hospitalization related questions, you need to answer the
nuclear medicine department. After the implementation of
SDM, it will be changed to SDM for the first time to
complete the understanding of the iodine 131 treatment
process, and then to the metabolic department; the patient
does not need to go back and forth between two subjects.
This is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 5.
The characteristics that may impact post-operative I-131 decision-making
Source: 2015 American Thyroid Association Management Guidelines
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 6.
The principals for I-131 treatment
Figure 7.
Analysis of the SDM procedure
A. Analysis of the SDM procedure
Since
2016,
SDM
has
been
listed
by
the
Joint
Commission of Taiwan (JCT) as one of the strategies for
“encouraging patients and patient families to participate in
patient safety tasks”. To comply with JCT’s policy, our
hospital has also set SDM as a focus of our medical quality
and patient safety activities for 2017. In collaboration with
the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, our
department analyzed the procedure for implementing SDM
for thyroid cancer patients who are suggested to receive the
I-131 treatment after a thyroidectomy. In the original
procedure, patients would undergo the thyroidectomy in the
Department of Surgery first and then be transferred to the
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism for the I-131
treatment.
The
physicians
of
the
Department
of
Endocrinology and Metabolism would directly prescribe a
low-dose or a high-dose I-131 treatment for the patients.
Later, the patients would have to visit our department for an
arrangement of the dates of hospitalization and treatment.
However, the clinical efficiency in our department might be
affected when our outpatients need health education or have
questions about hospitalization. Besides, cancellation or
rearrangement of hospitalization or treatment date due to
comorbidity or contraindication is also common in our
hospital. Changes of this kind would cause trouble to both
patients and physicians. With the implementation of SDM,
the procedure has been modified as follows: patients visit
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

our department first to understand the full procedure of the
I-131 treatment, and then make a treatment decision that
best suits their preferences and conditions through shared
decision making. Afterwards, they visit the Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism for the prescription. This
procedure can save patients time and the hassle of visiting
two departments more than once.
B. Design of the SDM system
Patient privacy is highly respected in our department.
Hence, patients are kept anonymous when using the system.
Based on the design concepts for decision-making support
tools introduced by Mayo Clinic Shared Decision Making
National Resource Center, we adopted a streamlined and
simple layout for our system interface. This system has been
designed to provide messages in a clear and straightforward
manner
and
guide
patients
through
the
questionnaire
question by question, based on their post-operative status.
This is shown in Figure 8. By applying the principles for I-
131 treatment, the system would carry out a decision-
tree analysis to infer the risk type (high, intermediate, and
low) for treatment and non-treatment, overall mortality, the
treatment’s potential side effects and impact on daily life,
and alternative treatment options for each patient. As most
patients who need the I-131 treatment are elderly people, we
considered the relatively higher difficulty of text reading in
elders in the design of our system interface. We adopted a
colorful layout and larger fonts for text messages. Moreover,
we also designed the system to visualize percentage data
using pictogram charts, which pop up only when the mouse
moves over them to keep the display simple and clear. If
patients still have difficulty reading the text on the screen,
they can click the “Show in a new window” button. The
content will then be enlarged in a new window, as shown in
Figure 9.
C. Integrated health education and consultation services
Health education is an indispensable step in the SDM
process. Without appropriate health education aids or a
pre-established health education process, patients may not
have sufficient understanding of the side effects of the
treatment, necessary care at home, and low-iodine diet. In
the present, our department uses health education leaflets to
provide health information to patients. Although the leaflets
contain rich information, including an introduction to the I-
131 treatment, indications, points to note, side effects, care
at home, and low-iodine diet, physicians or nurses have to
use highlights or add notes to remind patients of important
information. After implementation of the SDM platform’s
integrated
health
education
and
consultation
services,
physicians or nurses can simply rely on the standardized
health education procedure and the hierarchically structured
webpages to explain the instructional materials to patients
page after page. As all the important messages are presented
in larger fonts and different colors, patients gain sufficient
understanding of the treatment after the health education
and are able to directly enter the SDM process, where they
will have effective communications with their physicians
and determine the treatment method that best suits them.
The integrated health education and consultation services
are as shown in Figure 10.
D. Effectiveness evaluation
During September 2017~May 2018, we conducted a
questionnaire survey on the proposed SDM platform among
post-operative patients who underwent the I-131 treatment.
Figure 8.
The anonymous user interface
Figure 9.
Using a pictogram chart to visualize percentage data
Figure 10.
Integrated health education and consultation service
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A total of 64
copies of the questionnaire
were
distributed, and 64 responses were returned (100% response
rate). Participants were classified by whether they have
used the SDM platform, and the questions were intended to
measure patients’ understanding of SDM on a Likert scale
ranging from 1 to 5. The questionnaire of SDM for the I-
131 treatment consisted of 8 questions. The analysis of the
responses showed that the average score among non-SDM
users was 1.3 and that among users reached as high as 4.89.
The increased understanding of the treatment suggests that
the proposed platform has helped reduce the extent of worry
and fear about the I-131 treatment in patients. Because of
better understanding, certain concerns would still reside in
patients. Therefore, these concerns were excluded in the
calculation of mean score. To assess patients’ conditions
after using the platform, we added two questions in the
post-test questionnaire: satisfaction with the I-131 treatment
decision and trust for the physician. The mean was 4.97,
suggesting that SDM has helped improved physician-patient
relationship. The survey results are shown in Figure 11.
IV.
DISCUSSION
A.
Implementing SDM to improve the I-131 treatment
procedure
In recent years, JCT has been very active in promoting
SDM. No matter in annual goals of hospital medical quality
and patient safety or in hospital accreditation standards and
evaluation criteria, SDM is considered an important strategy.
According to Taiwan Patient-safety Reporting System,
communication problems between care team and patients
and patients’ families have always constituted a high
percentage. The main causes of these problems include:
insufficient information is given to the patient during the
diagnostic process; the physician has many patients to take
care of but limited time for communication; there is a wide
knowledge gap between the physician and the patient; and
the use of medical terminologies has made it hard to
understand
the
physician’s
explanation,
resulting
in
misunderstanding and even dispute. The existing journal and
Figure 11. Patients’ understanding of the I-131 treatment
research articles on application of SDM have focused mainly
on application of SDM in invasive examinations, treatments
of
high-risk
diseases or paper work operation. Research
integrating nuclear medicine radioactive examinations into a
SDM platform is rare. In our survey, the mean scores for all
the questions were higher in the post-test, confirming the
effectiveness of the proposed SDM platform for patients and
information systems to assist the less.
B. SDM implementation strategy
Under
the
department
director’s
support,
we
implemented the proposed system as a research project. The
engineers of the department worked in collaboration with the
attending physicians. After several meetings, we finally
submitted our project in March 2017 to Department of
Medical Research for review. The project was approved in
June 2017. For physicians, the time they have to spend on
SDM is greater than the time they used to spend on health
education, but the SDM platform has alleviated much of
their effort. Besides, physicians’ communication skills and
attitude also affect the success of SDM. If given training on
communication skills, physicians might be more able to lead
Asian patients to express their opinions during SDM.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we used computer programming to develop
a SDM platform that guides patients and their families to
express their main concerns following a structured procedure
and facilitates discussion between physicians and patients to
reduce the cognitive gap between the two parties.
The proposed system conforms to the three elements
advocated by JCT, namely knowledge, communication, and
respect. Results confirmed that it can drastically improve the
medical quality, patient safety, and satisfaction of thyroid
cancer patients. Besides, the system provides a standardized
communication procedure, allowing attending physicians to
guide their resident physicians through interactions with
patients based on the approach of learning by doing. Their
resident physicians thus have an opportunity to learn from
the most comprehensive and practical SDM procedure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was successfully carried out under the support
of Grant CMRPG8G0211 from Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
REFERENCES
[1]
Taiwan Patient Safety Net, Taiwan Patient Safety Goals for
Hospitals, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 2019.
[2]
L. Y. Tsai and C. C. Lin, “Using Shared Decision-Making on
a Patient with Renal Cell Carcinoma and Subcutaneous
Metastasis: A Care Experience,” The Journal of Nursing,
vol.62, pp.89-94, 2015, doi: 10.6224/jn.62.3.89.
[3]
Taiwan Patient Safety Net, Annual Report 2016, Ministry of
Health and Welfare, 2019.
[4]
United States, Making health care decisions: a report on the
ethical and legal implications of informed consent in the
patient-practitioner relationship, President's Commission for
the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical
and Behavioral Research, 1982.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[5]
C. Charles, A. Gafni, and T. Whelan, “Shared decision-making in the
medical encounter: What does it mean?,” Social Science &
Medicine, vol.44, pp.681-692, 1997, doi: 10.1016/S0277-
9536(96)00221-3.
[6]
W. P. Hsu, R. Y. Chang, M. C. Lu, M. C. Chou, and P. C.
Hsiao, “Shared Decision Making in Clinical Practice,” Cheng
Ching Medical Journal, vol.11, pp.24-29, 2015.
[7]
Ministry of Health and Welfare Platform for Shared Decision
Making, Shared Decision Making, 2019, [Online]. Available
from:http://sdm.patientsafety.mohw.gov.tw/Public/Detail?sn=
32&id=1035
[8]
Wikipedia,
Evidence-based
medicine,
2019,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evidence-ba
sed _medicine
[9]
Chang Shan Medical University Hospital, Getting to Know
Evidence-based Medicine, 2019, [Online]. Available from:
http://www.c- sh.org.tw/into/medline/main02.htm
[10] Department
of
Health,
Taipei
City
Government,
An
Introduction to Evidence-based Medicine, 2019, [Online].
Available from: http://health.gov.taipei/Default.aspx?tabid=4
17&mid=537&itemid=15639
[11] M.
Coylewright,
E. S.
O'Neill, S.
Dick,
and
S. W.
Grande, “PCI Choice: Cardiovascular clinicians' perceptions
of shared decision making in stable coronary artery disease,”
Patient Educ Couns, vol.100, pp.1136-1143, 2017, doi:
10.1016/ j.pec.2017.01.010.
[12] S. B. Wilton and K. J. Lyons, “The Challenge of Measuring
Adherence
With
Implantable
Cardioverter
Defibrillator
Referral Guidelines in the Era of Shared Decision-Making,”
Canadian Journal of Cardiology, vol.33, pp.420-421, 2017,
doi: 10.1016/j.cjca.2016.11.008.
[13] F. Bunn et al., “Supporting shared decision-making for older
people with multiple health and social care needs: a protocol
for a realist synthesis to inform integrated care models,” BMJ
Open, vol.7, 2017, doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014026.
[14] J. L. J. Yek et al. , “Defining reasonable patient standard and
preference
for
shared
decision
making
among
patients
undergoing anaesthesia in Singapore.” BMC Medical Ethics,
vol.18, 2017 doi: 10.1186/s12910-017-0172-2.
[15] Joint Commission of Taiwan, 2017 Hospital Accreditation
Standards
and
Evaluation
Criteria
–Trial
Version
for
Medical
Centers,
2019,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.jct.org.tw/mp-2.html
[16] Mayo
Clinic,
2019,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.mayoclinic.org/
[17] MayoClinic, Mayo Clinic Shared Decision Making National
Resource Center, 2019, [Online]. Available from https://share
ddecisions.mayoclinic.org
[18] Apache
Tomcat,
Apache
Software
Foundation,
2019,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://tomcat.apache.org/download-70.cgi
[19] MySQL,
Oracle,
2019,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.mys
ql.com/
[20] Protégé, Stanford University, 2019, [Online]. Available from:
https://protege.stanford.edu/
[21] B. R. Haugen et al., “2015 American Thyroid Association
Management Guidelines for Adult Patients with Thyroid
Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer,” Thyroid, vol. 26,
2016 doi: 10.1089/thy.2015.0020
[22] Administrative Regulations for Radioactive Material and Equipment
Capable of Producing Ionizing Radiation and Associated Practice,
Atomic Energy Council, 2019, [Online]. Available from:
https://erss.aec.gov.tw/law/EngLawContent.aspx?lan=E&id=
77
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

