Model-Driven Dynamic Service Delivery in Mobility and 
Ambient Environment 
 
Soumia Kessal/ Noëmie Simoni/ Xiaofei Xiong/ Chunyang Yin 
Department INFRES 
TELECOM ParisTech - LTCI - UMR 5141 CNRS 
Paris - France 
{kessal, simoni}@telecom-paristech.fr/ {xiaofei.xiong, chunyang.yin}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— The rapid evolution of the new generation networks 
and 
services 
(NGN/NGS), 
particularly 
the 
converged 
infrastructures, raises the challenge of ensuring not only the 
Media Delivery but also the Service Delivery towards the user, 
regardless of his terminal, his access network, his preferences and 
his Quality of Service. The existing approaches for Media 
Delivery  enable the improvement of the network in order to 
share and allocate the resources in the most optimal way. But the 
mobility and the heterogeneity of the user's ambient environment 
invoke more and more the complexity of the Service Delivery. In 
this paper, we propose a Dynamic Service Delivery process over 
Media Delivery in order to ensure the service continuity during 
the mobility or during all the other changes in the user's ambient 
environment. This Delivery process is driven by a model which 
represents the real world and differentiates the Service Delivery 
treated by the service platform from the Media Delivery treated 
by the network. The advantage of the proposed model is that it 
ensures the consistency within the deployment of user session and 
takes into account the End to End Quality of Service in the 
NGN/NGS context. 
Keywords-NGN/NGS; 
Service 
Delivery; 
Model 
Driven;  
Dynamic Management; Mobility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 With the new generation network (NGN), the user is facing 
a new environment composed by multiple access networks, 
core networks, service platforms, access terminals and even 
different operators. In such a varied environment, user hopes 
to change the terminal everywhere while maintaining the 
service continuity according to his preferences. A first 
response to this increasingly complex environment was the 
network convergence, which enables to provide the same 
services to the user through different networks. This 
convergence has thus allowed the passage from a vertical 
architecture (where the access network, the core network and 
the service platform are tightly coupled) to a horizontal 
architecture [1] [2] [3] (where the network and the service 
platform are on independent layers). If this architectural 
transformation 
succeeds, 
the 
objective 
of 
the 
trans-
organization, 
the 
mobility 
and 
the 
personalization 
requirements, is fulfilled. However, in this service separated 
architecture, how to address the service management and keep 
the consistence with the delivery of the network transport 
service (media delivery)? 
Service Overlay Network (SON) allows the access to the same 
types of services (Service Overlay) through different but 
provisioned networks (Network Convergence). Unfortunately, 
these architectures are still vertical from the point of view of 
resources reservation when providing the solutions for the 
improvement 
of 
the 
Media 
Delivery. 
Indeed, 
the 
infrastructures remain specific to certain types of services. As 
a result, there rests the passage from one type of service to 
another (for example, from a Telco service to a Web service), 
or the service composition will necessitate a change in the 
whole transport infrastructure.  
  Additionally, in this type of architecture, the maintenance 
of the service continuity during the mobility is only treated via 
the network (Media Delivery). But the End to End (E2E) 
Quality of Service (QoS) depends also on the QoS of Service 
Layer to achieve the demanded Service Delivery; moreover, 
the service layer can also provide complementary solutions. 
Indeed, depending on the current ambient network in which 
the user stays, we use an ubiquitous component of this area in 
order to have another network path and thus to meet the E2E 
QoS. Our main proposition called “Service Delivery” is based 
on this observation and takes account of mobility. 
 
From this point of view, we replace the Service Overlay 
by a Service Network which enables service convergence and 
global dynamicity in the network layer and in the service layer 
as well. Architecturally, this service network is driven by a 
model and the Service Delivery enables this service network 
to facilely provide user personalized services. This service 
network auto-manages itself independently of the transport 
infrastructures, and changes dynamically due to the mobility 
and the changes of environment in order to manage the real 
time service continuity during the delivery of the service.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: 
In Section 2, the related work shows the lacks of Media 
Delivery for the E2E service. After we introduce the models 
which are the base of our proposal (Section 3), we present in 
Section 4 our proposition in details. In the first place, we 
present as an example the Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) 
architecture to show the importance of the service level 
contribution. Afterwards, we present the important part of our 
contribution which allows the dynamic management to treat 
mobility. Then, in Section 5, we show how our proposal goes 
from the theory to the practice by two parts: for the Model-
Driven of our delivery process we present how to anticipate 
64
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

the degradations in order to maintain E2E QoS. On the other 
hand, we show how our model can help in the standardization; 
we propose the integration of our Service Delivery Process in 
the Tele Management Business Framework Process. Finally, 
we conclude the paper in Section 6. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
To deliver the services to today's large numbers of mobile 
users although a user's ambient environment, the management 
of multiple composed services, the flexible provisioning of 
resources, and the guarantees of QoS remain as challenges. 
However, current solutions are not dynamic and are of the 
type Overlay as the following in SON [4]. The Service 
Overlay Network (SON) is proposed as an intermediate layer, 
which enables the access to the same services by converging 
the different networks. SON attempts to increase application 
adaptation and service reliabilities. In this section we analyze 
the existing optimization solution for SON in order to show 
the lacks. 
  
A. Topology Re-configuration Policies in SON  
As the reconfigurability is one of the most appealing 
features of SON, J. Fan et al. proposed optimal reconfiguration 
policies for the topology design of SON in order to improve 
the performance and to minimize the operation cost of 
dynamic routing [5].  
As the communication requirement changes, the topology 
may need to be reconfigured with a lower-cost path. 
Comparing with other work, it is considered in a general case 
that the topology is not assumed as fully-meshed but as 
degree-bounded: the number of the neighbors of a node is 
limited. They analyzed and identified all types of cost during 
the 
phase 
of 
reconfiguration, 
observed 
the 
optimal 
reconfiguration of small systems, and then gave out the 
reconfiguration policies for large systems where the 
communication pattern is dynamic. 
The policies are verified to have low cost when facing 
changes of communication requirements. As the nodes in the 
topology graph are assumed to be fixed and the numbers are 
limited, it is difficult to discover other service nodes in an 
unknown domain out of the existing SON.  
The policies can resolve some mobility but in a limited 
range. It is not a trans-organizational solution. 
 
B.  An optimal routing based on service federation 
M. Wang et al. proposed a distributed algorithm [6] of the 
service flow graph based on the service federation in order to 
optimize routing in SON. The service federation enables 
independent services to perform the tasks in either a 
sequential, parallel, or interleaved fashion by allowing parallel 
paths for a complex service.  
To connect the service requirement and the overlay graph, 
they defined a service abstract graph, within which, a service 
abstract node is populated with the instances of the 
corresponding service. After applying the algorithm proposed 
by Z. Wang et al. [7] in the overlay graph, a service abstract 
graph is constructed respecting to proposed strategies, and the 
same algorithm is applied again in the abstract graph, so that 
some links of the previous path maybe replaced by optimal 
ones. This service federation algorithm is proved to be able to 
construct service flow graphs with high-quality.  
Although it can response dynamically in the service layer, 
but the algorithm is not flexible enough facing the ambient 
environment and service continuity during the process of the 
dynamic routing. 
 
C. QoS-Assured Service Composition 
X. Gu et al. presented an infrastructure for the efficient 
service composition, focusing on the assurance of QoS [8], 
which is in favor of the reliability within a SON. They propose 
a QoS-assured algorithm for the mapping from service 
template, which is mapped from service requirement, to an 
instantiated service path. 
For the initiation of service composition, the basic 
algorithm generates the weighted candidate graph instead of 
searching the path in the first step, and then runs the Dijkstra 
algorithm to find the shortest path considering various QoS 
constraints. In order to consider each individual QoS 
constraint, an enhanced algorithm is proposed in additional, 
which can change dynamically the weight of different factors. 
At last, the dynamic service composition algorithms are 
proposed to deal with the recomposing of service path in a 
complete way or in a partial way, in the run time when outage 
or significant quality degradations occur. 
The proposition is proved to be dynamic and to be able to 
provide both QoS assurances and load balancing for composed 
services in SON. As the algorithm considers the nodes and the 
links in the whole overlay topology, we still need to improve 
the flexibility and efficacy without increasing the complexity.  
 
D. Auto-configuration in SON 
R. Braynard et al. presents Opus, an overlay peer utility 
service which can automatically configure server network 
overlays by running instances of global resources and tracking 
their status, in order to improve the performance via the 
avoidance of unnecessary re-implementation [9].  
A service overlay works as a “backbone”, through which Opus 
can track and disseminate the information. For each individual 
application, Opus creates an overlay, and dynamically adapts 
the overlay topology according to the system load and network 
conditions. Opus determines the allocation of resources for 
competing applications, by maintaining a cellular structure, 
within which, a cell can be an entire Opus presence or a 
portion of it. To track the system characteristics, they applied 
to a generic communication library within Opus, some 
existing routing protocols which have the properties of 
aggregation, hierarchy and approximation. At last, to ensure 
reliability and availability, several approaches are pursued, 
such as restricted flooding and construction of disjoint paths. 
It is a good idea to appoint a special management unit to 
implement the auto-configuration. However, it is too 
centralized. Can the management mechanism to be more 
65
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

distributed which is self-manageable for each unit? And be 
more independent as possible to the infrastructures? 
 
In conclusion, the Overlay Network does not have enough 
flexibility to meet the new NGN/NGS challenges. 
III. 
BACKGROUND 
In this part, we present the models on which our 
proposition is built and which gathers: the NLN (Node-Link-
Network) meta-model [10] which represents all kind of 
component (§A), the QoS model to manage the behavior of 
the components (§B) and the Information Model which 
represent our knowledge base (§C). 
 
A. NLN Meta-Model  
In the delivery process, we must ask ourselves: what do we 
manage? Which type of resources do we want to provision? In 
order to be as generic as possible and to take into account all 
kinds of resources, we follow the NLN meta-model describing 
three types of objects: the Node which represents the 
component in each visibility level (Service, Network 
or Equipment) and which is responsible for specific treatment; 
the Link which represents the interaction between two Nodes, 
according to the service logic and the Network which 
represents all the Nodes and the Links offering a global 
service to each visibility level. This model enables the 
decomposition of the whole system in several abstractions’ 
levels according to the service provided by each component, 
which allows a complete management of the system.  
  
B. QoS model  
In order to maintain the user Service Level Agreement 
(SLA), we must have an E2E QoS control during all the 
service provisioning and delivery processes. We propose a 
QoS agent in every component and the behavior of each 
component will be translated by QoS measurable parameters. 
QoS can be categorized according to four criteria [11]: 
Availability, Reliability, Delay, and Capacity.  
These criteria are necessary and sufficient for self-control 
(IN/OUT Contract) because they are able to cover Fault, 
Configuration, Accounting, Performance, Security (FCAPS) 
framework proposed by the Telecommunications Management 
Network (TMN). Availability indicates the relation states for 
the configuration; Reliability depends on Fault; Delay and 
Capacity concern Performance and Accounting, and Security 
is considered as a service where we apply the QoS agent. This 
QoS model is instantiated on each visibility level and the 
aggregation of these parameters on all of the visibility levels 
ensures an E2E QoS. This QoS model allows managing the 
resources in use and their possible degradations. 
C. Informational Model (IM) 
The IM we propose is generic and abstract to describe any 
resource. This IM, as our knowledge base, is independent from 
application. It is directly related to the events that occur in the 
real network. The inference rules (implications of each event) 
have been defined in [12] [13]. 
In the next section, we present our proposal based on the 
model which allows the same architecture for the Service 
Delivery and Media Delivery. 
IV. 
PROPOSITION   
Our proposal takes into account the usage in the 
NGN/NGS context, essentially in a mobile and user-centric 
oriented context. Indeed, between the user’s demanded service 
and its dynamic utilization in this context, it is necessary not 
only to provision the service at the moment of its activation, 
but to re-provision continuously and dynamically according to 
the user’s location and the terminal in use. In additional, the 
service presented on a catalogue (for example, the Triple Play) 
incites, in terms of resources, several service elements (Voice, 
Data, TV), which need to be integrated in our dynamic 
management (Provisioning, Re-provisioning and Assurance). 
In this section, we firstly show the necessity of Service Delivery 
complementary to Media Delivery, by presenting in the IPTV 
architecture the application services and the network services, 
then explain the importance of Service Delivery in the service 
layer (§A). In (§B), we analyze the needs impacted by all types 
of mobility (User, Terminal, Network and Service), and the 
ambient networks offering ubiquitous services in order to meet 
the NGN/NGS context. Then, in order to manage the 
dynamicity during the usage of service (during the 
movement), we propose to follow the traceability of the 
dynamic session basing on the NLN model through the 
different layers (Service, Network and Equipment) (§C). In 
(§D), we present the process of E2E Service Delivery, which 
takes charge in the usage and complements the Media 
Delivery. At last, we detail the models (Virtual Service 
Community and Ubiquitous Service Element) which manage 
the mobility in the delivery process (§E). 
A. What is the Service Delivery  
In this section, we explain the Service Delivery and its 
contribution relative to the Media Delivery. 
During the phase of provisioning, we need two to provide a 
service requested by a user. The first is the selection of the 
requested service according to the user’s preferences, his 
location and his terminal. The second is the selection of the 
network that can satisfy the requested QoS. Within the 
ambient context, the user moves while having the continuity of 
service. Current Media Delivery solutions treat these 
requirements 
by 
shifting 
the 
access 
point 
and 
the 
corresponding supporting services in the network layer. The 
QoS is obliged to be recalculated and sometimes the delivery 
is interrupted, although we are now facing an ubiquitous 
context, i.e. we are already able to predict towards which 
pervasive service the user can be served while maintaining the 
desired QoS. That’s why we believe that a higher level 
concept of Service Delivery is needed to address the 
dynamicity during service usage. We benefit from the 
ubiquitous context in the level of the service platforms. The 
service continuity can be obtained by dynamically managing 
66
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

the Service Delivery. During this dynamic management, we 
can adapt to the change of the user’s location and to the QoS 
degradation, and can always conform user’s preferences. Once 
the Service Delivery is in place, the network layer follows the 
solution and provisions the resources to provide QoS 
continuity. 
In the following, we present the IPTV architecture and show 
the need of the Service Delivery, which complements the 
Media Delivery. 
The IPTV service [14] is becoming more and more popular 
among telecommunications companies because it promises to 
deliver TV programs at anytime and anywhere. Based on IP 
protocol, IPTV features advantages like bandwidth efficiency 
and ease of management. 
We can identify three main parts of the overall architecture 
(Figure 1): 
Transport 
Functions: 
RACS, 
NASS 
and 
Transport 
Processing. 
IPTV service control and applications functions: Service 
Selection Function (SSF), Service Delivery Function (SDF) 
and Service Control Function (SCF). 
Media Delivery, Distribution and Storage functions: Media 
Delivery Function (MDF) and Media Control Function 
(MCF). The MCF has three interfaces: one with application 
service (SCF), one with network service (MDF) and another 
with the User Equipment (UE) to control the remote.  
In this architecture, there are application services (offered 
by SSF, SDF, SCF or MCF) and network services (offered by 
MCF or MDF). The application services identify the flow-
generator services which must be transmitted through the 
network. Such services might change during the transmission. 
 
 
Figure 1 
Applicative Services and Network Services in the IPTV 
Architecture  
The MCF and MDF are concerned with the media 
transport via all the network components with the help of 
NASS and RACS, which manage the Policy Enforcement 
Point (PEP) as policy control to ensure the QoS.  
These two types of services work in an independent way, 
which separate the service from the network. However, the 
actual solution for the terminal mobility is oriented to the 
access network, i.e., the access part detects the new location 
and the Media Delivery part will not rearrange another 
delivery flow until the transport deviation is finished. As a 
result, the user service is not continuous due to the non 
seamless of the service handover. If we can realize the Service 
Delivery which aims at delivering complexes services (as 
IPTV) to today's large numbers of nomadic users through out a 
user's ambient environment, we can thus achieve the service 
continuity with the user desired QoS.  
 
B. Requirements analysis of  Service Delivery 
In order to realize the Service Delivery concept, we need to 
focus on the mobility management, the flexible provisioning 
of resources and the guarantees of service continuity and 
dynamic E2E QoS during the mobility. 
First of all, the ambient environment is actually a very 
heterogeneous 
environment 
due 
to 
different 
access 
technologies, services and networks environments. The 
competition and the cooperation of various market players are 
facilitated by defining interfaces, which allow the instant 
negotiation of agreements. This new environment enables 
services to be pervasive, i.e. the same type of services from 
different suppliers are all visible to a user.    
As a result, this new context challenges us:  
- To offer the ubiquitous services. This aims to provide the 
same services in the user's ambient environment during the 
movement. 
- To take into account the user's preferences. This might 
influences the choice of service, of operator, of access 
network, of equipment or of price rate against another. 
- To provide personalization by composing heterogeneous 
services 
during 
a 
session. 
This 
requires 
horizontal 
management to be independent to the different architectural 
layers (Service, Network and Equipment). 
Secondly, another major challenge rose is the mobility 
management during the user mobile session. We summarize 
four types of mobility that might occur during the session 
facing the ambient environment. 
The terminal mobility refers to a terminal which moves 
through different access points while maintaining its 
connectivity. 
The network mobility concerns the movement of the 
infrastructure of the transport support. 
The service mobility refers to the ability of service to be 
transferred from one machine to another so that the user can 
use the service independently to the terminal or network in 
use. 
The user mobility concerns that the terminals are switched by 
a user, which requires the adaptation of service on the new 
terminal. 
This mobile context imposes us:  
67
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

- To guarantee the continuity of service all through these types 
of mobility. This results in the session mobility. The session 
mobility concerns the dynamic management of the user 
session due to its E2E uniqueness in the real time. In fact, each 
type of mobility belongs to an architectural layer (Equipment, 
Network or Service), and is not able to ensure the E2E QoS by 
itself. It is the session management in the real time that 
maintains this E2E QoS.  
- To ensure the Re-Provisioning of resources during the 
movements. The new usage induces the consideration of the 
preferences and the mobility of the user.  
Our goal is to meet these needs by proposing a process of E2E 
Service Delivery driven by mentioned NLN and QoS models, 
which we detail in the next section. The Service Delivery 
takes in charge of the changes impacted by all types of 
mobility on the service platform in the ambient environment. 
 
C. Model-driven Service Delivery 
Our model thus consists of several concepts to response 
the requirements identified in §B: 
- The service element (SE): we model it ubiquitous and 
mutualisable. Its ubiquity answers especially to the ambient 
environment. The service elements are equivalent in function 
and in QoS and installed on the same platform or on different 
platforms.  The characteristic of mutualisation enables the 
sharability between multiple users, which allows, as 
consequence, different users’ preferences and a more dynamic 
and efficient participation of the service composition.   
- The model NLN presents in the background: it allows us to 
model the heterogeneous real world via the nodes and the 
links. The network of nodes and links of the same nature 
constitutes a virtual network. Taking advantage of these 
virtual networks, the required horizontal management obtains 
its architectural base.  
- The concept VPxN: allows the provisioning of resources in 
each layer of visibility. We propose to model each 
architectural layer by a Virtual Private x Network: VPxN 
(x=Equipment, Network or Service), which auto-manages 
itself dynamically during the movements. The VPxN allows 
re-provisioning the resources to the user according to the 
changes (mobility, preferences, degradation) for the purpose 
of the E2E QoS continuity. Thanks to the VPxN, during the 
mobility we can offer the user an ambient environment (all the 
resources of equipments, networks and services which enable 
the session continuity in the new location).  
- The concept Virtual x Community (VxC): allows creating 
communities of equivalent resources in function and in QoS at 
each visibility layer. Thanks to VxC, during mobility we can 
anticipate the degradations by replacing the degraded resource 
by another equivalent one.  
 
As a result of the application of these models, we have our 
global architecture as the following: 
The VPEN, which regroups all the ambient equipments of 
the user: terminals, networks equipment and servers. 
The VPCN, which consists of access and core networks. It 
regroups all the ambient connectivity of the user: Wifi access, 
BTS access, ADSL access, IMS core, etc. 
The VPSN, which makes up a logic network of all the 
accessible services to the user. These services are managed in 
a horizontal way (independent from any particular network 
infrastructure).  
Each visibility layer (VPEN, VPCN, and VPSN) is dynamic 
and self-manages in a horizontal way. Thus it is the session 
management which takes into account the different layers of 
visibility for the calculation of the E2E QoS. For example, 
given the user's preference of terminal, it is decided which 
ubiquitous service element to use, through which network, in 
order to guarantee the QoS continuity. Finally, to meet the 
needs of the dynamic management of the service elements 
during the mobility, the VxC monitors the comportment of 
each resource and proceeds to its replacement in each VPxN. 
The replacement is effected following any types of changes in 
order to maintain the continuity of the QoS. 
Therefore, we have three layers of visibility in the global 
architecture: equipment, network (access and core) and service 
platform (Figure 2). 
In the equipment layer, we have represented all the 
equipments in the PAN of the user, the equipments of his 
access network and of his core network, and the servers on 
which all the service elements accessible to the user are 
installed. 
In the network layer we have represented the access 
network and the core network chosen for his session. 
In the service layer we have represented the logic network 
(VPSN) of all the services to which the user has the right to 
access. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 
Service Delivery with QoS Continuity according to Mobility, 
User’s preferences and Ambient Environment  
68
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

From the VPxNs, in a given location, we can thus give the 
whole ambient environment of the user. For example, the user 
in his first location has chosen his cell phone as terminal 
during his session, he passes through the selected access 
network and the core network (VPCN1), and he may use the 
service elements (SE2.1, SE1.2 and SE6.2) during his session. 
All the service elements are ubiquitous (of the same color in 
the Figure 2) and distributed on two different platforms (SP1 
and SP2). 
During this session, user mobility occurs, i.e., he changes 
the terminal from a cell phone to a computer, which will cause 
a change in the access and core networks (VPCN2 in the 
Figure 2). This may require a change of a service element to 
adapted to the new terminal, or maintaining the same service 
element on another platform while changing the network or 
the terminal. In the example, an ubiquitous service (SE2.3) on 
another platform (SP2) replaces SE2.1. This change may be 
treated with during the transaction of the calculation of the 
E2E QoS, which selects this ubiquitous component in order to 
guarantee the demanded QoS. After the mobility, the user has 
still two new elements (SE7.1 and SE5.5) adapted to his 
terminal, which replace the previous element (SE1.2). The 
VSC management takes in charge of the efficient replacement 
of the service elements by anticipation. 
We present the E2E Service Delivery Process in the 
following part. 
 
D. Service Delivery Process 
When the user orders the services, the service provider 
firstly provisions the resources to meet his demand. In our 
proposed process, this step is the creation of a “Pre-VPSN”. 
The Pre-VPSN will contain all the services subscribed by the 
user. The service provider will add the necessary services for 
this user. At the session initiation, following his service logic, 
the user constitutes the services that might be used all through 
the session which will be the “VPSN”. Each service element 
in the VPSN belongs to a VSC which manages it dynamically 
during the mobility. During usage, the service elements 
requested will be reserved and constitute a Transaction 
“Active VPSN”. We have illustrated the different steps (Pre-
VPSN, VPSN and Transaction) in the Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3 
Pre-VPSN, VPSN and Transaction processes 
In the following, we detail the processes which manage 
the different steps. 
 
 
Figure 4 
Service Delivery Process and his interaction with Fulfillment and 
Assurance 
For the Order phase, we have the Fulfillment process (Figure 
4). We have two parts: Configuration and Resource. 
• 
The Configuration part takes in charge of service 
elements configuration and activation according to client 
order (Service Configuration and Activation process). 
This process communicates with the process (Service 
Inventory Management) in order to have the available 
services and their configurations. The Configuration part 
sends a request to the Resource part (OSS) to provision 
the demand.  
• 
In the Resource part, we have the provisioning of three 
visibility 
layers 
[15], 
thus 
the 
process 
(VPSN 
Provisioning) provision the service resource. This process 
sends a request to the process (VPCN Provisioning) in 
order to reserve the network resources selected for the 
required services. Then the request is sent to the process 
(VPEN Provisioning) to reserve the user equipments, 
network equipments and service equipments selected for 
the demand. These three processes communicate with the 
data base “Resource Inventory Management” to find the 
available resources, their QoS, their addresses, and etc.  
 
For the Usage phase, we have the Service Delivery process 
(Figure 4). This process manages mobility and changes in the 
user ambient environment. There are two parts in the process: 
• 
In the Configuration part, we have “Service Composition 
Management” which takes in charge of the management 
of the services subscribed by the user. These services 
represent a user's VPSN at his session initiation. The 
VPSN contains all the service elements that the user has 
chosen during his session. The information of these 
elements is stored in the proposed data base: Service 
Composition Inventory (Figure 5). 
  
69
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

 
Figure 5 
Pre-VPSN and VPSN example in Inventory 
• 
In the Resource part, we have the processes of Re-
provisioning of VPSN, VPCN and VPEN. Each VPxN 
auto-manages itself in a dynamic way and re-provisions 
the resources during mobility, preference changes or 
resource degradation. It is the session which deals with 
the aggregation of the three layers in order to handle the 
demanded service with QoS continuity. The “Session 
Management” thus regroups the three layers of re-
provisioning and community management which auto-
manage themselves ensuring session and QoS continuity. 
 
For the Assurance phase, we have the Assurance process 
(Figure 4), where we have the management of VEC, VNC and 
VSC. These components monitor the behavior of the resources 
(the behavior results in QoS). Each resource announces its 
conformity or its non conformity to the contract with the 
members of its community. In the case of a non conformity 
thus of a QoS degradation, the resource is replaced in each 
VPSN, VPCN or VPEN associated by a resource functionally 
and QoS equivalent of the appropriate community. 
In the next section, we detail the mobility management 
treated by VSC and ubiquitous service elements. 
E. Taken into account mobility (VSC and Ubiquious SE)  
The VSC we proposed are built at the deployment phase. 
When a service is deployed in a location it will search the 
ubiquitous service elements that are identical to him in terms 
of QoS and functionality, to represent the service community. 
This community aim to self-manage faults or QoS 
degradation. The goal to have these communities is that, when 
a service element is degraded and filled not its contract it will 
find in its location the nearest and similar service element 
which can replace it in the VPSN. Thus with this concept we 
can anticipate degradations in order to allow service 
continuity.  
During mobility, let us suppose that we have degradation 
in a service element (e.g., SE1.2); degradation is alerted by 
SE1.2 community. This community will carry out the 
replacement of this service element by another equivalent in 
the VPSN and will thus allow service continuity. But before 
replacing this element, we first calculate the QoS of the link 
(transport layer) between this new service element to replace 
(e.g. SE1.3) and the next and previous service element in the 
VPSN (e.g. SE6.5 and SE7.3). 
From the service element QoS table (TABLE I) on Server1, 
Server2 and Server3, we have the QoS of SE1.2, SE1.3, SE6.5 
and SE7.3. 
TABLE I.  
QOS TABLE OF SERVICE  LAYER: SERVER1, SERVER2 AND 
SERVER3  
 
 
From the Transport Layer QoS table (TABLE II), we have the 
QoS of all the links (networks) possible between Server1 and 
Server2, and between Server3 and Server2. Thus to replace 
SE1.2 installed on Server1 by SE1.3 installed on Server2, we 
have {QoSSE1.2, QoS (1-3)’’, QoS (1-3)’} and after replacement we 
have {QoSSE1..3, QoS (2-3), QoS (2-3)’}, which allows maintaining 
the E2E QoS during the current transaction. 
TABLE II.  
QOS TABLE OF TRANSPORT LAYER: SERVER1 AND SERVER2 
 
 
V. 
FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE 
In this section, we show the feasibility of our proposal 
through two parts: For the Model-Driven of our delivery 
process we will present in (§A) the implementation of the 
VSC by JXTA [16] which allows us to anticipate and deal 
with the changes of user's ambient environment in order to 
maintain E2E QoS. To verify the consequence of considering 
the mobility during usage via the service management 
processes, we show in (§B) how our model supports the 
standards of Tele Management Forum. 
A. VSC Implementation in JXTA  
 
As we have explained, the VxC takes in charge of the 
maintenance of the resources (Equipment Element, Network 
Element, Service Element) in each layer, for example, a VSC 
in the service layer contains all Service Elements equivalent 
both in function and in QoS in the service network. In the first 
place, each SE needs to publish its function and QoS values to 
the others and receive the information from the others, so that 
VSCs can be constructed. Secondly, a VSC should have the 
ability to be aware of the change of its SE and to discover the 
unknown SE which can be added into the current VSC. 
 
In our feasibility, we use the JXTA platform, which 
includes a set of open, generalized peer-to-peer (P2P) 
protocols. With the JXTA technology, all the elements can be 
regarded as peers, and can communicate and collaborate with 
each other in a P2P manner by publishing an advertisement 
with the form of language-neutral meta-data structures 
represented as XML documents. Within a sub network, the 
70
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

peers can communicate directly with each other by Peer 
Advertisement. In JXTA, a Rendezvous peer can maintain 
global advertisement indexes of the peers that register to it in a 
sub 
network, 
and 
exchange 
information 
with 
other 
Rendezvous peers of the other sub networks. Therefore the 
peers can get the information of the peers in another sub 
network by communicating with its Rendezvous peer via Pipe 
Advertisement.   
 
In our case, each SE publishes an advertisement including 
its characteristics, such as supported function, designed QoS, 
current location and etc. At the same time, each SE listens the 
advertisements from other peers in its neighborhood, and keep 
in a local table those whose function is the same with itself, 
basing on which a VSC is constructed.  
 
 
Figure 6 
Peer Advertisement published by a SE  
 
In Figure 7, before the VSC is constructed, the two 
elements with the same shape and the same color are two 
elements of the function MCF with the same designed QoS. 
They need to find each other and add each other to its own 
VSC. Each publishes a peer advertisement within the sub 
network shown in Figure 6, and a pipe advertisement (same 
contents as in the peer advertisement) to its Rendezvous so 
that the peers in another sub network can also receive its 
information. When the convergence of this phase is finished, 
the SE of IPTV MCF in platform 1 will know that in platform 
2 there is another SE of MCF which has the same QoS, and 
adds it to its table. Therefore, these two SEs make up a VSC of 
MCF (Figure 7). After being successfully created, the VSC 
will maintain its SEs by the current QoS values in the real time 
in order to help VpxN to adapt to the mobility and the changes 
of the user's ambient environment 
 
 
Figure 7 
Creation of VSC for MCF 
 
B. Valorisation on Standards  
In this section, we show how our model helps in the 
standards. The Tele Management Forum (TMF), one of the 
most general forums in the domain of telecommunication 
management, has proposed a framework to define a complete 
management environment. The TMF includes the Business 
Process Framework (eTOM) [17] which can help service 
providers to define and describe the business and functional 
processes they use, to understand the links between these 
processes, and to identify the working interfaces and external 
entities, in order to structure the basic management Processes.  
This management processes today are disjoined: the service 
is first provisioned following the customer's order, then used 
and assured, then billed [18]. However the NGS requires 
interactions between service logic during the usage. This 
interaction must be dynamic and takes into account the 
NGN/NGS challenges (e.g., User preferences, mobility and 
ubiquity). To meet these new paradigms we proposed to 
incorporate a usage process (Service Delivery) in the eTOM 
cartography. This process responds to NGN/NGS and interacts 
dynamically with the eTOM operations processes. In order to 
have coherence in this interaction we are based on an 
abstraction model of the real world for these processes 
(Fulfillment, Assurance, Billing and Delivery). In this model 
we have models each resource visibility level as a virtual 
private network (VPSN, VPCN and VPEN). We have also the 
VxC model that monitors the behavior of each resource and 
replace it by another ubiquitous resource in the VPxN in the 
case of QoS degradation. This can have a generic reference 
model for the NGN/NGS service management.  
But before the operations processes, we have the Strategy, 
Development and Deployment processes. In order to have 
business continuity from strategy to operations, we have 
proposed the same model that allows consistency between the 
different 
processes. 
Thus 
these 
processes 
exchanges 
information dynamically. In order to be trans-organizational 
and to have the possibility to deploy services that are not 
developed by the provider himself but bought from other 
suppliers, we proposed a separation between the deployment 
and the development processes in the eTOM cartography. We 
also proposed new processes to take into account when 
dealing with the NGN/NGS context. An example of these 
processes is the “Community Creation” (see Figure 8, 
Deployment Process) who creates and manages communities 
in the different visibility level (VSC, VNC and VEC). These 
communities are created at the Deployment phase and 
managed in the operation phase. Thus, our model facilitates 
the relationship between the SIP processes and Operation 
processes. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a dynamic Model-driven Service 
Delivery in an NGN/NGS context with mobility and ambient 
environment. The proposed Service Delivery focuses on the 
service layer, where we use the solutions provided by the 
network (Media Delivery) to guarantee the service continuity.
71
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

Figure 8 
‘Service Delivery’ process integrated in the eTOM cartography.  
 And also the solutions provided by the service platform 
(ubiquity, mutuality, composition and independence of 
services in the transport layer) to ensure QoS and service 
continuity during the session. The proposed model (SE, NLN, 
VPxN and VxC) enables the coherence among the different 
layers. The VSC enables the anticipation of degradation in 
order to ensure the QoS continuity. The implementation of 
VSCs in JXTA, allows us to verify the feasibility of our QoS 
Management by VSCs in P2P. The VSC and Ambient 
Environment concept that we have defined to resolve 
management problems allows taking account into the mobility 
between different ambient areas.  It allows us to make a 
“Semantic Handover” on other triggers criteria that the QoS 
management.  Thus as a future work, we will finalize the 
Semantic Handover automate according to different criteria. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ETSI DTR/USER-00029-1 (TR 102 805-1), “User Group; End-to-end 
QoS management at the Network Interfaces; Part 1: User's E2E QoS - 
Analysis of the NGN interfaces (user case) , Control plan solution: QoS 
signalling”, 2009. 
[2] 
ETSI DTR/USER-00029-2 (TR 102 805-2), “User Group; End-to-end 
QoS management at the Network Interfaces; Part 2: Control and 
management planes solution - QoS continuity, Management plan 
solution: QoS Inter-working ”, 2009. 
[3] 
ETSI DTR/USER-00029-3 (TR 102 805-3), “User Group, End-to-end 
QoS management at the Network Interfaces; Part 3: QoS informational 
structure”, 2010. 
[4] 
J.W. Kim, S.W. Han, D.H. Yi, N. Kim, and C.C.J. Kuo, “Media-
Oriented Service Composition with Servic Overlay Networks: 
Challenges, 
Approaches 
and 
Future 
Trends”, 
Journal 
of 
Communications, Vol. 5, No .5. (2010), pp. 374-389, May 2010. 
doi:10.4304/jcm.5.5.374-389. 
[5] 
J. Fan and M.H. Ammar, “Dynamic Topology Configuration in Service 
Overlay Networks: A Study of Reconfiguration Policies”, - Proc. IEEE 
INFOCOM, pp. 1-12, Spain, 2007. doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2006.139. 
[6] 
M Wang, B Li, and Z Li, “sFlow: Towards Resource-Efficient and Agile 
Service Federation in Service Overlay Networks”, 24th IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Distributed 
Computing 
Systems 
(ICDCS'04), 
pp. 
628 
– 
635, 
24-26 
Feb. 
2005, 
Japan.  
doi:10.1109/ICDCS.2004.1281630.  
[7] 
Z. Wang and J. Crowcroft, “Quality-of-Service Routing for Supporting 
Multimedia Applications”, IEEE Journal on In Selected Areas in 
Communications, IEEE Journal on, Vol. 14, No. 7. (1996), pp. 1228-
1234. August 2002. doi:10.1109/49.536364 Key: citeulike:2831634. 
[8] 
X. Gu, K. Nahrstedt, R.N. Chang, and C. Ward, “QoS-Assured Service 
Composition in Managed Service Overlay Networks”, Proceedings of 
the 23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems 
(ICDCS 
'03), 
June 
2003, 
pp. 
194 
– 
201, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICDCS.2003.1203466. 
[9] 
R. Braynard, D. Kostic, A. Rodriguez, J. Chase, and A. Vahdat, “Opus: 
an  Overlay Peer Utility Service”, Proceedings of the 5th International 
Conference on Open Architectures and Network Programming 
(OPENARCH 
2002), 
pp. 
167 
– 
178, 
August 
2002. 
doi: 
10.1109/OPNARC.2002.1019237. 
[10] N. Simoni and S. Znaty, Book . Gestion de réseau et de service: 
similitude des concepts, spécificité des solutions. ISBN: 2225829802. 
[11] N. Simoni, B. Mathieu, C. Yin, and M. Song, “ Autogestion de service 
par la QoS dans un Réseau Overlay ”, GRES.07, Nov. 2007, Tunisia. 
[12] N. Ornelas, N. Simoni, K. Chen, and A.Boutignon, “VPIN: User-session 
knowledge 
base 
for 
self-management 
of 
ambient 
networks”, 
UBICOMM’08, 
pp. 
122-127, 
Oct. 
2008, 
Spain. 
doi: 
10.1109/UBICOMM.2008.71.  
[13] N.Ornelas, N.Simoni, C.Yin, and A.Boutignon, “VPIN: An event based 
knowledge inference for a user centric information system”, Journal On 
Advances in Internet Technology, Vol. 2,  N° 1, pp. 29-44, Sept. 2009.  
[14] ETSI TS 182 027, V2.0.0, “Telecommunications and internet converged 
services and protocols for advanced networking (TISPAN), IPTV 
Architecture”, Technical specification, 2008. 
[15] S. Kessal and N.Simoni, “Service provisioning oriented QoS in 
NGN/NGS context”, unpublished.  
[16] Book.JXTA 
Java™Standard 
edition 
v2.5: 
Programmers 
guide, 
September 2007. 
[17] TMF-GB921, “Business Process Framework (eTOM) : Business process 
framework”, release 8.0. 
[18] TMF-GB921, “Business Process Framework (eTOM) : Representative 
process flows”, release 8.0. 
72
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

