Query-by-Appearance System for Style-Oriented Media Retrieval 
 
Yuka Koike 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
5322 Endo, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 252-0882, Japan 
t09334yk@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
Shuichi Kurabayashi 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
5322 Endo, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 252-0882, Japan 
kurabaya@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— This paper proposes the Query-by-Appearance 
system that provides an intuitive and effective query-input and 
visual retrieval method for media data, especially e-books, 
based on similarity of content’s layout and color. The unique 
feature of this system is a query-assistance function that helps 
users to input their requirements by utilizing the knowledge 
which have been developed in the field of “Editorial Design”. 
Editorial design is an essential methodology to enrich overall 
appearance of books and magazines. The query input assistant 
retrieves editorial design templates that are similar to the input 
query, and generates images by combining these templates 
with the chosen color scheme. The system then retrieves actual 
e-book images that are similar to those generated from the 
query. Finally, the system visualizes the retrieval results, which 
consist of two relevance scores (layout and color) in a two-
dimensional ranking plot. This assistant mechanism allows 
users to find the desired e-book by submitting a query, which 
consists of simple lines, intuitively. 
Keywords— e-Book; Search Engine; Editorial Design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The proliferation of portable, personal devices dominated 
by a large display, such as tablet computers and smartphones 
[1][2] has made it common for e-books and Web pages to 
viewed on such devices. E-books, in particular, are fast 
spreading; Association of American Publishers reported that 
the total e-book sale from January to October of 2010 
constituted 8.7% of all book sales in the United States [3]. 
Such proliferation and diversity of digital media data 
increase the demand of a system for retrieving them. Generic 
retrieval methods, such as keyword-based search engines and 
content-based image retrieval systems, are not sufficient for 
retrieving them, because users require highly-domain-
specific search quality in such daily-life media data. For 
example, a fashion magazine requires a fashion-domain 
specific query for retrieving it, and an outdoor and nature 
magazine requires different query for retrieving them. It is 
essential to provide a query which is tailored to each type of 
e-books. 
However, common users have difficulty in learning a 
new and specific search method for each type and genre of 
media data. It is important to develop a novel and intuitive 
search engine for those daily-life multimedia data. Visual-
oriented search mechanisms, which do not use text-based 
search methods, are promising because users often memorize 
e-book contents by associating them with their visual 
appearances. We suppose that the overall visual appearance 
of page layout is essential to e-book search. In spite of layout 
being an important factor for bookbinding, there are no 
studies about layout searching method for e-book, because 
conventional systems utilize CBIR (Content-Based Image 
Retrieval) mechanisms for retrieving e-book.  
Toward the above objective, this paper proposes a 
“Query-by-Appearance” system that improves the query 
input process by exploiting the knowledge of book design. 
This system provides a query-generation mechanism that 
enhances and decorates a user’s rough and simple query by 
generating candidates of queries inspired by the initial input. 
This system enables users to find a desired e-book just 
inputting intuitive and simple query alone because the 
system ranks e-books according to the similarity of overall 
compositions, layouts, colors, and overviews, rather than 
detailed and trivial differences between them. We call this 
visually rich search method “Query-by-Appearance”. 
The unique feature of this system is a book style-oriented 
query generation, which is enhanced by the knowledge of 
“editorial design”, for helping users to input a complex and 
sophisticated query by generating candidates of queries. 
Editorial design, developed in the book industry, is an 
essential methodology to enrich and to beautify books and 
magazines by configuring the overall appearance, including 
the visual layout, such as photographs and illustrations. 
Editorial design techniques provide sophisticated way to 
construct and to lay out visual objects' compositions. Our 
“Query-by-Appearance” system utilizes the editorial design 
methods as query templates. The query templates consist of 
layouts and color schemes. When the system receives a 
query, which consists of simple lines, the system applies the 
query templates to enrich and to improve the query, and 
generates the well-organized and colored image query by 
combining the layout templates and the color scheme 
templates. 
We design “Query-by-Appearance” system as an 
embedded system in an e-book format, such as EPUB3. The 
system encapsulates the templates, which are derived from 
the editorial design methods, into each e-book according to 
the style of books such as a fashion magazine and a mystery 
novel. This design principle makes it possible to interpret a 
user’s query with reflecting the target books’ own 
characteristics. A core function of this system is a design-
based template-matching function that compares a user’s 
rough query input with the embedded editorial design 
templates. 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The system is applicable to the following area: 1) 
searching dimly remembered visual contents, such as the title 
of book, web pages, and 2) searching jackets of DVD, CD, 
and packaging of a product by preparing appropriate 
templates. We show a prototype system implementation that 
is embeddable into a media data, by using JavaScript 
supported in EPUB3 and HTML5. This prototype system 
implements self-search mechanism in those media data 
according to the internal page images and images of web 
pages in the browser history. 
The remainder of the paper is structured by follows. In 
section two, we discuss several related studies. In section 
three, we show an architectural overview of our system. In 
sections four and five, we describe the four fundamental 
components and three core functions of our system. In 
section six, we show the prototype of our system. In section 
seven, we evaluate the effectiveness of our system. In section 
eight, we give concluding remarks. 
 
 
Figure 1. A Concept of Query-by-Appearance System for Style-Oriented e-
Book Retrieval by Using Encapsulated Editorial Design Templates for 
Query Generation. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
There are several studies on developing a search engine 
that considers the visual appearance of media. Recently, 
CBIR [4][5] systems have been developed that allow users to 
search for images by visual similarity. Such systems support 
“Query-by-Example,” which requires an example image as 
the query input. However, basically, CBIR methods are not 
suitable to find complex multimedia data such as Web sites 
and e-books because these methods ignore the semantic 
information associated with the images, such as text and 
annotations. Alternatively, a method [6] has been proposed 
to calculate similarity among the visual components of Web 
pages by their overall visual appearance. The system 
proposed in [7] analyzes the visual link structure created by 
assigning numerical weights to each image. This system 
incorporates visual signals into text-based search engines in 
order to improve the accuracy of conventional search engine. 
Those conventional approaches are effective to retrieve 
image data by submitting the detailed query, such as a sketch, 
an example image, and a combination of them. However, it 
is difficult for novices to input such as detailed query, 
especially in the domain of well-designed e-books. Thus, a 
new approach to assist users to create the domain-specific 
query for multimedia data is required. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Figure 2 illustrates an architectural overview of this 
system. Our “Query-by-Appearance” system provides an 
indirect e-book retrieval mechanism that is leveraged by the 
knowledge base of editorial design. This system retrieves the 
e-book images that are similar to editorial design 
characteristics inspired by the query. The results are 
visualized in two-dimensional ranking, such as generated 
query axis and ranking axis. This query-assistance function 
enables users to input layout sketch and color by using Web-
based touch UI, and search e-books through rough visual 
appearances intuitively, by accepting a simple query 
consisting of layouts and colors, rather than technical 
knowledge. 
The system uses the generated e-book image data for 
retrieving an e-book by calculating similarity based on the 
color and structure of appearance. This approach is highly 
effective to develop a Web-based touch UI because this 
system simplifies the query-input task. The touch UI 
visualizes both the layout similarity and the color similarity 
in a two-dimensional matrix. This visualization enables users 
to retrieve the desired e-book according to their preferences, 
which means weights of the layout similarity and the color 
similarity, by selecting sub-matrix in the visualized two-
dimensional matrix. 
The most important function of this system is the query-
assistance function that utilizes both layout and color to 
enrich and extend the input query. As described, this system 
employs a design template database which stores layouts and 
color scheme data. The templates are defined by sets of 
matrices; so, the system is able to select the relevant 
templates by calculating the similarity in layout structure. In 
addition, 20 color schemes are provided by the combination 
of 102 colors.  
This system performs the Query-by-Appearance for e-
books by involving the following six steps: 
1. 
The user inputs a rough layout sketch on the Canvas 
system. 
2. 
Second, the system converts the rough layout query 
input into a matrix, and compares this matrix with 30 
templates that are stored in the knowledgebase. 
3. 
The system generates colored templates by adding color 
to the selected layout templates using the 20 color 
schemes stored in the knowledgebase. The sets of 
colored templates are expanded automatically to sets of 
image matrices, which include the layout structure and 
the color scheme. 
4. 
The system calculates similarity between the expanded 
query matrices and e-book image data stored in an e-
book database. The e-book image data is preliminarily 
clustered into 102 colors. 
5. 
The e-book cover images that contain similar editorial 
design characteristics are visualized in a two-
dimensional ranking with generated query axis and 
ranking axis.  
Raster/Vector Image
Hyper Text
Cascading Style Sheet
Encapsulated Templates 
for Query Generation
JavaScript
EPUB3 File Format
Rendering
“Looks” of Content
Encapsulated Templates 
for Query Generation
JavaScript
“Looks” of Content
Content
Initial Query
Generated 
Queries
Generated 
Queries
Similarity 
Computation
Similarity 
Computation
Query Generation by using 
Editorial Design Methods
A different book provides different 
templates to generate appropriate queries.
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

6. 
Further retrieval is done by selecting a color on a sub-
matrix in the visualized two-dimensional matrix.  
Our visualization mechanisms allow users to retrieve the 
desired e-book according to similarity in layout and color 
scheme.  
IV. 
DATA STRUCTURES 
Our system contains four fundamental components: A) 
Query Matrix, B) Template Knowledgebase, C) e-book 
Database, and D) Visualization. 
A. Query Matrix 
Our system converts each query into a matrix that 
represents the user`s rough input, such as simple lines drawn 
on HTML5 Canvas. We call this matrix a query matrix. The 
query matrix is important for calculating the similarity 
between the user input and the layout templates in the 
knowledgebase. We assign weights to each column as 
follows: if a line passes through a column, 1.0 is assigned to 
the column; if no line passes through a column, 0.0 is 
assigned to it. This weight is assigned to get the inner 
product of the user`s query matrix and layout template 
matrix, as shown in the Template Knowledgebase.  
The query matrix Q is defined as follows: 
  [
      
 
      
 
 
 
      
 
      
] 
where        indicates whether a line is present at [n,m] in 
the query. 
B. Template Knowledgebase 
The system provides matrix structures representing: 1) 
the layout template 2) the assigned-color template, and 3) the 
color scheme. We call the data structures a design template 
structure. All of the above are stored in the Template 
Knowledgebase, which assists in expanding the input queries. 
1) 
The layout template matrix is the set of matrices 
obtained by exploiting the method of editorial design. 
We assign weights to each column as follows: if there is 
most obvious layout border passes through a column, 
1.0 is assigned to that column; the regions surrounding 
1.0, 0.5 is assigned to it; if there is no important layout 
structure to the column, 0.0 is assigned to it. 
The layout template matrix    is defined as follows: 
   [
      
 
      
 
 
 
      
 
      
] 
where        indicates whether a line is present at the 
location [n,m] in the template matrix. 
2) 
The assigned-color template matrix is a set of matrices 
containing numbers from 1 through 5 in each column. 
The system draws color in each column according to 
this number. 1 represents the color that appears most 
often in the image, whereas 5 represent the color that 
appears least often. 
3) 
The color scheme is a set of color data obtained by a 
combination of 102 colors. This system draws colors in 
each column by using this color scheme, to perform the 
expanded queries in order to generate e-book image 
data. 
The color scheme    is defined as follows: 
   〈          〉 
where    denotes each color used in the color scheme, 
and k is the total number of colors in the color scheme. 
In the examples in Figure 3, each color scheme is 
assigned a specific adjective. 
 
20 color schemes are made using a dictionary that defines 
adjectives for color schemes, such as “Romantic”, or 
“Elegant” [8].  
C. e-book Database 
Our system converts JPEG-format image data into the 
matrix structure by clustering the image into 102 colors. We 
call the data structure an e-book database matrix. This e-
book database matrix contains clustered image data that is 
used to calculate the similarity with the expanded query 
matrix obtained from the user input and template 
knowledgebase.  
The e-book database matrix D is defined as follows: 
 
Figure 2. System Architecture of Query-by-Appearance System. 
 
Select the 
most 
relevant
template
Query-by-
Appearance
① Initial 
Query Input
④ Visualization
e-book 
Database 
User inputs a rough 
layout sketch
ranking
…
…
Generated
queries
highly relevant e-book
② Generates queries by using 
editorial design templates
③ Relevance 
Computation
User selects a color 
from color scheme
Applying the encapsulated 
editorial design templates 
for query generation
Query Expansion
…
…
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

  [
      
 
      
 
 
 
      
 
      
] 
where d represents each element of the matrix, and [n, m] 
represent the rows and columns of the image data, 
respectively, in the matrix.  
 
 
Figure 3. Sets of color schemes. 
 
D. Visualization 
The system visualizes the layout and color similarity in a 
two-dimensional ranking. This ranking visualization consists 
of two relevance scores for each cell. The ranking array       
is defined as follows: 
        〈            {     }〉 
  
          〈            {     }〉 
where       to         comprise    for Layout id,    for color 
id,    for layout ranking,    for color ranking, and {     } 
for ranking order on a column, when more than one image 
data has the same layout template and color scheme. The 
order of books in a certain column is decided by color 
relevancy, where p represents the order of the books. 
V. 
CORE FUNCTIONS 
The system contains three fundamental functions: A) 
Selecting the most relevant template, B) Assigning-colors to 
the template C) Query-by-Appearance, and D) Two-
dimensional ranking.  
A. Selecting the most relevant template 
The system selects the most relevant template by 
comparing the user input with the template matrices stored in 
the template knowledgebase. We call this function query 
assistance. The inner product of the transformed user input 
matrix, which consists of line sketched data, and the template 
matrices that are stored in the template knowledgebase, is 
calculated in order to analyze the similarities. A higher value 
for this inner product indicates greater similarity. 
The function is defined as follows: 
       (   )   ∑ ∑              
 
   
 
   
 
where        indicates whether a line is present at position 
[i,j] in the query matrix, and        indicates whether a line is 
present at the position [i,j] in the template matrix. This 
calculation measures the line similarity between the query 
matrix and the template matrix by checking all the pixels. 
B. Assigning-colors to the template 
The system assigns colors 1 through 5 to the template, 
according to the users selected color scheme and number of 
colors. This function is important for generating a colored 
template, which contains template, keyword, and number 
information. The function is defined as follows: 
       (                 )    [
        
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
        
] 
where template TL indicates the template data that contains 
numbers 1 to 5 for drawing, a keyword indicates the name 
of the color scheme, and number indicates the number of 
colors in color scheme to draw on the template. 
C. Query-by-Appearance 
Our system calculates the correlation between the 
generated query matrix and e-book image data matrices in 
order to retrieve the relevant e-book image. The Query-by-
Appearance operation is defined as follows: 
    (   )   ∑ ∑         (             )  
 
   
 
   
 
           
     (     (  
|     |
   ))  (|     |)  ( |     |) 
 
 
 
where        denotes a color at the specific point in the 
generated query matrix, and consists of HSV components H1, 
S1, and V1.        denotes a color at a specific point in the e-
book image data, and consists of H2, S2, and V2. This 
calculation measures the color similarity between the 
expanded queries and the e-book image data for each block. 
We employ Godlove’s delta equation [9] to calculate the 
distance between two HSV colors. 
D. Two-dimensional ranking 
Our system provides a two-dimensional visualization 
mechanism for presenting the results of the e-book image 
search. This visualization enables users to select desired 
books on the basis of the layout and the color similarity. The 
system takes a wider sample of template data compared to 
the user`s input, in order to display the retrieval results 
interactively on the basis of the choice of layout and color. 
This system employs the following three steps: 
Step-1. The generated queries are shown on the horizontal 
axis. Each column contains a query with template and 
color. 
Step-2. The ranking of e-book image data is shown on the 
vertical axis.  
Romantic
Elegant
Natural
Clear
Sporty
Dynamic
Avant-garde
Gorgeous
Sexy
Wild
Modern
Chic
Formal
Classic
Somber
Noble 
Ethnic
Cool
Dundee
Fresh
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Step-3. The system stacks the e-book image data according 
to the similarity score of queries and e-book meta data 
in each cell.  
VI. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
We have implemented a prototype system for Query-by-
Appearance that calculates the similarity between generated 
queries and editorial design templates. The prototype system 
is implemented using HTML5 Canvas and JavaScript as 
shown in Figure 4. The important feature of this 
implementation is that it uses standard web technologies, 
which are also used by the current EPUB3 specification. So, 
we can apply our method to EPUB3-based e-books without 
significant modification. The implemented system consists 
of the following three modules:  
 
View: The user sketches the layout query on HTML5 
Canvas and selects a color scheme. The system 
calculates the similarity between the queries and 
template knowledgebase. 
 
Controller: The retrieval is done by clicking on the 
search button. 
 
Model: The retrieval target database and two templates 
(layout matrix, color scheme) are encoded in the JSON 
format and embedded in the HTML5.  
 
 
Figure 4 A Visualization of e-book search engine. 
 
VII. EVALUATION 
A. Outline of experimental studies 
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of our 
system by examining the retrieval precision for our generated 
queries. The task of this experiment is to clarify the 
effectiveness of retrieving book cover image by utilizing the 
knowledge of “editorial design”. We compare the retrieval 
precision using two search methods as follows: method-1) 
uses queries generated using only layout templates, and 
method-2) uses queries generated by integrating layout 
templates and color scheme templates. We show that the 
integration of a layout template and a color template has 
significant contribution to the e-book retrieval result. 
In this experiment, we have prepared: 1) 300 book cover 
images from Amazon.co.jp, 2) five queries, 3) five answer 
data sets for each query. The queries and answer data sets are 
set up considering the basic structure of “editorial design”, as 
specified as follows: 1) the symmetrical layout, 2) the 
diagonal layout, 3) the layout with gravity point on center. 
We chose the following five queries (Figure 5): 
Query-1.  Draw the shape of a cross to divide the canvas into 
four sections. 
Query-2.  Draw a vertical line along the center of canvas to 
divide it into two sections. 
Query-3.  Draw two horizontal lines on the canvas to divide it 
into three sections. 
Query-4.  Draw a rectangle in the center of the canvas to 
divide it into two sections. 
Query-5.  Draw two vertical lines on the canvas to divide it 
into three sections. 
We have used color schemes that consist of four colors (as 
shown in Figure 3). The system calculates the similarity 
between those queries and generated e-book image data.  
 
 
Figure 5. The Experimental Queries drawn on the Canvas. 
 
B. Experimental Results 
In this section, we have evaluated the retrieval precision 
of generated queries in order to clarify the effectiveness of 
our approach. Figure 6 shows the results of the retrieval. Our 
approach gives two average scores for retrieved rank. The 
first score is the average of correct answer data shown in the 
top 20, which has retrieved only by template relevance. The 
second score is the average rank of correct answer data that 
has the chosen color scheme.  
Figure 7 shows the resulting scores of this experiment. 
The vertical axis is the retrieved score. The horizontal axis is 
the variations of the query that is the template of correct 
answer sets. We calculate the average scores of each query in 
the top 20 ranking as shown in Figure 6. This result shows 
that method-2 (integrating both layout and color templates) 
achieves better retrieval precision than method-1 (using the 
layout template only), since a superior rank has been 
assigned to the result corresponding to the query. This result 
shows that the system effectively retrieves e-book images by 
using layout template and color scheme. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper proposes a “Query-by-Appearance” system 
for e-books, which provides an intuitive and effective query 
input and visual retrieval method base on the similarity in 
overall layout and color scheme. The unique feature of this 
system is the query-assistance function that exploits 
structural design and analysis knowledge from the field of 
“editorial 
design”. 
Editorial 
design 
is 
an 
essential 
methodology to enrich the appearance of books and 
magazines. The query input assistant retrieves the editorial 
design templates that are similar to the input query, and 
generates actual e-book images by combining the color 
templates and the layout templates. Then, the system 
retrieves e-book images that are similar to the generated e-
Query-1
Query-2
Query-3
Query-4
Query-5
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

book image. Finally, the system visualizes the retrieval 
results, which consist of two relevance scores (layout, color) 
in a two-dimensional ranking; generated query axis and 
ranking axis. This assistant mechanism is intuitive because it 
allows users to find a desired e-book by submitting a query 
that consists of simple lines. 
As a future work we are planning to develop a prototype 
system that supports full-spec EPUB3, and to perform a 
feasibility study by evaluating scalability and effectiveness 
of our approach applied to the existing e-books. 
 
 
Figure 6. The results of top 20 retrieved images. The combination of Query 
3 and "cool"(left), and Query 1 and "sporty"(right). 
 
 
Figure 7. The result of retrieved rank of "only layout template" and "colored 
template". 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by SCOPE: Strategic 
Information 
and 
Communications 
R&D 
Promotion 
Programme of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications, Japan: “Kansei Time-series Media Hub 
Mechanism for Impression Analysis / Visualization / 
Delivery Intended for Video / Audio Media”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Gartner, “Gartner Says Worldwide PC Shipments in First 
Quarter of 2011 Suffer First Year-Over-Year Decline in Six 
Quarters”, 
13 
April 
2011, 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1632414. 
[2] IDC, “Nearly 18 Million Media Tablets Shipped in 2010 with 
Apple Capturing 83% Share; eReader Shipments Quadrupled 
to More Than 12 Million, According to IDC”, 10 March 2011, 
http://www.idc.com/about/viewpressrelease.jsp?containerId=
prUS22737611. 
[3] American Association of Publishers, “AAP Reports October 
Book 
Sales”, 
2010, 
http://www.publishers.org/main/PressCenter/Archicves/2010_
Dec/AAPReportsOctoberBookSales.htm, (accessed 2010-9-
10). 
[4] Baeza-Yates, R. and Ribeiro-Neto, B. “Modern Information 
Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology behind Search (2nd 
Edition),” Chapter 14, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2011. 
[5] Datta, R., Li, J., and Wang, J. Z. “Content-Based Image 
Retrieval - Approaches and Trends of the New Age,” in 
Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGMM International Workshop 
on Multimedia Information Retrieval, ACM: New York, NY, 
USA, 2005. 
[6] Furusawa, T., Watai, Y., Yamasaki, T., Aizawa, K. “A Visual 
Similarity Metric for View-based Web Page Retrieval,” The 
Journal of the Institute of Image Information and Television 
Engineers, 
Vol. 
62, 
No.2, 
2008, 
pp.209-215, 
DOI: 
10.3169/itej.62.209 (In Japanese). 
[7] Jing, Y., and Baluja, S. “PageRank for Product Image Search,” 
In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World 
Wide Web (2008), pp. 307-316, April 2008. 
[8] Nagumo, H. “Color Scheme Imaging”, ISBN-13: 978-
4766111705, Graphics-sha, 2000 (In Japanese). 
[9] Godlove, I. H. “Improved Color-Difference Formula, with 
Applications to the Perceptibility and Acceptability of 
Fadings”. J. Opt. Soc. Am., Vol. 41, NO. 11, pp.760-770, 
1951. 
 
 
9
6.8
6.2
5.9
9
6.9
5
4.5
3.2
7
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
Retrieved Rank (Lower is Better)
Variations of Query (Layout Template ID: From T1 to T5)
method-1: layout template only
method-2: layout and color integrated
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

