A Novel Risk-based Approach for Online
Community Management
Bassem Nasser, Vegard Engen, Simon Crowle, Paul Walland
IT Innovation Centre
University of Southampton
Southampton, United Kingdom
{bmn, ve, sgc, pww}@it-innovation.soton.ac.uk
Abstract—Online communities play a pivotal role in inno-
vation, marketing, corporate expertise management, product
support and advertising. Communities in the order of millions
of users are becoming the norm. However, this proliferation
of demand is not met with intelligent, scalable, easy to use
community management approaches. Current methods are based
on basic statistical tools that aggregate data for the community
owner/moderator to interpret and take appropriate actions. The
data reﬂects only the current state of the community, which
does not constitute an effective warning system of future events.
Moreover, the community health becomes highly dependent on
the owner’s skill, interpretation, intimate knowledge of the
community and its evolution path. This paper presents a proac-
tive, extensible, risk-based management framework supporting
advanced analytical services for managing online communities.
The solution allows community owners to focus on the commu-
nity objectives and proactively manage favourable/unfavourable
events at the user and community level.
Index Terms—Risk management; online communities; risks
and opportunities; modelling; simulation; prediction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Online communities generate major economic value and
form pivotal parts of corporate expertise management, facili-
tating knowledge dissemination and communication as well
as boosting performance and innovation [1], [2]. Research
by McKinsey [3] shows that companies see a number of
beneﬁts in using collaborative technologies not only within
their organisational boundaries but also for the purpose of
reaching out to their customers, partners and suppliers. These
advantages include faster access to knowledge and experts;
increased customer and employee satisfaction; and a reduction
of communication time and travel costs.
These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by further analysis by Deloitte
and Frost & Sullivan [4], [5], [6], examining how social
collaboration technologies impact business performance. Their
research have shown that organisations who decide to deploy
social networking tools within their organisational boundaries
have much greater chance to improve their performance, attract
customers, and establish proﬁtable and long-term relations
with them. Whilst there is a clear gain provided by such
infrastructures, the management and preservation of their
efﬁcient operation is not trivial [7]. Communities can exceed
millions of users and infrastructures must support hundreds of
millions discussion threads that link together billions of posts.
Current management solutions fail to meet current challenges
of scale and growth, let alone the support for understanding
and managing the business, social and economic objectives of
the users and the host [1], [2], [8].
Current solutions usually consist of a dashboard for moni-
toring a set of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs, e.g., page
views, number of posts, average time for responding/closing
users’ queries) judged relevant for the users’ and the commu-
nity’s quality of service and experience. These KPIs present
the state of the community at a certain point in time, current
or past, but offer little to support what managers really need
to effectively manage risks in the community; an insight onto
the future state of the community. Community managers can
be proactive if they have knowledge such as the likelihood
that an expert’s activity will drop within the next month and
the impact on the community if this happens, the likelihood
that they will miss their performance target of solving any
query within 3 days, or the likelihood that negative sentiment
will be developed on a certain topic. This information about
the future state of the community is not provided by current
management approaches. A successful community requires
that the manager be empowered with new tools to break out of
the current reactive framework by predicting the community
future trends and the impact of any intervention across the
community landscape as well as decide whether this is in line
with the set of community objectives.
ROBUST [9] is an EC FP7-ICT project targeting an inte-
grated, coherent view of the community dynamics in relation
to the community objectives, offering a consistent, proactive
approach to the management of the community. ROBUST
is addressing the next generation of community management
where the focus is not limited to managing failures but to
manage risks and opportunities [7], [10], [11]. This paper
presents the risk management work done in the ROBUST
project, focusing on the risk management process applied
to online communities and the architectural design of the
proposed framework developed.
In Section II, we review the existing approaches for com-
munity management and their limitations. Section III present
the risk management context from risk management standards
perspective. Section IV details the risk speciﬁcation work
being done in the ROBUST project in the context of online
communities. In Section V we present the risk management
framework architecture. The conclusions and future work are
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

addressed in Section VI.
II. MANAGING ONLINE COMMUNITIES
Whilst the overall trend in adopting social technologies
is positive, recent stories of BASF [12] and Alcatel-Lucent
[13], who successfully deployed social networking technolo-
gies within their organisational boundaries, conﬁrm that the
beneﬁts of these tools come at a cost. First, transforming
the company into a social, collaborative network of employ-
ees, customers and partners is a disruptive step that breaks
down traditional, hierarchical business models upon which
a company relied (possibly from its inception). Second, the
key to the successful transformation is not the technology
itself (e.g., deploying wikis, social portals, messaging tools)
but the understanding how this technology can be applied by
people to achieve company-level goals (such as fast access
to knowledge and experts, collaborative problem solving and
cut in communication cost). This, in turn, not only requires
clear understanding of the goals that such social systems
need to fulﬁl, but more importantly, involves the continuous
monitoring and steering of such systems to make sure they
continue to satisfy company-level objectives.
This goes beyond the capabilities of information system
management solutions [7] because of two main reasons:
networked communities do not simply consist of machines
and software, but are also communities of people and human
behaviours; additionally, social software creates networked
social environments in which individuals self-select whether
and how they participate. The challenge in this ecosystem is
to understand and manage the bidirectional relations govern-
ing how interactions between community members inﬂuence
the overall community dynamics and impact its health and
performance.
Given that online communities (and social media in general)
is a relatively new phenomenon that emerged on a large scale
a couple of years ago, we are just beginning to understand
that the maintenance of such complex information ecosystems
requires active management effort realised by highly skilled
experts that take on the role of community managers. Unfor-
tunately, for many ﬁrst-time social media ‘integration’ efforts
the ofﬁcial community management staff is often non-existent
or represented by a few non-dedicated volunteers [14]. Tom
Humbarger (Marketing and Social Media Strategy manager at
AppleOne) is one of the few people who has done an analysis
of community activity with and without a community manager.
His observations [15] show that in the absence of community
management, the activity (whilst not immediately terminal)
slows signiﬁcantly in a fairly short amount of time. The
industry’s reaction focused on the human aspect by allocating
more community staff. For example, in the case of BASF, the
active management has led to the involvement of a number
of full-time community managers and part time involvement
of staff (for governance) and solution stakeholders/owners. In
addition, BASF utilises the power of numerous advocates who
volunteer time to spread awareness and best practices across
the company, as well as users who build and help facilitate
communities of practice.
As social media adoption continues and thousands of online
communities emerge, the role of community management
matures and is perceived not only as a risk mitigator but
also as a way to ensure that participation takes place, ROI
is measured and business goals are being met [7], [10],
[11]. Sophisticated data mining tools for sentiment and topic
analysis are becoming essential in the monitoring platforms in
order to provide more insights about the community [16], [17],
[18]. However, these tools did not change the management
methodology that is centered around monitoring the current
state of the community, for instance, by looking at the daily
growth rate of new members, calculating churn rates, identify-
ing topics and sentiments, etc. Whilst this approach provides
valuable information about the community’s current or past
state, it offers little support to the community manager in their
endeavour to analyse the monitoring information and infer
conclusions about the community’s future. For example, it is
hard for the community manager to predict the likelihood of
a user developing negative sentiments or quantify the impact
on the community caused by loss of key community members
or a decrease in their activity. As a consequence, the correct
choice of management actions is a mere trial and error process.
To address these limitations, this paper presents a novel risk-
based approach for online community management in which
decisions of community manager are supported by a suite
of automated tools that constitute a community management
platform. The goal of such a platform is not only to assist in
the performance of tedious and time consuming routine tasks,
such as monitoring of the current community state but, more
importantly, to support pro-active community management
involving the detection of risks and opportunities that may
happen within the community in the near future. The key
concepts behind the proposed solution along with its design
architecture are presented in the remainder of this paper.
III. RISK MANAGEMENT
Many risk management methodologies can be found in the
literature ranging from the generic [19] to the domain-speciﬁc
[20] . The aim of this section is to shed light on the deﬁnitions
of risk and risk management viewed by some of the highly
acclaimed standards rather than offer an exhaustive list of
them.
Management of Risk (M_o_R) [21] is a methodology pub-
lished by the OGC (Ofﬁce of Government Commerce). It
deﬁnes risk as “an uncertain event or set of events that, should
it occur, will have an effect on the achievement of objectives.
A risk is measured by a combination of the probability of a
perceived threat or opportunity occurring and the magnitude
of its impact on objectives”. M_o_R considers threats to be
the events with negative impact whereas opportunities are
interpreted to have a positive impact.
The Risk Management standard [22] adopted by FERMA
deﬁnes risk as “the combination of the probability of an event
and its consequences”. It also notes the potential for events
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

and consequences that constitute opportunities for beneﬁt
(upside) or threats to success (downside).
ISO 31000 “Risk Management Principles and Guidelines”
[19] deﬁnes risk as the “effect of uncertainty on objectives
... An effect is a deviation from the expected — positive or
negative”. This deﬁnition agrees with the above descriptions
on the uncertainty element of risk and its positive/negative
relation to the objectives. However this controversial deﬁni-
tion deﬁnes the risk as the impact (effect) of the uncertain
event. ISO 31000 still refers to the traditional view of the
risk being “characterized by reference to potential events
and consequences, or a combination of these”. This ISO
standard also indicates that “risk is often expressed in terms
of a combination of the consequences of an event and the
associated likelihood of occurrence”.
In ROBUST we specify a ’risk’ in terms of an uncertain
event (or set of events), which, if it occurs, affects the
objectives of the community owner negatively; we reserve
the ‘opportunity’ term for events that affect the objectives
positively. It is possible for an event to affect multiple objec-
tives negatively and positively at the same time. The boundary
between risk and opportunity can get blurry, however, we
argue that the community owner’s decision on how to deal with
the event ultimately classiﬁes it as a risk or opportunity. This
can be based on an implicit or explicit hierarchy of prioritised
objectives.
The above standards have similar deﬁnitions of risk manage-
ment being mainly the set of activities systematically applied
to direct and control an organisation with regard to risk
(identiﬁcation, assessment and treatment). Risk management
process, according to ISO 31000, consists of phases establish-
ing the context, risk assessment (identiﬁcation, analysis, and
evaluation), risk treatment, communication and consultation,
and monitoring and review - see Fig. 1.
Figure 1. ISO 31000 risk management process
In the ﬁrst phase, the context is speciﬁed, including the
objectives and scope of the analysed system (online commu-
nity in this case). Risk identiﬁcation deals with the identiﬁ-
cation and speciﬁcation of the risks and their attributes (e.g.,
events as well as their causes and potential consequences).
Risk analysis involves developing a detailed understanding
of the risk and determining the likelihood and consequences
(i.e., level of risk) . A risk evaluation process classiﬁes the
risks according to acceptable risk criteria in order to make
decisions about which risks need treatment and the priority
for treatment implementation. The treatment options could be
to avoid the activity that gives rise to the risk, modifying the
risk likelihood or consequence (enforcing countermeasures),
retaining/accepting the risk or sharing it with another party.
ISO 31000 does not distinguish treatment actions for a risk
from those of an opportunity. However, M_o_R offers more
speciﬁc options shown in Table I, below:
Table I
RISK AND OPPORTUNITY RESPONSES
Risk response
Opportunity response
Avoid
Exploit (ensure that event occurs
and impact realised)
Reduce (likelihood or impact)
Fallback (reduce impact)
Transfer to 3rd party (e.g.,
insurance)
Enhance (likelihood or impact)
Share
Accept
Reject (no action)
The ROBUST framework supports an organisation’s risk
and opportunity management activities by providing tools that
assist in risk identiﬁcation, expression, analysis, evaluation and
decision making in the treatment process. The tools do not
mandate the adoption of any speciﬁc risk management process.
The details of the framework are presented in the following
sections focusing on how ROBUST addresses each of these
phases.
IV. ONLINE COMMUNITY RISK SPECIFICATION
A. Risk Components
As per the deﬁnitions in Section III, risks and opportunities
are deﬁned within the context of the organisation and its objec-
tives. These objectives may be strategic, tactical or operational.
The scope can be the whole organisation, a department or a
sub-system such as the online community. The online com-
munity can have its own objectives (e.g., knowledge transfer
between users, improved quality of experience, increase the
number of community members) or inherit the organisations
objectives (e.g., reduce operational costs).
The objectives can then be used in order to identify the
uncertain events that may affect them positively or negatively.
The objectives can be viewed as the scope for the process
of identiﬁcation of risks and opportunities. An event is the
(one or more) occurrences or non-occurrences of a change of
a particular set of circumstances. An event can lead to a range
of (certain or uncertain) impacts on objectives. The impact
level or severity may not be static and may vary according to
different factors (time, life-cycle phase, community features,
etc.). An impact scale is usually produced in order to quantify
the risk impact (e.g., high, medium, low). The scale should
be speciﬁed in terms of impact criteria in line with the
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

objectives (e.g., in terms of activity level drop, content quality
deterioration or ﬁnancial loss).
B. Event Speciﬁcation
In ROBUST we classify risk/opportunity events based on
their source being either internal or external. The external
events are those that originate from external actors whom
are not part of the community. Examples of external events
include the introduction of new legislation affecting the online
community or the launch of a competitor’s community leading
to the churn of users.
Figure 2. Event categories
The internal event category comprises those events that
originate from within the community, such as a modiﬁcation
of its structure or a change of an individual user’s attributes
(see Fig. 2). The events can be deliberate, accidental or the
result of the normal evolution of the community. The internal
events can be decomposed into three categories:
1) Community features: This includes any changes related
to the community attributes like content, structure, users,
performance, etc (e.g., drop in community members or
new joiners)
2) User features: This includes any changes related to the
user attributes including role, connections, position (e.g.,
change of role, network centrality or activity level)
3) Stakeholder(s) actions: this includes deliberate or acci-
dental actions performed by the community managers or
users (e.g., delete or block user, user ﬂaming others)
Note that the three events categories are inter-dependent since
actions by stakeholders inﬂuence community features as well
as user features. The same applies to the external events that
can inﬂuence the internal changes. Moreover, within the same
category e.g., community features category, changes in the
number of community users may inﬂuence the community
activity level. In ROBUST, we focus on the internal events
mined from community data logs that contains users’ activities
time series. Given the event deﬁnitions we have established,
events can then be formulated as: Variable(s) attaining a certain
value (i.e., threshold if numeric) or Variable(s) changing from
one value to another (i.e., states).
An example of the former is ’the drop in community
members exceeding 50%’, and for the latter, ’a user X chang-
ing their role in the community from contributor to lurker’.
Although these are examples of risks formed by a single event,
there can also be compositions of multiple variables to produce
more complex events. For instance the community owner may
be interested in the joint event of an “expert user change of
role from contributor to lurker” and “increase in community
new joiners” in order to anticipate the load.
With risks/opportunities speciﬁed in such a measurable
manner, it is possible to automatically perform monitoring and
assessment in order to compute the likelihood of the events,
analyse them and later decide on a treatment strategy. In the
following Section, we introduce the ROBUST Risk Manage-
ment Framework and how it supports the risk management
cycle.
V. THE ROBUST RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
IMPLEMENTATION
The risk management framework that is presented here
takes a central role in a platform that is produced in the
ROBUST project. It is designed to be ﬂexible, extensible
and to allow the integration of new modules to address a
multitude of risks and opportunities in different communities.
An overview of the framework is given in Section V-A,
followed by sections describing how the framework can be
used in the risk management process discussed in Section III
for managing online communities. For this, a examples based
on the SAP Community Network will be given [23].
A. Overview
An overview of the main components in the framework is
given below in Fig. 3, comprising three layers: presentation,
core and support layers.
Figure 3. Risk management framework components
The presentation layer mainly includes the interfaces avail-
able to the community manager to interact with the system
capabilities. It consists of a Risk Editor, a Dashboard that
incorporates the results of the risk analysis and visualisation
tools, and treatment workﬂow monitor to manage the manage-
ment response to risks and opportunities.
The core layer consists of a Risk Registry, a Workﬂow
Engine that enacts the treatment workﬂows and an Evaluation
Engine that orchestrates support layer services in order to
evaluate the risk and opportunity events.
In the support layer, different services may be made avail-
able that can perform analytical tasks. We distinguish between
two types of services:
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

• Predictor Service: provides event prediction capabilities
based on the community data (could be done via batch
processing of historical data or real-time stream process-
ing).
• Simulation Service: allows simulating the community
evolution under a variety of “what if” scenarios and, thus,
enabling the assessment of the impact of the different
events and actions.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, above, the support services are
connected to the core system via an Enterprise Service Bus
(ESB) to improve the robustness and extensibility of the
framework. This means any number of services can be made
available for bespoke communities, exposing different func-
tionalities to address any risks or opportunities identiﬁed for
the respective community. To validate the ideas described in
this paper, we developed a prototype of the proposed risk
management framework based on Java technologies using
Apache ServiceMix ESB as a backbone. The prototype was
applied on one of the ROBUST use cases: the SAP Com-
munity Network (SCN) [23]. This is an online platform of
multiple communities for customers seeking support about
SAP products. Community members (whether SAP employees
or not) are encouraged to contribute to the community by
being awarded points for answering other users’ questions.
The following sections describe the implemented functionality
and interactions supporting the main risk management phases
discussed in Section III taking as example the risk of missing
a performance target: solving any customer query within 3
days.
B. Establishing the Context
The framework provides plugins to visualise and analyse
online communities as part of establishing the context (roles,
topics, network). The manager provides the system with details
of the sources of community data, as data batches or real-
time streams, and speciﬁes the community objectives. In
our case, this included, inter alia, quality of experience and
performance, fostering sharing and healthy community growth
[24].
C. Identiﬁcation and Speciﬁcation
The identiﬁcation phase is based on the community objec-
tives and manager’s knowledge of their own community events
and impacts. ROBUST tries to minimise the latter dependency
via Simulation Services that allow exploring the future state
of the community in various “what if” scenarios. The manager
can then identify the relevant events and can proceed with the
speciﬁcation using the Risk Editor.
The speciﬁcation includes the risk (opportunity) title, owner
(who is responsible for this risk management), scope (one
user, group of users or community) as well as the risk
event(s) and impacts (on the objectives speciﬁed above). In
our scenario, the event “not providing customer support within
a reasonable time” was identiﬁed as a risk. This is expressed
in a measurable form of a ROBUST risk as “thread response
time exceeds a threshold t”.
The information about supported events originates from the
Predictor Services, each of which supports one or more event
prediction capabilities. We have developed a Predictor Service
that can estimate the likelihood of the above event using
agent-based modelling (details are out of scope in this paper).
Advanced tools developed in the ROBUST project are being
integrated to address events based on topics, sentiment and
quality of the content [25], as well as the roles and behaviour
of users [26].
D. Assessment
This phase entails design-time as well as run-time activities.
In the design-time, the community manager needs to develop
the understanding of the event by quantifying any variables
like the above threshold, t. This can be guided by the man-
ager’s own observations/knowledge, existing online communi-
ties’ best practices or inherited from the organisation’s policy
as it was in our example (3 days). Moreover, the event impact
on the objectives is also deﬁned in this phase by indicating
the relative potential impact (positive or negative) the event
may cause, should it occur. In our example, we can estimate a
negative impact on all objectives speciﬁed above, particularly
on high performance and quality of experience objectives [24].
The above speciﬁcation is stored in the Risk Repository
and used at run-time by the Evaluation Engine (EE). The EE
orchestrates the associated Predictor Service to evaluate the
event likelihood within a future time window, such as the next
week or month. The future time window predictions can be
made for depends on the capabilities of the respective Predictor
Service. Prediction capabilities of the system can always be
extended by implementing a Predictor Service API, which
includes a generic way of describing the supported events and
any required conﬁguration parameters.
The results of the Predictor Services are returned asyn-
chronously to the EE, which stores the results in the Risk
Repository and notiﬁes the Risk Dashboard to give real-time
updates to the risk manager. An example of a visualisation
provided in the Dashboard is a risk/opportunity matrix, which
shows the likelihood of the risk on the vertical axis and
its impact (positive or negative) on the horizontal axis. The
manager can then evaluate the risk and opportunity levels and
proceed with the treatment phase if required.
E. Treatment
The Risk Editor allows the manager to assign a treatment
workﬂow as a response (mitigate, fallback or exploit) for the
risk or opportunity during design-time and enacting it during
run-time. Treatments are workﬂow based plans that address
one or more risks (or opportunities). Each treatment plan
includes a linear or parallel series of actions that can (some
could be optional) be carried out by the risk/opportunity owner.
Whilst some of these actions may require direct and manual
intervention in the community, such as blocking a malicious
user, others may dictate community exploration using other
ROBUST tools, for instance, using a Simulation Service
to explore and evaluate the potential outcomes of planned
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

actions. The Treatment Workﬂow Monitor implemented in our
framework allows storing, retrieving and enacting BPMN 2.0
based workﬂows to support semi-automated responses based
on the open source Activiti API [27]. In our example a simple
treatment workﬂow can be based on “allocating additional
internal resources, or attracting external resources by providing
double points for answering questions during the next period”.
The impact of these actions can be evaluated, before actual
enactment, using our “what-if” Simulation Service by adding
more agents or changing the agents’ behaviour.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
This paper has reviewed the current practices of community
management and showed the need for a new generation
of tools focusing on proactive risk management. We have
presented a framework that goes beyond analysing the current
state of the community; focusing on predicting whether risks
or opportunities are likely to occur in the future and what their
impacts may be on the community.
ROBUST supports online community risk and opportunity
identiﬁcation, speciﬁcation, assessment, monitoring, visuali-
sation and treatment. To our knowledge, such a risk-based
approach has not been directly exploited for online community
management. In our initial evaluation with SAP and IBM
community owners, it was pointed out that risk management
expertise can be an obstacle for the approach acceptance.
However, the promising capabilities provided by this approach
justiﬁes the minimal effort of acquiring the expertise. Though
scalability of the framework was addressed by design (mod-
ular, loosely coupled services), the accuracy of predictions
depend on the predictor services of which we developed Gibbs
Sampler, Compartment Model, and Agent-Based Simulation
Service [9]. The loosely coupled design guarantees that other
statistical approaches can be integrated if needed.
The prototype framework currently implemented does not
model the interdependencies between risks. This is not a trivial
problem that we are intending to tackle in our future work.
Portability of the system is crucial and requires supporting
different online community data sources and models. In RO-
BUST, a common community data model based on SIOC [28]
is being developed for this purpose. We are in the process of
updating our prototype to support the new community data
model thus allowing any community to use the framework by
simply mapping their data schema to SIOC.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been carried out in ROBUST, an EC sup-
ported 7th Framework Programme ICT project (FP7-257859).
REFERENCES
[1] A. Mocan, F. Brauer, and W. Barczynski, “D8.1: Provisioning and Prepa-
ration of the SAP Community Network Data,” EC FP7-ICT ROBUST
Project,
2011,
http://www.robust-project.eu/results/provisioning-and-
preparation-of-the-sap-community-network-data/view [retrieved: April
2013].
[2] I.
Ronen,
S.
Ur,
and
I.
Guy,
“D7.1:
IBM
Employee
Net-
work
Data
and
Requirements,”
EC
FP7-ICT
ROBUST
Project,
2011, http://www.robust-project.eu/results/ibm-employee-network-data-
and-requirements/view [retrieved: April 2013].
[3] McKinsey,
“The
rise
of
the
networked
enterprise:
Web
2.0
ﬁnds its payday,” http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/The_rise_of_the_
networked_enterprise_Web_20_ﬁnds_its_payday_2716, [retrieved: April
2013].
[4] Frost & Sullivan, “Meetings Around the World: The Impact of Collab-
oration on Business Performance,” http://www.jmorganmarketing.com/
wp-content/uploads/2010/03/impactcollab.pdf, [retrieved: April 2013].
[5] ——, “Meetings Around the World II: The Impact of Collaboration on
Business Performance,” http://www.jmorganmarketing.com/wp-content/
uploads/2010/03/impactcollab.pdf, [retrieved: April 2013].
[6] Deloitte,
“Social
software
for
business
performance.”
http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-UnitedStates/Local%20Assets/
Documents/TMT_us_tmt/us_tmt_%20Social%20Software%20for%
20Business_031011.pdf, [retrieved: April 2013].
[7] R. Happe, “Announcing the 2012 State of Community Management
Report,”
http://www.slideshare.net/rhappe/2012-state-of-community-
management-12162160, [retrieved: April 2013].
[8] M. Boniface, J. Pickering, E. Meyer, C. Cobo, A. Oostveen, B. Stiller,
and M. Waldburger. (2011) D3.1 First Report on Social Future Internet
Coordination Activities. EC FP7-ICT SESERV Project. [Online].
Available: http://www.scribd.com/doc/68338983/D3-1-v1-5
[9] EC FP7-ICT ROBUST Project, http://www.robust-project.eu/, [retrieved:
April 2013].
[10] R. Happe, “The 2010 State of Community Management Report. Best
Practices from Community Practitioners,” http://community-roundtable.
com/socm-2010/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[11] ——, “Announcing the 2011 State of Community Management Report,”
http://community-roundtable.com/socm-2011/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[12] D. Hinchcliffe, “Enterprise 2.0 success: BASF,” http://www.zdnet.com/
blog/hinchcliffe/enterprise-20-success-basf/1939?tag=search-results-
rivers;item19, [retrieved: April 2013].
[13] ——,
“Enterprise
2.0
Success:
Alcatel-Lucent,”
http:
//www.zdnet.com/blog/hinchcliffe/enterprise-20-success-alcatel-
lucent/1917?tag=content;siu-container, [retrieved: April 2013].
[14] ——, “Community management: The essential capability of successful
Enterprise
2.0
efforts,”
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/hinchcliffe/
community-management-the-essential-capability-of-successful-
enterprise-20-efforts/913, [retrieved: April 2013].
[15] T. Humbarger, “The Importance of Active Community Management
Proved With Real Data,” http://tomhumbarger.wordpress.com/2009/
01/13/the-importance-of-active-community-management-proved-with-
real-data, [retrieved: April 2013].
[16] Simply Measured, http://simplymeasured.com/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[17] Sysomos, http://www.sysomos.com/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[18] Facebook Insights, http://www.sysomos.com/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[19] ISO/IEC, 31000:2009 Risk management - Principles and guidelines, ISO
Std., 2009.
[20] ——, ISO/IEC 27005:2011 Information technology - Security techniques
- Information security risk management, ISO Std., 2011.
[21] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce (OGC), Management of Risk: Guid-
ance for Practitioners, Ofﬁce of Government Commerce (OGC) Std.,
2010.
[22] IRM, A Risk Management Standard, IRM Std., 2002.
[23] SAP, “SAP Community Network,” http://scn.sap.com/, [retrieved: April
2013].
[24] A. Mocan, F. Brauer, and B. Massarczyk, “D8.2: Business Anal-
ysis
of
the
SAP
Ecosystem,”
EC
FP7-ICT
ROBUST
Project,
2011, http://www.robust-project.eu/results/business-analysis-of-the-sap-
ecosystem/view [retrieved: April 2013].
[25] C. Lin, Y. He, R. Everson, and S. Rueger, “Weakly-supervised joint
sentiment-topic detection from text,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1134–1145, 2012.
[26] S. Angeletou, M. Rowe, and H. Alani, “Modelling and Analysis of
User Behaviour in Online Communities,” in Proc. of the International
Semantic Web Conference, 2011, pp. 35–50.
[27] Activiti Business Process Management platform, http://www.activiti.
org/, [retrieved: April 2013].
[28] SIOC, “Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities,” http://sioc-
project.org/, [retrieved: April 2013].
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

