Digital Uses and Practices in Secondary School 
Achieving Digital Literacy  
Digital Collaborative Space (DCS) 
Hafida Hammadi 
DICEN IDF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France  
E-mail: hafi_12@yahoo.fr 
 
 
 
Christian Bourret 
DICEN IDF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
E-mail: christian.bourret@univ-eiffel.fr
 
 
Abstract— Students' and teachers' digital uses and practices in 
the frame of Digital Collaborative Space (DCS) at Georges 
Seurat Secondary School in Courbevoie, France, will be 
discussed in our paper. In this context, our qualitative research 
is based on an average of 240 hours of observation across a 
variety of digital projects. This includes 80 hours per academic 
year beginning in 2021. We sampled 397 students in grades 6 
through 9. 
 
Keywords- digital literacy; digital workspace; digital practices; 
digital education; media literacy; virtual learning environment; 
virtual collaborative system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Our qualitative research is based on observations 
conducted during instructional sessions in OZE92 [1], the 
school’s Digital Collaborative Space. As part of media and 
information education, several digital projects [2][3], 
including the media class, have been launched. Students use 
synchronous collaborative documents to construct projects 
while working online under the teacher's guidance. Our 
ecosystem-based teaching model is founded on the 
constructivist approach, the Adaptive Structuring Theory 
(AST) hypothesis [4], the Personal Learning Environment 
(PLE) [5][6][7], and the notions of educational and 
pedagogical innovation associated with André Tricot [8][9]. 
How are Digital Collaborative Spaces (DCS) used to 
organize, 
and 
shape 
social 
interactions, 
digital 
competencies, and knowledge in the classroom and online? 
Understanding, examining, and quantifying the obstacles to 
digital behavior and tool adoption in the educational setting 
are the main goals of our qualitative research. 
II. 
SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING 
 
Our 
research 
emphasizes 
the 
principles 
of 
the 
"constructivist" approach to communication sciences and has 
connections to educational sciences in "Communication 
studies: Constructivist approaches" by Alex Mucchielli and 
Claire Noy [10]. 
This work is built on the Anthony Giddens and Poole 
Scott (AST) hypothesis. As the foundation for human action, 
AST theory highlights the social structures, laws, and 
resources given by institutions and technologies [4]. 
Technology frameworks and action frameworks are 
continuously linked.  
Along with Graham Attwell [5], 2006, and Mark Van 
Harmelen, 2006 [6], who place the student at the heart of the 
system, PLE stands for Personal Learning Environment. It is 
a set of tools or an ecosystem that helps learners create and 
organize their learning. 
III. 
QUANTITATIVE STUDY’S OBSERVATIONAL 
FRAMEWORK 
 
We are in the school's DCS. The education community, 
including teachers, students, parents, and administration, has 
access to this space. This is where they can exchange, share, 
communicate, learn, be informed, etc. In this space, we set 
up the model. It contains Alex Muchielli’s four elements of 
the situation, teachers and students as actors. It also contains 
the context, the project, and finally, the equipment DCS 
(Figure 1).   
All these elements are connected by the different 
processes proposed by Alex Mucchielli, which are: action-
process logic, which links a project to the device, the 
process of projecting action forms, which links the project 
to the context, interactional practice procedures, which link 
students to the device and, finally, the positioning process, 
which links students to the context. 
These processes set up interactions between all these 
elements, which lead to the emergence of meaning 
correlated to students' cultural, social, and individual 
environments. In addition, feedback between peers and 
between students and teachers is part of this model. This 
enhances instruction, increases knowledge, and promotes 
new digital abilities. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-069-8
ICIW 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

                      
 
Figure 1. Qualitative study's observational framework. 
 
 
IV. 
DIGITAL COLLABORATIVE PROJECTS 
 
We have established several projects within this 
framework. O Lab Citizen, WebTV project, Fake News 
project, European Language and Culture project, etc. An 
example of the Media Class project is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Media Class digital space. 
 
      This image in Figure 2 illustrates the Digital 
Collaborative Space (DCS) accessible through the School's 
Digital Workspace (SDW). It is a yearly class project in 
DCS using synchronous documents. Students in the 6th 
grade receive one/two hours of training per week on topics 
such as the online documentary research method, the criteria 
for validating online information, the different press articles, 
the inverted pyramid, copyright, image rights, etc. 
The project aims at the following:  
 
 
 
▪ 
Develop student collaboration. 
▪ 
Gain experience working in groups. 
▪ 
Students shall be trained in media education. 
▪ 
Enhance the student’s ability to think critically 
regarding digital information. 
▪ 
Start with journalistic writing. 
▪ 
Learn technical digital skills (word processing, 
document sharing, etc.). 
▪ 
Learn to work individually and remotely. 
▪ 
Discover how to use internal documentary 
resources (GDPR – General Data Protection 
Regulation). 
V. 
QUALITATIVE RESULTS  
A pair of students collaborate on a synchronous 
document to develop their WebTV project. We provide 
them with tools, resources, instructions, etc. The teacher and 
students still have online access to the project. Significant 
outcomes to elaborate on are as follows: Digital 
Collaborative Space encourages student social engagement. 
All the components of the DCS play a fundamental role in 
achieving 
the 
intended 
educational 
objectives 
[9]. 
According to Alex Mucchielli, the learning situation is made 
up of the project, the context, the actors, and the digital 
device (Figure 3). Interactions between each of these 
elements explain how students learn and why this process 
makes sense. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-069-8
ICIW 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

     
 
 
Figure 3. Elements that constitute a situation (Alex Mucchielli). 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
Collaborative work is being developed inside the DCS 
framework. In a safe environment, students are given 
resources and directions from the teacher. Social engagement 
among students is active. These characteristics place students 
in an excellent position for academic success. The 
quantitative study is going to enhance our research this year. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] OZE92, 
https://enc.hauts-de-seine.fr/my.policy, 
[retrieved: 
June 
2023]. 
[2] J. Boissière and E. Bruillard, "The digital school: a constructible and 
immersive learning environment", Ed. Armand Colin, 2021, p. 367. 
[3] R. Hétier (Directed by),  "Education's use of digital technology", Ed. 
Le bord de l’eau, 2021, p. 253.  
[4] M. Bia Figueiredo and A. Adrot, "Gerardine DeSanctis and Marshall 
Scott Poole - The founders of adaptive structuring theory” in "Great 
Authors in Information Systems", 2018. p.291 – 309.  
[5] G. Attwell,  “Personal Learning Environments-the future of 
eLearning?”, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228350341_Personal_Learn
ing_Environments-the_future_of_eLearning, [retrieved: June 2023]. 
[6] O. Liber and M. Johnson, “Personal Learning Environments”, 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220095391_Personal_Learn
ing_Environments, [ retrieved: June 2023]. 
[7] D. Gillet, "Personal learning environments: learners in control",  In 
"Learning with Technology", 2010, pp. 193-201. 
[8] A. Tricot, "Educational innovation: myths and realities", Ed; Retz, 
2017,  p.160. 
[9] A. Tricot, https://www.canotech.fr/a/enseigner-avec-le-numerique-
esprit-critique-et-travail-collaboratif, [retrieved: May, 2023]. 
[10] A. Mucchielli and C. Noy, "Communication studies: Constructivist 
approaches", Collection U, Ed. Armand Colin, 2005, P.240, chap. 9, 
pp. 165-189. 
[11] E. Morin, The seven pieces of knowledge known for future education, 
Ed. Seuill- UNESCO 1999, p.71. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-069-8
ICIW 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

