Issues in Conducting Expert Validation and Review and User Evaluation of the 
Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework and Method 
Kewalin Angkananon 
Electronic and Computer Science (ECS)  
University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK 
ka3e10@ecs.soton.ac.uk 
Mike Wald, Lester Gilbert 
Electronic and Computer Science (ECS)  
University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK 
mw@ecs.soton.ac.uk, lg3@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Abstract—A Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework has 
been developed to support designers and developers design and 
develop technology enhanced interactions for complex 
scenarios involving disabled people. Issues of motivation, time, 
and understanding when validating and evaluating the 
Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework were identified 
through a literature review and questionnaires and interviews 
with experts. Changes to content, system, and approach were 
made in order to address the identified issues. Future work will 
involve detailed analysis of the expert review and validation 
findings and the implementation of a motivating approach to 
user evaluation.  
Keywords - validation; expert review; user evaluation; 
framework; interaction  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This paper focuses on the issues involved with expert 
validation and review and user evaluation of the Technology 
Enhanced Interaction Framework (TEIF) and Method. The 
TEIF has been adapted from and extends the work of Dix [1] 
and Gaines [2] to support developers and designers design 
and develop technology enhanced interactions for complex 
scenarios involving disabled people. A review of interaction 
frameworks showed that many frameworks focus on people 
to people communication in the same time and at the same 
place but not using technology to enhance communication. 
Some frameworks address many interactions between 
humans and computers and Dix’s framework for Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work [1] seems to address some of 
the possible interactions but it misses out some important 
interactions in the same time and at the same place situations 
such as people using technology to interact with real objects. 
In Dix’s framework, the participants communicate with other 
participants in what is called “direct communication”. 
Furthermore, the participants also interact with artefacts 
(man-made technology tools) by “controlling” or “acting”. 
Sometimes an artefact is shared between the participants; in 
this case, the artefact is not only the subject of 
communication 
but 
can 
become 
a 
medium 
of 
communication, called “feedthrough”. In communication 
about work and the artefacts of work, various means are used 
to refer to particular artefacts, and Dix terms this “deixis”, as 
shown in Figure 1. However, no current framework 
addresses all of the interactions covered by the Technology 
Enhanced Interaction Framework explained in the next 
section. As information and communication technology has 
become more important in society, many researchers have 
been concerned with how to use technology to support 
communication between people and improve interactions 
between people, technology and objects [3] - [9].                   
A comprehensive review of existing frameworks [10] 
confirmed that there has, however, until now been no 
framework that has helped technology designers and 
developers consider all of the possible interactions that occur 
at the same time and in the same place.  Section II briefly 
explains the Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
and Method. Section III describes the research methods used. 
Section IV presents the pilot study findings. Section V 
summarises conclusions and future work. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGY ENHANCED INTERACTION FRAMEWORK 
AND METHOD 
The Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
supports developers and designers design and develop 
technology 
enhanced 
interactions 
involving 
people, 
technology and objects and has seven main components as 
shown in Table I and an architecture shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  The Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
The following scenario describes some problems faced 
by hearing impaired visitors at a museum and it is used as 
an example to help explain the TEIF Method by providing 
experts and users with requirements for an example 
technology solution developed using the framework. The 
TEIF method which has been explained in detail elsewhere 
[11], [12], involves 19 requirement questions based on the 
framework’s components and a wide range of technology 
suggestions based on the answers to these questions.  
 
People
direct 
communication
Technology
Objects
control
 information retrieval
control, information 
transmission & storage
technology-mediated-
information retrieval
control, information transmission & storage
Information retrieval, technology-mediated-
communication
deixis
deixis
direct 
interaction
direct 
interaction
technology-mediated-
interaction
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
  
 
 
TABLE I.      THE TECHNOLOGY ENHANCED INTERACTION FRAMEWORK 
Main 
Component 
Main Component of Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework 
Sub-component 
Example 
People 
Role 
A person has a role when communicating with others (e.g., presenter, audience, peer). Roles normally 
come in pairs such as speaker and audience (e.g., teacher and student or owner and visitor) and peer to 
peer (e.g., student and student or visitor and visitor). 
Ability/ 
Disability 
People have abilities and disabilities which can affect their use of technology or understanding of 
language and which can lead to communication breakdown (e.g., physical, sensory, language, culture, 
communication, Information Technology (IT)). 
Objects 
Dimension 
Objects have 2 dimensions (2D) or 3 dimensions (3D), and a 3D object may have a 2D representation. 
Property 
Objects have colour, shape and size. 
Content 
 
Objects have content which is human readable (text, pictures, audio, video) and machine readable (QR 
code, AR tag, barcode, RFID tag, NFC). 
Technology 
Electronic  
Electronic technology has stored information, is online (e.g., internet, phone network) or offline (e.g., 
not connected to the internet or phone network), and is mobile (e.g., smartphone) or non-mobile (e.g., 
desktop computer). 
Non-electronic  
Non-electronic technology is used to store information in objects (e.g., writing with a pen on paper) 
and is mobile (e.g., pen) or non-mobile (e.g., full-size desktop typewriter).          
User Interface 
People interact with technology through its user interface (e.g., touch screen, keyboard). 
Application  
or Service 
Electronic technology is an application (e.g., dictionary) or a service (e.g., weather forecast).  
Cost 
Technology has cost (e.g., of hardware, software, maintenance).   
Interactions  
and 
Communication 
People-People  
(P-P) 
 
People communicate verbally (speak, listen, ask, answer) and non-verbally (lip-read, smile, touch, 
sign, gesture, nod). When communicating, people may refer (speak or point) to particular objects or 
technology – this is known as deixis. 
People-Objects     
(P-O) 
People interact with objects for two main purposes: controlling (e.g., touch, hold or move), and 
retrieving information (e.g., look, listen, read, in order to get information or construct personal 
understanding and knowledge). 
People-Technology  
(P-T) 
People control technology (e.g., hold, move, use, type, scan, make image, press, swipe) and transmit 
and store information (e.g., send, save, store, search, retrieve). 
People-Technology 
-People (P-T-P) 
People use technology to transmit information to assist communication with (e.g., send sms, mms, 
email, chat, instant message) other people. 
People-Technology 
-Objects (P-T-O) 
People use technology (e.g., point, move, hold, scan QR codes, scan AR tag, use camera, use compass) 
to transmit, store, and retrieve information (send, save, store, search, retrieve) to, in, and from objects. 
Time/Place 
Place 
Same and different time and place yield four categories:  same time (ST) and same place (SP), 
different time (DT) and same place (SP), different time (DT) and different place (DP), same time (ST) 
but different place (DP). 
Time 
Context 
Location 
Location affects the use of technology (e.g., indoors, outdoors). For example GPS does not work well 
indoors. 
Weather  
Condition 
Weather condition may affect the use of technology (e.g., rainy, cloudy, sunny, windy, hot, cold, dry, 
wet). For example, the mobile phone screen doesn’t work well in sunshine.  
Signal Type  
and Quality 
Signal type can affect the quality of electronic technology (e.g., broadband, GPS, 3G, 4G). 
Background  
Noise 
Background noise can affect the communication particularly for hearing impaired people (e.g., 
background music, crowded situation). 
Lighting  
Light can affect the interaction (e.g., Inadequate light, too bright).  
Interaction 
Layer 
Culture 
Cultural layer includes countries, traditional, language and gesture (e.g., “hello” is a normal greeting 
used in the culture). 
Intentionality  
Intention layer involves understanding, purpose and benefit (e.g., the intent is a greeting). 
Knowledge  
Knowledge layer involves facts, concepts, procedures, and principles (e.g., how to spell the word 
“hello”). 
Action  
Action layer involves actions and behaviours (e.g., pressing the correct key and not hitting 
neighbouring keys). 
Expression  
Expression layer describes how actions are carried out (e.g., whether action is correct, accurate, 
prompt). 
Physical  
Physical layer is the lowest layer at which people interact with the physical world (e.g., the button is 
depressed and so sends the electronic code for the letter to the application). 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table II shows two of the technology suggestions with 
explanations. Although the TEIF can be applied to any 
disability, only one disability is mentioned in the scenario to 
help keep the example short and easy to understand.   
“Suchat Trapsin allocated some parts of his house to 
become the Museum of Folk Art and Shadow Puppets, in 
Thailand. There are exhibits of shadow puppets inside the 
museum, but there is no information provided in text format 
because Suchat normally explains the history and tradition 
in Thai by talking to visitors. He presents the same 
information in the same order every time. Chuty (who has 
been hearing impaired since birth) and her parents (who 
have some hearing loss due to their age) are local people 
who visit the museum. Suchat starts the talk by explaining 
about the exhibits. During the talk, Chuty and her parents 
find it very difficult to hear Suchat clearly. Chuty asks 
Suchat some questions about the exhibits. Suchat answers 
the questions, but Chuty misses some of the words. While 
Chuty and her parents are watching the shadow puppet 
show, they cannot hear the conversation clearly because of 
the background music, which is part of the show. It is also 
fairly dark which makes lip-reading very difficult for them. 
Suchat would like to have a technology solution that makes 
it easier for Chuty and her parents to understand him. There 
is good Wi-Fi at the museum so he would like to use 
Chuty’s and her parents’ smartphones to keep his costs 
low.” 
III. 
RESEARCH METHEDOLOGY 
A. Pilot Study 
Validation and review of the framework by experts was 
undertaken using an online system before engaging with the  
users (designers). In this study, the combination of online 
questionnaire on the system and interviewing were chosen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The online questionnaire gave experts time to complete the 
questionnaire as they could choose their preferred time and 
place and   also could stop and return to the questionnaire 
whenever they wanted. Using the online questionnaire helps 
experts to see   a   prototype   of   the   system  so  they  can  
give  more suggestions or comments about how to design the 
layout of the system. However, it might result in confusion 
between validating or reviewing the questionnaire and the 
system. Therefore, in the analysis of the results it was 
important to note whether the comments were about the 
system or the framework. For example, in the pilot test 
respondents gave comments about the slow response of the 
online system, which is not an issue about the content. The 
online questionnaire makes it easy to analyse the data and 
read the comments compared to the paper based system but 
doesn’t help when the expert requires clarification of the 
questions or misunderstands some points. Therefore, the 
study also used interviews to discuss with the experts about 
any 
unclear 
information. 
Having 
constructed 
the 
questionnaire, it is important to pilot it before giving it to 
experts to validate and review as it is difficult even for an 
experienced questionnaire designer to get a questionnaire 
completely right the first time. Questionnaires must be 
piloted on a small scale sample of people characteristic of 
those in the survey.  
 
To pilot the validation and review, one experienced 
accessibility expert and two experienced designers/ 
developers responded to an online questionnaire. Based on 
their responses changes were made to both the content and 
system to improve the questions, response times and layout 
as summarised in Table III. The pilot study participants 
were shown all these changes and confirmed that they were 
satisfied with them. 
TABLE II.      EXAMPLES OF TECHNOLOGY SUGGESTIONS 
 
 
 
Technology  
suggestions 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation 
Which requirements the technology meets 
1a.improve communication 
2a.same time/ same place 
3a.presenter-audience 
6b. speaker speaks Thai 
7b. presenter speaks Thai  
9a. hearing impaired  
11a. people – people 
11b. people - objects 
12a.online technology 
13a.mobile devices 
14a.pre-prepared  speech 
16a. indoor 
17a. noise 
17e.inadequate lighting 
18a. low cost solution 
19a. work with smart phones 
Total Score 
1. Mobile 
web site 
A Mobile Web refers to access to the world wide web, i.e. 
the use of browser-based Internet services, from a handheld 
mobile device, such as a smartphone,  a feature phone or a 
tablet computer, connected to a mobile network or other 
wireless network. 
ü 
 
ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü ü 16 
2. Pre-
prepared 
caption 
Captions are text versions of the spoken word. Captions 
allow the content of web audio and video to be accessible to 
those who do not have access to audio. More information 
about captions see: http://webaim.org/techniques/captions/ 
ü ü ü × 
× 
ü × 
ü ü ü ü ü × 
ü ü ü 12 
 
 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
B. Triangulation 
Triangulation is a technique used to ensure the validity 
and credibility of the results [13] - [15] and methodological 
triangulation was used based on theory from existing 
frameworks, expert validation and review, and user 
evaluation. Validation is an important process particularly  
 
 
when an instrument is being developed to measure the 
construct in the context of the concepts being studied [16]. 
Without validation, untested data may need revision in a 
future study [17]. Checking reliability normally comes at the 
question wording and piloting stage as if an item is 
unreliable, then it must also lack validity [18], [19]. An 
expert review is a process asking the opinions, suggestions, 
feedback or comments from experts. For example, subject 
TABLE  III.      PILOT STUDY FINDINGS 
Category of changes 
Result of changes 
Content 
Spelling and grammar mistakes 
Correct and more understandable 
Rewrite instructions 
Clearer 
Rewrite descriptions 
Clearer 
Add explanation of the technology suggestion 
tables 
Help respondents understand why technologies have ticks or crosses in cells corresponding to  
requirements 
Improve content  
Make it clear and understandable without  assuming knowledge 
Change the image tables to html tables 
Make the table accessible, now can copy the content in order to make change, can link to the websites 
were provided, can provide explanations in tooltip 
System 
Remove the logic and always display comment 
box and question  
System processing was slow therefore logic didn’t display question before user moved on to next 
question and the processing icon at the top of page was out of view unless the user scrolled up 
Choice, force entry to move on or just reminder 
remind the respondents to provide the answer but allow blank entry 
 
TABLE IV.      THE ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF  THREE USER EVALUATION APPROACHES 
Approaches  
Main Advantages 
Main Disadvantages 
1: Read scenario and design solution then  
read and understand TEIF & Self evaluate 
-­‐ Less time for participants than approaches 2 and 3 
-­‐ Designers may find designing more enjoyable than 
just reading and answering questions as in 1 
-­‐ No opportunity to actually use the 
framework for design 
2: Read scenario and design solution then read and 
understand TEIF then design solution again & 
build 
and 
get 
disabled 
person 
or 
expert 
understanding needs of disabled person to evaluate 
 
-­‐ Designers may find it more enjoyable to design 
and develop and test and evaluate a real solution 
with disabled people 
-­‐ Developing a working technology solution and 
evaluating it with disabled users provides greater 
face validity to the evaluation 
-­‐ Most time for participants as will spend 
much time to design and build the 
software 
 
3: Read scenario A and design solution A then read 
& understand TEIF and suggested solution A then 
read scenario B and design solution B using 
framework and example solution design patterns 
(e.g., A, C, D, E) then add their solution to the 
patterns and Self evaluate 
 
-­‐ Designers may find it more enjoyable and 
motivating and engaging than 1 or 2 by using 
framework with patterns to design a new solution 
to a new scenario.  
-­‐ Designers may find it more motivating than other 
approaches by taking part in helping their peers in 
designing technology and will be able to see the 
value of the framework for helping build a large 
number of patterns. 
 
-­‐ Participants spend more time than 
approach 1 
 
 
TABLE V.      THE PROBLEMS AND POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS OF USER EVALUATION APPROACHES 
Problem Type 
Actual Problem 
Possible Solution 
Motivation 
If it takes a long time to finish the task it’s 
difficult to find the participants 
- Reward (i.e., prize, put their name on published paper) 
Individual designers may get bored if just 
reading and answer the questions  
-­‐ Get them to design because the nature of designers like designing more 
than reading 
-­‐ Inviting a group of people who have the same interest in designing and 
get them to interact so becomes a more interesting task 
-­‐ Help them to see how their work will be of value to others 
Time 
Individuals designing using the new framework 
take too much time 
-­‐ Working in a team might be quicker 
Understanding 
Framework is difficult to understand 
-­‐ Redesign the task so it helps understanding in as short a time as possible  
-­‐ Select participants with a good level of understanding of the task	  
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

matter experts are asked to check content of questionnaires 
or appropriateness of wording and terminology of items [20].  
The validation of the Technology Enhanced Interaction 
Framework 
was 
considered 
by 
two 
groups: 
designer/developer experts and accessibility experts. The 
design experts focused on the main and sub-components 
while accessibility experts focused on checking the 
accessibility aspects. After the expert review and validation, 
user evaluation involving real users (designers) will be used 
to 
evaluate 
the 
Technology 
Enhanced 
Interaction 
Framework. Ryan and Deci [20] stated that there are two 
types of motivation: intrinsic motivation, which refers to 
motivation that is animated by personal enjoyment, interest, 
or pleasure and is usually contrasted with extrinsic 
motivation, 
which 
is 
manipulated 
by 
reinforcement 
contingencies. Normally, extrinsic motivations are rewards 
(e.g., money) for showing the desired behavior, and the 
threat of punishment when misbehaving. In order to engage 
the participants to become interested and engaged in a task 
which involves spending a lot of time thinking about and 
understanding a new idea, both intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation and Interaction Design components need to be 
considered. An important issue that can arise when users 
evaluate a new idea or concept using a prototype system is 
that they evaluate the system rather than the idea. Using a 
low fidelity prototype (e.g., paper) rather than a high fidelity 
prototype (e.g., a functioning website) can sometimes help 
the user focus on the idea rather than the system. However 
some users may find it more difficult to evaluate the 
potential of an abstract concept or idea than a concrete 
product 
[21]. 
Possible 
ways 
in 
which 
the 
designers/developers 
might 
evaluate 
the 
Technology 
Enhanced Interaction Framework will be considered before 
finally deciding on the method to be used. The advantages 
and disadvantages of three of these possible approaches are 
summarized in Table IV and problems of motivation, time 
and understanding and their possible solutions are presented 
in Table V. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Issues of motivation, time and understanding when 
validating and evaluating the Technology Enhanced 
Interaction Framework were identified through a literature 
review and piloting questionnaires and interviews. Changes 
to content, system and approach were made in order to 
address these issues. Future work will involve detailed 
analysis of expert review and validation findings and the 
implementation of a motivating approach to user evaluation. 
The updated user evaluation plans based on the analysis of 
the findings will also be presented at the conference. 
 
REFERENCE 
[1] A. J. Dix, "Computer supported cooperative work - a 
framework," Springer Verlag, pp. 23-37, 1994. 
[2] B. R. Gaines, "A conceptual framework for person-computer 
interaction in complex systems," Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 18, pp. 532-541, 
1988. 
[3] E. Berne, Games People Play – The Basic Hand Book of 
Transactional Analysis, New York, Ballantine Books. 1964. 
[4] A. Dix, “Challenges for Cooperative Work on the Web: An 
Analytical Approach.” Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW), 6, 135-156, 1997. 
[5] A. Dix, J. Finlay, D.G. Abowd, and R. Beale, Human-
Computer Interaction, Madrid, Spain, Prentice Hall, 2004. 
[6] D. Laurillard, Rethinking University Teaching: a framework 
for the effective use of educational technology, London, 
Routledge, 1993. 
[7] E. Rukzio, B. Gregor, and S. Wetzstein, “The Physical 
Mobile Interaction Framework (PMIF).” Technical Report 
LMU-MI-2008-2, 2008. 
[8] Y.T. Sung, K.E. Chang, H.T. Hou, and P.F. Chen, “Designing 
an electronic guidebook for learning engagement in a museum 
of history.” Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 74-83, 2010. 
[9] D. Vyas, A. Dix, and A. Nijholt, “Role of Artefacts in 
Mediated Communication”, CHI 2008, Florence, Italy: ACM 
SIGCHI, 2008, 
[10] K. Angkananon, M. Wald, and L. Gilbert, “Technology 
Enhanced Interaction Framework”, 6th Annual International 
Conference on Computer Games, Multimedia and Allied 
Technology. pp 30- 35, 2013. 
[11] K. Angkananon, M. Wald, and L. Gilbert, “Designing Mobile 
Web Solutions for Interaction Scenarios Involving Disabled 
People”, Advances in Computer Science, 2013. 
[12] K. Angkananon, M. Wald, and L. Gilbert, “Using the 
Technology Enhanced Interaction Framework for Interaction 
Scenarios involving Disabled People” 2nd International 
Conference on Advances in Information Technology, 2013. 
[13] L. Cohen and L. Manion, Research methods in education: 
Routledge, 2000. 
[14] H. Altrichter, A. Feldman, and P. S. Posch, Teachers 
investigate their work; An introduction to action research 
across the professions: Routledge, 2008. 
[15] T. O'Donoghue and P. K. O'Donoghue, Qualitative 
Educational Research in Action: Doing and Reflecting: 
Routledge, 2003. 
[16] D. F. Polit and C. T. Beck, "The content validity index: are 
you sure you know what’s being reported? Critique and 
recommendations.," 2006. 
[17] H. Coombes, Research Using IT. New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
[18] J. Bell, Doing Your Research Project A guide for first-time 
researchers in education, health and social science. England: 
Open University Press, 2010. 
[19] C. Ramirez, "Strategies for subject matter expert review in 
questionnaire design.," presented at the the Questionnaire 
Design, Evaluation, and Testing Conference, Charleston, 
2002. 
[20] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, "Intrinsic and Extrinsic 
Motivations: Classic Definitions and New Directions," 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 25, pp. 54-67, 
2000. 
[21] Y.-k. Lim, A. Pangam, S. Periyasami, and S. Aneja, 
"Comparative analysis of high- and low-fidelity prototypes 
for more valid usability evaluations of mobile devices," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on 
Human-computer interaction: changing roles, Oslo, Norway, 
2006. 
 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

