A Review On E-learning: Perspectives And Challenges 
 
Yosra Mourali1,2,3, Maroi Agrebi1, Houcine Ezzedine1, Ramzi Farhat2, Mohamed Jemni2 , Mourad Abed1 
1 Univ. Polytechnique Hauts-de-France, CNRS, UMR 8201 - LAMIH - Laboratoire d’Automatique de Mécanique et 
d’Informatique Industrielles et Humaines Valenciennes France 
2Research Lab. LaTICE, University of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia 
3Faculty of Economics and Management, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia 
email: yosra.mourali@etu-uphf.fr, {Maroi.Agrebi; Houcine.Ezzedine; Mourad.Abed}@uphf.fr, ramzi.farhat@esstt.rnu.tn, 
mohamed.jemni@fst.rnu.tn  
 
Abstract—E-learning has been receiving increasing attention in 
recent 
years. 
Many 
educational 
organizations 
have 
implemented Technology Enhanced Learning Environments 
(TELE) to improve student learning performance. This paper 
presents an overview of e-learning area, with a goal of 
providing references to fundamental concepts and identifying 
challenges 
for 
the 
broad 
community 
of 
e-learning 
practitioners. Until now, pedagogical content has been 
considered as a critical issue. Thus, we discuss recent content 
personalization's studies and the most important approaches. 
Keywords-E-learning; 
Technology 
Enhanced 
Learning 
Environments (TELE); Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC); 
Dropout Problem; E-learning Content Evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Distance education or distance learning has existed for 
centuries, before the advent of the Internet. The way of 
practicing has evolved with the development of technologies. 
In the beginning, mail was used to send homework and 
receive corrections. By 1921, courses were broadcast in the 
United States. From 1939, it was the turn of the telephone 
and television. Since 1990, distance learning has emerged in 
the United States and Canada with the development of the 
Internet. Today, we are using TELE that allow us to do 
everything we have done by correspondence.   
This study gives a historical overview of the field of e-
learning and provides details on the existing challenges, 
focusing on those regarding the dropout rate of learners.  
In spite of the limits that exist, e-learning offers 
acceptable solutions. This paper is designed to inform 
practitioners, policy developers and other stakeholders about 
the necessity of e-learning, which is becoming an important 
factor for education as well as business [1][2]. We dedicate 
this paper to those who want to reflect more deeply upon the 
adaptive capacity of e-learning to technological mutations 
[3]. This paper can interest, also, those who want to gain a 
greater understanding about how e-learning is a promoting 
field of scientific research.   
The aim of this study is to identify key concepts, studies 
and issues, to highlight the learning dropout phenomenon 
and make recommendations especially for data scientists to 
guide future research towards the improvement of 
pedagogical content. For the purpose of this review, 
electronic database like Google scholar, ScienceDirect and 
JSTOR were searched using keywords such as e-learning, e-
learning definition, MOOC, learner dropout. Selection 
criteria included: articles published in English, articles 
focusing on e-learning, recent articles. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 begins by 
giving general panorama of the paper. In Section 2 we 
present the concept of e-learning, underline the content 
personalization issue and trace the advances in TELE. In 
Section 3, we highlight the Massive Open Online Course 
(MOOC) revolution and examine some taxonomies. In 
Section 4, we draw attention to the most interesting 
challenge:  the dropout rate of learners in e-learning. In 
Section 5, we finish by a conclusion, in which we give 
foretaste of our future work. 
II. 
E-LEARNING 
E-learning or electronic learning, literally means learning 
on the internet. Sangra et al. [4] identified four definitions 
categories, where each category focus on a specific aspect of 
the neologism: technology, knowledge, communication and 
pedagogy. 
The 
first 
category, 
Technology-Driven 
Definitions, portrays e-learning as the use of technology such 
as the web and electronic media for learning. The second 
one, Delivery-System-Oriented Definitions, presents e-
learning as a mean of accessing knowledge. However, in the 
third category, Communication-Oriented Definitions, e-
learning is considered like a communication, interaction and 
collaborative tool. The last category, Educational-Paradigm-
Oriented Definitions, introduce e-learning as a new way of 
learning. However, learning needs change very quickly and 
the concept and functions of e-learning must continuously be 
adapted to these needs [4]. Nowadays, most of the efforts are 
addressed to the smart e-learning. Personalization is one of 
the promising subjects [5] and can be considered as an 
essential aspect of e-learning. Figure 1 below summarizes 
the five principal aspects of e-learning: knowledge, 
pedagogy, technology, communication and personalization.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 1.  E-learning aspects. 
As mentioned by Park et al. [6], “the students’ 
performance can be improved through adaptive e-learning 
environments that suit their needs”. Generally, there exist 
numerous methods, strategies and approaches to do that, 
namely personalized interfaces, personalized learning 
content, personalized learning paths, personalized diagnosis 
and 
suggestions, 
personalized 
recommendations, 
personalized 
prompts/feedback, 
and 
personalized 
professional learning guidance [7]. The challenge now is to 
give the most appropriate content to learners according to 
their interests and needs [8], and adapted to their profiles, 
abilities, preferences, characteristics, goals, talents, etc.  
 Chorfi and Jemni [9] have developed a personalized 
learning management system called PERSO. It is based on 
adaptation of the content to the learner’s preferences and 
knowledge level. The latent semantic analysis was used to 
analyze learner’s answer to a dynamic questionnaire to 
determine with a high accuracy the learner’s knowledge 
level. Personalization have been also applied to new forms of 
learning delivery, such as the MOOC [10]. 
  Based on the diversity of approaches, Esselmi et al. [11] 
provide generalized metrics to foresee the personalization 
strategies, which are the most appropriate to a specific 
course. 
Sarwar et al. [12] tried to take advantages of web 3.0 and 
developed an adaptive e-learning framework, named 
Ontology based Adaptive, Semantic E-Learning Framework 
(OASEF). OASEF allows the delivering of learning contents 
that takes into account not only pedagogical requirements but 
it also considers learning activities as well.  
An Educational Recommender System (ERS) exploring 
the use of argumentation based recommendation techniques 
as persuasive technologies was proposed by Heras et al. [13]. 
The purpose of the ERS is to show how arguments can be 
used as explanations to influence the behaviour of users 
towards the use of certain items. On the one hand, the ERS 
uses a database of Learning Objects (LOs), in which each 
LO included his metadata. On the other hand, the learner 
should register as a user in the ERS and fill out his 
educational information, such as his educational level or 
topics of interest. Then, he should answer a test to 
automatically determine his learning style. In this manner, 
the system can explore both characteristics of a student 
profile and LOs’ metadata to recommend e-learning contents 
that meet the needs of the learner. 
 Employing ontology in education recommender systems 
interests many researchers.  It is often considered as a useful 
tool for knowledge representation in ontology-based 
recommenders. Tarus et al. [14] explained that future works 
will focus more on hybridization of ontology-based 
recommendation with other advanced recommendation 
techniques to improve the recommendation’s performance of 
the learning resources.   
Personalized 
learning 
has 
become 
possible 
by 
implementing 
intelligent 
learning 
systems 
analyzing 
individual learning data. In this area, Belarbi et al. [15] 
propose a video recommender system across a Small Private 
Online Course (SPOC). They analyse firstly users’ video 
behaviour while enrolling into a SPOC to estimate their 
interest in videos. Then, they try to find learners with similar 
profile using the unsupervised K-Means clustering algorithm 
and recommend target user the same videos, in which similar 
users are interested in. 
 Bourkoukou and El Bachari [16] propose an adaptive 
learning system-LearnFitII. As an automatic courseware 
authoring based on learning identification and collaborative 
filtering techniques, this system recognizes different patterns 
of learning style and learners’ habits through testing the 
psychological model of learners and mining their server logs 
using K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and association rule 
mining algorithms.   
Meunier [17] adopts an ontology-based approach to 
enriches an e-books and shows how it can be an adaptive and 
collaborative learning device. 
After examining some interesting works, we can propose 
a new e-learning category definition in which e-learning is 
considered as a mean that provides personalized education. 
Thus e-learning can be defined as a new way of learning, 
using the technology to deliver a personalized training in a 
highly interactive environment. 
A. Technology Enhanced Learning Environments (TELE) : 
Overview 
In this Section, we focus on the major developments that 
have taken place in distance learning solutions from 1920 
until now.  
The first teaching experiences using computing as a 
pedagogy tool date back to the mid-1920s when Sidney L. 
Pressey designed several machines for the automatic testing 
of intelligence and information [18]. In the beginning, the 
device could only test and score. A student should press the 
right answer to move to the next question. If they are wrong 
the error is tallied. The last machine’s generation could 
teach, but the behaviour of students had not been improved 
because examinations were corrected and returned after few 
hours or days. 
 In 1953, the psychologist Burrhus Frederic Skinner, 
inspired by Pavlov's work on conditioned reflexes, 
developed a method of teaching called programmed 
instruction. This method is based on the systematic 
progression 
of 
acquisitions 
by 
pre-structured 
and 
individualized 
programs. 
The 
fit 
between 
Skinner's 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

behavioural theories and the technical possibilities revealed 
the concept of "Teaching Machine" in 1958 [19]. In front of 
a machine, the learner could follow a teaching by 
question/answer and learn by observing his own acts and the 
resulting consequences. 
 During the 1970s, the introduction of computer 
technology into programmed instruction gave birth to 
Computer-Assisted Education (CAE). CAE makes a 
dialogue between a learner and a computer possible. The 
dialogue is designed by teacher to help the learner achieve 
certain measurable goals in terms of knowledge and skills. 
CAE allows student the discretion of content, time, place, 
and pace of the training as it offers him the possibility to 
participate in simulations of situations and phenomena. 
Later, it may be noted that research on education and more 
generally on cognition, oriented computer applications on 
problems more directly related to learning than to teaching. 
Hence, “Computer-Assisted Education” (CAE) has been 
replaced by “Computer-Assisted Learning” (CAL) [20].  
In the same period, the trend of learn by playing began to 
take its place in the world of distance education. The serious 
game was born [21]. It refers to games used for training, 
advertising, simulation, or education that are designed to run 
on personal computers or video game consoles [22]. The 
player experiences situations that are impossible in the real 
world for reasons of safety or cost for example to acquire 
knowledge and develop skills. So, as mentioned in Figure 2, 
a serious game is defined as an application with three 
components: experience, entertainment, and multimedia 
[23]. 
 
Figure 2.  Definition of serious games [23]. 
By 1980s, CAL became in turn the ICAL Intelligent 
Computer-Assisted Learning. ICAL was appeared thanks to 
the contributions of artificial intelligence. Then, the 
intelligent tutors were born [24]. To perform his job 
successfully, an intelligent tutor has to be both pedagogue 
and expert in the domain to teach, he has also to know his 
students well and manage a real dialogue with them. Like 
this, learning has become more interactive and adapted to the 
learners. 
At the turn of the 1990s, problem-solving systems were 
replaced by interactive problem-solving systems. We no 
longer talked about computer-assisted learning, but rather 
about learning through interactions with the teacher and 
other 
learners. 
These 
are 
the 
Interactive 
Learning 
Environments with Computer [25].  
In the early 2000s, TELE emerged [26] to encourage, 
support and personalize learning. Today, a TELE refers to 
any computer environment designed to foster human 
learning, remotely at home or in-class at school, mobilizing 
human and artificial agents. A TELE can have multiple roles. 
It is not only used as an environment, which helps actors to 
realize educational activities, but it is also a presenting 
information tool, a communication tool and a support tool 
for teachers.  
In TELE, courses can be distributed via a simple intranet, 
but can also be managed by specialized software called e-
learning platform, learning management system or training 
management system.   
There is a large number of e-learning platforms in the 
international market. Among the freely licensed platforms, 
we can mention, Claroline, Ganesha, and the open source 
solution Moodle, which took off in the 2000s to become an 
international reference. There also exist licensed proprietary 
platforms such as e-doceo, myTeacher, and Blackboard, 
which was born in the late 1990s. One of the most famous 
organizations in distance learning is the British Open 
University, which has been training hundreds of thousands of 
people around the world since the 1970s. MOOCs appeared 
in the late 2000s as the most popular TELE [27].  
B. Actors of Technology Enhanced Learning 
Environments (TELE) 
Many educational organizations have implemented e-
learning platforms to improve student learning performance. 
TELE integrate tools for different e-learning actors. The 
objective is to facilitate their roles and functions. Figure 3 
below is an adaptation of the general outline of distance 
learning platforms proposed by Sébastien [28]. It describes a 
model of a TELE. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  A TELE model. 
A TELE involves essentially three main actors who are 
the learner, the tutor and the administrator.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The learner: consults and / or downloads the 
recommended educational resources, organizes his work, 
does exercises, self-evaluates and transmits questions and 
work to his tutor.  
The tutor role can be subdivided into teacher-designer, 
teacher-trainer "tutor", teacher-corrector, etc. He/she creates 
pedagogical trajectories, follows up learners and provides 
them assistance.  
The administrator: ensures the maintenance of the 
system, manage learners’ registrations and the access rights 
as well to the platform as to the educational resources.  
III. 
MASSIVE OPEN ONLINE COURSE: MOOC  
MOOCs constitute a major evolution of the e-learning 
thanks to the increasing expertise in the use of open 
educational resources, among others. Since 2008, major 
universities all over the world offered MOOCs to promise 
the democratization of knowledge and lifelong learning. 
Anyone can access to online higher education courses 
anytime and anywhere. So how did MOOCs appear?  
MOOCs were born from academic research on 
pedagogical methods, more specifically from an experiment 
conducted by two professors George Siemens and Stephen 
Downes from the University of Manitoba, Canada in august 
2008 [29]. They published an online course about 
techniques of learning in a group entitled "Connectivism 
and Connective Knowledge" (CCK08) [30]. In few weeks, 
approximately 2,300 students signed for this course that was 
offered for free [31]. In the fall of 2011, the University of 
Stanford offers a massive free online course and gave the 
certificate to students who succeeded the exam. These 
students were evaluated by their professors. In December 
2011, 
the 
American 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology (MIT) 
launched 
MITx; 
a 
non-profit 
organization that would offer online courses called 
"Massive Open On-line Courses" on an open-source basis 
[32]. More than 1.7 million registrants were reached [33]. In 
fall 2012, edX, a non-profit start-up from Harvard and the 
MIT, had 370,000 students in its first official courses [33]. 
EdX was offering high quality courses from the best 
universities and institutions to learners around the world. 
A.  Specificities of the Massive Open Online Courses 
MOOCs are a revolutionary trend of educational 
technology today. Those online interactive trainings open to 
all are usually given by university professors and researchers 
and are intended for a public of learners, who will be 
supervised and accompanied in their learning [34]. 
 
As the name suggests, MOOCs are open, they are 
accessible to anyone who has an Internet connection and a 
computer, tablet, or Personal Digital Assisted (PDA). The 
registration is generally free [35]. Some MOOCs remain 
permanently accessible. Others can only be accessible after a 
registration to be made before a deadline and then become 
inaccessible; this is the case of France digital university 
(France Université Numérique). One can follow courses 
directly on the site of the establishment that produces them 
like the sites of FUN, Sorbonne and Harvard. One can, also, 
follow courses on platforms dedicated to MOOCs, such as, 
UDACITY, COURSERA and OPENCLASSROOMS, or on 
specific MOOCs specialized on certain areas.  
The massive dimension is the feature that distinguishes 
the most MOOCs from classic e-learning. A course can be 
followed by millions of learners. By the end of 2017, the 
MOOC platforms have offered 9,400 courses worldwide and 
attracted 81,000,000 online registered students [36]. 
However, nearly in classical schools and universities, some 
professors integrate MOOCs into educational programs. 
They believe that it is more rigorous academically to 
experiment 
with 
interactive course 
formats; 
videos, 
PowerPoint and PDF documents, notes and abstracts. Thus, 
from massive and open, the courses become small and 
private, we speak here about Small Private Online Courses 
(SPOC), the knowledge’s window held and diffused by 
teachers [37]. 
Initially, MOOCs were intended for students, today the 
typical profile of a participant in a MOOC is the employee 
who seeks to develop new skills. If he achieves his activities 
and succeeds MOOC tests, he can enhance his experience 
thanks to a certificate. We called this variety of MOOCs, 
Corporate Open Online Courses (COOCs) or Corporate 
MOOCs [38]. Designed on the model of MOOCs, COOCs 
are training modules for two types of public: the employees 
of a company and its customers. They are increasingly used 
in large companies like Renault, Bouygues, SNCF or 
Pernod Ricard to train employees and retain customers. 
MOOCs benefit from active pedagogy and innovations of 
Web 2.0. They get the best of the recent uses of social 
media and the contributions of the renewed conception of 
learning that promotes the co-construction of knowledge by 
the students themselves. Thus, learning is no longer vertical 
from the expert to the learner but is horizontal because of 
the exchanges between learners and pedagogical team, all 
thanks to the social features of the MOOC platforms. 
Indeed, learners can interact with the tutor and are invited to 
do it between them in the context of forums. 
B. Typology of MOOCs 
Between the first MOOC of 2008 called CCK08 and the 
first course proposed by MIT (MITx) the approach is visibly 
different. We are talking about two categories of MOOCs; 
cMOOC and xMOOC. The cMOOC, or the connectivist 
MOOC, is inspiring from connectivism, the learning theory 
proposed by Siemens [29] that focuses on the contribution 
of new technologies in learning and more specifically on the 
interactions of networked human communities. The 
cMOOC adopts a participative approach where learning is 
based on dialogue, interaction, and exploration. The 
cMOOC brings together a community of people over the 
same period. Everyone carries out its own researches, 
exchanges and collaborates with its peers, shares, publishes 
its own conclusions, produces around a common interest 
area and not around a precise subject. In this MOOC 
category, we talk about learning from others. The 
pedagogical content is partly co-built during the training. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Although, the role of the tutor is limited to a constant 
animation of the cMOOC to maintain the interest of 
learners. It involves facilitating interactions and identifying 
existing educational resources more than designing them. 
Thus, in the cMOOC the tutor is rather facilitator than 
instructor. 
Known by transmissive MOOC, xMOOC tends to 
reproduce a traditional situation of teaching where the 
evaluation touches above the knowledge and not the skills. 
It adopts the transmission pedagogical model however it is 
organized with an attractive format using mainly pre-
recorded video lectures and quizzes with no emphasis in 
networking. The content is predefined by the pedagogical 
team. Learning happens through the transmission of 
knowledge; the tutor is the expert, he distils its specific 
knowledge to learners who can communicate with him or 
ask questions and get answers on forums. xMOOC stands 
for eXtended MOOC. The term was coined in 2012 by 
Stephen Downes that says "It should be clear here that the 
xMOOC sense is not of eXtended MOOC but rather MOOC 
as eXtension of something else" [39]. One of the features of 
xMOOCs is to use them as a pedagogical resource in 
cMOOCs, or more generally, in the case of self-learning 
where the learner will build his own course according to his 
needs and own learning goals. Hence a MOOC is not 
necessarily either a xMOOC or a cMOOC. It can be a 
hybrid MOOC [40]. Some researchers wrote about other 
possible taxonomies [31], Market/Open/Dewey Model, 
Lane’s classification, Clark Taxonomy. 
IV. 
LEARNING DROPOUT PHENOMENON: DISCUSSION 
In the world of training, increasing the success rate of 
learners is a major challenge. Nowadays, education is 
becoming a learner-centered market where learners are 
perceived as consumers of services. Most educational 
institutions at different levels work to attract those 
consumers and meet their needs. However, especially with 
the advent of MOOCs, this form of open and free distance 
training, the success rate remains tiny compared to the 
number of registrants. It usually runs around 10%. For 
example, of the 841,687 students enrolled at Harvard and the 
MIT, 5% earned such a certificate [41]. Is it really an 
alarming number? Can the certification rate be considered as 
an adequate performance metric for evaluating trainings in 
general or a TELE particularly? What knowledge and skills 
assessment techniques are most appropriate? Is it really the 
right place to talk about learner success or failure in a TELE? 
Several questions arise. 
 
After studying uncertified learners’ categories, we can 
say that problems related to success take mainly the form of 
dropping out of the online course, a phenomenon that has 
received 
a 
great 
deal 
of 
attention 
in 
e-learning 
[42][43][44][45]. School dropout, the term used for high 
school, college and university, is defined as the temporary 
or 
definitive 
studies 
interruption 
before 
obtaining 
recognition of prior learning, as a diploma or a certificate 
from an institution confirming the end of studies. In e-
learning, the dropout rate varies from one TELE to another; 
around 7% to 10% [46] of the large numbers of participants 
enrolling in MOOCs manage to finish the course by 
completing all parts [47]. Thus, among uncertified learners, 
those who achieve trainings are far from being the majority. 
The percentage is explicable because motivations to follow 
a course or a training are numerous and varied, ranging from 
curiosity for the general theme of a course, to the desire to 
acquire knowledge and skills without being engaged or 
adopting a steady pace of work. As an example, Powell [48] 
distinguishes between learners who drop out in the first 
month, and those who leave during the training. He 
separates, also, between intrinsically motivated dropouts 
where learners have chosen to spontaneously pursue an 
online course or training outside the academic or 
professional program of extrinsically motivated learners 
who are indirectly engaged by their institutions. He shows 
that the last ones are the most persevering. The right 
question, then, is why some users manage to achieve 
courses, and others not? Generally, the learner’s decision to 
interrupt his training cannot be attributed to an only one 
factor, but rather to a set of interrelated factors. Hence, the 
question of abandonment causes is complex. Until this 
moment, there is no real consensus in researches that can 
clearly identify the retention factors in e-learning platforms. 
However, according to Dalipi et al. [49] both student-related 
factors and e-learning platform related factors lead to a high 
number of dropouts. Pierrakeas et al. [50] summarize 
student-related factors in 4 major categories:  financial, 
professional, academic and family, and personal reasons. On 
the other hand, concerning e-learning platform related 
factors, we found a need to distinguish between; problems, 
which can meet a learner in connection with the platform 
tools or services, and problems relevant to the quality of 
pedagogical contents such as text, picture, video and quiz.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
With the advent of modern technologies, e-learning has 
been used in several sectors with significant impact. In this 
paper, we reviewed studies on the area of e-learning. We 
presented various definitions and proposed a new one. We 
described how e-learning has evolved. We revealed 
challenges and perspectives. To summarize, e-learning 
continues to grow around the world. The major challenge is 
to offer the learning where, when a learner wants and with 
the appropriate manner he/she desires [51]. The goal is to 
achieve learners’ satisfaction. A specific attention is given 
to the phenomenon of dropping out called also non-
persistence or disengagement from trainings. Nowadays, 
students’ withdrawal has   become   the   focus   of   
learners, tutors, and researchers. As a result, issues of the e-
learning efficiency continue to be the subject of a large 
number of recent scientific publications. The challenge for 
future TELE is to collect data produced by Learning 
Management Systems (LMS) and use this information to 
predict problems and opportunities that may arise [52]. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Our future work will focus on the evaluation of 
pedagogical content. The main objective is to help course 
designers in the educational reengineering. First, we will 
observe learners’ behaviour throw their interaction traces in 
the TELE. Then, we will adopt machine learning approach 
to identify elements needing to be revisited in the content; 
the form, duration, presentation, etc. The aim is to detect 
courses content weaknesses in order to give course 
designers sufficient recommendations that could help to 
improve pedagogical content and undertake educational 
interventions.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Calvo and Ó. Villarreal, “Analysis of the growth of the e-
learning industry through sustainable business model 
archetypes: 
A 
case 
study”. Journal 
of 
Cleaner 
Production, 191, pp. 26-39, 2018. 
[2] S. Singh and S. Z. Hussain, “Mechanising E-learning for 
equiping 
start-up 
entrepreneurs”. Materials 
Today: 
Proceedings, 2020. 
[3] S. Choudhury and S. Pattnaik, “Emerging themes in e-
learning: 
A 
review 
from 
the 
stakeholders' 
perspective”. Computers & Education, 144, 103657, 2020. 
[4] A. Sangrà, D. Vlachopoulos, and N.Cabrera, “Building an 
inclusive definition of e-learning: An approach to the 
conceptual 
framework”. The 
International 
Review 
of 
Research in Open and Distributed Learning, 13(2), pp. 145-
159, 2012. 
[5] M. Agrebi, M. Sendi, and M. Abed, M., “Deep Reinforcement 
Learning for Personalized Recommendation of Distance 
Learning”. In World Conference on Information Systems and 
Technologies , pp. 597-606,  2019. Springer, Cham. 
[6] O. 
C. 
Park 
and 
J. 
Lee, 
“Adaptive 
instructional 
systems,” Educational 
Technology 
Research 
and 
Development, 25, pp. 651-684, 2003. 
[7] H. Xie, H. C. Chu, G. J. Hwang, and C. C. Wang, “Trends 
and 
development 
in 
technology-enhanced 
adaptive/personalized learning: A systematic review of 
journal publications from 2007 to 2017,” Computers & 
Education, 103599, 2019. 
[8] M. K. Khribi, M. Jemni, and O. Nasraoui, “Toward a hybrid 
recommender system for e-learning personalization based on 
web usage mining techniques and information retrieval,” 
In E-Learn: World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, 
Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education, pp. 6136-
6145. Association for the Advancement of Computing in 
Education (AACE), October 2007. 
[9] H. Chorfi and M. Jemni, “PERSO : Towards an adaptative e-
learning system,”  Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 
15(4), pp. 433-447, 2004. 
[10] B. Jebali and R. Farhat, “Toward personalization in MOOCs,” 
In the 6th International Conference on ICT & Accessibility 
proceedings, pp. 145-151, 2017.  
[11] F. Esselmi, L. Jemni Ben Ayed, M. Jemni, and S. Graf,  
“Generalized metrics for the analysis of E-learning 
personalization strategies,” Computers in Human Behavior, 
48, pp. 310-322, 2015 . 
[12] S. Sarwar, Z. U. Qayyum, M. Safyan, and R. F. Munir, 
“Ontology based adaptive, semantic e-learning framework 
(OASEF),” In Information Science and Applications (ICISA) 
pp. 1199-1212, 2016, Springer, Singapore. 
[13] S. Heras, P. Rodríguez, J. Palanca, N. Duque, and V. Julián, 
“Using Argumentation to Persuade Students in an Educational 
Recommender System,” In International Conference on 
Persuasive Technology, pp. 227-239, 2017. Springer, Cham. 
[14] J. K. Tarus, Z. Niu, and G. Mustafa, “Knowledge-based 
recommendation: a review of ontology-based recommender 
systems for e-learning,” Artificial intelligence review, 50(1), 
pp. 21-48, 2018. 
[15] N. Belarbi, N. Chafiq, M. Talbi, A. Namir, and H. Benlahmar, 
“A Recommender System for Videos Suggestion in a SPOC: 
A Proposed Personalized Learning Method,” In International 
Conference on Big Data and Smart Digital Environment, pp. 
92-101, November 2018.  Springer, Cham. 
[16] O. Bourkoukou and E. El Bachari, “Toward a Hybrid 
Recommender System for E-learning Personnalization Based 
on Data Mining Techniques,” JOIV: International Journal on 
Informatics Visualization, 2(4), pp. 271-278, 2018. 
[17] J. M. Meunier, “Valorisation of a Pedagogical Digital 
Archive: The Example of an Ebook Enriched From An 
Ontology,” In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Digital Tools & Uses Congress , p. 17,  October 2018. 
ACM. 
[18] B. F. Skinner, “Teaching machines,” Science, 128(3330), pp. 
969-977, 1958. 
[19] R. M. Gagne, “Instructional technology: foundations,” 
Routledge, 2013. 
[20] T. E. Piemme, “Computer-assisted learning and evaluation in 
medicine,” Jama, 260(3), pp. 367-372, 1988. 
[21] M. Zyda, “From visual simulation to virtual reality to 
games,” Computer, 38(9), pp. 25-32, 2005. 
[22] T. Susi, M. Johannesson, and P. Backlund, “Serious games: 
An overview,” , 2007. 
[23] F. Laamarti, M. Eid, and A. E. Saddik “An overview of 
serious games,” International Journal of Computer Games 
Technology, pp. 11-12, 2014. 
[24] J. Self, “A perspective on intelligent computer‐assisted 
learning,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 1(3), pp. 
159-166, 1985. 
[25] D. Guin and J. F. Nicaud, “Environnements interactifs 
d'apprentissage avec ordinateur,”   Quatrièmes journées EIAO 
de Cachan, Ecole normale supérieure de Cachan, pp. 22-24 
mars 1995, Eyrolles. 
[26] N. Balacheff, “Les mots de la recherche sur les EIAH, enjeux 
et questions,”  STICEF review, 25(2), 2018. 
[27] I.S. Vatskovskaya, “The Use of MOOCs for Professional 
Development of Translators,” In Going Global through Social 
Sciences and Humanities: A Systems and ICT Perspective: 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference “Going 
Global through Social Sciences and Humanities”, 27–28 
February 2019, Tomsk, Russia pp. 255- 256. Springer. 
[28] G. Sébastien, “Apprentissage collectif à distance, SPLACH: 
un environnement informatique support d'une pédagogie de 
projet,” Doctoral dissertation, Université du Maine, 2001. 
[29] G. Siemens, “Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital 
age,”, 2008. 
[30] A. Fini, “The technological dimension of a massive open 
online course: The case of the CCK08 course tools,” The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed 
Learning, 10(5), 2009. 
[31] S. Sanchez-Gordon, and S. Luján-Mora, “MOOCs gone 
wild,” In Proceedings of the 8th International Technology, 
Education and Development Conference (INTED 2014),  pp. 
1449-1458, 2014. 
[32] M.M. Waldrop, “Online learning: campus 2.0,” Nature 
News, 495(7440), 160, 2013. 
[33] W. Wang, L. Guo, L. He, and Y. J. Wu, “Effects of social-
interactive engagement on the dropout ratio in online 
learning: insights from MOOC,” Behaviour & Information 
Technology, 38(6), pp. 621-636, 2019. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

[34] T. R. Liyanagunawardena, A. A. Adams, and S. A. Williams, 
“MOOCs: A systematic study of the published literature 
2008-2012,” The International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Learning, 14(3), pp. 202-227, 2013. 
[35] T. Clarke, “The advance of the MOOCs (massive open online 
courses) 
the 
impending 
globalisation 
of 
business 
education?,” Education+ 
Training, 55(4/5), 
pp. 403-413, 
2013. 
[36] D. Shah, “A Product at Every Price: A Review of MOOC 
Stats and Trends in 2017,” Retrieved August 28, 2018. 
[37] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Higher education and the 
digital revolution: About MOOCs, SPOCs, social media, and 
the Cookie Monster,” Business Horizons, 59(4), pp. 441-450, 
2016. 
[38] K. Mori and L. Ractliffe, “Evaluating the use of a MOOC 
within higher education professional development training,” 
In Proceedings 
of 
the 
25th 
International 
Conference 
Companion on World Wide Web, pp. 831-833. International 
World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2016. 
[39] L. Robinson and D. Bawden, “International good practice in 
information 
literacy 
education,” Knjižnica: 
Revija 
za 
Področje Bibliotekarstva in Informacijske Znanosti, 62(1-2), 
pp. 169-185, 2018. 
[40] F. J. García-Peñalvo, Á. Fidalgo-Blanco, and M. L. Sein-
Echaluce, “An adaptive hybrid MOOC model: Disrupting the 
MOOC concept in higher education,” Telematics and 
Informatics, 35(4), pp. 1018-1030, 2018. 
[41] L. Rai and D. Chunrao, “Influencing factors of success and 
failure 
in 
MOOC 
and 
general 
analysis 
of 
learner 
behavior,” International Journal of Information and Education 
Technology, 6(4), 262, 2016. 
[42] C. Pierrakeas, G. Koutsonikos, A. D. Lipitakis, S. Kotsiantis, 
M. Xenos, and G. A. Gravvanis, “The Variability of the 
Reasons for Student Dropout in Distance Learning and the 
Prediction of Dropout-Prone Students,” In Machine Learning 
Paradigms, pp. 91-111, 2020, Springer, Cham. 
[43] S. Goel, A. S. Sabitha, T. Choudhury, and I. S. Mehta, 
“Analytical Analysis of Learners’ Dropout Rate with Data 
Mining 
Techniques,” 
In Emerging 
Trends 
in 
Expert 
Applications and Security, pp. 583-592, 2019, Springer, 
Singapore. 
[44] O. S. Da Costa and L. B. Gouveia, “Dropout in distance 
learning: a reference model for an integrated alert system,” 
In Proceedings of the Euro American Conference on 
Telematics and Information Systems, pp. 27-28, 2018, ACM. 
[45] C. Burgos, M. L. Campanario, D. de la Pena, J. A. Lara, D. 
Lizcano, and M. A. Martínez, “Data mining for modeling 
students’ performance: A tutoring action plan to prevent 
academic dropout,”  Computers & Electrical Engineering, 66, 
pp. 541-556, 2018. 
[46] P. Gregori, V. Martínez, and J. J. Moyano-Fernández, “Basic 
actions 
to 
reduce 
dropout 
rates 
in 
distance 
learning,” Evaluation and program planning, 66, pp. 48-52, 
2018. 
[47] S. I. De Freitas, J. Morgan, and D. Gibson, “Will MOOCs 
transform learning and teaching in higher education? 
Engagement and course retention in online learning 
provision,” British Journal of Educational Technology, 46(3), 
pp. 455-471, 2015. 
[48] R. Powell, “Openness and dropout: A study of four open 
distance 
education 
universities,” 
In M-2009: 
23rd 
International 
Council 
on 
Distance 
Education 
World 
Conference on Open Learning and Distance Education, 2009. 
[49] F. Dalipi, A. S. Imran, and Z. Kastrati, “MOOC dropout 
prediction using machine learning techniques: Review and 
research challenges,” In 2018 IEEE Global Engineering 
Education Conference (EDUCON) , pp. 1007-1014, April 
2018, IEEE 
[50] C. Pierrakeas, G. Koutsonikos, A. D. Lipitakis, S. Kotsiantis, 
M. Xenos, and G. A. Gravvanis, “The Variability of the 
Reasons for Student Dropout in Distance Learning and the 
Prediction of Dropout-Prone Students,” In Machine Learning 
Paradigms, pp. 91-111, 2020, Springer, Cham 
[51] S. Ennouamani and Z. Mahani, “An overview of adaptive e-
learning systems,” In 2017 eighth international conference on 
intelligent computing and information systems (ICICIS), pp. 
342-347, December 2017,  IEEE. 
[52] D. Turnbull, R. Chugh, and J. Luck, “Learning Management 
Systems: An Overview,”  Encyclopedia of Education and 
Information Technologies, 2019.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-803-7
ICIW 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

