Mechanism Design for Designing Annotation Tools
Roberta Cuel, Oksana Tokarchuk, Marco Zamarian
Dept. of Computer and Management Sciences
Unviersity of Trento
Trento, Italy
Email: (roberta.cuel, oksana.tokarchuk, marco.zamarian)@unitn.it
Abstract—The Web 2.0 is increasingly considered as a
phenomenon that affects the way people interact, search, post
and share information on the Internet. Namely it affects the
daily life of any Web user, expert or company that works
on the network daily. One of the dominant traits of Web
2.0 applications is the capability of co-opting end-users in
endeavors which traditionally have been considered as top-
down activities and exploiting user-based networks. Through
Web 2.0 applications users add content and annotation in order
to describe and share pictures, videos, ﬁles, etc. Apart from
some of the most well known applications (e.g., Facebook,
Twitter, Flickr and the like), many Web 2.0 tools are not good
at attracting a critical mass of individuals. In fact, many studies
have shown that a common outcome for online communities is
an ’onion’ structure were only a few core individuals actively
participate discussing and contributing to the common content,
whereas others are considered as peripheral users who observe
the community and simply use the content. Participation and
willingness to contribute, thus, become two of the critical
issues that companies and software developers should take into
account when creating Web 2.0 applications. In other words,
we claim that understanding and analyzing appropriate sets of
incentives that might motivate users to contribute are critical
steps in the design of Web 2.0 applications. In this paper, we
describe how theories and techniques that are well known and
used by scientists in economics and management studies can be
used to develop incentive-compatible Web 2.0 tools. Speciﬁcally,
we will provide an example of an application of mechanism
design and applied experimental economics in the development
of an annotation tool.
Keywords-Incentives; Mechanism Design; Web 2.0; Content
Creation and Annotation.
I. INTRODUCTION
The collaborative, social way of generating, organizing,
and managing knowledge has been growingly considered as
a trigger of creativity and innovation in several applied ﬁelds.
This phenomenon has been heavily shaped by the advent of
social based technologies such as grid computing, peer to
peer ﬁle sharing, collaborative authorship of digital content,
social networks, and, more in general, Web 2.0 applications
[7], [18], [28].
In this scenario, the increasing popularity of Web 2.0
applications dramatically changes the way people interact,
have fun, communicate and consume. The common trait of
Web 2.0 applications is the empowerment of end-users by
co-opting individuals in endeavors which traditionally have
been considered as top-down activities, and the exploitation
of user-based networks of relationships [20], [23]. A glaring
example of such a trend is the new emerging crowd-sourcing
phenomenon [12], [14], [17]. Nowadays there are many
Web 2.0 applications that can be considered as concrete
examples of the crowdsourcing phenomenon: SourceForge
(sourceforge.net), Wikipedia (en.wikipedia.org), Galaxyzoo
(www.galaxyzoo.org), Crowdﬂower (crowdﬂower.com), In-
nocentive (www2.innocentive.com). All these applications
take advantage of communities of experts and/or users who
proactively contribute to the creation of a common good.
In economics, a good or service is called a ’common
good’ [21] when it has contemporaneously the properties
of non-exclusivity, and non-rivalry. Non-exclusivity means
that it is impossible or costly to exclude any person from
the use of the public good. Non-rivalry means that each
person can consume simultaneously the public good, without
constraining the use for others. In all of the above-mentioned
examples, users act according to their own personal purposes
and, at the same time, provide information and knowledge
that others can share and, in turn, use.
Many studies on online communities and peer to peer
collaboration identiﬁed the motivations that drive people to
participate in a rather large set of heterogeneous and context
dependent elements [2], [13], [15], [25], [26], [27], [29]
(e.g., reputation, altruism, competition, self-esteem, money,
reciprocity, fun, etc.).
Despite these many motives to contribute and the popu-
larity of many Web 2.0 applications, some studies observe
how a signiﬁcant number of online communities and social
network applications fail because of under-contribution of
participants. For instance, an analysis of the P2P ﬁle sharing
site Gnutella show that in 2000, only 25% of users shared
98% of the content while 66% of users shared nothing [1].
More speciﬁcally, insights concentrating on the patterns
that characterize annotation efforts in Web 2.0 communities
found that annotations are characterized by power law dis-
tributions, both in the relationship between number of tags
and number of posts [5] and number of tags and number
of contributors [10], indicating that few people contribute
disproportionately more than others.
It follows that not all Web 2.0 tools - and speciﬁcally the
ones that take advantage of social networks - can become
73
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

killer applications ´a la Facebook or Twitter. This is due
to the fact that users are not motivated enough to spend
time interacting and contributing to a common good. Thus,
motivating users to contribute to this kind of collective effort
is essential to reach critical mass and ensure a sustainable
growth for these crowdsoursing applications.
Since we consider the whole software development pro-
cess very relevant, we claim that success of an online
community-based application requires a blend of well-
designed software (i.e., usability) and carefully crafted poli-
cies aimed at achieving participation. In this paper, we focus
our attention on the social aspects of software development
and deployment and we offer an example on how these
aspects can be incorporated into the development of anno-
tation and semantic content creation tools. Speciﬁcally we
will adopt a set of methods and techniques, often referred
to as ’mechanism design’ in the ﬁeld of economics, that can
be used to develop incentives which can be embedded into
online applications. This choice does not reﬂect a disregard
for the techinical aspects of software design, but is meant
to underline features of the process that are oftentimes
neglected within the community of developers.
We will focus on the so called sociability design and in
particular on the ﬁrst two phases of the software develop-
ment process. These are the analysis of the use scenario
prior to application design and the ﬁne tuning process of
the incentive structure. These phases should be seen as a
continuous improvement process that enables designers to
adjust the software according to the social needs emerging
from the users’ experiences.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes
some basic notions of motivations and mechanism design,
Section 3 sketches out some techniques for analysis and
design of incentivized applications, Section 4 describes the
analysis of an annotation prototype, and ﬁnally Section 5
draws our conclusions.
II. BASIC NOTIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Bouman et al. [4] argue that designers of social software
have to design software and carefully craft social policies
such as: enabling practice, mimicking reality, building iden-
tity and actualizing self. In order to effectively design social
software we focus our analysis on motivations in the context
of Web 2.0 and on tools that enable us to identify key
incentives that can be embedded in the software.
A. Motivations
Several studies on the motivation to participate in knowl-
edge sharing indicate that people participate because they
want to be part of a ’community’, and engage in the
exchange of ideas and solutions [26]. Similarly, Forte
and Bruckman ﬁnd that peer recognition plays a role
in Wikipedia which is similar to the dynamics shaping
up scientiﬁc collaboration [9]. Wang and Fesenmaier [24]
demonstrate that efﬁcacy is a major factor affecting mem-
bers’ active contribution to online communities. The study
also indicates that the possibility of future reciprocation
(expectancy) is another major motivation driving an indi-
vidual’s contribution. Beenen et al. show that challenging
goals are powerful motivators of online contributions [2],
while Wasko and Faraj found that people contribute when
they perceive that this enhances their professional reputation
[27]. Kuznetsov argues that the motivations of Wikipedians
to contribute are grounded in the values of reputation,
community, reciprocity, altruism and autonomy [15], [25].
Wiertz and de Ruiter found that a customer’s online inter-
action propensity, commitment to the community, and the
informational value s/he perceives in the community are the
strongest drivers of knowledge contribution [29]. Bock and
colleagues suggest the provision of appropriate feedback
to employees engaged in (or not engaged in) knowledge
sharing [3]. These actions follow from two considerations.
On the one hand, they leverage on the importance of
pressure exerted from a person’s reference group (e.g., peers,
supervisors, senior managers, etc.) to engage in knowledge-
sharing behavior; on the other, they underline the importance
of enhancing the individual’s sense of self-esteem.
Studies concentrating on the patterns that characterize
annotation efforts in Web 2.0 communities found an inter-
esting correlation between a set of emerging social roles
and tagging behaviors. These behaviors seem to be spurred
by the attempt to create a community, the awareness of
one’s audience and a perceived need to communicate with
a small group [22]. Analogously, Chen and colleagues
found that social comparisons help explain the tendency to
contribute more (or less) in a social experiment involving the
MovieLens community [6]. Joinson identiﬁed these unique
uses and gratiﬁcations in the context of Facebook: social
connection, shared identities, content, social investigation,
social network surﬁng and status updating [13].
From these examples, we can clearly see that motivation
can be produced by heterogeneous motives, and might
derive from incentives that are assigned to the performer
or from an intrinsic desire. Motivation is intrinsic if the
performer enjoys the act of performing the task per se. In
all other cases, a set of extrinsic incentives can be provided
in order to make an individual/team perform. Incentives
are a set of instruments (e.g., money, reputation, rewards,
prices, credit points, medals) assigned by an external ’judge’
typically according to some sort of evaluation of the effort
exercised by the performer. In principle, these can be totally
uncorrelated to the nature of the task.
B. Mechanism design theory
Mechanism design is a ﬁeld of game theory developed
in economics that studies the effective design of rules for
human behavior. If individuals follow these rules, they
will reach the outcome desired by the game designer. The
74
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

underlying hypothesis is that individuals act according to
their own private interests and only a careful development of
appropriate incentives can enable the alignment of individual
and social interests.
To develop a set of incentives from the mechanism design
point of view, the ﬁrst thing developers should do is to
understand the social environment (the context) and codify
its constraints from the point of view of game theory. In
these terms, the game is deﬁned by the following features
[19]: the players, the rules, the outcomes and payoffs. In
the case of Web 2.0 applications the players are the users
(both contributors and readers of the content produced), the
rules refer to how the players interact among each other,
the outcomes are constituted by the public good produced
by means of the application, and ﬁnally the payoffs are the
values players attribute to the outcomes.
In the analysis of the context, the designer should focus on
the system of individual inner interests and the motivations
embedded in the structure they interact with (the tool for
instance). These interests are affected by various elements
which are:
• The goal: people interact to communicate and partici-
pate.
• The nature of good produced: a stylized description,
in game-theoretical terms, of the relationship between
what good is produced and who consumes it.
• The tasks: an ordered collection of tasks into which the
contributions can be broken down.
• The skills: competences and abilities required to carry
on the tasks.
• The social structure: a stylized and simpliﬁed set of
social relationships among the subjects participating in
the exercise.
After the analysis of the context it is necessary to deﬁne
the desirable outcome that the designers want to achieve.
Based on the given deﬁnition of players, desirable outcome,
and the context it is possible to deﬁne a set of rules and
payoffs that permit to achieve the desirable outcome.
Looking at Web 2.0 applications users spend time and
effort to produce - and at the same time to consume - a
public good. All individuals beneﬁt from the outcomes that
others produce and the application provides. The possibility
to access the content without necessarily contributing to its
creation leads to the phenomenon of free riding: expect-
ing that others will spend their time and effort to create
the content while dedicating own time to other rewarding
activities. Mechanism design tools allow us to analyze the
context corresponding to each Web 2.0 application and to
design some case-speciﬁc rules that lead to a reduction of
this kind of behavior within the desired context.
III. HOW TO DESIGN AN INCENTIVIZED APPLICATION
Mechanism design enables to analyze the social structure
of the scenario prior to application design, to ﬁne tune the
Figure 1.
The ideal process of design and development of an incentivized
application
incentive structure of an application, and to provide a set of
requirements for a ﬁrst prototype of the incentivized tool.
The lab experiments, then, allow us to evaluate such a tool
and to ﬁne tune the incentive structure that is embedded into
it.
Ideally the process of design and development of an
incentivized application (see Figure 1) should start from the
analysis of the concrete situation.
In the ﬁrst phase, the ﬁeld analysis is crucial to identify
the motivations of both individuals and the social groups
which they belong to. Direct observations, interviews and
questionnaires are very effective techniques that can be used
to unveil and better deﬁne the crucial elements described in
the previous section.
In the second phase, the raw knowledge is then analyzed
in terms of the above mentioned elements. Mechanism
design, as a set of techniques, allows the modeling of the
situation by using game theoretical predictions about the
behaviors of the actors described in the model. Given a set
of goals, this model enables the analysts to design a set of
incentive schemes that would spur users to behave in line
with the desired outcomes.
The third phase is the creation of the prototype which
should be the simplest possible solution that can effectively
support the users.
In the fourth phase, the resulting prototype is tested,
better if the test is conducted in a controlled environment,
such as a laboratory. The laboratory allows the experimenter
to test an hypothesis with artiﬁcially controlled conditions,
manipulating or eliminating extraneous factors. As soon as
the previous hypotheses are conﬁrmed a sequence of ex-
periments can be organized to ﬁne tune the set of incentives
that are embedded in the tool. The design of each experiment
may depend on the results of previous ones.
75
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In the ﬁfth phase, the ﬁeld experiments, the tool is
tested in the ﬁeld, mimicking the situation in the lab.
This ﬁne tuning process should increase the complexity
of the trial since the experiment get closer to the reality.
For instance, add new realistic components such as real
actors (i.e., community members), tasks (a daily activity that
actors usually carry on), situations (the ﬁeld and the social
structure which actors belong to). Since the control over
the ability to manipulate variables reduces, the experiments
gain awareness of interaction among variables. This might
continuously address new changes to the tool that ﬁnally is
introduced in the ﬁeld.
This process is continuously repeated since the tool is
ﬁnalized, sixth phase.
IV. THE ANALYSIS OF AN ANNOTATION PROTOTYPE
DEVELOPED BY T+ID
Founded in 1988, Telef´onica Investigaci´on y Desarollo
(TID) [16] is nowadays the largest private research and
development centre in Spain as regards activity and re-
sources, and is the most active company in Europe in
terms of European research projects in the Information
and Communication Technology sector. TID is currently
developing a prototype for the annotation of the internal
portal of Telef´onica. The tremendous amount of available
information hinders the access to the right pieces of infor-
mation required by a person for a speciﬁc goal, affecting the
company workﬂows. This is why the company decided to
develop an annotation tool to the corporate portal. Adding a
layer of annotations, helps obtain many advantages, such
as more efﬁcient resource retrieval and navigation, real
integration of heterogeneous sources of information (linked
data), personalization based on context and roles.
In the following section, we will go through the steps
we adopted to support the design of TID’s annotation tool.
It will serve as an illustration of the general process we
described in the previous section.
A. The ﬁrst phase: the ﬁeld analysis
We started our analysis collecting data on people’s mo-
tives and motivation drivers interviewing 11 employees of
TID representing the community at large (heads of divi-
sion, senior project managers, project managers, developers,
computer engineers, and consultants). Each semi-structured
interview was conducted by two interviewers, took 60 to 90
minutes and was recorded on audio tape. These recordings
have been transcribed and analyzed descriptively according
to ex-post categories. Additionally, a focus group discussion
with 6 TID employees was conducted, focusing on usage
problems of the existing system and on innovative solutions
that might overcome these problems. Since the number of
interviewees was not very high, the TID interviews were
decisive to provide starting data for the desk analysis phase.
More in depth requirements are identiﬁed in the following
phases.
B. The second phase: the desk analysis
We analyzed the interviews and classiﬁed TID portal’s
features according to the variables described above.
The goal of the annotation tool is to improve the search
and navigation experience in a corporate knowledge base.
TID providers of annotations might have two different
motivations to annotate. Users - by annotating resources -
can show their areas of competence and interest to the com-
munity. They improve navigation, searching and syndicating
capabilities of the enterprise portal by using annotations.
The nature of good produced by annotating is public. This
scenario is an almost straight out of the textbook case of
public good provision in which providers and consumers are
the same people. The part where things become problematic
is the problem shared by many knowledge management sys-
tems: there is a huge incentive to keep strategic knowledge
private so one can leverage on it when dealing/negotiating
with others.
The task is a typical annotation task. This means that it
is very repetitive and lacks a fun element.
The required skills of the agents to complete the annota-
tion task are very basic.
Finally, the social structure is quite complex and various
dynamics coexist. Employees work in teams and commu-
nities of experts, but also work in the company with a
strong hierarchical structure. Visibility, reputation, career
development, and money are all part of the mix of moti-
vations driving the behavior of employees. An important
issue to deal with is the large number of employees. As
underlined in many studies, group size plays an important
role in modifying behavior of individual contributors. If,
in principle, employees perceive that their contribution is
vital for the success of the group we could expect a higher
probability of contribution from each employee. In other
words, the reputation mechanism might be developed at
group or project level.
In this paper, we do not focus our analysis on the tool
development, therefore we do not discuss the third phase:
the prototype development process.
C. The fourth phase: the lab experiments
In the evaluation of the ﬁrst prototype we run a laboratory
experiment with the goal of identifying the more appropriate
set of incentives to spur people to annotate resources.
The incentive structures we tested are focusing on two
different rewarding systems:
• pay per click models: each participant get a ﬁxed
amount of money for each annotation provided (0,03
Euros per tag up to 3 Euro). For payment requirements
we had to round rewards in pay per tag treatment to
the highest 50 cents.
76
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

• winner takes all model: only the actor that provide the
higher number of tags and annotation wins 20 Euros.
Participants were 36 students with no experience in the an-
notation task nor in the tool that they tested.At the beginning
participants read a clear set of instructions and performed
a ﬁrst training session in order to understand the rules of
the game and the basic features of the annotation tool. Each
individual has been assigned to one of two ’treatments’ of
images annotation: the ﬁrst using the pay per click model
and the second using the winner takes all models. They
performed the task under time pressure (8 minutes for each
treatment) with the goal to produce the maximum amount
of tags in the allotted time on a random set of images.
We obtain the following results:
• The mean number of tags produced are: 47.42 with the
pay per tag model and 62.76 with the winner takes all
model. We can measure a 32% increase in the winner
takes all model.
• The average amount of money participants perceived
are: 6.66 Euros with the pay per tag model and 6.18
Euros with the winner takes all model.
• The average cost per tag is 0.1404 Euros with the pay
per tag model and 0.098407 Euros with the winner
takes all model.
• The budget has been 31.5 Euro for the pay per tag
model and 20 Euros for the winner takes all model.
In the experiment there are some biases. Students are
volunteers who are used to participate in experiments. Also,
students didn’t ﬁnd any problem in the annotation task
because they are strong Web users and game players.
D. The ﬁfth phase: the ﬁeld experiments
Despite the biases that affect the experiment results, it
clearly emerged that the winner takes all model is dramat-
ically more effective than the pay per click one, in this
context. These results constitute a baseline for the imple-
mentation of the tool within TID’s corporate environment.
The obvious next step is that of running a few other lab
experiments in order to move from simple tagging to more
complex tasks closely mirroring what happens in TID.
Since annotation is used to retrieve, organize and ex-
change information in the company portal, in the next
experiments annotations and the resulting tags obtained in
a ﬁrst stage of the experiment will be used as an input to
retrieve information in the ﬁfth phase: the ﬁeld experiments.
In the TID, the prototype and the set of incentives will be
tested ﬁrst with a small group of users in order to ﬁne tune
the adequate set of requirements. Eventually, the ﬁnalized
version of the incentivized application will be applied to the
whole TID.
V. CONCLUSION
As mentioned above, one of the dominant traits of the
Web 2.0 applications is the capability of co-opting end-users
in creating new content and sharing it across their networks.
The tremendous growth of data, pictures, images, videos that
are shared and copied by individuals in the networks, render
the access to the right piece of information more difﬁcult. As
a consequence many Web 2.0 applications, such as Facebook
and others, introduce annotation tools enabling users to add,
modify or remove information about a Web resource without
modifying the resource itself.
In this paper we demonstrate that, since the whole soft-
ware development process is very relevant, the success of
social software tools requires carefully crafted social design
policies aimed at fostering participation and willingness to
contribute.
For this purpose, mechanism design and laboratory/ﬁeld
experiments seem promising methods to enable designers to
analyze the motivations of users and embed this information
into their software.
These phases should be seen as a continuous improvement
process that enables designers to adjust the software accord-
ing to the social needs emerging from the users’ experiences.
As we have just seen, we have proposed a methodology
that encompasses the ability to a) analyze any work envi-
ronment of a social nature in which one aims to introduce
annotating tasks; b) conduct a design process for the tools
that serve as vehicle for the tasks themselves taking the
previous analysis of the social and technological context as
an input. This approach stresses a value-chain outlook on
the design process, clearly distinguishing problems regarding
motivation/participation in the design process strictu sensu,
on the one hand, and motivation/participation of users once
the tool is in place. The most glaring advantage of this
approach is the ability to consolidate theory, method and
applications in distinct units, avoiding redundancy.
Finally, since the methodology we propose seems promis-
ing and accepted by developers, the real beneﬁts of the
incentivized application will be measured only when it will
be adopted by TID.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the EU funded project IN-
SEMTIVES - Incentives for Semantics (www.insemtives.eu,
FP7-ICT-2007-3, Contract Number 231181).
REFERENCES
[1] Adar, E. and Huberman, B. A., Free Riding on Gnutella,
First
Monday,
October
2000.
Available
at:
http://ﬁrst-
monday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/-
792/701.
[2] Beenen, G., Ling, K., Wang, X., Chang, K., Frankowski, D.,
Resnick, P., and Kraut, R. E, Using Social Psychology to
Motivate Contributions to Online Communities, Proceedings
of the CSCW’04, November 6-10, Chicago, Illinois, USA,
pp. 212-221, 2004.
77
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

[3] Bock, G. W., Zmud, R. W., Kim, Y. G., and Lee, J. N., ’Be-
havioral Intention Formation in Knowledge Sharing: Exam-
ining the Roles of Extrinsic Motivators, Social-Psychological
Forces, and Organizational Climate’, MIS Quarterly, 29 (1),
pp. 87-111, 2005.
[4] Bouman, W., de Bruin, B., Hoogenboom, T., Huzing, A.,
Jansen, R., and Schoondorp, M. The Realm of Sociality:
Notes on the Design of Social Software, Proceedings of
the International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS),
Montreal, Canada, paper 154, 2007.
[5] Cattuto, C., Loreto, V., and Pietronero, L. Semiotic Dynam-
ics and Collaborative Tagging, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 104,
pp. 1461-1464, 2007.
[6] Chen, Y., Harper, F. M., Konstan, J., and Xin Li S. Social
Comparisons and Contributions to Online Communities: A
Field Experiment on MovieLens, Working paper, School of
Information, University of Michigan, pp. 1358-1398, 2008.
[7] Davenport, T. H. and Prusak L. Working Knowledge: How
Organizations Manage What They Know, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Business School Press, 1998.
[8] Fang, Y. and Neufeld, D. ’Understanding Sustained Par-
ticipation in Open Source Software Projects’, Journal of
Management Information Systems. Spring, (25)4, pp. 9-50,
2009.
[9] Forte, A. and Bruckman, A. Why do people write for
wikipedia? Incentives to contribute to open-content publish-
ing, in Proceedings of 41st Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), pp.119-128 2008.
[10] Golder, S. A. and Huberman, B. A. ’The Structure of Col-
laborative Tagging Systems’, Journal of Information Science,
32, pp. 198-208, 2006.
[11] Hars, A. and Qu, S. ’Working for free - Motivations for
participating in open-source projects’, International Journal
of Electronic Commerce, 6, pp. 25-39, 2002.
[12] Howe, J. Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd Is
Driving the Future of Business, Crown Publishing Group,
New York, NY, 2008
[13] Joinson, A. N. Looking at, looking up or keeping up with
people? Motives and uses of Facebook, Proceedings of 26th
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 1027-1036, 2008.
[14] Kleeman, F., Voss, G. G. and Rieder, K. Un(der)paid Innova-
tors: The Commercial Utilization of Consumer Work through
Crowdsourcing. Science, Technology and Innovation Studies,
(4) 1, pp. 5-26, 2008.
[15] Kuznetsov, S. Motivations of contributors to Wikipedia, ACM
SIGCAS Computers and Society, (36) 2, Article 1, 2006.
[16] Lopez, Garcia, S., The Role of Telefonica: The Inter-
nationalization
of
Telecommunications
in
Spain,
1970-
2000, Business and Economic History, (1), 2003. Avail-
able at: https://35.9.18.4/˜business/bhcweb/publications/BEH-
online/2003/Lopez.pdf.
[17] Malone, T. W., Laubacher, R. and Dellarocas, C. N. Harness-
ing Crowds: Mapping the Genome of Collective Intelligence,
MIT Sloan Research Paper No. 4732-09, 2009. Available at:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1381502.
[18] O’Reilly T. What Is Web 2.0 Design Patterns and Business
Models for the Next Generation of Software, 2005. Available
at: http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html.
[19] Osborne, M. J, and Rubinstein, A. A course in Game theory,
The MIT Press, 1994
[20] Smith, D. M. Key Issues for Web 2.0 and Consumerization,
Gartner Research Report, 2007. Available at: http://www.gar-
tner.com
[21] Sugden, R. ’Consistent Conjectures and Voluntary Contribu-
tions to Public Goods: Why the Conventional Theory does
not Work’, Journal of Public Economics, (27), pp. 117-124,
1985.
[22] Thom-Santelli, J., Muller, M. J., and Millen, D. R. Social
tagging roles: Publishers, Evangelists, Leaders, Proceedings
of 26th Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pp. 1041-1044, 2008.
[23] Von Hippel, E. Horizontal Innovation Networks - by and for
users, Industrial and Corporate Change, (16) 2, pp. 293315,
2002.
[24] Wang, Y. and Fesnmaier, D.R. ’Assessing motivation of con-
tribution in online communities: An empirical investigation
of an online travel community’, Electronic Markets, 13, pp.
33-45, 2003.
[25] Wagner, C. and Prasarnphanich, P. Innovating collaborative
content creation: The role of altruism and wiki technology,
Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences, pp. 18-27, 2007.
[26] Wasko, M. and Faraj, S. ’It is what one does: Why people
participate and help others in electronic communities of
practice’, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, (9) 2-3,
pp. 155-173, 2000.
[27] Wasko, M. and Faraj, S. ’Why Should I Share? Examining
Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic
Networks of Practice’, MIS Quarterly, 29 (1), pp. 35-57,
2005.
[28] White, D. Results and analysis of Web 2.0 services survey,
UK:JISC, 2007. Available at: http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/do-
cuments/programmes/digitalrepositories/spiresurvey.pdf
[29] Wiertz, C. and de Ruyter, K. ’Beyond the Call of Duty: Why
Customers Contribute to Firm-Hosted Commercial Online
Communities’, Organization Studies, 28 (3), pp. 347-376,
2007.
78
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

