The Location-based Authentication with The Active Infrastructure 
 
David Jaros, Radek Kuchta, Radimir Vrba 
Department of Microelectronics 
FEEC, Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
jarosd|kuchtar|vrbar@feec.vutbr.cz 
 
 
Abstract - The paper introduces location-based authentication 
techniques that are especially addressed to use in buildings and 
the environment, which is not covered by GPS signal (Global 
Position System). An active infrastructure is used as a source 
of position information. Two techniques are proposed.  The 
first technique performs a remote user’s authentication where 
the user’s terminal broadcasts identity message. The active 
infrastructure evaluates user’s position and informs an 
authenticator. The other proposed technique performs local 
user’s authentication. The authentication process is launched 
on the user’s terminal. The user’s terminal collects information 
from 
its 
actual 
neighborhood 
and 
evaluates 
position 
information. 
Keywords 
- 
Location-based 
authentication, 
active 
infrastructures, local authentication, remote authentication 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The location-based authentication is a quite new direction 
in the access management. The direction gains in importance 
nowadays due to mobile devices coming to wireless network 
environment. The advantages and a possible application 
scenario is discussed in [1, 2].   
The user’s position information is required for access 
management systems more and more often. The user should 
bring up information about his/her position with the other 
credentials when he/she attempts to get access to protected 
service or content. For example, the user’s right in the 
private company network can be assigned depending on 
his/her position. The access management system can make 
decision about the result of user’s authentication or can 
assign set of rights depending on the user’s position. The 
access management system is generally called AAA system 
(Authentication, Authorization and Accounting) regarding 
the three main processes covered in [3]. The user’s position 
information could be processed mainly in the authentication 
and authorization. The authentication techniques that use 
user’s position information are called location-based 
authentication. 
In this paper, we propose two techniques. The first of 
them is remote authentication. The user accesses to remote 
network resources in this case and sends his/her credentials 
over the network. The authentication process proofs brought 
up credentials on the remote machine (server). 
On the other hand, the local authentication is launched on 
the user’s terminal; the user brings up credentials locally. 
This case is useful when the protected content or services are 
stored on user’s terminal. The other possible application 
scenario can be found in authentication during logon to 
laptop operating system.  
We can divide location-based authentication techniques 
depending on the source of position information into two 
main groups. The position information can be sourced from 
the user’s terminal (for example GPS enabled) in the first 
group. The second group covers techniques where the user’s 
position is evaluated by infrastructure (for example GSM 
network). 
We introduce authentication techniques in which the 
position information is sourced from the infrastructure. The 
first technique is a remote type and the second one is a local 
type, as classification above refers.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The second 
section describes technology infrastructure that is used in the 
next two proposals. The third section introduces a new 
propose of the location-based authentication that is based on 
the active infrastructure and solves the remote authentication. 
The fourth section deals with our second proposal of the 
location-based 
authentication 
techniques. The 
second 
proposal is designed especially for local authentication in the 
user’s terminal. 
II. 
ACTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE 
The active infrastructure (AI) is a technology background 
that is used in the two authentication techniques that are 
described in the next two sections. The key parts of AI are an 
anchor point, a user’s tag and an authenticator. The anchor 
point is located somewhere from where some of the users 
want to be authenticated regarding to his/her position. We 
assume that the position of anchor point is exactly known for 
the authenticator. On the other hand, the user’s tag is 
assigned to the particular user and it is hard related with 
his/her identity. User’s tag can be a part of user’s terminal or 
an autonomy pocket device. The position of user’s tag is 
proclaimed in terms of proximity between the anchor point 
and the user’s tag. When the user’s tag can communicate 
with the anchor point it means that is nearby. 
Figure 1 presents AI’s key parts.  The anchor point is on 
known position xAP, yAP, zAP. If the user’s tag is in 
neighborhood it can communicate with anchor point and it 
means that anchor point’s position is similar to the position 
of user’s tag. The similarity between the positions is 
dependent on the range of transceivers. When the user claims 
that he/she is on position nearby the anchor point, the 
228
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

authenticator asks the anchor point if an appropriate user’s 
tag is in the neighborhood. Here should be noted, that for 
example IQRF [4], Bluetooth [5] or something similar can be 
used as wireless technologies.  
anchor point
user’s tag
xAP,yAP,zAP
wireless link
authenticator
unknown position
proof
claim
 
Figure 1.  Principle of an active infrastructure 
The relationship between the anchor points and the 
authenticator should be mutually trusted. We propose the use 
of symmetrical cryptographic system AES (Advanced 
Encryption System) that is described in [6]. The trusted 
relationship between communicating parts has to be 
established before the first use. An initial binding process 
covers key generation and its exchange. This process has to 
be granted by system administrator because it is crucial for 
system security. The binding process between the anchor 
point and the authenticator is described as follows. 
1. First, a secured channel between both sides has to be 
established. This is provided by the Diffie-Hellmann’s 
principle[7]. 
2. The authenticator generates AES’s key that will be used 
in the future whenever the authenticator will 
communicate with this anchor point. 
3. The generated key is sent through the secured channel 
to the anchor point.  
The above described AI can vary depending on 
authentication technique in which it is used.  
III. 
REMOTE AUTHENTICATION 
We introduce remote location-based authentication 
technique with AI in this section. 
A possible application scenario for remote location- 
based authentication is in figure 2. In this scenario user’s 
authentication is processed and evaluated dependent on 
his/her position. The technique is provided by two 
independent processes. The first one is user’s tag  
localization; this process is described as follows. 
The user’s tag is recognized by the anchor point as soon 
as it is in anchor point’s range (A1). The anchor point 
informs AAA system about this event (A2).The AAA system 
creates a record in database (A3). Each record contains time, 
user’s identification and anchor point’s identification. 
The second process is authentication that is initiated by 
user’s requesting of the protected content. The whole process 
is described below.  
1. User’s request is redirected to AAA systems that 
provide access management. 
2. AAA 
system 
will 
request 
credentials 
from  
user A. 
3. User A will replay with his/her credentials. 
4. Part of user’s credentials is claimed user’s position. The 
AAA system will query if it is the user who is currently 
authenticated in claimed position. 
5. The AAA system receives answer from the database. 
When the user is on correct position and his/her 
position was proved, position condition has been 
fulfilled. 
6. AAA system will inform server with protected content 
and user’s terminal when each of brought up credentials 
are proved. 
7. Access to protected content can be established after 
authentication and authorization processes are done and 
when they are correct. 
 
controlled area
user’s terminal
user A
xAP,yAP,zAP
anchor point 1
user’s tag
T
AAA system
protected content
identified clients 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(8)
(A1)
(A2)
(A3)
(6)
(7a)
(7b)
 
Figure 2.  The remote location-based authentication schematic 
The remote authentication can be adopted especially to 
protect sensitive information in private company network. 
The user has to be in his/her office when he/she wants to 
work with protected content. The position condition should 
be periodically tested to prevent user’s moving out of 
229
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

controlled area (out of the office). When a user moves out of 
controlled area, he/she lose access to protected content.  
Therefore a time period of re-authentication should be 
dependent on target application where is technique used. 
IV. 
LOCAL AUTHENTICATION 
The location-based technique for local authentication is 
described in this section. The technique is namely addressed 
to enhance login process in laptop operating system. 
The 
main 
difference 
in 
comparison 
to 
remote 
authentication is the situation of the authenticator. The 
authenticator is a part of the user’s terminal in this technique. 
The authenticator has to store a table with anchor point’s 
positions and their encryptions keys, as well as it is in the 
remote authentication. Initial bonding between anchor points 
has to be done before the first use, too. In this case the user’s 
tag is a part of authenticator and it can be used by different 
users. The authentication technique is described in Figure 3. 
The whole process can be depicted as follows. 
When the user tries to log on his/her terminal, the user’s 
tag is activated and it surveys its neighborhood. All available 
anchor points are captured. The user inputs the identification 
and other credentials if required. In regard to user’s profile, 
there are processed authentication and assigned right in the 
authorization. 
 
controlled area
user’s terminal
user A
xAP,yAP,zAP
anchor point
user’s tag
T
 
Figure 3.  The local location-based authentication 
The authentication technique shortly depicted above,  
could be suitable to assure that data stored on user’s terminal 
will be viewed just in the right place.   
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The location-based authentication is a quickly developing 
field in the access management due to enhancement of 
mobile devices that are coming into the network 
environment. We can divide the above mentioned techniques 
into two basic groups dependent on the source of position 
information. 
The active infrastructure is introduced in the second 
section. 
The 
active 
infrastructure 
provides 
position 
information of the authenticating user. The key parts of the 
active infrastructure are the anchor points and user’s tags. 
The main goal of the article is a proposal of the location-
based authentication techniques that are usable in the 
environment where GPS signal is not available.  
In the third section there is an application scenario of the 
active infrastructure being described. In this scenario the 
authentication process runs on a remote machine as it is 
frequent in the network environment.  
The forth section introduced the other proposed 
technique that is namely addressed to local authentication on 
user’s terminal. In this case an authentication’s entity is part 
of the user’s terminal.  
The 
authentication 
techniques 
were 
theoretically 
proposed till now. The future work will be focused on 
implementation of the proposed techniques. The active 
infrastructure test bed should be assembled at first.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research has been supported by the Czech Ministry 
of Education, Youth and Sports in the frame of MSM 
0021630503 MIKROSYN New Trends in Microelectronic 
Systems and Nanotechnologies Research Project, partly 
supported by 2C08002 Research Project KAAPS Research of 
Universal and Complex Authentication and Authorization for 
Fixed and Mobile Computer Networks in the frame of the 
National Program of Research II, ARTEMIS JU in Project 
No. 100205 Process Oriented Electronic Control Units for 
Electric Vehicles Developed on a multi-system real-time 
embedded platform, by ENIAC JU in Project No. 120001 
Nanoelectronics for an Energy Efficient Electrical Car, 
partly by the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade in 
projects FR-TI1/057 Automatic stocktaking system and FR-
TI1/058 Intelligent house-open platform. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. E. Denning and P. F. MacDoran, "Location-
based authentication: Grounding cyberspace for 
better security," Computer Fraud & Security, vol. 
1996, pp. 12-16, 1996. 
[2] 
Karaoguz 
and 
Jeyhan, 
"Location-based 
authentication of wireless terminal," US Patent, 
2011. 
[3] 
H. Rui, et al., "A novel service-oriented AAA 
architecture," in Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications, 2003. PIMRC 2003. 14th 
IEEE Proceedings on, 2003, pp. 2833-2837 vol.3. 
[4] 
Microrisc. 
(2011, 
30-01). 
IQRF 
homepage. 
Available: www.iqrf.org 
[5] 
B. SIG. (2011, 30-01). Bluetooth homepage. 
Available: www.bluetooth.com 
[6] 
L. Chi-Feng, et al., "Fast implementation of AES 
cryptographic algorithms in smart cards," in 
Security Technology, 2003. Proceedings. IEEE 
37th 
Annual 
2003 
International 
Carnahan 
Conference on, 2003, pp. 573-579. 
[7] 
Y. Eun-Jun and Y. Kee-Young, "An Efficient 
Diffie-Hellman-MAC Key Exchange Scheme," in 
Innovative Computing, Information and Control 
(ICICIC), 2009 Fourth International Conference 
on, 2009, pp. 398-400. 
 
230
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

