Promoting organisational emergence in business social networks 
 
 
Matei Dobrescu 
IT General Directorate 
Insurance Supervisory Commission 
Bucharest, Romania 
mdobrescu@csa-isc.ro 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper complex adaptive systems theory 
(CAS) and social autopoiesis have been interpreted with the 
aim to identify factors realising emergent properties in 
organisations structured as social networks. Understanding the 
complex dynamics of such communities requires a view of their 
infrastructure as a network of interacting agents involving 
both goals and constraints. We analyze the network structure, 
showing that it defines a complex weighted network with 
scaling laws at different levels. We also present a simple model 
of network growth involving non-local rules. 
Keywords - Social Networks; Self – organization; Complex 
Adaptive Systems; Organisational emergence; Social autopoiesis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Looking back there have been a few distinctive 
technological innovations that have radically changed the 
way society operates and is able to interact. Johannes 
Gutenberg’s printing press is the earliest example. For the 
first time knowledge could be shared to a wider population 
and what this did was take away the control of knowledge 
from the nobility and transfer it to the general population, 
this was the first step towards the democracy of knowledge. 
Radio and television and the Internet are more recent 
examples but the most exciting step, social networking has 
just arrived and will once again have a major impact on all 
elements of society.  
The Internet has been around for almost 20 years and has 
made drastic changes in the way we run our lives and the 
manner in which we conduct our business. The internet has 
provided us with a platform to exchange information and 
create knowledge in exponential quantities. We are however 
only now beginning to truly collaborate globally in how we 
exchange and create knowledge. 
One place that we are beginning to see this kind of global 
collaboration and knowledge creation is in social networks. 
It took radio 28 years to reach a market audience 50 million, 
13 years for TV, 4 years for the internet and only 2 years for 
FaceBook. 
More and more of our personal data are making it onto 
the web every day. From applications as pedestrian as word 
processing to social networking tools such as Loopt, which 
allow one to share their GPS location with friends, the web is 
supplanting the classic Personal Computing paradigm. The 
smart phone is accelerating this trend. Users expect to be 
able to view data produced on the desktop while on the go. 
Centralized application services have many positive 
properties. They are easy to use. They make it easy to share. 
It is fun and easy to discover new friends, to discover who 
your friends have as friends or to reconnect with old friends. 
Users do not need to worry about software upgrades as the 
application provider automatically updates the software as 
needed. Third party application developers have, through 
independent development, made these platforms more useful 
and fun than ever before. 
All of this freedom does come at a cost however. The 
risks created by centralized service providers is worthy of 
concern, and one can consider that in less than five years a 
network like Facebook is worth more as a direct mail 
marketing service than it is as a social networking 
application. Even worse seems to be the freedom in social 
networks communication for businesses. With a digitally 
connected social world in which the line between personal 
and corporate lives is increasingly blurred, potential risks to 
businesses also rise. It’s clear that businesses need a 
proactive— and powerfully persuasive—communications 
plan to educate their user community about social media 
risks, personal and company impacts, and expected 
behaviors.  
On the other hand, despite the risks, many companies are 
ill-prepared. To safeguard critical data, mitigate data leakage, 
and control intellectual property, one must adopt a strategy 
that leverages the experience and leadership of the business 
and technology sides of the companies. As an alternate 
solution, we propose to use in social network management a 
distributed platform that retains the core functionalities of a 
centralized service with the additional advantage of returning 
ownership of the data to the user. The existence of a 
distributed solution offers consumer choice and puts pressure 
on centralized services to treat our data with the care and 
discretion we desire.  
II. 
THE POLICIES AND PROCESSES FOR SUCCESSFUL 
SOCIAL NETWORKS  
As with any policy implementation, the first step 
concerning social media is to form a business strategy that 
includes a long-term adoption plan for policies, procedures, 
and solutions.  
150
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

It is essential that the business classify data so that 
employees understand precisely what is—and is not—
sensitive information. This process also should define who is 
authorized to access and share corporate content, and it 
should lay out procedures that delineate how employees may 
use sensitive data. As part of data classification, the business 
should also establish a data-retention policy for information 
created on social media.  
Policy also must clearly specify who is responsible for 
particular types of communications; these operational roles 
typically fall within the marketing and customer service 
departments. 
The 
company 
also 
should 
establish 
management oversight for social media—both a chief 
strategist and a community manager, for instance.  
When developing roles and policies, the business should 
include a strategy for employee separation to maintain 
ownership of intellectual property and social identities.  
Establishing these policies is only the beginning, 
however. The real work lies in behavioral changes of 
employees. Businesses must educate employees on the need 
to protect intellectual property and sensitive information, and 
they should fully detail the consequences of noncompliance 
for both the company and the individual.  
Typically, technology incubated by Computer Science 
professionals in universities and companies eventually make 
its way to consumers. Distributed systems have not made 
this leap. Consumers have the same need to share media with 
friends over the Internet. We envision that personal servers 
of tomorrow may become as prevalent as today’s personal 
computers. Obviously we still have a long way to go before 
today’s social applications. The key is to create open high-
level distributed programming interfaces and frameworks 
that enable independent software vendors to create 
distributed applications that run across these servers. 
Privacy, the key factor in our new design, must make 
possible a new class of viral applications and preserve and 
even enhance the ability of advertisers to make a profit. 
Without privacy, an entire class of financial and medical 
applications will not be accepted. In fact, privacy is also 
useful for applications involving interpersonal relationships, 
a particularly viral category. While it is generally accepted 
that the younger generation has less qualms over making 
personal information public, few would be willing to make 
public their negative feelings about other individuals.  
Concluding that in turbulent business environments 
organisations need to react quickly and creatively to make 
the most of new opportunities and business models, in this 
paper we consider as a possible solution to reach these new 
imperatives which require organisations to become more 
flexible to handle change, the model of  complex self-
organizing systems, where of key importance in responding 
successfully to change is the concept of emergence. 
Complexity science is a way of addressing and improving 
such capabilities in organisations, as it is concerned with the 
role of chance, emergence and contingency in the face of 
frequent and continuous change [1].  
In our work factors facilitating organisational emergence 
have been identified by interpreting complex adaptive 
systems (CAS) and social autopoiesis theories with the aim 
of identifying mechanisms or strategies that raise the 
emergent properties of social business enterprises [2]. Social 
autopoiesis was chosen as it focuses on social elements of 
emergence, such as communication, collaboration, morale, 
trust, etc., whereas CAS theory concentrates more on 
adaptive mechanisms that make a CAS produce emergent 
order, such as inter-relations, interconnectivity, edge of 
chaos, feedback, etc. Based on this a framework has been 
derived that summarises the so-called factors that facilitate 
organisational emergence. The framework classifies factors 
as tangible and intangible, and it differentiates between 
dynamics, enabling infrastructure and controls, amongst 
emergence factors. By 
enforcing 
factors facilitating 
emergence and avoiding factors prohibiting emergence, it is 
argued that organisational emergence will be leveraged 
leaving space to project teams to innovate and continuously 
evolve appropriate solutions in order to adapt to an ever-
changing business environment. 
 
III. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE SOCIAL NETWORKS AS 
COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS 
Self-organization has been subject of discussions 
concerning the question of the interrelationship between a 
system and its environment in various disciplines, apart from 
DAI (Distributed Artificial Intelligence). The different 
theoretical approaches have in common that they call any 
kind of system self-organizing if it is able to determine its 
internal structure by itself as the environment changes. The 
boundaries of a self-organizing system and its structure (i.e. 
the relation between its elements) are not determined by 
environmental factors. Rather, these systems generate, 
change and adapt their internal organization within their own 
logic in a dynamic process to cope with environmental 
changes. As a result of more recent social theories, the notion 
of self-organization has become a primitive in sociology 
when it comes to describe social entities (groups, networks, 
organizations). In particular in MAS (Multiagent Systems) 
literature the concept of self-organising MASs has been 
partially considered by researchers interested in designing 
the best match among task, environment, structure and 
performance. A prevalent opinion is that sociological theory 
can help overcoming difficulties in modeling MAS. In this 
spirit it is to mention a new sociological concept to the study 
of self-organization in MAS, the habitus-field theory of 
Pierre Bourdieu which describe organizations as self-
organizing social entities (“autonomous fields”) [3].  
Most of the work on complexity and the development of 
complexity theories have been undertaken in the context of 
the natural sciences and there has been relatively little work 
on developing or applying such theories in the social 
sciences. A thorough review of complexity and social 
autopoiesis literatures is undertaken in this section, based on 
the work of Alaa [4], with special focus on management-
related contributions to extract mechanisms or groupings of 
factors that are argued will facilitate emergence in social and 
management 
contexts. 
The 
analysis 
resulted 
in 
a 
classification into several groupings; dynamics (social 
construction factors/intangible dynamics and adaptive 
151
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

factors/tangible dynamics), enabling infrastructure (tangible 
& intangible), and control factors (tangible & intangible). 
Dynamics are factors that realise emergent properties, the 
enabling infrastructure include elements that enable the 
dynamics to become effective, whereas controlling factors 
attempt to ensure balance of dynamics to prevent descent 
into chaos.  
 
A. Social Construction Factors/Intangible Dynamics  
 
The social drivers and stimulators that have been 
suggested as important in facilitating emergent social 
behaviour are presented as follows:  
• 
The development of autopoietic society requires 
communication, meaning and consciousness that 
form an essential driver of emergent behaviour.  
• 
Facilitation of interaction in the development of 
social organisations put co-operative interaction and 
relationships 
at the centre 
of organisational 
emergence, which 
can 
be 
achieved 
through 
participation, collaboration and team working.  
• 
Local interactions are responsible for new order 
creation and emergence of global structures.  
• 
The quality of interactions between human agents is 
a function of the diversity, density, and intensity of 
those relations. These may be formal or informal, 
designed or un-designed, implicit or explicit 
• 
Individual motives or intentions and individual 
emotions and morale act as driving forces for social 
autopoietic systems influenced by interests, social 
context and forms of co-operation and collective 
behaviour towards achieving a specific goal.  
Thus, the important social construction factors are 
communication, collaboration, interaction, trust and morale. 
These appear to be the important elements of complex social 
systems as they are responsible for social interactions and 
stimulation of creative thinking that will lead to human 
empowerment and leveraging self-organisation.  
B. Adaptive Factors/Tangible Dynamics  
The dynamic of an evolving social entity is determined 
by inter-component relationships that outline its form and 
internal arrangements. Adaptive factors are required to 
improve the ability of the social system to re-arrange, re-
form its structure and quickly respond to change; they 
include the following elements:  
• 
In a social context each individual belongs to many 
groups and different contexts and the contribution 
depends partially on the other individuals within that 
group and the way they interact.  
• 
 
• 
Propagation of influence through social system 
depends 
on 
the 
degree 
of 
connectivity, 
interdependence and strength of coupling.  
• 
In human systems, connectivity between individuals 
or groups is not a constant or uniform relationship, 
but varies over time.  
• 
Complexity thinking is about wholes and complex 
inter-relationships.  
• 
Difficulties created by the unpredictability of 
complex human processes and interdependencies are 
problematic, therefore short-term orientation and 
simple solutions (simplicity) are likely to result in 
better outcomes.  
• 
Conditions for experimentation and exploration of 
possibilities implies small-scale orientation in order 
to quickly try out various options and get quick 
feedback without requiring large scale resources and 
time.  
Thus, the adaptive factors reflect the degree of 
interdependence, connectivity, structural coupling and quick 
re-formation of internal arrangements. These elements help 
facilitate fast response and quick, internal adaptation and re-
formation of system components.  
  
C. Enabling Infrastructure  
Aspects of an enabling infrastructure that facilitates 
emergence in social contexts include:  
• 
Hierarchy and structure are pre-conditions that 
enable or inhibit the emergence of new behaviours 
and working ways.  
• 
Action of organisation members is shaped to a high 
degree by the existence of specific organisational 
form and structures.  
• 
Conditions that facilitate the day-to-day management 
of an organisation, for example management style, 
are necessary for learning and emergence to occur.  
• 
Analysis of the influence of external factors like 
power, money and control regulations like contracts 
and conventions act as constraints that limit social 
dynamics in complex situations.  
D. Control Factors  
Complexity theory in social contexts is designed to 
enable creativity, spontaneity and emergence but it also 
requires some kind of moderating or control mechanisms, 
which seeks to balance excessive change with stability, 
possibilities with constraints, innovation with tradition, etc.  
• 
Change and stability are balanced and the edge of 
chaos is a critical point of the system, where a small 
change can either push the system into chaotic 
behaviour or tip the system back into a stable state.   
• 
Edge of chaos is controlled by equilibrium models 
which attempt to bound a system to ensure that the 
system is always pushed back to stable conditions. 
• 
The mechanisms by which complex systems 
maintain control and achieve certain goals is by 
feedback, learning and frequent small adjustments to 
counteract any excessive tendencies to change.   
• 
Continuous reflection, learning and circular causality 
mutually 
reinforce 
social 
relationships 
and 
interactions.  
• 
Simple high-level rules are a way to achieve a 
balance between dictation and freedom enabling 
152
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

team members to interact with each other guided by 
these rules  
Based on the above analysis we identify the first 
grouping of factors facilitating emergence, i.e. dynamics that 
include those factors that operationalise the emergent 
behaviour. The factors of a complex social system are also 
classified into intangibles and tangibles. Intangibles 
represent the social factors that uniquely characterise social 
human systems, as opposed to natural systems, whereas 
tangibles represent the mechanistic/adaptive factors, those 
elements responsible for the internal connectivity of system 
components.  
The second grouping is the enabling infrastructure that 
enables or allows the social and adaptive elements to either 
be effective or inhibited. This includes organisational 
structure, hierarchies, management style, work culture, 
leadership, etc. These elements can also be tangible, such as 
structures, hierarchies and external factors or intangible, such 
as culture, management style and leadership. The third 
grouping is control, as in order to facilitate emergent 
behaviour without complete chaos or anarchy, controls need 
to be in place and maintained, but they need not to be too 
restrictive. The different groups and elements of each 
category are illustrated in Fig. 1 that collates the various 
factors. It is argued that this forms a useful framework for 
identifying 
and 
understanding 
factors 
that 
facilitate 
organisational 
emergence.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Framework of Factors Facilitating Organisational Emergence  
IV. 
AN INFRASTRUCTURE MODEL FOR SOCIAL NETWORKS   
Social network analysis represents agent relationships 
with nodes and links. Every node i represents an actor i 
within the network and links (i, j) denote social ties between 
agents i and j. More representative models of social networks 
decorate each link (i, j) with the strength of the social tie or 
the amount of information flowing through it, hereafter 
called link weight wi,j. The statistical analysis of link weights 
wi,j between pairs of vertices in the social network indicates 
an heterogeneous pattern of interactions, typically following 
a power law: P(wi,j) ~ wi,j -λ. In addition, the heterogeneous 
distribution of link weights might be related to the 
hierarchical organization of the social network. 
We have chosen as specific example for which it is 
possible to reconstruct the social network, the social network 
of open source software communities (OSS). This system 
define a network of interacting agents with very similar 
features in common, reflecting the presence of limitations in 
the information shared by agents. It has been argued that 
decentralization leads to a distinctive organization that solves 
the communication bottleneck associated to large software 
projects [5]. The amount of submitted e-mails from one 
programmer to other members is a good indicator of his 
social position in the software community. However, not 
every e-mail message has the same influence in the process 
of software development. In order to reduce the amount of 
noise, here we will consider only e-mail traffic associated to 
bug-fixes and bug reporting. The rest of e-mails are 
discarded from any further consideration. From this subset of 
e-mails we can reconstruct the social network of the software 
community as shown in [6]. 
Nodes and links (i, j) of the OSS social network represent 
members and e-mail communication from i to j, respectively. 
At any time, a new software bug is discovered by the 
member i who sends a notification e-mail. Then, other expert 
members investigate the origin of the bug and eventually 
reply with the solution. Typically, several messages are 
required to solve the problem. Here, we define Ei,j (t)=1 if 
developer i replies to developer j at time t, or Ei,j (t)=0 
otherwise. We also define link weight wi,j as the amount of e-
mail traffic flowing from member i to member j, 
∑
=
=
T
t
i j
i j
t
D
w
0
,
,
( )
where T is the timespan of software 
development.  
 
Figure 2.  Heterogeneous interaction in small software communities 
153
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In fig.2 we put an emphasis in the link weight 
distributions P(wi,j). Here P>(wi,j) is defined as the 
probability of having a link with weight wi,j. In order to 
reduce the noise in the statistical data, we make use of the 
cumulative 
distribution 
)
(
iw , j
P>
, 
defined 
as 
∫
∞
>
≅
wi j
i j
d
P
w
P
,
( )
)
(
,
ω
ω
 . For the standard case where a 
scaling behaviour P(wi,j) ~ wi,j
-λ is observed, we have  
)
(
iw , j
P>
~ wi,j
-λ+1. 
There is a characteristic pattern of asymmetric 
interaction, where a few strong units dominate the activity of 
the whole OSS. Interestingly, the distribution of link weights 
in large software communities also follows a power-law; 
with an exponent consistent with the observed in the small 
software communities. Most real networks typically contain 
parts in which the nodes (units) are more highly connected to 
each other than to the rest of the network. The sets of such 
nodes are usually called clusters, communities, cohesive 
groups, or modules having no widely accepted, unique 
definition.  
In general, each node i of a network can be characterised 
by a membership number mi, which is the number of 
communities the node belongs to. In turn, any two 
communities α and β can share 
sov
α,β
 nodes, which we define 
as the overlap size between these communities. Naturally, 
the communities also constitute a network with the overlaps 
being their links. The number of such links of community α  
can be called as its community degree, 
com
dα
. Finally, the 
size   of any community α can most naturally be defined as 
the number of its nodes. To characterise the community 
structure of a large network we introduce the distributions of 
these four basic quantities. In particular, we will focus on 
their cumulative distribution functions denoted by P(scom), 
P(dcom), P(sov), and P(m), respectively.  
The basic observation on which our community 
definition relies is that a typical community consists of 
several complete (fully connected) subgraphs that tend to 
share many of their nodes. Thus, we define a community, or 
more precisely, a k-clique-community as a union of all k-
cliques (complete subgraphs of size k) that can be reached 
from each other through a series of adjacent k-cliques (where 
adjacency means sharing k−1 nodes). This definition is 
aimed at representing the fact that it is an essential feature of 
a community that its members can be reached through well 
connected subsets of nodes. There are other parts of the 
whole network that are not reachable from a particular k-
clique, but they potentially contain further k-clique-
communities. In turn, a single node can belong to several 
communities. All these can be explored systematically and 
can result in a large number of overlapping communities. 
Notice that in most cases relaxing this definition (e.g., by 
allowing incomplete k-cliques) is practically equivalent to 
lowering the value of k. In the same time any k-clique 
(complete subgraph of size k) can be reached only from the 
k-cliques of the same community through a  series of 
adjacent k-cliques (two k-cliques are adjacent if they share 
k−1 nodes) [7]. 
The algorithm for numerical determination of the full set 
of k-clique-communities is based on first locating all cliques 
(maximal complete subgraphs) of the network and then 
identifying the communities by carrying out a standard 
component analysis of the clique-clique overlap matrix [8]. 
We use our method for binary networks (i.e., with undirected 
and unweighted links). An arbitrary network can always be 
transformed into a binary one by ignoring any directionality 
in the links and keeping only those that are stronger than a 
threshold weight w*. Changing the threshold is like changing 
the resolution with which the community structure is 
investigated: by increasing w* the communities start to 
shrink and fall apart. A very similar effect can be observed 
by changing the value of k as well: increasing k makes the 
communities smaller and more disintegrated, but at the same 
time, also more cohesive. 
The extent to which different communities overlap is also 
a relevant property of a network. Although the range of 
overlap sizes is limited, the behaviour of the cumulative 
overlap size distribution P(sov) is close to a power law for 
each network, with a rather large exponent. This remark 
leaded us to consider that the most suitable topology of a 
social network is that of a scale free network [9].  
 
Figure 3.  The network of the most influent 27 blogger profiles on Twitter 
In order to establish whether sociak networks are indeed 
scalefree, we determined the degree distribution P(k), which 
is the probability of finding a node with a degree k in the 
Romanian Blogosphere (the interconnected network of 
romanian bloggers). The obtained distribution is indeed 
scale-free and satisfies the power law with the exponential: 
λ=2.65 which satisfies the condition to be between 2 and 3 
for a scale-free topology. As expected, the most influent 
persons in the Romanian Blogosphere will also have 
accounts on a large social network as Twitter and will keep 
their superiority there also. From the first 100 blogs, in July 
2008, already 27 were also on  Twitter. Figure 3 shows the 
interconnection between these most influent blogger profiles 
which are also interconnected on Twitter. The scale-free 
topology following the preferential attachment law is easy to 
observe. 
154
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

To determine the connectivity degree of such a network, 
we have made simulations using Ns2 simulator [910] and the 
Nam animation tool [11]. Fig.4 illustrates the topology of a 
free scale network with 128 nodes that started from an initial 
core of 4 nodes; in the connection of other nodes we have 
applied the law of the preferential attachment. In fig. 5 is 
represented the distribution of the connectivity degree from 
the most connected node till the less connected one, for 4 
scale free networks with nodes from 100 to 100000, the 
similarity being evident.    
 
 
Figure 4.  A scale free network with 128 nodes having 5 hubs 
 
 
Figure 5.  The evolution of the node conectivity for 4 free-scale networks  
The specific scaling of the community degree distribution 
is a novel signature of the hierarchical nature of the systems 
we study. We find that if we consider the network of 
communities instead of the nodes themselves, we still 
observe a degree distribution with a fat tail, but a 
characteristic scale appears, below which the distribution is 
exponential [12]. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper complex adaptive systems theory (CAS) and 
social autopoiesis have been interpreted with the aim to 
identify factors realising emergent properties in organisations 
defined as social networks. Social construction elements, 
such as communication, collaboration, interaction, trust, etc. 
are argued to be critical drivers of human empowerment and 
thus 
self-organisation, 
whereas 
mechanistic, adaptive 
dynamics like flexibility, short-term orientation, small scale 
approaches, simplicity and rapidity will ensure fast response 
and quick adaptation to the problem situation. However, 
emergence cannot be fully realised without the necessary 
enabling infrastructure that will allow the dynamics of 
emergence to become effective, e.g. management style, work 
culture, organisational structure etc. The elements or factors 
in each category have been identified and related in a 
framework, to help understand and analyse the phenomenon 
of emergence in social organisations.   
This framework can be seen as a significant improvement 
on generic complexity principles suggested in literature, such 
as diversity, large number of agents, interactions, edge of 
chaos, etc. that refer to emergence characteristics but without 
providing a clue on how to realise these concepts in action.  
Especially, it is important to notice that the framework 
represents a holistic approach where the various identified 
factors are intertwined and some of them may produce 
counteracting effect. Future research will focus on further 
validation of the framework through other empirical 
applications. Especially of interest is to test if the framework 
does help better understand and manage the emergence 
phenomenon and put forth intentionally factors that raise the 
emergence of new work arrangements. Generality and 
completeness of the framework are also important to test in 
future work.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1] E. Mitleton-Kelly, “Ten Principles of Complexity and Enabling 
Infrastructures”, in Mitleton-Kelly (ed.), Complex Systems and 
Evolutionary Perspectives on Organisations, Elsevier, 2003. 
[2] C. Hauert, “Cooperation, collectives formation and specialization”, 
Advances in Complex Systems, Vol. 9, No. 4, 2006,  pp. 315–335 
[3] P. Bourdieu, Pascalian Meditations, Cambridge, Polity Press, 2003 
[4] G. Alaa, “Derivation of Factors Facilitating Organizational 
Emergence Based On Complex Adaptive Systems and Social 
Autopiesis Theory”, E:CO, Vol. 11. No. 1. 2009, pp. 19-34 
[5] S. Valverde and  R. V. Sole, “Self-organization versus hierarchy in 
open-source social networks”, Phys. Rev. E, Volume 76. Issue 4, 
2007, pp. 44-50 
[6] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy, R. Pastor-Satorras, and A. Vespignani, 
“The Architecture of Complex Weighted Networks”, PNAS, vol. 101, 
no. 11., 2000, pp.3747-3752. 
[7] G. Palla, I. Derényi, I. Farkas and T. Vicsek, “Uncovering the 
overlapping community structure of complex networks in nature and 
society”, Nature, 435, 2005, pp. 814-818 
[8] M. E. J. Newman, “Detecting community structure in networks”, Eur. 
Phys. J. B, 38, 2004, pp. 321–330 
[9] R. Dobrescu, D. Hossu, and R. Ulrich. “Self-similarity Tests for 
Internet Traffic, Control Engineering and Applied Informatics, Vol. 
11, No. 4, p.11-17, dec. 2009, 
[10] K. Fall and K. Varadhan – The ns Manual, The VINT Project: A 
Collaboration between researchers at UC Berkeley, LBL, USC/ISI, 
and Xerox PARC, 2008. 
[11] D. Estrin, M. Handley, J. Heidemann, S. McCanne, Y. Xu and H. Yu, 
“Network Visualization with Nam, the VINT Network Animator”, 
Computer, 11, 2000, pp. 63-68 
[12] C. Song, S. Havlin, and H. A. Makse, “Self-similarity of complex 
networks”, Nature 433, 2005, pp. 392–39 
 
155
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

