Ontologies for Intelligent Provision of Logistics 
Services 
Andreas Scheuermann 
Information Systems 2 
University of Hohenheim 
70599 Stuttgart, Germany 
andreas.scheuermann@uni-hohenheim.de 
Julia Hoxha 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe 
Service Research Institute (KSRI), Institute of Applied 
Informatics and Formal Description Methods (AIFB) 
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany 
julia.hoxha@kit.edu
 
 
Abstract—The complex and volatile global economic environ-
ment challenges Supply Chain Management and increases the 
need for advanced Information Technology. To enable flexible 
and intelligent management of supply chains, we present an 
overall approach based upon a combination of Semantic Web 
Technologies and Service-oriented Computing. This work 
developes dedicated logistics ontologies for enabling intelligent 
provision of logistics services. 
Keywords-Logistics 
Ontology; 
Ontology 
Engineering; 
Semantic Technology; Service-oriented Computing; Supply 
Chain Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 21st century global markets become increasingly 
turbulent and volatile: life-cycles shorten due to the global 
economic environment and ever growing individual 
customer demands, while competitive forces put additional 
pressure on companies supply chains. Lengthy and slow-
moving supply chains bounded by rigid organizational 
structures endanger companies’ competiveness. In such a 
complex and dynamic environment, logistics excellence has 
become a powerful source of competitive advantage [1].  
However, the relentless effort of companies to strive for 
competitive advantage has ballooned complexity of logistics 
decision-making and intensified the need to flexibly provide 
logistics capabilities. This development highlights the vital 
role of Information Technology (IT) and especially the need 
for flexible IT architectures and intelligent approaches for 
exploiting logistics knowledge [2][3]. 
From an IT viewpoint, current technologies such as 
Semantic Web Technologies (SWT) and Service-oriented 
Computing (SOC) bear considerable potential to enhance 
Supply Chain Management (SCM). SOC, as a paradigm for 
distributed, 
potentially 
cross-organizational 
software 
systems, aims at rapidly and easily providing applications by 
combining single services to enable flexible business 
processes. In this paradigm, a service is a loosely coupled, 
autonomous, and platform-independent computational entity, 
which encapsulates discrete functionality and can be 
accessed by using established web standards [4][5]. SWT 
allows for describing consensual knowledge of a specific 
domain of interest by means of formal semantics. This 
enables automated reasoning, information integration, 
semantic interoperability, and, thus, the application of 
intelligent approaches [6], e.g., for decision support or 
discovery and composition of logistics services. While each 
of these technologies has revolutionized IT, so far, the 
capabilities and advantages of combining both approaches 
have been rudimentarily exploited.  
The objective of this paper is to extend the previous 
approach [7], which combines the paradigm of SOC and 
SWT, by applying them both on the logistics domain and 
SCM to enable intelligent provision of semantic logistics 
services. We propose a refined three-layered semantic 
approach consisting of a logistics semantic layer containing 
dedicated logistics ontologies, a logistics service description 
layer, and a logistics process description layer. From the 
perspective of ontology engineering, the contributions of this 
work are dedicated logistics ontologies that provide formal 
logistics knowledge to unambiguously describe logistics 
services and artefacts. In contrast to state-of-the-art logistics 
ontologies, the proposed ontologies (1) sufficiently capture 
the logistics domain not only restricted to specific logistics 
areas, and (2) incorporate a higher degree of formal 
semantics.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
reviews related work. Section 3 introduces the underlying 
approach. Section 4 develops dedicated logistics ontologies, 
which are evaluated in Section 5. Section 6 draws a 
conclusion and points to future work.  
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART 
A query to dedicated ontology search engines (e.g., 
http://swoogle.umbc.edu) reveals that the actual number of 
logistics ontologies is very small. The available ontologies 
can be assigned either to the domain of manufacturing or ex-
clusively to specific areas of logistics (e.g., aircraft types, 
IATA codes, hazardous cargo). These ontologies merely 
provide taxonomies lacking formal axioms.  
In scientific publications, the work of Wendt et al. [8] 
presents aspects of merging two domain-specific ontologies 
(production logistics and hospital logistics) to derive 
common logistics concepts for scheduling and facilitate 
efficient communication processes. The ontology itself is not 
published. Chandra and Tumanyan [9] apply an ontology to 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

systematically record knowledge about organizational and 
problem-specific issues for SCM. They propose an infor-
mation modelling framework to create a taxonomy of supply 
chain problems and operations to alleviate operational 
uncertainty. Madni et al. [10] introduce the IDEON ontology 
as a basis for designing, reinventing, managing, and 
controlling collaborative and distributed enterprises. IDEON 
integrates multiple perspectives, such as an enterprise 
context view or a process view. It is represented using the 
Unified Modelling Language. Lin et al. [11][12] develop a 
manufacturing system engineering (MSE) ontology to 
support an intelligent coordination tool within extended or 
virtual enterprises. The MSE ontology conforms to a 
taxonomy of different concepts: project, enterprise, process, 
extended enterprise, resource, and strategy. These ontologies 
are modelled by means of software engineering techniques, 
conform to simple taxonomies, and merely address specific 
logistics aspects.  
Another group applies ontology languages upon existing 
logistics models (“ontologizing”). Fayez et al. [13] propose 
an OWL representation of the SCOR model for supply chain 
simulation. The ontologies should capture the distributed 
knowledge being required to integrate several supply chain 
views in order to support the construction of simulation 
models. Leukel and Kirn [14] develop a logistics ontology 
based on the SCOR model to capture core concepts of inter-
organizational logistics. The proposed ontology facilitates 
the description of activities in logistics and provides relations 
and attributes. While these publications provide richer 
ontologies, they are still limited to few abstract concepts.  
The last group aims at extending well-grounded onto-
logies. Haugen and McCarthy [15] propose an extension of 
the REA Ontology to support internet supply chain 
collaboration. Pawlaszczyk et al. [16] introduce an ontology 
based on the Enterprise Ontology to describe the domain of 
mass customization for optimizing inter-organizational and 
distributed cooperation. The ontology introduced by Soares 
et al. [17] focuses on production planning and control in a 
virtual enterprise environment to improve human com-
munication and to support the specification of system 
requirements. The ontology is founded on the meta-ontology 
of the Enterprise Ontology, whereas the concepts are defined 
by natural language and object models. Ye et al. [18] propose 
a supply chain ontology to enable semantic integration 
between heterogeneous supply chain information systems. 
The supply chain setting is a web-based or virtual enterprise 
with no specific industry focus. The ontology is implemented 
in OWL and based on the Enterprise Ontology. This group of 
ontologies concentrates on supply chains rather than on a 
larger scope of the logistics domain. However, all listed 
ontologies lack rich formal semantics, remain rather abstract, 
merely focus on special logistics aspects, and neglect the 
service-oriented nature of logistics.  
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
The overall approach underpinning our work is to 
combine SWT with SOC and apply them on the logistics 
domain. The ultimate goal is to enable the intelligent and 
flexible provision of logistics services in supply chains and 
customized logistics applications (Fig. 1). 
SWT [6] comprises formal knowledge representation and  
reasoning capabilities. Thereby, ontologies provide appro-
priate means to formally structure and explicate knowledge 
about the logistics domain in order to enable semantic inter-
operability, information integration, and reasoning. 
SOC [19], particularly Web Services, conform to 
modular, loosely-coupled software components that are 
accessible by established web standards and, thus, facilitate 
the provision of services in distributed and heterogeneous 
environments. Web Services allow for flexible business 
process management, which when combined with formal 
semantics provide capabilities for (semi-)automated service 
discovery, ranking, composition. 
The combination of SWT and SOC lay the basis for 
semantic logistics services, which encapsulate discrete 
logistics functionality (e.g., transport), consume logistics re-
sources, and whose quality is measurable by logistics per-
formance indicators. Semantic logistics services consist of 
modular, reusable, and loosely-coupled logistics components 
for flexibly managing complex logistics processes.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Combining SWT and SOC for SCM 
Based on this approach, we introduce a three-layered 
model for engineering Semantic Logistics Services (Fig. 2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Three-Layered Model for Semantic Logistics Services 
Layer 1: Logistics Ontologies build the foundation for 
defining formal semantics of consensual logistics know-
ledge. We provide a modular ontological setup, which allows 
for easy reuse, adaption, and refinement.  
Layer 2: Semantic Logistics Service Descriptions are used 
for the representation of atomic logistics services. We exploit 
Semantic 
Technology
Service-oriented 
Computing
 Logistics Ontologies
(Knowledge Representation)
 Reasoning
(Knowledge Processing) 
 Logistics Web Services
 Discovery, Ranking, 
Matchmaking, Compo-
sition, Execution
combined
applied              upon
Intelligent and Flexible Logistics Service Provision
Domain of Logistics
Semantic 
Logistics Pro-
cess  Description
Semantic Logistics
Service Description
Logistics Ontologies
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 3
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

OWL-S Service Profile [20] for the description of service 
features and utilize the logistics ontologies of Layer 1 for 
semantic annotation.  
Layer 3: Atomic logistics services are composed into 
complex logistics processes, which are semantically 
described by SuprimePDL [21] process description language. 
Layer 3 consists of such Semantic Logistics Process 
Descriptions. 
IV. 
ENGINEERING LOGISTICS ONTOLOGIES 
We focus on Layer 1 to propose dedicated logistics 
ontologies for semantically describing logistics services. 
A. Scenario: The Case of Fourth- Party Logistics 
The increasing pressure on companies to rapidly and flexibly 
provide superior logistics capabilities has led to logistics 
outsourcing, which involves both operational logistics 
services (e.g., transport) and management capabilities (e.g., 
planning). As an optimal solution, the concept of fourth-
party logistics (4PL) has emerged. A 4PL is challenged to 
provide logistics expertise and IT to integrate and manage – 
plan, implement, and control – logistics services in complex 
and dynamic supply chains without possessing own logistics 
assets [22]. In particular, a 4PL could significantly benefit 
from exploiting both SWT and SOC:  
First, the use of the logistics ontologies and the OWL-S 
Service Profile allows 4PL and other logistics service 
providers (LSP) to unambiguously characterize their offered 
services. Accurately fulfilling customer service levels 
directly affects a retailer’s or manufacturer’s competitive 
ability. Exploiting formal semantics not only fosters 
semantic interoperability and (semi-) automatic data 
integration between heterogeneous logistics information 
systems along the supply chain but also speeds up 
communication and makes it more flexible and error-
resistant. Further, logistics ontologies allow for automated 
reasoning to expose implicit knowledge. Customer require-
ments on logistics service provision dynamically change, 
thus, reasoning enables to check usability of services beyond 
explicitly stated characteristics.  
Second, applying semantic logistics services allows for 
advanced functionality with regard to logistics service 
discovery, ranking, matchmaking, and composition. A 4PL 
faces both a huge amount of end-customers with individual 
requirements concerning logistics service provision and, 
moreover, a variety of LSPs for satisfying these require-
ments. Hereby, logistics service discovery and ranking 
accelerate matching demand with supply of logistics 
services. As supply chain complexity and dynamicity 
constantly increase, service composition enables a 4PL to 
rapidly and flexibly integrate logistics services, and, thus, to 
configure and manage highly complex supply chains.  
B. Logistics Domain Capture 
The ontology engineering approach is based on a 
dedicated methodology [24]. A main characteristic of this 
methodology is the formulation of informal competency 
questions (CQ) to determine the scope and purpose of the 
ontology. These questions incorporate the terminology and 
functional requirements of the ontology to be developed. In 
our case, the development of CQ is based on two main 
factors. First, the CQ relate to logistics theory in terms of 
logistics literature and standards (e.g., UN/CEFACT, 
SCOR). Second, domain experts – developers of logistics 
software, logistics experts and managers – participated in 
workshops to contribute to the development of the CQ. 
Table I depicts some general CQ, which are further extended 
and substantiated. 
TABLE I.  
COMPETENCY QUESTIONS  
CQ1: 
What actors participate in the provision of logistics services? 
CQ2: 
What roles can logistics actors play? 
CQ3: 
What types of logistics services are offered by LSP? 
CQ4: 
Which functional and nonfunctional parameters characterize 
logistics services? 
CQ5: 
Which metrics characterize logistics service performance? 
CQ6: 
Which logistics units and goods flow through supply chains? 
CQ7: 
Which resources are needed for logistics services provision? 
C. Logistics Ontology Modeling 
The objective of the logistics ontologies is to capture and 
structure overall knowledge of the logistics domain to 
annotate logistics services. The logistics ontologies from [7] 
are further extended and modularized to facilitate reusability, 
extensibility, and maintainability. To encode the logistics 
ontologies we apply OWL 2 DL [25].  
Figure 3 zooms into Layer 1 and provides an overview of 
the modularly organized logistics ontologies, their concepts, 
and relations.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Logistics Ontologies  
The main component of the logistics ontologies is the 
Logistics Service Ontology. Its fundamental concept is 
LogisticsService that encapsulates spatial, temporal, and 
quantitative transformations according to the logistics basic 
functions: transport, handling, warehouse, and comple-
menting value-added services. Logistics companies provide 
logistics services that respectively represent a temporally and 
factually logic finite sequence of states to completely 
transform a logistics object.  
 
LogisticsService  TransportService ⊔ 
Logistics 
Service
Composite 
Logistics 
Process
Logistics 
Resource
Logistics 
KPI
Logistics 
Role
Logistics 
Actor
Logistics 
Object
Logistics 
Location
Handling
Service
Transport
Service
hasRole
isProvidedBy
Logistics 
Company
3PL 
Provider
transforms
contains
hasLogisticsLocation
Logistics 
Process
4PL 
Provider
Logistics 
Source
Logistics 
Destination
isComposedBy
isUsedBy
measures
Agility
Reliability
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

HandlingService ⊔ WarehouseService  
LogisticsService ⊑ isProvidedBy.LogisticsCompany 
⊓ transforms.LogisticsObjects 
 
The Logistics Process Ontology is especially important 
with respect to Layer 3 in order to handle dynamic aspects of 
real-world logistics complexity. Its key concept is Logistics-
Process, which comprises atomic or composite logistics 
processes. Thereby, a composite logistics process conforms 
to a composition of at least two logistics services. For 
instance, a transport process contains various logistics 
services (e.g., transport, handling) being composed to realize 
the pre-, main, and on-carriage of a supply chain. 
 
LogisticsProcess  AtomicLogisticsProcess ⊔ 
CompositeLogisticsProcess 
 
Subject to logistics transformations are Logistics 
Objects. According to the logistics unit-load concept, 
logistics objects are a combination of economic goods with 
charge carriers. For instance, microprocessors (goods) are 
packaged in boxes (charge carrier), which are in turn 
consolidated on pallets and/or containers. The unit-load 
concept aims at a smooth flow of logistics objects from 
source to destination.  
 
LogisticsObject ⊑ ChargeCarrier ⊔ Good ⊔ 
isTransformedBy.LogisticsService 
ChargeCarrier  Container ⊔ Box ⊔ Pallet 
 
A supply chain consists of actors, which are defined in 
the Logistics Actor Ontology. Logistics actors are either 
individuals or corporative actors, i.e., legal entities created 
for business ventures. To model logistics actors, we consider 
the way they participate in supply chains. For instance, we 
distinguish between logistics companies dealing with the 
provision of logistics services and manufacturers aiming at 
the production of goods.  
 
LogisticsActor  LogisticsCompany ⊔ Authority ⊔ 
ManufacturingCompany ⊔ TradingCompany 
LogisticsCompany ⊑ 2PLProvider ⊔ 3PLProvider ⊔ 
4PLProvider 
 
Further, we introduce the Logistics Role Ontology to 
depict the capabilities and responsibilities of logistics actors 
in a supply chain. The concept LogisticsRole is inevitable 
because a logistics actor could have different roles at a 
certain point in time or over a particular time period, e.g., a 
manufacturer may simultaneously act as a requester of logis-
tics services or supplier of goods to another manufacturer.  
 
LogisticsRole ⊑ ServiceProvider ⊔ ServiceRequester 
⊔ Supplier ⊔ OEM 
 
Whereas logistics services conform to the process 
organization (dynamic component) of a supply chain a 
Logistics Location Ontology represents the structural 
organization of supply chains. Therefore, we combine 
general location concepts such as country, zip code, city, and 
street with specific logistics concepts, e.g., source, and 
destination. For instance, the availability and performance of 
a transport service is strongly determined by the logistics 
object, its source, and its (final) destination (e.g., location of 
a manufacturer).  
 
LogisticsLocation ⊑ LogisticsSource ⊔ 
LogisticsDestination  
 
Providing 
logistics 
services 
requires 
Logistics 
Resources. Logistics resources are factors of production, 
which are used during logistics service provision. They can 
be conceptualized according to the different types of logistics 
services. For instance, providing a road transport service for 
heavy goods requires a truck being capable to transport 
goods with a weight greater than 50 tons.  
 
LogisticsResource ⊑ TransportationResource ⊔ 
WarehouseResource ⊔ isUsedBy.LogisticsService 
 
Moreover, the availability and capability of logistics 
resources affects logistics service performance. Key perfor-
mance indicators (KPI) measure logistics service perfor-
mance. These KPI are modelled in the Logistics KPI 
Ontology and represent business key figures that assess the 
degree of logistics service performance. For this purpose, we 
reuse parts of SCOR [26] to provide a detailed classification 
of logistics performance indicators. 
 
LogisticsKPI ⊑ Agility ⊔ Costs ⊔ Reliability  
 
Beyond, we reuse and extend existing ontologies either 
specific to the domain of logistics or ontologies with a more 
general character. For instance, to model hazardous goods 
we reuse the hazardous goods ontology. Additionally, we 
reuse an ontology containing airport codes to unambi-
guously define airports as locations. To represent units of 
measurement we reuse and extend the units of measurement 
ontology (MUO). 
V. 
EVALUATION 
Ontologies are complex engineering artefacts. Their 
evaluation is crucial to fully put their potential into practice, 
to make them reusable, and maintainable. For instance, 
incorrect and low quality ontologies might not be readable 
due to vocabulary and/or syntax errors, and, in the case of 
incorrect semantics, they might not be usable by reasoning 
engines. The evaluation includes logistics vocabulary, 
semantic interoperability, and information integration.  
A. Vocabulary of the Ontologies 
Evaluation of the vocabulary of the logistics ontologies is 
based on the CQ and performed as a classroom experiment 
that simulates expert evaluation. The class room experiment 
comprised a review group of twenty persons. The group was 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

composed of ten university students with a strong 
background in logistics and ten logistics practitioners. The 
review group was given the task of comparing and assessing 
the concepts/relations of the logistics ontologies with the 
keyword index of selected logistics textbooks and standards. 
To capture the results of the class room experiment, we used 
match strength. To achieve operationalization, we applied an 
ordinal scale with: 1st quartile below 25% (poor), 2nd quartile 
between 26% and 50% (satisfactory), 3rd quartile between 
51% and 75% (adequate), and 4th quartile between 76% and 
100% (good). For instance, the match strength ‘adequate’ 
displays that between 51% and 75% of the concepts and 
relations contained in the respective logistics ontology 
appear in the key word index of logistics textbooks. 
Homonym and synonym conflicts were dissolved. 
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW OF VOCABULARY EVALUATION 
Logistics 
Ontologies 
Logistics
textbook 
[27] 
Logistics 
textbook 
[28] 
Logistics
standard 
[29] 
Logistics 
standard 
[30] 
Logistics Process 
adequate 
adequate 
adequate 
poor 
Logistics Service 
good 
good 
good 
adequate 
Logistics Object 
good 
good 
good 
satis-
factory 
Logistics Actor 
good 
good 
satis-
factory 
poor 
Logistics Role 
satis-
factory 
satis-
factory 
satis-
factory 
poor 
Logistics 
Location 
good 
good 
adequate 
poor 
Logistics 
Resource 
satis-
factory 
good 
adequate 
satis-
factory 
Logistics KPI 
satis-
factory 
adequate 
adequate 
poor 
 
The experiment shows empirical evidence (Tab. II) 
indicating that across all developed logistics ontologies the 
match strength is good in 34% (11 out of 32), adequate in 
25% (8 out of 32), satisfactory in 25% (8 out of 32), and 
poor in 16% (5 out of 32). Occurring deviations could be 
explained by (1) the transfer of concepts originating in SOC 
to the logistics domain, which in particular holds for the 
concepts of the Logistics 
Process 
Ontology, (2) 
terminological heterogeneities existing in logistics literature, 
and (3) the human factor when performing such experiments. 
In particular, the results in column 5 are influenced by the 
specificity of the corresponding logistics standard. 
B. Semantic Interoperability and Information Integration 
The logistics ontologies constitute a consensual termi-
nological basis for semantic annotation of logistics services. 
Since logistics implies communications beyond organi-
zational borders at a global range, there exists an urgent need 
of integrating heterogeneous and distributed data sources, in 
particular, to achieve semantic interoperability. The logistics 
ontologies should support the mediation between hetero-
geneous data sources and enable unambiguous service 
annotations. To illustrate the problem related to semantic 
interoperability, we review common terms and definitions 
used in conventional service descriptions of three real-world 
LSP and show respectively how they relate to concepts in the 
logistics ontologies. 
TABLE III.  
SEMANTIC INTEROPERABILITY  
Ontology 
Concept 
LSP1 
LSP2 
LSP3 
Transport 
Service 
Complete 
load 
Full load 
Truck load 
Logistics 
Objects 
General cargo 
Parceled 
goods 
Piece goods 
2PLProvider 
Shipper 
Haulage 
contractor 
Forwarder 
Transportation 
Resource 
Truck 
Lorry 
Commercial 
vehicle 
Logistics KPI 
Lead time 
Period of 
supply 
Time of delivery 
 
Based on the content of Table III, we present an example 
originating from real-world data to demonstrate the 
evaluation of semantic interoperability in the proposed 
logistics ontologies. Thereto, we pose queries against the 
logistics ontologies formulated in SPARQL [31]. Originally 
designed as a query language for graph patterns in Resource 
Description Format (RDF), SPARQL is practically also used 
to encode queries against OWL knowledge bases, 
interpreting the basic graph-matching capabilities by using 
the semantics of the ontology language. 
Example: A manufacturing company requests a 4PL to 
provide logistics capabilities, which correspond to the 
capabilities of the logistics company type ‘shipper’. To find 
all names of logistics companies that provide such capa-
bilities, a query is formulated as follows: 
 
PREFIX lo: http://www.interloggrid.org/ 
LogisticsOntology.owl# 
SELECT ?logisticsCompany ?logisticsCompanyName 
FROM <http://www.interloggrid.org/ 
LogisticsOntology.owl#> 
WHERE { 
?shipper rdfs:subClassOf ?2PLProvider. 
?2PLProvider rdfs:subClassOf ?logistics 
Company. 
?logisticsCompany lo:hasFirm lo:logistics 
CompanyName.} 
 
The output of the query, comprises names of Logistics 
Company instances of LSP1, LSP2, and LSP3. This is due to 
the fact that we established equivalence among the classes 
Shipper, Forwarder, and HaulageContractor, being all 
subclasses of 2PLProvider.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposed dedicated logistics ontologies to 
semantically annotate logistics services. The overall 
approach combines SWT and SOC, applying them on the 
logistics domain for flexible and intelligent SCM. We 
propose a three-layered model for engineering semantic 
logistics services. This model includes elements to describe 
both declarative as well procedural aspects. The main focus 
is on the foundation of the three-layered model constituted 
by dedicated logistics ontologies. The logistics ontologies are 
modularly organized and capture the overall concepts of the 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

logistics domain. The application of these ontologies fosters 
semantic annotation of logistics services and facilitates 
semantic interoperability, information integration, and 
reasoning capabilities allowing for intelligent applications. 
The evaluation comprises aspects of the logistics ontology 
vocabulary, semantic interoperability, and information 
integration. This work provides logistics ontologies for 
advanced and more flexible provision of logistics services to 
enhance dynamic configuration of complex supply chains. 
This would be of particular benefit to all participants in 
cooperative logistics scenarios assuming that the logistics 
ontologies are used to describe (annotate) logistics services.  
Future work includes an extensive documentation and the 
full integration, as well as application of the logistics 
ontologies in a logistics platform prototype.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Christopher, “The Agile Supply Chain: Competing in Volatile 
Markets,” Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 29, Jan., 2000, pp. 
37-44, doi:10.1016/S0019-8501(99)00110-8. 
[2] P. Helo and B. Szekely, “Logistics information systems. An analysis 
of software solutions for supply chain co-ordination,” Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 105, Jan. 2005, pp. 5-18, 
doi:10.1108/02635570510575153. 
[3] J. Leukel, A. Jacob, P. Karaenke, S. Kirn, and A. Klein, 
“Individualization of Goods and Services: Towards a Logistics 
Knowledge Infrastructure for Agile Supply Chains,” Proceedings 
AAAI Spring Symposium (AAAI), Mar. 2011, pp. 36-49. 
[4] B. Iyer, J. Freedman, M. Gaynor, and G. Wyner, “Web services: 
enabling dynamic business networks,” Communications of the 
Assocation of Information Systems, vol. 11, 2003, pp. 525-554, 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol11/iss1/30. 
[5] M. Papazoglou and W.-J. van den Heuvel, “Service oriented 
architectures: approaches, technologies and research issue,” The 
VLDB Journal, vol. 16, Mar. 2007, pp. 389–415, doi:10.1007/s00778-
007-0044-3. 
[6] R. Studer, R.V. Benjamins, and D. Fensel, “Knowledge engineering: 
Principles and methods,” Data and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 25, 
March 1998, pp. 161–197, doi:10.1016/S0169-023X(97)00056-6. 
[7] J. Hoxha, A. Scheuermann, and S. Bloehdorn, “An Approach to 
Formal and Semantic Representation of Logistics Services, “ 
Proceedings of the ECAI’10 Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and 
Logistics (AILOG10), Aug. 2010, pp. 73-78. 
[8] O. Wendt, T. Stockheim, S. Grolik, and M. Schwind, “Distributed 
Ontology Management Prospects and Pitfalls on Our Way Towards a 
Web of Ontologies”, Dagstuhl Workshop, 2002. 
[9] C. Chandra and A. Tumanyan, “Organization and problem ontology 
for supply chain information support system,” Data & Knowledge 
Engineering, 
vol. 
61, 
May 
2007, 
pp. 
263–280, 
doi:10.1016/j.datak.2006.06.005. 
[10] A.M. Madni, W. Lin, and C.C. Madni, “IDEON TM: an extensible 
ontology for designing, integrating and managing collaborative dis-
tributed enterprises,” Systems Engineering, vol. 4, Feb. 2001, pp. 35–
48, doi: 10.1002/1520-6858(2001)4:1<35::AID-SYS4>3.0.CO;2-F. 
[11] H.K. Lin, J.A. Harding, and M. Shahbaz, “A Manufacturing system 
engineering ontology for semantic interoperability across extended 
project teams,” International Journal of Production Research, vol. 
42, 2004, pp. 5099–5118, doi: 10.1080/00207540412331281999. 
[12] H.K Lin and J.A. Harding, “A manufacturing system engineering 
ontology model on the se-mantic web for inter-enterprise 
collaboration,” Computers in Industry, vol. 58, June 2007, pp. 428–
437, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2006.09.015. 
[13] F. Fayez, L. Rabelo, and M. Mollaghasemi, “Ontologies for supply 
chain simulation modeling,” Proceedings of the 37th Conference on 
Winter simulation (WSC’05), Dec. 2005, pp. 2364–2370. 
[14] J. Leukel and S. Kirn, “A Supply Chain Management Approach to 
Logistics Ontologies in Information Systems,” Proceedings of the 
11th International Conference on Business Information Systems 
(BIS08), Springer LNBIP, May 2008, pp. 95-105. 
[15] R. Haugen and W.E. McCarthy, “REA, a Semantic model for Internet 
Supply Chain Collaboration,” ACM Conference on Object-Oriented 
Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications, Business 
Objects and Component Design and Implementation Workshop VI: 
Enterprise 
Application 
Integration, 
Oct. 
2000, 
http://jeffsutherland.org/oopsla2000/mccarthy/mccarthy.htm, 
<retrieved: March, 2012>. 
[16] D. Pawlaszczyk, A.J. Dietrich, I.J. Timm, S. Otto, and S. Kirn, 
“Ontologies Supporting Cooperation in Mass Customization - A 
Pragmatic 
Approach,“. 
International 
Conference 
on 
Mass 
Customization and Personalization – Therory and Practice in Cebtral 
Europe, Apr. 2004, pp. 1-19. 
[17] A. L. Soares, A.L. Azevedo, and J.P. De Sousa, “Distributed planning 
and control systems for the virtual enterprise: organizational 
requirements and development life-cycle,” Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing, 
vol. 
11, 
June 
2000, 
pp. 
253–270, 
doi: 
10.1023/A:1008967209167. 
[18] Y. Ye, D. Yang, Z. Jiang, and L. Tong, “An Ontology-based 
Architecture for Implementing Semantic Integration of Supply Chain 
Management,” International Journal of Computer Integrated 
Manufacturing, 
vol. 
21, 
Jan. 
2008, 
pp. 
1–18, 
doi: 
10.1080/09511920601182225. 
[19] M.N. Huhns and M.P. Singh, “Service-oriented computing: key 
concepts and principles,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 9, Jan./Feb. 
2005, pp. 75–81, doi. 10.1109/MIC.2005.21. 
[20] OWL-S: 
Semantic 
Markup 
for 
Web 
Services, 
http://www.w3.org/Submission/OWL-S/, <retrieved: March, 2012>. 
[21] J. Hoxha and S. Agarwal, “Semi-automatic Acquisition of Semantic 
Descriptions of Processes in the Web,” Proceedings of The 
International Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent 
Technology (WI-IAT'10), IEEE, September, 2010, pp. 256-263, doi: 
10.1109/WI-IAT.2010.271. 
[22] M.A. Razzaque and C.C. Sheng, “Outsourcing of logistics functions: 
a literature survey,” International Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics, 
vol. 
28, 
Apr. 
2008, 
pp. 
89-107, 
doi 
. 
10.1108/09600039810221667. 
[23] A. Win, “The value a 4PL provider can contribute to an organi-
sation,” International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics, 
vol. 38, 2008, pp. 674-684, doi: 10.1108/09600030810925962. 
[24] M. Uschold and M. Grüninger, “Ontologies: Principles, Methods, and 
Applications,” Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 11, Feb. 1996, 
pp. 93–155, doi. 10.1109/MIS.2002.999223. 
[25] OWL 
2 
Web 
Ontology 
Language 
(OWL2), 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-profiles/, <retrieved: March, 2012>.  
[26] Supply-Chain Council. 2010. Supply Chain Operations Reference 
Model 
(SCOR®) 
Vers. 
10.0, 
http://www.supply-chain.org, 
<retrieved: March, 2012>. 
[27] H.C. Pfohl, Logistiksysteme. Betriebswirtschaftliche Grundlagen. 
Heidelberg et al., Springer, 2010. 
[28] T. Gudehus, Logistik. Grundlagen, Strategien, Anwendungen. Berlin, 
Springer, 2005. 
[29] Deutsches Institut für Normung (DIN): Transportdienstleistungen – 
Logistik- Glossar. DIN EN 14943:2006-03, 2006. 
[30] Deutsches Institut für Normung (DIN): Transportkette-Grundbegriffe. 
DIN 30781 Teil 1, Teil 2, Beiblatt Teil 1, 1989. 
[31] E. Prud'hommeaux and A. Seaborne, “SPARQL Query Language for 
RDF,” 
W3C 
Recommendation 
15 
January 
2008, 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/, <retrieved: March, 2012>. 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

