Web Service and Structure of University Data 
- Development of Japanese Higher Education Database - 
Masaaki Ida 
Department of Research and Development 
National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation 
Tokyo, Japan 
ida@niad.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the state of research and 
development of web services and data structure of university 
survey data, especially, Japanese higher education survey data. 
Our research and development are aimed for university 
comparative analysis on the data with consideration on general 
university information structure. Institutional data of university, 
college, or college of technology are substantially important for 
data analysis or knowledge discovery in the higher education 
management field. However, university institutional data are not 
necessarily standardized and compiled, so it is not easy to 
integrate their information for various reporting and data 
analysis. In the past decade, investigation of the integrated 
university data sets has been done to deal with various kinds of 
university institutional information including university survey 
or school basic survey data in Japan, by providing the structured 
university data via web services. This paper describes the state of 
research and development of web services and data structure of 
university survey data, which are utilized for understanding the 
university characteristics. We describe: (i) a proposal of the XML 
schema for Japanese university data (ii) development of various 
Web APIs (XML, JSON) of university database for survey cards. 
Keywords- database; school basic survey; web service; data 
structure. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. University Insititutional Data 
Development of education-related databases is substantially 
important for data analysis and knowledge discovery in 
education field worldwide [1]. Institutional data of universities 
are not easy to analyze because they are not necessarily 
standardized and integrated in each university itself or national 
education-related 
agencies. 
However, 
some 
advanced 
education-related 
database 
systems 
are 
progressively 
developing.  
In the United States, Integrated Postsecondary Education 
Data System (IPEDS) [2] of National Center for Education 
Statistics has been developed to collect and analyze basic 
institutional information about universities and colleges in U.S. 
IPEDS 
standardizes and accumulates the information 
nationwide. This system comprehensively holds basic 
institutional data, such as institutional characteristic, degree 
completion, enrollment, human resource, finance, student 
financial aid, graduation rate, and so on. Moreover, this 
system is equipped with facilitated data analysis tools to 
conduct university comparative analysis.  
College Portrait [3] is also higher education database that is 
“a source of basic, comparable information about public 
colleges and institutions presented in a user-friendly format”.  
In European area, for example, Unistat [4] system is 
developed in order to search, review, and compare subjects at 
UK universities and colleges. It “is the official website to help 
you make an informed choice when deciding which UK 
university or college to apply to. It includes the results of the 
latest National Student Survey”.  
In Asia, Korean government started their university 
evaluation system which consists of the university information 
disclosure system, Korea Academyinfo [5], conducted by the 
Korean Council for University Education, so that higher 
educational information of Korean universities is published on 
their web site. 
These databases are well-organized and comprehensive 
systems with easy web-based operation on their web pages. 
However, in order to cooperate (mash-up) with other 
information systems, e.g., in-house database developed in 
individual higher education institutions, or external web 
services (Google Chart API), more improved systems should 
be equipped with various web service functions and 
standardized data sets.  
 
B. University Basic Survey in Japan 
In Japan, Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology collects basic information about higher 
education institutions in Japan [6]. This basic survey data 
include the yearly information of higher education institutions, 
such as number of faculties or staffs, number of enrolled 
students by grade (undergraduate, graduate, foreign student), 
number of graduates by subsequent course, number of those 
who were employed after graduation by industry and by 
occupation, faculties, facilities, and financial data. Fig. 1 
shows an example of university basic survey sheets. 
Its online submission system via internet has been 
developed, which is equipped with authentication and 
encryption functions. Persons of universities in charge of data 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

submission must fill the data into electronic files (PDF files) 
and submit them through internet to the ministry’s data 
collection server.  
The data in the files are saved as XML data as duplication 
data of the submitted PDF file data. However, the XML data 
structure is designed only for data submission purpose. And it 
is not designed for data analysis purpose. These submitted 
survey data are compiled and published by the ministry as 
summarized statistics data tables. Parts of the survey data of 
some universities are published on their web sites. However, 
under the present circumstances sufficient amounts of data, 
detailed 
and 
standardized 
data 
required 
to 
conduct 
intercollegiate comparative analysis are not necessarily 
obtained.  It is difficult to examine detailed situation of higher 
education institutions from various perspectives. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Survey sheet (number of faculty and student) [7]. 
 
C. eXtensible Business Reporting Language 
The eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) [8-10] 
is one of the computer languages based on XML, which is a 
standard for the electronic exchange of data between businesses 
on the internet. XBRL utilizes some XML technologies such as 
XML Schema and XLink standards. Based on XML, tags are 
applied to items of financial business data so that financial data 
can be processed efficiently by computer software. XBRL is 
implemented in a wide range of scenes such as tax payment 
system and financial data transfer system in stock exchange.  
XBRL consists of an XBRL Instance, containing primarily 
the business facts being reported, and a set of Taxonomies, 
defining metadata about these facts, such as what the facts 
mean and how they relate to one another: 
・ Instance holds the following information: business facts, 
contexts (date and time information, scenario), units,  
footnote, and references. 
・ Taxonomies are the reporting-area specific hierarchical 
dictionaries. The XBRL specification defines five different 
kinds of linkbases (Label linkbase, Reference linkbase, 
Definition linkbase, Calculation linkbase, and Presentation 
linkbase). Taxonomies consist of hierarchical structure. 
Different taxonomies are required for different purposes in 
various application fields, therefore, we extend or modify 
taxonomies for university information. 
 
In the following sections of this paper, Section II presents 
structured data and university information database system. 
Section III presents construction of university survey database 
and schema of university survey data. Section IV presents web 
service and application of university survey data.  
 
II. 
UNIVERSITY INFORMATION DATABASE SYSTEM 
A. Structured Data Sets and Taxonomies 
In this section, we describe the general information 
structure of university information and the XBRL extension 
for university information as shown in Fig. 2. 
As shown in the lower right side of the Fig. 2, various data 
and databases are developed in each field such as enrollment, 
finance, personnel data, and so on, which possess and provide 
their data in various manners cooperating with other databases. 
These databases provide specified and designated information 
as HTML files or XML files via Web API [11].  
In the upper left side of the figure, taxonomy hierarchical 
structure expresses the generalized information structure with 
specified taxonomy levels, three level structure, such as 
national or international standard level, institution type level, 
and individual institution level. The structured taxonomy sets 
and their data stored in various concrete databases are linked 
mutually, so that rigid and various definitions of data and 
hierarchical structures are possible, and flexibility for the 
changes of database equipment and time transition of data 
definition is guaranteed. 
Their data are transmitted via web services, which are 
composed of REST type Web APIs (JSONP) with XML and 
JSON data transferred into the Business Intelligence system as 
shown in the right-hand side of the figure. The Business 
Intelligence system produces integrated university reports and 
the results of comparative analysis of higher education 
institutions combined with outer databases, reporting system, 
and analysis systems (mash up). 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Fig. 2. University information system and taxonomy hierarchical structure. 
 
B. Extension of Taxonomies 
We conducted taxonomy design for university financial 
statements in Japan [12], i.e., we proposed taxonomy for 
Balance Sheet and Income Statement of university, which is an 
extension from ordinal XBRL taxonomy. The structure of 
proposed taxonomy for university financial statement consists 
of five different kinds of linkbases or files. In the taxonomy, 
the definitions of the vocabulary (Japanese and English) are 
assembled in the definition file folder for general company or 
in the extended university finance file folder. The presentation 
orders or format structure of the financial elements in the 
financial statement are defined in the university finance 
presentation file folder.  
Adding to the extension for university finance data, we 
proposed further extension for university institution data [13], 
which aims for expressing various indexes of institutional 
situation, e.g.,  
Ratio of education expenses to student 
＝ (Education expenses) / (Number of student). 
In order to treat various indexes related to higher education 
institutions for institutional reports, we extended the general 
hierarchy of terminologies, e.g., taxonomy extension such as 
number of undergraduate male and under graduate female  
extended to ordinal taxonomy. 
III. 
UNIVERSITY SURVEY DATA 
A. Construction of University Survey Database 
In this section, we focus on the data of University Basic 
Survey and its database. We have examined the data structure 
of university survey of Japan. Based on the examination we 
are considering database system as an infrastructure for 
applying them to analyze various aspects of universities. As a 
pilot system, we tried to collect sample survey data of U.S. 
and store them into the developed database so far. 
Up to now for Japanese university survey data, we 
designed and developed useful tools that upload and transform 
the XML data in university basic survey, and store them into a 
relational database. The data flow and process for the survey 
are shown in the Fig. 3.  
University Survey Formats (sheets) are consist of detailed 
university information card, such as “Institutional structure, 
faculty member and staff (7_A (number of students), 7_B1 
(number of academic staffs), 7_C, 7_Z)”, “Student (8_D2 
(number of students of each department), 8_3, 8_E, 8_G, 8_7, 
8_R)”, “Graduate student (9_H4, 9_5, 9_I, 9_S, 9_8)”, 
“College (10_J6, 10_9, 10_K)”, “Foreign student (11)”, 
“Facility (20)”, “Financial data (22A, 22B)”, “Employment 
(30)”, and so on. The detailed card information,  such as card 
7_A, card 22A, are described in reference [7]. 
 
 
 
 Fig. 3. Data flow and process for Japanese university basic survey. 
 
B. Schema of University Survey Data 
  In this paper, we propose XML schema of various university 
information in University Survey Formats. The XML schema 
represents the University Survey information of several 
universities into a standard  and integrated university  formats. 
Fig. 4 shows the overview of XML Schema structure of 
university information. Each dashed-green rectangle indicates 
university level schema, and dashed-blue rectangle indicates 
department level schema. Fig. 4 is a part of whole structure of 
the XML Schema of university survey information. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Fig. 4. XML Schema for Japanese university basic survey. 
 
IV. 
WEB SERVICE OF UNIVERSITY SURVEY DATA 
A. Web API of University Survey Database 
In this paper, we develop two kinds of Web APIs (XML, 
JSON) of university database for survey cards. 
Several web APIs were considered which are suitable for 
data analysis and data dissemination. This type of web 
services cause independency of application modules which 
can be easily redesigned and reformed. 
The following are examples of RESTful web service (Web 
API) [14] retrieved by survey year and institution number of 
Japanese universities and so on.  
Fig. 5 shows an example of output of web service on the 
number of student form the university survey (survey format 
7), that is corresponding to red rectangle part in Fig. 4. 
Elements in Japanese mean “university name”, “address”, 
“number of undergraduate student”, “number of graduate 
student (master)”, “number of graduate student (doctor)”, and 
so on. 
Fig. 6 shows an example of output of the web service 
concerning university financial data from the university survey 
(survey format 22) , that is corresponding to green rectangle 
part in Fig. 4. Elements in Japanese mean “university name”, 
“address”, “faculty salary”, “staff salary”, “education 
expense”, “management expense”, and so on (unit: 1,000 Yen). 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Output example of web service (Number of student; Format 7). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Output example of web service (Finance; Format 22). 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

B. Web API and Reporting 
Receiving the web service data form database system at the 
client side, this system generates spreadsheet or PDF files, 
which are reporting sheets subject to the conventional formats 
of university survey booklets.  
When the XML data from web services are obtained, that is 
corresponding to blue rectangle part in Fig. 4. The data are 
simply transmitted into spreadsheet files with data bindings as 
shown in Fig. 7. The elements in Japanese mean the number of 
“professor male”, “professor female”, “associate professor 
male”, “associate professor female”, and so on for each 
university faculty. The Excel sheets only possess the 
relationships between items of XML returned by web service 
and the columns of sheets. Therefore, in case that some data 
on University Database are modified, we don’t need to adjust 
the spreadsheet structure, and the data in each sheet would be 
automatically changed. 
 
University DB system –> Web API (REST) –> XML –> Data 
binding –> Excel Sheets 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Reporting results: Binding of spreadsheet and  web service. 
 
C. Web API and Comparative Analysis 
We can utilize these web services in case of comparative 
analysis. In this section, we show some examples of 
comparative analysis using JSON data derived from the web 
services and mash up with outer web APIs. Simplified and 
smart analyses can be executed as shown in the following 
examples. Outer web APIs are included in Google API 
(Google Chart, Map, …).  
 
DB system –> Web API (JSONP) –> JSON –> “Mash Up” -> 
JavaScript (jQuery)  –> Visualization (Chart, Graph) 
 
1) 
Comparative Analysis on Ration of Expenditure 
Fig. 8 shows an example of comparative analysis of three 
major national universities on expenditure ratio. The data from 
the web API is JSON data of JSONP call back function, so 
that this analysis is programmed by JavaScript combined with 
“Google Chart API”. Mash-up programing is not difficult for 
beginner of programming because of the typical combination 
of web services for university comparison and analysis. 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Example of university survey data analysis: Annual expenditure of 
three national universities in Japan. 
 
2) 
Comparative Analysis on Faculty Salary 
Fig. 9 shows an example of university survey analysis on 
total faculty salary on various sections (faculty, university 
hospital, research institution, total amount) on four major 
national 
universities 
in 
Japan. 
This 
visualization 
is 
programmed by JavaScript combined with some JavaScript 
libraries such as jQuery. 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

V. 
CONCLUSION 
Applications 
of 
education 
related 
information 
are 
substantially important for data analysis and knowledge 
discovery in education field. This paper described the state of 
research for web service and data structure of university survey 
data, which is utilized for analyses of university characteristics. 
In this paper, we (i) proposed the XML schema for Japanese 
university data, and (ii) developed various Web APIs (XML, 
JSON) of university database for survey cards. In order to 
handle of more general university data such as the data 
between some countries, we have to coordinate differences 
between those data for effective comparisons. We hope that 
our proposal will play an important role as an infrastructure for 
data analysis and knowledge discovery in higher education 
field. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Romero, S. Ventura, M. Pechenizkiy and R. Baker (eds.),  Handbook 
of Educational Data Mining, CRC Press, 2010. 
[2] Integrated 
Postsecondary 
Education 
Data 
System, 
IPEDS, 
http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/ 
[3] College Portrait, http://www.collegeportraits.org/ 
[4] Unistat, http://unistats.direct.gov.uk/ 
[5] Korea Academyinfo, http://www.academyinfo.go.kr/ 
[6] Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, basic 
information 
of 
higher 
education 
institutions 
in 
Japan,  
http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/toukei/  
[7] Example of survey sheet (sheet of “faculty and student”), 
http://www.mext.go.jp/component/b_menu/other/__icsFiles/afieldfile/20
12/03/30/1318957_3.pdf 
[8] eXtensible Business Reporting Language, http://www.xbrl.org/ 
[9] R. Debreceny, C. Felden, B. Ochocki, M. Piechocki, et al., XBRL for 
Interactive Data: Engineering the Information Value Chain, Springer, 
2009. 
[10] C.Hoffmann, and L.A. Watson, XBRL, Wiley, 2010. 
[11] M. Ida, “Web Service and Visualization for Higher Education 
Information Providing Service,” Proc. of ICSESS2010, pp.415—418, 
2010. 
[12] M. Ida, “XBRL Extension for Knowledge Discovery in Higher 
Education,” the 8th International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and 
Knowledge Discovery,  pp.2177—2180, 2011. 
[13] M. Ida, “XBRL Financial Database for Higher Education Institutions,” 
the 14th International Conference on Advanced Communication 
Technology, pp. 398—401, 2012. 
[14] L. Richardson and S. Ruby, Restful Web Services: Oreilly & Associates 
Inc, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9. Example of university survey analysis for financial information: Total salary on sections (109 Yen) 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

