A Mobile Learning App for Driving Lessons
J. Molina-Gil, C. Caballero-Gil, P. Caballero-Gil
Department of Statistics, Operations Research and Computing
University of La Laguna
Tenerife, Spain
Email: {jmmolina, ccabgil, pcaballe}@ull.es
A. Quesada-Arencibia
Institute of Cybernetic Science and Technology
University of Las Palmas de G.C.
Las Palmas, Spain
Email: aquesada@dis.ulpgc.es
Abstract—Mobile learning, or m-learning, is a new step in
e-learning that offers novel opportunities for learning beyond
traditional classrooms and computer-based tools, thanks to the
use of mobile devices. The mobility of digital technologies may
be applied to change the nature of the relationships among
teachers, students and learning objects. In this paper, we
propose a mobile application, called Planning2Drive, as an m-
learning example that shows the potential of smartphones in the
learning process, mainly because they can be used anywhere,
any time.
Keywords-Mobile learning; m-learning; education; mobile
devices; outdoor learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile learning can be deﬁned as the use of wireless
mobile technology for e-learning [1]. M-learning is a sub-
set of e-learning through mobile computational devices. It
allows the access to a learning environment from anywhere,
at any time. Therefore, learners can use wireless mobile
technology both for formal and informal learning, so that
they can get additional and personalized learning materials
from the Internet and/or from the host organization.
Most research on e-learning and m-learning is focused on
theoretical learning. In particular, in the literature we can
ﬁnd different proposals on how to generate contents, exer-
cises, activities, etc., for e/m-learning platforms. However,
in general the practical part of the lessons is what provides
a richer education and promotes lifelong learning.
A practice environment is deﬁned as a situation where
students apply their knowledge to practice, learn key skills
and achieve the required competencies. Thus, it can be seen
as a way to reinforce learning. Despite the great progress in
mobile devices and their growing inﬂuence in our society,
they have not yet been proposed as a learning tool in a
practice environment. In this paper, we show an example of
how e-learning based on mobile technology can be used in
the teaching/learning process, through a learning case study
and the analysis of its educational potential.
Practical lessons, like those followed by students who are
preparing for the driving license test, do not allow students
to keep track of their progress and subsequently to ﬁx the
points where mistakes were made. These aspects are very
important in any teaching process, not only to ensure that
teachers have reached the learning goals but also to give
students the necessary trust to face the practical driving test.
In this paper, we present a mobile application called
Planning2drive, which allows students to create learning
sequences from their own experience as well as from the
output generated by other students. It creates a collaborative
environment where not only students learn from their own
mistakes, but also from the mistakes of other students. In
addition, students can track their progress as well as compare
them with other students who are preparing or have taken
the test. This work is focused on the practical driving test
in UK for being a fairly easy system due to its properly
regulated assessment model.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
related research about e-learning and m-learning. Require-
ments and explanation of the proposed application are in-
cluded in Section III. In Section IV the potential of this
new technology as tool for teaching and learning is analysed.
Finally, Section V includes conclusions and future work.
II. BACKGROUND
Nowadays, information technologies, such as email and
instant messaging, are widely used to facilitate commu-
nication and collaboration. In [2], the authors state that
technology can be effective in the learning process only
when it meets speciﬁc educational needs. This happens when
the activities that learners perform are active, constructive,
intentional, authentic, and cooperative. In addition, access
to multimedia technology has previously been shown in [3]
to improve cognitive engagement and cognitive absorption
in users. On the other hand, Ellison et al. [4] states that
instructors should investigate which are the software imple-
mentations that best support the pedagogical goals and needs
of students in advance.
Many papers study the inﬂuence of m-learning in the
teaching-learning process. For instance Hardless et al. [5]
presents a research project on training, education and shar-
ing of experiences among mobile people in a professional
environment. That work shows the need for new forms of
education in which students can participate where and when
they choose, and evidences how third generation cellular
can provide them. In [6] the author presents a study of
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

the mobile media revolution on instructional design and
learning effectiveness in nursing education. In [7], Alexander
proposes the use of iPhones to take attendance. In particular,
according to that proposal, as students enter the classroom,
instead of writing their name on a sheet, they simply
enter their ID number and a speciﬁc class number into an
iPhone application. In order to prevent students from logging
in from home or outside class, the application uses GPS
location data and checks which router the students have
logged in to.
Finally, Traxler [8] presents a preliminary attempt to
address the issue of deﬁnition and conceptualisation of
m-learning, and draws on recent research examining case
studies from the UK and elsewhere. Such a research shows
how mobile learning can transform the delivery of education
and training.
III. RESEARCH APPROACH
A. Understanding the Ofﬁcial DSA car practical test
The Driving Standards Agency (DSA) is an executive
agency within the UK Department for Transport. Its mission
and primary aim is to promote road safety by inﬂuencing
driver and rider behaviour. It delivers tests from around 400
driving test centres and 140 theory test centres. The DSA
provides the possibility that students book the practical test
online, so that they can check whether their preferred date
and time is available and book it by phone or through email.
On average, those who pass the test have taken around 45
professional lessons and 20 hours of private practice.
When students get to the test, they are asked if they want
to be accompanied by their driving instructor or another per-
son during the test, and after it for the result and feedback.
The test lasts from 28 to 40 minutes. During it, students
drive in various road and trafﬁc conditions and are asked
to drive independently for approximately ten minutes, by
following either trafﬁc signs or a series of verbal directions,
or a combination of both. They can also be asked to complete
certain test manoeuvres such as turning in the road, parallel
parking, reversing around a corner, or doing a controlled
stop. If students commit more than 15 driving faults or a
serious or dangerous fault at any time, they fail the test.
B. Planing2Drive Architecture
Planning2drive is a mobile phone application whose goal
is to monitor students during the teaching-learning process
and the preparation for the driving test. A Beta version is
already available for both iPhone and Android platforms. In
addition, the application allows to maintain student-teacher
communication. In the teaching-learning process two main
roles are distinguished within the application’s functionality:
• The teacher, who monitors and supports students
throughout the learning process. He/She is responsi-
ble for signalling mistakes during practices, using the
Planning2Drive platform.
• The student, who can receive professional and private
practices. Besides, he/she can check all the mistakes
committed in the practices that have been marked by
the teachers using the website or a mobile phone.
Planning2drive app allows students to be best prepared
for the driving test so that they can ﬁnd it less difﬁcult.
Moreover, through its use, students can reduce the number
of lessons, and consequently save money.
In this section, we outline several use cases of the pro-
posed application, suited for teachers and students.
1) Planing2Drive Website: The website [9] allows to
create a virtual classroom where all the professionals of
driving training can be registered. This will be the meeting
point between teachers and students. In order to ensure the
e-learning platform, in addition to registering, the professio-
nals have to prove their ability to teach driving practices.
Once the website administrator has checked the data, the
website shows the contact details of the teachers to the
students, so that they can book lessons with them. Each
teacher has a calendar that is administered by him/herself,
indicating the available hours. Students registered in the
system can select the teacher they want and ask for a lesson
using the timetable set by the teacher.
In addition, each teacher shows on the website a set
of practices performed with his/her students, including the
committed mistakes. The teacher is free to publish all, some,
or none of the practices, but the recommendation is that the
teacher only publish the practices that can help students in
the learning process. In any case, student identiﬁcations are
never shown with the published practices.
On the other hand, teachers also publish their students’
exam practices, both the passed ones and the failed ones.
In this way, students can see the most common faults in
practice exams and learn from them. In addition, it will help
them not to get nervous if they make a mistake because they
would have seen how other students have passed the exam
even with some errors.
Students who register in the system, in addition to book
lessons with teachers, can keep track of all the practices they
have done with each teacher. In this way, they can strengthen
their learning, not only when they make a mistake and the
teacher indicates it, but also when they achieve observational
learning through reviewing their lessons and mistakes.
2) Planing2Drive App for Professional Lessons and Ex-
ams: Once the student/teacher relationship is set, the teacher
can begin the process of tracking practices of each student.
The application is very intuitive and easy to use so, the
teachers have no problem with it, and the corresponding
learning curve indicates a quick progress in learning.
When the teacher logs in at the application, he/she is
shown a list of students who have booked a practice with
him/her that day (see Figure 1A). As shown in Figure 1B,
once the teacher selects a student, he/she can see the
student’s contact information, like phone number and email.
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 1.
Teacher Interface: Students List and Students Details
The ﬁrst step for a practice lesson is that the student
and the teacher agree a meeting place, because there is no
school or classroom. The proposed application facilitates
contact between the student and the teacher in case of
unexpected change of plans, such as delay, cancellation, etc.
It also provides an interface that allows the teacher to start a
practice and mark possible faults committed by the students.
In order to mark the mistakes during the practices, the DSA
Driving Test Report provides a list containing the most
common mistakes, but teachers are also permitted to create
and introduce new mistakes. When the practice lesson starts,
the teacher pushes the correspondent button, and in that
moment the app shows the map with the current location and
a list of possible errors nearby. Each time a student commits
a mistake, the teacher pushes the icon corresponding to the
mistake and that mistake is shown on the map. Figure 2
summarizes some mistakes that the application contains and
the corresponding icons that represent them. Locating the
mistakes on the map is beneﬁcial for the student because in
this way he/she can pay more attention to avoid repeating
the same mistakes in the same places, especially when the
student is carrying out a test in the area. The application
contains a ﬁeld that allows distinguishing between the two
types of practices: training and test. This not only allows
improving the student’s knowledge but also allows sharing
with other students’ information about the possible mistakes
during the exams and about the usual exam routes.
3) Planing2Drive App for Private Practices: The best
way to learn is through the combination of professional
lessons and private practices. Currently, the students try to
get as much experience on the road as they can. One of
the problems they face is that they only receive feedback
during the lessons or when they ﬁnish them and speak with
the teacher. The proposed application provides a tool that
not only allows obtaining information about the mistakes
the students commit, but also reviewing such feedback from
anywhere, including from home. Students can get informa-
tion about the place where the mistakes were committed and
afterwards repeat the same route as many times as they want
Figure 2.
Common Error Table
Figure 3.
Errors in a Practice
either in professional lessons or private practices.
Each student who has installed the application can use
it for two purposes. On the one hand, the student can
record the private practices following the same process that a
professional teacher. In this case, the person responsible for
overseeing these private lessons, is responsible for following
the teacher’s role speciﬁed in section III-B2. On the other
hand, the student has access to data about all types of
practices (professional or private) that have been recorded, so
therefore he/she can check the committed mistakes during
them. Figure 3 shows an example of a recorded practice
that a student can visualize. In that example the student has
committed three faults, two of them involving driving faults
while the other is a serious fault. The ﬁrst corresponds to
a manoeuvre that had not been properly signalled. If the
teacher used the tool correctly, the mistakes appear in the
exact place where they were committed. As can be seen in
the image, the second fault occurred while the student was
driving on a highway, where the student exceeded the limit
speed, which in this case was set at 70km/h. This would
mean a failing in the test. Finally, there is a signal indicating
that the student has not respected the safety distance with
the vehicle ahead.
Besides, the students have a section in the website where
they can share experiences in their practices. The most
important aspect is the possibility to establish cooperation
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

among students. Students can explain their experience with
the tool during the teaching/learning process, and they can
also share with other students which teachers they have
liked most and why. They may also indicate which practices
have been more useful for them. It provides a cooperative
environment where students can share their experiences.
IV. PEDAGOGICAL VALUE
The purpose of this study is to investigate the pedagogical
value of the Planning2Drive application by identifying its
relationship with factors that may have the potential for
improving learner outcomes. For the purpose of this study,
the pedagogical value has been deﬁned on constructivist
principles in the learning process, by retaining and using
information about committed mistakes.
An important aspect for the learning process is that
students have opportunities to receive feedback, especially
to correct faults, and to incorporate that information into
their further understanding and/or performance. Constructive
criticism, performed effectively, is a productive educational
activity. However, in the proposed application, the public
nature of feedback, particularly criticism, can complicate its
effectiveness as a form of pedagogy. Thus, possible defen-
siveness and embarrassment of students have to be avoided
by providing complete anonymity in the data offered to
other students. Planning2Drive reaches this goal by showing
practices and exam examples without showing the students’
names. On the other hand, the students can review their own
practices, in a private way.
Chickering et al. [10] identiﬁes seven principles that are
types of teaching and learning activities needed to improve
learning outcomes. Some of those principles are met in
Planning2Driver. First, in order to state a good teaching
procedure, it promotes reciprocity and cooperation among
students. This is accomplished through the web platform
that offers students the opportunity to share their expe-
riences. Another proposed principle is encouragement of
active learning. In the proposed tool, students are able to
see the immediate results of their professional practices and
create their own practices. Students can also ask teachers
to perform some of the practices that other students have
categorized as difﬁcult in order to analyze and compare their
own results. Furthermore, as recommended, a prompt feed-
back is give throught he proposed application. In particular,
during the practices, the teacher indicates what the student
has done well and wrong so that after the student ﬁnishes
the practice, he/she can immediately visualize the commited
mistakes in his/her mobile phone and review them with or
without the teacher. One of the most important aspects of
the used technology is that it allows to respect diverse ways
of learning. Students can ﬁx their pace of learning by doing
less or more professional practices depending on their own
needs.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Planning2Drive is an m-learning tool that allows track-
ing driving lessons. This study has demonstrated that the
proposed tool presents an important educational content and
shows once again the importance and potential of mobile
technology in the teaching/learning process. Planning2Drive
is a tool yet under development. In particular, a Beta version
is already available which will be put into operation soon
in UK, so wide data and feedback about its usefulness will
be obtained from teachers and students. The anaysis of such
results and consequent improvements of the tool are part of
the future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research supported by the Ministerio de Economa y Com-
petitividad and the FEDER Fund under Projects TIN2011-
25452 and IPT-2012-0585-370000, and the FPI scholar-
ship BES-2009-016774, BES-2012-051817, and ACIISI-
BOC Number 60.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Sung, et al. ”Mobile-IT Education (MIT. EDU):m-learning
applications for classroom settings”. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning Vol. 21, N. 3, 2005, pp. 229237.
[2] D. H. Jonassen, J. Howland, R. M. Marra, and D. P. Chrismond,
”Meaningful Learning With Technology”. Prentice-Hall, 2008.
[3] R. Agarwal and B. Karahanna, ”Time Flies When You Are
Having Fun: Cognitive Absorption and Beliefs About Infor-
mation Technology Usage”. MIS Quarterly, Vol. 24, No. 4,
2000, pp. 665-694.
[4] N. B. Ellison and Y. Wu, ”Blogging In The Classroom: A
Preliminary Exploration Of Student Attitudes And Impact
On Comprehension”. Journal of Educational Multimedia and
Hypermedia, Vol. 17, No. 1, 2008, pp. 99-122.
[5] C. Hardless, J. Lundin, and U. Nuldn, ”Mobile competence
development for nomads”.
System Sciences, Proceedings of
the 34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Source:
IEEE Xplore, DOI: 10.1109 /HICSS.2001.926229, 2001.
[6] M. Maagi, ”iPod, uPod? An emerging mobile learning tool in
nursing education and students satisfaction”.
Australasian
Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education
(ASCILITE), Sydney, Australia, 2006.
[7] B. Alexander, ”Using smartphones to track attendance”.
Lib-
eral Education Tomorrow, 2010.
[8] J. Traxler, ”Deﬁning Mobile Learning”.
Proceedings IADIS
International Conference Mobile Learning 2005, Malta, 2005,
pp. 261-266.
[9] http://www.planningtodrive.com/, 2013.
[10] A. W. Chickering and Z. F. Gamson, ”Seven Principles For
Good Practice In Undergraduate Education”.
The Teaching,
Learning and Technology Group (TLT). Retrieved on Septem-
ber 6 from http://www.tltgroup.org/Seven/Home.htm, 2008.
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

