 
 
Value Engineering and Agile for building Urgent and Emergency Care 
Daniela America da Silva,   Samara Cardoso dos Santos,   Wilson Cristoni,   Luiz Coura,   Fabio Kfouri,   
Gildarcio Sousa Goncalves,   Alyson Basilio,   Ricardo Alvarenga,   Breslei Max Reis da Fonseca,   Jean Carlos 
Lourenco Costa,   Juliana F. Pasquini Martinez,   Claudio Lima,   Alexandre Nascimento,   Johnny Marques,   
Luiz Alberto Vieira Dias,   Adilson Marques da Cunha,   Paulo Marcelo Tasinaffo 
Electronic Engineering and Computing Department 
Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology 
São José dos Campos, São Paulo, Brazil 
Email: stagiho-bd@googlegroups.com 
 
Abstract—In health care, combating waste is an emerging issue 
as clinicians face the complexities of current patient care 
requiring to apply new technologies as also collaborate with 
professionals 
from 
engineering 
and 
computer 
science 
background. Answering to that call, during the 1st Semester of 
2018, at the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology 
(Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronautica - ITA), a successful 
Collaborative Interdisciplinary Problem-Based Learning (Co-
IPBL) experience took place, for conceptualizing, modeling, 
developing, and testing a Computer System based upon Big 
Data, Blockchain Hyperledger, Micro-services, and other 
emerging technologies applied to Urgent and Emergency Care. 
The Co-IPBL experience had the participation of a medical 
technical team from the Hospital of Clinics at the Faculty of 
Medicine of the University of São Paulo. In the present article, 
we discuss how value engineering, agile and the business model 
canvas could help improve functionality benefit, reduce cost, 
combat waste and reduce complexity. We then propose a 
process to apply a quantitative method to prioritize valuable 
User Stories, reducing scope and demonstrating real delivered 
value as proposed in the Business Model Canvas. For the 
implementation, the Blockchain Hyperledger was used as a 
common database of health care information that doctors and 
providers could access.   
Keywords-Health Care System; Big Data; Internet of Things; 
Agile method and testing; Intelligent Systems; Micro-services 
Architecture; Cloud Computing; Blockchain; interdisciplinarity; 
Collaborative problem-based learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper tackles the development of an academic 
project using the Collaborative Interdisciplinary Problem-
Based Learning (Co-IPBL) and how value engineering, agile 
and the business model canvas could help to improve 
functionality benefit, increase the effectiveness of attendance 
in hospital and/or reducing cost for the specific urgent and 
emergency care domain. 
Combating waste is a permanent goal and priority of all 
organizations. Any activity in the project that is not adding 
some value or utility to someone is an unnecessary activity 
and must be eliminated. Another area requiring attention is 
the capacity and human energy, and the waste of these 
capabilities has brought huge losses to companies. 
Combating waste is a responsibility everyone can not be left 
out of it, because non-participation is already a waste of a 
very valuable resource, which is human talent. 
In health care, combating waste is an emerging issue as 
clinicians face the complexities of current patient care: the 
need for applying new technologies in health care 
management and the need for health care professionals to 
collaborate with professionals from engineering and 
computer science background. Interdisciplinary health care 
teams with members from many professions and value 
engineering usually answer calls, by working together, 
collaborating, 
communicating 
closely 
and 
improving 
functionality benefits to digitize patients' care [10]-[12]. 
This research work provides an integration of 3 different 
courses taught at the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of 
Technology (Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica - ITA): 
CE-240 Database Systems Projects, CE-245 Information 
Technologies, and CE-229 Software Testing. It involved 
some cooperative work with technical Physicians from 
Urgent and Emergency Health Care at the Hospital of Clinics 
from the Faculty of Medicine at the University of São Paulo, 
Brazil. 
This academic project was driven by ITA to generate 
expertise on developing, integrating, and managing Urgent 
and Emergency Health Care in the Hospital of Clinics [4]. 
This 
project 
was 
named 
in 
Portuguese 
Soluções 
Tecnológicas Aplicáveis ao Gerenciamento de Informações 
Hospitalares Ostensivas com Big Data - STAGIHO-DB, 
meaning in English, "Technological Solutions Applicable for 
Managing Ostensive Hospital Information with Big Data- 
TSA4MOHIBD". Scrum Agile Method [1]-[3], Value 
Engineering [15][16], Business Model Canvas[19] and its 
best practices were used, in order to develop a computer 
system to satisfy project requirements in a time frame of just 
16 academic weeks. 
This TSA4MOHIBD Project [5] was divided into two 
groups of application: External Regulation and Internal 
Regulation, by sharing its development among four student 
teams, which were responsible for developing different 
functional requirements involving the verification of quality, 
reliability, safety, and testability. 
This research work project was developed by using 
GitHub to store program code, NodeJs [21] for the 
development of Java Micro-services (fine-grained services), 
NoSQL Databases [22] to store the internal data for the 
Hospital, Blockchain Hyperledger [9] to store the electronic 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
health records, Kafka [23] for message exchanging in the 
common communication data bus, and other emerging 
technologies. During this collaborative project development, 
more than 20 students have practiced the roles of Product 
Owner (PO), Scrum Masters (SMs), and Team Developers 
(TDs). 
At the end of this project, a total of 52 Atributtes has 
been identified to prepare 35 User Stories (USs) to compose 
the Product Backlog. However, only 20 USs were developed 
within 3 monthly sprints as part of scope reduction and value 
engineering. For each Sprint was built a Business Model 
Canvas describing the benefits to be delivered. In the first 
week of each sprint it was performed the Sprint Planning to 
identify the USs aligned with the Business Model Canvas, 
and every week the development process was monitored to 
keep the focus on the big picture and final product more 
aligned to target audience desires and needs [19]. At the end 
of each sprint, reviews and retrospective meetings took 
place. Moreover, the Acceptance Test Driven Development 
(ATDD) [6] was applied by generating a minimum, 
necessary, and sufficient set of artifacts stored at the Project 
Internet Portal [5]. 
For each US, more than one test case and acceptance test 
were developed. The integration strategy between groups of 
subsystem components occurred, by using Micro-services, a 
Commom Data Communication Bus, and Blockchain 
Hyperledger, allowing information to be available via 
broadcast to every hospital area and also to the External 
Regulator named CROSS (named in Portuguese Central de 
Regulação de Ofertas de Serviços de Saúde and meaning in 
English the Regulation Center for Health Services 
Offerings). 
An overview of the Urgent and Emergency Care flow is 
presented in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  The Emergency and Urgent Care Overview. 
In Section II, we describe the attributes of Urgent and 
Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP. In Section III we present 
the analysis of attributes and the process applied to reduce 
scope prioritizing the most valuable USs according to the 
Value Engineering analysis. In Section IV, we present the 
Proof of Concept. In Section V, we present the final 
deliverables using Blockchain Hyperledger. And in Section 
VI we state our conclusions and suggest possible topics for 
future research. 
 
II. 
THE URGENCY AND EMERGENCY HEALTH CARE IN 
THE HCFMUSP 
Before starting the academic year, some students from 
the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology (ITA) had 
a planning meeting with some members of the Emergency 
Care in the Hospital of Clinics from the Faculty of Medicine 
at the University of São Paulo (in Portuguese, Hospital da 
Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina de São Paulo - 
HCFMUSP). 
On that opportunity, the internal members of the hospital 
have presented some details of the internal and external 
regulation and clarified the diagram presented in Figure 1. At 
that time, there was also an on-site visit to some emergency 
areas and hospital sectors and it was agreed that some 
information should be shared with ITA developers, such as 
students and professors, in order to provide requirements 
specifications for the next steps of project development. 
A. Regulations 
Regulations of Hospitals and Health Units attending 
Urgencies and Emergencies are usually carried out by the 
Health Care Supply Regulatory Center (CROSS). Some 
urgencies and emergencies are referred to the CROSS by: the 
Mobile Emergency Response Service (in Portuguese, Serviço 
de Atendimento Móvel de Urgência - SAMU); the Military 
Police Operations Center (in Portuguese, Central de 
Operações Policias Militares - COPOM); the Firefighter 
Operations Center (in Portuguese, Centro de Operações do 
Corpo de Bombeiros - COBOM); and/or Health, Secondary 
Hospitals, and Specialized Hospitals. 
It is through the CROSS that the HCFMUSP use to be 
contacted, in order to respond to urgencies and emergencies. 
An emergency patient may also arrive by the regular 
entrance of the HCFMUSP and after contacting the CROSS 
(usually via email or through the CROSS Web Portal), the 
HCFMUSP will screen through an Internal Hospital 
Regulation to filter relevant cases for hospital care. 
B. The External Regulation 
The Health Care Secretary of São Paulo understood the 
regulation as an important tool for the management of public 
health systems, which has among its objectives the equity of 
the access implemented through dynamic actions executed in 
an equitable, orderly, timely and rational way, creating the 
CROSS, which brings together actions aimed at regulating 
access in hospitals and outpatient areas, contributing to the 
integrality of the assistance, providing the adjustment of the 
available health care supply to the immediate needs of the 
citizen as described at the CROSS Internet Portal [13]. 
C. The Internal Regulation 
The Internal Regulation is the area responsible in the 
Hospital for verifying availability to receive a Patient and 
will also make the contact with the appropriate hospital 
institute to evaluate if a Patient could be transferred to the 
Hospital. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
III. 
THE BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS 
The Business Model Canvas is a simple graphical 
template describing nine essential components and it brings 
clarity and simplicity to evaluate business models in minutes 
[19] and a way to refocus the way you view your business. 
Between the elements analyzed are: Customer segments, 
value propositions, channels, customer relationships (such as 
self-service or personal assistance), revenue streams, 
resources, activities, partnerships, and costs.  
The individual elements prompt consideration of a 
business’ full scope, while the layout encourages thought 
about how the pieces fit together. In Figure 2 is presented the 
Urgent and Emergency Care Business Model Canvas. And in 
Table I and II the details analyzed for each Business Canvas 
Element. 
 
Figure 2.  The Urgent and Emergency Care Business Model Canvas 
TABLE I.  
THE BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS - MAPPING RESOURCES 
Elements 
Urgent and Emergency Care 
Main Partners 
HCFMUSP. Resources acquired: Knowledge about 
urgent and emergency care. Partner Activities: Verify 
deliveries. 
Main 
Activities 
Attend the Patient at the right time in the right place. 
Decrease waiting queue at the Hospital. 
Best Patient Care. Better use of resources. 
Appropriate Patient Flow Strategy with planned 
emergency care. Appropriate flow of emergency 
doors, emergency room and surgical center and costs. 
Main 
resources 
Beds, Physicians, Patients, On Call Physicians. 
Communication between the services delivered by the 
teams. Patient data availability (Blockchain). 
Availability of hospital data (data bus). Efficient 
communication with External Regulator (CROSS) 
TABLE II.  
THE BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS - MAPPING VALUES 
Elements 
Urgent and Emergency Care 
Value 
proposition 
Allocate the appropriate vacancy for the right care, at 
the right time and in the right place. Respond to the 
REGULATOR if there are vacancies for emergency 
care using Artificial Intelligence. Decrease silos 
within the hospital. Patient demographics information 
available to know the source of emergencies. 
Physician georeference, his mobility, location and 
time of arrival in the emergency. Patient georeference, 
mobility, location, reducing idle time. Health Care 
Planning even before the arrival of the PATIENT to 
the HOSPITAL. Electronic Records available for all 
departments (Blockchain) and also other institutions 
Elements 
Urgent and Emergency Care 
(check-in). 
Customer 
Relationship 
Broadcast between internal regulator, emergency 
room, and support staff (doctors and nurses). Cross, 
Hospital and Emergency First Aid are integrated 
through a common data communication bus to align 
Patient Care. Patient data is in BlockChain. 
Communicati
on Channels 
Communication is proactive, via broadcast 
communication data bus, bed planned for the moment 
of hospitalization of the patient, staff prepared for the 
care. The communication is proactive, the Hospital 
regularly publishes vacancies, Cross publishes its 
requests and the intelligence monitors and verifies 
based on this data whether PATIENT can be attended 
or not. 
Customer 
Segments 
CROSS - It will know in advance the vacancies in the 
Hospital, before sending  a request to the Hospital. 
PHYSICIANS - better informed and better planning 
of daily activities and mobility within the hospital, 
medical prescription and outcome evaluation, focused 
on the correct patient care. HOSPITAL - proactive 
communication, reduced idle bed time, and improved 
bed availability. PATIENT - will be promptly directed 
to the correct Hospital, with the appropriate and 
available specialists and will be promptly directed 
into the hospital's internal flow to the care of the 
correct medical staff. 
Costs 
Structure 
Better hospital bed management that has a high cost 
of 150 thousand dollars at least and 40% of this value 
is used to maintain the bed. Motorcycle Accident have 
a high cost of hospitalization and requires 6 months 
hospitalization. There are patients who, during the 
first six months of hospitalization, cost about R\$ 
600,000 to the Hospital, among surgeries, Intensive 
Care hospitalizations, nursing care, use of medication, 
among other procedures. With regards to the 
application development team, it was composed by 23 
students working part time 10 hours per week. 
Revenue 
Streams 
Avoiding loss, reducing evasion and length of stay in 
the emergency. Improvement of patient rotation per 
bed. Better management of the occupancy rate and 
understanding if more beds are needed in the 
Hospital. Public system is an unpaid service, however 
we need to have a better efficiency of the budget 
predicted by the government because the demand in 
the area of Health Care is high and must not generate 
loss. Development application team must do the 
things the team said were capable of doing. 
IV. 
VALUE ENGINEERING 
A. Analyzing Urgency and Emergency Care Attributes 
In order to collect data, a visit to the HCFMUSP was 
carried out, and documents provided by the Hospital were 
collected to provide initial understanding on the flow of care 
from the CROSS service request until the patient arrived at 
the Hospital and patient care started. The adoption of the 
meeting with the technical team is justified to identify the 
team's perception of the current service operation and the 
opportunities for improvement. 
The people of the HCFMUSP technical team selected for 
the meeting are those who participate in the internal 
regulation of the hospital for patient care authorization: the 
director of internal regulation, and two physicians who 
coordinate the internal regulation. The people from the ITA 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
selected for the meeting were one PhD Candidate student 
and one Master's degree student for the preparation of the 
requirements specification. 
As a result, it was possible to understand the 
characteristics of urgent and emergency service assigning 
degrees of importance to each service attribute. On top of 
most valuable attributes, to simplify the Proof of Concept  
and to reduce the scope and complexity of the system to be 
developed, a mission assigned was developed to the rescue 
of motorcycle accident victims, mainly because it is a 
frequent occurrence in the city of São Paulo [17][18]. 
The Definition of Ready (DoR) checklist was created to 
indicate to the team that the US was READY to be 
INITIATED, that is, all necessary definitions, information, 
data and resources have been provided, UNDERSTOOD and 
ESTIMATED, and the development and testing phase can be 
initiated.  
The Definition of Done (DoD) checklist was created and 
tells the team that the US is READY to be DELIVERED, 
that is, all development and testing activities have been 
performed. Without the DoD the US can not be considered 
delivered to the Product Owner. 
The User Stories were written using the INVEST 
(Independent, Negotiable, Valuable, Estimable, Small, 
Testable) method because it solves practically the entire 
DoR. If US does not meet DoR's requirements, it can not be 
placed on the Sprint Backlog. Also, team members did not 
wait for Sprint Planning to prepare the next US, it was done 
constantly and the Product Backlog was updated according 
to the expected benefit to be delivered during the Sprint. The 
USs that comply with the DoR were placed at the top of the 
Product Backlog, according to the example in Figure 3 
below. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Managing the Product Backlog 
Table III and IV presents details of scope reduction, from 
the identification of attributes to the deliverable of a product 
propitiating good benefits to the Urgent and Emergency 
Care, and specifically for the External Regulation, from the 
request placed by CROSS for Patient Care, to Hospital 
vacancy and confirmation of acceptance from the Hospital. 
TABLE III.  
THE EXTERNAL REGULATION SCOPE REDUCTION - MAIN 
STEPS 
Attributes 
Quantity 
Valuable 
for USs 
Scope 
reduction 
USs 
Developed 
Attributes 
Quantity 
Valuable 
for USs 
Scope 
reduction 
USs 
Developed 
About Patient 
Care 
10 
5 
3 
1 
About 
Logistics 
6 
1 
1 
1 
About the 
Internal 
Controller 
10 
6 
5 
3 
About the 
Governance 
8 
7 
2 
2 
About the 
Standards 
5 
0 
0 
0 
About 
Systems 
Integration 
14 
5 
4 
2 
About the 
Management 
of Beds 
4 
2 
2 
2 
TOTAL 
60 
26 
17 
9 
TABLE IV.  
THE EXTERNAL REGULATION SCOPE REDUCTION - 
INTERACTIONS 
Attributes 
Quantity 
Valuable 
for USs 
Scope 
reduction 
USs 
Developed 
About Data 
Quality 
4 
3 
2 
1 
About the 
Human 
Factor 
1 
0 
0 
0 
About the 
Telemedicine 
2 
2 
2 
0 
About the 
Hierarchy 
2 
1 
0 
0 
TOTAL 
9 
6 
4 
1 
 
Table V presents details of scope reduction specifically 
for the Internal Regulation from the response to the CROSS 
confirming Patient Acceptance to the Patient identification, 
arrival and care after arrival in the Hospital propitiating good 
benefits to the Hospital Internal Health Care Flow. 
TABLE V.  
THE INTERNAL REGULATION SCOPE REDUCTION 
Attributes 
Quantity 
Valuable 
for USs 
Scope 
reduction 
USs 
Developed 
About the 
Lobby 
5 
2 
1 
1 
About the 
Identification 
8 
5 
3 
3 
About Patient 
Care 
7 
3 
1 
1 
About 
Patients in 
the 
Emergency 
Room 
5 
2 
1 
1 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Patients 
3 
2 
1 
1 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Physicians 
4 
1 
1 
1 
About the 
Internal Flow 
of Nurses 
2 
1 
1 
0 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
Attributes 
Quantity 
Valuable 
for USs 
Scope 
reduction 
USs 
Developed 
Integration 
Needs 
11 
4 
4 
2 
TOTAL 
45 
20 
14 
10 
 
In Figure 4, it is presented a chart demonstrating how the 
value engineering, agile method and business model canvas 
combined could  simplify the Proof of Concept and reduce 
the scope and complexity of the system to be developed, and 
demonstrates that developing team managed to choose USs 
that could delivery the benefits mapped in the Business 
Model Canvas presented in Table I and II and how this 
process based on value could reduce complexity in 
developing phase. 
 
Figure 4.  The Value Engineering Results and the Scope Reduction 
Figure 5 presents a summary on the Urgent and 
Emergency 
Care 
deliverables 
based 
on 
the 
Value 
Engineering Analysis. It demonstrates that value could be 
increased focusing in improving process to propitiate the 
right Patient to the correct Patient Care, proactive 
communication with Regulator, sharing vacancies prior to 
receive requests, improving speed to plan and predict Patient 
Care and sharing Patient Information to internal institutes 
and other Institutions through blockchain [20]. 
 
Figure 5.  An Urgent and Emergency Health Care Value 
As presented in Figure 6, for the external regulation the 
team focused on USs related to communication between 
CROSS and Internal Controller, Governance, Systems 
Integration, Management of Hospital Beds, and Data Quality 
using Blockchain. 
 
Figure 6.  External Regulation Value Engineering 
And as presented in Figure 7 for the internal regulation 
the team focused on USs related to patient identification, 
planning and managing patient care in the emergency room, 
managing flow of Patient and Physicians in the Hospital, and 
improving integration needs using blockchain. 
 
Figure 7.  Internal Regulation Value Engineering 
B. The Proof of Concept as an Assigned Mission 
To reduce the scope and complexity of the system to be 
developed, a mission assigned was developed to the rescue 
of motorcycle accident victims, mainly because it is a 
frequent occurrence in the city of São Paulo. On a regular 
workday, every 15 minutes, the SAMU assists a motorcyclist 
in the city of São Paulo. Most of victims are not made up of 
motoboys. Usually, they are drivers who use vehicles 
(motorbikes) to go to work or are weekend drivers. 
Rehabilitation of those who are injured is usually time-
consuming and laborious, as described below: 
- 40\% of motorcycle accident victims need to undergo 
complex surgeries and long physiotherapy treatments; 
- The most serious injuries caused by motorcycle 
accidents are usually in the skull and spine; 
- Most motorcycle riders use the vehicle as transport, 
only for 2 hours a day, usually to move between home and 
work place; Most of them have been injured before; 
- Of the total number of accidents initially investigated, 
2% resulted in death of motorcyclists; 
- Of the total number of injuries: 48% had serious 
injuries, 17% in the legs and feet; 12% in arms; and 23% had 
other types of trauma; 
- Most of them were discharged immediately after care 
and only 18% had to be hospitalized; and 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
- Considering the annual costs, about R$ 100 million are 
invested by the Orthopedics Institute of the HC, exclusively 
for the recovery of motorcyclists: "These are patients who, in 
the first six months of hospitalization, cost about R$ 300 
thousands to the Hospital, on surgeries, ICU hospitalizations, 
occupations of wards, use of medications, among other 
procedures.  
Based on previously reported motorcycle accident data, 
the development of the TSA4MOHIBD project should be 
able to provide an adequate management for the control of 
victim assistance only considering motorcycle accidents, in 
such a way that: 
- Those motorcycle accident victims (PATIENTS) may 
be appropriately diagnosed, promptly identified and/or 
attended to; 
- PHYSICIANS may have computers and/or computer 
tools capable of providing preventive and appropriate 
planning, scheduling, and controlling of motorcycle accident 
emergency services, for example, identifying the needs of: 
hospitalization time; procedures; medical teams; procedures 
for surgery preparations; as well as the availability of 
operating rooms and Intensive Therapy Units; 
- 
The 
HOSPITAL 
and/or 
the 
INTERNAL 
CONTROLLER shall have computers and/or computer tools 
capable of using appropriate technologies to provide efficient 
screening methods, prioritization of care, patient and 
physician locations within the HOSPITAL, in order to 
locate, 
if 
necessary, 
other 
HOSPITALS 
to 
attend 
emergencies of motorcycle accident victims, according to the 
criticalities and needs from specialized treatments of the 
PATIENTS; 
- HOSPITAL must have adequate computers and/or 
computer means to collaborate in the process of managing 
large data flows, involving efficient attendance of injured 
motorcycle patients, by using appropriate technologies and 
efficient screening methods for this type of emergency; 
- SUPPLIERS of medicines, devices and/or technologies 
must have appropriate tools to participate in logistics and/or 
supply process to be used in care and/or care for victims 
from motorcycle accidents attended by urgent and 
emergency care of HOSPITALS; 
- PHYSICIANS and NURSES must have appropriate 
tools to provide care to victims from motorcycle accidents 
attended by the urgent and emergency care of the 
HOSPITAL, for example, to identify them from their 
entrance hall, by verifying and controlling also the 
movement of the stretchers, according to internal flows of 
required services; 
- Each confirmed case of motorcycle-injured PATIENT 
can and should generate, within the inventory control of a 
HOSPITAL, the release of care kits containing materials and 
medications, according to the size of events. In these cases, 
in addition to medicines, other supplies can and should be 
considered important, such as blood bags for transfusions, as 
accident victims need quick rescue and motorcycle accidents 
kill from blood loss; 
- The population/society should have access to computers 
and/or computer tools of the System Project involving the 
TSA4MOHIBD and/or the Real-time TSA4MOHIBD 
capable of providing appropriate records, management, 
controls, and governance of resources used in the area of 
Health Care; 
- Public administration must have reliable data to provide 
a comprehensive situational awareness to support decision 
making for accidents and/or crises, involving motorcycle 
accidents. 
V. 
THE FINAL PRODUCT 
In 
order 
to 
provide 
appropriate 
speed 
in 
the 
communication with the Regulator and also to allow the 
Regulator to know in advance the number of bed vacancy in 
the Hospital, it is suggested that the communication between 
the Regulator and the Hospital works similarly to the 
AirBnB model. Then, the hospital will publish in a data bus 
communication how many vacancy, physicians, and 
specialists are available and also the Regulator will publish 
an attendance request for a patient and its initial conditions. 
After that, an Artificial Intelligence algorithm will 
perform some analysis to identify what kind of treatment is 
necessary for the Patient, and to search among the Hospitals 
which one is closest, has a vacancy and suitable resources to 
receive this Patient. The Artificial Intelligence algorithm, 
after finding the appropriate Hospital, will place in the same 
data bus a message to the Hospital.  
In the Hospital at the Internal Regulator, the operator will 
analyze the request and through the application system the 
operator will place a message in the Data Bus, by informing 
to Artificial Intelligence algorithm that the Patient was 
accepted and will inform straight the Urgent Care Unit that a 
Patient will arrive, also informing the date and time of the 
estimated arrival. The patient information will be available in 
the Blockchain Hyperledger, and then data from the CROSS 
and also data about the Patient will be internally matched in 
the Hospital. From that point onwards, the planning for 
Patient Care will be started prior to the Patient arrival. 
When the Patient arrives the technical team, the bed, and 
the required examination and health care steps will proceed 
as per suggested planning. After acceptance from the Internal 
Controller, the intelligence of the system will place a 
message to the Regulator, by informing that the Patient was 
accepted by the HCFMUSP.  
After a Patient arrived at the Hospital, his Electronic 
Health Record could be read by any Institute or professional 
from inside of the HCFMUSP, and information about patient 
care steps, as all the current bed management in the Hospital, 
would be presented through a dashboard that could be 
available for the governance team, by physicians and nurses 
looking at the next steps of the Patient Care.  
For the Urgency and Emergency Care at the HCFMUSP, 
our proposal is to use two separate Blockchain networks: one 
for Patient and other for Attendance. The Blockchain Patient 
network has overall patient information and is a private 
network with information that can be accessed by the 
CROSS and any other Institution that would like in the 
future to access Patient Identification (e.g., Single Health 
System, in Portuguese, named Sistema Único de Saúde - 
SUS). The Blockchain Attendance network has detailed 
patient information and all the heath care details performed 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
by the Hospital. And it is a private network with information 
that can be accessed only by the Hospital and internal 
institutes. For future work, examination details could be also 
stored in this Blockchain network. 
The main benefit of isolating patient's data from patient's 
own care is to provide data safety, since confidential 
information will be managed only by the hospital. The 
indirect benefit is to allow that two different groups of 
students learning Blockchain could also learn separately and 
then the integration has worked smoothly during the Sprint 3 
of the TSA4MOHIBD project, focusing in the Integration. 
The Blockchain Hyperledger implementation also makes 
use of encapsulated micro-services allowing smooth 
functionalities' integrations, which were developed during 
Sprint 1, focusing in the External Flow implementation, and 
Sprint 2, focusing in the Internal Flow Implementation. The 
overview of The Proposed Product Architecture is presented 
in Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The Proposed Architecture Overview 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper aimed to describe the development of an 
academic interdisciplinary project combining Scrum agile 
method, value engineering and the business model canvas in 
order to develop a prototype for a Proof of Concept (PoC) to 
improve functionality benefit and/or reducing cost in the 
urgent and emergency care domain. 
It has described a Collaborative Integrated Problem-
Based Learning (Co-IPBL) performed with the participation 
of a medical technical team from the Hospital of Clinics 
from the Faculty of Medicine of the University of São Paulo 
(in Portuguese, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de 
Medicina de São Paulo - HCFMUSP), focusing in the 
Urgent and Emergency Care. This academic research project 
was named in Portuguese as "Soluções Tecnológicas 
Aplicáveis ao Gerenciamento de Informações Hospitalares 
Ostensivas com Big Data - STAGIHO-DB", meaning in 
English, "Technological Solutions Applicable for the 
Management of Ostensive Hospital Information with Big 
Data - TSA4MOHIBD", a Computer System based on Big 
Data, Blockchain Hyperledger, Micro-services, and other 
emerging technologies for governmental organization and 
private sector. 
The purpose of this system was to aggregate data and 
integrate sectors, such as External and Internal Regulations 
through its PATIENTS, HOSPITALS, PHYSICIANS, and 
HEALTH CARE SUPPLIERS, for the decision making 
process related to Urgency and Emergency Care, involving 
motorcycle accidents. The TSA4MOHIBD project was 
developed by students from three different Computer 
Science courses taught at the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute 
of Technology (Instituto Tecnológico de Aeronáutica – ITA), 
on the 1st Semester of 2018. 
A. Specific Conclusions 
The use of interdisciplinary in 3 courses of Computer 
Science has worked as expected, since students were able to 
know how to work in teams to successfully develop a 
complex computer system. 
The cloud-computing environment has been widely used 
by students to enable collaborative work from distance, by 
using remote meetings, personal websites, and an official 
project website. The Scrum framework has been adapted to 
the reality of the interdisciplinary academic environment of 
ITA, helping the entire team of more than 20 students to 
offer value to stakeholders at the end of each sprint and also 
at the end of this project. 
Combating waste is a permanent goal and priority of this 
project as well active participation of team members, since 
human talent is a very valuable resource. The Collaborative 
Interdisciplinary and the use of Value Engineering and 
Business 
Canvas 
propitiate 
identify 
the 
valuable 
functionality to be developed during the Proof of Concept 
and the benefits desired for the Urgent and Emergency Care.  
And the process increased creativity in the use of disruptive 
technologies and in the use of innovative practices in 
software development. 
The application of Test Driven Development (TDD) and 
Acceptance 
Testing 
Driven 
Development 
(ATDD) 
techniques in the project was closely related to the 
interdisciplinary approach adopted, since acceptance tests 
were created by CE-229 Software Testing course students, 
while the Blockchain, NodeJS applications, and the Value 
Engineering and Business Model Canvas were implemented 
by 
CE-240 
Database 
System 
Project 
and 
CE-245 
Information Technologies course students. 
Its operating logic was established and all teams were 
able to perform development integration, by defining and 
accomplishing the phases of an Assigned Mission to reduce 
scope, mapping User Stories to functionalities for the 
External and Internal regulations integration, which variables 
and detailed characteristics would be changed as inputs 
and/or outputs. The main results obtained from the use of the 
TSA4MOHIBD project prototype were successful. 
At the end of this project, in just 17 weeks, it was 
possible to demonstrate the building of the Collaborative 
Interdisciplinary 
Project 
TSA4MOHIBD, 
without 
completeness, but following a model with quality, reliability, 
safety, testability, norms, and standards applicable to a 
product of this nature. Finally, students have presented the 
TSA4MOHIBD Academic Project Prototype, as the final 
project for their courses, as a Proof of Concept (PoC) to 
professors, entrepreneurs, and some invited guests from 
industry and academia. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
B. General Conclusions 
The academic development of a critical intelligent system 
is a rewarding experience that can be used in different 
undergrad and graduate courses. The use of interdisciplinary, 
Blockchain 
Hyperledger, 
cloud 
computing, 
value 
engineering, business model canvas, and agile methods 
seems to be an interesting novel and exciting way to achieve 
academic goals, in just one semester of 17 weeks and can 
also be extended to other knowledge domains.  
It is possible to avoid waste and increase value by either 
improving the functionality benefits and/or reduce costs. The 
technique applied uses rational logic and analysis of 
functionalities, modern technologies and agile practices to 
increase value. The Proof of Concept demonstrates the 
importance of customer perception of value, the business 
goals, needs and issues to build the best solution. It also 
propitiated keep the focus on the big picture prioritizing first 
the most important functionalities, better support for business 
decisions, points out waste that could be eliminated, speed 
up solution delivery, and promoted better communication, 
alignment and commitment between project team members. 
C. Recommendations 
It is strongly recommended to align expectations and 
results that may be compromised and quickly adjusted to 
review 
deliverables, 
when 
working 
with 
emerging 
technologies. This cycle, in the area of computing science, 
should be repeated all the time we have to deal with new 
technologies. It is important to have on the team participants 
who will face the challenge of learning and preparing a 
legacy. 
It is also fundamental to have participants in the team that 
could identify in advance were the team could fail with the 
new technology, proposing improvements and allowing the 
team to repositioning itself to deliver what is agreed in 
consensus in the appropriate time. 
The business model canvas produced presented a 
summary on the valuable functionality for the Urgent and 
Emergency Care, and for an investor view it is recommended 
to prepare a simplified Business Model Canvas that focus on 
cost reduction. While using new technologies, such as 
Blockchain and Node JS, it is important to build tutorials to 
speed up team members learning curve.  
It is recommended the continuation of this Project, by 
starting from what has already been done, possible to obtain 
and execute, within the courses on the next semesters, on 
new Sprints, generating the possibility of increasing 
completeness. 
D. Future Work 
It is suggested that the process used in this 
TSA4MOHIBD academic project prototype can be extended 
to other Agile projects, in order to improve estimation of 
efforts, resources and avoid waste to attend Urgent and 
Emergency Care. It is also suggested the use of some 
simulation processes to measure Urgent and Emergency Care 
with and without the use of Value Engineering supporting 
projects development in health care. 
Finally, for future work, it is suggested to expand some 
cooperation 
among 
the 
ITA, 
hospitals, 
innovation 
foundations, medical suppliers, industries and public and 
private enterprises, in order to get a selection of academic 
projects aligned to updated needs from the market. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Hospital of Clinics 
from The Faculty of Medicine at The University of São 
Paulo, the Brazilian Aeronautics Institute of Technology, the 
Ecossistema Negócios Digitais Ltda for its finantial support 
and scholarships, during the STAMPS Project Development 
and  The Casimiro Montenegro Filho Foundation (FCMF) 
for their support, during the development of this 
TSA4MOHIBD Project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Sutherland, "SCRUM Handbook", Scrum Training Institute Press, 
2010 
[2] D. Cohen et al., "An Introduction to Agile Methods", Fraunhofer 
Center for Experimental Software Engineering, ADVANCES IN 
COMPUTERS, VOL. 62, 2004. 
[3] M. Cohn, "Succeeding with agile: Software development using 
Scrum", 1st Edition, Pearson Education, Inc., 2010. 
[4] FMUSP,   "Medical   School   of   São   Paulo",   2018,   accessed   
from http://www.fm.usp.br/fmusp/portal/  in June 10, 2018. 
[5] TSA4MOHIBD  Project,  "Technological  Solutions  Applicable  for  
the Management  of  Ostensive  Hospital  Information  with  Big  
Data", 
 
2018, 
accessed 
from 
https://sites.google.com/site/projetointerdisciplinar2018/  in June 10, 
2018. 
[6] K.   Pugh,   "Lean-Agile   Acceptance   Test-Driven   Development:   
Better Software  Through  Collaboration",  Addison-Wesley,  2011,  
ISBN  978-0321714084. 
[7] Forbes,  "This  is  Why  Blockchain  will  Transform  HealthCare",  
2017,accessed 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2017/11/29/this-is-why-
blockchains-will-transform-healthcare/13be90781ebe   in  June  10, 
2018. 
[8] GitHub, 
"Open-source 
landscape 
map 
for 
healthcare-related 
blockchain", 
2018, 
 
accessed 
 
from  
https://github.com/acoravos/healthcare-blockchains in June 10, 2018. 
[9] Linux  Foundation  Projects,  "Blockchain  Hyperledger",  2018,  
accessed from https://www.hyperledger.org/  in June 10.2018. 
[10] D.  A.  Silva  et  al.,  "Health  Care  Information  Systems:  a  Crisis  
Approach", In 15th International Conference on Information 
Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2018), 2018, Las Vegas. 
[11] D. A. Silva et al., "Health Care Transformation: An Academic 
Application System Case Study", In 10TH IFAC Symposium on 
Biological and Medical Systems - International Federation of 
Automatic Control (IFAC BMS 2018), 2018, São Paulo, Brazil. 
[12] J.  C.  Martins  et  al.,  "Internet  of  Things,  and  Agile  for  Crises  
Management",  In  14th  International  Conference  on  Information  
Technology: New Generations (ITNG 2017), 2017 
[13] CROSS, "Health Care Supply Regulatory Center", 2018, accessed 
from http://www.cross.saude.sp.gov.br/ in June 10, 2018. 
[14] A.  Conceicao  et  al.,  "Eletronic  Health  Records  Using  
Blockchain", XXXVI Brazilian Symposium on Computer Networks 
and Distributed Systems (SBRC 2018), 2018, accessed from 
http://www.sbrc2018.ufscar.br/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/07-
181717-1.pdf  in June 10, 2018. 
[15] P. Vieira, "Engineering and Value Analysis: a question of efficiency 
and survival",  2018,  e-Disciplinas  University  of  São  Paulo,  
accessed 
 
from 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
 
https://edisciplinas.usp.br/mod/resource/view.php?id=891829 in  June  
10, 2018. 
[16] CiT, "Presentation CiT Value Engineering Framework", 2018, 
accessed 
from 
https://www.ciandt.com/card/business-value-
engineering-framework in June 10, 2018. 
[17] M. A. B. Lima, "Target Costing in Public Hospital Services", 
Accounting 
Journal, 
2013, 
accessed 
from 
https://periodicos.ufpe.br/revistas/ricontabeis/article/download/7966/8
040 in June 10, 2018. 
[18] C.  Bonacim,  A.  Araujo,  "Cost  Management  Applied  to  Public  
University  Hospitals",  Public  Administration  Journal,  2010,  
accessed  from www.scielo.br/pdf/rap/v44n4/v44n4a07.pdf  in June 
10, 2018. 
[19] Forbes, "Business Model Canvas: A Simple Tool For Designing 
Innovative 
Business 
Models", 
2012, 
accessed 
from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/tedgreenwald/2012/01/31/business-
model-canvas-a-simple-tool-for-designing-innovative-business-
models/    in   June 10, 2018. 
[20] WHO, "Emergency Care System Framework Infographic", 2018, 
accessed 
from 
http://www.who.int/emergencycare/emergencycare_infographic/en/  
In June 10, 2018. 
[21] Linux Foundation Projects, "Node.JS Foundation", 2018, accessed 
from https://nodejs.org/en/  in 10 June, 2018. 
[22] Apache Kafka, "Apache Kafka Distributed Stream Platform", 
2018,accessed from http://kafka.apache.org/  
[23] MongoDB, 
"MongoDB", 
2018, 
accessed 
from 
https://www.mongodb.com/  
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-651-4
ICIW 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

