Crawling and Mining Social Media Networks: A Facebook Case 
Abd El Salam Al Hajjar, Haissam Hajjar,  Mazen El Sayed, Mohammad Hajjar 
Institute University of Technology  
Lebanese University 
Lebanon 
e-mail: abdsalamhajjar@hotmail.com, haissamh@ul.edu.lb, mazen_elsayed@yahoo.fr, m_hajjar@ul.edu.lb 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Social media is computer-mediated tool that allows 
people to create, share or exchange information, ideas, and 
pictures/videos in virtual communities and networks. The most 
popular social media in these days is Facebook. This paper 
treats the problems of web crawling and mining. More 
precisely, we focus our intention on Facebook information 
extraction, and its importance in gathering data and tracking 
people. Also, we focus on the crawling mechanism of several 
Facebook pages and extracting the data contained in it and 
finally storing it in our database. Specifically, we extract the 
basic information, such as home town, age, work, education, 
friends list, events and other information. At first, we describe 
the content of Facebook web pages and the principle of web 
crawling and mining. Second, we propose the architecture of 
our system, which allows extracting the Facebook information, 
for a specific user logged in. The result of our work is an 
automated system that takes a Facebook user as an input, 
extracts recursively the list of friends for this user, and returns 
the friends information (name, university, etc.).   
Keywords-Web data crawling and mining; social media 
network; Facebook; HTML; PHP; MySQL; database. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The “Social media” axiom is widely used these days; it is 
a computer-mediated tool that allows people to create, share 
or exchange information, ideas, and pictures/videos in virtual 
communities and networks [2]. Social media is defined as "a 
group of Internet-based applications that build on the 
ideological and technological foundations of web and that 
allows the creation and exchange of user-generated content". 
Furthermore, social media depends on mobile and web-based 
technologies in order create highly interactive platforms 
through which individuals and communities share, co-create, 
discuss, and modify user-generated content [4]. 
Social media is different from other traditional or 
industrial media in many ways, including quality, usability, 
immediacy, and permanence [3]. Internet users spend more 
time with social media sites than any other type of site. 
Furthermore , the total time spent on social media in the U.S. 
increased by 99 percent to 121 billion minutes in July 2012 
compared to 66 billion minutes in July 2011 [4][5]. 
In 2014, the most popular used social network 
was Facebook, 
comparing 
to 
other 
networks 
such 
as Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, etc. [6]. 
Facebook is an online social network service. Its website 
was launched on February 4, 2004, by Mark Zuckerberg with 
his 
college 
roommates 
and 
fellow Harvard 
University students Eduardo Saverin, Andrew McCollum, 
Dustin Moskovitz and Chris Hughes [7]. The founders had 
initially limited the website's membership to Harvard 
students, but later expanded it to colleges in the Boston area, 
the Ivy League, and Stanford University. It gradually added 
support for students at various other universities and later to 
high-school students. Facebook now allows anyone who 
claims to be at least 13 years old to become a registered user 
of the website [8]. Its name comes from a colloquialism for 
the directory given to it by American universities students 
[9].  After registering to use this type of site, users can create 
a user profile, add other users as "friends", exchange 
messages, post status and photos, share videos and receive 
notifications when others update their profiles. Additionally, 
users may join common-interest user groups, organized by 
workplace, school or college, or other characteristics, and 
categorize their friends into lists, such as "people from work" 
or "close Friends". Facebook had over 1.3 billion active 
users as of June 2014 [10].  Due to the large volume of data 
collected about users, the service's privacy policies have 
faced scrutiny, among other criticisms. Facebook held 
its initial public offering in February 2012 and began selling 
stock to the public three months later, reaching a peak 
market capitalization of 104 billion. 
A social media network has a large volume of data; 
therefore, it will provide a big amount of useful information 
(people pictures, relations, etc.). So, it is very important to 
follow a methodology to extract and analyze information 
from social media web site. 
In this work, we collect the data from the social media 
network, specifically Facebook, organize them in a database, 
analyze these data, and show the information on screen. The 
presented information can be a list of all friends at many 
levels (e.g., level1 gives the only friends of the selected 
person, level2 presents also the friends of each friends. etc.), 
and it can be events as like/comment/share for each friends 
already extracted, etc.  
In the next section, we present the web crawling and 
mining definition and concept. Section 3 presents the social 
media and Facebook.  Section 4 presents the Facebook web 
crawling and mining methodology, and presents the 
Facebook content with the architecture of the system. 
Section 5 presents the result. Section 6 describes the 
conclusion and the future work. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

II. 
WEB CRAWLING AND MINING 
A web crawler is an Internet bot (a bot is an automated 
application used to perform simple and repetitive tasks that 
would be time-consuming, impossible for a human to 
perform), that systematically browses the World Wide Web, 
typically, for the purpose of web indexing. A Web crawler 
may also be called a web spider [11]. Web search 
engines and some other sites use web crawling to update 
their web content or indexes of others sites' web content. 
Web crawlers can copy all the pages they visit for later 
processing by a search engine that indexes the downloaded 
pages so that users can search them much more quickly. Web 
crawlers can validate hyperlinks and HTML (HyperText 
Markup Language) code. They can also be used for web 
scraping (see also data-driven programming) [12]. Within 
the past few years there has been an increase of free web 
crawler datasets [13]. The challenges become increasingly 
difficult when doing this on a larger scale. However, 
capturing the content of a single web page is quite easy. 
Below, we present the main steps of the web crawler:  
i. Select a URL (Uniform Resource Locator). 
ii. Fetch and parse the corresponding page. 
iii. Save the important content into database. 
iv. Extract URLs from this page. 
v. Add URLs to queue. 
vi. Select a URL and repeat. 
Data-mining is the analysis step of the Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases (KDD) process [14]; it is allowed to 
process big amounts of data to provide meaningful and 
relevant information. The collected information are in an 
unstructured form, must be transformed into a structured 
format to be suitable for processing. The data mining 
technology is coming from a huge evolution; the new and 
better technique is made available continually to gather 
whatever information is required [15]. The term “web data 
mining” is a technique used to crawl through various web 
resources to collect required information, which enables 
organizations and individuals to gather information, and to 
utilize this information in the best interest [16]. The 
advantage of the web data mining can be shown in the 
following general example: a company is thinking about 
launching a new product of cotton shirts, through the client 
databases founded on web, so they can clearly determine 
how many clients have placed orders for cotton shirts over 
the last year and how much profit such orders have brought 
to the company. The disadvantage is resumed by losing the 
user privacy when individual information is obtained, used, 
and distributed, especially if this happens without the user 
knowledge. 
III. 
SOCIAL MEDIA NETWORK, FACEBOOK CASE 
Social media network is the cooperation of online 
communications channels dedicated to community-based 
input, interaction, content-sharing, and collaboration [17]. 
Social networking is the practice of growing the number of 
one's business and social contacts by making connections 
through peoples. While social networking becomes societies 
themselves, the unparalleled potential of the Internet to 
promote such connections is only now being fully 
recognized and exploited, through web-based groups 
established for that purpose[1][2] ( see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Social media networking. 
The most popular social media networking sites in the 
world are Facebook, Google+, LinkedIn, Instagram, and 
Twitter, etc. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Facebook general layout 
Facebook represents a potentially useful tool in 
educational contexts (see Figure 2). It allows for both an 
asynchronous and synchronous, open dialogue via a familiar 
and regularly accessed medium, and supports the integration 
of multimodal content, such as student-created photographs, 
video, and URLs to other texts, in a platform that many 
students are already familiar with. Further, it allows students 
to ask more minor questions that they might not feel 
motivated to visit a professor personally during office hours. 
It also allows students to manage their own privacy settings, 
and often work with the privacy settings they have already 
established as registered users [18]. 
IV. 
FACEBOOK CRAWLING AND MINING METHODOLOGY 
In this section, we present the crawling and mining 
methodology for a social media networking, specifically, a 
Facebook case. We describe the Facebook web pages content 
and the system architecture that allows crawling and mining 
automatically the Facebook information for a specific user 
logged in.  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

A. Facebook Content 
The first page in Facebook is the login page that allows 
authenticating a user. If this user is authenticate, the user can 
navigate different pages in the Facebook website, starting 
from the profile that includes the following:  basic 
information, messages, photos, friends, notes, status, 
comments, groups, pages, and the wall. A user is able to 
search for friends by e-mail address, or just by typing a name 
of the friend. When people become friends, they are able to 
see all of each other’s profiles including contact information.  
The user also can create groups. This group allows members 
who have common interests to find and interact with each 
other. Also, the user can create Facebook pages that contain 
many members (other Facebook users). Beside all that, 
Facebook contains a set of games which allows users to play 
online, etc. 
The target is crawling and extracting data from the 
Facebook pages, then, saving the data into a database, using 
a specific web programming language. When, Facebook is 
not anymore a secure network, we can get the html source of 
the page using any browser. However, some data, maybe for 
privacy reasons cannot be viewed. So, we only collect public 
data organize and view them in the simplest desired form. 
 
Figure 3.  Facebook HTML generated code 
In general, most Facebook data is very important, since it 
allows getting information about someone (e.g., who likes 
swimming or whom wearing jeans), collecting data for 
investigations purposes (e.g., crimes, retrace criminals), and 
for statistics and analysis purpose (e.g., number of likers for 
a specific event). PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor) presents the 
main programming language of the  Facebook 
frontend, 
which is suited for web development and can be embedded 
into HTML. PHP is an open source, support object-oriented, 
powerful built in functions. PHP can works and connects 
with several databases, such as MySQL (My Structured 
Query Language), Oracle, etc., and it can manipulate XML 
(Extensible Markup Language) documents. For that, we can 
use the PHP programming language for the data crawling 
and mining reasons (see Figure 3). 
B. Architecture of Facebook Crawling and Mining system 
The login page presents the entrance into Facebook 
according to a specific user account (username or email, and 
password); if this user is authenticated, then we can directly 
access the full information about it, such as news feed, group 
information, friends, photos, events, comments, etc. All this 
information is presented in several HTML generated pages; 
knowing that, the HTML code is generated from many 
others programming languages. Inside this HTML code, we 
have all the data viewed on the web browser, so, we can 
crawl and extract the data from the opened Facebook user 
account page. This data may be the list of friends, 
information about each friends, events and notifications. 
The data crawling procedure will automatically occur 
according to an automated system. Our developed automated 
system allows takes taking as an input a Facebook user, 
fetching the Facebook HTML pages, splitting the HTML 
code according to specifics delimiters (rules) into a more 
manageable portion, removing the unwanted HTML tags, 
reformatting HTML, adjusting spaces, removing entities, 
matching content with regular expressions, and storing the 
pertinent content into a structured MySQL database for 
future data mining use.  The system database structure and 
algorithm will describe in detail below.  
1) Database design 
The parsing presents a main step in the data crawling 
process; it is based on specific characters and symbols that 
must be defined according to the text to be analyze. In the 
Facebook crawling, the parsing process must split the HTML 
code according to specific tags that can be used later as rules. 
For that, we save these rules in the database (in the “rules” 
table). Later, for each parsing process, we will select the 
corresponding rules from the database.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Database diagram 
For a specific Facebook account, we can recursively 
extract a list of friends, and information about these friends 
(friend name, URL of the friend profile page, number of 
mutual friend according to the authenticated account, school, 
university, hometown, dateofbirth, gender, others). For each 
extracted friend, we can extract their events which saved on 
the table events (Figure 4). 
2) Algorithms  
In this section, we will present an algorithm that 
describes several operations on Facebook crawling and 
mining. Firstly, the operation allows extracting recursively 
the list of friends for a specific Facebook user, e.g., for a 
given Facebook user, we will extract the list of their friends 
L1, and, for each one in the list L1, we will extract their 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

friends, and so on. Also, in this section, we will present the 
other operations that allow extracting other information, such 
as: events, comments, etc. 
Figure 5 shows the architecture of the system algorithm 
for Facebook data crawling automatically starting from the 
home page of a specific Facebook authenticated user.  
 
Figure 5.  General architecture of Facebook Crawling and Mining  system.
This algorithm is composed of several operations, as 
follow: firstly, we get the HTML of the home page for a 
specific Facebook user U and parse this page according to 
the database rules; the objective of parser is to transform an 
HTML code into data and information. Parsing an HTML 
code is done in several stages. Firstly, we determine the main 
delimiters that allow extracting some information; these 
delimiters are HTML tags. We determine these delimiters by 
navigation and analysis of the Facebook HTML code, then 
extract manually these delimiters, and save them as rules in 
the database; for example in the Facebook HTML code: 
friends name exist between the two tags <Friendtag1> 
FriendName </ Friendtag1>, then these 2 tags (<Friendtag1> 
and </Friendtag1>) must be saved in the table rules. Then, 
the table rules present the reference of parsing stage in the 
Facebook crawling system. For example, to extract friend 
from a Facebook HTML code, firstly, we must get the 
specific rules of friends from the table rules in our database. 
The parsing stage allows extracting all the events and the 
URL of this user profile page, the list of all friends for the 
user U are presented in a page that have as URL the 
concatenation between the URL of the user U profile page 
and “/friends”. From this new URL, we can extract, after 
parsing, the list of all friends. For each friend in list, we can 
follow the same procedure to getting their information, such 
as friend name, friend events, friend profile URL page, etc., 
according to their information (name, date of birth, etc.).  We 
can test whether this friend is already added into DB in the 
table friends; if it is new, it must go to the About page, the 
About page URL can be done by concatenating the friend 
profile URL and “\About”; then, we can extract other 
information, such as school, university, etc. Finally, all the 
extracted information (friend profile page URL, friend name, 
friend events, etc.) will save in the database (in the 2 tables 
friends and events). Otherwise, if this friend already exists in 
the database; then, we must get the URL of their profile 
page, and we will follow the same procedure to get their 
friends; in this case, we extract all the friends of friends for 
the user U, and so on. 
V. 
RESULT 
The main result of this work is an automated Facebook 
crawling and mining system. This system take as input a 
Facebook user and give as output big amount of information 
about this user such as friends, comments, likers, etc. It is 
based on set of rules saved manually in the database. This 
system allows extracting recursively the list of friends for a 
specific Facebook user, and storing the entire extracted 
friends’ information into a MySQL database for future use. 
The start point of this system is the home page for a specific 
Facebook authenticated user. After that, we apply the system 
operations (see Figure 5) in order to collect the pertinent 
information for all friends, friends of friends, friends of 
friends of friends, etc., of the logged user. We evaluate the 
system on several Facebook users, for each one it returned 
the demanded information. For that, we will describe the 
result as an example of the user “Joe”, in order to explain 
that the result of our work is a system that return the 
pertinent information about a given. Let us consider that we 
have 
a 
Facebook 
user 
named 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 “Joe@hotmail.com”, presented as input to our system. The 
system takes the HTML code of the home page, and selects 
from the database the rules (or tags). These rules are already 
saved manually in the rules table. Next, the system allows 
extracting the profile page link for Joe, according to the 
selected rules (for example :< a class="_2dpe _1ayn">, 
<title="Profile">). Then, we apply the parsing operation 
according to the extracted tags in order to deliver the profile 
page link “https://www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=1013”; 
from this URL, we can explore the HTML code in order to 
extract the friends list, by applying the parsing operation 
according to the stored rules of friends list. For each friend F 
in the extracted list, we can apply the same procedure to 
extract its profile page (profile page of friend F). The profile 
page includes pertinent information such as friends, photos, 
posts, etc. 
We have several purposes for gathering the information 
from the system, which focused on extracting many facts 
about a person. For example, we can view that (Joe) is not 
friend with (George), but he is related to him on FaceBook 
because (Joe) is friend with (Mario), (Mario) is friend with 
(Elie), and (Elie) is friend with (George). Also, we can 
analyze the stored data and conclude that (Joe)’s hobby is 
politics, because the collected data describe that (Joe) likes 
several politic pages, and he likes the politic events. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Social media is becoming an integral part of online life, 
as social websites and applications proliferate. Most 
traditional online media include social components, such as 
comment fields for users. In business, social media is used to 
market products, promote brands, and connect to current 
customers and foster new business.  
Social media analytics is the practice of gathering data 
from social media websites and analyzing that data to make 
business decisions. The most common use of social media 
analytics is to mine customer sentiment to support marketing 
and customer service activities. 
In this paper, we are interested to study the problem of 
gathering information from Facebook pages and storing them 
in a database. More specifically, one gathers the basic 
information, such as home town, age, work, education, 
friends, events and much other information. First, we 
describe the content of Facebook web pages and the 
principle of web crawling and web data mining. Second, we 
proposed the architecture of our automated system that 
allows crawling and mining the Facebook information for a 
specific user logged in.  
In future works, we plan to study the problem of web 
crawling and web data mining in the cases of other social 
media websites like YouTube, Instagram, etc. We also plan 
to study the way in which we use gathering data in the 
database. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been done as a part of the following 
project: “Automatic information extraction form Arabic 
texts" supported by the Lebanese National Centre of Scientific 
Research (CNRSL). 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kaplan and M. Haenle, "Users of the world, unite! The challenges 
and opportunities of social media", Business Horizons, vol.53 (1), 
pp. 61, 2010. 
[2] J. Kietzmann, K. Hermkens, I. McCarthy, and B. Silvestre, "Social 
media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building blocks of 
social media", Business Horizons, vol. 54, no. 3, 2011. 
[3] E. Agichtein, C. Castillo, D. Donato, A. Gionis, and G. Mishne. 
"Finding high-quality content in social media", WISDOM – 
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Web Search and 
Data Mining: 183–193, 2008. 
[4] Nielsen Holdings,"State of the media: The social media report 2012", 
Featured Insights, Global, Media + Entertainment. Nielsen. 
Retrieved 9 December 2012. 
[5]  Q. Tang, B. Gu, Bin, and A. Whinston, "Content Contribution for 
Revenue Sharing and Reputation in Social Media: A Dynamic 
Structural Model",  Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 
29, no. 2, pp. 41-76, Fall 2012 . 
[6] Nielsen Holdings,  "The U.S. Digital Consumer Report". Featured 
Insights, Global, Media + Entertainment. Nielsen [Retrieved 
November 25, 2014]. 
[7]  N. Carlson,"At Last – The Full Story Of How Facebook Was 
Founded", Business Insider, http://www.businessinsider.com/, March 
5, 2015. 
[8] R. E. Cash, "Depression In Young Children: Information For Parents 
And 
Educators". 
Facebook 
Retrieved, 
Social/Emotional 
Development, November 22, 2011. 
[9] E. Eldon, "2008 Growth Puts Facebook In Better Position to Make 
Money", 
 VentureBeat(San 
Francisco). 
[Retrieved December 
19, 2008]. 
[10]  M. Zuckerberg, "Company Info | Facebook Newsroom", Facebook 
newsroom, http://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/. September 30, 
2014. 
[11]  J. Wu, P. Teregowda, M. Khabsa, S. Carman, D. Jordan, J. 
Wandelmer, X. Lu, P. Mitra, and C. Giles “Web crawler middleware 
for search engine digital libraries: a case study for citeseerX”, In 
proceedings of the twelfth international workshop on Web 
information and data management pp. 57-64, Maui Hawaii, USA, 
November 2012. 
[12] Y. Sun, "A comprehensive study of the regulation and behavior of 
web crawlers". A comprehensive study of the regulation and behavior 
of web crawlers, Publisher: Pennsylvania State University, 2008. 
[13]  OutWit Technologies, "OutWit Hub - Find, grab and organize all 
kinds of data and media from online sources". Outwit.com. 2014-01-
31. [Retrieved March 20, 2014]. 
[14]  U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, "From Data Mining 
to Knowledge Discovery in Databases". American Association for 
Artificial Intelligence, fall 1996. 
[15] S. Chakrabarti,  "Data Mining Curriculum: A Proposal (Version 
0.91)". Group of ACM SIGKDD Curriculum Committee, August 5, 
2004. 
[16] K. Wahlstrom, J. Roddick, R. Sarre, V.  Estivill-Castro, and D. de 
Vries, "Legal and Technical Issues of Privacy Preservation in Data 
Mining". Legal and Technical Issues of Privacy Preservation in Data 
Mining, 2007. 
[17] D. Boyd and N. Ellison, "Social Network Sites: Definition, History, 
and Scholarship". Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 
vol.13, pp. 210–230,  2008. 
[18] M. Moody, "Teaching Twitter and Beyond: Tip for Incorporating 
Social Media in Traditional Courses". Journal of Magazine & New 
Media Research, vol. 11(2): pp. 1-9, 2010. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-412-1
ICIW 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

