The Strategic Role of IT: An Empirical Study of its Impact on  
IT Performance in Manufacturing SMEs 
 
      Louis Raymond 
 
             Anne-Marie Croteau 
 
           François Bergeron 
    Université du Québec 
 
               Concordia University 
                              Télé-Université 
   Trois-Rivières, Canada  
                   Montréal, Canada 
                              Québec, Canada 
   louis.raymond@uqtr.ca  
    anne-marie.croteau@concordia.ca 
  bergeron.francois@teluq.uqam.ca  
 
 
Abstract — The business value of Internet and Web 
applications for small- and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) is dependent upon how such applications “fit” 
with the strategic orientation of these firms. Based on the 
strategic alignment of information technology (IT), this 
study uses a systemic approach to test the contribution of 
three predictors of IT performance in an organization: the 
strategic role of IT as well as the sophistication of the 
management and the use of IT. A multivariate mediation 
perspective is used to conceptualize alignment. The results 
of an empirical investigation of 44 manufacturing SMEs 
establish an important mediator effect of IT management 
and IT usage sophistication between the strategic role of 
IT and IT performance. 
 
Keywords - IT sophistication; IT performance; SME; 
strategic alignment; strategic role; e-business applications 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current economic context is marked by a 
considerable expansion of electronic markets. The need 
for information technology (IT) comes with the ever 
increasing demand for digital information. The impact 
on business is tremendous, especially for small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) who need to invest in 
systems with the ability to store, process, and generate 
data stemming from its dealings with various business 
partners. For many small companies, the need for IT is 
necessary to ensure their survival and competitiveness 
[25], and to enable their innovation capabilities [15]. 
While it is evident, IT systems have substantially 
improved the manufacturing process and productivity, 
they have also allowed for more organizational 
flexibility by transforming workers time and space, and 
reinventing the internal and external mode of business 
organization [14].  
With the pervasive arrival of IT and the opening of 
the global marketplace, SMEs have been subject to 
rapid change and extreme instability. The SME is 
obliged to integrate IT to ensure its competitiveness and 
survival. IT can play an important role in a company‘s 
performance and its ability to respond effectively to the 
changing needs of the market, therefore special 
attention and research is needed [33].  
And given the inherent fragile nature of the SME, IT 
plays an increasingly strategic role in creating new 
challenges [11]. New online competitors easily enter 
new or existing markets, customers are more informed 
and more demanding because they can compare 
features and prices of products through the Web; also, 
the changing needs and wants of the market often 
render recent IT investments obsolete [36]. As a result 
of substantial investments by many SMEs into IT, it is 
essential to foresee the threats and opportunities that are 
inherent in the technology, to discover the mechanisms 
that manage and drive these technologies, and to 
analyze the impact in terms of cost-effectiveness and 
profitability for these enterprises [22].  
The increased strategic nature of the role of IT in the 
organization may give rise to management problems 
and IT use, not only at a technical level, but also at 
strategic and organizational levels [5]. It is therefore 
important for SMEs to better understand how their 
investments in IT, coupled with an increased 
understanding of their management practices and how 
they use the technology, provides the most benefits 
[16]. This research thus aims at better understanding the 
impact of the strategic role of IT, IT management 
sophistication, and IT usage sophistication upon IT 
performance in manufacturing SMEs, by answering the 
following research question: To what extent and in what 
manner do the strategic role of IT, the sophistication of 
IT management, and the sophistication of IT usage 
contribute to the performance of IT in manufacturing 
SMEs? 
  We first present the theoretical background of the 
research, followed by the research model, and the 
method by which 44 French manufacturing SMEs were 
empirically studied in order to answer the research 
question. Next, the results are presented and discussed. 
We further identify the study‘s implications and 
limitations, and conclude with future research.  
 
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The study‘s theoretical background is founded on the 
concept of strategic alignment at the core of the 
89
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

strategic paradigm in information systems research. It 
was first defined in terms of its impact on 
organizational 
performance 
rather 
than 
on 
the 
performance of IT. However, there is no doubt the 
concept is still one of the most important fundamental 
bases of our understanding of the strategic role of IT 
and IT performance in organizations. According to 
Henderson and Venkatraman [18], strategic alignment 
is based on the assumption of a dynamic and coherent 
IT (strategy and infrastructure), the company's business 
strategy and process development, would have an 
impact on performance and thus its competitiveness. An 
enterprise should synchronize its business and its 
technology sectors, as well as at the strategic and 
operations levels. As presented in Fig. 1, Henderson 
and Venkatraman‘s [18] model is based on a systemic 
approach, emphasizing the importance of aligning 
internal and external business activities in order to 
improve organizational performance and predetermined 
strategic objectives. 
 
Business Strategy
IT Strategy
Organizational Infrastructure and Processes
IT Infrastructure and Processes
Processes
Business
Governance
Business
Scope
Technology
Scope
IT
Governance
Systemic
Competencies
Distinctive
Competencies
Skills
Architectures
Processes
Skills
Administrative
Infrastructure
External
Internal
Business
Information Technology
Strategic Fit
 
Figure 1. Adaptation of Henderson and Venkatraman‘s [18] IT 
alignment framework 
 
This model of IT strategic alignment has been tested 
in various ways over the past two decades, often by 
exploring in more detail some aspects of each 
dimension described above. However, few studies have 
taken into account other factors such as organizational 
context (business strategy, organizational structure), the 
environmental context (industry, firm size), and the 
technological 
context 
(technology 
solutions, 
IT 
management) [39]. It has been highlighted that a close 
link between business strategy and IT strategy 
contributes to both IT performance and organizational 
performance [8, 12]. Despite previous empirical studies 
that have allowed us to better understand the contexts in 
which the alignment of IT contributes or not to 
organizational performance, many aspects remain 
unexplored, including alignment at the technological 
level [2].  
This 
study 
proposes 
a 
research 
model 
for 
ascertaining in what manner IT ―works‖ in SMEs, 
specifically the strategic role of IT, and the 
sophistication of IT management and IT usage. IT 
performance is seen here as a result of direct or 
"proximal" strategic alignment of IT [8], while 
organizational performance would be considered rather 
as an indirect consequence or "distal" of this alignment. 
Returning to Fig. 1, the shaded sections of Henderson 
and Venkatraman‘s [18] model are the basis of the 
research model used for the current study.  
 
A. Strategic Role of IT  
According to Powell and Dent-Micallef [32], IT 
human resources and the organizational structure of the 
business must complement one other in a way that 
creates intrinsic benefits that results in a significant and 
distinctive performance compared to other sectors in 
the company. Thus, more and more emphasis is needed 
to optimize the use and management of IT based on the 
internal characteristics of the company as well as its 
strategic profile, size, in-house expertise, as well as its 
managerial, technological, and functional capacity.  
Certain researchers have explored the idea of the 
evolution of IT usage, namely Ward, Taylor and Bond 
[43] who observed that the strategic role of IT is 
developed over three major periods in order to support 
the business while throughout its growth: (1) The 
period of developing data processing standards and 
automating 
repetitive 
tasks, 
thereby 
improving 
operational efficiency, (2) The period of managing 
information systems, designed to improve management 
efficiency by producing concrete information that will 
be used to better manage and control the firm, (3) The 
period of strategic information systems enabling the 
company to better position itself in its market segment. 
As per the model proposed by Philip and Booth [31], 
each organization has its own expectations with regards 
to IT that is dependent upon its skills and capabilities to 
align the technology with its strategic objectives. 
According to this model, information systems can play 
five potential roles in the enterprise: (1) Survival is the 
most important role played by IT in an organization. 
The goal of IT is to achieve greater control over 
management and can be used to understand day-to-day 
administrative and production tasks in order to achieve 
operational performance and cost reduction. (2) 
Resources: this model compares the company to a 
waterway, receiving a stream of resources such as 
materials and services of other companies, and issuing 
products and services that can be used by other third 
parties. (3) Competitive advantage: IT moves from the 
simple role as facilitator of obtaining resources to one 
of fully exploiting potential of resources to gain a 
competitive advantage. Creativity and innovation are 
90
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

essential ingredients to this approach. (4) Value 
analysis service: rethinking business processes by 
reengineering 
them 
to 
improve 
the 
company‘s 
competitiveness and flexibility, taking into account the 
rapid changes in the environment. (5) Cyberspace: It is 
in 
cyberspace 
that 
virtual 
organizations 
build 
relationships with suppliers, consumers, and other 
organizations. This type of structure is very flexible, 
innovative, and provides very personalized service.  
 
B. IT Sophistication 
The evolution of the strategic role of IT is closely 
linked to IT sophistication because it reflects the way 
IT is managed and used by the company. IT 
sophistication is explained by the way IT falls into line 
with the firm‘s strategic objectives [34]. The concept of 
IT sophistication and its measurement were first 
defined and validated by Raymond, Paré and Bergeron 
[35], to be subsequently used by other researchers [10, 
19, 29]. IT sophistication refers to the nature, 
complexity, and interdependence of IT use and how it is 
managed within the organization. IT sophistication 
management includes managerial and functional 
sophistication on the one hand, while the use of IT 
sophistication includes informational and technological 
sophistication on the other hand.  
Managerial sophistication takes into account the 
mechanisms used to plan, monitor, and assess current 
and future applications. Within the context of the SME, 
the sophistication of planning is demonstrated by the 
degree of formalism of the company‘s processes and 
the level of alignment with the organizational goals. 
The availability of written documents, standards, and 
measures for purposes of security and confidentiality 
clearly reveal a managerial sophistication. This 
dimension may also contain aspects related to the 
accomplishment of business objectives relating to the 
adoption of IT, the degree of formalization of the 
adoption process as well as managerial involvement in 
this process. Also related to managerial sophistication 
are the presence of external consultants, the initial 
investment, and the annual budget allocated to develop 
and operate IT applications. 
Functional sophistication refers to the location and 
functional autonomy of IT within the organization. The 
number of internal specialists within IT function is an 
indicator insofar as it refers to the number and nature of 
the tasks to be completed by the IT function or by the 
amount of persons responsible for IT within the 
organization. Based on the hierarchical level of the 
organization (operational, administrative, strategic), 
sophistication can be characterized by the proportion of 
IT applications at each of these decision-making levels.  
Informational sophistication refers to the nature, 
both transactional and managerial, of the applications 
portfolio 
[4]. 
Another 
aspect 
of 
informational 
sophistication is the degree in which applications are 
integrated in the SME; this element can be 
characterized by the presence of a central database 
shared by the implantation of a LAN, by a fluid 
circulation of information and sharing of resources, and 
by the implementation of an integrated management 
software package (ERP). The importance of the ERP 
system at this level would allow businesses to share 
information with its partners in real-time [7].  
Technological sophistication reflects the number or 
variety of IT used by the SME in several areas such as 
CAD/CAM, 
internal 
networking, 
and 
external 
networking [23]. In each of these areas, the number of 
hardware and software integrated into the system is 
counted based on the degree of complexity and type of 
technology used by the organization. The technological 
dimension considers the nature of the hardware and 
development tools used by the SME. The number of 
workstations is a first indicator of IT sophistication in 
addition 
to 
decentralized 
hardware 
within 
the 
organization. A second indicator is the diversity of 
programming languages and development tools used. 
The sophistication of the man-machine interface can 
also be considered as a criterion. Finally, dominant 
treatment modes as well as the types of operation 
preferred by the SME are added to the mass of 
indicators of technological sophistication. The adoption 
of an ERP system can be considered as a perfect 
example of technological sophistication within the 
SME, who are attempting to prevent the consequences 
of technological obsolescence by more sophisticated 
integrated applications such as FMS [40].  
 
C. IT Performance  
Assessing the performance of the IT function in an 
organization is not a simple task [26]. In a process 
evaluation of IT costs, Keen [21] proposed taking into 
account various elements such as the technical 
obsolescence of software, the declining cost of work 
units and operating software, development flows, and 
operating costs. IT takes the form of other assets and is 
also subject to devaluation or replacement. These items 
could be used to quantitatively assess the standard IT 
budget including machines, applications, and services. 
However none of them consider organizational 
transition costs related to learning, reticence, stress, 
fault, change internal reporting, information loss, and 
additional migration costs. 
Benefits gained from IT remain very complex to 
identify specifically in relation to profitability studies. 
In addition, quantifying benefits from organizational 
change, improved customer follow-up, or even an 
improvement of internal and external communication, 
are a challenge for a number of enterprises. In fact, 
91
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

there is the dilemma of quantifying qualitative and 
intangible inputs with indicators for legacy assets. 
Some companies choose to go beyond this notion of IT 
profitability, by categorizing them as machinery and 
equipment for production, such as furniture, office or as 
general operating costs resulting in a shortsighted view 
on IT investment. Others use indicators to measure 
operational performance (quality indicators, satisfaction 
surveys), 
technical 
(referencing, 
application 
availability, application evolution), or users (number of 
users of a system, effective consultations frequency). 
DeLone and McLean [13] developed a model that IT 
success can be measured via six dimensions; quality of 
the system, quality of the information, usage, user 
satisfaction, individual impact, and organizational 
impact. User satisfaction remains however one of the 
most important measures of success and most 
recognized in IT [37]. It has been demonstrated that the 
quality of the system, the quality of the information and 
the usefulness of applications point to, in large part, the 
satisfaction of users. 
 
III. RESEARCH MODEL 
As presented in Fig. 2, the research model is based 
upon a conceptualization of the strategic alignment of 
IT proposed by Henderson and Venkatraman [18], more 
specifically the alignment between the IT strategy and 
the IT infrastructure and processes that is deemed to 
have a positive impact upon the performance of IT in 
manufacturing SMEs. The IT strategy is as the strategic 
role attributed to IT by the SME‘s leader, whereas the 
IT infrastructure and processes are as the firm‘s 
sophistication in both managing and using IT. Testing 
this model should help us answer the following research 
question: To what extent and in what manner do the 
strategic role of IT, the sophistication of IT 
management, and the sophistication of IT usage 
contribute to the performance of IT in manufacturing 
SMEs? 
As shown in the research model, the strategic role of 
IT is an independent construct directly related to the 
dependent construct, i.e. IT performance. The impact of 
the strategic role of IT will also be felt by the 
sophistication of IT management and IT usage. This 
research model aims to explain IT performance in a 
novel way by focusing on the strategic role of IT while 
taking into account the sophistication level of IT 
deployed in manufacturing SMEs. It is for this reason 
that the IT sophistication concept [35] is mobilized 
here, that is, IT management sophistication on one 
hand, and IT usage sophistication on the other hand. 
The first hypothesis is in line with the main proposition 
found in previous conceptualizations of the strategic 
alignment of IT on the basis of the evolution of 
information technology‘s role in organizations [31, 42]. 
Its distinction and contribution however lie in the 
choice of IT performance (or organizational IS 
effectiveness) rather than organizational performance as 
the outcome of such alignment. 
 
IT Usage
Sophistication
IT Management
Sophistication
IT Performance
H5
H4
H6
Strategic Role
of IT
H2
H3
H1
Figure 2.
Research model
   It had been previously noted that the strategic role 
played by IT in organizations could only be ascertained 
if one took into account their IT management and usage 
characteristics. Now the notion of IT sophistication 
effectively reflects how IT are managed and used 
within organizations [43]. Hence the second hypothesis 
assumes the more strategic the role played by 
information technology in the organization, the greater 
the presence of its IT function. Following Henderson 
and Venkatraman [18], it is presumed that in 
manufacturing SMEs, the strategic importance of IT 
will be reflected in the IT resources and capabilities 
developed by the IT function. The third hypothesis 
reflects the premise that users will be more satisfied 
with the applications implemented and with the quality 
of information output if the SME‘s leadership views IT 
as a strategic necessity or as a source of competitive 
advantage. Here, the notion of ―top-management 
support‖ as a determinant of IS success would take on 
added importance in small business [37].  
The fourth hypothesis assumes a certain hierarchy in 
the evolution of IT, as previously indicated, i.e. this 
technology must be effectively managed and deployed 
in the SME if it is to be appropriated and effectively 
used by employees. This is basically in line with 
DeLone and McLean‘s [13] updated IS success model 
in which system usage and user satisfaction are 
dependent upon the quality of the system, the 
information output, and the service provided by the IT 
function [30]. The fifth hypothesis proposes that the 
performance of IT improves when the sophistication of 
the management of IT increases [27]. As noted by 
Philip and Booth [31], ―sustainable advantage depends 
on the ability to manage the IS resources effectively on 
an ongoing basis‖. The last hypothesis similarly 
92
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

proposes that IT performance improves with more 
sophisticated usage of IT [35], this being in line again 
with DeLone and Mclean‘s [13] IS success model.  
In summary, the following hypotheses are tested: 
H1: The more strategic the role played by IT, the higher 
the performance of IT. 
H2: The more strategic the role played by IT, the 
greater the IT management sophistication. 
H3: The more strategic the role played by IT, the 
greater the IT usage sophistication. 
H4: The greater the IT management sophistication, the 
greater the IT usage sophistication. 
H5: The greater the IT management sophistication, the 
higher the performance of IT. 
H6: The greater the IT usage sophistication, the higher 
the performance of IT. 
 
IV. METHOD 
Secondary data was provided by a database created 
by a university research center for benchmarking 
purposes and containing information of 44 French 
manufacturing SMEs. For the study‘s purpose, a SME 
is defined as having between 10 and 299 employees, the 
median size of the sampled firms being 38 employees. 
The industrial sectors represented include metals 
(27%), food and beverage (16%), wood (9%), plastics 
(9%), textile (7%), minerals (5%), electronics (2%) and 
others (25%). 
 
A. Data Collection 
This database was created in collaboration with 
business owners that belong to chambers of commerce 
in Midi-Pyrénées region, by asking the management 
team and IT manager to answer a questionnaire on the 
firm‘s strategic orientation, practices, and performance 
with regard to information technology and e-business, 
broken down by the main business functions of the 
SME, namely operations and production, sales and 
marketing, and accounting, finance and HRM. In 
exchange for this information, the firm was provided 
with an overall diagnostic of its situation relative to the 
management and performance of its information 
technology. 
 
B. Measures 
In view of Henderson and Venkatraman‘s [18] 
framework on which this research is based, fit or 
alignment between the strategic role of IT and the 
sophistication of IT management and usage in the firm 
is ascertained here from a ―fit as mediation‖ perspective 
[41]. First, the extent to which IT plays a strategic role 
in the SME was measured through a self-typing 
approach based on Venkatraman‘s [42] and Philip and 
Booth‘s [31] stage models, by asking the chief 
executive to answer the following question (statements 
were coded from 1 to 4 in order of increasing strategic 
importance):  
Indicate among the following statements the one that 
best defines your understanding of the strategic role 
that is assigned to information technology-based 
applications (ITApps) in your firm (choose one 
statement)? 
 
1. ITApps should allow us to improve our managerial 
control and our production monitoring. 
 
2. ITApps should insure greater operational flexibility 
and better response to our customers‘ needs. 
 
3. ITApps should facilitate and accelerate the 
development of new products, and allow us to 
increase our market share. 
 
4. ITApps should allow us to integrate our business 
and production processes, and to improve exchanges 
with our business partners. 
 
 
The measures of IT management sophistication, in 
terms of managerial and functional sophistication, and 
of IT usage sophistication, in terms of informational 
and 
technological 
sophistication, 
emanate 
from 
constructs developed, validated, and used in previous 
research [29, 35]. IT performance is measured by the 
level of attainment of the benefits associated with four 
types of IT-based applications (accounting-finance-
HRM, 
logistics-production-distribution, 
marketing-
sales-customer service, e-business-Internet-Web), thus 
following a process-based approach wherein the 
respondents evaluate the ―business value‖ of IT for 
their firm [38, 40]. A list of expected benefits specific 
to each type of application (e.g. ―increase flexibility‖, 
improve customer service‖, ―facilitate the recruitment 
of personnel‖) is presented to the manager (CEO or 
CFO, operations manager, sales and marketing 
manager, and IT manager) who must indicate on a 5-
point scale the extent to which the applications 
implemented contribute to the attainment of these 
benefits.  
 
V. RESULTS 
Structural equation modeling was used to validate 
the research model. To this effect, the PLS technique 
was chosen for its robustness, more precisely its 
capacity to handle small samples and formative 
measurement models in comparison to covariance 
structure analysis techniques such as Lisrel, EQS and 
Amos [17].  
 
A. Measurement Model 
Given their composite and multidimensional nature, 
the research constructs are modeled as being 
―formative‖ rather than ―reflective‖ [9]. Such a 
construct is composed of many indicators that each 
93
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

captures a different aspect; hence changes in these 
indicators bring or ―cause‖ change in their underlying 
construct [24]. IT management sophistication is thus 
modeled as a second-order formative construct from 
two sub-constructs, namely managerial sophistication 
and functional sophistication. As presented in Table 1, 
each of these sub-constructs is in turn composed of six 
and two formative measures respectively, a functional 
sophistication and managerial sophistication score 
being obtained from the factor scores determined by a 
principal components analysis. Given that this analysis 
produced 
two 
components 
for 
managerial 
sophistication, a single score was obtained by averaging 
the two factor scores. 
The reliability of a formative construct, as opposed 
to a reflective one, is confirmed by the absence of 
multicollinearity between its measures or indicators 
[28]. Formative indicator validity is confirmed by a 
weight that is significant and not less than 0.1 [20], as 
confirmed in Fig. 3. Discriminant validity of a 
formative construct is confirmed by it sharing less than 
50% variance with any other construct, whereas 
nomological validity is confirmed when the construct‘s 
hypothesized 
links 
with 
other 
constructs 
are 
significantly greater than zero and in the expected 
direction [1]. 
 
TABLE 1. 
PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS OF IT 
                            MANAGEMENT SOPHISTICATION 
 
factor  
  indicator 
Funct. 
Soph. 
Man. 
Soph.a 
Man. 
Soph.b 
Functional Sophistication 
 designated manager for IT 
 org. level of the IT function 
 
.91 
.91 
 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
Managerial Sophistication 
 IT development 
 IT evaluation 
 user participation 
 external consultants  
 IT resources&competencies 
 IT support & appropriation 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
.79 
.68 
.75 
.58 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
.93 
.95 
aIT management practices 
bIT management capabilities 
 
In similar fashion, IT usage sophistication is 
modeled and measured from two sub-constructs, 
namely informational sophistication and technological 
sophistication. As presented in Table 2, each sub-
construct is in turn composed of six and three indicators 
respectively. The reliability and validity of the IT usage 
sophistication construct was similarly confirmed. As to 
the IT performance construct, it is composed of four 
measures, that is, the average benefits obtained from 
each type of IT-based application. One may note again 
that there is no multicollinearity among these last 
formative measures, the highest correlation among 
them being equal to 0.19 (p > 0.1), with all four 
regression weights being greater than 0.1 (Fig. 3), thus 
showing adequate reliability and validity. 
 
TABLE 2. 
PRINCIPAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS OF IT 
                                         USAGE SOPHISTICATION 
 
factor  
 indicator 
Tech. 
Soph. 
Inf. 
Soph.a 
Inf. 
Soph.b 
Technological Sophistication 
 uses of IT 
 uses of e-bus/Internet/Web 
 quality of IT security 
 
.90 
.81 
.50 
 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
Informational Sophistication 
 accounting/fin./HRM apps 
 logistics/prod./distrib. apps 
 mark./sales/cust. serv. apps 
 ERP system modules 
 information output quality 
 user-system interaction qual. 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
.78 
.60 
.74 
.69 
- 
- 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
.93 
.95 
aextensiveness of IT usage 
bquality of IT usage 
 
B. Test of the Research Model 
The research hypotheses were tested by evaluation 
the direction, value, and level of significance of the 
path coefficients estimated by PLS, as presented in Fig. 
3. 
 
Figure  3.
Results of testing the research model
IT Usage
Sophistication
(R2 = 0.27)
IT Management
Sophistication
(R2 = 0.07)
IT
Performance
(R2 = 0.60)
0.04
0,54***
0.65**
Strategic Role
of IT
0.28*
-0.12
0.32*
managerial
sophistication
functional
sophistication
technological
sophistication
informational
sophistication
.86***
.52**
.83***
.56**
logistics/production
and distribution applic.
benefits
marketing/sales and
customer service applic.
benefits
e-business, Internet
and Web application
benefits
.19
.81***
.29a
Nota. Significance levels were obtained by bootstrapping.                  ap < 0.1     *: p < 0.05      **: p < 0.01      ***: p < 0.001
accounting/finance
and HRM application
benefits
.27*
 
A positive and significant path coefficient (γ1 = 0.32; 
p < 0.05) confirms the first research hypothesis, that is, 
the more strategic the role played by IT in the 
manufacturing SME, the greater its IT performance. 
Moreover, if one removes the effect of IT management 
and IT usage sophistication upon IT performance, the 
strategic role of IT still explains 25% of the variance in 
this same performance. The benefits obtained from 
marketing, 
customer 
service, 
and 
e-business 
applications thus flow directly from a vision of IT as a 
94
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

mean for the SME to develop its products and markets, 
to integrate its production processes, and to improve 
exchanges with its business partners. 
A positive and significant path coefficient (γ2 = 0.28; 
p < 0.05) confirms the second hypothesis, that is, the 
more strategic the role played by IT, the greater the IT 
management sophistication of the SME. When IT 
constitutes a strategic necessity or a competitive 
weapon, when IT is of critical importance for ―core‖ 
business processes of small manufacturers, these 
organizations act in a coherent manner by adopting 
managerial practices that allow them to better manage 
the development and use of these technologies. These 
are practices such as planning, designing and evaluating 
IT-based applications, sustaining and favoring user 
participation and user appropriation of IT, preserving 
and developing IT resources and competencies, and 
seeking outside consultants to overcome internal lacks 
in this regard. These firms show similar coherence 
when they place the IT function at a high hierarchical 
level in the organization and render IT autonomous 
(with a designated manager), that is, not subordinated to 
the financial or accounting function as is still often the 
case in small business. 
Due to a negative and non significant path 
coefficient (γ3 = -0.12), the third hypothesis could not be 
confirmed. It stated that the more strategic the role 
played by IT, the greater the IT usage sophistication of 
the SME. Thus it seems that the strategic role of IT 
would be only indirect here, that is, through its effect on 
IT management sophistication. For instance, seeking 
internal and external integration of business processes 
through IT would lead the firm to better plan its use of 
IT and to dispose of better IT resources and 
competencies; only then could a more advanced 
technological infrastructure and applications such as 
ERP and e-business be implemented.  
The fourth research hypothesis is confirmed by a 
positive and significant path coefficient (γ4 = 0.54; p < 
0.001), 
relating 
the 
firm‘s 
IT 
management 
sophistication to its IT usage sophistication. This result 
increases the relevance of a strategic perspective based 
on IT resources and competencies, namely a resource-
based view [3] to explain the level of adoption and 
assimilation of IT in manufacturing SMEs. Now, firms 
that have sufficiently developed their IT function and 
managerial competence and that have access to external 
resources are those that have adopted and assimilated 
the greatest number of advanced manufacturing 
applications, and where system quality and security are 
best.  
Due to a non significant path coefficient (γ5 = 0.04), 
the fifth hypothesis could not be confirmed. It stated 
that the greater the IT management sophistication, the 
greater the IT performance of the SME. In the absence 
of a direct effect, better management of IT has 
nonetheless an indirect effect upon IT performance, that 
is, through its positive effect on the use of TI (which in 
turn has a direct effect on performance, as we shall see). 
This last result is obtained with an estimation of this 
indirect effect by the product of the two path 
coefficients (γ4 * γ6 = 0.54 * 0.65 = 0.35; p < 0.05). 
A strong path coefficient (γ6 = 0.65; p < 0.001) 
confirms the sixth research hypothesis, that is, the 
greater 
the 
small 
manufacturer‘s 
IT 
usage 
sophistication, the greater the performance of its 
information technology. Advanced applications such as 
an 
ERP 
system, 
a 
transactional 
Web 
site, 
videoconferencing, and mobile computing, to the extent 
that they are effectively assimilated by SMEs, are those 
that are the most strategic, that is, bring the greatest 
―value‖ to these firms in the form of increased 
competitiveness and competitive advantage. One may 
recall moreover that this increased assimilation of IT is 
the result of better management of these technologies. 
In turn, this better management is the result of a more 
strategic vision of the role played by IT in the 
organization. 
In total, these three factors combined explain 60% 
of the variance in the performance of IT. One may note 
here that the applications that are most affected in terms 
of 
performance 
are 
the 
marketing 
and 
sales 
applications, followed by the accounting, finance and 
HRM applications, and the e-business, Internet and 
Web applications. This last result tends to underline the 
more operational rather than strategic nature of the 
logistics, production, and distribution applications as 
presently implemented in the sampled manufacturing 
SMEs. 
 
VI. DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The results obtained from 44 SMEs show that IT 
performance is influenced in two ways. First, IT 
performance is directly affected by the strategic role of 
IT. Second, IT performance is also influenced by the 
indirect effect the strategic role of IT that passes first 
through a greater IT management sophistication, which 
in turn influences the IT usage sophistication, which 
finally contributes to IT performance.  
This dual contribution of the strategic role of IT on 
IT 
performance 
suggests 
that 
the 
functional 
sophistication of IT alone is not sufficient to increase IT 
performance; it is also necessary that IT be well used by 
the employees. Thus, to ensure that IT fully meets its 
strategic role, it has to be well managed. Its 
development and evaluation should take into account 
the needs of users, involving them when conducting 
process analysis to make the most effective use of 
resources, all this being done within a structured IT 
95
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

function which reflects the reality of the organization 
while using external resources when necessary.  
The strategic role of IT has no direct influence on IT 
usage 
sophistication, 
however 
it 
does 
via 
IT 
management sophistication. It recalls that once IT is 
deployed and well managed, it is possible for users to 
enhance their strategic role. These results are in line 
with Westerman‘s [44] work on the evolution of IT. It 
recalls the importance of ensuring that IT should 
adequately support business operations, making certain 
that information systems work as and when they are 
supposed to, that their access is secure, that information 
is accurate, complete and correct, and that all this is 
done in time and within budget. Then users are able to 
learn and adopt the various functional applications 
available within the company, and to assess the quality 
of information they find and the links that they may 
develop to make better decisions. 
The descriptive results indicate that for all SMEs, the 
benefits of IT mainly come from accounting / finance / 
HRM, and logistics / production / distribution 
applications. Then come benefits accruing from 
marketing / sales/ customer service applications, and to 
a 
lesser 
extent 
e-business, 
Internet 
and 
Web 
applications. This descending order of the benefits of 
application is consistent with the increasing complexity 
of IT strategic role. All companies do not cover the use 
of IT for electronic integration of internal and external 
functions, which is the most strategic role. The IT 
applications that are easiest to implement are often the 
first established, and therefore are the first to generate 
profits. In this study, where the benefits are cumulative 
by type of applications used, companies that have 
established several types of applications are the ones 
showing the highest performance from their IT. They 
are also those who have the most comprehensive 
strategic role, the more complex and more demanding. 
In the context of this study, firms that gain the most 
benefits from their IT are those that devote the more 
strategic role to these technologies, manage them in a 
sophisticated way, and use them extensively and 
intensively.  
 
VII. 
LIMITATIONS AND CONCLUSION 
As in any empirical research, this study has some 
limitations that should be mentioned. Given the nature 
of the sample, its representativeness in relation to all 
SMEs limits the scope of the results. The sample firms 
have indeed participated in a broad diagnostic 
performance survey, which may reveal distinctions with 
the general population in terms of IT [6]. The use of 
perceptual measures for assessing the strategic role and 
performance of IT may also have induced some 
respondent cognitive biases, although earlier studies 
have also resorted to such measures [38].  
Notwithstanding its limitations, this study revealed 
that a strategic vision of the role of IT is critical to the 
managerial and technological skills developed by the 
SME and the organizational impacts of the exploitation 
of these capabilities. Based on a strategic alignment 
perspective, however, future studies could extend the 
research model by examining whether the role assigned 
to IT depends on its fit with the SME‘s business 
strategy, structure, and environment. A formative 
model for measuring a most complete performance of 
IT such as that proposed by Gable, Sedera and Chan 
[16] may also be used to include, in addition to the 
organizational impact, individual impact, quality of IT-
based systems, and quality of information produced by 
these systems. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Andreev, P., Heatr, T., Maoz, H., and Pliskin, N. (2009), 
Validating formative partial least squares (PLS) models: 
Methodological review and empirical illustration, 
Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Conference on 
Information Systems, Phoenix, Arizona, pp. 1-17. 
[2] Bergeron, F., Raymond, L., and Rivard, S. (2004), Ideal 
patterns of strategic fit and business performance, 
Information & Management, (41:8), pp. 1003-1020. 
[3] Bharadwaj, A.S. (2000), A resource-based perspective on 
information technology capability and firm performance: 
An empirical investigation, MIS Quarterly, (24:1), pp. 
169-196. 
[4] Brown, C.V. (1997), Redesigning the emergence of hybrid 
IS governance solutions: Evidence from a single case 
site, Information Systems Research, (8:1), pp. 69-94. 
[5] Caldeira, M.M. and Ward, J.M. (2003), Using resource-
based theory to interpret the successful adoption and use 
of information systems and technology in manufacturing 
small and medium-sized enterprises, European Journal 
of Information Systems, (12), pp. 127-141. 
[6] Cassell, C., Nadin, S., and Gray, M.O. (2001), The use 
and 
effectiveness 
of 
benchmarking 
in 
SMEs, 
Benchmarking: An International Journal, (8:3), pp. 212-
222. 
[7] Chalmers, M. (1999), Comparing information access 
approaches», Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, (50:12), pp. 1108-1109. 
[8] Chan, Y.E., Huff, S.L., Copeland, D.G., and Barclay, 
D.W. (1997), Business strategic orientation, information 
systems strategic orientation, and strategic alignment, 
Information Systems Research, (8:2), pp. 125-150. 
[9] Chin, W.W. (1998), Issues and opinion on Structural 
Equation Modeling, MIS Quarterly, (22:1), pp. vii-xvi. 
[10] Chwelos, P., Benbasat, I., and Dexter, A.S. (2001), 
Research report: Empirical test of an EDI adoption 
model, Information Systems Research, (12:3), pp. 304-
321. 
[11] 
Cragg, 
P.B. 
(2002), 
Benchmarking 
information 
technology practices in small firms, European Journal of 
Information Systems, (11:4), pp. 267-282. 
[12] Croteau, A.-M. and Bergeron, F. (2001), An information 
technology trilogy: Business strategy, technological 
deployment and organizational performance, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, (20:2), pp. 77-99. 
96
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

[13] DeLone, W.H. and McLean, E.R. (1992), Information 
systems success: The quest for the dependent variable, 
Information Systems Research, (3), pp. 60-95.  
[14] Dibrell, C., Davis, P.S., and Craig, J. (2008), Fueling 
innovation through information technology in SMEs, 
Journal of Small Business Management, (46:2), pp. 203-
218. 
[15] Dierckx, M.A.F., and Stroeken, J.H.M. (1999), 
Information technology and innovation in small and 
medium-sized enterprises, Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change, (60), pp. 149-166. 
[16] Gable, G.G., Sedera, D., and Chan, T. (2008), Re-
conceptualizing information systems success: The IS-
impact measurement model, Journal of the Association 
for Information Systems, (9:7), pp. 377-408. 
[17] Gefen, D., Straub, D.W., and Boudreau, M.-C. (2000), 
Structural equation modeling and regression: guidelines 
for research practice, Communications of the AIS, (4:7), 
pp.1-76. 
[18] Henderson, J.C. and Venkatraman, N. (1999), Strategic 
alignment: Leveraging information technology for 
transforming organizations, IBM Systems Journal, 
(38:2&3), pp. 472-484. 
[19] Iacovou, C.L., Benbasat, I., and Dexter, A.S. (1995), 
Electronic data interchange and small organizations: 
Adoption and impact of technology, MIS Quarterly, 
(19:4), pp. 465-485. 
[20] Jahner, S., Leimeister, J.M., Knebel, U., and Krcmar, H. 
(2008), A cross-cultural comparison of perceived 
strategic importance of RFID for CIOs in Germany and 
Italy, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
41st 
Annual 
Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE 
Computer Society, pp. 1-10. 
[21] Keen, P.G.W. (1993), Shaping the future, business 
design 
through 
information 
technology, 
Harvard 
Business School Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  
[22] Kohli, R. and Grover, V. (2008), Business value of IT: 
An essay on expanding research directions to keep up 
with the times, Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems, (9:1), pp. 23-39. 
[23] 
Lehman, 
J.A. 
(1985), 
Organizational 
size 
and 
information systems sophistication, Working Paper #85-
18, University of Minnesota.  
[24] MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., and Jarvis, C.B. 
(2005), 
The 
problem 
of 
measurement 
model 
misspecification 
in 
behavioral 
and 
organizational 
research and some recommended solutions, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, (90:4), pp. 710-730. 
[25] Marbert, V.A., Soni, A., and Venkataramanan M.A. 
(2003), The impact of size on enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) implementation in the US manufacturing 
sector, Omega, (31), pp. 235-246. 
[26] Myers, B. L., Kappelman, L.A., and Prybutok, V.R. 
(1998), A comprehensive model for assessing the quality 
and productivity of the information systems function: 
Toward a theory for information systems assessment, in 
Garrity, E.J. and Sanders, G.L. (Eds.) Information 
Systems Success Measurement, Idea Group, Hershey, 
Pennsylvania, pp. 94-121.  
[27] Paré, G. and Sicotte, C. (2001), Information technology 
sophistication in health care: an instrument validation 
study among Canadian hospitals, International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, (63), pp. 205-223. 
[28] Petter, S., Straub, D., and Rai, A. (2007), Specifying 
formative constructs in information systems research, 
MIS Quarterly, (31:3), pp. 623-656. 
[29] Pflughoest K.A., Ramamurthy, K., Soofi, E.S., Yasai-
Ardekani, M., and Zahedi, F. (2003), Multiple 
conceptualizations of small business Web use and 
benefit, Decision Sciences, (34:3), pp. 467-512. 
[30] Pitt, L.F., Watson, R.T., and Kavan, C.B. (1995), Service 
quality: a measure of information systems effectiveness, 
MIS Quarterly, (19:2), pp. 173–185. 
[31] Philip, G. and Booth M.E. (2001), A new six ‗S‘ 
framework on the relationship between the role of 
information systems (IS) and competencies in ‗IS‘ 
management, Journal of Business Research, (51), pp. 
233-247. 
[32] Powell, T.C. and Dent-Micallef, A. (1997), Information 
technology as competitive advantage: The role of human, 
business, 
and 
technology 
resources, 
Strategic 
Management Journal, (18:5), pp. 375-405. 
[33] Premkumar, G. (2003), A meta-analysis of research on 
information 
technology 
implementation 
in 
small 
business, Journal of Organizational Computing and 
Electronic Commerce, (13:2), pp. 91-121. 
[34] Rai, A., Tang, X., Brown, P., and Keil, M. (2006), 
Assimilation 
patterns 
in 
the 
use 
of 
electronic 
procurement innovations: A cluster analysis, Information 
& Management, (43), pp. 336-349. 
 [35] Raymond, L., Paré, G., and Bergeron, F. (1995), 
Matching information technology and organizational 
structure: Implications for performance, European 
Journal of Information Systems, (4:1), pp. 3- 6. 
[36] Riemenschneider, C.K. and Mykytyn, P.P. (2000), What 
small business executives have learned about managing 
information technology, Information & Management 
(37), pp. 257-269. 
[37] Seddon, P.B., Graeser, V., and Willcocks, L.P. (2002), 
Measuring organizational IS effectiveness: An overview 
and update of senior management perspectives, DATA 
BASE for Advances in Information Systems, (33:2), pp. 
11-28.   
[38] Tallon, P.P., Kraemer, K.L., and Gurbaxani, V. (2000), 
Executives's perceptions of the business value of 
information technology: A process-oriented approach, 
Journal of Management Information Systems, (16:4), pp. 
145-173 
[39] Tornatsky, L.G. and Fleischer, M. (1990), The processes 
of technological innovation, Lexington, Massachusetts: 
Lexington Books. 
[40] Uwizeyemungu, S. and Raymond, L. (2009), Exploring 
an alternative method of evaluating the effects of ERP: A 
multiple case study, Journal of Information Technology, 
(24:3), pp. 251-268. 
[41] Venkatraman, N. (1989), The concept of fit in strategy 
research: Toward verbal and statistical correspondence, 
Academy of Management Review, (14:3), pp. 423-444. 
[42] 
Venkatraman, 
N. 
(1994), 
IT-enabled 
business 
transformation: From automation to business scope 
redefinition, Sloan Management Review, (35:2), pp. 73-
87.  
[43] Ward, J., Taylor, P., and Bond, P. (1996), Evaluation and 
realisation of IS/IT benefits: An empirical study of 
current practice, European Journal of Information 
Systems, (4:4), pp. 214-226. 
[44] Westerman, G. (2009), IT risk as a language for 
alignment, MIS Quarterly Executive, (8:3), pp. 109-121. 
 
97
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

