Towards a Unified User Profiling Scheme for Distributed Large Sporting Events’ 
Environments 
Uko Asangansi, Stefan Poslad  
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, 
Queen Mary University of London  
London, United Kingdom 
{uko.asangansi, stefan}@eecs.qmul.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a user modeling and 
personalisation framework for providing personalized services 
to users through their mobile devices during large sports 
events. The user model combines the knowledge of sports 
events the user physically attends and the knowledge of the 
user's interaction behavior when consuming multimedia 
content from his mobile while away from the sporting event's 
venue(s). The user model employs both explicit and implicit 
modeling techniques which is able to learn and represent shifts 
in the user's preferences. Ontologies are used to formalize the 
user model and domain knowledge thereby disabling 
ambiguities in preferences specification but introducing 
reasoning capabilities. 
Keywords- Ontology, user profile, sports, olympics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Distributed large sports events (DLSE) like the Summer 
Olympics, Commonwealth Games, and Paralympics are 
often characterized by several sport events of diverse 
disciplines taking place at disparate venues and places and 
spanning a number of days. This high activity environment is 
becoming a melting pot for several dimensions of research 
into personalization in order to enable spectators make better 
use of the enormous amount of information that is often 
generated in this sort of environment [7]. Mobile devices 
lend themselves as a target platform for personalisation in 
this environment due to their small form, light weight [3] and 
sensors, e.g., GPS (Global Positioning System) modules 
which can be queried to return a device’s position.  
Current state of the art of personalisation systems in 
DLSEs can be broadly classified into two categories based 
on their target context of usage.  While the first category 
focuses on the spectator who physically attends the sports 
events, the second category focuses on remote users who 
receive the content over a network. On the former category, 
the 
personalisation 
system 
delivers 
complementary 
multimedia information services, e.g., replays, game 
statistics etc. but these systems do not factor in other sports 
events the user might be interested in and has accessed 
through their devices. In the second category, emphasis is 
laid on the user’s interaction with the networked (mobile) 
device and viewing pattern in order to deliver a personalized 
service but no consideration is given to what events the user 
has physically attended in the past.  In this paper, we present 
a user modeling and personalisation framework that attempts 
to unify both worlds as they combine the sports multimedia 
consumption habit of users on their mobile devices and 
information on what sporting events they physically attend 
during DLSEs inferred through the user’s location. This 
combination is done in order to offer the user a more 
accurate personalisation service within and without the 
sports arena. 
In order to investigate this, we propose an ontology-
based location augmented user profiling scheme which 
profiles users attending sports event by monitoring the 
sporting events content they consume within and without the 
events they attend. An ontology based approach is chosen 
because it provides a richer representation scheme which is 
more precise and less ambiguous than other conventional 
schemes [6]. In addition, it provides an adequate foundation 
for the representation of coarse user interests to fine-grained 
preferences in a hierarchical way, and can be a key enabler to 
deal with the subtleties of user preferences [4]. 
In the rest of this paper, a review of related work is 
presented in Section II and it is followed by the architecture 
proposed in Section III. The constituent ontologies of the 
system and the applied proposed profile learning techniques 
are specified in Section IV and V respectively and finally, 
some future work is discussed. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There has been several research endeavors directed 
towards 
enriching 
users’ 
interest, 
engagement, 
and 
experience of DLSEs in different ways. In order to deliver 
this experience, these systems need to maintain an internal 
model of the user.  
In [12], a personalized live sports event viewing system 
for mobile devices is presented. The system uses an implicit 
user model driven approach to enables the personalisation 
system which adaptively predicts a user’s preferred events 
during live sports shows. While this work demonstrates how 
a personalisation system can use a user’s previous viewing 
session to elicit the user’s preferences, it does not take the 
user’s location (which can offer more insight into the user’s 
preferences) into consideration. In addition, a simple XML 
format is used to represent the user model. Hence not much 
of reasoning can be done with such a model.  
In [2], a place-shifted sports ‘snacking’ application is 
presented. The system provides sports fans a medium to 
catch-up with their favorite sports when they cannot view the 
live event in person as it unfolds. Although this system does 
not explicitly describe its user model, one can envisage that a 
very simple user model is used to achieve this.  
184
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

In [1], a mobile based in-stadium information system is 
presented. The system provides on-demand instant sports 
replay and traditional media convergence functionality to 
mobile devices by capturing and processing a television 
signal. This system assumes a generic user model for all 
users and does not support any out-of-stadium experience     
Other DLSE personalization systems include [10], which 
allows users to follow athletes of their choice by tracking 
their preferred athlete’s location, speed and pulse. This idea 
is pushed further by [5], where users can track their preferred 
cyclists in a long distance cycling race and based on the 
tracking information, they can decide where to position 
themselves in order to get a good view of their preferred 
athlete. Although these works use the concept of location, it 
is used in improving the user’s interaction with the 
associated sport and does not in any way aid the 
personalisation system in gaining a better knowledge of the 
user’s preferences.  
 
The aforementioned works show the lack of a rich user 
profiling scheme in the prevailing DLSE personalization 
domain. In order to develop a functional user profiling 
scheme, some requirements as outlined in [8] ought to be 
considered. Some of these requirements include:  
Semantic Reasoning – the user model and multimedia 
artifacts (video, text, pictures, metadata etc) should be 
semantically modeled based on ontologies in order to enable 
semantic reasoning.  
Dynamic User Profiling - human preferences generally 
tend to be dynamic and transient. Most of this dynamic 
behavior can be captured by continuously monitoring and 
recording the user’s behavior for analysis. This record can be 
collected in form of a history of multimedia artifacts 
assessed or requested by the user as a function of the time 
spent consuming it. In addition this work argues that a 
location component ought to be added to this record. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The aim of this proposed framework is to formally elicit 
a location-augmented user model optimized for mobile 
devices aimed at large spots events. The architectural 
overview of the proposed framework as depicted in Figure 1 
shows the main components of the system and their 
respective data flow. As shown, the proposed system 
architecture consists of a User Profile Management System, 
a Personalised Event Listing Service (PELS), a Sport Events 
Schedule Server and some domain ontologies.  A brief 
outline on these components is as follows:  
The User Profiling system consists of the User Profile 
Ontology, Profile Learning Module, the (Runtime) User 
Profile, the Profile Store and the Profiling Proxy – which 
runs on the personalized application installed on the user 
terminal. These components work together to ensure that 
both explicitly and implicitly collated information from the 
user is used to identify and represent the user’s static and 
transient interests or preferences. The PELS is responsible 
for matching users with available live sport events as 
described in the semantically annotated event schedule and it  
 
 
 
outputs a ranked list of live events that matches the user 
preferences as specified in the user’s profile. This is a ranked 
list ordered by the degree of relevance it has to the user.  The 
associated domain Ontologies are integrated for knowledge 
inference and vocabulary control. In line with this, users can 
only express their preferences on concepts formalized in the 
Summer Olympic Events (SEO) ontology and concepts from 
this ontology are used in for annotating the schedule. 
A. The Personalization Process 
In a nutshell, the personalisation process as offered by the 
PELS begins when the user logs-in into the system. A 
successful log-in sub-process involves the transfer of a 
profiling proxy from the user’s mobile device to the profiling 
service. The profiling proxy at log-in encapsulates the user’s 
unique identifier, current location, usage history (of the last 
session) and location history etc. The proxy remotely and 
temporarily stores the user’s usage information before it is 
sent to the Profiling system – this is done periodically.    The 
information from the proxy is used to uniquely identify the 
user and retrieve his full profile from the profile store. The 
retrieved profile is then updated with the content of the 
profiling proxy (depending on which of the information is 
more current). The updated profile is then passed to the 
PELS. 
The PELS receives the user’s profile and reasons with it 
along with a semantically annotated schedule of the live 
sport events which includes the event venue for every given 
event. The output of this reasoning process is a ranked list of 
events that matches the user’s interests and relevant to the 
user’s current location.  
IV. 
DOMAIN ONTOLOGIES 
The domain ontologies specified in the proposed 
framework are responsible for giving structure to the 
knowledge represented in the framework. The ontologies 
conceived as depicted in Figure 1 include the Summer 
Olympic Events (SEO) ontology, the Location Information 
Ontology and the User Profile Ontology. In developing these 
ontologies, the Web Ontology Language (OWL) was used to 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed framework 
 
185
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

formalize an ontology conceptualization and produce a 
hierarchy of concepts. The concepts and relationships for the 
Summer Olympics Events domain ontology in this 
framework are specified based upon the structure of sports 
information collated from the Olympics organization website 
and the rules and regulation handbook for each respective 
sports discipline – retrieved from the website of the 
respective governing body for the given sport.  While the 
Location Information Ontology contains concepts and 
relations that represent location information but only 
focusing on those that can be used to connect the domain 
knowledge (which include the sport events and their 
respective venues) with user’s location(s) during the profile 
learning and personalisation process. On the other hand, the 
User Profile Ontology comprises concepts and relations that 
represent a user, his preferences and past behaviors. 
A.  The Summer Olympic Events (SOE) Ontology 
The Summer Olympics Events Ontology represents the 
conceptualization of the domain of Summer Olympics 
Events. The aim of this ontology is to provide a vocabulary 
and background knowledge for eliciting user preferences as 
well as annotating the events schedule in order to streamline 
the semantic matching and personalisation processes in the 
PELS. Given that users are currently only allowed to specify 
their preferences for sport events and venues, athletes and 
sports officials are currently not included in the model. 
The SOE Ontology is modeled to be consistent with the 
sport events nomenclature and taxonomy used by the 
International Olympics Committee (IOC) which has an 
Olympic sport at the top of the taxonomy, then sports’ 
disciplines and the sports events in the bottom. According to 
the IOC, a sport is a single or group of disciplines regulated 
by an international federation (a governing body). 
Taking the IOC’s model into consideration, the SEO 
ontology was conceptualized to include all 26 Olympic 
Sports, and their respective disciplines, and events in the 
Summer Olympic Games. The sports are modeled as top 
level concepts, while the disciplines as the subclasses (where 
applicable) of these top level concepts while the events are 
instances of the subclasses. In addition, each individual event 
is qualified by a number of object properties such as 
performedWith, performedIn in order to support a richer 
inference and classification scheme by comparing the values 
of the specified object properties. 
B. Location Information Ontology ( LIO) 
The Location Information (LIO) domain ontology 
conceptualizes the notion of location in the proposed 
framework. Location related information is necessary for 
adding a location component to the semantically annotated 
events schedule thereby signifying where the events are 
taking place which translates into providing a means to 
model location information for the events described in the 
SEO domain ontology. Thereby, enabling the personalization  
system to filter events according to a user’s current location. 
Moreover, users can elicit their preferences through locations 
(venue of sports events) explicitly – by users choosing which 
sport event venues they will prefer to visit or receive live  
 
 
Figure 2.  An abridged representation of the Location Information 
Ontology (LIO). 
 
information from or implicitly – by the system monitoring 
which event venues the user actually attends and using the 
information as a form of relevance feedback to augment the  
user’s general preference model. Figure 2 shows an abridged 
model of the LIO. 
The Location concept is has the property hasAddress 
which qualifies the address of the given location. The 
locatedAt property reflects the location’s geo-coordinates (in 
logtutude and latitude) while the hasAlias is used to hold the 
location’s well-known name e.g., Aquatics Centre. 
C. User Profile Ontology ( UPO) 
In conceptualizing the User Profile Ontology (UPO), we 
were inspired by a number of user models especially the 
General User Model Ontology [11]. However, we have so 
modeled it such that only concepts relevant to our domain of 
discourse are retained. Our model logically contains both 
static and dynamic representations of the User. The static 
information are those that are less likely to change over time 
and this is represented by the Person the user is. This sub-
model describes the user’s unique identifier and other 
demographic information. The other components comprise 
the dynamic entities whose instances are updated by the 
system as the user interacts with it. These components 
include the user’s locationHistory, usageHistory, and 
Preferences. 
Furthermore, as depicted in Figure 3 the proposed User 
Profile Ontology is modeled to capture not only the sports 
events selected by the user in previous instances, but also the 
location where the user was. For instance, the user selecting 
an Archery event while at the Aquatic Centre may signal the 
user’s preference for swimming events over archery. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 An abridged representation of the User Profile Ontology 
186
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

The Preference concept is used to specify the user’s sports 
event and venue interests and disinterests respectively. These 
interests are associated with a degreeOfInterest index which 
is used in a preferences weighting scheme and reflects how 
much the user prefers a given event over the others. This 
weighing scheme allows the profiling system to dynamically 
increase the weights associated with sports events the user 
continually shows an interest in, while the index of those the 
user shows disinterests in are gradually attenuated.  
V. 
USER PROFILE LEARNING 
Since user’s preferences change over time [8], it is 
imperative to for the system to learn the user's preferences by 
monitoring the user’s behavior by analyzing the contents 
they have viewed in the past as stored in the usageHistory 
component of the profile and the sports venues they have 
been to as stored in the locationHistory component of the 
profile. One approach employed in ensuring that the user’s 
profile stays relevant is by updating the degreeOfInterest 
component for every preference concept in the user’s profile 
by a time-based decay function based on the user’s behavior 
(i.e., sports events venue attendance habit and mobile 
application usage). The decay function is as follows:  
 
 
 
The 
 variable 
stands 
for 
the 
current 
degreeOfInterest component of the preference concept.  
 
is the relevance feedback factor given through an analysis of 
the content consumption and frequency of visits to a given 
event venue; the relevance feedback value is taken to be a 
Boolean value. The 
 expression reflects the 
time spent at the given event venue or watching an event 
content item on the mobile application and the duration of 
the event or length of the content, operates as the 
normalizing factor. The 
 factor is used to cushion the 
personalized non-linear change of the concept’s weight 
according to user locationHistory and usageHistory data. ‘x’ 
represents the number of consumed content. The more 
content a user consumes, for example, the more slowly the 
weights increase. The ∂ factor is a constant, which takes 
different values in the two opposite scenarios of 
consumed/non-consumed content. More precisely, in the 
case of non-consumed content, the changing rate (i.e., the 
decreasing rate) should be slower, since a non-consumed 
content does not constitute an explicit indication for non-
interest. On the contrary, in case of consumed content the 
changing rate (i.e., the increasing rate) should be faster, since 
a consumed content demonstrates a better indication for 
interest. 
VI. 
FURTHER WORK 
   In moving this work forward, the profile learning 
algorithm will be improved by integrating a weight 
spreading algorithm which will update other semantically 
related preference concepts’ weights when one of the 
neighboring concepts in the user model is updated. In 
addition, an empirical evaluation of the framework will be 
carried out using real users and the results will be compared 
with that of convention DLSE personalization systems. 
Furthermore, aspects of social and group modeling are areas 
to be further investigated with respect to this work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been undertaken within the framework of 
the My-e-Director 2012, Real-Time Context-Aware and 
Personalized Media Streaming Environments for Large Scale 
Broadcasting 
Applications, 
FP7 
Project 
(grant 
No.  
2152482012), funded by the European Commission. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Ault, J. Krogmeier, S. Dunlop, and E. Coyle, "eStadium: The 
Mobile 
Wireless 
Football 
Experience," 
Internet 
and 
Web 
Applications and Services, International Conference on, pp. 644-649, 
2008 Third International Conference on Internet and Web 
Applications and Services, 2008 doi:10.1109/ICIW.2008.57 
[2] 
F. Bentley and M. Groble, “TuVista: meeting the multimedia needs of 
mobile sports fans,” Proceedings of the seventeen ACM international 
conference on Multimedia (MM '09). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
Oct. 2009, pp. 471-480, DOI=10.1145/1631272.1631337 
[3] 
U. Bhuvan and M. San, "The Enterprise Mobile Applications 
Development Framework," IT Professional, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 33-39, 
May/June 2010, doi:10.1109/MITP.2010.45 
[4] 
D. Vallet, I. Cantador, M. Fernandez, and P. Castells. “A Multi-
Purpose Ontology-Based Approach for Personalized Content Filtering 
and Retrieval,”Proceedings of the First International Workshop on 
Semantic Media Adaptation and Personalization (SMAP '06). IEEE 
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 19-24. 
[5] 
A. Devlic, M. Koziuk, and W. Horsman. “Synthesizing Context for a 
Sports Domain on a Mobile Device,” Proceedings of the 3rd 
European Conference on Smart Sensing and Context (EuroSSC '08), 
Daniel Roggen, Clemens Lombriser, Gerhard Tröster, Gerd Kortuem, 
and Paul Havinga (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 
206-219. DOI=10.1007/978-3-540-88793-5_16  
[6] 
G. Dragan, D. Djurić, and V. Devedz
