Towards a New Trust Model for Health Social Networks 
Sojen Pradhan and Valerie Gay 
Faculty of Engineering and IT 
University of Technology Sydney (UTS) 
Sydney, Australia 
 e-mail: {Sojendra.Pradhan,Valerie.Gay}@uts.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract—More specific purpose driven social networking sites 
have emerged since social networking sites have gained 
popularity by bringing people with shared interests together to 
interact. In health care, they are referred as Health Social 
Networks (HSNs).  Given the sensitive nature of health 
information, trust is fundamental for them. The emergence of 
pervasive and 
ubiquitous computing environment and 
overwhelming information available online is helping the 
health social networking sites gain popularity at a fast pace. 
Health social networkers are willing to create, share or retrieve 
trustworthy health or lifestyle related information. Therefore, 
it is essential that trust is stipulated and scrutinised to 
understand how the users perceive healthcare, how they decide 
to interact with HSNs. This paper analyses external factors 
such as perceived information quality, perceived system 
quality, perceived reputation and perceived trust signs which 
impact the trust model for HSNs. In particular, ‘perceived 
reputation’ based on the factor ‘who has recommended the 
site’ is given an emphasis on this paper. It highlights that 
popularity of social networking sites is changing the way trust 
models have been defined in the past. This is because social 
relationships created via social networking sites are also 
impacting on choosing the HSNs and how users are sharing 
health information on these platforms. 
Keywords-Online health information; social networking 
sites; health social networks; trust model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The use of SNSs (social networking sites) has made a 
substantial impact on the revolution of health care digital 
communication.  Health information is generally sourced 
from health care professionals but an increasing number of 
healthcare consumers turn to websites and SNSs nowadays 
for the source or second opinion.  Due to both pervasive and 
ubiquitous nature of ICTs (information and communication 
technologies), the number of people sharing health 
information online and the number of social networking sites 
for health-related information is increasing [1,2,3].  One of 
the popular topics for people to participate and share online 
is health-related information. Health information is shared 
with other users although personal health information is 
considered to be sensitive. It is one of the basic characteristic 
of human being that when we experience something positive, 
we tend to share with peers and recommend others. For 
example, if we watch a good movie, we tend to recommend 
this movie to our friends to watch. In a social networking 
environment, when a user shares information on a particular 
topic, they discuss their positive experience and subliminally 
recommend, validate and endorse the experience. In this 
paper, we use the term ‘HIs’ (health infomediaries) for 
providers who provide unbiased health information online to 
users, through which they have choice to make their health 
related decisions [4]. Another term ‘HSNs’ (health social 
networks) is used to cover social networking sites where 
users search, self-track, discuss health and lifestyle or fitness 
related information [2, 5]. 
While there is an increasing trend in using the ICTs to 
search and communicate health information online, the 
demand for high quality information has also been rising [6]. 
At the same time, there is also a legitimate concern for 
security and privacy. The impact of social networks on 
healthcare is the subject of studies [5] and there are serious 
concerns as the healthcare consumers rely on the information 
provided by the health related platforms such as HIs, HSNs, 
Apps. Despite the warnings ‘not to use the information 
without consulting a health care professional’, consumers use 
the information to make health related decisions. Therefore, 
questions such as, ‘how do health consumers know the 
platform is trustable and the provided information is well 
researched? Are the health social network sites safe?’ have 
risen. Such platforms may have been created to provide 
information to facilitate sales of a product or service [7] or 
capture private information in exchange of perceived benefit 
[3]. Trust plays an important role for healthcare consumers to 
reduce uncertainty in technology-mediated environment [8]. 
There have been many studies regarding trust on the 
websites but only a few researchers have focused on the 
health related online information. Among them, Song and 
Zahedi [4] suggested that the quality of information and the 
level of trust the healthcare consumers have with the health 
platforms are very important to make their health decisions.  
It has been argued that the trust would be more reliant on the 
content for health related information, than other factors such 
as how it is presented, HCI (Human Computer Interaction) 
factors or the credibility of the platform. Less priority seems 
to be given to the factor such as ‘who has recommended the 
site for the particular health information or to exchange 
health related information’. Pew Research Center [9] has 
reported that 80% of Internet users in US have looked for 
information about health topics or similar health issues they 
are facing. It has also been reported that over 3,000 hospitals 
have social networking sites which includes over 700 
Facebook pages [10]. However, due to the sensitive nature of 
the health related information, the health social network 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

users may disclose information and describe terms which 
could be misleading or misinterpreted. This certainly creates 
some challenges to the health social networkers. 
This paper is a step towards a new trust model for HSNs. 
Section 2 defines HSNs and the risks associated with them. 
Section 3 focuses on trust and discusses its vital role in 
reducing those risks. Section 4 analyses external factors 
affecting a concept of trust. Section 5 proposes a new trust 
model for health care recommendation systems. The paper 
concludes with open issues and future work. 
 
II. 
HEALTH SOCIAL NETWORKS AND RISKS 
Since SNSs have been gaining popularity, more specific 
purpose driven social networks have emerged in addition to 
the popular sites such as Facebook for general purposes and 
LinkedIn for career specific. Healthcare consumers (both 
professionals and consumers) have moved from searching 
information online to sharing information and in fact 
interacting with other users within the platforms [11]. They 
are able to find other users in similar illnesses or health 
situations and interact with each other about their conditions, 
symptoms and treatments in the sites like PatientsLikeMe, 
DailyStrength and many others [1]. This environment 
provides great opportunities for healthcare consumers to be 
able to connect and relate with each other [11]. It has been 
reported that 23% of chronic health e-patients with cancer, 
diabetes, or heart disease have searched for other patients 
with similar conditions [11]. Other studies such as ‘Point of 
Care’ Survey conducted by Wolters Kluwer Health revealed 
that the physicians have changed initial diagnosis of patients 
based on new information accessed online resources [12]. 
With the increased number of healthcare consumers 
turning to HSNs for retrieving and sharing health 
information, the number of the users who rely on the 
information from these platforms is rising. It raises the 
potential danger of using the health information incorrectly 
by healthcare consumers in a short or long term. The degree 
of danger unequivocally depends on the skills and 
knowledge 
of 
the 
healthcare 
consumers, 
such 
as 
understanding of medical or scientific vocabulary and 
biomedical 
knowledge, 
to 
interact 
with 
the 
HSN 
communities and other health related platforms [2]. 
BetterHealthChannel [13] has listed some of the potential 
risks associated with health information online. These 
include, wrong diagnosis, misunderstanding of medical 
jargons, self-medication may delay visit to the health 
professional and hence miss out on appropriate early and 
appropriate treatment for the illness, a delay may cause 
serious complications or death, and may have unwanted side 
effects or interact with other medications. 
III. 
‘TRUST’ AS A MAJOR FACTOR 
Trust is a very complex phenomenon. There are many 
definitions and studies of trust in many aspects of lives.  
Many experiments and surveys have been conducted and 
developed trust models accordingly. Yet there is no universal 
definition of trust that everybody can share and the concept 
of trust remains elusive [14]. A simple reason for that is that 
‘trust’ has numerous and diverse meanings. On a daily 
context, ‘trust’ is a term with many meanings [15]. “Trust is 
an important lubricant of a social system”, because it can 
enhance efficiency [16]. It has been shown how trust as a 
high level of altruism can increase efficiency of people 
working together [17]. In general terms, trust is a 
relationship between the trustor and the trustee. In the 
context of health information; the trustor is a health social 
networker (healthcare consumer) and the trustee is the HSN 
platform. 
Many researchers and scientists have defined and 
categorised many different types of trust. Among them, 
Josang et al. [18] used Reliability trust and Decision trust in 
the context of health information. The measurement of 
reliability trust is to provide the best health-related 
information based on ability, knowledge, skills and 
competence of the trustee (platform or information provider). 
This could be determined by the credibility, qualification and 
history of successful stories or case studies provided. 
Decision trust can be measured based on the actual actions 
the users take after getting exposed to the information in the 
platform. This could be influenced by the circumstances the 
users are in, for example the urgency of the need, or most 
importantly who has recommended this platform. 
Many researchers emphasised the importance of initial 
trust for users that attract them to visit a platform for the first 
time. Song and Zahedi [4] designed a trust model and not 
only focused on the initial trust component for health related 
platforms, but the dynamics of trust revision as per time of 
loyal users. Time is important component on measuring trust 
because the level of trust may increase or decrease over time. 
Adams [19] focused on reliability issues in the context of 
interaction of health consumers with information in the 
technology-mediated environment. More specifically on the 
quality of information (credibility and accuracy) and the 
healthcare consumer’s behavior in terms of creating, 
exchanging 
and 
retrieving 
within 
social 
network 
environment. Quality of information is not just about ratings 
of the health information available online [20], but the 
credibility of the content in line with the concept of 
reputation and a collective measure of trustworthiness [19]. 
Reputation building is prevalent within SNSs and 
recommendation sites as these platforms provide the 
opportunities to reach more consumers and facilitate to 
create, share and retrieve information online. In hindsight, 
the reputation building process can be manipulated through 
pre-formatted templates, which could lead to suggest specific 
products or services [19]. 
With the increased number of healthcare consumers 
interacting on HSN platforms, more issues about reliability 
and trustworthiness will be encountered in making decisions 
for their health issues. In this paper, an existing trust model 
for health infomediaries by Song and Zahedi [4] is reviewed. 
In addition to existing external factors, this model will be 
altered to emphasize impacts of social influence such as 
‘who has referred to this particular HSN platform?’ Later on, 
a new trust model is proposed. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

IV. 
NEW TRUST MODEL FOR HSNS 
The model is based on the framework of TRA (Theory of 
Reasoned Action) and conceptual trust model designed by 
Song and Zahedi [4]. TRA has five main components: 
‘external 
factors’, 
‘trust 
beliefs’, 
‘trust 
attitudes’, 
‘intentions’, and ‘behavioural outcome’ [21]. These five 
components lead to develop relationship between the trustor 
(health social networker) and trustee (HSN platform) and the 
relationship could be either positive or negative. The five 
components and the ‘relationship development’ steps are 
shown in the Fig. 1. 
While making decisions, external factors assist to outline 
the trust beliefs formation. This is what influences the 
formation of trust attitudes and then intentions towards 
determining eventual behaviour such as whether to act or not 
on the information provided or extracted from the HSN 
platforms for their health issues. TRA considers that trust 
beliefs lead to trust attitudes, and then they lead to 
behavioural intentions and becomes behaviour [22]. 
The first three components from the TRA framework: 
‘external factors’, ‘trust beliefs’ and ‘trust attitudes’ are 
further refined into a conceptual framework and shown in 
Fig. 2.  
 
 
 
Figure1.     Components of e-commerce exchange relationship development framework [21] 
 
 
External Factors  
 
Trust Beliefs 
 
     
Trust Attitudes 
 
Figure 2.  Conceptual model of trust [4] 
 
The intentions to use health information or take part in 
interaction or exchange of personal health information in 
HSN platforms are derived through the level of trust to the 
particular platform. If the intentions are positive and the 
experience turns out to be a favourable one, this could lead to 
the development of a relationship with the HSN platform 
(trustee). Inherently, health consumer would likely re-visit 
the platform and recommend the platform to others. This is 
where power of SNSs comes into play. In terms of gaining 
the trust, the first impression or initial trust is very important. 
Through a good initial trust, the users will be willing to use 
and share health information within the HSN platform. 
Therefore, social influence ‘who refer to the site’ has a 
critical role. Once the trust is established, there will be more 
interactions between the trustor and the trustee over time. 
The level of trust is determined by the information quality 
(credibility), system quality and satisfaction to the trustor 
which will be developed over the time [23]. 
A. Perceived Information Quality  
The measurement of information quality is evolving with 
the pervasive ICTs in the healthcare domain. In the model 
we selected, perceived information quality has been further 
classified into the following sub-categories: 
• 
Understandability: Understandability means clarity of 
the information to the user. Medical and scientific 
vocabulary could create challenges or users to 
understand. As long as the HSN platform is destined for 
the general public, the trustor needs to be careful of the 
vocabulary used. There is always a danger that users 
may misunderstand the terminologies used.   
• 
Relevance: Relevance refers to the appropriateness of 
the information to the users. If the information is 
understood, the users are able to verify whether it is 
relevant to their needs. Medical or health related 
knowledge is important to understand the relevance.  
• 
Usefulness: Due to the sensitive nature of health 
information, healthcare consumers are concerned about 
Perceived 
System Quality 
•Ease of Use 
•Interactivity 
Perceived 
Reputation 
Perceived Trust 
Signs 
Trust Beliefs 
 
•  Ability 
•  Benevolence 
•  Integrity 
Risk Beliefs 
•  Undesired consequences 
•  Security 
•  Privacy 
Trust Attitudes / 
Intentions to use 
+ 
- 
(+) Positive Intentions 
(-) Negative Intentions 
Perceived 
Information Quality 
•Understandability 
•Relevance 
•Usefulness 
•Reliability 
•Adequacy 
 
  External 
  Factors 
  Trust 
  Beliefs 
 Trust  
  Attitudes 
      Intentions 
   Behavioral 
   Outcome 
   Relationship 
      Development 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

any 
form 
of 
digital 
communication. 
Perceived 
usefulness (PU) of the extracted information influences 
the trust beliefs to a positive territory and eventually 
influences behavioural intentions [24]. 
• 
Reliability: Reliability refers to the credibility of the 
trustee and the accuracy of the information. It is a broad 
terminology and may well incorporate technical aspects 
of the platform and health consumer behavior [19].   
• 
Adequacy: Adequacy refers to the completeness and 
references provided. Completeness means an extensive 
coverage of health-related information on the specific 
topic. This could portray as a sign of the commitment 
of the platform to the users by providing unbiased 
information and references.  
Besides these sub-categories, there are many other 
important factors to qualify health-related information 
quality such as timeliness, accuracy, clarity and so on. They 
are not covered in the model in the Fig 2. 
B. Perceived System Quality 
A study was carried out to determine overall satisfaction 
with system quality and information quality for health 
information. It was reported that system quality (usability) 
played a greater role than information quality in the study 
[25]. Both perceived ease of use (PEOU) and perceived 
usefulness (PU) are basic ingredients to support the 
technology acceptance model (TAM), an information system 
theory which models how users accept and use a technology. 
This theory later forms the trust antecedents of intentions to 
utilise the health-related information, as intended at the time 
of creation [26]. 
• 
Ease of use: The ease of use refers to the usability of 
the HSN platform which will determine whether the 
users want to spend time on it. Perceived ease of use 
(PEOU) influences the perceived usefulness (PU).  
• 
Interactivity: Interactivity refers to the web features that 
ease the user’s experience for the search and potentially 
even personalize the information based on the search 
criteria. 
C. Perceived Reputation 
The term reputation can be defined as the social influence 
of trust, which can be referred as social exchange theory that 
define one party’s reputation based on a third party’s ability 
to tell stories about its trustworthiness. The terms 
‘reputation’ and ‘trust’ are strongly linked to each other. 
Reputation is usually influenced by the past behaviour. A 
repeated visit and prior positive experience of health 
consumer with the platform denotes the perceived reputation. 
Any good or bad experiences or result is easily circulated via 
social networking sites instantly. It is even more important 
for health-related information to be distributed faster if more 
people to get benefit or protect from. 
D. Perceived Trust Signs 
Trust signs are used to reassure the healthcare consumers 
that there are no risks associated with HSN platforms to 
interact to or retrieve information from and reinforce 
integrity of the provider. The use of trust signs is necessary 
to convince the users that they can trust the HSN platform 
and its information [4]. 
Deshpande and Jadad [20] provided five broad 
categories to evaluate the quality of online health 
information and depicted as trust signs: 
• 
Codes of conduct (e.g., Australian Medical 
Association),  
• 
Quality labels (e.g., Health on the Net Foundation 
[HONcode]),  
• 
User guides (e.g., DISCERN Online),  
• 
Filters (e.g., intute.ac.uk) and  
• 
Third party certification (e.g., Hi-ethics, Utilization 
Review Accreditation Commission [URAC]) 
Overall, the external factors from the conceptual model 
in Figure 2 influence the trust beliefs and ultimately 
influence the HSN platform user’s intention to act on the 
information extracted from HSN platforms. If the perceived 
information quality, perceived system quality, perceived 
reputation, perceived trust signs and satisfaction are all 
positive, the HSN platform users will come back to retrieve 
and share health information in the HSN platform and in fact 
recommend to others [27]. Loyalty is critical to sustain the 
systems however these information tend to have temporal 
effect as soon as the user receive the required information, 
there is no incentive for them to come back. The user 
satisfaction is what makes the users loyal and recommend 
the system to others. 
Intention of using the information extracted from the 
HSN platform is significantly relied on the urgency of the 
matter, need and circumstances of the person at the time and 
the trust is crucial for these circumstances. From the 
conceptual trust model, the impact of the external factors, 
specifically the influence from the third party based on who 
has recommended visiting the HSN platform, will be 
researched further. This factor is very dynamic and very 
complicated to measure as these variables would change 
from case to case.  
V. 
PROPOSED MODEL 
The conceptual trust model analysed external factors 
which affects trust in the health information and the health 
related platforms. However, in this research, we focus on the 
perceived reputations, one of the external factors and 
specifically, impact of ‘who recommended the platform or 
information?’  
Since the explosion of social media, more information is 
being shared online.  The social behavior of human being has 
been replicated in social reviews sites or recommendation 
sites by allowing more users to interact and share their 
experiences in an unbiased environment. Depending on who 
recommended the health platform or information provider, 
users have tendency to follow through better. If the 
experience is good and satisfied during the process, they will 
tend to continue to use and recommend to others further. 
Based on this, a new trust-based model for dynamic 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

healthcare recommendation system is proposed as shown in 
the Fig. 3.  
This model has 3 steps. Firstly, users or patients will 
have some preferences (criteria) while searching for health-
related information or healthcare providers. The criteria such 
as location, symptoms, age, specialist, availability and others 
are used. Based on these criteria, a system would provide a 
list of health-related information or providers. Which one in 
the list to use in this information overloaded age?  
Because people tend to rely more on recommendations 
from people they trust, we would evaluate trust within their 
own social networks which can help to sort out the list from 
the previous step. The trust is what would influence how and 
what information is going to be used by the users. There are 
many ways to evaluate trust within SNSs. The evaluation of 
trust in our research will be done by analysing the strength of 
relationships among users in the social network. The 
influence 
is 
directly 
proportionate 
to 
strength 
of 
relationships. Analysis of similarity in the context is another 
element we will focus on, such as symptoms, side-effects, 
and behaviours among the users. In addition, influence could 
also be determined by how knowledgeable the trustee in the 
specific healthcare area is. If the person is an expert in the 
area, his/her opinion will be given more priority by the 
trustor. Analysing these information, a trust value would be 
generated. Based on the trust value, the health information or 
the healthcare provider would be selected.  
In some cases, the users or patients are able to verify the 
information (or provider) further with the existing online 
information (crowdsources) to assure that the information is 
trustworthy. It is the last step of the proposed model, which 
is an alternative, because the information may not be 
available for all information (or providers).  
This model accommodates the users’ preferences 
(criteria) and users’ trust within their own network to be able 
to filter through to the best possible result while looking for 
health-related information or healthcare providers.   
 
 
Figure 3. Proposed Model 
 
VI. 
OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE WORK 
 SNSs are open platform for communication and they 
provide a meeting place to create and share experiences in 
life. Users share information with each other in the SNSs, 
regardless of whether knowing or not knowing the remote 
user, which provides both opportunities and challenges for 
sensitive health information. How do we know the 
information publicised on the HSNs or shared in the SNSs 
are accurate? Not only content but also the source of the 
information is very important. The search engines cannot 
provide whether the source is trustworthy or not. Trust has 
been regarded as one of the major factors the users consider 
in the process of searching and taking actions on health- 
related information.  Yet, it is very subjective to determine 
the trust value as it is extremely dynamic and changes 
quickly with many dependent variables such as time, 
situation, knowledge, experiences and many others. 
 In the future work, we will focus on the impacts of 
health social networks to the trust model and test some 
hypotheses to prove the significance of the impacts on the 
model in specific health care areas such as dental care. We 
will divide trust into internal (local) and external (global) 
trust factors. Internal trust is generated within a user either 
through existing relationships in their network or through 
their sharing experience in a particular HSN. External trust 
will be through existing ratings and review sites about the 
health information online.  Impacts of reviews and 
recommendations in conjunction with own level of trust to 
the health platform and a particular information provider as a 
trustee will be studied further in the domain. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Swan, “Emerging patient-driven health care models: an 
examination of health social networks, consumer personalised 
medicine and quantified self-tracking”, International journal 
of environmental research and public health, vol. 6, no. 2, 
Feb. 2009, pp. 492-525, doi:10.3390/ijerph6020492. 
[2]  Y.W. Webster, E.R. Dow, J. Koehler, R.C. Gudivada, and 
M.J. 
Palakal, 
“Leveraging 
health 
social 
networking 
communities in translational research”, Journal of biomedical 
informatics, Feb. 2011, vol. 44, pp. 536-544, doi: 
10.1016/j.jbi.2011.01.010. 
[3]  J. Williams, “Social networking applications in health care: 
threats to the privacy and security of health information”, 2nd 
Intl Workshop on Software Engineering in Health Care at 
ICSE,  May. 2010, pp. 39-49. 
[4]  J. Song and F.M. Zahedi, “Trust in health infomediaries”, 
Decision Support Systems, vol. 43, no. 2, Jan. 2007, pp. 390-
407, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2006.11.011. 
[5]  V. Gay, and P. Leijdekkers, “The Good, the Bad and the Ugly 
About Social Netwoks for Health Apps”, 9th IEEE/IFIP 
Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC),  Oct. 2011, 
pp.463-468, doi: 10.1109/EUC.2011.69. 
[6]  N. Pletneva, S. Cruchet, M.A. Simonet, M. Kajiwara, and C. 
Boyer, “Results of the 10 th HON survey on health and 
medical Internet use”, Health on the Net Foundation, 2011. 
[7]  C. Boyer, V. Baujard, and A. Geissbuhler, “Evolution of 
Health Web certification, through the HONcode experience”, 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 169, 2011, 
p. 53. 
[8] B. Hernández-Ortega, “The role of post-use trust in the 
acceptance of a technology: Drivers and consequences”, 
Technovation, vol. 31, Jul. 2011, pp. 523-238, doi: 
10.1016/j.technovation.2011.07.001. 
[9]  S. Fox, “The social life of health information, 2011”, Pew 
Research Center's Internet and American Life Project, 
[retrieved: April 2013, http://www.pewinternet.org].  
[10]  N.P. Terry, “Fear of Facebook: Private Ordering of Social 
Media Risks Incurred by Healthcare Providers”, Working 
Paper, Aug. 2011,<http://works.bepress.com/nicolas_terry/2>. 
[11] W.L. Lober and J.L. Flowers, “Consumer Empowerment in 
Health Care Amid the Internet and Social Media”, Seminars 
in Oncology Nursing, Vol. 27, No.3. Aug. 2011, pp: 169-182, 
doi: 10.1016/j.soncn.2011.04.002. 
[12] M. Merrill, “Docs turn to Google, Yahoo for health info, 
survey finds” Healthcare IT News, Nov. 2011, [retrieved: 
April 2013, http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/survey-
docs-turn-google-yahoo-health-info]. 
[13] Victoria-Government, “Health information on the Internet,”, 
Better Health Channel, Jun. 2012, [retrieved: Apr 2013,  
http://www.betterhealth.vic.gov.au/bhcv2/bhcarticles.nsf/page
s/Health_information_on_the_internet?open]. 
[14] N. Watanabe, “Role of trust in cross-cultural adaptation: the 
perspective of international degree students at a Finnish 
university”, Master’s Thesis, University of Jyväskylä, 2008. 
[15] J.M. Sinclair and R. Carter, Trusts the text: language, corpus 
and discourse, Routledge, New York. 2004. 
[16] F. Fukuyama, Trust: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of 
Social Order, Free Press, New York, 1996, p. 151. 
[17] R. Chami and C. Fullenkamp, “Trust and efficiency”, Journal 
of Banking & Finance, vol. 26, no. 9, Sep. 2002, pp. 1785-
1809, doi: 10.1016/S0378-4266(02)00191-7. 
[18] A. Josang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and 
reputation systems for online service provision”, Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 43, 2007, pp. 618-644. 
[19] S.A. Adams, “Revisiting the online health information 
reliability debate in the wake of “web 2.0”: An inter-
disciplinary literature and website review”, International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 79, no. 6, Jan. 2010, pp. 
391-400, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.01.006. 
[20] A. Deshpande and A.R. Jadad, “Trying to measure the quality 
of health information on the internet: is it time to move on”, 
Journal of  Rheumatology, vol. 36, no. 1, Jan. 2009, pp. 1-3, 
doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081101. 
[21] A. Salam, L. Iyer, P. Palvia, and R. Singh, “Trust in e-
commerce”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 48, no. 2, 
Feb. 2005 pp. 72-77. 
[22] D.H. McKnight, V. Choudhury, and C. Kacmar, “Developing 
and validating trust measures for e-commerce: An integrative 
typology”, Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 3, Sep. 
2002, pp. 334-359. 
[23] F.M. Zahedi and J. Song, “Dynamics of trust revision: Using 
health infomediaries”, Journal of Management Information 
Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, 2008, pp. 225-248, doi: 
10.2753/MIS0742-1222240409. 
[24] R. Klein, “Internet-Based Patient-Physician Electronic 
Communication Applications: Patient Acceptance and Trust”, 
e-Service Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, 2007, pp. 27-51. 
[25] M. Bliemel amd K. Hassanein, “Consumer satisfaction with 
online health information retrieval: a model and empirical 
study”, e-Service Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, 2007, pp. 53-83. 
[26] V. Cho, “A study of the roles of trusts and risks in 
information-oriented online legal services using an integrated 
model”, Information & Management, vol. 43, no. 4, Jun. 
2006, pp. 502-520, doi: 10.1016/j.im.2005.12.002. 
 [27] J. Gummerus, V. Liljander, M. Pura, and A. van Riel, 
“Customer loyalty to content-based web sites: the case of an 
online health-care service”, Journal of Services Marketing, 
vol. 
18, 
no. 
3, 
2004, 
pp. 
175-186, 
doi: 
10.1108/08876040410536486. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

