Ebanshu: An Interactivity-aware Blended Virtual Learning Environment 
 
Jingjing Chen, You Li, 
Xiaowen Chu, Shaohuai Shi, 
Jianliang Xu 
Department of Computer 
Science 
Hong Kong Baptist University  
Hong Kong SAR, China  
Email: {jjchen, youli, chxw, 
xujl}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, 
shaohuaishi@gmail.com 
Tang Tao 
Department of 
Mathematics 
Hong Kong Baptist 
University 
 Hong Kong SAR, China 
Email: 
ttang@math.hkbu.edu.hk 
 
 
Lin Cui 
Department of 
Computer Science 
Jinan University 
Guangzhou, China 
Email: 
tcuilin@jnu.edu.cn  
 
 
Jingjing Chen, 
Zhiling Xu 
Department of 
Computer Science 
China Jiliang 
University  
Hangzhou, China 
Email: {cembcjj, 
xuzhiling}@cjlu.edu.cn
 
Abstract— Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), as a type of e-
Learning platform, is widely used to serve teaching and learning 
for education in many countries. However, most of the existing 
systems fail to seamlessly support and monitor the real-time 
interactivity and collaboration among the learners and 
instructors in the virtual learning environment. Moreover, 
instructors are unable to know the real-time learning statuses of 
learners at distance, which is critical to effective teaching and 
learning achievement.  This paper presents a novel interactivity-
aware blended VLE system for synchronous and asynchronous 
teaching 
and learning. 
By 
using 
popularity dashboard, 
instructors can monitor real-time learning statuses of learners. 
Furthermore, all the teaching activities in the virtual classroom 
will be automatically recorded as lecture videos for self-directed 
learning.  
Keywords-e-Learning; interactivity; blended learning; MOOC   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
E-Learning is increasingly popular for instructors and 
learners in universities [8]. Blended learning is a formal e-
Learning program in which learners learn at least in part 
through online delivery of content and instruction with some 
element of learners control over time, place, path or pace. 
While still attending traditional instructor-led, face-to-face 
classroom methods are combined with computer-mediated 
activities. Many e-Learning tools are available for blended 
learning. For example, Blackboard [18] and Moodle [19] are 
widely used in universities and institutions around the world. 
These tools make the learning and teaching more efficient and 
productive, but they usually lack effective real-time monitoring 
of the learning process [14]. In the meantime many universities 
and institutions planned to construct platforms for Massive 
Online Open Courses (MOOCs) [5], which lots of learners in 
or out of campus can much benefit from. The real-time 
teaching/learning feedback is important for the effectiveness of 
MOOCs.  
B. Challenges 
As emphasized in e-Learning theory and practice 
[3][4][14], effective human interaction is a vital factor for 
successful e-Learning and teaching. A previous study also 
showed that beginners of an e-Learning system might feel 
being isolated from the teachers and other students, because of 
missing essential interactions components in the system design 
[10]. 
Lack of interactivity, usually, leads to terribly negative 
impact on the outcome of e-Learning. The emotional illiteracy 
and the feeling of being isolated in e-Learning environments 
need to be addressed urgently for new generation of e-Learning 
systems [1][2]. The key solution and objective are to strengthen 
interactivities among instructors and learners. With well-
designed synchronous virtual classrooms and collaborative 
tools, the negative impact incurred by the lack of interactivity 
can be significantly reduced. [3][4]. 
In addition, most of the current VLEs lack monitoring on 
the interactivity and collaboration activities during the teaching 
and learning process, especially lack of effective mechanism 
enabling instructor know learners’ learning statues in real-time 
manner [14]. However, the tracing and monitoring of these 
activities is important and necessary to analyze the learning 
behaviors in the VLEs, to provide accurate feedback to 
instructors for refining the method of teaching [17]. 
C. Contribution 
In this paper, our contributions are three-folded: 
1) We propose an interactivity-aware blended e-Learning 
architecture of ebanshu for massive web-based learning. By 
utilizing the real-time web and HTML5 technologies, the 
ebanshu architecture can enable real-time interactivities and 
automatic monitoring and recording of the teaching & learning 
activities, which are very important for improving cognitive 
engagement that is poorly supported by today's e-Learning 
systems [14][15]. 
2) We implement and deploy the ebanshu system for 
MOOCs. The system is available on Internet [9] and has been 
used by more than 10 universities and institutions in China. 
More than 30 online courses are hosted by ebanshu, serving 
more than 10,000 users for their daily teaching and learning 
activities. 
3) We conducted extensive evaluations of the ebanshu 
system using the course MATH 7090 in Hong Kong Baptist 
University, as a case study. The analysis based on the 
evaluation results indicates that by using the ebanshu system, 
the interactivity in the virtual learning environment can be 
enhanced significantly. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we explain the architecture of ebanshu. A math 
course is used as an example to show the pedagogy design 
based on ebanshu in Section III. Evaluations and data analysis 
are presented in Section IV. Finally, we conclude the paper and 
describe some possible future work in Section V. 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE AND FUNCTIONS 
A. Design Rationale 
The ebanshu system is designed as a web-based blended e-
Learning platform, with support of full functions for VLE [11]. 
In particular, it is capable of supporting the monitoring of 
learning activities, the recording and delivering of massive 
online open courses. In ebanshu, all participants can freely join 
a virtual classroom with different types of devices. Two 
different learning models are supported by ebanshu: 
synchronous 
learning 
and 
asynchronous 
learning. 
Synchronous learning refers to the case when both instructors 
and learners are present in the virtual classroom during the 
teaching/learning process. For asynchronous learning, learners 
are allowed to study the course anytime without an instructor 
being online.  
  
 
Figure 1. Overview of interactivity-aware blended learning scenario. 
The whiteboard is a core module for ebanshu. All contents 
and actions on the whiteboard will be synchronized to all the 
participants 
in 
real-time. 
During 
the 
course, 
various 
communication media (e.g., voice, handwriting, text, video) are 
supported and strongly encouraged. Furthermore, instructors 
can know learners’ real-time learning statuses through a 
visualized dashboard component. Besides, all the teaching 
contents and activities took place in the virtual classroom will 
be automatically recorded and archived in the background to 
generate course videos for asynchronous learning. A general 
scenario is depicted in Figure 1. 
B. System Components 
The proposed ebanshu architecture, which is described in 
Figure 2, includes four major components: 
1) Adaptive User Interface (AUI) component: AUI offers a 
responsive web user interface adapting to various devices with 
consideration of the portability and user experience. Instructors 
and learners can use ebanshu simply through web browsers 
without installing additional application. The flash player 
embedded in web browser can be used as voice player and 
recorder. The HTML5 canvas is used to construct and render 
the whiteboard. The socket.io client can keep real-time 
connection with the server side and exchange data from time to 
time.  
2) 
Teaching & Learning Support Service (TLSS) 
component: TLSS consists of the “virtual classroom” unit and 
the “course management” unit. The “user” module included in 
the “virtual classroom” unit serves as the attendance recorder 
and user manager. It also includes a popularity dashboard, 
which is updated periodically to show the learners’ real-time 
learning statues. The popularity is defined as the frequency of 
the interactions (including raw Human-Computer interaction 
and predefined interactivities: Voice, Handwriting, Text chat, 
Document Sharing, Comments, Personal note) in ebanshu 
system. The numerical value of popularity ranges from 0 to 
100. Learning status is defined as learner’s response toward the 
teaching activities in ebanshu system, which can be 
quantitatively presented by the popularity. Instructors can 
adjust his/her teaching activities according to the popularity 
dashboard, and identify students who are passive and inactive 
toward the learning activities, and take actions to get them 
more involved into the virtual classroom [12][13].   
The “Interactivity” module included in the “virtual 
classroom” offers various interactive and collaborative tools. 
The host of the classroom can communicate with participants 
in the virtual classroom by the “Voice” tool. There can be up to 
5 participants speaking concurrently in classroom. The host can 
use the “Handwriting” and “Document sharing” tool to 
conveniently present and share documents in the whiteboard. 
Participants can communicate with each other through the “text 
chat” tool. The “Comments” tool is designed for asynchronous 
interactions, allowing learners can post questions to instructor 
about the course even if the instructor is absent. By using the 
“Personal note” tool, learners can note down personalized 
notes. 
The course homepage included in the “Course” unit 
consists of syllabus, course forum, etc. Once instructor-led 
learning session completed, lecture videos would automatically 
generated by the virtual recorder, which was watched in the 
course homepage. 
3) Real-Time Service Cluster (RTSC): RTSC serves as the 
core middleware in the system, which employs the message 
notification and distributed computing. These technologies 
enabled the system capacity of high availability and high 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

concurrency. RTSC consists of “Socket.io Engine” module, 
“Document Interpreter” module and “Voice Service” module. 
The “Socket.io Engine” module aims to make real-time 
apps possible in every browser and mobile device, blurring the 
differences among different transport mechanisms. It utilizes 
the event-driven and asynchronous model to smoothly handle 
the high concurrency issue, running websocket protocol and 
offering the real-time data synchronization service for the 
system, by which the content and actions in the whiteboard can 
be synchronized to all participants in real time manner. 
The “Document Interpreter” module serves as the powerful 
web service for archiving and converting uploaded files (e.g., 
doc, ppt, pdf files) to portable format. It is running as 
distributed computing clusters with capacity of high 
availability and high performance.  
The “Voice Service” module consists of several media 
servers running RTMP protocol, which are geographically 
distributed at different cities and offer reliable voice 
communication service.     
4) Virtual Recorder: VR serves as daemon process on the 
server side, which enables the system support MOOCs. VR can 
continually record what happened in the virtual classroom. All 
recorded data will be saved to different data collections in the 
mongoDB. 
MongoDB is an open-source document database, which can 
offer data storage service with high availability and high 
performance, we deployed the mongoDB enabling both the 
“Replica Set” and “Sharding” features, “Replica Set” enabled 
the mirror access LANs and WANs scale and peace of mind, 
and the “Sharding” enabled scale horizontally without 
compromising functionality.   
 
Figure 2. ebanshu components architecture. 
III. 
PEDAGOGY DESIGN  
In this section, we will take the course MATH7090 - "The 
high-precision Numeric Calculation" as a case study to show 
the pedagogy design based on ebanshu. MATH7090 is the first 
online open course offered in Hong Kong Baptist University. 
Considering the need for both synchronous learning and 
asynchronous learning, the pedagogical design of the course 
includes three separate components: Pre-course Learning 
Activities, Teaching & Learning Activities, and Assessment & 
Feedback. 
A. Pre-course Learning Activities 
Generally, instructor-led courses are usually organized by 
sessions, which can be daily or weekly, depending on the 
duration of the courses and learners’ available time. The course 
MATH7090 was delivered to Science students during Semester 
2013-2014-1. The course included 12 sessions, each session 
lasted two hours. 29 students officially enrolled the course. The 
course was hosted by the ebanshu system, and also was open 
on the Internet. 53 learners subscribed the course in the 
ebanshu system, including the 29 officially enrolled students 
and 24 Internet learners. 
The course syllabus and ebanshu system instructions were 
automatically sent to subscribers by the system. The course 
syllabus describes the session topics and learning objectives. 
The instructions explained how to conduct teaching and 
learning activities. 
Prior to the beginning of each session, Teaching Assistants 
(TAs) uploaded the teaching materials and references to the 
virtual classroom in the ebanshu system. TAs can join the 
virtual classroom in advance and perform the teaching 
assistance for the instructor. The instructor could perform the 
teaching anywhere, as long as the Internet was available 
(microphone is required). At the beginning of each session, a 
remainder letter was automatically sent to learners. They can 
come to the classroom where they can communicate with the 
instructor in a face-to-face fashion. They can conveniently join 
the virtual classroom with mobile devices anywhere. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

B. Teaching & Learning Activities 
During each session, there are many teaching and learning 
activities in the virtual classroom. Teaching activities are 
usually initiated and conducted synchronously by instructor. 
Learning activities consist of the synchronous interactive 
learning with the instructor and learners in the virtual 
classroom, and the asynchronous learning with less interaction 
and collaboration.  
The 
ebanshu 
system 
offers 
various 
synchronous 
communication tools for instructors to conduct synchronous 
teaching. The instructor can use the real-time voice and 
whiteboard to present the lectures, Additionally, the 
handwriting function is very helpful for presenting complicated 
questions with much descriptions; and the document sharing 
function usually is used to present documentations and 
references.  
Learners are encouraged to hand up to (an alert message 
will be sent to instructor’s interface) the instructor if they do 
not understand some teaching materials. Instructor will handle 
this case, and further communication with learners. Instructor 
usually much cares about learners’ learning statuses during the 
teaching, which is crucial for learning outcome. The popularity 
dashboard described in the Figure 3 is a good assistant for 
instructor. The instructor can accurately know the learners' 
learning statuses, and intervene with inactive learners, so that 
the adjustment of the teaching pace can be conducted timely.  
 
Figure 3. The instructors’ user interface with the popularity dashboard. 
Each session of the course is composed of a sequence of 
synchronous learning activities, which include a range of 
individual and collaborative activities between instructors and 
learners. 
Learners can view the references and teaching materials, 
which may include different types of contents, e.g., learning 
resources (documents and presentations), video and audio 
contents. They can also take private notes on the whiteboard. 
Learners’ user interface on desktop PC is depicted in Figure 4, 
and while that on mobile device is depicted in Figure 5. In the 
virtual classroom, all lectures and materials will be 
automatically saved and accessible to all participants, which is 
more convenient and efficient than the traditional classroom 
learning. Learners can also initiate group discussions and are 
encouraged to create new virtual classroom for learning 
proposes. In the background, the system tracks interactivities 
so that instructors or the TAs can review them afterwards and 
evaluate learners’ involvement and filter out the hard questions 
in each session. 
 
Figure 4. Learners’ user interface on desktop PC and laptop. 
 
Figure 5. Learners’ user interface on mobile device (iPad). 
Asynchronous tools are available for learners to conduct 
asynchronous learning, which includes the assignments 
requiring detailed response and more time, asynchronous 
discussions, self study by the learners, who are unavailable for 
synchronous teaching, and course review. Learners can 
download the lectures and references, and watch the online 
course videos, which can be used for self-study and course 
review. Learners can also leave comments about the course in 
the instructor’s homepage. When the instructor was present, 
he/she 
would 
get 
the 
message, 
allowing 
to 
further 
communication with the learners. 
C. Assessment and Feedback 
In each session, the instructor uploads the assignments in 
the virtual classroom, which were attached in the whiteboard as 
separate page. Learners are expected to submit the answer 
sheets of the assignments in the virtual classroom directly by 
using uploading function. Finally, the instructor or the TAs can 
assess the learners’ performance and comment on these 
assignments in the whiteboard. The comments would 
individually help learners to review the highlighted contents. In 
order to further enhance the teaching quality through learners’ 
feedback, an evaluation survey was conducted at the last 
session of the course by utilizing the questionnaires and short 
talk with learners and instructors. This is a critical component 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

for e-Learning systems since it allows system designers to 
improve it over time. 
IV. 
IMPACT EVALUATION 
A. Evaluation criteria 
According to Graham et al. [16], seven principles 
(including “Instructors should provide clear guidelines for 
interaction 
with 
students”, 
“Well-designed 
discussion 
assignments facilitate meaningful cooperation among students”, 
“Students should present course projects”, “Instructors need to 
provide two types of feedback: information feedback and 
acknowledgment feedback”, “Online courses need deadlines”, 
“Challenging tasks, sample cases, and praise for quality work 
communicate high expectations”, “Allowing students to choose 
project topics incorporates diverse views into online courses”) 
are helpful to significantly improve learning outcomes. 
Ebanshu can perfectly meet 4 principles (including “Instructors 
should provide clear guidelines for interaction with students”, 
“Well-designed discussion assignments facilitate meaningful 
cooperation among students”, “Students should present course 
projects”, “Allowing students to choose project topics 
incorporates diverse views into online courses”) out of these 
principles [9]. Furthermore, studies show that “interactivity” is 
the most crucial evaluation criteria for e-Learning systems 
[7][8][16]. In the following, we conduct a comparative analysis 
of interactivity from four aspects, which includes “Participants’ 
attendance”, “Interactivity by instructor”, “Interactivity by 
learners”, and “Popularity”, “Records” in Figure 7 and Figure 8 
are actions in the whiteboard, which will be saved to database 
and automatically counted for data analysis. 
There are kinds of metrics available to evaluate the 
performance of online courses in the administrative page of the 
system, aiming to evaluate and analysis “the way to join the 
course”, we focus on four metrics: “Device used - Mobile” 
describes how many learners use mobile device in each session; 
“Device used - PC” counts how many learners use PC in each 
session; “Participants - Synchronous” records how many 
learners 
attend 
the 
virtual 
classroom 
synchronously; 
“Participants - Asynchronous” records how many learners 
attend the virtual classroom asynchronously.  
Interactivities among the participants help to understand 
how participants react to the teaching. This can be measured 
through the real-time tracking and statistical analysis of 
activities of instructors and learners. For instructors, 
“Whiteboard - Handwriting” describes the usage of the 
whiteboard-based 
handwriting 
tool 
in 
each 
session; 
“Whiteboard - Document Sharing” – describes the usage of the 
whiteboard-based document sharing. For learners, “Notes” 
records the learners’ private note in each session, “Hands up” 
records the learners’ handing up during the synchronous virtual 
classroom in each session, “Comments” records the learners’ 
comments on the course in each session, and “Text chat” 
describes the learners’ text communication in each session. 
“Popularity of instructor” will be used to track the change of 
the average value of the popularity index in each session; 
“popularity of learner” will be used to track the change of the 
average value of the popularity index of all the learners in each 
session. 
B. Data Analysis  
The following figures show the collaboration and 
interactivity throughout all the 12 sessions of the course. 
 
 
Figure 6. Participants’ attendance in virtual classroom throughout the course. 
Figure 6 shows that the learners prefer to attend the course 
by mobile device instead of PC in the end of the course. The 
instructor should prepare the teaching materials with extra 
consideration of document size. Most of synchronous 
participants attended all the 12 session, while asynchronous 
participants did not attend all sessions. The main reason is 
probably due to the feeling of being isolated.  
 
Figure 7. Interactivity by instructors in the virtual classroom in each session. 
 
Figure 8. Interactivities by learners in the virtual classroom in each session. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 9. Popularity observation in the virtual classroom throughout the 
course. 
Figure 7 shows that the instructor preferred using the 
handwriting to deliver teaching, which is very helpful to 
explain complicated problems. The handwriting is heavily used 
in Session 8, which is about the “Temporal discretization and 
FFT” and includes lots of mathematical formulae. The same 
observation is also found in Figure 6 for the activities of 
“Note”. Figure 8 also shows that note is the most popular tool 
for learners, followed by text chat, comments, and “hands up”. 
The text chat tool is frequently used and gets the highest record 
in the last session, which included the course review.  In the 
last session, learners preferred to ask questions by the text chat 
instead of the “hands up” tool, and the instructor should adjust 
the pedagogical design to pay more attention to observe the 
contents of text chat.  
Red curve in Figure 9 describes the change of the mean 
value of instructor’s popularity throughout each session, and 
blue curve describes the change of the mean value of all the 
learners’ popularity throughout each session. Figure 9 shows 
that the popularity of the instructor was always at a high level 
throughout the course. The popularity of learners increased 
over time, which indicates that if the instructor can accurately 
monitor learners’ learning statuses, it is more likely to keep 
learners in active learning. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, a novel web-based e-earning system - 
ebanshu was presented. By providing real-time response and 
supporting mobile devices, ebanshu can help facilitate the 
activities of teaching and learning, improving the teaching 
efficiency and learning outcomes. In particular, ebanshu 
provides a real-time visualized popularity dashboard for 
instructors to monitor the learners’ statuses in the virtual 
classroom. The system can also automatically record the 
instructor-led courses in the background and generate the 
courses learning materials for asynchronous learning. With 
ebanshu, courses can be easily delivered and made available 
online as the MOOC, benefiting many off-campus learners out 
of campus. We have also explored the pedagogical design with 
the novel e-Learning system and statistically evaluated the 
impact to the course MATH7090 at Hong Kong Baptist 
University. The ebanshu has been successfully used in more 
than 10 universities (including Peking University, Zhejiang 
University, and Jilin University), hosting more than 30 online 
courses, and offered teaching/learning service for more than 
10,000 users. 
The ebanshu apps for iOS and Android are under 
development, which will make offline asynchronous functions 
available in the future. With the rich performance data and user 
feedbacks obtained from many universities, the analysis based 
on the feedback will be an important work in future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Hong Kong Innovation & 
Technology Fund entitled “Education Data Mining Based 
Personalized Mathematics Teaching System for Primary and 
Middle Schools”, and the reference number is ITS/166/12FX. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D’Mello, S., Picard, R., and Graesser, A. "Toward an affect-sensitive 
AutoTutor." Intelligent Systems, IEEE 22, no. 4, 2007, pp. 53-61. 
[2] 
Bråten, I. and Strømsø, H. I. "Epistemological beliefs, interest, and 
gender as predictors of Internet-based learning activities." Computers in 
Human Behavior 22, no. 6, 2007, pp. 1027-1042. 
[3] 
Nedeva, V., Dimova, E., and Dineva, S. "Overcome Disadvantages of E-
Learning for Training English as Foreign Language.", 2010.  
[4] 
Kruse 
K.2004 
http://www.e-Learningguru.com/articles/art1_3.htm. 
[retrieved: 21, January, 2014]  
[5] 
Pisutova, K. "Open education." In Emerging eLearning Technologies & 
Applications (ICETA), IEEE 10th International Conference on,  2012, 
pp. 297-300. 
[6] 
Clark R.C., The New Virtual Classroom: Evidence-based Guidelines for 
Synchronous e-Learning, Pfeiffer, 2007. 
[7] 
Kirkpatrick D.L. and Kirkpatrick J.D. Evaluating Training Programs. 
The Four Levels. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2006 
[8] 
Mahanta, D. and Ahmed, M. "E-Learning Objectives, Methodologies, 
Tools and its Limitation.", International Journal of Innovative 
Technology and Exploring Engineering (IJITEE), vol. 2, December 
2012, pp. 46-51.  
[9] 
Ebanshu, http://www.ebanshu.com, [retrieved: 20, Febuary, 2014]. 
[10] Jonas, D., CMMC, N., & Burns, B. "Using e-Learning to Educate Health 
Professionals in the Management of Children’s Pain.", 6th International 
Conference Creativity & Engegement In Higher Education, 2013. 
[11] Fronter, 
http://com.fronter.info/virtual-learning-environment-lms. 
[retrieved: 10, Febuary, 2014]. 
[12] Croft, Nicholas, Alice Dalton, and Marcus Grant. "Overcoming isolation 
in distance learning: Building a learning community through time and 
space."Journal for Education in the Built Environment 5, no. 1, 2010, 
pp. 27-64. 
[13] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “E-learning 
methodologies A guide for designing and developing e-Learning 
courses”, FAO, 2012, pp. 59-64. 
[14] Belaid-Ajroud, H., Talon, B., and Tnazefti-Kerkeni, I. "Monitoring 
Activities in an E-Learning 2.0 Environment: A Multi-Agents system." 
ICIW 2013, The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web 
Applications and Services. 2013. 
[15] Agarwal, R. and Karahanna, E.. "Time flies when you're having fun: 
Cognitive absorption and beliefs about information technology 
usage." MIS quarterly 24, no. 4, 2000. 
[16] Graham, C., Cagiltay, K., Lim, B., Craner, J., and Duffy, T. M. "Seven 
principles of effective teaching: A practical lens for evaluating online 
courses." The Technology Source 30, no. 5, 2001, pp. 14-16. 
[17] L. Settouti, N. Guin, A. Mille, and V. Luengo, “A Trace-Based Learner 
Modelling Framework for Technology-Enhanced Learning Systems”, 
Proc. 10th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning 
Technologies (ICALT 10). Sousse, Tunisia, 2010, pp. 73-77. 
[18] Blackboard, http://www.blackboard.com, [retrieved: 20, Febuary, 2014]. 
[19] Moodle, http://www.moodle.org, [retrieved: 20, Febuary, 2014].
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-361-2
ICIW 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

