Security is in the Eye of the Beholder: Security Perceptions and Challenges in Social
Networks
Ioanna Dionysiou
Department of Computer Science
University of Nicosia
Nicosia, Cyprus
dionysiou.i@unic.ac.cy
Abstract—This paper discusses security as perceived by so-
cial networking participants. A conceptual security framework
is presented that captures the security requirements that a user
engaging in social networking activities may impose on other
users, the social network provider, and a third-party user. We
claim that even though the social network users seem to not
value at the fullest extent the security that privacy that they
are entitled, still the providers are responsible for supplying
a secure infrastructure for user interactions that will protect
users from security and privacy threats.
Keywords-social networks; security; user perceptions
I. INTRODUCTION
Even though social networking emerged as organized
virtual communities in the last few years, its drastically-
growing popularity is undisputed. Social networking sites
such as Facebook, Linkedin, myspace, orkut, and twitter
attract millions of users everyday. Social networking has
been quickly adapted by the young population as the newest
online trend, while there are very strong indications of a
rapid growth amongst older users as well. According to a
recent Nielsen report, ”social network and blogging sites
are now the fourth most popular activity on the Internet”
[1], with the amount spent on these sites increasing by 63%.
The popularity of social networks lies on the simple fact that
they accommodate the exchange and sharing of information
in an easy and intuitive manner for social, professional,
and educational purposes. They even replace or supplement
communications in the real world by diminishing barriers
on physical location and time. Social networks provide
opportunities to connect with friends, use short postings to
inform friends on whereabouts, share videos and news, es-
tablish business contacts, advertise products, and campaign
for various causes (political, social, etc.).
Social networks are subject to all common security vul-
nerabilities of the web [10] with their users being in even
greater risk due to the implicit trust that governs these virtual
communities. For example, users may show skepticism when
receiving an email message that encourages them to click on
a link or open an attachment, which is actually a malicious
worm. However, they will click on such a link if it came
from one of their social network connections. Needless to
say, the sites that suffer more from security attacks are
the most popular ones, and this realization has prompted
several public and private bodies in lowering their tolerance
of social networking activity during business hours. Besides
the security concerns, privacy concerns also exist in social
networks due to the vast amount of data that gets collected
by the providers, allowing them to become digital big broth-
ers. Personal and professional data could be exploited for a
number of purposes, ranging from harming the system itself
to increasing economic proﬁts via data mining techniques.
As an indicator of the monetary value of the stored data, the
value of Facebook has been estimated to approximately $15
Billion.
Social networking represents the next generation of the In-
ternet. It is here to stay. The aim of this paper is to investigate
the security and privacy risks when interacting with social
networking sites and present a security framework that those
risks could be systematically assessed. Prior this discussion,
a compact introduction to the structure and functionality
of social networks is presented. Next, the ﬁndings of an
empirical study that investigated the user perceptions of
social network security is discussed. Security challenges of
the construction of a global social network constitute the
concluding part of this work.
II. SOCIAL NETWORKING SITES (SNSS) ESSENTIALS
According to [8], social networking sites (SNSs) are web
services that allow users to manage their proﬁle within a
bounded system, establish a list of connections, and ﬁnally
traverse their connections’ lists. However, this deﬁnition
does not address the creation of new content and its dis-
semination among participants, which is after all the driving
force behind social activities, either online or ofﬂine. Thus,
a complete deﬁnition is one that relies on the functional
triangle of social software that deﬁnes social software in
terms of both information exchange and relationships. To
be more precise, there are three primary functions of social
software [3]:
1) Information management: creation, dissemination, and
management of content, including searching
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

2) Self management: presentation of one’s self to reﬂect
various aspects of his/her personality
3) Relationship management: provision of proﬁles and
management of connections
Hence, social networking sites are web services that
support online social networks that provide to their members
a platform that integrates a variety of information manage-
ment and exchange tools (blogs, forums, instant messaging
event management, media uploading applications, podcasts,
etc.) as well as relationship management tools (proﬁle con-
struction, connection lists, searching). In addition, the SNS
platform allows a user to express the aspects of him/herself
that are considered to be important in the particular online
community.
If we were to classify SNSs based on the type of infor-
mation handled, then two categories arise: the ﬁrst one is
the group of SNSs that is used primarily for professional
information dissemination, such as Linkedin that manages
business contacts. The second group focuses on personal
and private information and its character is more informal.
Such an example is myspace.
A social network compromises of the SNS provider, the
member users, and third-party sites that develop applications
interacting with the SNS platform (e.g. in the case of Face-
book). A user registers with the particular SNS and creates a
proﬁle by supplying basic, personal, contact and professional
information, with an emphasis on the category that best
represents the nature of social network. The user can use
applications developed by the SNS providers or request use
of a third-party application after getting authenticated by the
SNS.
Facebook is selected from a plethora of social networks to
serve as the example social network to demonstrate the func-
tionality of a typical social networking site. The choice of
Facebook is based on the undeniable fact that it is the largest
and most feature-rich social network, with a rather broad set
of privacy policies and thousands of third-party applications
running on its platform. According to Jeff Rothschild, the
Vice President of Technology at Facebook, there are cur-
rently 30000 servers supporting the operations of Facebook,
with 25 terabytes of logging data managed daily on behalf
of 300 million active users. Facebook develops its own in-
house technologies to facilitate the sharing of information
among its members, such as photos, notes, groups, events,
posted items, video, marketplace, gifts. It supports features
such as news feed, share, and wall for up-to-date info. The
open Facebook API enables developers to integrate their own
applications with Facebook and gain access to millions of
users. However, the intriguing potentials of Facebook have
an impact on the security and privacy of users, as it will be
discussed later on.
III. SECURITY AND PRIVACY RISKS
Security is in the eye of the beholder. The 2011
review
of
social
networking
sites
as
posted
on
the
www.toptenreviews.com clearly suggests that the security of
the most popular social networks ranges from very good to
excellent. The evaluation criteria to assess the security of
those sites were the following: support of privacy settings,
block user feature, report spam feature, report abuse feature,
and ﬁnally provision of safety tips.
This perception of security gives uninformed users a false
reassurance. As a matter of fact, social networking sites
suffer from a number of security vulnerabilities that could be
exploited intentionally and accidentally [7], [24]. Facebook
has suffered already XSS exploits, in the form of session
hijacking and fake login pages. The infamous harmless
Samy XSS worm shut down myspace in 2005 despite the
fact that it only created inconvenience by adding the words
samy is my hero to the top of every affected user page. Orkut
users fell victims of a twitter-based scam, when they were
lured to download a fake ﬂash update that resulted in the
launch of the worm that started harvesting google account
details. Myspace and Facebook users were also the targets of
the Koobface.a and koobface.b worms respectively. When a
user of an infected machine log in to their social networking
sites, fabricated messages were posted to the user’s friends
encouraging them to visit the malicious page.
Security and privacy in social networks as perceived by
the users is also being investigated [4], [13], [20], [21]. Users
seem to expect from the social network providers to support:
• Trustworthy environment: the community members
should be able to trust each other, including applica-
tions.
• Privacy: users should be in control of privacy settings,
which must be ﬂexible and extensible
• Identity: even though the users are encouraged to
reveal as little as possible to protect themselves from
malicious acts, anonymity should be revoked when user
harassment takers place
• Access control: users should have control over the
content they generate by deciding its dissemination and
revocation at any given time.
• Transparency: users must be informed how the col-
lected data is used
Interestingly enough, there was no mention on vital
security issues such as data integrity and conﬁdentiality.
The security and privacy problems do not only lie in the
presence of design and implementation faults; the users carry
their share of responsibility as well. If we were to examine
the weakest links in the security of social networking, the
investigation should have focused on all three participants
groups as their actions have an impact on the overall security
of the system:
• Users: The user behavior and user unawareness re-
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

grading security are the primary factors that often
lead to security and privacy problems. Bad habits also
constitute a large fraction of the problems [10], [9].
User connectivity has become the primary objective of a
signiﬁcant number of users, who judge their importance
by the numbers of friends they have. Experimental
studies [18] have shown that almost half of the users
agreed to accept as a friend someone they did not
know, especially if a mutual friend existed between
the requester and the target user [17]. This careless
behavior increases the risk of being the victim of an
attack, as a user with hundreds of friends is more likely
to be subject to security breaches. In addition, users
feel shielded from outside harm in online communities
because they completely trust their connections. That’s
why they are more likely to click on a malicious link
sent by a friend than if the link was sent via email, or
they are willing to share personal information online
than they would not normally do ofﬂine.
• SNS Provider: The SNS providers do not educate the
users of risks of disclosing personal information [12].
For instance, users cannot control what their friends
can reveal about them when using the tagging feature of
Facebook. In addition, privacy tools and settings are not
ﬂexible or they are too complicated to be used properly
by the average user. SNS providers do not provide the
necessary security provisions for a number of security
services, as it will be discussed below.
• Third-party: Social networks are complex systems that
have their content and functionality enhanced by third-
party applications. Rigorous methods are required to
assess the security of the these system, and still is an
open problem how to evaluate the security and safety of
modules composition. As s result, malicious third-party
applications could be launched via Facebook.
IV. USER PERCEPTIONS OF SECURITY OF SOCIAL
NETWORKS
In order to investigate the user perceptions of the security
and privacy risks when interacting with social networks, a
survey was conducted among Cypriot university students.
The survey questionnaire (available upon request) focused
on closed-ended questions that addressed factors involving
most security services, such as authentication, conﬁden-
tiality, integrity, access control, and privacy. It comprised
of three sections. Part A collected demographic details,
educational status, and internet usage information for the
respondent. Part B aimed in gathering more information
regarding the online activities a responded was involved
in. Part C examined the perceptions that a social network
user has on matters involving security risks, proﬁle data
disclosure, authentication process, privacy settings, privacy
and conﬁdentiality issues. At the end of the survey, the
respondent was prompted to answer whether or not he/she
will do anything different after taking the survey.
Questionnaires were collected during the period of Octo-
ber 2011 until December 2011, and the survey was con-
ducted through personal interviews to assure the highest
possible degree of accuracy for the received responses. The
non-probability quota sampling method was employed with
a sample of 109 users. The social network users were 86
and the non-users of social networks were 23. Starting with
the ﬁndings for the ﬁrst two parts of the survey, a total of
74% of the participants fell in the 18-34 age group, 86%
of the respondents were listed as university students studied
either in Cyprus or abroad, and 73% was using the internet
on daily basis. Surprisingly, all social network users had a
Facebook account, and approximately 10% also had a twitter
account. It seems that Facebook is the dominant social
networking site among Cypriot university students. When
it comes to ways of accessing the social networking site,
the most popular mean was using a laptop(45%), followed
by a desktop (33%), and then a mobile phone (18%). The
remaining users made use of tablets or another device.
The majority of the respondents claimed to be aware
of social security risks in general (68.6%), however it is
alarming that 15.1% is not aware of such risks and a
percentage of 16.2% does not even know what a security
risk is. As a follow up question, 32.5% responded positively
when asked if they use a public machine to logon in a
networking site and do not uncheck the ”keep me logged
in” button. Furthermore, 41.8% use the same password to
log on to various social networking sites.
Figure 1 shows the response distribution for the ques-
tions referring to proﬁle information and Figure 2 lists
the responses for the proﬁle settings. 6.9% of the users
post their cell phone number on their public proﬁle that
is viewable at least by their connections and/or strangers.
Approximately 40% of the respondents are not aware who
can view their proﬁle and are not concerned who has access
to their information. A percentage of 36% is aware of the
information that third-party applications collect, and a 27.9%
even claims to know how the information is used and stored
by such applications.
Figure 1.
Response Distribution for Proﬁle Question Set
Figure 3 shows the response distribution for questions
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

Figure 2.
Response Distribution for Proﬁle Settings Question Set
that involve a user’s connections. An impressive 69.7% has
accepted connection requests from strangers, showing that
university students are willing to add into their circle users
that they don’t even know. Furthermore, 73.2% admitted that
they click on a link posted by friends.
Figure 3.
Response Distribution for Friends Question Set
Finally, Figure 4 reﬂects the replies of the respondents
on privacy and other security risks. Less than half of the
users have read the terms of service regarding the social
networking site they are using. In addition, only half of them
are aware of the information that the social network provider
is collecting. Almost one ﬁfth of the users believed that a
third-party application is a legitimate application.
To conclude, it seems that not all users are concerned
about privacy, access control of their information, storage
or distribution of their personal data, conﬁdentiality, and
authentication. Besides, only 11.6% responded positively
when asked if they will do anything different after taking the
survey. This is an indication of lack of security-awareness
among the target population, which is not always due to
ignorance but it could be intentional as well.
V. SECURITY FRAMEWORK
Even though the social network users seem to not value
at the fullest extent the security that privacy that they are
entitled, still the providers are responsible for supplying a se-
cure infrastructure for user interactions that will protect users
from security and privacy threats. To assess and evaluate the
security model of a social network, a systematic approach is
needed to deﬁne the security requirements and characterize
the approaches to satisfy them [23]. For our purposes, the
Figure 4.
Response Distribution for Security Risks Question Set
security services required by a social networking site are the
standard security services as deﬁned by X.800: user authen-
tication, data integrity, data conﬁdentiality, data availability,
and access control. Privacy, the ability to hide personal
information from the system, is also a required service due to
the vast volumes of data collected by both the provider and
third-parties. Table I illustrates the comprehensive security
and privacy framework for social networking, where services
are established with connection to the system participants.
In the discussion below, the focus is on the user-oriented
requirements. The requirements imposed on the user by
the SNS or the third party are outside the scope of this
discussion.
Table I
SECURITY AND PRIVACY FRAMEWORK
user-user
user-SNS provider
user-Third Party
authentication
no
yes
no
integrity
yes?
yes?
yes?
conﬁdentiality
no?
no?
no?
availability
yes
yes
yes?
access control
yes?
no
yes?
privacy
yes?
no
yes?
A. Authentication
Authentication is one of the security services that is
provided by almost all social networks. It refers to the
assurance that the communicating entity (user, provider,
third party) is the one that it claims to be. In order to
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

implement the authentication service, credentials such as
username (or email) and password need to be supplied by
the unauthenticated user, and upon veriﬁcation the user is
either authorized to log on or access is not granted. In the
case of Facebook, an SSL connection is established during
the authentication phase so that the message exchange will
be protected from eavesdropping. An authenticated user is
presented with a session key that is used throughout the
active session for any further authentication purposes.
When a user interacts with a third-party application,
the authentication process will still be performed by the
SNS provider. The third-party server does not perform any
authentication on the user. Similarly, a user does not have
the means to authenticate another user; there are no tools or
mechanisms to verify the identity of another user. This is
especially problematic when anonymity is viewed favorably
by a number of users in order to protect their identity.
B. Integrity
Integrity refers to the assurance that the data has not been
altered during its transmission to its indented destination.
Due to the proprietary nature of the majority of social
networks and the non-disclosure of technical speciﬁcations
of the built-in or third-party applications, it is nontrivial
to assess whether or not data integrity is part of the se-
curity model of the system and accompanied applications.
There have been no incidents of message alteration (even
though message fabrication has been witnessed), thus it
could be assumed that some sort of message authenticator
is generated that veriﬁes the authenticity of the message.
Taking Facebook as the example, the trafﬁc among the
external participants is digitally signed; however there is no
description of how messages of built-in chatting applications
are authenticated.
C. Conﬁdentiality
When assessing the conﬁdentiality strength of social sys-
tems, one needs to take into consideration the underlying
purpose of these systems. The original goal was to facilitate
various forms of communication among interacting parties.
Secrecy was not a main concern, whereas access control
and privacy were top priorities. But, with the increase of so-
phisticated attacks by knowledgeable hackers, conﬁdentiality
should also be of an equal concern. Currently, it is not clear
how the network servers of the social networks interact with
each other, and what security protocols are using.
Consider chatting applications. It is well-documented
that the .Net Messenger Service allows unencrypted trafﬁc,
making the wiretapping of such conversation subtitle to
both passive and active attacks. Facebook Chat was found
to be subject to similar problems and has already started
preparing a new interface which will be based on Jabber’s
XMPP (extensible messaging and presence protocol) that
uses encryption to protect the secrecy of the communicated
messages.
However, it may not be performance-wise to encrypt all
trafﬁc that goes through the social network. Trade-offs have
to considered and perhaps the user could either opt-in or
opt-out when it comes to encrypting communication sessions
for different applications. Moreover, users could increase or
increase the encryption strength, but with a monetary cost.
D. Availability
Availability is a system property where resources will
be accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized
system entity. Social networks suffer availability of service
when denial of service attacks are launched due to either
implementation vulnerabilities that get exploited or infected
users that are used as points of launching worms and trojan
viruses. Users expect their public proﬁle information to be
available to other users according to their preferences and
they also anticipate that all features will be available when-
ever they want to use them. Users have the same availability
demands from third-party applications as well – however,
there are not any imposed availability requirements on the
later applications. Needless to say, the more unavailable they
are, the more users will abandon using their applications.
E. Access Control and Privacy
Social networks emphasize access control and privacy as
the two most important pillars of their security model. Users
have strong expectations for privacy on social networking
sites and they believe that it is the responsibility of the SNS
providers to protect personal and user-generated content.
The two terms are often used interchangeably as they are
both associated with restricting access to user data. However,
privacy involves more than controlling who can access what;
it allows a user to be part of the environment without
leaving any traces and enables his/her easy and permanent
withdrawal without any evidence of the prior interactions. It
can be claimed that the design of social networks partially
implements both privacy and access control.
Starting with the user-to-user access control, social net-
works offer proﬁle ”privacy”, meaning that the user con-
ﬁgures privacy settings that explicitly specify the group of
users that are granted access permission to various proﬁle
properties. This is a course-grained access control that
handles a limited number of access groups such as friends
and everybody. However, there is the option to block users.
Once the data is accessible by others, the owner of the data
has no control over its further dissemination and usage. As
far as privacy is concerned, social networks such as linkedin
and facebook support the search feature that control who can
search for the user and the ways to get in contact.
Third-party applications are granted second-degree access
permissions, resulting in gaining access not only to the data
of the user who authorized the application but also getting
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

access to friends’ data. In a sense, applications become
automatically friends of the user. The application developers
are obliged, as dictated by the Terms of Service, to display a
warning screen asking the user’s consent in accessing data;
this is quite meaningless as the user is given no choice to
restrict access to information that the application does not
need or provide anonymized data. Once the application is
authorized by the user, social network providers have no
way to check how the information is used by the third-party
application; they only have the developers’ consent that they
will observe the Terms of Service.
And when it comes to the SNS provider, there are no
technical obstacles to prevent access to all user data, supplied
and generated, and further manage it as the provider sees
appropriate. It is important to note that the users volunteer
to abandon their rights to privacy by agreeing with the
Terms of Service. For instance, Facebook explicitly speciﬁes
that personal information is stored and web site informa-
tion (browser type, IP address) is stored from the user’s
browser using persistent cookies. In addition, according to
the Facebook Terms of Service there is a wide range of
information that Facebook gathers about a user”...We receive
data about you whenever you interact with Facebook, such
as when you look at another person’s proﬁle, send someone
a message, search for a friend or a Page, click on an ad,
or purchase Facebook Credits...We receive data from the
computer, mobile phone or other device you use to access
Facebook. This may include your IP address, location, the
type of browser you use, or the pages you visit...When we
get your GPS location, we put it together with other location
information we have about you (like your current city). But
we only keep it until it is no longer useful to provide you
services.”. In other words, whatever a user posts, views,
searches, exchanges is stored on the Facebook servers.
VI. SOCIAL NETWORK CHALLENGES
The evolution of social networks into applications that
span the web with millions of users plugged in offers new
opportunities and challenges in the technological, economic,
and social arenas. Below is a list (note: this list is by no
means exhaustive) of security and privacy issues in each of
these directions that are anticipated to be addressed in the
near future.
A. Technological Directions: Global Social Ecosystem
One of the technological challenges in building a social
ecosystem is how to achieve interoperability among SNSs.
Blosser and Zhan [6] explain that in order to build a
collaborative social network, three main issues have to be
addressed, one of them being how to combine the data of
the various social network providers while preserving user
privacy and provider conﬁdentiality. OpenSocial [16][15] is
a framework that interlinks social networks that support its
API. However, there is no mention on how security and
privacy are implemented in this network of social networks.
The second challenge focuses on the sociological aspect
of a global social network [19]. Aggregating audience of
different communities implies the merging of multiple iden-
tities that users may have in those communities. However,
the ability of a user to have different identities and portray
the self to other in various ways will be simply disabled
by the interconnection of social networks. There must be
ways to protect the various roles and data of a user in this
interconnected network: the professional role and the social
role must be clearly distinguished as they are in real life.
B. Economic Directions
It has been observed that people tend to share the same
interests with their friends, and this feature of homophily
is vital if social networks were to be used for advertising.
Various aspects of online advertising in social networks have
been the subject of research works that present ﬁndings
on how relevant online relationships are to advertising.
The goal is to match an ad to a user. A recent study by
Bagherjeiran and Parekh [5] investigated whether or not
social network links are relevant to the targeted ads and
how social information could be used in targeting methods
to predict user response rates. It has been shown that the
response rate on ads is indeed proportional to the number
of connections who have responded in the past. They have
hinted that relevant advertising will be more effective than
viral spam.
The advertising business is already seeking ways to
partner with social networks and gain access to the vast
number of users that could be the target audience for
their advertisements [2]. Mining social networks for viral
marketing will be the future of advertising [22], with serious
implications on the privacy of the user data.
C. Social Impacts
Web-based social networking is also transforming social
habits, especially of the youth, by shifting from face-to-face
communication to online interactions. It is argued that social
networking fulﬁlls a human need, that of gossiping. The
largest the size of your friends group, the more efﬁcient
the dissemination of gossip becomes. However, is this an
evolutionary shift that will change the way we operate or
will it diminish as years go by?
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The popularity of social networking still exhibits an
exponential growth, despite well-known and documented
privacy and security breaches. The harm that a user may
experience depends on how much the user engages in social
networking activities. Social networks are complex systems
and it is expected to observe security vulnerabilities from
time to time.
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

However, could it be the case that we are reaching a new
era where perhaps there is no such a thing as privacy any-
more? The ability to collect data and monitor activities has
serious impact to the users’ privacy. Third-party companies
could correlate public proﬁle data and sell their ﬁnding to
credit-card rating companies, insurance companies, employ-
ers, etc. That brings the question of what happens next.
Shall users become more alert regarding the consequences
of their interactions? Should a code of etiquette together
with violation consequences [22] be established as part
of the terms of service? Should security be transparent to
the user [14] or security preferences will be speciﬁed and
observed via service-level agreements for ﬁne-tune security
and privacy based on the interaction [11]?
REFERENCES
[1] Global Faces and Networked Places: A Nielsen report on
Social Networkings New Global Footprint.
The Nielsen
Company, March 2009.
[2] Many online social networks leak personal information to
tracking sites, new study shows, August 2009.
[3] Richter A. and Koch M. Social software - status quo, 2007.
[4] Esma Aimeur, Sebastien Gambs, and Ai Ho.
Upp: User
privacy policy for social networking sites. In Internet and
Web Applications and Services, International Conference on,
pages 267–272. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[5] Abraham Bagherjeiran and Rajesh Parekh. Combining be-
havioral and social network data for online advertising. In
ICDMW ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE International
Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pages 837–846. IEEE
Computer Society, 2008.
[6] Gary Blosser and Justin Zhan. Privacy preserving collabo-
rative social network. In 2008 International Conference on
Information Security and Assurance. IEEE Computer Society,
2008.
[7] Joseph Bonneau, Jonathan Anderson, and George Danezis.
Prying data out of a social network. In 2009 Advances in
Social Network Analysis and Mining, pages 33–40. IEEE
Computer Society, 2009.
[8] D. M. Boyd and N. B. Ellison.
Social network sites:
Deﬁnition, history, and scholarship.
Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 13(1):210–230, 2007.
[9] John Breslin and Stefan Decker. The future of social networks
on the internet: The need for semantics.
IEEE Internet
Computing, 11(6):86–90, 2007.
[10] Steve Mansﬁeld Devine. Anti-social networking: exploiting
the trusting environment of web 2.0.
Network Security,
2008(11):4–7, 2008.
[11] Ioanna Dionysiou, Dave Bakken, Carl Hauser, and Deborah
Frincke. Formalizing end-to-end context-aware trust relation-
ships in collaborative activities. In International Conference
on Security and Cryptography (SECRYPT08), pages 546–553,
2008.
[12] Ai Ho, Abdou Maiga, and Esma Aimeur. Privacy protection
issues in social networking sites. In ACS/IEEE International
Conference on Computer Systems and Applications,, pages
271–278. IEEE Computer Society, 2009.
[13] Amela Karahasanovic, Petter Bae Brandtzg, Jeroen Vanatten-
hoven, Bram Lievens, Karen Torben Nielsen, and Jo Pierson.
Ensuring trust, privacy, and etiquette in web 2.0 applications.
Computer, 42(6):42–49, 2009.
[14] Ryan Layﬁeld, Bhavani Thuraisingham, Latifur Khan, Murat
Kantarcioglu, and Jyothsna Rachapalli. Design and imple-
mentation of a secure social network system.
In IEEE
Intelligence and Security Informatics 2009, pages 236–247.
IEEE, 2009.
[15] J. Mitchell-Wong, R. Kowalczyk, A. Roshelova, B. Joy,
and H. Tsai.
Opensocial: From social networks to social
ecosystem. In 2007 Inaugural IEEE International Conference
on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, pages 361–366.
IEEE, 2007.
[16] Juliana Mitchell-Wong, Ryszard Kowalczyk, and Bao Quoc
Vo.
Social network proﬁle and policy.
In 2008 IEEE
International Workshop on Policies for Distributed Systems
and Networks, pages 207–210, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
2008. IEEE Computer Society.
[17] Frank Nagle and Lisa Singh. Can friends be trusted? explor-
ing privacy in online social networks. In 2009 Advances in
Social Network Analysis and Mining, pages 312–315. IEEE
Computer Society, 2009.
[18] Jan Nagy and Peter Pecho. Social networks security. In Third
International Conference on Emerging Security Information,
Systems, and Technologies, pages 321–325. IEEE Computer
Society, 2009.
[19] Martin Pekarek and Stefanie Potzsch. A comparison of pri-
vacy issues in collaborative workspaces and social networks.
Identity in the Information Society, pages 1–13, 2009.
[20] Cynthia Putnman and Beth Kolko. Getting online but still liv-
ing ofﬂine: the complex relationship of technology adoption
and in-person social networks. In 2009 Advances in Social
Network Analysis and Mining, pages 33–40. IEEE Computer
Society, 2009.
[21] L. Sorensen and K.E. Skouby.
Next generation social
networks - elicitation of user requirements.
In IEEE 19th
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile
Radio Communications, pages 1–5. IEEE, September 2008.
[22] Steffen Staab, Pedro Domingos, Peter Mika, Jennifer Gol-
beck, Li Ding, Tim Finin, Anupam Joshi, Andrzej Nowak, and
Robin R. Vallacher. Social networks applied. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 20(1):80–93, 2009.
[23] William Stallings. Network Security Essentials: Applications
and Standards. Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, USA, 3rd edition, 2006.
[24] M. Tubi, R. Puzis, and Y. Elovici. Deployment of dnids in so-
cial networks. In 2007 Intelligence and Security Informatics,
pages 59–65. IEEE, 2007.
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-200-4
ICIW 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

