Stigmergy within Web Modelling Languages: 
Positive Feedback Mechanisms 
Aiden Dipple, Kerry Raymond, Michael Docherty  
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Queensland University of Technology 
Brisbane, Australia 
aiden.dipple@student.qut.edu.au 
k.raymond@qut.edu.au 
m.docherty@qut.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract— Stigmergy is a biological term originally used when 
discussing insect or swarm behaviour, and describes a model 
supporting environment-based communication separating 
artefacts from agents.  This phenomenon is demonstrated in 
the behavior of ants and their food foraging supported by 
pheromone trails, or similarly termites and their termite nest 
building process. What is interesting with this mechanism is 
that highly organized societies are formed without an apparent 
central management function.  We see design features in Web 
sites that mimic stigmergic mechanisms as part of the User 
Interface and we have created generalizations of these 
patterns.  Software development and Web site development 
techniques have evolved significantly over the past 20 years.  
Recent progress in this area proposes languages to model web 
applications to facilitate the nuances specific to these 
developments.  These modeling languages provide a suitable 
framework for building reusable components encapsulating 
our design patterns of stigmergy.  We hypothesize that 
incorporating stigmergy as a separate feature of a site’s 
primary function will ultimately lead to enhanced user 
coordination.   
 
Keywords-web collaboration; virtual pheromones; stigmergy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The World Wide Web has transitioned from its 
historically static content to a new, dynamic experience 
emerging through collaborative websites and social 
networking.  We seek to understand a specific set of 
emerging designs that we believe are indicative of a natural 
phenomenon called stigmergy [1]. 
In biology, stigmergy describes a mechanism of indirect 
communication where the actions of individuals affect the 
behavior of others (and their own).  This communication 
mechanism describes what has been considered as apparent 
cooperative behavior of insects’ during various activities.  
An example of this is the food gathering activities of ants 
which exploit pheromone trails.  To find the most recent and 
relevant food source the ants select paths to follow based on 
the strength of specific trails.  The environment embedded 
pheromones 
is 
considered 
a 
form 
of 
indirect 
communication.  This stigmergic communication comprises 
of an explicit message in the pheromone to gather food, and 
an implicit signal through the current level of decay: 
information within the trails themselves show which trail 
will currently lead to a food source opposed to those leading 
to a depleted food source. 
There are multiple varieties of stigmergy and our 
research to date has modeled and documented this [2, 3].    
We have created generic design proto-patterns from 
observing stigmergy in numerous Web sites, however this 
paper will focus on those observed within Facebook.  The 
User 
Interface 
(UI) 
designs 
observed 
provide 
representations of user feedback along with representations 
of behavior trends from unintentional interactions recorded 
as trace data.  Examples of these UI designs can be seen in 
Facebook where users “Like” other user contributions 
causing an area of focused interest.  Another example can be 
seen where Facebook has introduced a “Seen By” 
representation of feedback where the number of users 
navigating to an article is presented as a trail (or virtual 
footsteps).       
Web Modeling Language (WebML)[4] is a method of 
modeling data content, user interaction and navigation flow 
for Web 2.0 applications. WebML provides a way to design 
the mapping of a data model to different UI views and the 
navigation paths between those views.  The pertinent aspect 
of the WebML framework to our research question is that 
WebML is designed to be extensible to facilitate new 
concepts, interface types and event types.  Our research uses 
WebML and the WebRatio development environment 
allowing stigmergy to be easily incorporated into a site as 
reusable components keeping the core code-base separate 
from the stigmergic features.  Given the Web 2.0 UI designs 
that we have observed and a thorough analysis of how they 
correlate to stigmergy, we have implemented generic UI 
components as standard elements for web site development 
to exploit stigmergic communication.  
Our research project focuses on creating a model of 
stigmergy that we can use to design feedback mechanisms 
into Web applications.  From this model we can describe a 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

framework to exploit stigmergy in the collaborative 
environment provided by specific Web applications. This 
paper illustrates how we create design patterns in an 
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) to capture the 
features of stigmergy as a separate aspect to core Web site 
features.  The research contribution of the PhD project is to 
determine the efficacy of incorporating stigmergy into site 
design; this paper makes a significant contribution by 
documenting our current progress capturing user input 
(positive feedback) using reusable stigmergic design 
patterns 
readily 
included 
into 
primary 
Web 
site 
functionality. Future work will involve testing our model of 
stigmergy using our design patterns in experiments with 
users to test how they react to the presence of stigmergic 
features in a Web 2.0 site when compared with a similar 
Web 2.0 site without the stigmergic features. 
This paper will introduce our research question based on 
our hypothesis in Section II.  Section III will provide a brief 
Literature Review describing previous work on Stigmergy 
providing key facets of our model development.  Section IV 
will detail our research methodology and explain why we 
have chosen a multi-method approach.  Section V will detail 
our current progress including an overview of our developed 
model of stigmergy, data model and interface components 
implementing the positive feedback mechanisms.  Section 
VI will discuss problems yet to be solved and will be 
followed by the conclusion in Section VII. 
II. RESEARCH PROBLEM 
Our hypothesis is that stigmergic behaviour is inherent 
in collaborative Web environments and that a framework to 
support all attributes and dynamics of stigmergy will 
facilitate higher quality collaborative outcomes.  This leads 
to the question: Does the Web enable us to build better 
collaborative sites when the attributes and dynamics of 
stigmergy are fully exploited?  Are there facets of stigmergy 
missing in the Web environment that could be used in 
capturing implicit communication otherwise lost?  To 
answer this question the project has required a clear 
definition of stigmergy and how it manifests in Web 
environments.  There is significant research into stigmergy, 
virtual pheromones and swarm intelligence re-creating 
stigmergic behaviour; but limited research into its relevance 
as a design pattern to coordinate human behaviour.  If we 
can build a model identifying stigmergy in Web 
environments, we speculate we can create a methodology to 
build sites benefiting from this phenomenon. 
III. STATE OF THE ART 
The word stigmergy “is formed from the Greek words 
stigma ‘sign’ and ergon ‘action’” [5] and is used within 
biology to describe the way non-rational, autonomous 
agents (such as termites or ants) collaborate to achieve 
complex tasks thereby displaying some type of emergent 
swarm-intelligence [6].  These agents use pheromones as 
signs embedded within the environment to trigger behaviour 
or actions in other agents in the swarm. 
Stigmergy was first introduced in 1959 by a French 
zoologist named Pierre-Paul Grasse [7] to describe how 
insects appear to coordinate successfully despite having no 
centralized management structure or direct observable 
intercommunication [1].  A simplified definition of 
stigmergy is: a process by which agents communicate 
indirectly between one and other through their environment.  
More specifically, the behaviour of agents is influenced or 
determined by the behaviour of agents which have 
interacted with the spatio-temporal environment previously 
[8].    Essentially stigmergy describes an autonomous 
system enabling self-organisation, self-optimisation and 
self-contextualisation in a light-weight and scalable 
mechanism [9].  This is interpreted as the associated 
mechanisms and emergent behaviour enabling the selection 
of the optimal solution without the prerequisite of knowing 
anything about the environment. 
Stigmergy is a compelling phenomenon because it 
describes a positive feedback system where the signal 
strength of a trail will increase as more agents follow that 
trail. This leads to more rapid successful task completion.  
In opposition to this the environment enacts upon the sign 
causing atrophy and entropy to diminish the signal strength.  
This decay provides the negative feedback ensuring only the 
most current trails can be sensed and that old trails do not 
interfere with the task as they become redundant.  
Stigmergy provides a model of both active contributions 
and 
passive 
interaction 
with 
both 
varieties 
being 
demonstrated within the Web.  The two varieties of 
stigmergy have been categorized as marker-based [1] and 
sematectonic [10].  Marker-based stigmergy describes an 
explicit modification of the environment by leaving a sign 
with the intention of signaling to other agents.  Marker-
Based stigmergy is broken into two sub-types: qualitative 
and quantitative [1].  The sub-types differentiate where 
single contributions are sufficient to elicit a response versus 
an accumulation of contributions increasing the probability 
of triggering a response as signal strength increases. 
In 
contrast 
to 
explicitly 
leaving 
contributions, 
sematectonic stigmergy is defined as a modification to the 
environment as a by-product of actions being performed.  
These 
by-products 
are 
occurring 
inadvertently 
and 
unintentionally to the primary task being performed.  For 
example, when considering a path being left in a lawn when 
people take a short-cut across it they have no intention of 
signaling to others that they have taken a short-cut.  The 
short-cut is the purpose of the action, but the environment 
will retain the footstep impact as an alteration of the 
environment.  There is no explicit foot-step left in the 
environment (obviously excluding cases such as wet feet 
leaving wet foot prints) however the action has altered the 
environment and the cumulative foot-step action manifests 
in the format of a path rather than something recognizable 
as an aggregation of individual feet traces.  These two 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

varieties of stigmergy highlight the notion of intentionality 
of communication as being either explicit or implicit [11, 
12], 
with 
marker-based 
stigmergy 
being 
explicit 
communication and sematectonic stigmergy being implicit 
communication. 
There has been a significant amount of research focused 
on stigmergy in robotics and Web environments [5, 13].  
Web environments provide a close facsimile to stigmergy in 
physical environments where a large number of users 
coordinate in a highly organized manner indirectly 
communicating through the contributions they make within 
the Web sites.  Our research focuses on how the varieties of 
stigmergy manifest as Web environment User Interface (UI) 
elements and how they can be employed within Web site 
design to improve user collaboration and information 
categorization.  We seek to do this using emerging web 
modeling technologies. 
Web Modelling Language (WebML [4]) is a platform 
independent way to express the interaction design, data 
model and business rules of Web application development 
separately from the implementation platform.  WebML 
permits the formal specification of the data model, interface 
composition and navigation options.  WebML describes a 
visual notation for designing Web applications that to be 
exploited by the visual design tool WebRatio for the auto-
generation of code.  We have implemented proof-of-concept 
UI mechanisms to record and display both intentional and 
unintentional web site interaction based on our model of 
stigmergy that we present in this paper. 
IV. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
This research project focuses on identifying the 
attributes and dynamics of stigmergic behaviour and how it 
facilitates and benefits the process of recording active 
contributions and passive interaction of users when 
participating in the grand purpose.  The research is based on 
a mix-method approach comprised of a literature review 
content analysis, comparative case studies of existing Web 
sites, and finally experimentation and data analysis testing 
the stigmergy design patterns created as part this research.  
The literature review has provided a thorough analysis 
of stigmergy exposing the complexities of the phenomenon 
and how to best incorporate the properties of stigmergy into 
a Web environment.  The results of the initial analysis stage 
has led to the development of a model describing the 
attributes 
and 
dynamics 
of 
stigmergy 
along 
with 
documentation tracing its components back to the work 
performed by previous researchers.  This provides the chain 
of evidence to validate the model and enable its correctness 
to be reviewed. 
Due to the qualitative nature of the data collection, a 
comparative case study approach has been used [2] to 
provide legitimacy to the repeatability of the research 
findings.  The pattern in the developed model has allowed 
the comparative case study to be performed against a 
selection of existing web sites with varying levels of model 
alignment.  Analysis of the case studies identified common 
solution patterns as well as proto-patterns representing 
solutions which provide more sophisticated implementation 
of the stigmergy varieties [3].  Targeting multiple sites for 
case studies has provided a vital cross section of sites 
displaying aspects that impact the simplistic entomological 
examples of stigmergy when applied to complex and 
cognitive human systems.  Targeting multiple sites over a 
broad spectrum of social aspects of the Web has exposed the 
repetition of stigmergic patterns further enforcing the 
generic design of our model.   
V. PROGRESS TO DATE 
The investigative stages of the research plan have been 
completed including the literature review and initial case 
study.  The literature review includes the analysis of 
stigmergy as a generic phenomenon and from the 
perspective of various algorithm designs.  Previously [2], 
we have introduced the resulting model (see Figure 1) of 
stigmergy including the concept of a stigmergy grand 
purpose and the core components of stigmergy: the agent, 
the environment, and the sign.   
 
Figure 1. Stigmergy Cycle 
Stigmergy facilitates a grand purpose (or emergent 
behaviour) through the dynamics (or mechanisms) applied 
to its inherent attributes (or components) of the 
environment, agents, and artefacts.  Our progress to date has 
provided clarification and the categorisation of virtual 
pheromones (and other traces) and their role as triggers.  
The development of our model has provided insight into 
various similar indirect methods of communication that are 
considered to be a superset of stigmergy: Behavioural 
Implicit Communication (BIC).  BIC is considered outside 
of our research area of stigmergic communication.  Our 
modelling of the concepts of implicit and indirect 
communication mechanisms has provided the missing 
holistic, conceptual synthesis of the phenomenon.  Our 
intended contribution of analysing the efficacy of stigmergy 
within Web 2.0 sites will build on this contribution.   
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

The model ties together the core components of 
stigmergy: an inner band representing the attributes of the 
components; and an outer band representing the dynamics 
acting on those attributes.  The outer band dynamics are 
either internal to each component, or defining the interface 
between components.  The model describes the dynamics of 
equilibrium between positive feedback (contributions) and 
negative feedback (decay) illustrating how the agent 
contributes the positive feedback, where the environment 
applies the negative feedback.  This is a generic model of 
stigmergy that applies for the world of entomology, the 
human world and the virtual world.  This paper focuses on 
how the varieties of stigmergy manifest as Web 
environment User Interface (UI) elements; therefore the 
three components of stigmergy correlate to the users of Web 
environments, and the contributions that the users make. 
To incorporate stigmergy into WebML we need to 
understand the ways the system receives input and how it 
should display output.   The contribution attribute of the 
model correlates with the user having an input mechanism 
to actuate the contribution to a sign; the signal diffusion 
attribute defines accessibility of an output mechanism 
presenting the transformed contributions as a signal to users.  
The environment requires the capacity to store contributions 
therefore requiring a stigmergy specific data model.   
Our research has explored how the different varieties of 
stigmergy manifest as proto-patterns within the target case 
study sites [3].  The key concepts identify that there are 
consistencies between the input (actuators) and output 
(sensor) mechanisms for each variety of stigmergy.  These 
findings highlight that the observed Web site cases can be 
implemented using reusable stigmergic mechanisms.   
The two simplest forms of input mechanism for marker-
based stigmergy both enable a user to intentionally make a 
selection, whether as a single presented choice or as a single 
choice from a number of options.  An example of the single 
presented option can be seen in Facebook with the “Like” 
feature where there is only one option presented to the user.  
An example of a single selection of multiple options can be 
seen in rating systems such as the one-to-five scale within 
eBay.  More accurately the eBay example is a composite set 
of options where a group of categories are presented (e.g., 
communication quality, postage costs, etc.) with each choice 
selection aggregating into a single seller reputation metric.  
In the case of sematectonic stigmergy, the trigger for the 
contribution is hidden from the user and occurs 
unintentionally when the user interacts with site content or 
navigates to particular pages.  An example of this is seen in 
the Facebook “Seen By” feature that records which users 
view a particular Group’s news-feed item. 
The 
two 
simplest 
output 
mechanisms 
observed 
correspond to signal type: quantitative or qualitative.  The 
Facebook quantitative signal type illustrates how the 
contributions 
are 
transformation 
into 
an 
aggregate 
summation presented to the user as a “Liked” count.  The 
eBay example provides a metric that is based on a more 
complex function but presented as a single percentage value.  
Our design facilitates both the storage of each of these types 
of contributions and each type of presentation.   
The qualitative signal type is a detailed list of raw 
contributions and can be seen within the Facebook “Share” 
feature.  The user contribution broadcasts specific content 
displayed within the standard Facebook news-feed.  The 
contribution is a reference to an article and is stored as a 
primary key value and specific data model entity name that 
that key relates to.  The actuator input mechanism  to record 
the contribution is the same as for the Facebook “Like” 
example.  The sensor output mechanism of this example is 
the propagation of the sign to the recipients with 
accessibility to the signal as defined by signal diffusion. 
Our most recent progress has been to implement proof-
of-concept examples within the WebRatio development 
environment built on these -generic proto-patterns.  The data 
model for our tests can be considered within three separate 
components: core entities for application functionality; 
supporting entities (e.g., user accessibility entities); and 
stigmergy entities.   
Figure 2 shows the user accessibility entities (user, group 
and module) that are created by default within WebRatio.  
Also shown is the stigmergy specific data model that maps 
to the components and attributes as illustrated in Figure 1.   
 
 
Figure 2. User Accessibility & Stigmergy Positive Feedback Data 
Model 
Our model requires that we add the self-referenced 
many-to-many relationship to the user entity and call the 
resulting relationship friends.  It is possible that in future 
releases this enhancement would become a standard part of 
WebRatio given current social website networking trends.   
The sign and contribution entities are associated (via 
Foreign Key) to the user and functions as the environmental 
persistence of the user contributions.  The contribution is 
the result of the option selected (intentionally) or left 
(unintentionally) by the user as a byproduct of interaction 
with the input mechanism.  The available options are those 
which have been defined as being presented for a particular 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

sign.  The difficulty entity defines the accessibility for to the 
actuator (or input) to particular users of the site, where 
signal diffusion defines accessibility to the signal sensor (or 
output) through the output mechanisms.  The group entity is 
related to the difficulty and signal diffusion entities 
(resulting from the many-to-many relationships) defining 
accessibility and enabling users to set their own privacy 
levels of contributions. The deployment of this feature is 
dependent on site-specific implementations.  For example, 
Facebook allows users to restrict the accessibility of their 
“Share” contributions but not their “Like” contributions.  
The capability to expose these features for one contribution 
and not the other are implemented in the sign definition as a 
dynamic 
feature 
based 
the 
stigmergy 
data 
model 
configuration.  Finally, we could consider extending the 
implementation for position to include navigable connected 
graphs based on Web site hyperlinks but the added 
complexity is outside the scope of this research project. 
The data model supports the definition of signs that fit 
different varieties of stigmergy.  Our quantitative, marker-
based example (as illustrated by the Facebook “Like” 
feature) is defined as a single sign record (e.g., of “Like”) 
and a corresponding single option record that has a value 
attribute of 1.  The sign aggregationOptionFx attribute 
indicates the SUM function for the output mechanism to 
perform a sum function against to determine the “Like” 
count.  Note: a COUNT function would produce the same 
result.  Given our qualitative, marker-based example we 
assume that Facebook stores news-feed data in an associated 
table.  The sign record defining the sign stores the table 
name in the positionEntity attribute and the name of the 
primary key field in the positionPrimaryKey attribute.  This 
defines the content’s position for news feed articles being 
liked and how that content is referenced.  The signal 
diffusion record for the sign is preset to visible to everyone 
and the sign.signalDiffusionUserConfigurable disabled 
because Facebook does not allow users to set privacy on 
who can see that they have liked something; anyone with 
access to the news-feed article can see the “Like” count.  
The contribution record would then store that a particular 
user deposited the “Like” option against a news-feed item 
that is identified by the primary key value stored in the 
positionIndex attribute.  The option should be presented as a 
single button (or hyperlink) being that there is only a single 
option in this instance, and is labeled using the string stored 
in the sign.uiLabelInput attribute.  The output mechanism 
queries the stigmergy data and presents the result labeled 
using the string stored in the sign.uiLabelOutput attribute.  
The differentiation of input and output labels is purely for 
semantics (e.g., Facebook input is “Like” where the output 
aggregation is “Likes”).   The query is a simple sum 
function of the contribution.value where the positionIndex is 
equal to the current news-feed entry’s primary key. 
If we consider the quantitative, marker-based, eBay 
example for seller-reputation feedback, there is an input 
mechanism that allows the selection of a single option from 
multiple options defined against the sign.  The input 
mechanism in our proof-of-concept implementation presents 
a number of options within a drop-down list; however it 
could also be presented as a radio-button group or a group 
of buttons / hyperlinks.  This option presentation is designed 
into our generic WebRatio output mechanism component 
and should be dynamic in its ability to render itself 
according to whether one or many options are available for 
the sign.  The storage of the contribution remains the same, 
as does the query used within the output mechanism.  A 
slightly more complex query is required where a composite 
sign (sign made up of signs) has been defined.  The result 
set is driven by a recursive tree-walk of the sign entity 
generating the collection of contribution data grouped by 
the positionPrimaryKey attribute.  This applies the sign’s 
aggregationOptionFx attribute named function against the 
collection of children sign’s option.value attribute where 
multiple contributions exist.  This functionality is hidden in 
the output mechanism and is transparent to both the user and 
developer.  In the case of eBay where feedback appears to 
be an average or moving average, the output mechanism can 
be extended enabling the customization of the aggregation 
function; however the incorporation of more complex 
though standard functions can easily be included in the 
default output mechanism. 
The Facebook “Share” feature is an example of 
qualitative, marker-based stigmergy and follows the same 
pattern where there is single option selection that is 
associated (via Foreign Key described by meta-data in the 
sign entity) against each news-feed article.  Corollary the 
same data for the contribution would be stored; however the 
difference here is that the user is capable of specifying a 
different visibility level in signal diffusion for their 
individual contribution because that feature is offered to the 
user.  The difference with the output mechanism is that the 
“Share” feature is provided as part of the core Facebook 
functionality.  The sharing of a news-feed item means that it 
becomes accessible to the subset of users to whom the 
content has been shared with.  The site functionality 
provides a qualitative listing (rather than quantitative 
aggregation function) to exploit this particular signal type.  
In this example the result set is driven by a query selecting 
data that is visible to the current user where the contributing 
user is related to them as defined by the friend entity 
relationship or group entity which they belong to.   
The Facebook “Seen By” feature is an example of 
sematectonic stigmergy and follows the same pattern where 
a single option is stored as the contribution.  This is the 
same sign and option configuration as outlined in the 
Facebook “Like” and “Share” examples.  The only 
difference is that the user when navigating a hyperlink to 
specific 
content 
triggers 
the 
input 
mechanism 
unintentionally.  The option record for the “Seen By” sign 
has a value attribute of 1 and has the same results as for the 
“Like” sign count.  The input mechanism is associated to a 
hyperlink with the pre-defined option specified for the 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

contribution.  The output mechanism in this example 
performs the same sum function of the contribution.value 
and where the positionIndex is equal to the current news-
feed entry’s primary key.     
WebRatio provides a modeling interface for design a 
web application.  Predefined components are provided 
which perform the presentation and transactional operations 
of a Web site.  While stigmergy can be incorporated into a 
site as a design pattern the optimal approach is to provide 
reusable components performing the actuator and sensor 
dynamics of our model thereby providing reusable input and 
output mechanisms.  Figure 3 provides an example of how an 
actuator can be built using standard WebRatio components 
based on our design pattern. 
 
Figure 3. WebML “Like” Sign Actuator design 
The example illustrates one way to implement the 
“Like” sign (predefined within the sign data model entity at 
primary key oid 1) against a particular group.  The actuator 
is located on the page where group entities can be edited and 
in this example is provided by the link from the Entry Unit 
named “Modify Group” to the Create Unit named “Create 
Like”.  The standard Create Unit is used to insert a record 
into the contribution entity and the row values area passed 
in through the links providing values for contributedOn, 
currentUser, currentGroup and the option entity foreign 
key.  The positionIndex value is provided using the Link for 
the currently selected group data entry unit.  The specific 
option to add as the contribution is provided by the Entry 
Unit named “Actuator Options”.  The option value is 
restricted using a Relationship Condition between the “Like 
Sign selector” and the “Like Options selector”.  NOTE: In 
the “Like” stigmergy example only a single option is 
presented to the user requiring the Entry Unit being 
configured to not be visible.  For examples where multiple 
options are provided, a Selection Field must be included to 
present the alternate options within a drop-down list.  
 
Figure 4. Custom Unit “Like” Sign Actuator design 
Figure 4 shows the same example when using our 
actuator Custom Unit within the WebML design.  Also 
shown is our sensor Custom Unit.  The dramatic 
simplification is obvious where current user and group 
values can be obtained within the web service context 
instead of model links; only the positionIndex value needs 
to be provided via a link.  The primary key defining the 
options for the sign is specified as parameter of the unit, as 
shown in the Properties window.  There is a web service 
associated with the unit providing database transactions, and 
more sophisticated algorithms pertaining to the difficulty 
and signal diffusion facets of the signal.  The final runtime 
output is displayed in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Runtime “Like” actuator and sensor output 
VI. PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED 
WebRatio is a relatively immature product with a small 
user group and support based.  As such there have been a 
number of problems and impediments encountered.   
Custom Units within WebRatio allow definition of page 
template content to be customized (using scripts) at page 
generation time, while mark-up tags enable dynamic content 
during page population at runtime.  The limited available 
tutorials for WebRatio have impeded our progress in 
optimizing our actuator and sensor units’ implementation.  
A specific example can be seen in Figure 5 where the runtime 
actuator instance displays a drop-down list containing 
“Like” and also a button labeled “Like”.  Our optimal 
design requires the capacity at page generation time to 
determine whether a specific sign has a single option, or 
multiple as defined in the option entity.  Based on the result 
of this database query either a single button or a button with 
the drop-down list would be presented.  At present only 
Custom Unit design-time properties such as the SignId as 
seen in Figure 4 have successfully been prototyped as 
available at page generation time.  A simple work-around 
for our proof-of-concept has been to split our actuator into 
three separate Custom Units: marker-based (single option), 
marker-based (multiple options) and sematectonic based.  
The same applies for our sensor design where the Custom 
Unit split is based on signal type: quantitative and 
qualitative.  Rather than rely on the work-around (which 
merely means the appropriate Custom Unit be selected for 
the associated sign data) we pursue the implementation of 
the consolidated actuator and consolidated sensor designs.  
Resolving 
this 
issue 
will 
also 
facilitate 
removing 
superfluous Custom Unit design-time properties of 
Stigmergy Type (for actuator) and Signal Type (for sensor), 
as they are also defined within the data model.  Ideally we 
will succeed in accessing the stigmergy data model content 
to define these page qualities at page generation time.  
However, if we realize that this is not achievable within the 
WebRatio tool it does not impinge on the correctness of our 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

model or future experiments on the efficacy of including 
stigmergy in Web sites.   
Since development of the actuator and sensor 
prototypes, we have reflected on potential design 
deficiencies when considering stigmergic mechanisms 
deployed against our case study Web sites.  We have 
identified two areas for improvements: the ability to revoke 
a contribution (such as “Unlike” within Facebook); 
restricting accessibility to the actuator after a single 
contribution (such as providing transaction feedback within 
eBay).  Both of these enhancements can easily be achieved 
by adding Boolean fields userRevokable,(as Boolean) 
uiLabelRevoke (as String) and singleContrbution (as 
Boolean) to the sign entity.  The singleContribution value 
will define additional accessibility to the actuator, and will 
provide alternative labeling for revocable contributions. 
Progress so far only covers the user-centric dynamics 
(e.g., actuate and sense making) of stigmergy that provides 
the positive feedback system.  To fully exploit stigmergy we 
must also implement the negative feedback illustrated as 
atrophy and entropy.  WebML and WebRatio provide 
system events to trigger actions that can drive these 
environment-centric 
dynamics. 
 
Inclusion 
of 
these 
mechanisms into our proof-of-concept will complete our 
implementation by introducing the balancing negative 
feedback of stigmergy.  We have yet to address some 
attributes presented in Figure 1: Progress, Goal, Completion 
Point, and Significant Dimensions.  These attributes pertain 
to user-centric data (e.g., stored in users heads) and as such 
are arbitrary as to whether sites facilitate the recording and 
inclusion of such data.  We anticipate addressing these 
issues in the future. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Stigmergy can be seen throughout entomological, 
human and Web environments.  Stigmergy provides a set of 
dynamics that facilitate a balance between positive and 
negative feedback within a system.  Previously we have 
presented papers defining what stigmergy is.  This paper 
presents how the positive feedback mechanisms of 
stigmergy can be architected into web sites incorporating 
reusable User Interface components.  We have designed a 
data model supporting each stigmergy variety.  Our generic 
implementation of input and output mechanism within 
WebRatio demonstrates the simplest examples of stigmergy.   
We continue to refine our implementation of positive 
feedback mechanisms by addressing problems encountered 
during initial prototype development.  Immediate future 
work is required to consolidate our sensor and actuator 
units.  This requires resolving whether our chosen 
development environment is technically capable of allow 
database querying at page generation time, and not solely 
page population time.  We intend to extend model 
functionality where a Web site design enables user 
revocation of a contribution or provides a restriction to 
single, irrevocable contributions.  Further model validation 
will occur by 
developing 
prototypes 
encompassing 
stigmergy examples observed in alternative case study sites 
thereby, extending on our Facebook-centric examples.  
Finally we must extend this data model and include 
mechanisms that provide negative feedback. 
Our proof-of-concept will be used to create an 
experimental Web site testing user interaction.  The analysis 
will determine how best to employ stigmergy in site designs 
and assess if stigmergy improves user coordination. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Theraulaz and E. Bonabeau, "A Brief History of 
Stigmergy," Artificial Life, vol. 5, pp. 97-116, 1999/04/01 
1999. 
[2] 
A. Dipple, "Stigmergy in Web 2.0: a Model for Site 
Dynamics," in ACM Web Science 2012, Evanston, 2012, 
pp. 116-124. 
[3] 
A. Dipple, K. Raymond, and M. Docherty, "Extending Web 
Modeling Language to Exploit Stigmergy: Intentionally 
Recording Unintentional Trails," in WEB 13, The First 
International Conference on Building and Exploring Web 
Based Environments, Seville, Spain, 2013, pp. 87 - 92. 
[4] 
S. Ceri and P. Fraternali, "Model for the definition of world 
wide web sites and method for their design and 
verification," US6591271 B1, 2003. 
[5] 
H. Van Dyke Parunak, "A Survey of Environments and 
Mechanisms 
for 
Human-Human 
Stigmergy," 
in 
Environments for Multi-Agent Systems II, ed, 2006, pp. 
163-186. 
[6] 
Z. Mason, "Programming with stigmergy: using swarms for 
construction," in ICAL 2003: Proceedings of the eighth 
international conference on Artificial life, 2003, pp. 371-
374. 
[7] 
P.-P. 
Grasse', 
"La 
reconstruction 
dun 
id 
et 
les 
coordinations 
interindividuelles 
chez 
Bellicositermes 
natalensis et Cubitermes sp., La theorie de la stigmergie: 
Essai d'interpretation du comportement des termites 
constructeurs," Insectes Sociaux, vol. 6, pp. 41-80, 1959. 
[8] 
E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm 
Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems. New York: 
Oxford University Press, Santa Fe Institute Studies in the 
Sciences of Complexity, 1999. 
[9] 
M. Baumgarten, K. Greer, M. D. Mulvenna, K. Curran, and 
C. Nugent, "Utilizing Stigmergy in Support of Autonomic 
Principles," 
in 
Third 
International 
Conference 
on 
Semantics, Knowledge and Grid, 2007, pp. 98-103. 
[10] 
E. O. Wilson, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis, Twenty-
Fifth Anniversary Edition ed.: Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 2000. 
[11] 
L. Tummolini and C. Castelfranchi, "Trace signals: the 
meanings of stigmergy," in E4MAS'06 Proceedings of the 
3rd international conference on Environments for multi-
agent systems III Hakodate, Japan, 2007, pp. 141-156. 
[12] 
L. Tummolini, C. Castelfranchi, A. Ricci, M. Viroli, and A. 
Omicini, "'Exhibitionists' and 'Voyeurs' Do It Better: A 
Shared Environment for Flexible Coordination with Tacit 
Messages," in In 1 st International Workshop on 
Environments for Multiagent Systems. LNAI, n.3374, ed, 
2004, pp. 215-231. 
[13] 
M. den Besten, L. Gaio, A. Rossi, and J.-M. Dalle, "Using 
Metadata Signals to Support Stigmergy," in SASOW '10 
Proceedings of the 2010 Fourth IEEE International 
Conference 
on 
Self-Adaptive 
and 
Self-Organizing 
Systems Workshop 2010, pp. 131-135. 
 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-280-6
ICIW 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

