Service Network Modeling and Performance Analysis  
 
Manolis Voskakis 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: voskakis@tsl.gr 
 
 
Christos Nikolaou 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: : nikolau@tsl.gr
Willem-Jan van den Heuvel 
European Research Institute in Service Science 
Tilburg University  
The Netherlands 
e-mail: wjheuvel@uvt.nl 
 
Marina Bitsaki 
Transformation Services Lab 
University of Crete 
Crete, Greece 
e-mail: bitsaki@tsl.gr
 
Abstract — Services play an important role in business 
interactions among partnerships forming value-creating 
service networks. A central problem in service network design 
is to analyze participants’ behavior and optimize their value. 
In this paper, we propose a simulation model to evaluate the 
long-term impact of changes to resources and predict the 
performance of service networks.  Successful predictions of the 
future behavior of service networks help analysts improve 
service network’s functionality. 
Keywords- service networks; value optimization; performance 
analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The growth of service economies coupled with the 
evolution of information technology have increased the 
complexity of service companies in a world of interactions 
and partnerships. We observe that large and vertically 
integrated firms are replaced by value-creating service 
networks. Service networks consist of interdependent 
companies that use social and technical resources and 
cooperate with each other to create value [1], [2], [3].   
Fig. 1 depicts the anatomy of a car repair service network 
comprised of five interrelated levels. In particular, the top 
level defines end-to-end processes connecting service 
provisions of several service providers (Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (OEM), Car Dealers and Clients [4]). In this 
way a service network can be partitioned into a set of 
discrete business services that completely process service 
client requests. Fig. 1, shows that an end-to-end process 
such as car repair is subdivided into composite service 
processes such as diagnosing the problem to be repaired, 
ordering part replacements and perform the repair. The 
order process shown in Fig. 1 is a composition of several 
atomic services (see corresponding level) such as 
investigating failure symptoms, identifying parts, ask advise 
from technicians, and ordering the appropriate (possibly 
upgraded) parts. Software and human services can be 
routinely mapped to atomic services, and can be selected, 
customized 
and 
combined 
into 
aggregated 
service 
applications. The software service may be deployed on a 
software service infrastructure, which may for example be a 
distributed cloud environment, providing the capabilities 
required 
for 
enabling 
the 
development, 
delivery, 
maintenance and provisioning of services as well as 
capabilities that monitor, manage, and maintain QoS such as 
security, performance, and availability. 
Clearly, the trend will be to move to high-value service 
networks where business process interactions give rise to 
new service analytics models and techniques that will help 
to pro-actively manage services and pinpoint areas for 
improvement. 
Various approaches have been proposed to measure the 
performance of service networks [5], [6], [7]. Most of the 
research has focused on describing models that represent 
inter-organization exchanges. In [5], a quantifiable approach 
of value calculation is proposed that connects value with 
expected revenues. In contrast, Biem and Caswell [6] 
describe building block elements of a value network model 
and design a network-based strategy for a prescriptive 
analysis of the value network. Allee [7] provides a 
systematic way for approaching the dynamics of intangible 
value realization, interconvertability, and creation. Biem and 
Caswell [6] and Allee [7] use qualitative methods to 
describe value in a service network in contrast to Caswell et 
al. [5] that calculates that calculates value in a quantifiable 
manner. The above approaches do not study strategic 
behavior of network participants that would result in value 
optimization.   
In this paper, we study the impact of strategic changes on 
the performance both at the level of the network as well as 
its participants. In particular, we introduce an analytical 
model and associated simulation tool to optimize value. 
Comparing to previous work that has been done, we 
improved the estimation techniques and we used a powerful 
58
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

simulation tool to perform our experiments and analyze 
dynamic “what-if” questions such as: what is  
Figure 1.  The anatomy of service networks. 
 
the impact of setting optimal – for one participant - prices 
on the performance of the other participants as well as the 
entire network? What is the impact on the performance if a 
new participant suddenly enters the service network? Are 
there any equilibrium strategies among the participants that 
eliminate their conflicts of interests?  
We extend the model presented in [5] and take into 
consideration the expected costs to estimate the expected 
value of the network and the various participants. We also 
improve the methodology used in [5] to provide estimations 
of 
revenues 
and 
satisfaction 
measures. 
Our 
main 
contribution is the definition and solution of value 
optimization problems with respect to service prices.  
We observe that participants‟ value depends on their 
expected profits. Expected profits express the additional 
value that will be accrued by the relationship levels a 
participant develops when it sells goods and services to 
other participants or to the end customers. This value is 
related to its intangible assets and on the degree of 
satisfaction it obtains from its customers. There are many 
approaches that have been proposed to measure customer 
satisfaction. In this paper, we use the methodology proposed 
by Fornell et al., known as American Customer Satisfaction 
Index [8].  
We use the System Dynamics approach [9], [10] to 
analyze the behavior of a complex system (car repair service 
network) over time. System dynamics tools allow modelers 
to succinctly depict complex (service) networks, visualizing 
processes as behavior-over-time graphs, stock/flow maps, 
and causal loop diagrams. These models can be tested and 
explored with computer simulation providing for example 
better understanding of the impact of policy changes (e.g., 
through animation of (service) systems) and facilities for 
sensitivity analysis. Examples of such tools include iThink 
[10], Vensim [11] and PowerSim [12]. 
In this paper, we have adopted the iThink tool to 
investigate the fluctuation of value under different 
circumstances. The results of these simulations provide 
predictions about the future of the service network in order 
to increase its adaptability to the changes of the environment 
and enable network participants to determine the most 
profitable co-operations and attract new ones. We show that 
the interactions among the participants of a network force 
them to reach equilibrium otherwise the network will 
collapse. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the car repair service system. Section III 
presents the methodology proposed to estimate value in 
service systems. In Section IV, we analyze the case study 
and run experiments to measure its performance. The results 
of the simulations are presented in Section V. Finally, in 
Section VI, we provide some concluding remarks. 
II. 
MOTIVATING SCENARIO 
The motivating scenario revolves around a service network 
that links four types of participants: an Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (e.g., Volvo), Car Dealers (with repair 
facilities), Suppliers and Customers. In particular, the 
scenario considers the end-to-end process “Order & Repair” 
that was already briefly introduced in the introduction.  
The scenario that we will use during the remainder of 
this article is an extension to [5] and basically looks as 
follows. OEM-franchised dealers may service and repair 
cars for their clients. Both activities require a car parts 
catalogue to ensure that repairs can be performed efficiently 
either in the replacement of parts or repairing after 
accidents. 
The 
part 
catalogue 
facilitates 
efficient 
installation, operation and lifecycle maintenance of intricate 
products describing detailed part information that can be 
fully integrated with other service applications supporting 
customer support processes, human resource management, 
and other service provisions. 
The quality of the OEM parts, catalogues, and OEM 
support services influences how many OEM parts will be 
ordered and used for a car repair and how many parts will 
be used from Third Party Suppliers (TPS), and how many 
customers will go to OEM dealers or to TPS dealers. OEM 
obtains parts from certified supply-chain suppliers (SCS). 
The technicians report the car service requirements that 
may include replacing teardowns, warranty replacements and 
collision repairs. On the basis of the car diagnosis, a cost 
estimate will be computed and communicated to the client 
for authorization. Once authorized the automotive technician 
will scrutinize failure symptoms, detect faulty parts, order 
parts and perform the repair. Ordering parts is a complex 
process that involves asking advice from expert technicians 
from the OEM, including acquiring information about parts 
under warranty, and getting approval from the dealer‟s part 
manager. The part manager then checks local inventory for 
the required part, and if necessary checks the stock at the 
OEM or supplier stocks, and eventually places an order. The 
59
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

part manager may either use third-party suppliers or 
suppliers from certified supply-chain suppliers.  
III. 
THE MODEL 
In this section, we introduce our service performance 
analytics model in support of strategic analysis of service 
network changes and improvements. Theorizing on service 
networks, and particularly performance analysis, can be 
addressed 
from 
multiple 
and 
often 
complementary 
perspectives. In our work, we propose a methodology to 
calculate value in service systems. We focus on the dynamic 
environment in which service networks emerge, and 
especially on connectivity and profitable cooperation that 
play an important role in value creation. We use our model 
to investigate network profitability and give answers to the 
following: 
 
Determine the conditions under which it is 
profitable for a firm to participate in the network 
and identify the factors that influence its value.  
 
Identify key stone participants (participants that 
create the most value for the network).  
 
Determine participants’ optimal strategic decisions 
(cooperating with someone or not, joining the 
network or not, etc.). 
We consider the service network as a set   of 
participants connected through transfer of offerings that 
delivers value to them. All offerings are treated as services 
that are composed by participants‟ interactions and co-
operations to provide a final service to a set  of end 
customers. Let pij denote the price participant i charges 
participant j for offering its services and rij denote the 
service time of the interaction between participants i and j. 
Price and time are the main parameters that affect customer 
satisfaction which is in turn the corner-stone for calculating 
value as we will see below. 
A. Customer Satisfaction 
Customer satisfaction measures the willingness of end 
customers to buy the services offered by the network and 
influences the increase or decrease of new entries. The 
calculation of satisfaction SATij(TN) of participant j for 
consuming services from participant i at the end of the time 
interval [TN-1, TN] for our model is a variation of the 
American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) [9] and 
basically described as follows. ACSI is operationalized 
through three measures: q1 is an overall rating of satisfaction, 
q2 is the degree to which performance falls short of or 
exceeds expectations, and q3 is a rating of performance 
relative to the customer‟s ideal good or service in the 
category. Without loss of generality, we quantify the above 
measures using the following formula:  

qk = [(k/pij)0.6 + (k/rij)0.4], k=1,2,3,

where [x] denotes the integer part of x and ks, ks are the 
parameters that determine the effect of price pij and time tij 
respectively on qk. In our analysis, we use the following 
function (see [8] for further details) to calculate the 
satisfaction:  

SATij(TN)=(w1q1+w2q2+w3q3-w1-w2-w3)/(9w1+9w2+9w3),
where wk are weights that indicate the importance of each 
measure qk.  
B. Participants’ Value 
We consider that an economic entity within a service 
network has value when it satisfies the entity‟s needs and its 
acquisition has positive tradeoff between the benefits and the 
sacrifices required. We emphasize on the gains or losses 
captured by the relationships between participants in order to 
compute value. Our focus is on the methodology in [5], but 
with a different view of the utilization of relationships 
between the participants. We define the expected profits 
Epij(TN) of participant i due to its interaction with participant 
j to be the expected value of participant i in the next time 
interval [TN, TN+1] increased (or decreased) by the percentage 
change of the expected satisfaction ESATij(TN) in the next 
time interval and is given by: 

Epij(TN)=(ESATij(TN)/ESATij(TN-1))(ERij(TN)-ECij(TN,
where ERij(TN) and ECij(TN) are the expected revenues and 
costs respectively for the next time interval. Thus, the value 
Vi(TN) of participant i at the end of time interval [TN-1,TN] is 
the sum of its revenues and the expected profits minus the 
costs that come from its relationships with all other 
participants. The total value of the network is the sum of the 
value of each participant. 
C. The Mechansim for Value Calculation  
In this subsection we present our value-based model that 
provides a mechanism to calculate value divided in various 
hierarchical levels. Fig. 2 (generated by iThink) shows the 
upper level of the hierarchy and visualizes the basic elements 
of our framework. We use the example of Section II to 
simplify our description. Each node represents a module that 
calculates the value of a participant. Arrows represent 
dependencies between modules. Each module encloses a 
sub-system that calculates the value of the module (second 
hierarchical level). Complex variables inside the module are 
presented as modules too. Fig. 3 shows the dealer‟s value 
calculation process. The green arrows show the impact a 
module has on another module (e.g., dealer‟s expected 
profits increase as dealer‟s revenues increase). The module 
dealer‟s cost in the third hierarchical level is depicted in Fig. 
4. 
 
60
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

 
Figure 2.  First hierarchical level of value mechanism. 
 
Figure 3.  Second hierarchical level – dealer‟s value.  
 
Figure 4.  Third hierarchical level – dealer‟s cost. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS TO THE CAR REPAIR 
SERVICE SYSTEM 
We perform simulation experiments to analyze our model 
making use of 4 scenarios. First, we apply our approach to 
the car repair service system (Section II) to examine the 
network‟s evolution over time. We represent technicians, 
the parts manager, and the help desk experts as economic 
entities, each of which is offering its labor as a service to the 
service system. We measure rates of offerings and payment 
flows per month over a period of about 30 months. End 
customer service requests denoted by s are strongly affected 
by end customer satisfaction, since satisfied customers 
attract new customers to enter the network. Without loss of 
generality, we consider that the service requests are 
produced by the Poisson distribution with mean es being the 
output of the function: 

es = -a1SAT2 + a2SAT,

where a2>2a1>0 so that es is an increasing function of SAT 
in the range [0,1]. (We have chosen (4) because the rate of 
increase of es decreases with respect to SAT.) We also 
consider that the number of technicians is a function of the 
number of service requests; we take that the number of 
technicians increases linearly with the number of service 
requests. We calculate the value of each participant as a 
function of price and time and determine its optimal level 
with respect to price. The equations of revenues and costs for 
the dealer, the OEM and the suppliers are taken from [5]. As 
opposed to [5] that calculates value for a given mean repair 
price and time, we optimize value with respect to mean 
repair price and time. 
Second, we use the transformation of the basic model, as 
in [5], in order to cut costs and increase value. Concisely, a 
solution 
provider 
achieves 
interoperability 
between 
participants‟ information systems through application 
software operated by the OEM. The application allows 
everyone to have access to up-to-date information about 
parts at any time, as soon as this information becomes 
available to the data base of the application. The gain from 
the new IT infrastructure is twofold: repair time is reduced 
resulting in customer satisfaction increase and OEM‟s 
mailing costs are eliminated. We apply our methodology to 
the transformed network to show that the continuous 
changes of the environment push the network to restructure 
itself in order to remain competitive. We determine the time 
interval in which we observe positive effects in profitability 
in the transformed network compared to the initial one. We 
also determine which of the participants benefit from the 
transformation and which not. 
Third, we consider a model in which the group of 
dealers is replaced by a new one that offers more 
complementarities to the end customers without increasing 
the mean repair price. This action seems to be profitable due 
END CUSTOMER'S 
VALUE
SUPPLIERS' VALUE
DEALER'S VALUE
TOTAL VALUE OF 
SERVICE NETWORK
OEM's VALUE
DEALERS' REVENUES
DEALERS' EXPECTED 
PROFITS
DEALERS' COSTS
DEALERS' VALUE
DEALERS' COSTS.COSTS OF THE 
DEALER
DEALERS' EXPECTED 
PROFITS.EXPECTED
PROFITS OF THE DEALER
DEALERS' REVENUES.REVENUES OF THE
DEALER
-
+
Ordering
 Logic
ordering
Repairing Materials 
Inventory
supplier 
lead time
repair materials
on order
receiving materials
selling materials
Consumer 
Demand 
Logic
DEALERS' COST
MEAN REPAIR TIME
numbers of parts 
ordered per month
average OEM price 
per part Po
TOTAL COST OF 
PURCHASES.COST total purchases Pd
mean price per repair
DEALERS' 
FIXED COST.DEALERS' FIXED COST
average number of parts 
per repair
TOTAL COST OF 
PURCHASES
DEALERS' 
FIXED COST
rate of service
requests
CUSTOMER 
SATISFACTION
poisson s
61
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

to the increase of the satisfaction of the end customers of the 
service network. However new dealers have higher costs 
that may affect service network‟s value. We examine the 
value of these dealers and the value of the entire service 
network provided that OEM chooses to cooperate with 
them.  
Fourth, we investigate Nash equilibrium strategies [13], 
[14] between OEM and the dealer. We define as a strategy 
for OEM and the dealers the mean profit rates a and b of 
selling parts and repair services respectively. Let ps, p0, pd 
be the mean prices set by the suppliers, OEM and dealers 
respectively for offering their services. Then it holds that: 

p0 = ps + aps = (1+a)ps,


pd = p0 + bp0 = (1+b)p0.

We examine the existence of equilibrium strategies 
considering that the rest of the network participants (apart 
from OEM and the dealer) do not affect their decisions. We 
assume that OEM buys parts from certified suppliers at a 
given price ps. 
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we present the simulation results from our 
analysis. First, we compare the basic model with the 
transformed one. 
A .Value Optimization in Basic and Transformed Network 
We show the mean repair price p* that maximizes the 
dealers‟ and OEM‟s value in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN THE BASIC AND THE 
TRANSFOMED NEWORK 
Value 
Model 
Basic Network 
Transformed Network 
p* 
111 
(dealer) 
225 (OEM) 
116 
(dealer) 
218 (OEM) 
Dealer 
51.469.012 
34.700.000 
46.874.332 
34.985.000 
OEM 
8500*106 
26793*106 
9100*106 
29990*106 
 
We observe that: 
 
The dealers‟ optimal mean repair price in the basic 
service network is lower than in the transformed 
service network, since the mean repair time (that 
affects value) decreases, so the dealer charges his 
customers less. Consequently, the dealer is forced 
to increase the mean repair price in order to increase 
its revenues. Nevertheless, at the optimal mean 
repair price, dealers‟ value is less in the transformed 
network since the customer satisfaction has 
decreased as well (higher charges).  
 
OEM‟s value is much higher in the transformed 
network than in the basic one. This is explained by 
the fact that the mean repair time decreases and the 
customers are more satisfied (at OEM‟s optimal 
mean repair price). In addition, OEM in the 
transformed network has much lower mailing and 
labor costs.  
 
In both networks OEM‟s value at dealer‟s optimal 
mean repair price (111 and 116 respectively) is very 
low compared to OEM‟s value at his optimal mean 
repair price. This means that OEM will never be 
satisfied to offer its services at prices that reach 
dealer‟s optimal level. 
 
Dealers‟ value at OEM‟s optimal mean repair price 
is higher in the transformed network, since OEM‟s 
optimal price is lower (218).  
Furthermore, the simulation results show that, OEM‟s 
value in the transformed network is not higher than that of 
the basic network from the first month. It dominates after 10-
12 months, when both networks offer their final services at 
their optimal mean repair price (Fig. 5). When both networks 
offer their services at common prices in the range of 80 to 
350, the transformed network dominates the basic network at 
month 8 to 17.  
Finally, the total value of the transformed network 
(32.190.040.300) is maximized at mean repair price 216 and  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  OEM‟s value in basic (1) and transformed (2) network at 
common mean repair prices. 
is higher than that of the basic network (28.593.400.000) 
which is maximized at mean repair price 223.  This is 
explained due to the fact that end customers are more 
satisfied and OEM (the keystone participant) has managed to 
cut costs at a great extend in the transformed network. 
Moreover, we see that the optimal mean repair price for both 
service networks is very close to the optimal mean repair 
price of OEM, since OEM contributes the largest part of the 
total value of the network.  
B. Sensitivity Analysis of  the Mean Repair Price 
In this section, we investigate the impact of mean repair 
price changes to the dealers’ value. As the mean repair price 
increases, the difference between the dealers’ value in the 
basic network and that in the transformed network is 
62
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

smaller. This is justified by the fact that although the service 
requests decrease the mean repair price increases resulting 
in a decrease of the total value as shown in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Dealers‟ difference of  value in basic and transformed networks. 
C.The Impact of New Entries 
We call the network with the new group of dealers as the 
competitive network. We calculate values in the new 
scenario at mean repair price 216 which is the optimal price 
for the transformed network. We investigate the impact of 
the change of dealers letting the price unchanged so that the 
end customers are motivated to remain in the network. We 
show that dealers‟ value (31.527.812) is lower in the 
competitive network compared to the transformed one 
(35.481.031), since the new dealers‟ cost is higher due to the 
complementarities they offer. In addition, OEM‟s value 
increases (from 29.793.000.000 to 31.713.504.020) due to 
the increase of the service requests. The total value of the 
network increases from 32.190.040.300 to 32.792.529.000. 
From the above we observe that a change in the network 
that improves its performance may affect positively some 
participants and negatively others. Naturally, dissatisfied 
participants abandon the network causing side effects to the 
others. 
D. Participants’ Equilibrium Strategies 
We perform two experiments in order to investigate 
strategic interactions and determine equilibrium strategies of 
OEM and dealers. In the first experiment we calculate 
OEM‟s optimal profit rate at a given profit rate for the 
dealer. Simulations show that when the dealer increases its 
profit rate (e.g., from 6% to 10%), OEM‟s optimal choice is 
to decrease its optimal profit rate (from 24% to 21%). 
Conversely, if OEM increases its profit rates (e.g., from 14% 
to 21%), the dealer optimally decreases its profit rate (from 
15% to 10%).  
The second experiment calculates a set of equilibrium 
strategies for OEM and the dealer: at dealer‟s profit rate of 
10% the optimal OEM‟s profit rate equals 21%. Conversely, 
at OEM‟s profit rate of 21% the optimal dealer‟s profit rate 
equals 10%. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we proposed a methodology that estimates 
value in service systems. We applied this methodology to a 
car repair service network. We run simulation experiments 
to maximize the value of each participant and the total value 
of the network. In addition, we defined suitable scenarios to 
study the internal relationships that are developed inside the 
service network. Finally, we examined the interactions 
between the participants inside the service network in order 
to determine their optimal choices. 
Directions for future work include the study of 
competitive service networks that form oligopolies in order 
to increase value. Furthermore, additional work is needed on 
the estimation of value of intangible assets such as 
knowledge, sense of community, etc.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Spohrer, P. Maglio, J. Bailey, and D. Gruhl, “ Steps 
Towards a Science of Service Systems”, Computer 40(1), pp. 
71–77, 2007. 
[2] V. Allee, “The Future of Knowledge: Increasing Prosperity 
through Value Networks”, Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, 
2002. 
[3] J. Gordijn and H. Akkermans, „„Designing and Evaluating E-
business Models,‟‟ IEEE Intelligent Systems 16, No. 4, 11–
17, 2001. 
[4] J. Sairamesh et al.: “Dealer collaboration: transforming the 
value chain through integration and relationships”, Proc. of 
International 
Conference 
on 
E-Commerce 
Technology 
(CEC‟04), pp. 325-239, 2004. 
[5] N.S. Caswell, C. Nikolaou, J. Sairamesh, M. Bitsaki, G.D. 
Koutras, and G. Iacovidis, “Estimating value in service 
systems”, IBM System Journal, vol. 47, nr. 1, pp. 87-100, 
2008. 
[6] A. Biem and N. Caswell, “A value network model for 
strategic analysis”, Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2008. 
[7] V. Allee “Value Network Analysis and Value Conversion of 
Tangible and Intangible Assets” Published in Journal of 
Intellectual Capital , Volume 9, No. 1, 5-24, 2008. 
[8] C. Fornell, M.D. Johnson, E.W. Anderson, J. Cha, and Bryant 
B.E., “The American customer satisfaction index: Nature, 
purpose, and findings”,  Journal of Marketing 60, 7–18, 1996. 
[9] Jay 
W. 
Forrester, 
“Industrial 
Dynamics”, 
Pegasus 
Communications, 1961. 
[10] http://www.iseesystems.com/softwares/Business/IthinkSoftwa
re.aspx 
[11] http://www.vensim.com 02/12/2010 
[12] http://www.powersim.com 02/12/2010 
[13] J.D. Sterman, “Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and 
Modeling for a Complex World”, McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
[14] D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, “Game Theory”. MIT Press, 
1991. 
 
11500000
12000000
12500000
13000000
13500000
14000000
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
Price
Difference of value in two networks
63
ICIW 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-124-3

