Implementing Artificial Neural Network to Identify Influencers for Crowdfunding 
Campaigns on Twitter 
 
Frank Yeong-Sung Lin1, Evana Szu-Han Fang1, Chiu-Han Hsiao2, Hsin-Hong Lin1 
Department of Information Management, National Taiwan University1 
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica2 
Taipei, Taiwan 
e-mail: yeongsunglin@gmail.com, evanafang@gmail.com, chiuhanhsiao@citi.sinica.edu.tw, reckonlin7@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—This study proposes an Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN) 
model 
for 
ranking 
potential 
influencers 
for 
crowdfunding campaigns on Twitter. Because influencers have 
a strong connection with their followers and are considered 
trustworthy key opinion leaders, identifying them provides 
opportunities for start-up companies to reach highly relevant 
audiences and promote their campaigns. In this study, the 
social 
authority 
value, 
a 
mechanism 
developed 
by 
Followerwonk, was employed to examine the influence 
strength of a Twitter user. Followerwonk is one of the most 
popular Twitter marketing platforms in the United States. A 
total of 20 influence factors of 1969 Twitter users were 
collected to train the ANN model. The results revealed that 13 
of the 20 influence factors were significant for measuring 
influence strength, which improved the time efficiency of the 
process of evaluating potential influencers. This model can be 
effectively and cost- efficiently applied to support start-up 
companies, thus increasing the success rate of campaigns by 
utilizing influencer marketing. 
Keywords- social media analysis; influencer marketing; 
artificial neural network; sentiment analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Crowdfunding has flourished in the Internet age as a 
revolutionary means of raising capital and gaining publicity 
[1][2]. To increase the success rate of fundraising, 
determining strategies for attracting more people to 
contribute to fundraising campaigns is crucial for 
fundraisers [3]; therefore, influencer marketing on social 
media plays the role of “force multiplier” for crowdfunding. 
Influencer marketing is a trending marketing strategy 
that 
entails 
companies 
partnering 
with 
influential 
individuals to relay brand messages to the individuals’ 
audiences [4]. In the age of social media, everyone can be 
an influencer [5]. An influencer can be a popular fashion 
photographer on Instagram, a well-known product reviewer 
who uses Twitter, or a respected marketing executive who 
frequently shares ideas on LinkedIn. Through recurrent 
communication, an influencer can influence a prospective 
consumer by providing campaign information and advice 
for funding decisions, thereby affecting their beliefs, 
motivations, attitudes, and opinions [6][7]. However, 
because of the high intricacy of social media characteristics 
and the haphazard action of influencers, identifying 
influencers in a limited time is difficult [8]. 
 
Different approaches have been developed for identifying 
influencers; however, none of such approaches have focused 
on crowdfunding. Therefore, the objective of this study was 
to 
identify 
suitable 
influencers 
who 
can 
promote 
crowdfunding campaigns on Twitter. This study selected 
Twitter, a representative microblog, because it is a suitable 
platform for comprehending people’s behaviors in the 
physical world [9]. To achieve the study objective, an 
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model was used to rank 
the influence strength of Twitter users, and the social 
authority value on Followerwonk [10] was employed in the 
training process. A total of 20 influence factors of 1969 
Twitter users were collected to train the ANN model. 
Furthermore, the Marketing Influential Value (MIV) model 
[11] was applied to classify the 20 influence factors into three 
primary categories. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II reviews related work on surveying influencer 
identification and measurement. Definitions of 20 key 
influence factors for measuring the influence strength of a 
Twitter user are provided in Section III. Section IV details 
the executed experiment, and Section V presents the results. 
Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Over the past decade, an increasing number of studies on 
influencer identification has been a trending research topic. 
Studies have extensively applied three approaches for 
identifying influencers: centrality measures [12] applied with 
graph theory for examining the influence of a given node in a 
graph; prestige ranking [13] adapted for ranking influencers 
and inspired by the PageRank algorithm [14], which is the 
underlying algorithm for the Google search engine; and 
information diffusion [15] applied to identify the optimal 
path for spreading information. 
A. Measurement of Influence on Blogosphere 
Several studies have focused on different social media 
platforms, such as Facebook [16][17], Twitter [18][19], and 
other renowned platforms [20]. Moreover, the blogosphere 
is a widely used target for identifying influencers. Li et al. 
[11] proposed the MIV model to calculate the strength of 
influence 
and 
identify 
influential bloggers 
in 
the 
blogosphere. They divided the marketing influence value 
into three primary categories: network-based factors, 
referring to the explicit relationship between links or visits 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

and social interaction (e.g., number of comments and 
citations); content-based factors, including the subjective 
degree, length, and lifetime a certain blog; and activeness-
based factors, including the number of posts and replies. 
Under the consideration of time-stamped observations of 
posts and the assumption that transmission was governed by 
an independent cascade model, Gruhl et al. [21] attempted 
to construct a transmission network between bloggers. Adar 
and Adamic [22] used a similar approach to reconstruct 
diffusion trees among bloggers. Other similar approaches 
can be found in the next section regarding influencer 
identification on Twitter. 
B. Measurement of Influence on Twitter 
In earlier studies measuring influence on Twitter, the 
challenge was to define influence and determine the key 
factors of influential Twitter users. Anger and Kittl [23] 
compared three different measures of influence: indegree, 
representing the popularity of a specific user; retweets, 
representing the content value of a user’s tweets; and 
mentions, representing the name value of a user. They 
concluded that indegree is not always related to the ability 
to engage an audience. This finding suggests that indegree 
alone reveals little information on user influence. 
Kwak et al. [24] compared three different measures of 
influence: number of followers, page rank, and number of 
retweets. They observed that the rankings of most 
influential users differed depending on the applied measure. 
Similarly, Cha et al. [25] compared the number of followers, 
number of retweets, and number of mentions. They found 
that the most followed users did not score the highest on the 
other measures. Finally, Weng et al. [26] compared the 
number of followers and page rank with a modified page 
rank measure that accounted for topics; they also revealed 
that ranking depended on the influence measure. These 
studies have provided the foundation for future researchers; 
nevertheless, their results cannot be easily applied by 
marketing experts because of the lack of a mechanism to 
identify influential Twitter users. Moreover, the studies 
have considered a limited number of factors, which may 
engender a significant bias in the definition of Twitter user 
influence. 
C. Machine Learning for Influencer Identification 
Researchers at the Thomas J. Watson Research Center 
of IBM developed a supervised rank aggregation model for 
predicting influencers on Twitter; the model combines 
different influence measures to produce a composite 
ranking mechanism that is most effective for a desired task 
[27]. They compared 13 different ranking measures for 
identifying influencers and concluded that previous retweets 
were the most effective measure with the highest accuracy. 
Some studies have focused on analyzing factors that are 
crucial for increasing the influence of a Twitter user. Such 
studies have extracted factors from several Twitter 
marketing platforms: one of them is Twinfluence, which 
includes the velocity metric that determines the average 
number of first- and second-order followers [28]; 
TwitterGrader, which measures the number of followers and 
friends [28]; and Klout, which provides an influence 
ranking value [18]. Several regression models have been 
trained based on different services for evaluating factors 
that are crucial for increasing the influence of a Twitter 
user. Bakshy et al. [5] investigated the attributes and 
relative influence of 1.6 million Twitter users by tracking 
74 million diffusion events occurring on Twitter follower 
graphs. They found that the largest cascades tend to be 
generated by users with many followers. Moreover, they 
observed that the most influential users are also the most 
cost 
effective, 
therefore, 
to 
achieve 
cost-effective 
marketing strategies, managers can increase the degree of 
influence of ordinary influencers, that is individuals 
exerting average or below average influence. 
In summary, influencer identification has been 
prominently discussed in academia. On the basis of related 
work, this study can be addressed by using machine 
learning and deep learning techniques. These techniques 
can facilitate the consideration of a relatively high number 
of measures, which may provide new insights into 
marketing 
III. 
KEY INFLUENCE FACTORS 
Although studies have generally defined influencers as 
individuals who can have a disproportionate effect on the 
spread of information, this definition is ambiguous without 
general measurable standards. A feasible solution to the 
problem of defining influencers is to apply the ranking 
mechanism of current influencer marketing services. IZEA 
[29] has a quality score that ranks potential influencers on 
different levels from 1 to 5; however, this ranking service 
cannot be accessed without subscription. Followerwonk is a 
leading online application that provides several Twitter 
marketing features, one of which is the “Search Bios” tool. 
This tool enables users to obtain a list of Twitter users who 
are relevant to a search keyword. Furthermore, users can 
search specific Twitter profiles and obtain a summary of its 
influence. Followerwonk also provides the social authority 
value, a ranking mechanism that ranks the influence 
strength of a Twitter user from 0 to 100. A higher social 
authority value indicates a stronger influence. The score is 
based on three components: 
• 
The retweet rate of a few hundred of a measured 
user’s last non-@mention tweets [10]. 
• 
A time decay to favor recent activity versus ancient 
history [10].  
• 
Other data for each that are optimized via a 
regression model trained to retweet rate. 
Because retweets constitute a common measure of the 
effectiveness of a marketing campaign on Twitter, the 
social authority value is a reasonable reference of the 
ground truth data for ranking influence. 
The Twitter ecosystem is suitable for studying the effect 
of influencers. This is because interactions between users 
can be observed using structured data among their tweets 
and profiles. To examine the degree of influence of Twitter 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

users, this study collected 20 influence factors from profiles 
of Twitter users and tweets from their user timelines. These 
factors might exert significant or nonsignificant effects on 
the social authority value of users. The factors were 
evaluated using a Backpropagation Neural Network 
(BPNN). Before their evaluation, the 20 factors were 
classified into three categories by adjusting the present MIV 
model [11]: network-based, activeness-based, and content-
based factors. These categories are described in the 
following sections. 
A. Network-Based Factors 
People tend to follow someone with a fine reputation, 
which represents their popularity and trustworthiness within 
a social network. Network-based factors represent the 
popularity and trustworthiness of a user. In a Twitter 
network, which comprises a user’s followers and followings, 
tweeting is analogous to spreading seeds on a field. The 
more influential a user is, the higher is the likelihood that 
the user’s seeds will sprout.  
1) Popularity: To follow conversations of other 
communities and users, Twitter users must subscribe to such 
communities and users; the tweets of such communities and 
users would then appear on the users’ own newsfeeds. 
Different from other social media platforms, Twitter users 
do not require consent to follow other users’ activities. Two 
basic indicators represent the popularity of Twitter users: 
number of followers, which indicates their reputation but is 
not necessarily related to their influence; and number of 
followings (users one follows), which can indirectly 
increase the visibility of accounts. When users follow other 
users, they have a relatively high opportunity for interacting 
with the followed users. The higher the popularity of a 
Twitter user is, the higher the number of people who can 
access the user’s tweets within a certain period. Therefore, 
the two aforementioned indicators must be considered: 
• 
Number of followers: The number of followers of a 
Twitter user. 
• 
Number of followings (users one follows): The 
number of users followed by the Twitter user. 
2) Trustworthiness: Trustworthy Twitter users are 
responsible when sharing information on Twitter. They are 
reliable and honest with respect to delivering consistent 
values and behaviors and understand the importance of 
nourishing their relationship with subscribers [30]. To 
evaluate the trustworthiness of a Twitter user, the following 
factors are usually examined: 
• 
Account age: This refers to the duration for which 
the account has existed. The credibility of an 
account can be evaluated using the account age. 
• 
Number of statues: This refers to the number of 
tweets posted in the lifetime of the account. The 
number of statues indicates the effort of the Twitter 
user in managing the account. Twitter users with a 
high number of statues may be more trustworthy 
than others. 
• 
Listed number: This refers to the number of times 
the Twitter account has been added to other users’ 
favorite list in its lifetime. Twitter users can add 
accounts into their favorite lists. The higher the 
number of times the account has been listed, the 
higher the trustworthiness of the account is. 
B. Activeness-Based Factor 
Twitter is different from other social media platforms or 
microblogging service providers in that it can highlight 
some social interactions. First, most interactions occur on 
tweets. Second, Twitter users can repost other users’ tweets 
to their followers, an action that is popularly known as 
retweeting. Finally, users can respond to other users’ tweets. 
Users can respond to tweets on Twitter through two 
approaches: replying and mentioning. Replies can be 
indicated by tweets starting with @username, excluding 
retweets. A tweet that starts with @username is not 
broadcast to all followers but to only the corresponding user. 
Mentions can be indicated by tweets containing @username 
in the middle of its text. Such tweets are broadcast to all 
followers. Twitter users can “like” other users’ tweets by 
clicking or tapping on the “favorite” button. All these 
interactions can be adequately tracked through the 
application programming interface (API) of Twitter. These 
interactions can be further categorized as passive and active. 
1) Passive Interactions: When Twitter users tweet, they 
passively receive likes, retweets, and replies. Influential 
Twitter users can induce others to interact with them by 
initiating discussions and creating trending topics. The 
measurement of passive interactions indicates the ability of 
Twitter users to induce interactions. 
• 
Most favorited: This represents the number of 
favorites observed on the most favorited tweet in a 
Twitter user’s account lifetime. 
• 
Average favorites per tweet: This represents the 
average number of favorites of each tweet in a 
Twitter user’s account lifetime. 
• 
Average favorites per user: This represents the 
average number of contributed favorites of each 
follower of a Twitter user in the user’s account 
lifetime. 
• 
Most retweeted: This represents the number of 
retweets observed on the most retweeted post in a 
Twitter user’s account lifetime. 
• 
Average retweets per tweet: This represents the 
average number of retweets of each tweet in a 
Twitter user’s account lifetime. 
• 
Average retweets per user: This represents the 
average number of contributed retweets of each 
follower of a Twitter user in the user’s account 
lifetime. 
An 
analysis 
that 
considers 
reply 
measures 
is 
comprehensive; 
nevertheless, 
an 
enterprise-level 
application of Twitter’s official API is to acquire relevant 
objects on Twitter. Because retweeting is considered to be 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

similar to replying, employing retweet measures is 
sufficient. 
2) Active Interaction: In addition to passively receiving 
favorites, retweets, and replies from others, Twitter users 
can actively interact with other users to strengthen their 
influence by favoriting, retweeting, and replying to other 
users’ tweets. Active interactions increase a user’s 
probability of acquiring more followers. The higher the 
number of active interactions contributed by a user is, the 
more active the user becomes. Some of the existing active 
interaction measures can be outlined as follows: 
• 
Average tweets per day: This represents the average 
number of tweets a Twitter user posts per day. 
• 
Average favorites per day: This represents the 
average number of favorites a Twitter user 
contributes per day. 
• 
Average retweets per day: This refers to the average 
number of retweets a Twitter user contributes per 
day. 
These interactions describe the methods through which 
users use Twitter. This study was conducted to evaluate the 
mechanisms through which these interactions affect user 
influence. Notably, all factors were averaged to moderate 
the effects induced by the lifetime of an account and the 
number of followers. 
C. Content-Based Factors 
The role of content cannot be excluded from this study. 
Some content types may exhibit a stronger tendency to 
spread than others. Although Twitter restricts the length of 
tweets to less than 140 characters, it permits users to include 
videos, pictures, URLs, and other media on their tweets. 
Moreover, tweets with emotionally stimulating contents 
show different tendencies to spread than others [31]. 
Therefore, VADER [32], an open-source sentiment analysis 
tool, was applied to provide an averaged sentiment score for 
each Twitter user; this score indicates the degree to which 
each user’s tweets are positive or negative. 
1) Content Analysis: VADER is an open-source Python 
library for performing sentiment analysis. In VADER, 
sentiment classification is executed using the lexicon and 
rule-based sentiment analysis library; the tool performs 
adequately on text originating from microblogs [32]. This 
tool was utilized to calculate each Twitter user’s average 
sentiment score, which was measured on a scale ranging 
from −4 to +4, with the midpoint 0 representing a neutral 
sentiment. This study considered the following content 
factors: 
• 
Sentiment score: This represents the average 
sentiment score of each tweet on a Twitter user’s 
timeline. 
• 
Average length of tweets: This represents the 
average length of a tweet on a Twitter user’s 
timeline. 
• 
Average number of hashtags per tweet: This 
represents the average number of hashtags used in 
each tweet on Twitter user’s timeline. 
The length of a tweet and number of hashtags used in the 
tweet may affect the level of influence of the tweeted 
content. Hashtags are used to express a tweet’s similarity 
with certain clusters of contents and can increase the 
exposure of the tweet to other users. 
2) Types of Media: Twitter allows users to tweet with 
several types of media. Videos, pictures, and URLs are the 
most common options. Different levels of difficulty may be 
experienced in spreading various types of information on 
social media. To spread information, selecting an 
appropriate type of media is crucial for a Twitter user. For 
example,  This study considered the following factors to 
reveal the usage habits of Twitter users and determine the 
effectiveness of such factors for influence measurement: 
• 
Tweets with hashtags: This represents the number of 
tweets with hashtags on a Twitter user’s timeline, 
and the corresponding ratio ranges from 0 to 1. 
• 
Tweets with media: This represents the number of 
tweets containing media (videos or pictures) on a 
Twitter user’s timeline, and the corresponding ratio 
ranges from 0 to 1. 
• 
Tweets with URLs: This represents the number of 
tweets containing URLs on a Twitter user’s timeline, 
and the corresponding ratio ranges from 0 to 1. 
Tweets with media and URLs are separated into two 
factors, as videos and pictures bring stronger 
interaction than URLs. 
To identify influencers on Twitter, this study collected 
and processed the 20 aforementioned factors, divided into 
three categories, from the profiles of Twitter users; the 
processing results served as inputs for training the neural 
network model. As mentioned, the effectiveness of some of 
these factors in revealing the features of influencers may be 
significant or nonsignificant, and this is discussed in the 
following sections. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Numerous new projects are being implemented on 
Kickstarter daily, and most of them are in the top five 
campaign categories: games, technology, design, publishing, 
and arts. Entrepreneurs must identify different types of 
influencers during the marketing process. For example, a 
fundraiser who owns a campaign selling a new smartwatch 
product might prefer a tech influencer rather than an art 
influencer. Existing influencer marketing platforms usually 
rank Twitter users by their general influence rankings, 
which cannot measure their influence among different 
categories of campaigns. 
To 
observe 
the 
difference 
between 
categorical 
influencers and general influencers, the first step is to train a 
neural network model, which fits the existing influencer 
ranking mechanism. Accordingly, this study collected the 20 
aforementioned influence factors from the profiles of 
Twitter users who had recently tweeted about crowdfunding 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

campaigns. These Twitter users were ranked according to 
the corresponding social authority value derived on 
Followerwonk. After the datasets were prepared, they were 
fed into the BPNN. Finally, the predicted social authority 
value and the actual value on Followerwonk were compared. 
This study was considered the expandability of the model 
for its practicality. The ANN model was applied in this study 
for the following reasons: First, the proposed marketing 
research framework could handle more than 20 analyzed 
factors. Second, accessibility was considered, thus rendering 
the ANN model the first choice for addressing the proposed 
research problem for numerous existing free open-source 
libraries. Finally, the model can help to capture the complex 
nonlinear relation between this study’s input factors and 
output results. 
A. Data Collection 
With the basic usage limitation of Twitter’s API, this 
study collected only tweets posted within a 7-day period. To 
obtain a sufficient number of Twitter users, the data 
collection period was from May 8, 2018, to July 3, 2018, a 
total of 8 weeks. First, all data of live crowdfunding 
campaigns were crawled on Kickstarter from the top five 
categories [33]. These campaigns were filtered using pledged 
percentages. Campaigns with a pledged percentage of more 
than 50% were selected to moderate the effect of campaign 
quality (Table I). A statistical report [34] supported that 
95.6% of unsuccessful campaigns did not have a pledged 
percentage of more than 50%; this thus indicates that 
unsuccessful campaigns were excluded from the analysis in 
the present study. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF CAMPAIGNS ABOVE 50% PLEDGED  CRAWLED 
ON KICKSTARTER 
Category 
Art 
Design 
Technology 
Game 
Publishing 
Campaigns 
360 
754 
236 
646 
302 
TABLE II.  
STATISTICS OF THE TWITTER USER DATASET 
Statistics from Our Examined Blogger Set 
Number of total Twitter users 
1969 
Average account live time 
2048.789/per user 
Average number of statuses per user 
21378.363/per user 
Average number of followers per user 
39391.371/per user 
Average number of friends (followings) per user 
3282.032/per user 
Average listed number per user 
323.231/per user 
Average number of favorites per tweet 
6.741/per tweet 
Average number of retweets per tweet 
926.577/per tweet 
Average social authority value of all users 
43 
First quartile of social authority value of all users 
32 
Third quartile of social authority value of all users 
56 
Second, using the list of campaigns as search keywords, 
this study collected all tweets containing search keywords 
by using Twitter’s API Tweepy. Tweepy is a free Python 
library that allows users to access Twitter and obtain the 
required data. From the collected tweets, this study acquired 
the usernames and their profile information for further 
evaluation. Finally, on the basis of each Twitter username, 
each Twitter user was ranked in terms of the social 
authority value on Followerwonk. The initial dataset was 
prepared by combining the collected data (Table II). 
B. Experimental Design 
The initial dataset was divided into a training set and 
testing set at a ratio of 8:2. The complete process for training 
the prediction model involved influence factor calculation, 
model training, and performance evaluation (Figure 1).  
Figure 1.  Model training process. 
1) 
Influence Factor Calculation: The entire data of 
Twitter users collected in this study must be evaluated to 
derive the influence factors. A total of 20 influence factors, 
comprising the network-based factors, activeness-based 
factors, and content-based factors, were derived. 
2) 
Model Training: In this study, an ANN with a two- 
hidden layer BPNN was used to address the problem of 
uncertainty in the weighting process. The 20 influence 
factors were used for social authority value prediction. 
The BPNN is the most widely applied ANN model 
because of its strength [34] of managing complex 
nonlinear relationships between input data and output 
results. The original sigmoid function is [0,1], and this 
study performs rescaling to get the results in the range [0, 
100] to fit in the bracket of social authority value. 
3) 
Performance 
Evaluation: 
To 
evaluate 
the 
performance of the BPNN model, the predicted social 
authority value and the actual value on Followerwonk were 
compared, and efficiency of the model was examined. A 
different combination of parameters of the network structure 
was tested to fine tune the model. The grid search algorithm 
was applied for finalizing the parameter settings (Table III). 
TABLE III.  
PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR THE BPNN MODEL 
Parameters 
Value 
Parameters 
Value 
Number of hidden layers 
2 
Loss function 
MSE 
Kernel initializer 
Normal 
Batch size 
32 
Activation function 
(hidden layer) 
Rectifier 
Epochs 
256 
Activation function 
(output layer) 
Sigmoid 
Optimizer 
Rmsprop 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

C. Structure of BPNN 
Keras on Tensorflow [35], an open-source ANN library 
written in Python, was applied to construct the three-layer 
BPNN for training and testing the proposed prediction 
model. The constructed three-layer BPNN was composed of 
an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. The 
input layer had 20 neurons to adopt the 20 influence factors, 
comprising the network-based factors, content-based factors, 
and activeness-based factors. In the hidden layer, 10 
neurons were used for adaptive weight adjustment. Only 
one neuron was included in the output layer for the output 
data, which was the predicted social authority value. Table 
III details the parameter settings for the BPNN model. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
After the model training process, the model performance 
was evaluated to optimize the training process. The grid 
search algorithm was applied to determine the optimal set 
of parameters to train the BPNN model. A feature selection 
technique was then applied to determine the factors with 
relatively high effects and eliminate irrelevant factors. Thus, 
the resulting factors can help brands to identify influencers 
by using the minimum required amount of data, thereby 
improving time efficiency. Finally, the data of categorical 
influencers were selected. Their Twitter influence was 
ranked based on the social authority value predicted by the 
model. The difference between general influencers and 
categorical influencers was observed with reference to the 
origin of the social authority value. 
A. Results 
Several parameter sets were tested to optimize the 
performance of the BPNN model by using the grid search 
algorithm. Grid search is an approach of parameter tuning 
that methodically develops and evaluates a model for each 
combination of algorithm parameters specified in a grid. 
Because the output value of the BPNN model is a 
continuous value between 0 and 100, this research problem 
is naturally defined as a multiple linear regression problem. 
Therefore, selecting a mean squared error to score each 
parameter set is the most appropriate approach. The 
calculated mean squared error value was averaged after the 
application of 10-fold validation (Table IV). 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF EACH TESTING PARAMETER SET 
Parameters Set 
Batch Size 
Epochs 
Optimizer 
MSE 
Set #1 
32 
256 
Adam 
0.0118 
Set #2 
32 
256 
Rmsprop 
0.0116 
Set #3 
50 
512 
Adam 
0.0128 
Set #4 
50 
512 
Rmsprop 
0.0125 
Set #5 
64 
1024 
Adam 
0.0126 
Set #6 
64 
1024 
Rmsprop 
0.0133 
The variance of all the results was under 0.01, 
signifying that the model performance was acceptable 
without overfitting. Moreover, when identifying the 
influencers on Twitter, a brand is concerned with the 
accuracy of the model in detecting high-influence Twitter 
users. Therefore, the best 25 influencers were extracted 
from the dataset as highly influential users with a social 
authority value of higher than 82. The performance of the 
prediction model in identifying these 25 users was 
examined. A confusion matrix was used for accuracy 
evaluation, and Table V shows the results. 
This study also examined different numbers of layers of 
the ANN model and determined that the three-layer model 
exhibited a relatively high performance level (Table VI). 
The main explanation for the derived results is that the 
number of highly influential users selected for evaluating 
the model corresponded to the extreme values of the dataset. 
The model was trained to fit most of the observed data, but 
not the extremely large data. Furthermore, a deeper network 
is required for training a large amount of data, particularly 
for unstructured data. Accordingly, the three-layer ANN 
model was deemed suitable for this study’s analysis. 
TABLE V.  
ACCURACY OF MODEL WITH HIGH-INFLUENCE USERS 
Parameters Set 
Accuracy 
True Positive 
Rate 
False 
Positive 
Rate 
Set #1 
94.67% 
52.63% 
0.53% 
Set #2 
94.92% 
57.89% 
0.27% 
Set #3 
95.18% 
42.10% 
0.00% 
Set #4 
95.18% 
36.84% 
0.00% 
Set #5 
94.67% 
57.89% 
0.53% 
Set #6 
95.18% 
42.10% 
0.00% 
TABLE VI.  
EXAMINING DIFFERENT NUMBER OF LAYERS OF THE ANN 
MODEL 
Layers 
MSE 
Variance 
Accuracy 
True 
Positive 
Rate 
False 
Positive 
Rate 
3 
0.0116 
0.0029 
94.92% 
57.89% 
0.27% 
4 
0.0119 
0.0025 
91.17% 
28.07% 
5.63% 
5 
0.0116 
0.0025 
97.21% 
10.52% 
2.4% 
On the basis of the model evaluation process and the 
aforementioned results, set#2 was selected as the optimal 
parameter set for constructing the BPNN model. However, 
performance could still be improved for highly influential 
users. The model was still determined to be effective for 
conducting further analysis. 
B. Feature Selection 
Although the model was appropriately trained and 
exhibited adequate performance, data collection was the 
most time-consuming part of this process. The collection of 
20 influence factors for the targeted Twitter users required 
considerable time. To improve time efficiency and avoid 
the problem of dimensionality, feature selection techniques 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

must be used. This study thus applied the backward 
elimination process to select the features that were most 
relevant for measuring the social authority value of Twitter 
users. 
1) Backward Elimination: Backward elimination is a 
widely used feature selection technique for multiple linear 
regression problems. Before the initiation of the selection 
process, the significance level (0.05) required for features to 
remain in the model must be determined first. The model 
was fitted with all possible features, and features with the  
highest p value were considered. If the p value was higher 
than the significance level, the feature was removed from 
the model. After the completion of the iterations, 13 
features were selected from the 20 influence factors. As 
shown in Table VII, all network-based factors were selected, 
and the content-based factors were considered relevant. By 
contrast, most activeness-based factors were eliminated 
based on the selected significance level. 
TABLE VII.  
SUMMARY OF FEATURE SELECTION 
Features 
Category 
P-value 
Account age 
 
 
Network-based 
factors 
0.000 
Number of statues 
0.000 
Number of followers 
0.000 
Number of followings (friends) 
0.000 
Listed number 
0.003 
Average favorites per day 
 
Activeness-based 
factors 
0.000 
Average favorites per tweet 
0.000 
Average favorites per user 
0.000 
Average length of tweets 
 
 
Content-based 
factors 
0.000 
Sentiment score 
0.049 
Tweets with hashtags 
0.007 
Tweets with URLs 
0.000 
Tweets with media 
0.047 
 
2) Eliminate Activeness-based Factors: The preceding 
result shows that activeness-based factors were less relevant 
features for measuring the social authority value. The model 
was retrained to improve its performance in identifying the 
top 25 influencers. First, the activeness-based factors were 
eliminated from the features, and the true-positive rate was 
then improved to 63.19%, without increasing the variance 
(Model #1). Subsequently, according to the feature 
selection result, the features that were not eliminated were 
considered. The true-positive rate was then highly improved 
to 89.47% (Model #2) (Table VIII). 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VIII.  RETRAINED MODEL PERFORMANCE 
 
Model 
 
MSE 
 
Variance 
 
Accuracy 
True 
Positive 
Rate 
False 
Positive 
Rate 
#1 
0.017 
0.010 
96.19% 
63.16% 
2.13% 
#2 
0.010 
0.003 
97.46% 
89.47% 
2.13% 
C. Observing Effect of Categories 
As 
mentioned, 
existing 
influencer 
marketing 
applications, such as Followerwonk, can rank Twitter users 
based on the general influence. Understating whether a 
Twitter user is more influential on some topics than others 
is difficult. To observe the effect of categories, data 
obtained from 40 Twitter users were selected from the 
dataset. These users were highlighted for focusing on a 
certain category of campaigns. Their data were modified 
and fed into the fine- tuned ANN model to compare the 
social authority value predicted by our model and the 
original value on Followerwonk. 
Eliminate Tweets without URLs: To examine the impact 
of categories, tweets without URLs were excluded from the 
analysis. These tweets were crawled from the timelines of 
the 40 categorical users. Table IX presents tweets with 
URLs containing information that users intended to share. 
These tweets are shown to contain a “call to action.” The 
objective of a piece of content was to induce followers to 
perform a specific act. Such tweets are more important for 
ranking the influence of Twitter users compared with other 
tweets.  
TABLE IX.  
PREDICTED VALUE OF CATEGORICAL USERS (PARTIAL) 
User 
Category 
Social 
Authority 
Predicted 
Value 
18dMedia 
 
 
 
Design 
25 
64.32 
5toclose 
33 
57.93 
bikeradar 
66 
69.96 
designtaxi 
76 
84.48 
gadgetfeedco 
39 
57.37 
werdcom 
31 
51.24 
Ellerium_Games 
 
 
Games 
26 
33.33 
ETBoard_Games 
55 
61.09 
ssoebmizan 
38 
47.65 
tgn_news 
47 
57.40 
NewsWatchTV 
Technology 
51 
57.14 
 
After predicting the modified data of the 40 categorical 
users, this study observed that the predicted social authority 
value of some categorical users was increased (Figure 2).  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

 
Figure 2.  The predicted value of categorical users. 
Although the study cannot attribute the differences to the 
effect of categories, the predicted social authority value of 
some users increased under the condition where tweets 
without URLs were excluded. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This study proposes a research framework, involving 
data collection, influence factor calculation, and ANN 
model training, for identifying potential influencers for 
crowdfunding on Twitter. The processes involved in the 
framework can be easily applied through open-source 
libraries without incurring any costs. The MIV model and 
feature selection technique were applied in this study to 
identify the optimal measures of the influence strength of a 
Twitter user. Thirteen factors were selected from a total of 
20 influence factors. Activeness-based factors were 
determined to be the least relevant features for measuring 
influence. These results may be explained by the fact that 
the quality of tweets by influencers could be inversely 
proportional to the number of tweets posted. These findings 
can improve time efficiency for companies in the execution 
of marketing research. After observing the effects of 
different categories, this study determined that the social 
authority value of some of the categorical users increased 
after the exclusion of tweets without URLs from the 
analysis. 
Future research directions include the development of a 
fair ranking mechanism because predicted values are 
limited by the original social authority value, which may be 
inaccurate in case of promotional activities. Furthermore, 
this study suggests that future studies monitor changes in 
crowdfunding campaigns to determine and measure the 
actual effects of potential influencers. Finally, it would be 
difficult to conclude that the observed differences between 
the predicted value and original social authority value were 
the result of categorical effects. Therefore, this study highly 
recommends the implementation of a posterior examination 
framework in future research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. F. Yu et al., “Prediction of crowdfunding project success 
with deep learning,” Proc. IEEE 15th International 
Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE 2018), 
IEEE Press, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–8. 
[2] 
X. Ren et al., “Tracking and forecasting dynamics in 
crowdfunding: A basis-synthesis approach,” Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2018), 
IEEE, Nov. 2018, pp. 1212–1217. 
[3] 
G. U. T. Sahid, I. Putrì, I. S. Septiana, and R. Mahendra, 
“Estimating the collected funding amount of the social 
project campaigns in a crowdfunding platform,” Proc. 
International Conference on Advanced Computer Science 
and Information Systems (ICACSIS 2017), IEEE, Oct. 
2017, pp. 277–282. 
[4] 
P. Lagrée, O. Cappé, B. Cautis, and S. Maniu, “Algorithms 
for online influencer marketing,” ACM Transactions on 
Knowledge Discovery from Data, vol. 13, no. 1, 2019, pp. 
3:1–3:30. 
[5] 
E. Bakshy, J. M. Hofman, W. A. Mason, and D. J. Watts, 
“Everyone’s an influencer: Quantifying influence on 
twitter,” Proc. The 4th ACM international conference on 
Web search and data mining (WSDM 2011), ACM, Feb. 
2011, pp. 65–74. 
[6] 
J. Villanueva, S. Yoo, and D. M. Hanssens, “The impact of 
marketing-induced 
versus 
word-of-mouth 
customer 
acquisition on customer equity growth,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol. 45, no. 1, 2008, pp. 48–59. 
[7] 
T. W. Valente and P. Pumpuang, “Identifying opinion 
leaders to promote behavior change,” Health Education & 
Behavior, vol. 34, no. 6, 2007, pp. 881–896. 
[8] 
H. Cao, J. Wang, and Z. Wang, “Opinion leaders 
discovery in social networking site based on the theory of 
propagation probability,” Proc. 2nd IEEE Advanced 
Information Management, Communicates, Electronic and 
Automation Control Conference (IMCEC 2018), IEEE, 
May, 2018, pp. 700–704. 
[9] 
L. Tang and Z. Ni, “Emerging opinion leaders in crowd 
unfollow crisis: a case study of mobile brands in Twitter,” 
Pattern Analysis and Applications, vol. 19, no. 3, 2016, 
pp. 731–743. 
[10] Followerwonk, https://followerwonk.com/ [retrieved: Jun. 
2019] 
[11] Y. M. Li, C. Y. Lai, and C. W. Chen, “Discovering 
influencers 
for 
marketing 
in 
the 
blogosphere,” 
Information Sciences, vol. 181, no. 23, 2011, pp. 5143–
5157. 
[12] L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual 
clarification,” Social Networks, vol. 1, no. 3, 1978–1979, 
pp. 215–239. 
[13] S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis. 
Cambridge, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
[14] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The 
PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web,” 
Technical Report, Stanford InfoLab, 1999. 
[15] E. Bakshy, I. Rosenn, C. Marlow, and L. Adamic, “The 
role of social networks in information diffusion,” Proc. 
The 21st international conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW 2012), ACM, Apr. 2012, pp. 519–528. 
[16] M. Nouh and J. R. C. Nurse, “Identifying key-players in 
online activist groups on the Facebook social network,” 
Proc. IEEE International Conference on Data Mining 
Workshop (ICDMW 2015), IEEE, Nov. 2015, pp. 969–
978. 
[17] J. Heidemann, M. Klier, and F. Probst, “Identifying key 
users in online social networks: A PageRank based 
approach,” Proc. The 31st International Conference of 
Information Systems (ICIS 2010), AIS, Dec. 2010, pp. 79. 
[18] G. 
S. 
Mahalakshmi, 
K. 
Koquilamballe, 
and 
S. 
Sendhilkumar, “Influential detection in Twitter using 
Tweet 
quality 
analysis,” 
Proc. 
2nd 
International 
Conference on Recent Trends and Challenges in 
Computational Models (ICRTCCM 2017), IEEE, Feb. 
2017, pp. 315–319. 
[19] J. Torres, G. Baquerizo, C. Vaca, and E. Peláez, 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

“Characterizing influential leaders of Ecuador on Twitter 
using computational intelligence,” Proc. 3rd International 
Conference on eDemocracy & eGovernment (ICEDEG 
2016), IEEE, Mar. 2016, pp. 159–163. 
[20] X. Lin and W. Han, “Opinion leaders discovering in 
social networks based on complex network and DBSCAN 
cluster,” Proc. 14th International Symposium on 
Distributed Computing and Applications for Business 
Engineering and Science (DCABES 2015), IEEE, Aug. 
2015, pp. 292–295. 
[21] D. Grugl, R. Guha, D. Liben-Nowell, and A. Tomkins, 
“Information diffusion through blogspace,” Proc. The 
13th international conference on World Wide Web 
(WWW 2004), ACM, May, 2004, pp. 491–501. 
[22] E. Adar and L. A. Adamic, “Tracking information 
epidemics 
in 
blogspace,” 
Proc. 
The 
2005 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web 
Intelligence (WI 2005), IEEE, Sep. 2005, pp. 207–214. 
[23] I. Anger and C. Kittl, “Measuring influence on Twitter,” 
Proc. The 11th International Conference on Knowledge 
Management and Knowledge Technologies (i-KNOW 
2011), ACM, Sep. 2011, article 31. 
[24] H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, “What is Twitter, 
a social network or a news media?” Proc. The 19th  
international conference on World wide web (WWW 
2010), ACM, Apr. 2010, pp. 592–600. 
[25] M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Benevenuto, and K. P. Gummadi, 
“Measuring user influence in Twitter: The million 
follower 
fallacy,” 
Proc. 
the 
Fourth 
International 
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM 
2010), AAAI, Jun. 2010, pp. 10–17. 
[26] J. W, E. P. Lim, J. Jiang, and Q. He, “Twitterrank: 
Finding topic-sensitive influential Twitterers,” Proc. the 
3rd International Conference on Web Search and Data 
Mining (WSDM 2010), ACM, Feb, 2010, pp. 261–270. 
[27] K. Subbian and P. Melville, “Supervised rank aggregation 
for predicting influencers in Twitter,” Proc. Third 
International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and 
Trust and Third International Conference on Social 
Computing (PASSAT and SocialCom 2011), IEEE, Oct, 
2011, pp. 661–665. 
[28] Y. Blanco-Fernández, M. Lopez-Nores, J. J. Pazos-Arias, 
and M. I. Martín-Vicente, “Spreading influence values 
over weighted relationships among users of several social 
networks,” Proc. International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing and Communications Workshops (PerCom 
2012), IEEE, Mar. 2012, pp. 149–154. 
[29] IZEA, https://izea.com/ [retrieved: Jun. 2019] 
[30] L. Li, C. Chen, W. Huang, K. Xie, and F. Cai, “Explore 
the effects of opinion leader’s characteristics and 
information on consumer's purchase intention: Weibo 
case,” Proc. 15th International Conference on Service 
Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM 2018), IEEE, 
Jul. 2018, pp. 1–6. 
[31] S. Stieglitz and L. Dang-Xuan, “Emotions and 
information diffusion in social media—Sentiment of 
microblogs 
and 
sharing 
behavior,” 
Journal 
of 
Management Information Systems, vol. 29, no. 4, 2013, 
pp. 217–248. 
[32] C. J. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “VADER: A parsimonious 
rule- based model for sentiment analysis of social media 
text,” Proc. International Conference on Weblogs and 
Social Media (ICWSM 2014), AAAI, May. 2014, pp. 
216–225. 
[33] Statista. “Distribution of unsuccessfully funded projects 
on crowdfunding platform Kickstarter as of April 2018, 
by 
share 
of 
funding 
reached,” 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/251732/overview-of- 
unsuccessfully-funded-projects-on-crowdfunding-
platform- kickstarter/ [retrieved: Jun. 2019] 
[34] J. 
Devillers, 
“Strengths 
and 
weaknesses 
of 
the 
Backpropagation Neural Network in QSAR and QSPR 
studies,” Neural Networks in QSAR and Drug Design. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1996. 
[35] Keras, https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/keras [retrieved: 
Jun. 2019] 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-728-3
ICIW 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services

