MAC Protocol for Ad Hoc Network Using Smart Antenna with Pulse/Tone Exchange
Jing Ma, Hiroo Sekiya, Nobuyoshi Komuro, Shiro Sakata
Graduate School of Advanced Integration Science, Chiba University
1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba, 263-8522 Japan
Email: maggie@graduate.chiba-u.jp, sekiya@faculty.chiba-u.jp, kmr@faculty.chiba-u.jp, sakata@faculty.chiba-u.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes a MAC protocol for smart
antenna used networks. The basic idea is that the Pulse/Tone
exchange, instead of the RTS/CTS handshake, is applied prior
to the data transmission. By only changing the transmission
initiation method, we can obtain four advantages. First,
collisions due to general hidden-node problem can be reduced.
Second, the collision between the control frame and the
DATA frame due to the directional hidden-node problem
can be mitigated. Third, the transmission delay can be
reduced by using the ﬁxed contention window value. Finally,
the overhead can be reduced because the duration of the
Pulse/Tone exchange is much shorter than that of the RTS/CTS
handshake. As a result, the higher network throughput can be
achieved compared with previous protocols. Simulation results
demonstrate the validity and eﬀectiveness of the proposed
protocol.
Keywords-Smart antennas; ad hoc networks; Pulse/Tone.
I. Introduction
Recently,
wireless
communication
systems
using
a
beamforming of the smart antenna have attracted many
researchers‘ attention [2–6]. Smart antennas provide two
separate modes. One is the omni-mode, where the antenna
radiates in omni-directions. The other is the directional
mode, where the antenna can point its main lobe towards
any speciﬁed direction. A MAC protocol for smart antenna
used networks was proposed in [2], in which IEEE 802.11
with RTS/CTS is applied to smart antenna used networks.
Because the spatial-reusability eﬃciency is enhanced by
using smart antennas, the network throughput can be
improved. However, there are two dominant factors for
degrading the network throughput. One is the collision
occurrence. Collisions often occur between two control
frames due to general hidden-node problem. Additionally,
collisions
between
the
control
frame
and
the
DATA
frame due to the directional hidden-node problem newly
occur in smart antenna used networks. The other factor
is the transmission delay due to the deafness problem.
The deafness problem is a typical drawback for smart
antenna used networks. When the transmission fails, the
transmitter cannot understand the cause for transmission
failure. The transmitter initiate the retransmission with
doubled contention window value(CW) in all cases, because
the eﬀect of the transmission failure caused by the collision
is larger than that due to the eﬀect of the transmission failure
caused by the deafness problem. The binary exponential
increase in the CW value causes the transmission delay.
On the other hand, narrow-band and short-time in-band
signals, called Pulse and Tone hereafter, are proposed in [7].
According to [7], it is suﬃcient for nodes to detect the Pulse
or Tone signal in 5 µs, which is much shorter than the
control frame length, e.g. RTS and CTS frames. Therefore,
the simultaneous transmission of Pulse or Tone signals from
multiple nodes rarely occurs. Additionally, the Pulse or Tone
signal does not interfere with frames. The characteristics of
Pulse and Tone signals are suitable to avoid collisions which
occur between the control frame and the DATA frame due
to the directional hidden-node problem.
This paper proposes a MAC protocol for smart antenna
used networks. Each node has only one transceiver in the
proposed system. The basic idea is that the Pulse/Tone
exchange, instead of the RTS/CTS handshake, is applied
to
smart
antenna
used
networks.
By
only
changing
the transmission initiation method, we can obtain four
advantages. First, collisions due to general hidden-node
problem
can
be
reduced,
because
the
simultaneous
transmission of Pulse or Tone signals from multiple
nodes rarely occurs. Second, the collision between the
control frame and the DATA frame due to the directional
hidden-node problem can be mitigated, because the Pulse
or Tone signal does not interfere with DATA frames. Third,
the transmission delay can be reduced by using the ﬁxed
contention window value. Because collisions due to the
general or directional hidden-node problem rarely occur
by using Pulse/Tone exchange, it can be stated that the
reason for transmission initiation failure is the deafness
problem. Therefore, the retransmission is conducted using
the ﬁxed CW, which can achieve the transmission delay
reduction. Finally, the overhead can be reduced because the
duration of the Pulse/Tone exchange is much shorter than
that of the RTS/CTS handshake. As a result, the higher
network throughput can be achieved compared with previous
protocols. Simulation results demonstrate the validity and
eﬀectiveness of the proposed protocol.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The related
work is discussed in Section 2. In Section 3, the details of the
proposed protocol is introduced. Performance evaluations
are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

D
S
D
S
RTS
CTS
N1
DATA
NAV
N1
RTS
Backoff
Beam of S
Beam of D
Beam of N1
Collision
A slot time
Backoff
Fig. 1.
An example scenario of the collision due to the directional
hidden-node problem in the DMAC protocol.
D
X
S
RTS
CTS
RTS
RTS
DATA
ACK
RTS
CTS
Backoff
Backoff
Backoff
Transmission 
delay
Beam of X
X
D
S
Beam of S
Beam of D
Fig. 2.
The transmission failure example due to the deafness problem in
the DMAC protocol.
II. Related Works
Wireless communications in smart antenna used networks
can enhance the spatial reusability of the network [2–6]. The
DMAC (Directional Medium Access Control) [2] protocol
is a basic MAC protocol for smart antenna used networks.
In the DMAC protocol, a channel is reserved by using
RTS/CTS handshakes. Because all frames are transmitted
in the directional mode, the network spatial-reusability
eﬃciency is high. Therefore, the throughput can be improved
compared with the omni-directional antenna networks.
However, the network throughput is degraded because of
two dominant factors in the DMAC protocol. One is the
control frame collisions due to general hidden-node problem.
This kind of collision often occurs when control frames
are transmitted by multiple nodes simultaneously when the
oﬀered load is heavy. Additionally, collisions between the
control frame and the DATA frame due to the directional
hidden-node problem newly appear in the smart antenna
used networks. Fig. 1 shows an example scenario of a
collision due to the directional hidden-node problem. In
Fig. 1, we consider the case that the node N1 communicates
with a certain node, which is in the opposite direction
of the node S. In this case, the node S cannot hear the
RTS/CTS handshake between the nodes S and D. There is a
possibility that the node N1 transmits an RTS-frame to the
node D after the previous communication. Therefore, the
RTS-frame transmission of the node N1 interferes with the
DATA-frame transmission of the node S. In this case, the
frame transmissions from both the nodes S and N1 are in
failure. In Fig. 1, the node N1 is a hidden node of the node
S due to the smart-antenna usage. Therefore, this collision
problem is called ”directional hidden-node problem”.
The other factor is the deafness problem, which causes the
transmission delay according to [2]. The deafness problem
is a typical drawback for smart antenna used networks.
When a transmitter transmits an RTS frame to a receiver,
which transmits or receives a frame to or from another
node, the deafness problem occurs. Since the receiver is
beamformed toward the direction away from the transmitter,
the receiver is unable to hear the RTS frame transmission.
Fig. 2 shows an example of transmission failure due to the
deafness problem in the DMAC protocol. Since node X is
beamforming toward node D, node X cannot comprehend
the RTS frame transmission from node S. Accordingly,
node S cannot receive the CTS frame for response. Then,
node S retransmits the RTS frame after the BT decreases
to 0. The initial BT value is set randomly in the range
of 0 to CW. When the RTS frame transmission fails, the
CW is doubled and the BT is reset. This kind of binary
exponential increase in the CW can reduce the RTS frame
collision probability. However, if the transmission failure is
caused by the deafness problem, then the binary exponential
increase in the CW causes wastage of channel resources, as
shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, node S fails in the RTS/CTS
handshake process due to the deafness problem. It is not
necessary to double the CW when the transmitter retransmits
the RTS frame. In the DMAC protocol, the transmitter
cannot understand the reason for the transmission failures.
When an RTS frame retransmission is needed, the CW is
doubled in all cases. This is because the throughput decrease
due to the eﬀect of the transmission failure caused by the
hidden-node problem is larger than that due to the eﬀect of
the transmission failure caused by the deafness problem.
III. Proposed MAC protocol
In this paper, a MAC protocol for ad hoc networks with
smart antennas is proposed. The basic idea is that the
Pulse/Tone exchange, instead of the RTS/CTS handshake,
is applied to smart antenna used networks. In the proposed
protocol, we only focus on the MAC protocol design. It
is assumed that each node knows all the neighbor nodes
and their directions, which is the same assumption as the
smart-antenna systems [2], [5]. There are some techniques
for identifying the node positions. GPS technique [3] is one
of the methods which determine the location of a node in the
network. Fig. 3 shows a ﬂowchart of the proposed protocol
for the transmitter. Compared with the DMAC protocol,
the short-duration Pulse/Tone exchange is conducted prior
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

CW 㻩㻌CWmin
Decrement of BT
Pulse transmiting
Success of Tone 
reception 㻫
DATA transmission
Success of ACK 
reception 㻫
End
No
No
Yes
Yes
CW= 2×CW
CW= α×CW
Fig. 3.
Flowchart of the proposed protocol.
to the DATA-frame transmission instead of the RTS/CTS
handshakes in the proposed protocol.
Pulse and Tone are narrow-band and short-time in-band
signals [7]. According to [7], it is suﬃcient for nodes to
detect the Pulse or Tone signal in 5 µs, which is much shorter
than the control frame length, e.g. RTS and CTS frames.
Therefore, the simultaneous transmission of Pulse or Tone
signals from multiple nodes rarely occurs. Additionally, the
Pulse or Tone signal does not interfere with frames. Because
of the characteristic of Pulse and Tone signals, Pulse and
Tone signals can be exchanged within only one time slot [8].
In the proposed protocol, Pulse/Tone exchange, instead of
RTS/CTS handshake, is conducted at the ﬁnal count of the
backoﬀ timer (BT).
A. The proposed protocol design
A node, which has no transmission frame, is in the idle
state with omni-mode. When a node has a transmission
frame, it sets the BT and senses the channel in omni-mode.
If the transmitter conﬁrms that the channel is idle, it transfers
to directional mode, requests the physical layer to beamform
toward the receiver, and sends a Pulse signal. After that, the
transmitter sets a Tone-wait timer and waits for the Tone
signal in the directional mode. If the transmitter detects the
Tone signal, it starts transmitting a DATA frame. Inversely,
if the transmitter cannot detect the Tone signal during the
Tone-wait timer duration, it transfers to the omni-mode
and sets the BT again with the ﬁxed CW, namely α=1 in
Fig. 3. After transmitting the DATA-frame, the transmitter
sets an ACK-frame-wait timer. If the transmitter receives an
ACK-frame from the receiver successfully, the transmission
process is ﬁnished successfully. If the transmitter cannot
receive the ACK-frame from the receiver, it sets the BT
again after doubling the CW value as shown in Fig. 3.
SlotTime
SlotTime
D
X
Pulse
Tone
DATA
SIFS
Pulse
Tone
DATA
Backoff
SIFS
SIFS
SIFS
Data Channel
Pulse Channel
Tone Channel
Total bandwidth
Fig. 4.
Pulse/Tone exchange process.
Nodes, which detect the Pulse signal, reply a Tone signal
and prepare to receive a DATA frame in directional mode.
Nodes, which only detect the Tone signal, will freeze their
transmissions of the Tone detected direction.
B. Features of the proposed protocol
In the proposed protocol, each node is only required
to have one transceiver. The Pulse/Tone exchange, instead
of the RTS/CTS handshake, is applied prior to the DATA
frame transmission in smart antenna used networks. By
only changing the transmission initiation method, we can
obtain four advantages. First, collisions due to general
hidden-node problem can be reduced. Second, the collision
between the control frame and DATA frame due to the
directional hidden-node problem can be mitigated. Third, the
transmission delay can be reduced by using the ﬁxed CW.
Finally, the overhead can be largely reduced. As a result, the
network throughput can be eﬀectively improved.
1) Reduction of frame collisions due to the general
hidden-node
problem.:
Fig.
4
shows
the
Pulse/Tone
exchange process in the proposed protocol. In Fig. 4, the
transmitter X sends a Pulse to the receiver D prior to the
DATA frame transmission. The duration of the Pulse/Tone
exchange is only one slot time, which is 20 µs in IEEE
802.11b, as shown in Fig. 4. The probability that multiple
Pulses are sent simultaneously is much lower than the
probability of DATA frame collisions. As a result, DATA
frame collisions due to the general hidden-node problem are
eﬀectively inhibited.
2) Mitigation of directional hidden-node problem:
By using Pulse/Tone exchanges, collisions between the
control frame and the DATA frame due to the directional
hidden-node problem can be mitigated. Fig. 5 shows an
example for avoiding the collision due to the directional
hidden-node in the proposed protocol. As shown in Fig. 5,
the Pulse/Tone exchanges are carried out only one time slot
at the ﬁnal count of the BT. Therefore, the probability of the
concurrent transmission of the Pulse signals from multiple
nodes is very low. In the shown scenario in 5, when the
node N1 ﬁnishes the previous communication and wants to
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

P
:Pulse T
:Tone
D
S
N1
NAV
Backoff
T
P
T
A slot time
Pulse
Tone
SIFS
Pulse
Tone
Backoff
SIFS
DATA
ACK
S
D
D
S
N1
Beam of S
Beam of D
Beam of N1
P
Backoff
P
Backoff
Fig. 5.
An example of mitigating the directional hidden-node problem in
the proposed protocol.
D
X
S
Beam of X
X
D
S
Beam of S
Beam of D
: Pulse T : Tone
P
P
P
P
P
P
T
Backoff
ACK
DATA
T
Backoff
Backoff
Backoff
DATA
Transmission 
delay reduction
Fig. 6.
An example of reducing the transmission delay due to the deafness
problem in the proposed protocol.
transmit a new frame to the node D, the node N1 is unaware
of the communication between the nodes S and D. In this
case, the node N1 sends a Pulse signal as shown in Fig. 5.
Because the Pulse signal does not interfere with the frame,
the node D can receive the DATA-frame from the node S
successfully. This means that the directional hidden-node
problem is solved by using Pulse/Tone exchanges.
3) The transmission delay reduction: Fig. 6 shows an
example of reducing the transmission delay due to the
deafness problem in the proposed protocol. Node S transmits
a Pulse to node X, as shown in Fig. 6. Since node X
communicates with node D, node S cannot detect a Tone
for response. Thus, node S recognizes that node X is busy
communicating with another node in another direction. This
is because the probability of Pulse-transmission overlapping
due to the hidden-node problem is very low. Therefore, node
S retransmits a Pulse with the ﬁxed CW, namely α = 1 in
Fig. 3. As a result, the network throughput can be improved
by applying the Pulse/Tone exchange due to the transmission
delay reduction.
4) The overhead reduction: In the proposed protocol, the
Pulse/Tone exchange is conducted prior to the DATA frame
transmission instead of RTS/CTS frame handshake. Because
the duration of the Pulse/Tone exchange is much shorter than
that of the RTS/CTS handshake [1], [7], the overhead can
be largely reduced by using Pulse/Tone exchange instead of
RTS/CTS handshake.
By the way, because Pulse and Tone signals do not contain
any information, the all nodes, which only detect the Tone
signal, freeze their transmission processes in the proposed
protocol. It seems that many exposed node will appear
in this proposed protocol. Smart antennas are, however,
applied in the proposed system. By using smart antennas,
the transmission range can be squeezed. Therefore, exposed
nodes appearance is limited. The exposed nodes appearance
due to the Pulse/Tone exchange is not a serious problem in
the proposed protocol.
IV. Performance Evaluations
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed
protocol, we have simulated ad hoc networks implementing
the proposed protocol and other conventional protocols
using a simulation program written in C. In order to
conﬁrm the credibility of our simulator, the throughputs
of the IEEE 802.11 DCF obtained using our simulator
were veriﬁed to be the same as those obtained using the
NS-2 simulator. The eﬀects of PHY and upper layer are
not included in the results of this paper. Additionally, it
is assumed that the bandwidth consumption of the in-band
Pulse and Tone signals is negligible compared to the
bandwidth of the data channel. This assumption is the
same as assumptions in [7], [8]. Each node has both the
omni mode and the directional mode with an adaptive array
antenna. Generally, directional transmissions have larger
transmission range than omni-directional transmissions.
Therefore, the directional beamforming may potentially
interfere with communications taking place far away. In this
paper, however, we would like to focus on the gains from
spatial reuse exclusively. Therefore, it is assumed that the
transmission range of the directional antenna is the same as
that of the omni-directional antenna. Each node can know
all neighbor nodes and their directions. Receivers can know
the transmitter direction by receiving frames and the sensing
Pulse or Tone signals in the omni-mode. It is possible for
the nodes to transmit only one frame or one signal at a time.
A. Simulation parameters and results
The simulation parameters are given in Table I, which
basically follow those in IEEE 802.11b standard [1].
Data-channel and control-channel rates are 11 Mbps and
1 Mbps, respectively. Both the Pulse and Tone signals are
sent for 5 µs duration [7]. Nodes are placed in the 300 m
× 300 m square area at random. Each node randomly
selects one of the neighbor nodes as a receiver. The traﬃc
model follows the Poisson arrival. The node mobility is not
considered in this paper. The angle of the antenna beam is
set to π/2. In this paper, MAC protocol using smart antennas
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Table I
Simulation parameters.
Antenna type
Adaptive antenna array antenna
Angle of antenna beam
π/2
Node density
9.11×10−4 nodes/ m2
Transmission range
135 m
PHY layer
IEEE 802.11b
Data channel rate
11 Mbps
Control channel rate
1 Mbps
Slot time
20 µs
DIFS time
50 µs
SIFS time
10 µs
Minimum CW size
31 slot
Max CW size
1023 slot
Frame payload
1024 bytes
RTS-frame length
20 bytes
CTS/ACK-frame length
14 bytes
Pulse/Tone tx time
5 µs
Simulation area
300 m × 300 m
Simulation time
20 s
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
DMAC
Proposed(α=2)
Proposed(α=1)
Average throughput (Mbps)
Offered load at each node (Mbps)
Fig. 7.
Average throughput as a function of the oﬀered load at each node.
(DMAC) [2] and the proposed protocol (Proposed) are
investigated. Additionally, the proposed protocol is evaluated
for α=1 and 2, where α is deﬁned as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 7 shows the average throughput as a function
of oﬀered load at each node for 9.11×10−4 nodes/m2
of node density. Additionally, Figs. 8 and 9 show the
average of backoﬀ time (Aver backoﬀ) and overhead time
(Aver overhead) per one DATA-frame transmission success
as functions of oﬀered load at each node. Aver backoﬀ,
and Aver overhead are deﬁned as ratio of the total backoﬀ
time to the number of the DATA-frame transmission success
and ratio of the total control-frame-transmission duration
to the number of the DATA-frame transmission successes,
respectively.
Here,
the
total
control-frame-transmission
duration includes RTS-, CTS-, and ACK-frame transmission
periods. Pulse and Tone signal durations are not included in
the overhead time since Pulse/Tone exchanges are conducted
in the ﬁnal time slot in the backoﬀ stage.
It is seen from Fig. 7 that the proposed protocol provides
0
50
100
150
200
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Offered load (Mbps)
Average backoff time per one DATA-frame 
transmission success (Aver_backoff)  (time slots/frame)
DMAC
Proposed(α=2)
Proposed(α=1)
Fig. 8.
The average backoﬀ periods per successful frame transmission at
each node.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Offered load (Mbps)
Average overhead time per one DATA-frame 
transmission success (Aver_overhead)  (time slots/frame)
DMAC
Proposed(α=2)
Proposed(α=1)
Fig. 9.
The average overhead per successful frame transmission at each
node.
the higher throughput than DMAC. This is because the
collisions due to the general and directional hidden-node
problem are reduced by applying the Pulse/Tone exchanges,
as well as the overhead is largely reduced in the proposed
protocol. DMAC suﬀers from frame collisions and the
deafness problem. It can be conﬁrmed from Fig. 8 that
DMAC achieves the highest Aver backoﬀ. This is because
collisions cause many retransmission, as well as the deafness
problem causes the transmission delay. In the proposed
protocol, by using the Pulse/Tone exchange, collisions can
be reduced. Therefore, it can be conﬁrmed from Fig. 8
that Aver backoﬀ of the proposed protocol is much lower
than that of DMAC. Additionally, the overhead is reduced
compared with DMAC. It can be conﬁrmed in Fig. 9 that
Aver overhead of the proposed protocol is lower than that
of DMAC. As a result, the proposed protocol achieves the
higher throughput compared with DMAC.
In addition, it is seen from Fig. 7 that the throughput
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
Average throughput (Mbps)
Density (nodes /m  )
×10-4
2
DMAC
Proposed(α=2)
Proposed(α=1)
Fig. 10.
Average throughput as a function of the node density
of the proposed protocol for α=1 is higher than that for
α=2. This is because transmission delay induced by the
deafness problem is reduced by retransmitting with the
ﬁxed CW in the proposed protocol for α=1. It can be
conﬁrmed from Fig. 8 that the proposed protocol for α=1
shows lower Aver backoﬀ than that for α=2. Therefore,
the transmission delay reduction enhances the network
throughput by using the ﬁxed CW value. By the way, it
is seen from Fig. 9 that the Aver overhead of the proposed
protocol for α=1 is a little higher than that of the proposed
protocol for α=2. This is because ﬁxing the CW increases
the retransmission probability in the proposed protocol for
α=1. Note that the positive factor of the transmission delay
reduction can overcome the negative factor of the increase
in retransmissions, which can be conﬁrmed in Figs. 8 and 9.
Fig. 10 shows the average throughput as a function of the
node density for 2.5 Mbps of oﬀered load. It is seen from
Fig. 10 that the throughput decreases as the node density
increases for all the protocols. When the node density is
high, it is inevitable that the network throughput is degraded
due to collisions. However, it is seen from Fig. 10 that the
proposed protocol for α=1 achieves the highest throughput
regardless of the node density. In the proposed protocol, the
positive factor of the collision reduction, the transmission
delay reduction, and the overhead reduction improves the
network throughput even if the node density is high.
Additionally, it is seen from Fig. 10 that the throughput
diﬀerence between the proposed protocol for α=1 and that
for α=2 becomes small as the node density increases. As the
node density increases, the possibility that the transmitter
detects the unexpected Tone signals becomes high in spite
of the smart antenna used networks. Therefore, most of the
Pulse/Tone exchanges are in success. Therefore, the behavior
of the proposed protocol for α=1 is almost the same as
that for α=2 as the node density increases. In this case, the
DATA-frame collisions due to the directional-hidden node
problem occur.
V. Conclusions
This paper has proposed a MAC protocol for smart
antenna
used
networks.
The
basic
idea
is
that
the
Pulse and Tone signals are exchanged, instead of the
RTS/CTS handshake, prior to the data transmission. In
the proposed protocol, ﬁrst, collisions due to general
hidden-node problem can be reduced. Second, the collision
between the control frame and the DATA frame due to
the directional hidden-node problem can be mitigated.
Third, the transmission delay can be reduced by using
the ﬁxed contention window value. Finally, the overhead
can be reduced because the duration of the Pulse/Tone
exchange is much shorter than that of the RTS/CTS
handshake. As a result, the higher network throughput can
be achieved compared with previous protocols. Simulation
results demonstrate the validity and eﬀectiveness of the
proposed protocol.
References
[1] IEEE 802.11 Standard: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcation, IEEE, 1999.
[2] R. R. Choudhury, X. Yang, R. Ramanathan, and N. H. Vaidya,
“Using Directional Antennas for Medium Access Control in
Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. ACM MobiCom, Atlanta, Georgia,
USA, pp.59-70, Sept. 2002.
[3] S. Motegi, H. Sekiya, J. Ma, K. Sanada, and S. Sakata, “A
directional MAC protocol with the DATA-frame fragmentation
and short busy advertisement signal for mitigating the
directional hidden node problem, “ Proc. PIMRC‘ 12, Sydney,
Australia, Sept. 2012.
[4] J. L. Bordim, K. Nakano, ”Deafness Resilient MAC Protocol
for Directional Communications,” IEICE TRANSACTIONS on
Information and Systems, Vol.E93-D, No.12, pp.3243-3250,
2010.
[5] K. Sundaresan, R. Sivakumar, “Cooperating with smartness:
using heterogeneous smart antennas in multihop wireless
networks,” Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol.10,
no.12, pp.1666-1680, Dec. 2011.
[6] K. Takano, S. Shiokawa, ”Fairness aware back-oﬀ control
scheme in wireless network using directional MAC protocol”,
IEICE Tech. Rep., vol.110, no.449, IN2010-187, pp.259-264,
March 2011. (in Japanese)
[7] Fouad A. Tobagi and L. Kleinrock, ”Packet switching in
radio channels: part II- the hidden terminal problem in carrier
sense multiple-access and the busy-tone solution, “ IEEE
Transactions on Communications, COM-23(12), Dec. 1975.
[8] K. P. Shih, W. H. Liao, H. C. Chen, and C. M. Chou, “On
avoiding RTS collisions for IEEE 802.11-based wireless ad hoc
networks,” Computer Communications, vol.32, no.1, pp.69-77,
Jan. 2009.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

