Study on Use-Cases of Open Source Management and Orchestration Framework in 
5G Projects 
 
Andra Ciobanu, Cosmin Conțu, Eugen Borcoci 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest - UPB 
Bucharest, Romania 
Emails: andraciobanu90@yahoo.com, cosmin.contu@elcom.pub.ro, eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract — Open Source Management and Orchestration 
(OSM) is an European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI) hosted project supporting the development of 
Open 
Source 
Network 
Function 
Virtualization 
(NFV) 
Management and Orchestration (MANO) software stack 
aligned with ETSI NFV. This short paper is focused on the 
introduction of OSM and studies some real use cases on the 
market and in the same time brings out a new possible use case 
in order to evidence its flexibility. The paper will prepare 
future work of the authors, to migrate from a previous 
approach 
based 
on 
only 
Service 
programming 
and 
orchestration for virtualized software networks (SONATA) 
framework, to the more comprehensive OSM. A comparison 
between OSM and SONATA is provided here. 
Keywords — Network Function Virtualization; Software 
Defined Networking; Cloud computing; Open Source Mano; 
SONATA; Orchestration; Use case 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telecommunication infrastructures include a large range 
of   specific technologies from specialized domains such as 
radio, access, transport, and core and (virtualized) data center 
networks. Designing, deploying and operating end-to-end 
(E2E) services on top of the above infrastructure are 
commonly manual and long processes performed via 
traditional Operation Support Systems (OSS) resulting in 
long lead times (weeks or months) until effective service 
delivery [1]. Moreover, the involved workflows are 
commonly hampered by infrastructures strongly coupled to 
physical topologies and hardware-specific constraints.  
Technological advances under the ages of Software 
Defined Networking (SDN) [2] in cooperation with Network 
Function Virtualization (NFV) bring new ways in which 
network operators can create, deploy, and manage their 
services. SDN and NFV, as well as cloud/edge computing 
support the introduction of novel services, and systems while 
meeting specific requirements and objectives (e.g., a 
customer requesting a specific network service). Altogether, 
the process shall be timely, consistent, secure, and lead to 
cost reduction due to automation and virtualization. We refer 
to Network Service Orchestration (NSO) as the automated 
management and control processes involved in services 
deployment 
and 
operations 
performed 
mainly 
by 
telecommunication operators and service providers [3]. 
However, to realize this paradigm, there is a need to 
model the E2E service and have the ability to abstract and 
automate the control of physical and virtual resources 
delivering the service. The coordinated set of activities 
behind such process is commonly referred to as 
orchestration. 
In this paper, a new orchestration framework has been 
studied and used, i.e., Open Source MANO (OSM). The 
reason for this is that a previous framework SONATA and 
project itself is today considered as a part of entire OSM; it is 
not going to be treated alone anymore in the future, but as an 
integrated part of OSM. 
OSM is an ETSI-hosted open source community 
delivering a production-quality MANO stack for NFV, 
capable of consuming openly published information models, 
available to everyone, suitable for all Virtualized Network 
Functions (VNFs), operationally significant and Virtual 
Infrastructure Management (VIM)-independent. OSM is 
aligned to NFV Industry Specification Group (ISG) 
information models while providing first-hand feedback 
based on its implementation experience [4]. The first release 
of OSM was in October 2016 and in December 2019 they 
unveiled the latest release (Release SEVEN). 
The main purpose of this paper is to introduce OSM, 
compare it with SONATA framework from previous   
papers, present some specific use cases in order to 
understand the capabilities of the framework. Future work 
will test the OSM scalability properties and capabilities for 
using it to develop and test some custom VNFs from 
previous papers   along with developing Network Services 
(NSs) with OSM and OpenStack. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section I is 
introduction. Section II is an overview of related work and 
architecture of OSM framework and a short parallel with 
SONATA framework. Section III introduces use cases. 
Section IV presents conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK AND SHORT PARALLEL BETWEEN 
OSM AND SONATA 
This section presents a selective view on some related 
work dedicated to service development and orchestration in 
virtualized networks and its relation to OSM architecture, 
when applicable and introduces SONATA which is part of 
OSM.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 1 OSM Release Four Architecture Progression [4] 
 
OSM is innately a modular and model driven architecture 
(Figure 1) and has evolved steadily to adopt cloud native 
design principals. The OSM community adopted rapidly this 
modularity, given its better fit to the growing functionality 
and answer to the need of efficient operation.  
In the Release 4, the community rationalized the network 
to VNF Configuration (N2VC) module and the VNF. 
Configuration and Abstraction Task Force to support 
rapid progress on the VNF configuration functionality. The 
Information Model and Northbound API were combined 
under one module ensuring model/interface harmony in the 
system and to support a growing demand for vendor/user 
different options.  
The following OSM architectural entities (Figure 1) are 
shortly described below. 
IM-NBI contains the information model and northbound 
interface.  
The Service Orchestrator (SO) is responsible for E2E 
service orchestration and provisioning. The SO stores the 
VNF definitions and Network Services (NS) catalogs, 
manages workflow of the service deployment and can query 
the status of already deployed services. OSM integrates the 
rift.io orchestration engine as an SO [5]. 
The Resource Orchestrator (RO) is used to provision 
services and it orchestrates the resources necessary to 
compose a service over a particular IaaS provider in a given 
location. The RO component can deploy networking services 
over OpenStack, VMware, and OpenVIM.  The SO and RO 
components can be jointly mapped to the NFVO entity in the 
ETSI MANO architecture [5]. 
UI-Apps module refers to the new lightweight graphic 
user interface (GUI) of OSM. 
The DevOps module controls the Continuous Integration 
(CI) / Continuous Development (CD) pipeline optimizing the 
release process for the developers.  
The Network Service to VNF Communication (N2VC) 
Module is responsible for the plugin framework between the 
SO and the VNF Configuration and Abstraction (VCA) layer 
[6]. 
The VNF Configuration and Abstraction (VCA) layer is 
responsible for enabling configurations, actions and 
notifications to/from the VNFs and/or Element Managers. 
When backed by Juju, it provides the facility to create 
generic or specific indirect-mode Virtualized Network 
Functions Managements (VNFMs), via charms   that can 
support the interface the VNF/EM chooses to export [6]. Juju 
is an open source modeling tool, composed of a controller, 
models, and charms, for operating software in the cloud. A 
charm is a collection of actions and hooks that encapsulate 
the operational logic of an application. 
The Monitoring Module (MON) should mostly be 
considered as a tool for driving monitoring configuration 
updates to the external monitoring tool and as a conduit for 
steering actionable events into the Service Orchestrator. 
These actionable events may be either directly triggered by 
running NS/VNFs or deduced by the external monitoring 
tools. Apache Kafka was used as the Monitoring Module 
message bus implementation. It is a fault-tolerant message 
passing system that supports a publish-subscribe model that 
aligns with the Monitoring Module’s architecture. Messages 
sent to or received from the Monitoring Module core will be 
passed via the message bus for both internal and external 
components of monitoring. Apache Kafka “topics” and 
“partitions” are used to segregate messages to MON [6]. 
SONATA is the acronym name of an EU-funded project 
who developed an NFV platform, which offers to service 
developers or operator an ecosystem for managing the full 
lifecycle of a network service [7]. 
It consists of three main modules: 
- 
Service Development Kit (SDK) which represents a 
set of models and tools that can be used to develop 
and test NS and VNFs. 
- 
Service Platform (SP) which is responsible in 
orchestrating the network resources by providing a 
MANO framework. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 2 SONATA Service Platform Architecture [9] 
 
- 
Validation and Verification (V&V) Platform Service 
which automatically manages the testing of 
services. 
SONATA is in a direct relationship with OSM due to the 
integration of SONATA’s emulator from the SDK module 
into OSM DevOps which was part of OSM Release THREE. 
This emulator assures an easier integration with MANO 
stacks due to its APIs, which resemble with the APIs offered 
by OpenStack [8]. Looking at Figure 2, the following 
components are shortly presented: 
The Service Platform which may be considered as an 
alternative to OSM, consists of a Gatekeeper, Management 
and Orchestration Framework, Slice Manager, Infrastructure 
Abstraction, Catalogue, Repository, Policy Manager, SLA 
Manager, Monitoring Manager and a Portal. 
Gatekeeper   ensures that the Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs) from the Service Platform are available to 
authorized users. 
MANO Framework is managing the lifecycle of the 
Network Service active instances. It is the most important 
component from the Service Platform. 
Network Slice Manager controls the deployment of 
multiple and isolated Network Services grouped in a 
Network Slice. 
Infrastructure Abstraction is responsible of creating a 
unified management of all available infrastructures. 
The Catalogue contains Virtual Network Functions 
(VNFs), Network Services (NS), Network Slice Templates 
(NSTs), etc.  
Repository stores information from Network Service and 
Network Slice instances. 
Policy Manager ensures the management of the policies 
used in Network Service instances.  
Service Level Agreement (SLA) Manager works like a 
plugin and it is responsible for the lifecycle management of 
the SLA during the entire Network Service lifecycle. 
Monitoring Manager collects data and displays the 
metrics through an interface. 
The Portal is the front-end component which ensures the 
access to the Service Platform through an user interface. 
As it was described, SONATA looks more like an OSM 
contributor than a competitor, having different components 
which are already compatible with OSM framework or 
which are easy to integrate. They already started a 
collaboration from OSM’s third release (which was already 
stated above). 
More than this short introduction and comparison, here 
are some pending and future works between SONATA and 
OSM.  
SONATA is also playing a central role in a white paper 
that OSM is currently writing about “Experience with NFV 
architecture, interfaces and information models”. A type of 
scenario is where the operator wants to cooperate with 
another operator to deliver the network service. For instance, 
it may devolve provision of the infrastructure, or of a 
specialist VNF, to another operator. The implication is that 
OSM needs an architecture that allows to orchestrate 
orchestrators and SONATA project contributes for this 
through its MANO framework. Another type of scenario 
involves modification to a network service, say ‘video 
delivery’. The internal operation of the service may vary 
according to the specific device type, content source and so 
on – hence the network service may consist of an initial 
firewall that steers a request into the appropriate chain of 
VNFs. In the SONATA project, the development of their 
pilots is helping OSM to explore and sort out some of these 
scenarios.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 3 5GTango (SONATA) in OSM [10] 
 
Regarding future work, there is 5GTANGO (the 5th 
SONATA Release) which is going to take the opportunity of 
the 7th OSM Hackfest to demonstrate the use of the 
standalone 5GTANGO V&V platform in an OSM 
environment. GTANGO has developed a unique V&V 
approach. V&V stands for verification and validation and 
aims at ensuring that a software application behaves 
according to its specification (verification) and users’ needs 
(validation). The 5GTANGO V&V environment is a multi-
MANO (targeting SONATA, OSM, ONAP) standalone test 
environment which streamlines the complete test chain: 
definition of reusable test plans across NS, reporting from 
the Service Platform with advanced analytics and reusable 
probes. Packaged with the 5GTANGO SDK, it becomes part 
of the developers’ continuous integration (CI) framework. 
[14] 
 
III. 
USE CASES FOR OSM NETWORK FUNCTION 
VIRTUALIZATION 
Network function virtualization proposes an architecture 
that allows operators to virtualize network functions in a 
high-performing, elastic and automated way.  Most of the 
early use cases are related to mobile networks in a move 
towards fifth generation (5G) technology and most 
implementations aim to have OpenStack as a Virtualization 
Infrastructure Manager (VIM), complemented with NFV 
orchestration platforms like the open source projects Open 
Source MANO (OSM) and Open Networking Automation 
Platform (ONAP.)  
OSM can reach common goals for global service 
providers, leading IT/cloud players and VNF providers, but 
also for 5G research projects. 
These 5G projects which use OSM to implement NVF 
MANO orchestration are very important for OSM 
community. Here are below, some examples of 5G projects 
and how OSM contributes to them:  
- 
5GTango [10]: In the context of OSM, this project 
has contributed with a VIM emulator, advanced 
NFV packages formats, network slicing and many 
automation efforts.  
 
- 
Metro-Haul [11]: is intended to build a smart optical 
metro infrastructure able to support traffic from 
different 5G access networks. OSM is the 
orchestrator in Metro-Haul, it deploys, manages and 
orchestrates 
the 
network 
services 
across 
disaggregated datacenters. It deploys VNFs across 
multiple datacenters in a network service; it creates 
L2 
VLANs 
over 
the 
underlying 
network 
infrastructure. 
There are also other 5G-oriented projects which use 
OSM 
(Matilda, 
5GCity, 
5G-MEDIA, 
5G-
TRANSFORMER). 
 The objective of this paper is to bring new 
functionalities and use cases from OSM which can be used 
for 5G over NFV and its application on the market in 
general. In order to bring new ideas, a study of the actual use 
cases of OSM has been done.   The conclusion is that OSM 
is used in: 
- 
Multi-site orchestration over disaggregated optical 
networks 
- 
Urban radio infrastructure 
- 
Media content distribution in core and edge cloud 
- 
Computing resources management in multi-point of 
presence scenarios. 
Next, this paper   proposes an OSM approach for an 
Internet of Vehicles (IoV) schema in Figure [4]. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 4 Implemented OSM slicing framework for vehicular applications. [13] 
 
IoV is seen as a global network of vehicles enabled by 
various Wireless Access Technologies (WAT). It involves 
Internet and includes heterogeneous access networks. IoV 
can be seen a special use case of Internet of Things (IoT). 
IoV Target domains includes the basic vehicular services like 
vehicles driving and safety, but adds novel domains: traffic 
management, automobile production repair and vehicle 
insurance, road infrastructure construction and repair, 
logistics and transportation, etc.  
IoV is a hot research domain exploiting the synergy 
between Cooperative Intelligent Transportation Systems (C-
ITS) and the IoT, which can greatly benefit of the upcoming 
development of 5G technologies. [12]. The variety of end-
devices, applications, and WATs in IoV calls for new 
networking schemes that assure the Quality of Service (QoS) 
demanded by the users. To this end, network slicing 
techniques (the slice is a dedicated, logical, isolated, virtual 
network sharing the same infrastructure with other slices) 
enable traffic differentiation with the aim of ensuring flow 
isolation, resource assignment, and network scalability. The 
development is based on a distributed Multi-Access Edge 
Computing (MEC) architecture, which provides flexibility 
for the dynamic placement of the Virtualized Network 
Functions (VNFs) in charge of managing network traffic. 
The solution is able to integrate heterogeneous radio 
technologies such as cellular networks and specific IoT 
communications with potential in the vehicular sector, 
creating isolated network slices without risking the Core 
Network (CN) scalability. 
The proposal presents two orchestration tiers, complaint 
with ETSI NFV-Management and Orchestration (MANO):  
The General Orchestrator (GO) and the Domain 
Orchestrator (Dos). The former is placed on the top of the 
system hierarchy in order to have control over the deployed 
slices. It consists of an OSM instance and of two micro-
services in the form of VNFs: The Slicing Manager (SM) 
and the Slice Creator (SCr). The SM processes the slice-
creation requests sent by the Slice Session Manager (SSM) 
placed in the MEC-node. When a request is received, the SM 
checks the requester subscription stored in the 5G CN’s 
Unified Data Repository (UDR); this functionality is 
equivalent to the one described for the Network Slice 
Selection Function (NSSF) in [13]. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Today, the OSM community is not only comprised of 
global service providers, leading IT/cloud players and VNF 
providers, but also many 5G research projects that are 
injecting more life, code and validation of the readiness of 
this NFV MANO implementation.  
This study was necessary for the future work of the 
authors which are going to integrate OSM in the 
infrastructure and experiments. This integration represents an 
upgrade to the current infrastructure which was build using 
SONATA framework. After the upgrade, all experiments 
which were already done with SONATA will be recreated 
using the new infrastructure. Afterwards, new experiments 
containing new functionalities included in OSM will be 
started.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Blue Planet Multi-Domain Service Orchestration [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.blueplanet.com/products/multi-
domain-service-orchestration.html 2019.12.06. 
[2] D. Kreutz, et al., “Software-defined networking: A 
comprehensive survey”, Proc. IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–
76, 2015. 
[3] R. Mijumbi et al., “Network function virtualization: state-of-
the-art and research challenges”, IEEE Commun. Surv. 
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 236-262, 2016  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

[4] OSM 
Release 
FIVE, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://osm.etsi.org/wikipub/index.php/OSM_Release_FIVE 
2019.12.11 
[5] Sagar Nangare, Incorporation of OpenStack and Open-Source 
MANO (OSM) for NFV Deployments, [Online]. Available 
from: https://dzone.com/articles/incorporation-of-openstack-
and-open-source-mano-os 2019.12.14 
[6] OSM Release FOUR Technical Overview, May 2018, 
[Online]. Available from: https://osm.etsi.org/images/OSM-
Whitepaper-TechContent-ReleaseFOUR-FINAL.pdf 
2019.12.15 
[7] SONATA, [Online]. Available from: https://www.sonata-
nfv.eu/ 2019.12.16 
[8] Research – OSM Public Wiki, [Online]. Available from: 
https://osm.etsi.org/wikipub/index.php/Research#Sonata 
2019.12.16 
[9] Service 
Platform, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sonata-nfv.eu/content/service-platform 
2019.12.16 
[10] R. Vilalta, P. Alemany, M. Peuster, E. Schilling and F. 
Vicens, "5GTANGO and OSM”, [Online]. Available from: 
http://osm-download.etsi.org/ftp/osm-5.0-five/5th-
hackfest/5G-Day/OSM%205G%20Day%20-
%20Session%203%20-
%20OSM%20in%205GTANGO%20by%20Ricard%20Vilalt
a%20CTTC.pdf 2019.12.18 
[11] Reza Nejabati, Metro-Haul, [Online]. Available from: 
http://osm-download.etsi.org/ftp/osm-5.0-five/5th-
hackfest/5G-Day/OSM%205G%20Day%20-
%20Session%201%20-
%20OSM%20in%20MetroHaul%20by%20Abubakar%20Mu
qaddas%20University%20of%20Bristol.pdf 2019.12.18 
[12] K. Katsaros and M. Dianati, “5G Mobile Communications. 
Springer”; Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany: 2017. A conceptual 
5G vehicular networking architecture; pp. 595–623. [Google 
Scholar] 
[13] Sanchez-Iborra, R.; Santa, J.; Gallego-Madrid, J.; Covaci, S.; 
and Skarmeta, A.’ “Empowering the Internet of Vehicles with 
Multi-RAT 5G Network Slicing”. Sensors 2019, 19, 3107.  
[14] 5GTANGO presents its Validation and Verification Platform 
in 
OSM 
Hackfest, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.5gtango.eu/blog/69-5gtango-presents-its-
validation-and-verification-platform-in-osm-hackfest.html 
2019.12.15
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

