Does Cloud Computing Matter? 
Networking IT and Services Value in Organizations 
 
Cheng-Chieh Huang 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University,  
Taipei, Taiwan 
d94725007@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—This article argues that cloud computing matters 
through interactions between organizations, IT, and cloud 
services. It illustrates the cloud computing value generation 
processes of Amazon, Google, IBM, and Microsoft and 
examines their strategies. Furthermore, this paper proposes 
value networking concepts and an ANT lens for future 
research on cloud computing and business values. 
Keywords-cloud computing; IT value, actor network theory 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since Carr [1] published his article “IT Doesn’t Matter” 
in the Harvard Business Review, scholars have started to 
reconsider the business value of information technology. 
Carr [1] argued that IT has become a kind of commodity like 
water or electricity, and is thus no longer specific strategic 
value to enterprise. The introduction of cloud computing 
partly reinforces Carr’s claims, by potentially outsourcing 
certain IT functions to a third party service. However, cloud 
computing is also considered as a strategic weapon, helping 
enterprises lower the costs and increase their competitiveness. 
Does cloud computing matter or not?  
Past literature on IT and business value divides IT value 
into two types. One, called technology determination, views 
IT as a strategic resource or innovative tool, and states that a 
specific IT can create value for organizations. Another, 
organization determination, claims that IT increases 
competitiveness when it’s aligned with organizational 
strategy.   
With this perspective, cloud computing appears to offer 
technical innovation, but not all organizations can enjoy the 
benefit immediately. It seems that IT and organizational 
value generation do not share a simple causal relationship [2].  
Furthermore, cloud computing is not only a technological 
innovation but also a service innovation. Thus, any 
evaluation that fails to consider the service advantages of 
cloud computing neglects an important characteristic.  
In this article, we consider the IT business value 
generated through dynamic interactions of organizations, IT 
artifacts and services.  We use the cloud computing 
development cases of Amazon, Google, IBM, and Microsoft 
to demonstrate how different business values emerged 
through the dynamic interactions within these companies. 
 We argue that while IT is more service-oriented, a 
network view is needed to fully understand the relationship 
between IT, services, and business values. As a result, we 
employ actor network theory (ANT) as a lens to illustrate the 
value of cloud computing and the implications of further 
research. 
In the following sections, we first review the literature of 
cloud computing and IT business value, and then propose an 
analytical framework. Next, we describe our methodology 
and use our research framework to illustrate four business 
case studies. Finally, we discuss our conclusions and identify 
contributions, limitations and suggestions for future research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Cloud Computing 
Cloud Computing generally refers to applications or IT 
resources delivered as services over the Internet, and the 
datacenter hardware and system software that provides those 
services. Definitions of cloud computing are diverse [3, 4]. 
Vaquero et al. provide one careful definition [4]: 
 
Clouds are a large pool of easily usable and accessible 
virtualized resources (such as hardware, development 
platforms and/or services). These resources can be 
dynamically re-configured to adjust to a variable load 
(scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilization. 
This pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use 
model in which guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure 
Provider by means of customized SLAs (p.51). 
 
From this definition, cloud computing functions not only 
as an enabling technology but also as a service model.  From 
the beginning, cloud computing has co-evolved as both a 
service and technology innovation (see Figure 1).  
This implies that evaluations of cloud computing such as 
Carr [1] cannot only examine its IT characteristics, but also 
its service of economic model. Evaluations of cloud 
computing must consider both aspects. 
 
75
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Hosting
ASP
Utility
Computing
Web Technology
•Computing Power
•Network Bandwidth
Web 
commercialization
Distributed
Computing
Grid
Computing
Cloud 
Computing
peer-to-peer
technology
virtualization
multi-tenancy
Service 
Model
Enabled
Technology
Service Model Innovation
Technology Innovation
•Web 1.0
•Web 2.0
Pay-by-use
Outsourcing
•Green IT
•Mobile Computing
 
Figure 1.  Co-evolution of Cloud Computing 
 
B. IT and Business Value 
Past literature on IT and business value focuses on three 
perspectives: assets, investments, and alignment (see Table 
1). The asset perspective views IT as a strategic resource or 
an innovation tool that when introduced to organizations 
generates value. For example, Lynntien argues that Internet 
computing technology brings the disruptive nature of 
innovation to organizations [5]. Additional studies claim that 
IT generates business value through its combination with 
other complementary organizational resources, such as 
human resources or business relations [6, 7]. 
The investment perspective looks past organizational 
characteristics or strategy and instead focuses on financial 
models, such as the real option model or productivity factor 
counting [8, 9]. This perspective is problematic however, as 
existing literatures increasingly argues that organizational 
characteristics 
influence 
IT 
investment 
and 
firm 
performance relations [10]. 
The alignment perspective considers how IT may 
improve 
a 
firm’s 
performance 
by 
fitting 
certain 
organizational needs or aligning with organization strategy 
[11][12]. However, this viewpoint largely fails to explain 
why certain Internet characteristics or cloud computing 
increase 
opportunities 
to 
strengthen 
a 
company’s 
competitiveness. 
 
TABLE I.  
LITERATURE REVIEW OF IT AND BUSINESS VALUE 
Perspectives 
IT and Business Value 
Literature 
assets 
IT as strategic resource 
[5] [6] [7] 
IT as innovation tool 
investments 
IT as investment 
[8] [9] [10] 
IT as productivity factor 
alignment 
IT organizational fit 
information processing 
[11] [12] 
IT aligned to business 
strategy 
 
 
Value of
Cloud Computing
Organization
IT 
Service
 
Figure 2.  Research Framework 
 
In summary, the potential relationship between IT and 
business value generation is not straightforward, but rather 
emerges through interactions between organization and IT 
[2]. 
 
C. Research Framework 
Based on the literature described above, we design a 
framework for examining the cloud computing value 
generation process within different organizations. A diagram 
of this framework is presented in Figure 2.  
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
In this paper, we use case study methodology [13] to 
examine cloud computing and business value. We selected 
four firms: two Internet service firms (Amazon, Google), and 
two technology vendors (IBM, Microsoft). These four firms 
are famous for their use of cloud computing. Our data 
sources include documentation on their cloud computing 
development histories, news reports, company reports, 
successful cases, and independent analysis reports such as 
IDC, Gartner, and Ovum [14]. We also interviewed high-
level managers to discuss their strategies and their 
perceptions on the values of cloud computing. All interviews 
were recorded. From this data, we use event analysis and our 
research framework to understand their value generation 
processes. 
 
IV. 
CASE STUDIES 
 
A. Amazon 
Headquartered in Seattle, Amazon was established in 
1994 as primarily an online bookstore. They soon expanded 
to flowers, software, electronic goods, toys, and eventually 
general retail items. Amazon was the first top 500 online 
retail business in the United States, with recorded profits in 
2009 of roughly 24 billion dollars. 
 
 
76
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Amazon Supply Chain
Partner’s Supply Chain
Partner’s Supply Chain
Partner’s Supply Chain
Cloud Services
 
Figure 3.  Amazon’s Cloud Comuting Strategy 
The development of cloud services at Amazon began in 
2003, when it first offered web services for its e-commerce 
partners. For example, partners who used Amazon’s online 
store to sell music CDs could use Amazon’s services to rank 
the latest music purchases and examine customer comments 
in order to better market and sell their products. These web 
services helped partners use Amazon as a promotional site 
for their goods.  
To better facilitate their small electronic store partners, 
Amazon gradually transferred their internal IT infrastructure 
to cloud services. This included such functions as storage 
(S3), server computing resources (EC2) and even e-
commerce business processes, such as fulfillment processes 
(FWS), payment processes (FPS), and personnel matching 
processes (Mechanical Turk). 
Through the development history of cloud computing at 
Amazon, we understand that Amazon first offered website 
design and development tools to help partners sell goods 
through Amazon’s online store. After integrating various 
kinds of services with partners, Amazon strengthens the 
competitiveness of its whole supply chain operation (see 
Figure 3). 
 
B. Google 
The largest online Internet search engine in the world, 
Google is headquartered in California and was established in 
1998. Relying on advertising revenue from its search engine 
business, Google earned 23.6 billion dollars in 2009. For 
several years now, Google has moved beyond online 
searching, as represented by its acquisition of YouTube, the 
development of the Android open source operating system, 
the Google Chrome Internet browser, Google Earth, and 
various cloud services.  
Google first announced its cloud services in 2005. The 
primary purpose of the Google API is to let consumers log 
into their websites frequently, increasing web traffic, and 
thus encouraging advertisers to place their ads on Google 
websites.  
 
 
 
Search
Engine
Google
API
Open
Social
Gmail
Google
Earth
Google
APE
YouTu
be
Google
Apps
Google
Chrome
Android
Mobile 
Phone 
OS
Traffic=$
 
 
Figure 4.  Google’s Cloud Comuting Strategy 
Later, Google developed various types of cloud services 
for both consumers and website designers, such as Google 
Docs, Google Financial, Google Spreadsheets, Google APE, 
and so fourth. 
For Google, search engine traffic is revenue (traffic=$). 
That is, services are developed and branches are merged to 
help improve traffic. For example, YouTube or Open Social 
API were acquired and merged or linked with other social 
community websites in order to increase their popularity and 
thus increase traffic. Through the new Android operating 
system and Google Chrome, Google hopes to connect cell 
phones and browsers directly to its search service, and make 
this service more convenient.  
As Figure 4 shows, cloud services support Google’s 
“traffic equals money” strategy, which attracts more 
consumers to its search engine and thus increases advertising 
revenue.  
 
 
C. IBM 
Established in 1924, IBM started with making enterprise 
information hardware, such as electronic calculators, large-
scale mainframes, and the first generation of personal 
computers. Recently, IBM has shifted its business towards 
services and software provided to large enterprises.  
IBM started developing cloud services to help its small 
independent software vendor (ISVs) partners located 
worldwide use IBM’s servers or storage capacity. This 
obviated the need for ISVs to invest in hardware/software, 
and allowed them to develop software through IBM’s own 
platform. Later, IBM developed their cloud computing 
technology into products that support their large enterprise 
customers in building their own cloud data center. IBM’s 
online cloud services help showcase their cloud computing 
technology solutions. 
 
 
77
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

On-Promise Market
Enterprise Market
Brick-and-Mortar Company
Cloud Service Market
SME Market
Online Service Company
 
 
Figure 5.  IBM’s Cloud Comuting Strategy 
 
IBM attempts to use the cloud computing technology 
products and leverage their consulting services and software 
implementation experiences in the large-scale enterprise and 
then explores to small and medium enterprises and on-line 
service companies market.  
Take her cloud services implementation experiences in 
UPS for example, IBM combined cloud services with their 
software implemented in UPS. IBM supported their 
customers, UPS and also touched UPS’s online partners. It is 
so-called two-sided market strategy includes the large-scale 
enterprise software service market (on-promise market) that 
IBM has already deeply engaged and new developing 
medium and small-scale online service companies (cloud 
service market).  
For IBM, cloud services and technology play a bridge 
role to explore on-line and small medium enterprise (SME) 
markets (see Figure 5). 
 
D. Microsoft 
 
Established in 1983, Microsoft was an early leader in 
computer operating systems and suite software on the 
personal computer with both its MS-DOS operating system 
and MS-Office software suite.  
Microsoft earned 58 billion dollars in profit in 2009. Its 
personal and commercial Office series accounts for more 
than 90% of the market.  
Despite its dominant market position, Microsoft realizes 
the growing trend towards online services, and that PC or on-
promise software are no longer the only choices. It is thus 
finding ways to combine its software expertise with online 
services.  
This is the concept of “software plus services” or “3 
screens and a cloud” that Microsoft announced in 2009. For 
Microsoft, cloud services or cloud computing technology 
helps the company smoothly transition to a new "network 
operating system" by combining their traditional on-promise 
software with these services (see Figure 6). 
 
Phone
TV
PC
Software
Services
3 Screens and a Cloud
Software plus Services
 
Figure 6.  Microsoft’s Cloud Computing Strategy 
V. 
LANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
 
A. Networking IT/Service Value 
 
The four cases described above demonstrate that different 
companies 
view 
different 
opportunities 
with 
cloud 
computing, and align their strategies accordingly to generate 
value. 
For these firms, cloud computing is not only a 
technology artifact, but also a part of their service model. In 
this way, it represents a techno-economic network (TEN) 
[15]. 
Callon described TEN as “a coordinated set of 
heterogonous actors which interact more or less successfully 
to develop, produce, distribute and diffuse methods for 
generating goods and services.” From Callon’s point of view, 
the economic value is generated from actors, intermediaries 
(nonhuman), translation and their relationships [15]. 
In Amazon’s case, cloud computing services stemmed 
from their internal IT and originally supported their business 
processes. Then, Amazon enrolled their e-commerce partners, 
adopting their web services, and then embedding their cloud 
services within their daily business operations. Amazon thus 
used IT and cloud services to form their partners’ networks 
and strengthen their own business value (Figure 7). 
 
Internal
business
process
operation
performance
partner’s
web site
cloud services
partner’s
business
process
cloud services
2
1
4
3
5
6
Internal IT
Amazon
 
Figure 7.  Amazon’s Value Networking 
78
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

cloud
service#1
cloud
service#1
IT#1
product#1
business
strategy
Google
 
Figure 8.  Google’s Value Networking 
cloud services 
ISVs partners
IT products
, org strategy
ISVs, SI partners
online partners
(ex: Google)
cloud services 
online/SME
customers
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
IBM
 
Figure 9.  IBM’s Value Networking 
Microsoft
cloud services 
customers
devices 
on-promise IT products,
org strategy 
1
1
2
2
2
3
 
Figure 10.  Microsoft’s Value Networking 
In Google’s case, their cloud services, IT products, and 
tools all support their advertising revenue business strategy. 
Moreover, these services and products leverage each other 
and thus intensify the value of their whole network (see 
Figure 8). 
In IBM’s case, cloud services originally helped IBM’s 
small independent software vendor (ISV) partners leverage 
IBM’s software/hardware resources through the Internet. 
Then, IBM strengthened and transferred their technology 
products to the cloud in support of their secondary market: 
online/SME customers. Clouds services acted as a bridge to 
a new market network [6] (see Figure 9). 
In Microsoft’s case, Microsoft leveraged cloud services 
to complement their on-promise software, and strength their 
product’s value. Microsoft then hopes to enroll its 
customers into this new value network (see Figure 10). 
According to our analysis, IT/services generate business 
value dynamically, and thus not only through strategy 
alignment or IT determination, as suggested by previous 
literature. Value is generated through networking activities 
between heterogeneous actors and IT/services. We refer to 
this as “Networking IT/service Value.” 
With cloud computing, internal IT artifacts are 
transferable to cloud services (as with Google) or 
strengthened by cloud services (as with Microsoft). 
However, in considering IT value, we should both discuss 
the properties of IT artifacts and the service models they 
serve. 
B. ANT Lens and Cloud Computing Value 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) was developed in the 
sociology of science and technology [16]. ANT helps 
describe how actors form alliances, involve other actors and 
use non-human actors (artifacts) to strengthen such alliances 
and secure their interests. ANT consists of two concepts: 
inscription and translation. 
Inscription describes what characteristics an engineer 
designs, develops, and diffuses into a technical artifact. For 
translation, when an actor-network is created, it consists of 
four translation processes [17]:  
 
 
problematization: The focal actor defines the 
interests that others may share, establishes itself as 
indispensable, and sets the obligatory passage point 
through which all the actors in an actor-network 
must pass. 
 
interessement: The focal actor convinces other actors. 
 
enrollment: Other actors accept the interests as 
defined by the focal actor.  
 
mobilization: The focal actor uses a set of methods 
to ensure that the other actors act according to their 
agreement and do not betray this agreement. 
 
Regarding the cases in this study, what do these 
companies inscribe into their cloud computing technology or 
services? For example, Amazon designed its cloud 
computing technology and services for strengthening its e-
commerce partners’ business processes. Are the properties of 
a technology or service model transferable to a brick-and-
mortar enterprise?  
Second, how do our case companies mobilize their 
partners to join the network? How do they set the obligatory 
passage point through which all actors pass? 
In Table 2, we analyzed the translation and inscription 
characteristics of our four case companies’ cloud computing 
actor-networks. 
ANT assumes the properties of actors or non-humans are 
static. However, in the case of cloud computing, IT artifacts 
may transfer to services, and services also can strengthen IT 
artifacts. These dynamic interactions and transformations 
need to be considered in future research.  
 
 
79
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

TABLE II.  
TRANSLATION AND INSCRIPTION OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
Focal 
Company 
Translation 
Inscription 
Amazon 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement, 
Envrollment 
Mobilization 
efficient supply  
chain process 
Google 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement, 
Envrollment 
online services  
IBM 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement 
smart services 
 connection 
Microsoft 
Problemaitziaion, 
Interessement 
software plus  
services 
 
TABLE III.  
CLOUD COMPUTING VALUE RESEARCH IMPLICATIONS 
THROUGH ANT LENS 
ANT Lens 
Research Implications 
Inscription 
1. Does the originate design of cloud computing 
technology/service impact their networking and value 
generation? 
Translation 
1. What are actors’ translations of cloud computing? 
2. How do they negotiate their interests of cloud 
computing? 
Obligatory 
passage point 
1. What are the obligatory passage points of different 
actors? 
2. Are the obligatory passage points different in every 
actor-network? 
Technology/s
ervice 
1. How the non-humans (IT or services) convert each 
other characteristics impact actor-network? 
Competitive 
networks 
1. Why and how do these companies generate 
different network values? 
2. How do these different actor-networks compete or 
collaborate? 
 
Finally, in our case analysis, these companies generate 
different value networks. Do these networks compete? How 
do they compete? 
In Table 3, we list additional issues and implications that 
are interesting for further research on the value of cloud 
computing, as seen through the ANT lens. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this article, we discuss cloud computing value 
generation through four company case studies. We argue that 
cloud computing value is generated through the interactions 
of organization, IT and services. We further analyze their 
value networking activities, and then propose ANT as a lens 
to interpret the cloud computing value generation process. 
ANT provides research implications for further research on 
cloud computing value and competitive strategy.  
The analysis of this paper is limited to the four major 
company cases. Future research may investigate smaller 
firms, and analyze firm activity, actor responses, and their 
translation within the actor network in more detail. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. G. Carr, “IT Doesn’t Matter”, Harvard Business Review, 2003, pp. 
41-49. 
[2] M. L. Markus and D. Robey, “Information Technology and 
Organization Change: Casual Structure in Theory and Research”, 
Management Science, 1988, pp. 583-598. 
[3] M. Armbrust and UC Berkeley RADSL, “Above the Clouds: A 
Berkeley View of Cloud Computing”, http://radlab.cs.berkeley/edu/, 
2009, pp. 1-23. 
[4] L. M. Vaguero, and L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, 
“A Break in the Clouds: Toward a Cloud Definition”, ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 2009, pp. 50-55. 
[5] K. Lyytinen and G. M. Rose, “The Disruptive Nature of Information 
Technology Innovations: The Case of Internet Computing in Systems 
Development Organizations”, MIS Quarterly, 2003, pp. 557-595. 
[6] N. Melville, K. Kraemer, and V. Gurbaxani, “Review: Information 
Technology and Organization Performance: an Integrative Model of 
IT Business Value”, MIS Quarterly, 2004, pp. 283-322. 
[7] T. Ravichandran and C. Lertwongsatien, “Effect of Information 
Systems Resources and Capabilities on Firm Performance: A 
Resource-Based Perspective”, JMIS, 2005, pp. 237-276. 
[8] M. Benaroch, S. Shah, and M. Jeffery, “On the Valuation of 
Multistage Information Technology Investments Embedding Nested 
Real Options”, JMIS, 2006, pp. 239-261. 
[9] P. E. D. Love and Z. Irani, “An Exploratory Study of Information 
Technology Evaluation and Benefits Management Practices of SMEs 
in the Construction Industry”, 2004, pp. 227-242. 
[10]  L. Motiwalla, M. R. Khan, and S. Xu, “An Intra- and Inter-Industry 
Analysis of E-business Effectiveness”, I&M,   2005, pp. 651-667. 
[11]  J. F. Fairbank, G. Labianica, H. K. Steensma, and R. Metters, 
“Information Processing Design, Choices, Strategy, and Risk 
Management Performance”, JMIS, 2006, pp. 293-319. 
[12]  T. A. Byrd, B. R. Lewis, and R. W. Bryan, “The Leveraging 
Influence of Strategic Alignment on IT Investment: An Empirical 
Examination”, Information and Management, 2006, pp. 308-321. 
[13]  R. K. Yin, Case Study Research, Design and Methods, 2nd Edition, 
Sage Publications, CA, 1994. 
[14]  G. McCulloch, Documentary Research in Education, History and the 
Social Sciences, Routledge Falmer, London, 2004. 
[15]  M. Callon, “Techno-economic Networks and Irreversibility”, in: Law 
J. (ed.), A Sociology of Monsters: Essays on Power, Technology, and 
Domination, Routledge, New York, 1991, pp. 132-164. 
[16]  M. Callon, and B. Latour, “Unscrewing the big Leviathan”, in: 
Knorr-Cetina, K., Cicourel, A.V. (eds.), Advances in Social Theory 
and Methodology. Routledge & Kegan, London, 1981, pp. 277–303. 
[17] M. Callon, “Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: 
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay”, 
in: Law, J. (ed.), Power, Action and Belief, Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, London, 1986, pp.197–233. 
 
 
 
 
 
80
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

