 
Security Analysis of LTE Access Network 
 
Cristina-Elena Vintilă, Victor-Valeriu Patriciu, Ion Bica 
Computer Science Department 
Military Technical Academy - Bucharest, ROMANIA 
cristina.vintila@gmail.com, vip@mta.ro, ibica@mta.ro 
 
      
Abstract: The latest technological development in mobile 
telecommunications is the 4G architecture. Developed and 
standardized by the 3GPP, this technology proposes significant 
throughput and security enhancements in comparison with its 
predecessor, 3G – a 3GPP architecture, as well as with the non-
3GPP solutions like WiMAX. Besides the enhancements 
mentioned above, 4G is a simplified network architecture, flat-IP 
topology and services-oriented. One of the major simplifications 
is the base-station architecture, called eNodeB in the 4G 
terminology, which eliminates the need for a radio resource 
controller and assumes signaling, control-plane and security 
functions. It is the mobile device connection to the network and 
the proxy of all its traffic. This is why the access network is one of 
the most important areas for network design and optimization 
and also for security in term of access control, authentication, 
authorization and accounting. This paper reviews the access 
network components, the eNodeB security requirements, as 
defined by 3GPP and analyzes two secure access mechanisms to a 
4G network, one via eNB (3GPP access type) and the other one 
via AP (non-3GPP access type). It also proposes an improvement 
to the AKA protocol in order to obtain better security. 
Keywords-SAE; LTE; EPC; security; eNodeB; shared-secret; 
HSS; Diameter; EAP; AKA; J-PAKE 
 
 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
The most important and influential telecommunications 
organizations around the Globe are part of the 3GPP society 
[20]. 
The 
latest 
technological 
design 
for 
mobile 
telecommunications 
that 
appears 
to 
be 
the 
future 
communications architectural baseline is the 4G architecture, 
also called SAE (System Architecture Evolution). SAE 
comprises the radio access network, usually referred to as LTE 
(Long Term Evolution) and the EPC (Evolved Packet Core) 
the core network of this design, a flap-IP network, highly 
optimized and secure network, oriented on services. 
       The figure below describes one of the most common 
architectural design views, a non-roaming architecture with a 
4G mobile device and only 4G access to the network. The 
entities that appear in this case are the UE (User Equipment), 
the eNodeB (the antenna), the MME (Mobility Management 
Entity), the SGW (Serving Gateway), PGW (PDN (Packet 
Data Network) Gateway), HSS (Home Subscriber Server), 
PCRF (Policy Charging Rules Function) and a 3G access 
network where the UE can roam to. This also represents the 
naming of the interfaces that connect these entities. 
 
 
Figure 1. Basic 4G Core Network Architecture 
 
       The UE connects to the 4G network by signaling its 
presence in the eNodeB cell. The cell selection prerequisites 
are described in [3], [4] and [5]. The process by which an UE 
chooses a certain antenna (eNodeB) to connect to is called 
camping – the UE camps on a cell. The best situation for an 
UE is to find a so-called suitable cell to camp on. This suitable 
cell is a cell that meets the following requirements: it is part of 
the selected PLMN (Public Land Mobile Network), part of a 
registered PLMN or part of the Equivalent PLMN list as per 
the most recent update from the NAS. Also, the cell should not 
be barred, not reserved and should not be in the list of 
forbidden areas for roaming. Once these criteria are met, the 
UE sends an Attach Request message to this eNodeB, asking 
to attach to the network. This message flows over the LTE 
29
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
radio interface, reaches the eNodeB, and then the eNB sends 
this message to the MME via the S1-MME interface. The 
MME verifies the validity of the UE request against the HSS 
credentials, then selects an appropriate SGW that has access to 
the PLMN requested by the UE. The PLMN where the UE 
connects is identified by a string called APN (Access Point 
Name) preconfigured on the USIM. Once the access request 
reaches the PGW – which is the UE’s anchor point to the 
desired PLMN, the request is replied with an IP address 
suitable for this connection and, even more, after interrogating 
the PCRF about this UE, the PGW may create dedicated 
bearers for this UE immediately after attach.  The decisions on 
the way are detailed in Section 4.3.8 of [1], which describes 
the selection functions of each of the core-network entities. 
Briefly, the HSS drives the selection of the SGW and the 
SGW on its turn, selects the PGW, based mostly on 
information already decided upon by the HSS. The MME is 
selected based on the network topology, the eNB trying to 
select the MME that minimizes the probability of doing 
handovers and that provides load balancing with other MMEs. 
       The Initial Attach process starts with the Attach Request 
message sent by the UE to the eNB selected. This message 
contains, among other parameters, the IMSI (International 
Mobile Subscriber Identity) or the old GUTI (Global Unique 
Temporary Identity), the last TAI (Tracking Area Identifier) if 
available, PDN Type, PCO (Protocol Configuration Options), 
Ciphered Options Transfer Flag, KSI-ASME (Key Set 
Identifier - Access Security Management Entity), NAS 
(Network Access Server) Sequence Number, NAS-MAC, 
additional GUTI and P-TMSI (Packet - Temporary Mobile 
Subscriber Identity) signature. 
       The PCO means that the UE wants to send some 
customized information to the network (the PGW may not be 
in the visited network also), indicating for instance that the UE 
prefers to obtain the IP address after the default bearer has 
been activated. If the UE intends to send authentication 
credentials in the PCO, it must set the Ciphered Options Flag 
and only send PCO after the authentication and the NAS 
security have been set up completely. From now on, it is the 
responsibility of the eNB to proxy the UE’s message to the 
MME. And, once the UE is authenticated, the eNB is also the 
one responsible of establishing security connections with the 
UE and the core network in order to protects the UE’s traffic 
at the radio/ethernet border. Being at the border between these 
two topologies, the eNB is exposed to the security issues 
arising from both the radio and the IP networks. 
 
II. SECURITY ARCHITECTURE 
The 4G architecture defines, in [6], the five main areas 
concerned with the Security of this design. The first is called 
Network Access Security and it refers mostly to the radio 
attacks. The second one is the Network Domain Security and 
it defines the requirements and rules to prevent attacks over 
the wire, when exchanging control-plane and user-plane. The 
third is User Domain Security, dealing with securing the 
access to mobile terminals, the fourth is the Application 
Domain Security – which standardizes the set of rules for 
secure message exchange between applications on clients and 
servers. The fifth domain defined by this standard is the 
Visibility and Configurability of Security – set of features that 
informs the user about a particular security feature and 
whether this feature is applicable or not to the services this 
user is trying to access. 
      The standard [6] describes in Section 5.3 the security 
requirements 
necessary 
for 
a 
secure 
eNB 
operation 
environment, as well as for secure eNB functioning. It 
nevertheless leaves these specifications at a requirements 
level, permitting the operator to implement the exact protocols 
he considers for his network; these protocols are compliant to 
the standard as long as they meet the security requirements 
defined here, in Sections 11 and 12. The principles are that the 
eNB should have a mean of securing the cryptographic keys 
and information inside the device, it should have secure 
communication links both over the air with the UE and with 
the MME (via the S1-MME interface), SGW (via the S1-U 
interface) and other eNBs (via the X2 interfaces, if they exist) 
for control-plane and user-plane traffic. Also, if the operator 
has 
a 
securely 
contained 
environment 
where 
these 
communications happen, he may not implement any precise 
security measure for the requirements defined here. 
      The access to a 4G network is done in many ways, most 
importantly driven by the type of radio medium in place. The 
most usual procedure is the AKA (Authentication and Key 
Agreement) Procedure. This happens when the access medium 
is LTE. The AKA procedure is described in the figure below. 
 
 
Figure 2. AKA Exchange 
 
       The MME here is the authenticator, while the HSS is the 
authentication server. The communication between the MME 
and the HSS takes place over S6a and it uses Diameter as a 
30
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
protocol. The UE (the mobile terminal) has a UICC (Universal 
Integrated Circuit Card) inside. This circuit stores the K, a 
shared key located as well on the AuC (Authentication Center) 
entity part of the HSS. The authentication in 4G is not natively 
implemented over a PKI infrastructure; it uses the shared-
secret symmetric authentication inherited from the 3G UMTS 
systems, with some improvements.  
       The purpose of the AKA mechanism is to create keying 
material for the RRC (Radio Resource Control) signaling, 
NAS (Non-Access Stratum) signaling and for the user-plane, 
both ciphering and integrity keys. The first NAS message may 
be an Attach Request, a Service Request or PDN Connectivity 
Request message. This message reaches the MME, which 
should verify the UE’s identity. If the UE is new to this 
network entirely, then the MME asks the UE for its permanent 
identity – the IMSI. This is considered a security flaw and it is 
not yet addressed. But, if the UE is not new to this network, 
but rather reached this MME by means of a TAU (Tracking 
Area Update) procedure, then this MME should have a GUTI 
in the message received from the UE. This MME then sends 
the GUTI and the full TAU message to the previous (old) 
MME, and this one replies with the actual permanent UE 
identity – the IMSI and the authentication data for it. The 
message exchange between the two MME entities takes place 
over the S10 interface. Also, if the UE roamed to this MME 
from a 3G network, the current MME tries to connect to the 
previous management entity of this UE, the (old) SGSN 
(Serving GPRS Gateway) via the S3 interface and get the 
IMSI information from there. Otherwise, it tries to derive it 
and then connects to the HSS via the S6a interface and verifies 
that the IMSI this UE utilizes is actually valid for this network 
and may have permission to attach. This message is a 
Diameter message described in [9]. 
       The HSS gets the AV (Authentication Vector) set and 
sends it to the MME. This EPS-AV consists of RAND, 
AUTN, XRES and K-ASME and the HSS, entity that is also 
called UE’s HE (Home Environment) may send multiple sets 
of AVs to the MME currently serving the UE. The standard 
recommends that the HSS sends only one set of AVs, but in 
case it still sends multiple sets, there should be a priority list 
which the MME should use. 
       A major improvement when comparing EPS-AKA to 
UMTS-AKA is that the CK and IK keys never actually have to 
leave the HSS. The UE signals in its initial message the type 
of access network he used. If this is E-UTRAN, then a flag 
called AMF is set to value 1, and this instructs the MME and 
ultimately the HSS to only send the K-ASME key in the AV 
reply (along with RAND, AUTN and XRES), but not the CK 
and IK as well. Also, this K-ASME can be stored in the MME, 
so, when re-synchronizing the UE’s status, the full AKA 
process may not even have to take place. The MME sends the 
RAND and AUTN to the UE, then it waits for the response. 
Here, the eNodeB just forwards these messages back and 
forth, not participating effectively in the cryptographic 
exchange. Unlike the GSM, where only the network was 
authenticating the UE, but not viceversa, the EPS-AKA 
provides mutual authentication between the UE and the 
network. Upon receipt of the message, the UE can verify, 
based on the AUTN, the validity of the reply, computes the 
RES’ and sends this message to the MME. The MME verifies 
whether XRES equals the RES’ and if they are the same, the 
UE is authenticated. As described, the CK and IK are 
computed by UICC and HSS independently, they are never 
sent over the wire in EPS. Also, the HSS sends initial keys to 
MME and eNB, which are then used by these entities to derive 
actual keys for NAS, user-plane and RRC traffic. 
       The figure below depicts two flows: the first one 
represents the sending of the IMSI in clear-text over the 
network (the case of the first attach of this UE to the network 
or when the new MME cannot locate the previous MME) and 
the second one represents the message exchange between the 
two MMEs. 
 
 
Figure 3. Message exchanges to locate the IMSI 
 
       The key hierarchy in 4G is more complicated than in 3G, 
but it assures this way the protection of the master keys and it 
also reduces the need for periodic updates, re-generation and 
transmission of the master keys. There are also special cases 
for TAU and handover types and also for re-keying that may 
require special attention, and they are described in [6]. 
       For the non-3GPP access types, the 4G architecture no 
longer uses the AKA mechanism, but a variation of the EAP 
with AKA: EAP-AKA (Extensible Authentication Protocol) 
mechanism. This assumes the presence of a EAP capable 
phone, the Access Point, which connects to the AAA 
(Authentication, Authorization, Accounting) server via the Wa 
interface and the AAA server connects to the HSS via the Wx 
interface. The EAP-AKA message flow is represented in the 
picture below. The EAP is a Request/Response type of 
protocol. When the AP detects the presence of the USIM, it 
sends this mobile an EAP Identity Request message. The 
USIM sends back its NAI (Network Address Identifier), which 
is similar to an e-mail address – RFC 822. The AP forwards 
this NAI to the 3GPP AAA Server based on the domain name 
which is part of the NAI – this happens over the Wa interface. 
31
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Then the AAA server verifies whether it has a valid and 
unused AV for this USIM. If so, it sends this AV and AKA 
Challenge for the USIM, back to the AP. If there is no 
available AV for this USIM, the AAA server contacts the HSS 
server via the Wx interface, retrieves the AV and then 
continues to the AKA Challenge. The rest of the process is 
similar to the EPS-AKA, with the only observation that it 
takes place over the EAP framework. 
 
 
Figure 4. EPS EAP-AKA exchange 
 
       When comparing pre-4G authentication methods, there 
are several aspects that may be observed. One of them is the 
authentication method. This is very similar for 3G (UMTS), 
3.5 G (HSDPA) and 3.75G (HSDPA+), as all of them use the 
AKA mechanism. The differences appear in the actual 
implementation:  the 3G implementation specifies that the CK 
and IK keys from the AuC (Authentication Center) part of the 
HE (Home Environment) are actually being sent to the SGSN 
at the moment the SGSN downloads the Authentication 
Vectors from this database. This never happens in 4G, where 
the key hierarchy is more complicated and the only key 
downloaded from the HSS to the MME is the K-ASME key. 
This is also a security improvement in 4G in comparison to 
3G, because the CK and IK keys should not leave the AuC, 
but only be derived independently by the UICC and HSS. In 
both 3G and 4G security architectures, there are multiple AVs 
(Authentication Vectors) available in the authentication part of 
the subscribers database. All these authentication vectors may 
be downloaded initially by the authentication entity (SGSN, 
MME respectively), a certain AV being used for a single 
round of authentication. The order in which these AVs are 
used is determined in both architectures by a sequence 
number. The CK||IK pair is derived by the UICC in 3G, and 
the SGSN only selects this pair from the authentication data 
received from the AuC. In 4G, the MME receives only its K-
ASME from the HSS, and it then derives, together with the 
UE, the K-NASint and K-NASenc from the K-ASME. The 
following figure describes the key hierarchy in the 4G 
architecture. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. EPS key hierarchy [6] 
 
       The keys derived in the classical 4G AKA procedures are 
the following: K-NASenc (encryption key for NAS traffic), K-
NASint (integrity key for NAS traffic), KeNB (derived by 
MME and eNB), KUPenc (encryption key for the user-plane 
data, derived by MME and eNB from KeNB), KRRCint and 
KRRCenc (integrity check, respectively encryption key 
derived by MME and eNB from KeNB, used for securing the 
Radio Resource Control traffic). 
       The sections in this figure describe which entities are 
involved in a particular key generation process; there are 6 
keys derived from the EPS authentication mechanism. This 
key generation feature introduced in 4G improves the speed of 
the re-authentication procedures and also the refreshing 
process of the keys. As the K-ASME may be used a master 
key in further service requests authentication, the MME no 
longer has to download the authentication data from the HSS 
and it can also avoid re-synchronization issues. HSDPA and 
HSDPA+ follow the 3G procedures and mechanisms. 
       The entire authentication information that is stored in the 
UICC and its corresponding associates from the network side 
is called “security context”; a security context consists of the 
NAS (Non Access Stratum) and AS (Access Stratum) security 
contexts. The AS security context has the cryptographic keys 
and chaining information for the next hop access key 
derivation, but the entire AS context exist only when the radio 
bearers established are cryptographically protected. The NAS 
context consists of the K-ASME with the associated key set 
identifier, the UE security capabilities and the uplink and 
downlink NAS count values, used for each EPS security 
context. The 3G architecture also has the concept of security 
contexts, and this becomes very important when 3G and 4G 
devices and network entities interoperate. A 3G device that 
was initially attached to a 3G network has received a set of 
security content that is stored in the UICC. This information is 
considered a partial and legacy security context in the 4G 
environment. For a security context to be considered full, the 
MME should have the K-NASenc and K-NASint keys, which 
are obtained when the 3G device handovers to the 4G 
network. In this handover case, the legacy security context is 
32
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
referred to as mapped security context. A NAS security 
context of a mapped security context is always full and it is 
current (which means it is the most recently activated context). 
A summary of the types of security contexts that exist in the 
3G – 4G interoperation is in the following table. 
TABLE I.  
TYPES OF SECURITY CONTEXTS 
AGE/EFFECT 
CURRENT 
NON-CURRENT 
FULL 
NATIVE / MAPPED 
NATIVE 
PARTIAL 
X 
NATIVE 
 
       A native security context is the one established at the 
EPS-AKA procedure successful completion. 
 
III. SECURITY ISSUES AND ASSESSMENT 
The security analysis in a mobile network expands from the 
radio access network until the core network and services. The 
most common threats are related to the following security 
prerogatives: 
- 
authentication: the network must be sure that the 
person accessing a certain service is the one 
pretending to be and paying for this service 
- 
confidentiality of data: the user and the network must 
be sure nobody un-authorized is viewing or accessing 
the user’s data 
- 
confidentiality of location: the user’s location must 
not be known by anybody un-authorized 
- 
denial of service: the user and the network must be 
sure that nobody interferes with a user’s session, nor 
high-jacks it 
- 
impersonation: the network and the user must be sure 
that no other user is pretending to be the actual 
registered user, nor this user can access services 
available to the actual registered user 
The EPS security mechanisms should be able to 
enforce the above principles, and everything starts with the 
access level. The NDS (Network Domain Security) enforces 
these principles as well, but at a different level. When talking 
about User Domain Security, the Access Level is the first line 
of defense against attacks.  For this, the EPS provides mutual 
authentication via the EPS-AKA mechanism or EPS-EAP-
AKA (for non-3GPP access types). Using the keys generated 
after the AKA mechanism, all the RRC, NAS and user-plane 
signaling 
and 
data-planes 
are 
protected 
by 
secure 
encapsulation and integrity protected. Even though a flaw of 
the EPS-AKA: the transmission of the permanent identity 
IMSI over the air at Initial Attach exchange, EPS implements 
the GUTI value that is sent over the air instead of the IMSI, so 
that the AKA mechanism also provides identity protection. 
The only cases that require the transmission of the IMSI are 
the first Initial Attach and the attach after the core network 
entities are de-synchronized. This vulnerability opens the door 
for a man-in-the-middle attack that can take place once the 
IMSI is captured. Another vulnerability identified within the 
EAP-AKA, but that manifests in consequence with EPS-AKA 
also is the lack of PFS support. The PFS – Perfect Forward 
Secrecy is an attribute of the mechanism’s that assures the 
secrecy of a set of session keys even if a previous set of keys 
has been compromised. 
       A solution for the PFS vulnerability can be the use of an 
algorithm that has the PFS built-in. This algorithm is the 
Diffie-Hellman key exchange. Still, DH does not provide 
mutual authentication by itself. Another algorithm, based on 
the J-PAKE mechanism, can be used. The J-PAKE mechanism 
has the following properties – as described in [19]: 
- off-line dictionary attack resistance – it does not leak any 
password verification information to a passive attacker 
- forward secrecy – it produces session keys that remain secure 
even when the password is later disclosed 
- known-key security – it prevents a disclosed session key 
from affecting the security of other sessions 
- on-line dictionary attach resistance – it limits an active 
attacker to test only one password per protocol execution 
       One solution for using the Juggling scheme in the UE’s 
authentication to the network is to replace part of the AKA 
protocol with the J-PAKE protocol. 
 
 
Figure 6. Simplified J-PAKE usage in 4G authentication 
 
       This solution does not cover the first security issue present 
in AKA, the identity protection. This aspect will be debated in 
a separate article. This solution also assumes the existence of a 
secure communication channel between the MME and the 
HSS. Once the IMSI is sent to the HSS by the MME, the HSS 
will return the shared key it has for this UE, secured via the 
S6a interface. Having the password, the MME will run the J-
PAKE protocol with the UE, the eNB serving as simple relay 
agent; the UE proves, via the J-PAKE rounds, its knowledge 
of the password, and at this moment, the UE is considered 
authenticated by the network and it has also authenticated the 
network, This is a mutual authentication, resistant to the 4 
security aspects listed above. It improves on the AKA 
algorithm by providing forward secrecy for the keys resulted 
from this negotiation. The generation of the EPS key hierarchy 
is not impacted by the authentication mechanism, the 
generation remains the same as described by the standard. 
       A more detailed comparison and simulation on the 
effectiveness of the J-PAKE method versus the AKA method 
is in progress. 
       J-PAKE is a password authentication keying agreement 
protocol, a method to provide zero-knowledge proof using a 
shared key that is never sent over the transmission medium. 
One of the first algorithms of this type is the EKE (Encryption 
Key Exchange) protocol, which has been proved to have many 
33
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
flaws. SPEKE (Simple Password Exponential Key Exchange) 
is one of the protocols that improved the EKE variant. SPEKE, 
along with EKE and J-PAKE are all balanced versions of 
password-authenticated key agreement. This variant uses the 
same password to authenticate both peers. There is another 
variant of PAKE, called augmented PAKE. This variant is 
usable in a client/server environment. Here, a brute-force 
attack on the connection is more inconvenient and the 
representative protocols for this variant are B-SPEKE and SRP 
(Secure Remote Password protocol). J-PAKE improves on the 
limitations of S-PEKE, limitations that are already observed in 
the BlackBerry implementation. The actual protocol – level 
security comparison between J-PAKE and SPEKE are 
described in the J-PAKE presentation paper.  The conclusions 
are that EKE does not fulfill the off-line dictionary attack 
resistance requirement, while the SPEKE does not fulfill the 
on-line dictionary attack resistance requirement.  
 
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This paper presented the basic 4G architecture and reviewed 
the main security domains used to classify and integrate the 
security aspects to this design. The paper focused on the 
access-level security issues that may arise at the eNodeB, UE 
and MME level. As the connection to the network poses the 
most issues when talking about User Domain security, this 
paper analyzed the authentication process of the UE 
connecting to the 4G network. There are two most common 
cases when talking about initial attach, the attach of a plain 4G 
device and the attach of non-3GPP device. 
       The paper identified two issues that appear almost every 
time: the lack of identity protection at the first initial attach 
and the lack of perfect forward secrecy for the AKA 
mechanism, inherited also in the EAP-AKA mechanism 
specific to the authentication of the non-3GPP devices. At 
least for the perfect forward secrecy issue, we have proposed 
the usage of the J-PAKE protocol in the authentication 
process, instead of the AKA protocol, which we consider a 
flexible and lightweight mechanism, suited for use in the 
mobile device environment.  
       The future articles will describe the comparison and a 
possible simulation of the efficiency of J-PAKE in comparison 
with SPEKE and other similar balanced PEKE algorithms, as 
well as measure the efficiency of this protocol as the main 
authentication algorithm in the 4G authentication process. 
       Further on, this study continues with the analysis of the 
IMSI identity protection mechanism and proposes a solution 
for the complete identity protection even for the first initial 
attach process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] TS 23.401, GPRS Enhancements for E-UTRAN access, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.401/23401-a10.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[2] TS 23.122, NAS Functions related to Mobile Stations in idle mode, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/23_series/23.122/23122-a10.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[3] TS 36.300, E-UTRAN Overall Description, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/36_series/36.300/36300-a10.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[4] TS 43.022, Functions of the MS in idle mode and group receive mode, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/43_series/43.022/43022-920.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[5] TS 25.304, UE Procedures in idle mode and procedures for cell reselection 
in connected mode, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/25_series/25.304/25304-930.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[6] TS 33.401, SAE - Security Architecture, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.401/33401-950.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[7] TS 33.310, Network Domain Security; Authentication Framework, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.310/33310-a10.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[8] TS 33.102, 3G Security Architecture, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.102/33102-930.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[9] RFC 5516, Diameter Command Code Registration for the Third 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Evolved Packet System (EPS), 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5516 , April 2009 [retrieved: November 2010] 
[10] TS 29.272, MME related interfaces based on Diameter, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/29_series/29.272/29272-a00.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[11] Tech-Invite, http://tech-invite.com/, [retrieved: March 2010] 
[12] TS 29.294, Tunneling Protocol for Control plane (GTPv2-C), 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/29_series/29.274/29274-a00.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[13] TS 33.220, Generic Authentication Architecture; Generic Bootstrapping 
Authentication, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.220/33220-a00.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[14] TR 33.919, Generic Authentication Architecture – System Overview, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.919/33919-910.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[15] TS 33.221, Support for Subscriber Certificates, 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/33_series/33.221/33221-910.zip 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[16] Han-Cheng Hsiang and Weu-Kuan Shih, “Efficient Remote Mutual 
Authentication and Key Agreement with Perfect Forward Secrecy”, 
Information Technology Journal 8, 2009, Asian Network for Scientific 
Information [retrieved: November 2010] 
[17] RFC 4187, EAP Method for 3GPP AKA, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4187 [retrieved: November 2010] 
[18] RFC 2631, Diffie-Hellman Key Agreement Method, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2631 [retrieved: November 2010] 
[19] F. Hao and P.Ryan, “Password Authenticated Key Exchange by 
Juggling”, Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop on Security 
Protocols,2008, 
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/1363/Research/contributions/hao-ryan-2008.pdf 
[retrieved: November 2010] 
[20]3GPP, http://3gpp.org/-partners-, [retrieved: November 2010] 
[21] Georgios Kambourakis, Angelos Rouskas, and Stefanos Gritzalis, 
"Performance Evaluation of Public Key-Based Authentication in Future 
Mobile Communication Systems", August 2004, EURASIP Journal on 
Wireless Communications and Networking [retrieved: November 2010] 
[22] Qiang Tang and Chris J. Mitchell, “On the security of some password-
based key agreement schemes”, 23rd May 2005 [retrieved: November 2010] 
34
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

