Proposal of a Quadrature SSB Modulation Scheme  
for Wireless Communication Systems 
 
Hiroaki Waraya and Masahiro Muraguchi 
Department of Electrical Engineering, Tokyo University of Science 
6-3-1 Niijuku, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-0051, Japan 
E-mail: 4319583@ed.tus.ac.jp, murag@ee.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Recent wireless communication systems strongly 
require modulation scheme with higher spectral efficiency. In 
this paper, we propose a new modulation scheme, i.e., the 
Quadrature Single Side Band (Q-SSB) modulation scheme, 
which orthogonally multiplexes two SSB signals and it has twice 
spectral efficiency. Under Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) channel environment, the Bit Error Rate (BER) 
performance of the Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying (QPSK) 
based Q-SSB signal, i.e., two independent Amplitude-Shift 
Keying SSB (ASK-SSB) signals, is superior by 3.5dB in Carrier- 
to-Noise Ratio (CNR) in comparison to the same data rate and 
the same occupied bandwidth of 16 Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (16QAM) signal. A key idea of our Q-SSB 
modulation 
scheme 
is 
to 
introduce 
a 
power-domain 
multiplexing type of Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA) 
technique for removing the Hilbert transform terms from in-
phase and quadrature components in the receiver side. 
 
Keywords-SSB; Hilbert; Quadrature; NOMA; Multiplexing. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the demand of wireless communication system 
has been increasing with the spread of smartphones, digital 
terrestrial broadcastings, and wireless Local Area Network 
(LANs). Frequency resources are depleted in the Ultra High 
Frequency (UHF) and Super High Frequency (SHF) bands 
used by many wireless systems, so the high-priority issue for 
next wireless systems is a revolutionary modulation scheme 
with higher spectral efficiency. Here, to improve spectral 
efficiency, we propose the combination of the SSB scheme 
and the quadrature modulation scheme.  
The Single Side Band (SSB) system sends data at half of 
the occupied bandwidth compared with the Double Side 
Band (DSB) system. The SSB signal can be made by 
combination of Hilbert transformation and quadrature 
multiplexing, which causes in-phase addition of one sideband 
and cancellation of the opposite sideband. The SSB system, 
however, is only effective scalar modulation, such as an 
Amplitude-Shit Keying (ASK) modulation. 
On the other hand, the quadrature modulation, which is a 
typical DSB modulation, employs the two carrier waves of 
the same frequency which are out of phase with each other by 
90°. The transmitted signal is created by quadrature 
multiplexing the two carrier waves. The SSB modulation has 
a single data rate and a single sideband and the quadrature 
modulation has a double data rate and double sidebands. As 
a result, the both have same spectral efficiency. Here, if we 
incorporate the SSB modulation with the quadrature 
modulation, twice spectral efficiency will be expected.  
Unfortunately, since both modulations use the same signal 
processing of quadrature multiplexing, it is not independent 
each other. Thus, a lossless demodulation cannot be 
performed analytically. The in-phase component includes I-
data and the Hilbert transform of Q-data, and the quadrature 
component includes Q-data and the Hilbert transform of I-
data in the receiver side. Those Hilbert transform terms 
cannot be removed analytically if this goes on. In fact, several 
recent researchers have investigated the SSB modulation. For 
example, the research in [1]-[3] successfully transmitted SSB 
signal using the turbo equalization technology in the receiver 
side. We present our proposed system that can solve the 
problem about Hilbert transform terms in the transmission 
side. 
A key idea of our Q-SSB modulation scheme is to 
introduce a power-domain multiplexing type of Non-
Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA) technique for 
removing the Hilbert transform terms from in-phase and 
quadrature components in the receiver side [4]. Thus, on the 
receiver side, IQ-data can be demodulated by estimating the 
amplitude of data [5].  
In this paper, we confirmed Bit Error Rate (BER) 
performances in both of the Q-SSB NOMA signal, and the 
multiplexed Q-SSB NOMA signals. We also confirmed that 
under Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel 
environment the BER performance of the Quadrature Phase-
Shift Keying (QPSK) based Q-SSB NOMA signal is superior 
by 3.5dB in Carrier-to-Noise Ratio (CNR) in comparison to 
the same data rate and the same occupied bandwidth of 
16QAM signal.  
The remainder of this paper is organized into sections as 
follows: Section 2 explains a method of DSB modulation, and 
Section 3 explains how SSB modulation is performed. 
Section 4 presents our proposed system that uses Q-SSB 
NOMA modulation, and explains how to multiplex two data 
in the proposed system. Section 5 presents the performance 
evaluation and simulation results of the proposed scheme. 
Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6. 
II. 
DSB MODULATION  
Amplitude Modulation (AM) is a technique that multiplies 
carrier wave into the information signal, and change the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

amplitude of the transmission signal in proportion to the size 
of the information signal. A transmission signal S(t) in a 
general AM method can be represented as 
    𝑆(𝑡) = 𝐴[1 + 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑚(𝑡)] ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑠(2𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 + 𝜑),   
(1) 
where A is the signal amplitude, k is the modulation index 
(0 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 1) , 𝑓𝑐 is the carrier frequency, and 𝜑 is the phase 
of the carrier. A general envelope waveform of AM method 
has m(t) waveform centered around ±𝐴 amplitude. 
 Next, consider the transmission spectrum of AM method. 
Note that multiplication on the time axis is the convolution 
on the frequency axis, and the Fourier transform of (1) is 
represented as 
𝑆(𝑓) = [𝛿(𝑓) + 𝑀(𝑓)] ⊗ 1
2 [𝛿(𝑓 − 𝑓𝑐) + 𝛿(𝑓 + 𝑓𝑐)] 
    = 1
2 [𝛿(𝑓 − 𝑓𝑐) + 𝑀(𝑓 − 𝑓𝑐)]       
                   + 1
2 [𝛿(𝑓 + 𝑓𝑐) + 𝑀(𝑓 + 𝑓𝑐)]. 
(2) 
Here, to simplify (2), 𝐴 = 1, 𝑘 = 1,  and 𝜑 = 0 . Thus, by 
multiplying the carrier wave, the baseband signal is shifted to 
the carrier wave band. A spectrum diagram showing this state 
is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Spectrum diagram of AM method 
 
As an example, consider the case of 𝑚(𝑡) = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑚𝑡. If 
𝜑 = 0 is set, (1) is rewritten as  
 𝑆(𝑡) = 𝐴(1 + 2𝜋𝑓𝑚𝑡) ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡        
 = 𝐴 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 + 𝐴
2 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋(𝑓𝑐 − 𝑓𝑚)𝑡           
                                 + 𝐴
2 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋(𝑓𝑐 + 𝑓𝑚)𝑡.      
(3) 
In (3), the first term represents a carrier wave component. The 
second and third terms are components of the information 
signal m(t).  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Spectrum of DSB modulation 
 
The lower frequency component than the carrier wave in the 
second term is called Lower Side Band (LSB), and the higher 
frequency component than the carrier wave in the third term 
is called Upper Side Band (USB). As shown from Figure 2, a 
spectrum is generated at a location separated by ±𝑓𝑚  from 
the carrier frequency 𝑓𝑐. In this way, a method of moving an 
information signal to a carrier band and performing 
communication using LSB and USB is called Double Side 
Band (DSB) modulation method. 
III. 
SSB MODULATION 
We present how SSB modulation is performed, by 
explaining about the characteristic of SSB modulation and 
Hilbert transformation. 
 
A. The characteristic of SSB modulation 
In the previous section, we described that the DSB system 
performs communication using both the left and right 
sidebands centered on the carrier frequency. However, as can 
be seen from (3), since the LSB and USB contain the same 
information, all information transmission is possible by using 
only one of the LSB and USB. In this way, a method for 
performing communication using only one sideband is called 
Single Side Band (SSB) modulation method. 
Figure 3 shows the SSB transmission spectrum by LSB. 
Here, the negative frequency region is also shown as an 
arithmetic expression, but only the positive frequency region 
appears as a real signal. Compared to the DSB method the 
greatest feature of the SSB method is that the frequency 
occupation band is halved [6]. 
 
 
 
(a) Base band signal                             (b) SSB signal     
Figure 3. SSB transmission spectrum using LSB 
 
B. Hilbert transformation 
A method of generating an SSB signal using two  𝜋 2
⁄  
phase shifters is called the Phase Shift Method. As one of the 
phase shifters, generating the signal 𝑥̂(𝑡)  whose phase is 
shifted  𝜋 2
⁄    from the input signal 𝑥(𝑡)  is called Hilbert 
transform, and is represented as   
𝑥̂(𝑡) = 𝐻[𝑥(𝑡)] = 1
𝜋 ∫
𝑥(𝜏)
𝑡 − 𝜏 𝑑𝜏.
∞
−∞
   
(4) 
Here, 
the 
frequency 
characteristic 
of 
Hilbert 
transformation 𝐻(𝜔) is represented as 
ℎ(𝑡) ⇔ 𝐻(𝜔) = {−𝑗 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝑗𝜋 2
⁄ ) (𝜔 > 0)
+𝑗 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝(+𝑗𝜋 2
⁄ ) (𝜔 < 0). 
(5) 
The Hilbert transformation delays  𝜋 2
⁄
 at positive 
frequencies, and advances 𝜋 2
⁄  at negative frequencies. Also, 
Carrier Component 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

the amplitude characteristic is constant regardless of the 
frequency. Figure 4 shows the conversion characteristics [7].  
 
 
 
(a) Amplitude characteristic          (b) Phase characteristic 
Figure 4. Hilbert transformation characteristics  
 
The following explains about the repeatability of Hilbert 
transformation. First, (6) is obtained by expressing (5) of the 
Hilbert transformation in the form of Fourier transform and 
combining them into one equation. That is represented as 
𝑋̂(𝜔) = −𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔) ⋅ 𝑋(𝜔),          
(6) 
where the 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔)  is a sign function. The value of this 
function is 1 at positive frequency and is -1 at negative 
frequency. Therefore, when the Hilbert transform is 
performed again on the signal that has been conducted Hilbert 
transformation, the equation is represented as  
𝑋̂̂(𝜔)   = {−𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔)} × {−𝑗 𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝜔) ⋅ 𝑋(𝜔)} 
= −𝑋(𝜔),            
(7) 
and the signal inverting the original signal is output. Thus, 
the Hilbert transformation has repeatability. Moreover, it is a 
linear transform, and the equation is represented as 
 𝐻[𝑚(𝑡) ± 𝑛(𝑡)] = 𝐻[𝑚(𝑡)] ± 𝐻[𝑛(𝑡)]     
     = 𝑚̂(𝑡) ± 𝑛̂(𝑡). 
(8) 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Generation method of SSB modulation signal  
Figure 5 shows the spectrum transition in the SSB signal 
generation circuit. In Figure 5, 𝑆𝑈𝑆𝐵(𝑡) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑆𝐿𝑆𝐵(𝑡) of 
transmitted signal at this time is represented as 
𝑆(𝑡) = 𝑚(𝑡) ⋅ 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 ± 𝑚̂(𝑡) ⋅ 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡,    
(9) 
where 𝑚(𝑡) is the modulation signal and 𝑚̂(𝑡) is the Hilbert 
transformation of 𝑚(𝑡). In (9), when the second term is 
added, SSB modulation by LSB is performed. And when the 
second term is subtracted, SSB modulation by USB is 
performed. As shown from (9), the modulation signal can be 
restored by multiplying 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 on the receiver side, and 
can demodulate SSB modulation signal [8]. 
IV. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
In this section, we present our proposed system that uses 
Q-SSB NOMA modulation, and explain how to multiplex 
two data in the proposed system. 
 
A. The method of Q-SSB NOMA modulation 
The conventional Q-SSB modulation scheme considered 
the transmission method in which the phases of I-data and Q-
data differ by 90° as shown in Figure 6. The transmission 
signal of the conventional method is expressed as  
    
𝑆𝑢(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡      
      + {−𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) + 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡.  
(10) 
 
From (10), it is possible to extract I-data by multiplying 
𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡, and to extract Q-data by multiplying 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡. 
However, the BER performance is extremely deteriorated 
because the extra Hilbert component cannot be removed 
analytically.  
Therefore, as shown in Figure 6, we introduce the method 
like NOMA that adds two data with different amplitudes on 
the same frequency. Here, our proposed system is different 
from the real NOMA method. We use the term of NOMA to 
help understand that two data have different amplitudes on 
the same frequency. The demodulation method on the 
receiving side uses the original method using amplitude 
estimation. The transmission signal of our proposed method 
in the case of USB is expressed as  
 
𝑆𝑢(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡      
      + {−𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) − 1
2 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡.  
(10) 
 
I-data and Q-data can be extracted by multiplying 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡. 
In the case of LSB, the transmission signal is expressed as 
 
𝑆𝑙(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑙(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑙(𝑡)} 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡       
     − {−𝐼𝑙̂(𝑡) − 1
2 𝑄𝑙
̂(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡. 
(11) 
 
Figure 7 shows Q-SSB modulation circuit. Here, the 
modulation signal on the I-data is 𝐼(𝑡), and the modulation 
Composition 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

signal on the Q-data is 𝑄(𝑡). USB is adopted as the sideband. 
As shown from Figure 7, Q-data is halved after QPSK 
mapping, and 𝑆(𝑡) is configured as (10). 
Figure 8 shows the amplitude combinations of IQ data on 
the receiver side. 
 
 
  (a) Conventional method                  (b) Proposed method 
Figure 6.  Comparison between conventional method and proposed method 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Q-SSB modulation circuit 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Amplitude of quadrature SSB received signal 
 
As mentioned in the introduction, our system estimates the 
amplitude of {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) +
1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)}  on the receiver side. Since 
our system introduces QPSK modulation, the value of I-data 
and Q-data is 1 or -1. So, the amplitude of  {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) +
1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡)} 
is represented as in Figure 8. The quadrature signals can be 
demodulated by the distinction of each amplitude in Figure 8. 
 
B. The method of multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA modulation 
In the previous section, we described the modulation 
method of SSB signal. However, it is a method to suppress 
the sideband on the opposite side, putting information on 
LSB or USB with one carrier wave.  
In this paper, we put different information on LSB and 
USB at the same carrier frequency and perform data 
transmission by multiplexing method. From (10) and (11), the 
signal obtained by adding different information on USB and 
LSB is represented as  
𝑆(𝑡) = {𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡) + 𝐼𝑙(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑙(𝑡)}𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡       
   + {−𝐼𝑢̂ (𝑡) − 1
2 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡) + 𝐼𝑙̂(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑙
̂(𝑡)} 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡. 
(12) 
Then, the spectrum of the multiplexed SSB signal can be 
represented as Figure 9.  
 
              
 
 
Figure 9. Spectrum of multiplexed SSB signal 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Demodulation circuit of multiplexed SSB signal 
 
On the receiver side, our proposed system uses the 
demodulation circuit as show in Figure 10. In the upper part 
of Figure 10, 𝑆(𝑡)  of (12) is multiplied by 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 , and 
passed through LPF. That is represented as (13). In the lower 
part of Figure 10, 𝑆(𝑡) of (12) is multiplied by 𝑠𝑖𝑛 2 𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡, and 
passed through LPF. That is represented as (14). And the 
signal when the Hilbert transformation is performed on (14) 
is represented as (15). The USB signal is extracted by adding 
(13) and (15), and IQ data is obtained by the amplitude 
estimation.  
 
𝑆𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑡) = 𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡) + 𝐼𝑙(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑙(𝑡) 
(13) 
𝑆𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑡) = −𝐼𝑢̂(𝑡) −
1
2 𝑄𝑢
̂(𝑡) + 𝐼𝑙̂(𝑡) +
1
2 𝑄𝑙̂(𝑡)  
(14) 
𝑆̂𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝑡) = 𝐼𝑢(𝑡) + 1
2 𝑄𝑢(𝑡) − 𝐼𝑙(𝑡) − 1
2 𝑄𝑙(𝑡) 
(15) 
 
Similarly, the LSB signal is extracted by subtracting (13) and 
(15), and IQ data is obtained by the amplitude estimation.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

𝑐𝑜𝑠2𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 
𝑠𝑖𝑛2𝜋𝑓𝑐𝑡 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION BY SIMULATION 
In this paper, we confirmed BER performances in both of 
the Q-SSB NOMA signal which have data on only USB, and 
the Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA signals. And we confirmed 
that the BER performance of the QPSK based Q-SSB NOMA 
signal is superior by 3dB in CNR in comparison to the same 
data rate and the same occupied bandwidth of 16QAM signal. 
 
A. Simulation specification 
 Table 1 shows the simulation tables used in this study. Our 
proposed system performs on the simulation by using 
MATLAB/Simulink. Figure 11 shows the block diagram of 
the Q-SSB NOMA system. Figure 12 shows the block 
diagram of the Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA system. We 
have evaluated the utility of Q-SSB NOMA signal by 
measuring its BER performance and spectrum. We also 
confirmed the advantage of proposal compared to the 
conventional Q-SSB modulation method in Figure 6. 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION SPECIFICATION. 
Primary Modulation 
QPSK 
Secondary Modulation 
SSB 
Data Rate 
2 Mbps 
Carrier Frequency 
16 MHz 
Data Size 
Single Carrier 
Transmitted Sample Rate 
128Mbps 
Received Sample Rate 
512Mbps 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Block diagram of Q-SSB NOMA system 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Block diagram of Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA system 
B. Simulation result (Q-SSB NOMA signal) 
Figure 13 shows the spectrum of Q-SSB NOMA signal. 
Figure 14 shows the BER performance of the conventional 
Q-SSB modulation method (a) and our proposed Q-SSB 
modulation method (b) shown in Figure 6. Figure 15 
compares the BER performance of DSB QPSK transmission 
or DSB 16QAM transmission with the BER performance of 
Q-SSB QPSK transmission.  
 
      
  
 
 Figure 13. Spectrum of Q-SSB NOMA system 
 
 
 
Figure 14. BER performance of conventional method and proposed method 
 
 
 
Figure 15. BER performance of Q-SSB NOMA system 
 
As can be seen from Q-SSB NOMA modulation spectrum, 
compared to QPSK modulation spectrum, the part of the 
opposite sideband is suppressed by about 30dB by the Hilbert 
transformation process. And it expresses that Q-SSB NOMA 
signal can be transmitted using only one sideband. 
As shown in Figure 14, it can be confirmed that our 
proposed method has the BER performance of 7.5dB better 
than the conventional method. This is because the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

conventional method uses a complicated demodulation 
method to remove an extra Hilbert component, whereas the 
proposed method can demodulate only by amplitude 
estimation without considering the Hilbert component. 
 As can be seen from 15, the SSB method that can send 4-
bit data using two transmissions simultaneously has the BER 
performance of 3.5dB better than the DSB method that sends 
4-bit data using 16QAM. The reason why the BER 
performance of Q-SSB QPSK transmission is 2.5dB worse 
than DSB QPSK transmission is considered to be the penalty 
when IQ data transmitted by NOMA is separated by the 
amplitude estimation method.  
 
C. Simulation result (Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA signal) 
Figure 16 shows the spectrum of Multiplexing Q-SSB 
NOMA signal. Figure 17 compares the BER performance of 
the Q-SSB signal with data only on USB and the BER 
performance when each of USB and LSB signals are 
extracted from Multiplexing Q-SSB signal. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Spectrum of Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA system 
 
 
 
Figure 17. BER performance of Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA system 
 
As can be seen from Figure 16, each sideband part 
suppresses 
the 
opposite 
sideband 
by 
the 
Hilbert 
transformation process, so that two QPSK transmissions can 
be performed simultaneously using different data on USB 
and LSB.   
In Figure 17, the BER performance of the Multiplexing Q-
SSB signal may be slightly more deteriorated than Q-SSB 
signal with data on only one sideband. But that is due to the 
regenerating method to adjust Hilbert components, and their 
BER performances are almost not change. DSB 16QAM 
transmission and Q-SSB NOMA QPSK transmission sends 4 
bits per symbol. Therefore, it was confirmed that the 
Multiplexing Q-SSB NOMA signal is superior to 16QAM 
transmission in terms of BER performance.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We have proposed the Q-SSB NOMA modulation scheme 
to generate the quadrature SSB modulation signal with half 
of frequency band. It has been confirmed that under AWGN 
channel environment the BER performance of the QPSK 
based Q-SSB NOMA signal is superior by 3.5dB in CNR in 
comparison to the same data rate and the same occupied 
bandwidth of 16QAM signal. We are going to improve better 
the BER performance of the QPSK based Q-SSB NOMA 
signal. Additionally, we proposed improving the frequency 
efficiency of single carrier transmission. Therefore, we are 
going to improve the frequency efficiency of multicarrier 
transmission by combining the OFDM method and the Q-
SSB modulation method. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  M. Mustafa,  “Four  Single-Sideband  M-QAM  Modulation 
using Soft Input Soft Output Equalizer over OFDM,” 28th 
ITNAC, 2018. 
[2]  Y. Jiang, Z. Zhou, M. Nanri, G. Ohta, T. Sato, “Performance 
Evaluation of Four Orthogonal Single Sideband Elements 
Modulation Scheme in Multi-Carrier Transmission Systems,” 
2011 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 2011.  
[3]  B. Pitakdumrongkija, H. Suzuki, S. Suyama, and K. Fukawa, 
“Coded Single-Sideband QPSK and Its Turbo Detection for 
Mobile Communication Systems,” IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, VOL. 57, NO.1, pp.311-323, January 
2008. 
[4]  S. A. Mujtaba, “A Novel Scheme for Transmitting QPSK as a 
Single-Sideband Signal,” IEEE GLOBECOM 1998, pp.592-
597,1998. 
[5]  K.   Senda   and   H.   Otsuka,   “Transmission        Performance 
of Superposed Modulation Using QPSK and 1024-QAM in 
Downlink NOMA,” IEEE VTS APWCS 2019. 
[6]  J. G. R. C. Gomes and A. Petraglia, “A switched-capacitor 
DSB to SSB converter using a recursive Hilbert transformer 
with sampling rate reduction,” ISCAS 2000, pp.315-318, 
2000. 
[7]  X.   Wang   and   M.   Hanawa,    “Sideband Suppression 
Characteristics of Optical SSB Generation Filter with 
Sampled FBG Based 4-taps Optical Hilbert Transformer,” 
15th APCC, pp.622-625, 2009. 
[8]  K.  Takao,  N.  Hanzawa,  S. Tanji, and  K.  Nakagawa, 
“Experimental Demonstration of Optically Phase-Shifted 
SSB 
Modulation 
with 
Fiber-Based 
Optical 
Hilbert 
Transformers,” OFC/NEOEC, 2007. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

