Resource Allocation in 5G and Beyond Networks
for Mu-MIMO Systems
Eirini Barri
Department of Computer Engineering
and Informatics
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
Email: ebarri@ceid.upatras.gr
Christos Bouras
Department of Computer Engineering
and Informatics
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
Email: bouras@cti.gr
Apostolos Gkamas
Department of Ecclesiastical Academy
University of Vella
Ioannina, Greece
Email: gkamas@aeavellas.gr
Vasileios Kokkinos
Department of Computer Engineering
and Informatics
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
Email: kokkinos@cti.gr
Aspasia Koukouvela
Department of Computer Engineering
and Informatics
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
Email: st1059617@ceid.upatras.gr
Abstract—The resource allocation problem focuses on finding
an optimal allocation of a specific number of resources to
maintain Quality of Service (QoS). That is where Multiple-Input
Multiple-Output (MIMO) come in as a radio antenna technology.
In order to optimize data speed, minimize errors and improve
the radio transmission capacity, MIMO utilizes multiple antennas
at both the transmitter and the receiver. This technology uses a
variety of antennas and paths that carry the data. Each antenna
uses different paths. Multi-user MIMO (mu-MIMO) stands for
a technology that allows routers to communicate simultaneously
with multiple endpoint devices and it is the next evolutionary
step of single user MIMO. Over the past decade, significant
advances have been made to improve the performance of mu-
MIMO. Although non-negligible progress has been achieved so
far, optimal algorithms for Resource Allocation (RA) will help
better the performance of mu-MIMO by increasing the system’s
performance in terms of throughput, fairness, and QoS. The
purpose of this paper is to provide a comparison of different
beamforming techniques used for resource allocation and list
them in ascending order depending on their efficiency.
Index Terms—5G; MIMO; Mu-MIMO; Bandwidth; Spectral
Efficiency; Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
Radio Resource Allocation (RRA) uses a frequency reuse
planning of first-generation cellular systems aiming to increase
spectrum efficiency. The above utilization plays a significant
role since the spectrum is a widely shared and scarce resource.
Resource Allocation (RA) as a discipline of its own encom-
passes a variety of techniques such as dynamic channel allo-
cation, frequency hopping, and power control. More advanced
multiantenna concepts such as Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
(MIMO) solutions and beamforming also integrate RA.
Significant advances and remarkable research activities have
occurred over the past decade in Multi-user MIMO (mu-
MIMO) systems. MIMO aims to provide practical solutions
and techniques to send and receive more than one data signal
simultaneously at the same radio. There is a separation or
isolation that helps prevent them from interfering with each
other. That allows the wireless devices and Access Points (AP)
to send and receive multiple streams of data simultaneously.
That eventually increases the transmission speed of the con-
nection. The transmitter and the receiver have more than one
antenna/radio chain aiming to support MIMO connectivity.
Each spatial stream is transmitted at the same frequency for
both the transmitter and the receiver, but using a different
radio/antenna chain. The receiver reconstructs the original
stream as it knows the phase offsets of its antennas. While
multiple streams can be transmitted, only one device can be
served and all the other streams are wasted. The total number
of antennas that are transmitting the data must be equal to
the quantity of the receiving ones at any moment. MIMO
can multiply the network capacity by using the horizontal
and vertical polarity of a radio wave. All of the above make
scaling challenging and this is where mu-MIMO provides
many benefits.
In [1], the authors show how MIMO can increase the
capacity of the communication system while also improving
the reliability of the link that uses a variety of schemes
beyond the spatial diversity. Applications involving multiple-
cell networks with multiple access channels are presented in
[2] where possible coordination between base stations has set
the foundation for research.
Mu-MIMO can isolate the traffic of each subscriber al-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

lowing them to transmit and receive concurrently between
multiple subscribers. MIMO refers to a range of technologies
used to multiply the capacity of a wireless connection without
requiring additional spectrum by using the horizontal and
vertical polarities of the radio wave. A system’s Spectral
Efficiency (SE) is mainly based on Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR), channel estimated accuracy [3], spatial correlation
modeled by the propagation environment that is considered
in [4] and is also limited by the theoretic capacity [5].
Early surveys report that RA enhances when tracing the
momentary fluctuations of the channel in scenarios using a
single transmitter, as presented in [6]. During the last years,
various techniques are developing for many heterogeneous and
diverse MIMO scenarios. This paper’s purpose is to classify
the state-of-the-art of the already existing algorithms used for
single and multiple transmitter scenarios in regards to mu-
MIMO.
Furthermore, an overview of different methodologies used
for RA is presented in mu-MIMO systems. Moreover, we
compare them, explaining the way that they are defined.
We aim to provide guidelines for efficient design of RA
algorithms, point out practical challenges, and comment on
and compare the processing techniques of mu-MIMO’s state
of the art.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we are
presenting RA in mu-MIMO analyzing both transmission and
precoding techniques. Furthermore, in Section III, we present
RA algorithms, compare them and propose changes to the
most promising one in order to make it more efficient. Finally,
the conclusions and our future work are provided in Section
IV.
II. RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN MU-MIMO
During the last years, mu-MIMO systems have been studied
from a practical as well as a theoretical point of view. Mu-
MIMO systems come without propagation limitations. Chan-
nel rank loss or antenna correlation are some of them and make
the mu-MIMO system a perfect candidate for the upcoming
wireless systems and standards [7]. Massive MIMO or large-
scale MIMO employs a few hundred antennas at the Base Sta-
tion (BS) that are responsible for sending simultaneously data
streams to many users. These are evolutions of the mu-MIMO
technology. Massive MIMO is an example of a very promising
technology, able to get by with the continuous, growing,
capacity needs arising with 5G networks. RA management in
wireless communications includes various network functions,
such as power control, transmission rate control, call admis-
sion control, scheduling, handover, transmitter assignment, and
bandwidth reservation. Figure 1 illustrates the components
mentioned above, the RA policy, and the connection between
them. As displayed in Figure 1, each RA technique can either
implement in optimal or suboptimal way. A mu-MIMO system
uses various RA techniques that are based on user scheduling
and signal to process, as mentioned, and presented in Figure
1, and depend on the SNR value, quantity of users, antennas
and coordinated transmitters.
Fig. 1. Coordinated Network in mu-MIMO
In order to maintain the QoS and reduce potential in-
terference that may occur to the users, various components
are used. Scheme and Scheduling components as well as a
multiple access technique are used to distribute the resources
to the users. Mu-MIMO also uses signal design and processing
components that are responsible for the transmission of data
to the scheduled users simultaneously. Last but not least, a
power rate allocation guarantees QoS.
Mu-MIMO allows the same data channels to distribute
messages for different users. After the distribution, follows a
classification of the individual users that takes place when the
data reaches their mobile devices [8]. Serving multiple users
with the same transmission ensures increased capacity and
better utilization of resources. The latter increases the ability
to stream or download with improved user experience even
if the area is crowded. Shared data can also provide a faster
and more efficient system for all users and can furthermore be
switched between one or multiple users.
Each antenna receives both direct and indirect components.
The direct ones are intended for this particular antenna and
the indirect ones are not. That happens because these two
antennas use the same channel. So, it is imperative to divide
the transmitted data into multiple independent data streams.
The number of streams is always less or equal to the number of
antennas and this is further explained in the following section.
The literature on MIMO communications is very rich, and
this paper’s goal is to provide and compare the different
aspects considering RA schemes and mechanisms in Mu-
MIMO systems. Users with independent channels can increase
the overall performance of a system. However, there are
systems that provide orthogonal resource that can be accessed
by each user of the cell as stated in [9] and in [10], but the
real diversity in MU-MIMO systems comes when many users
access the same resource simultaneously.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

A. Transmission
Surveys over the years have pointed out that the increase
of RA is possible if the instant channel inconstancies are
tracked for scenarios including a single transmitter. RA de-
cisions are affected because users have heterogeneous long-
term gains because of the wide coverage of areas in wireless
communications. Mu-MIMO transmissions are organized into
two types, partial and full bandwidth. The latter mode is
when Mu-MIMO streams are transmitted and occupy the
entire channel of the system in 802.11ac. On the other hand,
partial bandwidth mode is the simultaneous use of Orthogonal
Frequency-Division Multiplexing Access (OFDMA) and Mu-
MIMO. That means that users multiplex in both time and
frequency. In order to transmit independently and separately
coded data signals from each of the multiple transmit antennas,
MIMO uses multiplexing or spatial streaming. The number
of mu-MIMO Space-Time Streams (STS) supported by the
Access Point (AP) in the Downlink and Uplink depends
on the number of transmitter antennas. In general, an AP
with N antennas should be able to support up to N STS
in both downlink and uplink. When discussing clients, the
maximum number of STS for one user can be up to four
despite the amount of antennas. Furthermore, the total number
of STS is less than or equal to eight. Mu-MIMO aims to
accommodate as many users as possible per resource. That
is the reason why RA techniques are thoroughly examined at
the basic resource unit, e.g., time-slot, code, frequency-time
resource block, or single-carrier. Since the RA strategy applies
to overall resources, the global system model (single-carrier,
OFDM, or Code-division Multiple Access (CDMA)) is not
taken into account.
B. Precoding
The term precoding indicates the rotation and scaling of
the set of beams having their spatial properties and power
adjusted towards one particular purpose. Multi-antenna trans-
mitters provide spatial dimensions and can create autonomous
channelization schemes, allowing the user transmitting to serve
multiple ones concurrently using the same frequency band
and time slot. The above is also known as Space-Division
Multiple Access (SDMA). Taking into account the constraints,
different techniques can be considered optimal. Precoding can
be either linear or non-linear. The latter techniques can provide
better performance while the former is computationally less
expensive and requires no prior signaling. In mu-MIMO
wireless technology, the term beamforming indicates the signal
steering needed to achieve SDMA using beams.
III. COMPARISON
In [11], the authors propose an optimized algorithm for
Zero-Forcing (ZF) precoding for a downlink massive MIMO
system. To maximize Energy Efficiency (EE), the authors
are proposing an iteration algorithm having a sensible power
consumption model. Aiming at optimal EE, this particular
algorithm uses the perfect Channel State Information (CSI)
scenario and uniform rates for each user. In [12], the authors
TABLE I
COMPARED ALGORITHMS
Work Algorithm
Techniques
Results
[11]
ZF
Design prefilters
to remove multi-user
interference
Good
throughput,
EE quite low
[12]
EE
optimization
Obtain an asymptotic
EE expression
utilizing smatrix theory
Target QoS
[13]
TSD
Assign each subcarrier
to one user.
Best EE
Bad
throughput
[13]
SM
Spatial Multiplexing
Good
throughput
EE quite low
[13]
SDMA
Subcarrier assigned
to multiple users
concurrently
Improved
throughput
for low power
consumption
[14]
Power
allocation
Global optimization ranges
depending on the user’s
high or low SINR.
Total EE
increases
significantly
[14]
MRT
Beamforming
Low
Complexity
Processing
[15] Fully-adaptive
RA scheme
Joint EE-SE
performance
EE performance
exceeds semi-adaptive
and non-adaptive
RA schemes
[16]
MMSE
Combination of
ZF and MRT
Good
throughput,
EE quite low
*EE: Energy Efficiency
investigate an efficient algorithm achieving the same goal in a
massive MIMO system having imperfect CSI. The proposed
RA scheme has low complexity and concurrently optimizes
the number of antennas, power allocation, and user selection.
The EE optimization problem is intractable to solve since it
is a mixed integer and non-convex problem and was therefore
divided into two subproblems to be solved efficiently. In [13],
the authors compared different schemes based on energy effi-
ciency of RA. In Table I, all those schemes are presented and
compared based on their results according to their techniques.
The first scheme is based on designing prefilters at the Base
Transceiver Station (BTS). The above condition meets the
ZF criterion and efficiently removes Multi-User Interference
(MUI). Having MUI eliminated throughput multiplication can
also be achieved since every subcarrier could be assigned
concurrently to all the user ends.
The second scheme presented in this paper bases on Trans-
mit Spatial Diversity (TSD). A subcarrier is assigned by the
BTS to a user having the maximum vector channel gain.
The third scheme presented in the same paper utilizes the
Spatial Multiplexing (SM) technique. This particular technique
employs the MIMO system between a specific RT and BTS.
Data rate increases since the MIMO system can potentially
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

send multiple substreams. Every subcarrier is assigned to
a particular user each time for both the TSD and the SM
scheme. Lastly in the fourth scheme presented, the subcarrier
is designated for every user having spatial signatures. This
scheme is also known as SDMA and it manages to increase
the throughput. The main disadvantage is that spatial channels
are seldom orthogonal in practice.
In [14], the authors investigated a MIMO downlink system.
This particular system contains a BS with an immense number
of antennas serving many single-antenna users. This kind of
system creates a problem that considers the circuit power
consumption, CSI, QoS requirements including a minimum
required data throughput rate. The power allocation scheme
which is proposed is optimized for maximization of the EE of
data transmission.
Furthermore, in [14] the authors analyze Maximum Radio
Transmission (MRT) and present it as practical precoding that
can balance the system’s performance and complexity. This
algorithm provides excellent performance having low process-
ing complexity in massive MIMO systems. Furthermore, MRT
manages to maximize the signal gain of the designated user.
MRT appears to be almost optimal at systems where noise is
limited and inter-user interference is insignificant compared to
the noise.
In [15], a demonstration of a fully adaptive RA scheme is
presented. The scheme exceeds the EE performance of semi-
adaptive and non-adaptive RA schemes. The authors point
out that data streams or Radio Frequency (RF) chains are
equivalent to two times the number of receiving antennas.
These are adequate for achieving EE in a mmWave massive
MIMO network. That concludes in reducing the amount of
required RF chains and further decreasing the power consump-
tion needed.
In [16], authors analyze the Minimum Mean Square Error
algorithm (MMSE) which employs both the ZF and the MRT
algorithms analyzed above and is a linear precoding algorithm.
Hence, this creates a balance between them and achieves
adequate performance in systems with moderate noise and
interference. By utilizing the mean square error, this algorithm
manages to minimize the error and filter the already sent
symbols transmitted from the BS to the received terminal.
MMSE’s performance exceeds the one of ZF and MRT.
Having analyzed the algorithms, we will compare them
further and place them in descending order proposing the one
we think excels.
In our opinion, the best algorithm appears to be the TSD
since it has the best EE and high utility, which is the result
of low power consumption. This algorithm also has low
throughput as it is a single-user RA algorithm. The second
best algorithm is the power allocation scheme, implementing
a low complexity algorithm that also presents a significant EE
increase. The following algorithm is considered to be the EE
optimization that achieves target QoS and better performance
by having low complexity and good EE. The SDMA scheme
presents improved throughput for low power consumption
since it is a multi-user protocol. SDMA has increased EE
when an antenna array at BTS is employed. The disadvantage
of SDMA is that channels are not orthogonal most of the
time, and the spatial signatures are designated that way. The
SM algorithm is a single-user scheme that presents low EE,
but has good throughput. The next scheme is MMSE which
is a combination of the ZF and MRT algorithms. Although
MMSE achieves adequate throughput, it comprises a matrix in-
version throughout the processing, making detection methods
computationally ineffective for many antennas. The following
algorithm is ZF, and even though it has good throughput, it
presents bad EE and utility. That is a result of the significant
power consumption needed to separate the transmission of
multiple users. The MRT algorithm balances performance
and efficiency. Despite that fact, it is almost optimal only
when the Inter-User Interference (IUI) is less contrasted to the
noise. This comparison lowers the efficiency of the algorithm.
Adding to that pilot contamination and the imperfect CSI
should be taken into account. The Fully Adaptive RA scheme
requires a panoramic view of the traffic demands and the
loading of the network for efficient scheduling. Despite that
disadvantage, EE increases according to the SE. When EE
peaks, it starts degrading even if SE is still increasing.
Since the TSD scheme appears to perform better compared
to the other schemes, an analysis of the TSD algorithm
explained in [17] is presented. The algorithm consists of the
following steps:
1) The first subcarrier is assigned to the channel with max-
imum gain. That corresponds to the maximum number
of bits transmitted among all users and antennas in that
subchannel. We set Y as the following: Y = (a, b).
The pair (a∗, b∗) represents the data modulated onto
the nth subcarrier. The data is transmitted from the BS
to the b*th antenna of the a*th Remote Terminal (RT).
Furthermore, we set mn
(a,b) as the maximum number of
bits that can potentially be transmitted to ath user using
nth subcarrier.
2) Calculate mn
(a,b) and Ta∗ using the appropriate math
equations.
3) Ensure that the user Ta∗ meets the minimum bit rate con-
straint stating that the data rate designated for ath user
should equal Ra bits per OFDM symbol. If Ta∗ < Ra∗,
the algorithm has to backtrack and check for the next
subcarrier. If Ta∗ ⩾ Ra∗, then we temporarily dismiss
user a∗ and backtrack to the first step distributing the
subchannels to those users that fail to meet the above
constraint.
4) The algorithm keeps backtracking to step 1 until all
the users meet the minimum bit rate constraint and,
therefore, all the subcarriers have been allocated to
subchannels.
Observing Table I, the TSD algorithm seems to be the best
option for resource allocation. It is also visible and noticeable
that TSD’s disadvantage, bad throughput, it’s MMSE’s advan-
tage. That means, in an ideal scenario, the combination of both
of them will lead up to the most efficient resource allocation
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

algorithm.
IV. CONCLUSION
Considering that the technology is constantly evolving,
it is difficult to keep up with, especially when it comes
to wireless networks. Thus, already existing algorithms and
technologies must be reconsidered. This paper’s ultimate goal,
as mentioned above, is to compare algorithms and techniques
that a mu-MIMO system uses, and provide the reader with
useful information about how the resource allocation works in
mu-MIMO systems and how that can significantly improve in
order to increase the system’s performance. The comparison
results show that the TSD algorithm is the most efficient,
having the best EE, as well as low power consumption among
the others. A suggestion for possible future work might be
a comparison provided with the simulation of each algorithm
based on fixed network topology in order to present the results
figuratively.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Johannsen, N. Peitzmeier, P. Hoeher, and D. Manteuffel, “On
the feasibility of Multi-Mode antennas in UWB and IoT applications
below 10 GHz, toward 6G networks: use cases and technologie,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 58, page 55-61, 2020.
[2] M. Ben Zid and K. Raoof, “Multi-User MIMO communication : basic
aspects, benefits and challenges,” Recent Trends in Multi-user MIMO
Communications (2013): 3-24.
[3] F. Rusek et al., “Scaling up MIMO: opportunities and challenges with
very large arrays,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 30, no. 1, pp.
40-60, 2013.
[4] G. Caire, N. Jindal, M. Kobayashi, and N. Ravindran, “Multiuser MIMO
achievable rates with downlink training and channel state feedback,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 6 , pp. 2845-
2866, 2010.
[5] H. Q. Ngo, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Uplink power efficiency
of multiuser MIMO with very large antenna arrays,” in 2011 49th An-
nual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing
(Allerton), 2011, pp. 1272-1279.
[6] D. Gesbert, M. Kountouris, R. Heath, C.-B. Chae, and T. S¨alzer, “From
single user to multiuser communications: shifting the MIMO paradigm,”
IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 24, January 2007.
[7] P. Aggarwal and V. A. Bohara, “A nonlinear downlink multiuser MIMO-
OFDM systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 6, no. 3
, pp. 414-417, 2017.
[8] J. Zhang, E. Bj¨ornson, M. Matthaiou, D. W. K. Ng, H. Yang, and D.
J. Love, “Multiple Antenna Technologies for Beyond 5G,” ArXiv, vol.
abs/1910.00092, 2019.
[9] F. Capozzi, G. Piro, L. Grieco, G. Boggia, and P. Camarda, “Downlink
packet scheduling in LTE cellular networks: key design issues and a
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp.
678-700, 2013.
[10] G. Y. Li, J. Niu, D. Lee, J. Fan, and Y. Fu, “Multi-Cell coordinated
scheduling and MIMO in LTE,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tuto-
rials, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 761-775, 2014.
[11] E. Bj¨ornson, L. Sanguinetti, J. Hoydis, and M. Debbah, “Optimal design
of energy-efficient Multi-User MIMO systems: Is Massive MIMO the
answer?,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no.
6, pp. 3059-3075, 2015.
[12] Y. Zhang, H. Gao, F. Tan, and T. Lv, “Resource allocation of energy-
efficient Multi-User Massive MIMO systems,” 2016 IEEE Globecom
Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 1-6, 2016.
[13] W.-C. Wu, “Toward the energy efficiency of resource allocation algo-
rithms for OFDMA downlink MIMO systems,” Journal of Electronic
Science and Technology, vol. 17, no. 4 , pp. 100007, 2019.
[14] Yingchu Guo, Gang Wu, Zhenzhen Hu and Shaoqian Li, “Energy effi-
cient resource allocation for Massive MIMO cellular systems,” American
Journal of Engineering Research (AJER), vol. 9, no. 4 , pp. 141-149,
2020.
[15] S. A. Busari, K. Huq, G. Felfel, and J. Rodriguez, “Adaptive resource al-
location for energy-efficient millimeter-wave Massive MIMO networks,”
2018 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 1-
6, December 2018.
[16] M. A. Albreem, A. H. A. Habbash, A. M. Abu-Hudrouss, and S. S. Ikki,
“Overview of Precoding Techniques for Massive MIMO,” IEEE Access,
vol. 9, pp. 60764-60801, 2021
[17] C.-Y. Wei-Chiang Wu, “Subcarriers and its allocation algorithms for
downlink OFDMA-based MIMO systems,” ScienceDirect, April 2017.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

