Centralized Retransmission Management with SDN in Multihop Wireless Access
Network
Bong-Hwan Oh, Jaiyong Lee
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Yonsei University
Seoul, Korea
{crusader27, jyl}@yonsei.ac.kr
Abstract—In
this
paper,
a
centralized
retransmission
management
with
Software
Defined
Network
(SDN)
is
proposed in order to handle packet loss in multi-hop wireless
access
networks.
The
proposed
scheme
manages
retransmission persistence for Automatic Repeat Request
(ARQ) in all wireless links, which satisfies a delay constraint
and maintains end-to-end throughput. Simulation results show
that
the
proposed
scheme
allows
both
throughput
improvement and less average delay than a delay constraint by
adjusting the trade-off between throughput and wireless delay.
Keywords – SDN; retransmission; management
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quality of Service (QoS) in wireless networks is an
important issue because of the increase in the number of
applications for delay sensitive services. Because a high
wireless error and variable delay can occur in wireless links,
a reliable data transmission and satisfying end-to-end delay
constraint should be considered in order to support QoS in
wireless networks.
Automatic repeat request (ARQ) is one of the general
transport protocols in wireless networks and ARQ-based
error control is an efficient methodology because ARQ can
optimize packet loss recovery for a specific wireless link and
can prevent a reduction of congestion window of higher
layer by shielding the wireless error. However, one of the
weak points of ARQ is an additional delay caused by ARQ,
which can cause a degradation of high layer performance due
to an inaccurate Round Trip Time (RTT) estimation. The
main factor for this phenomenon is a retransmission
persistence of ARQ which refers to a degree that an ARQ
tries the retransmission.
There are several works attempting to improve end-to-
end performance by managing the retransmission persistence
for ARQ [1]-[4]. Retransmission persistence is defined as the
maximum retransmission number in data link layer. In the
previous works, the fundamental assumption in order to
improve end-to-end performance is that wireless access
networks should be single-hop wireless networks. If the
network environment expands to multi-hop wireless network,
the previous methods are insufficient to ensure end-to-end
performance. Thus, multiple ARQs are mutually operated in
order to support end-to-end performance in multi-hop
wireless network.
In order to consider end-to-end performance in multi-hop
wireless network, all wireless links should be estimated and
handled. One solution is to apply a centralized method such
as Software Defined network (SDN) [5] in order to handle
all wireless links.
In this paper, we focus on an SDN-based solution for a
retransmission management in multi-hop wireless network.
In the proposed scheme, a SDN controller monitors all
wireless links and determines the retransmission persistence
of ARQ in each wireless links, which handles not only
wireless delay but also end-to-end throughput.
II.
CENTRALIZED RETRANSMISSION MANAGEMENT WITH
SDN
The main feature of the proposed scheme is to manage
the retransmission persistence for ARQ according to end-to-
end throughput and wireless delay in a multi-hop wireless
network. The proposed scheme is composed of two stages. In
the first stage, an SDN controller monitors the state of all
wireless links and compares the link state between wireless
links. Then, in the second stage, centralized retransmission
management is performed not only for satisfying a delay
constraint, but also for improving wireless throughput
depending on the state of all wireless links.
A.
Monitoring status of wireless links
The main objective of the monitoring method is to
discover a bottleneck link or a good link for satisfying end-
to-end performance. The SDN controller monitors a link
delay (Dl), a link delay variance and the retransmission
persistence (RP) of ARQ in each wireless links. This link
information is written in each wireless access points and the
SDN controller gathers the information in all wireless access
points. In the monitoring method, queuing delay is only
considered in order to calculate the link delay because the
link delay is mainly determined by queuing delay and other
factors such as link propagation and processing delay are
negligible and uncontrollable.
B.
Centralized retransmission persisence management
The main object of this management is to satisfy a delay
constraint as well as to maximally maintain end-to-end
throughput using the retransmission persistence management.
In order to perform the above operation, SDN controller
should maximally increase RP in all wireless links without a
delay constraint violation. It is because the increasing RP can
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

Figure 2.
Throughput versus wireless link error in link 1.
Figure 1.
Entire wireless link delay versus wireless link error in link
1.
shield wireless error, which improves end-to-end throughput.
Thus, the proposed management reduces or increases RP
only when a cumulative delay in all wireless links exceeds a
delay constraint or the cumulative delay is sufficiently small,
respectively. By using the monitoring information in all
wireless links, the SDN controller estimates a cumulative
delay of all wireless links and discovers a bottleneck link
among all wireless links. If the cumulative delay exceeds the
delay constraint, SDN reduces RP in the bottleneck link.
Conversely,
the
SDN
controller
increases
RP
in
the
bottleneck link when the cumulative delay is sufficiently less
than the delay constraint. The delay threshold for increasing
RP can be set according to the management policy.
III.
SIMULATION RESULTS
A simulation is conducted in order to evaluate the
performance of the proposed scheme. The client and the
server are connected by two serial wireless links (wireless
link1 and wireless link 2) and the wireless links are
connected with the SDN controller. As a transport protocol,
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is applied. We operate
the simulation by changing the wireless link error rate. Each
wireless link error rate is variable but the cumulative
wireless error rate is fixed (0.2). In this simulation, the delay
threshold for increasing RP is a half of a delay constraint.
Figure 1 shows the average end-to-end throughput versus
error rate in wireless link 1. The x-axis indicates the error
ratio of wireless link 1 to the cumulative error rate. The
results show that average throughput performance tends to
decrease with the decrease in the delay constraint. It is
because the wireless error is less recovered in order to satisfy
the delay performance. In other words, the proposed
management can improve the average throughput as the
delay constraint increases. It means that the proposed
management
can
adjust
the
throughput
performance
according to the delay constraint.
Figure 2 shows the total average delay in wireless links
versus the error rate in wireless link 1. The results show that
the proposed management can achieve lower average delay
than the delay constraint. It is because, when the delay over
wireless links exceeds the delay constraint, the proposed
method reduces RP in the bottleneck link, which can
improve the delay performance by reducing the recovery
time of ARQ due to wireless error.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, a centralized retransmission management
with SDN is proposed to handle wireless error in a multi-hop
wireless access network. The proposed scheme monitors and
handles all wireless links for satisfying end-to-end delay
requirements and improving end-to-end throughput. The
simulation results show that the proposed scheme can
manage the trade-off between throughput and delay, which
can
improve
end-to-end
throughput
without
a
delay
constraint violation. In the future, we plan to consider
general scenarios and other factors in wireless networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by the MSIP (Ministry of
Science, ICT and Future Planning), Korea in the ICT R&D
Program 2015.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. F. Chiasserini and M. Meo, “Modeling interactions
between link layer and transport layer in wireless networks,”
The 12th IEEE Int. Symp. PIMRC 2001, San Diego, USA,
vol 1, Sep. 2001.
[2]
F. Vaciraca, A. D. Vendictis, and A. Baiocchi,“Investigating
interactions
between
ARQ
mechanisms
and
TCP
over
wireless links,” in Proc. of European Wirel., Barcellona,
Spain, Feb. 2004.
[3]
A. Mehta, D. Kagaris, and R. Viswanathan,“Throughput
performance of an adaptive ARQ scheme in rayleigh fading
channels,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 5, no. 1, Jan.
2006.
[4]
J. Han, B. Kim, and J. Lee. “TCP-friendly retransmission
persistence management for SR-ARQ protocols,” IEICE
Trans. Commun., vol. E92-B, no. 10, pp. 3243-3246, Oct.
2009.
[5]
Software-Defined Networking: The New Norm for Networks"
White paper. Open Networking Foundation. April 13, 2012
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

