A Real Time Synchronous V - C System with the Extracted Data from Buffering 
Function 
Hyung-Se Kim1, Chan-Seok Jeong2 ,  
Moon-Hwan Lee3 
CAAS (Center for Army Analysis & Simulation),  
R.O.K.A  
Gyeryong, Korea 
 e-mail: kjk9311@gmail.com1, csjeong7@paran.com2,  
doleok445@gmail.com3 
 
Baek-Yeol Seong4, Sung-Woo Choi5,  
Mi-Seon Choi6, Young-Kuk Kim7 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, 
Chungnam National University 
 Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: {sby864, oneloveyou085, mschoi276, 
ykim7}@cnu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—This study introduces the state-of-art of the 
Real-time LVC (Live-Virtual-Constructive) interoperation 
systems that are being used for the purpose of warfare 
training and presents the first Real-time V-C (Virtual-
Constructive) interoperation system building project in 
Korea, recently performed by ROKA (Republic of Korea 
Army). In this project, we have developed a new UAV  
(Unmanned Aerial Vehicle) image simulation system, which 
corresponds to V (Virtual) system and made it interoperate 
with the existing C (Constructive) system, ChangJo21, held 
by ROKA. Through this V-C interoperation, it became 
possible for the UAV image simulation system to simulate 
surveilance of a large group of troops like a real battlefield. 
But this V-C interoperation system can be suffered from 
severe overload caused by lots of data transmission between 
two systems. To solve this problem, we apply buffering 
function on data extraction procedure and use different 
data transmission strategies on the types of object. As a 
result, we have decreased more than 53% of amount of data 
transmission needed for V-C interoperation. 
Keywords-simulator; simulation; Interoperation system; 
Live; Virtual; Constructive; LVC; data extraction 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to rapid progress in IT technology over the 
decades it is anticipated that the theatre of the future is 
dependent to the network-based operational environment 
[1].  
For now, it is said that combat training based on LVC 
training environment is the most economical and 
effective way for combat training because LVC virtually 
presents the real battlefield using computer and network 
technology.  
In LVC training environment, “L” means a “Live” 
training system where real people operate real systems such 
as a pilot flying a jet. “V” means a “Virtual” training system 
where actual players use simulated systems in a synthetic 
environment. “C” means a “Constructive” training system 
where simulated players use simulated systems in a 
synthetic environment. Constructive training system is often 
referred to as “wargame”.  
Any of L, V, C systems, which is inadequate to 
simulate complex battlefield situations by oneself, can 
complement each other by interoperating with one 
another, leading to a more realistic combat simulation. In 
general, LVC requires that at least two of three types, 
which are Live (L), Virtual (V), and Constructive (C), are 
involved. 
To make L, V, C systems interoperable, assets, models, 
and effects from one training environment should be seen, 
affect, and be affected within the rest of the training 
environment. This implies that huge amount of data 
transmission between several training systems is needed. 
Therefore, it is important to effectively exchange and 
process data in real time which is served as the 
foundation for strategizing tactics and allocating 
commander and staff in punctuality [1][2]. 
Recently, we have developed a new UAV (Unmanned 
Aerial 
Vehicle) 
image 
simulation 
system, 
which 
corresponds to V system. As the next step, we have 
constructed a real time synchronous V-C interoperating 
system by making the UAV simulator interoperate with the 
existing C system, ChangJo21 [5], held by ROKA. In order 
to enable interoperation between the UAV image 
simulation system and ChangJo21 with different 
resolution(UAV simulator: entity-level, ChangJo21: unit-
level), unit information of ChangJo21 is disaggregated 
into individual objects (entities) of UAV image simulator 
and individual objects of UAV image simulator are 
aggregated into units on real-time basis (within a second) 
[5]. We also reduced the amount of data transmission by 
applying buffering function on data extraction procedure for 
information exchange and use different data transmission 
strategies on the types of object.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
2, we will introduce some restricted L, V, C training 
examples that are being operated in developed countries 
[3][4]. In Section 3, we will introduce a new V-C 
interoperating system consisting of a UAV image 
simulation system (V) and ChangJo21 (C). And then, we 
are going to describe the problems and our solutions for 
interoperating two heterogeneous simulation systems. Some 
modifications in simulation logic for supporting V-C system 
interoperation will be described in Section 4. Finally, we 
conclude our work in Section 5. 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
A. LVC examples in developed countries 
1) U.S. Army 
U.S. Army has tried to construct STOW (Synthetic 
Theater of War) as in Table I since 1994.  However, they 
recognized some problems such as difficulty in sharing 
battlefield situation between Live (L) and Virtual (V), 
Constructive (C) training systems.  It was very difficult to 
achieve different training goals for each system at the 
same time.  A large amount of budget has to be injected 
to solve these problems. Instead, COP (Common 
Operation Picture) Based LVC (not to interoperate 
systems but gather unit identifications on COP to utilize 
in commander / staff procedure training) integration has 
been adopted in training.  
In U.S. Army, Live training is mainly applied to an 
individual or a team and Virtual training is applied to 
middle echelon such as a brigade or a division. 
Constructive training is used for joint military exercises 
[1].  
TABLE I.  
TRANSITION OF LVC SYSTEM 
STOW : '94∼'01 
 (Synthetic Theater of War) 
L․V․C : '02 ∼ 
 (Live Virtual Constructive) 
 
 
 Concept 
- Synthesis of L.V.C in the same 
theater 
 Restriction 
- 
Restriction 
on 
situational 
description for L, V and C 
- Difficult to achieve all the 
purposes of various training 
- Need to secure network stability 
reliance 
 Concept 
- Divide L and C, coexist with V 
 Restriction 
- 
Restriction 
on 
situational 
description for L, V and C 
 
2) German Army 
The German Army thought that verification is needed 
to figure out if LVC really boosts effects in training. They 
are also worried that LVC might create situations that 
cannot happen in reality and lead to discontinuities in 
situation [4]. Table II shows the German army‘s 
evaluation results of the effects that LVC interoperation 
gives to combat training. 
TABLE II.  
THE GERMAN ARMY’S EVALUATION RESULTS OF THE 
EFFECTS OF LVC INTEROPERATION IN COMBAT TRAINING 
Sorting 
Virtual (A) 
Live (A) 
Constructive (A) 
Virtual (B) 
+ 
- 
◦ 
Live (B) 
- 
+ 
- 
Constructive (B) 
◦ 
- 
- 
+ (Expected effect), ◦ (Restricted effect), - (Insufficient effect) 
 
Figure 1.  Diagram of scientific training system for the German Army. 
 
Combat training systems are classified by the size of 
training into an individual - a crew - a platoon ∼ battalion - 
a commander or a staff officer training. They are also 
divided into L, V, C according to application system.   
The German army’s LVC concept is similar to STOW 
(Synthetic Theater of War) of the U.S. Army. However, it is 
different from that of U.S. Army because each system 
operates solely by stages as in Fig. 1.  
LVC training exercises continues step by step as 
follows. At first, individuals and crew are trained by virtual 
simulators (Virtual). Next, teams and platoons are trained 
interactively in real situation with dual simulator (similar to 
MILES: Multiple Integrated Laser Engagement Simulation), 
which are considered as Live training. Finally, commanders 
and staff officers are trained in virtual situation with war-
game model (Constructive) [4]. 
B.  Characteristics and development of virtual training 
The purpose of virtual training is to make teams and 
individuals experience battle fields indirectly and execute 
tactical training by utilizing developed simulator in case 
of restriction in armament because of high price and 
danger.  
However, most of simulators that ROK (Republic Of 
Korea) Army possess or currently under development are 
just for acquiring simple skills [3]. 
There is no simulator for tactical training linked to 
other systems in ROK Army. Therefore, a simulator 
which can facilitate the training environment in 
accordance to the training characteristics and interests 
has to be taken in place in the near future. 
1) System Operations 
When we develop simulators, there are many things 
that should be considered such as acquiring cost, 
developing range according to purposes of training, 
adjusting to environment, evolving concepts of operating 
battle, and developing new technologies. 
There are little data that can approve the effect of PC 
game-based simulator training and it needs to be checked 
by many types of experiments. Especially, PC game-
based simulator training has to be used as an auxiliary 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

tool for real maneuver in an echelon from a soldier to a 
battalion, not just simulation or simple game method. 
Simulator for instrument training in the past was just 
for acquiring skills. However, it is being developed to be 
used in tactical training for a platoon or a company, and 
synthetic theater in the same environment of the crew.  
Therefore, it should be used to train operating 
instrument, 
controlling 
and 
managing 
in 
various 
environments as preceding training instruments. 
2) System construction / development 
Simulators need to be made according to the purposes 
such as acquiring skills and tactical training. Simulators 
for acquiring skills should be settled in institutions and 
simulators for tactical training should be settled in field 
units to practice tactical training. 
However, all of the simulators in ROK Army  (24 
types 175 items) are put in practice for acquiring skills. 
Therefore, all the simulators should be used in training 
connected with the same system. 
Ongoing simulator development project is developing 
simulators for tactical training. However, connection with 
other systems is not considered at this moment. Therefore, 
simulators in the future should be connected to not only 
the same system, but also the other systems for integrated 
training. 
Simulators should be constructed for enabling not 
only improvement in controlling and firing ability under 
various virtual reality training environment but also 
training for a team, a platoon, or a company.  
In the future, simulators should be developed in the 
way of satisfying requirements such as interoperation 
property, ease in improving capacity, ease in setting up 
and supporting military demands, ease in movement and 
operation, ease in various kinds of training, adjustment to 
environment, and cost effectiveness. 
Like the above, virtual training is the training that 
real forces participate with simulation equipments. It can 
give opportunities for acquiring equipment control skills / 
proficient training method and HITL (Human-in-the-
Loop), such as human reaction process, decision process, 
human-machine interface, etc. [1].  
However, it can only be used in training of a person 
or a small force for simultaneous training. 
C. Characteristic and development of a war-game model 
War-game (Constructive) models that ROK Army 
possesses, ChangJo21 and Combat21 [13], do not reflect 
the characteristic of terrain of Korea and brand-new 
weapon systems.  
Future development of war-game model has to   
move toward improving the performance of training 
model currently being used and making possible to 
interoperate with newly developed simulation models for 
auxiliary functions. It is also moved in the direction of 
developing a war-game model which is able to train 
upper and lower echelon in collective way and to train 
and test various echelons, and to train multi-function 
echelons [6]. 
1)  Development of simulation capabilities according to 
battle field function 
A war-game model should be developed to provide 
Command and Control/Communication capability similar 
to reality in a network environment on the way that  
directions deliver, and this enables Command and 
Control/Communication training. It also should simulate 
the procedure to collect information by analyzing, 
processing, merging secret information gathered by a 
number 
of 
secret 
information 
collecting 
system. 
Especially, it should be able to provide collected data 
with images and photos with same form to real system. 
Since mechanized corps has high mobility and strong 
combat capability, a close combat must be differentiated 
according to simulation level. Also, a war-game model 
should provide detection-decision-fire procedure for 
operating integrated fire-power and simulation of a 
precise strike by a high precision projectile weapons [12]. 
In addition, the model must be able to simulate air 
defense, automation system, real time air observation and 
radio system as well as details about a combat service 
support system of a whole army. 
2)  Development of image information field 
When simulating a field of information, although it is 
possible to operate equipments such as a UAV, TOD  
(Thermal Observation Device) and a RASIT  (Radar 
Surveillance Intercept), the fact is that training of a field 
of information is restricted because detection results are 
offered dissimilar report form to actual fighting.  
On the other hand, the U.S army practices using 
methods providing virtual image information produced 
by collected data from UAV interlocked with CBS (Corps 
Battle Simulation) model for direction command center 
in every 10 minutes. Therefore, ROK Army needs a 
system that can give information analysis training 
opportunities in ASIC (All Sources Intelligence Center) 
by providing image information that is similar to real 
system to command center. 
As stated above, as a method for scientific corps 
practice using computer simulation in order to enhance 
combat 
direction 
abilities, 
war-game 
models 
are 
economical and offers us large scale integrated practice 
environment, but, have defects that they cannot embody 
actual fighting combat situations (equipment controlling 
exercise and the rest) [11]. 
D.  Development of LVC integrated simulation system 
The purpose of constructing LVC integrated simulation 
system is to provide a virtual integrated battle field 
environment similar to a real combat circumstance, by 
interlocking Live (L), Virtual (V) and Constructive (C) 
system with inter-working interface.  
If 
providing 
a 
virtual 
integrated 
battlefield 
environment by using available M&S (Modeling and 
Simulation) system, it is possible to do integrated training; a 
training from an individual to theater level, the staff and the 
director training by function, and an individual soldier 
training.  
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

1) Working system 
Most LVC working systems of U.S army have the main 
purpose of  providing a natural integration of LVC training 
assets and a large scale distributed environment by 
integrating weapon system simulators, and constructive 
simulations which depict a large scale battle-ground with a 
huge military strength in order to conduct training which 
considers operation situation of theater level. 
Live Assets should be selectively connected to provide 
highest level of tough-to-feel considering the restricted 
usefulness of real system integration and various safety 
precautions. In addition, it should provide integrated 
simulation that scenarios like actual fighting, real-world 
protocols and interfaces are integrated with other systems to 
support pertinent training of live asset managers. 
A virtual simulator asset should provide flexibility of 
training with a low cost by establishing an integrated 
synthetic training environment and training of strategies and 
tactics under dangerous areas or virtual situations. It should 
make it possible to conduct flexible training through 
simulating sensors and tough-to-feel three-dimensional 
terrain and pause/resume function not in reality. 
A war-game (Constructive) asset encourages to provide 
construction 
synthetic 
environment 
for 
sufficing 
a 
established training goal, production of a number of friendly 
forces, enemies and neutral forces, and a perfect training 
atmosphere complementing a platform produced by 
combatants in real and a virtual simulator, as well as 
dynamic training environment by creating unexpected 
conditions and enemies. 
2)  Establishing and development of System 
Steps of establishing and development plan for a LVC 
integrated simulation system of ROK Army is like below  
[3]; Table III, Table IV and Table V. 
 Step1: Establishing each model separately considering 
interoperation in the future (’14 ~ ‘20). 
 Step2: Establishing interoperating system between the 
other systems after between the same systems 
 Step3:  Establishing division level/ brigade level LVC 
interoperating system (’19∼’25). 
TABLE III.  
ESTABLISHING AND DEVELOPMENT OF EACH SYSTEM 
Live  (L) 
Constructing a foundation system interlocked with 
other systems when promoting project with a brigade 
level  (∼'14) 
Virtual (V) 
Developing a simulator which allows integrated 
simulation for tactical training  (∼'24) 
Constructive 
 (C) 
Developing a brand-new army’s combat direction 
training model which enables to be interlocked with 
other systems and models  (∼’17) 
TABLE IV.  
INTERLOCK BETWEEN THE SAME/OTHER SYSTEMS 
V-V 
Support L, C system by establishing connection between 
V systems 
C-C 
Support a war-game training  by establishing connection 
between C systems 
V-C 
Firstly construct an interlock system  (V-C) considering 
effect of training and technical level 
TABLE V.  
ESTABLISHMENT/DEVELOPMENT OF LVC SYSTEM 
DEPENDING ON ECHELON 
Division level 
LVC 
Establish LVC system considering training 
demand 
and 
technology 
after 
training 
interlocked between same systems. 
Brigade level 
LVC 
Establish with minimizing errors by analyzing 
division level LVC cases 
 
If we establish the LVC integrated simulation system as 
above, we attain vertical integration by echelons and 
horizontal integration by function. The system allows 
conducting unified combat training based on network by 
integrating various training capabilities such as detection 
asset, decision of direction, and means of attack. 
E. Restriction on establishing LVC integrated system 
Provided that we utilize LVC integrated simulation 
system, we can achieve the goal, “A training likes a combat, 
a combat likes a training.” for directors, chiefs and 
combatants by attaining upmost effects similar to real 
combats by implementing virtual simulation environments. 
However, there are some restrictions for building LVC 
integrated system as follows.  
First, a standard architecture which is able to satisfy all 
interoperability demand or interlock system (middle-ware) 
is absent.  
Since each L, V, C system is developed based on field-
specific requirements of various users they differ so much in 
communication protocol, object model, and so on. It implies 
that data converting and mapping process are required when 
interlocking between systems, which not only increases 
complexity of the system but also causes a bottleneck due to 
the tremendous amount of data it has to deal with 
Second, when interlocked between simulation-systems 
which have different simulation resolution (degree of 
depiction: object unit, corps unit), the systems need  
disaggregation and aggregation process due to difference of 
resolution of information. While ChangJo21 training model 
of ROK army like Fig. 2 depicts battles in a corps unit, the 
UAV simulator depicts battles by individual weapon 
systems.  
 
Figure 2. Aggregation/Disaggregation process between LVC systems. 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Because the simulator is unable to depict such a direct 
combat between corps and individual weapons, it is required 
that corps is disaggregated into individual equipment in 
necessity 
or 
numerous 
individual 
weapon 
systems 
aggregated 
into 
a 
unit. 
After 
several 
rounds 
of 
disaggregation and aggregation process, it is difficult to 
maintain accuracy and consistency of information due to 
loss of information. 
Third is a technical problem concerning about how to 
transmit status information of corps/objects depicted in each 
L, V, C training system to the counterpart systems. We have 
a technical problem about transmitting various status 
information including position information in V training 
system (UAV) to C training system (ChangJo21) and how 
to apply to V training system when damages occur in 
combat in C training system [3]. 
Another technical problem is due to the network 
overload caused by transmission of about 49,000,000 byte 
per second (participated corps * combat equipment 
possessed by corps, the number of supporting equipment * 
fixed objects). This data transmission quantity of 
49,000,000 byte/sec is hard to operate and apply to different 
systems (V-C) in short amount of time. Thus, it is hard to 
guarantee actual combat condition. 
III. 
DEVELOPMENT OF NEW V-C INTEROPERATING SYSTEM 
 
 
Figure 3. Operations of Real UAV System. 
A UAV system is operated as in Fig. 3. UAV flies 
without pilot by remote control and performs a 
reconnaissance 
mission. 
Images 
acquired 
during 
reconnaissance flight are transmitted to GRS (Ground 
Repeater System) by the radio, then transmitted to CCC 
(Corps Command Center) [4][11]. 
ChangJo21, one of the constructive training models that 
are owned by ROK Army, can simulate several information 
assets (UAV, TOD, RASIT, etc.). Among these, UAV 
automatically detects units / armaments of enemy located 
within radius of 2km by applying certain probability when 
inputting flight-related information (flight route, prior-target 
decision, etc.) as in Fig. 4.  
 
Figure 4. ChangJo21 UAV Simulation (Result of target detection). 
However, ChangJo21 provides the reconnaissance result 
of UAV simulation in text-based report without analysis 
procedure of target detection result. The result is that 
realistic training is restricted [5].  
 
 
Figure 5. Newly developed V-C interoperating simulation system. 
In order to overcome this restricted training condition, we 
have developed a new UAV image simulator and made it 
interwork with ChangJo21 constructive training model as in 
Fig. 5. The UAV simulator can produce reconnaissance 
images close to the level of images produced by real UAV. 
This V-C interoperating simulation system provides similar 
effectiveness to real training through virtual simulation 
environment and enables training for commands and staffs 
in intelligence field by simulating target detection/analysis  
/processing 
functions 
and 
mastering 
UAV 
image 
photographing at the same time [9][10]. 
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

A. Problem of interworking between ChangJo21 training 
model and the UAV image  simulator 
1) Object data transmission reduction strategy  
There is a problem in supporting real-time (1 second) 
training using our V-C system due to the network overload 
caused by 49,000,000 byte of object data transmission.  
To solve this, we have applied a dispersion method that 
only considers objects in the inner section of UAV detection 
capacity. First, the required information (approximately 
18,000,000byte) within UAV detection capacity (40km) is 
transmitted. Then, we applied the strategy that the updated 
information within detection territory is transmitted 
differently on the type of object such as fixed object or 
moving object. 
Different transmission strategies of object information 
are shown in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
TRANSMISSION STRATEGY OF OBJECT INFORMATION 
Item 
Transmission Strategy 
Remarks 
1. 
Transmission 
of initial data 
Transmit data only 
within detection 
territory considering 
UAV detection capacity 
(30Km) 
- Reduction of 80% of load 
- Increase in complexity of 
related logic 
2. 
Transmission 
of fixed object 
Need to register or 
delete of object along 
the UAV flight 
- Increase of load 
- Increase in complexity of 
related logic 
3. 
Transmission 
of moving object 
Register or delete 
objects only within 
detection territory 
considering UAV 
detection capacity 
(30Km) 
- Reduction of load 
- Increase in complexity of 
related logic 
a) Designing Concept 
As in Fig. 6, the UAV image simulator transmits objects 
within detection territory (40km) which is determined by 
applying buffering function (10km) to UAV detection 
capacity (30km) to prevent frequent addition, deletion of 
objects. Reconfiguration also has been made to have 
average network load at the moment of large capacity.  
 
Figure 6. Domain of object processing that is capable of buffer function. 
b) Comparison of reduced load caused by reconfiguration 
Table VII is a table of results that measures and 
compares quantity of data that has transmitted to the UAV 
system. This is based on the assumption that the number of 
participated military units is about 6,000 in ChangJo21 
constructive training system, and the average number of 
combat equipments and supporting equipments is 30. 
TABLE VII.  
RESULTS OF MEASURING DATA QUANTITY SENT TO THE 
UAV SYSTEM 
Classification 
Transmission 
(byte/sec) 
Remarks 
Quantity of transmission before 
reconfiguration 
49,000,000 
 
After 
applying 
detector 
capacity area 
Initial (40Km) 
18,000,000 
First 
Reconfiguration 
Fixed object 
30 
Moving object 
78,000 
After 
applying 
buffer 
function 
Initial (30Km) 
+Buffer 
900,000 
Final 
Reconfiguration 
Fixed object 
30,000 
Moving object 
15,600 
 
If the image diameter (width) of image sensor is 40km, 
radius of area that object information should be exchanged 
between our V-C interoperation system is more than 40Km, 
which is too large to continuously transmit in real-time. 
We have accomplished more than 53% of data reduction 
by reconfiguring V-C interoperation system in order that 
only object information inside detection territory including 
buffered area is transferred with different transmission 
strategies depending on the types of object, while satisfying 
requirement of interoperation system that has to be provided 
by V system, which requires real-time information exchange. 
2)  Information resolution conversion between systems  
ChangJo21 training system describes battlefield in unit 
(battalion) while UAV simulator describes battlefield in 
individual entity (tank, armored vehicle, etc.). This 
difference of information resolution between two systems 
implies that information resolution conversion function is 
needed 
to 
interconnect 
them. 
A 
Unit 
should 
be 
disaggregated to individual entities, or many of weapon 
systems should be aggregated into one unit as in Fig. 7.  
 
Figure 7. Information resolution conversion / exchange. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

In addition, state information (location, state of 
equipment, etc.) for the UAV is transmitted from the UAV 
simulator to ChangJo21 model in real-time as in Fig. 8. It 
makes operating UAV simulator impossible when it is 
damaged by air defense weapons. 
 
Figure 8. Transmission of UAV state information. 
3) Correspondence of topographical information between 
ChangJo21 and the UAV simulatior 
Due to differences of topographical information between 
ChangJo21 and the UAV simulation system, unrealistic 
situations may occur. For example, tanks may move along 
rivers or mountains as in Fig. 9. In this case, it is required to 
match topographical information between two systems. 
Through this work, objects (tanks, etc.) can move along the 
roads. 
 
Figure 9. Inconsistency of geographical information between systems. 
4) Optimization of simultaneous target processing for 
UAV simulator 
More than 7,000 military units are operated in corps 
combat-command 
training 
using 
ChangJo21, 
and 
approximately 350,000 objects (entities) are operated when 
units are transformed to objects (weapons) in order to be 
expressed in the UAV simulation system. It is impossible to 
operate systems normally due to overload caused by 
processing such a large amount of objects simultaneously.  
We have reduced system loads by processing only 
updated objects located within feasible photographing 
regions by UAV sensor (with diameter 00km) as in Fig. 10. 
 
Figure 10. Target detection / Discerned territory. 
B. Construction of a real-time UAV image sharing system 
Gamers who are responsible for controlling combat units 
in combat command training by corps are located in BSC 
(Battle Simulation Center) and CCCs (Corps Command 
Centers) are located in that corps. That is, BSC and CCCs 
are placed and operated in different locations. The UAV 
image simulation system is operated in BSC’s information 
simulation department.  
We have constructed a real-time UAV image sharing 
system by transmitting acquired secret information of UAV 
image to ASIC and CCCs as in Fig. 11. It enables 
commanders and staff officers to have exercise for 
information analyzing /handling process. 
 
 
Figure 11. Architecture of real-time UAV image sharing system. 
C.  Comparison of UAV image systems held by Korea and U.S 
Fig. 12 shows the differences in a visual aspect between 
our UAV image simulation system and MUSE, UAV virtual 
reality system that has been used to real training since 
August 2003 by U.S. Army.   
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 12.  Comparison of UAV image systems in Korea and U.S. 
Table VIII also describes system configuration for each 
system in detail. 
TABLE VIII.  COMPARISON OF KOREA-U.S. UAV IMAGE SYSTEM 
Item 
Contents 
MUSE 
(U.S. Army) 
 
MUSE operator: located in ASIC 
 
Map image: Black / White 
 
Sensor capacity: Diameter 0Km 
 
System overloads due to the transmitting information 
of all units within operating area  (by minute) 
UAV 
(ROK 
Army) 
 
UAV system operator: Located in simulated 
Information team 
⇒ transmitting UAV image to ASIC 
 
Map image: Color  
 
Sensor capacity: Diameter 00Km 
 
Minimize system overloads by selected transmission 
of data which is in UAV screen  (by second) 
IV.  MODIFICATION OF SIMULATION LOGIC FOR V-C 
INTEROPERATION 
A.  Visual factor 
In order to reflect shielding effect to the objects  
(weapons) by applying altitude to plateau/ridge considering 
3-dimensional topographical characteristics, we have to 
match topographical information in training model with 
those in the UAV simulator.  In addition, topographical 
information should not be applied to simulator in artificially 
edited way.  
Unfortunately, 3-dimensional topographical map of our 
UAV simulator does not support forests (plants), civilization, 
and topographical shape (mountains, clouds), so that it is 
necessary to consider the effect of detection of hidden and 
concealed objects in real theater as in Fig. 13.  
 
Figure 13.  Shielding effect considering three-dimensional topography. 
We have solved these problems by applying different 
detection rate on topographical factors in the training model. 
Specifically, we have applied 60% of detection rate on 
objects of stopped units considering various kinds of hiding 
and concealment in combat situation, and have applied 
100% of detection rate on objects of moving units using 
roads except for infantry outfits. We decided the detection 
rates based on the experiences in real combat training. 
B.  Weather factor 
In operation of real UAV, it is general to set up flying 
plans considering rainfall, snowfall, the direction of the 
wind/the velocity of the wind. Therefore, we have made   
UAV flight restricted considering weather condition in the 
UAV image simulation system as well. The flight is 
restricted when rainfall more than midway (0mm /H above) 
or snowfall more than midway (00mm /H above) occurs or 
when right wind 00m/s / side wind 0∼0m/s occurs in 
respect of the direction and the speed of wind. 
On the other side, it is necessary to carry out consistent 
research on special effects such as blurred image occurred 
by weather condition on sensor image photographing / 
diminished visible area. 
C.  Application of moving distance depending on unit 
formation / armament 
We 
have 
applied 
different 
movement 
intervals 
depending on weapons (tanks, armored vehicles, etc.) and 
vehicles to provide each object location to simulator 
applying 6 formations (column, row, tripod, inverse tripod, 
right echelon, left echelon) and tactical intervals between 
objects.  
Simulation logic for unit movement of training model 
has been modified, which made it possible for marching 
columns to follow along the bending roads instead of 
keeping straight disposition as in Fig. 14. This logic 
modification has brought a positive effect on not only 
damage estimation on moving units but also interoperation 
between simulator and training model. 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 14.  Objects moving along the roads. 
D. Further developments 
Newly developed UAV image simulation system is the 
first system that supports V-C interoperation in ROK Army 
but is not perfect yet. There are several points to be 
complemented and further developed.  
First, in terms of personnel / portable equipment, the 
reflection of three-dimensional image of objects, is 
restricted if the number of objects (military forces) is 
excessive. In case of considering all personnel, the system 
loads will be aggravated.  
The reflection is also restricted due to limitation of 
three-dimensional image processing capability of portable 
equipments. Thus, it is necessary to estimate appropriate 
number of persons and reflect it to the system after system 
overload test for further personnel. Displaying of three-
dimensional object images on portable equipment should be 
considered after developing three-dimensional image 
processing capability. 
Second, it is necessary to complement reality such as 
blurred image effect and reduction of visibility range in 
target 
detection 
/ 
discernment 
considering 
image 
photographing effect which includes weather condition like 
rainfall, snowfall, mist, cloud and the rest. 
Third, real UAV operation has been executed mainly on 
providing target information associated with tactical plan 
and 
secret 
information 
for 
BDA 
(Battle 
Damage 
Assessment) evaluation. Consequently, newly developed 
UAV image simulation system supports 3D image 
photographing and represents objects considering combat 
damage as that objects destroyed by attack are deleted in 
real-time. However, the flame and smoke from objects  
(equipments) when damage occurs are not included in the 
image. Therefore, this weak point should be complemented. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Current simulation models (system) held by ROK Army 
have limitations on vicarious execution of mission and 
action of combat personnel.  Moreover, there are restrictions 
on providing comprehensive training / exercise opportunity 
because simulator training is also restricted for upper level 
unit’s commanders / staff training. Therefore, LVC training 
system is the most suitable means for commanders, staffs, 
and combat personnel to train together in ordered ways.  
The purpose of LVC training system is to embody the 
system for accomplishing similar effect with real combat 
execution through providing virtual simulation environment 
similar to real world. Still, the embodiment of LVC 
integrated simulation system is currently restricted in ROK 
Army because LVC training system construction is planned 
from year 2019 to 2025 in successive manner. 
We described about a V-C interoperation system first 
developed in Korea that connects UAV simulator (V) and 
ChangJo21 model (C). We have enhanced the performance 
of the V-C interoperation system by applying buffer 
function only to changed object information that is within 
the diameter of image sensor, and by constructing 
interoperation system. 
As this study suggests, when V system has self-image 
and interoperates with C system in real-time, and when V 
system interoperates with war-game model (C) for a large 
troop, it is possible to do real-time data synchronization 
between two models. 
We have developed the foundation of L-V-C system 
without trial and error that many of the M&S developed 
countries experienced in interoperation of different systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Defense Acquisition 
Program 
Administration 
and 
Agency 
for 
Defense 
Development under the contract UD110006MD, Korea 
REFERENCES 
[1] ROK Joint Chiefs of Staff, National Defense M&S System 
Improvement Points (12∼26 Integrated Concept Guide), Appendix Ⅲ, 
Annex 2, 2011. 
[2] ROK Army Headquarter, M&S Policy Guide (2009 ∼ 2025 
Fundamental Policy Guide of Army), 2009. 
[3] ROK Army Headquarter, Scientific Training System  (LVC) Mid-
long Development Planning, 2010. 
[4] ROK Air Force Headquarter, Air Force LVC System Interoperation 
Technique Concept Research, 2010. 
[5] ROK Army Training & Doctrine Command, ChangJo21 Model ‘11 
Simulation Logic Analysis Guide  (Education Reference 25-14), ROK 
Army Press, 2011. 
[6] S. Y. Choi, National Defense Modeling and Simulation, National 
Defense University, 2007. 
[7] K. T. Kim and Y. S. Moon, Data Structure Theory, Jeong-Ik Press, 
1990. 
[8] G. R Ash, Traffic Engineering and QoS Optimization of Integrated 
Voice & Data Networks, MORGAN KAUFMANN Publishers, 2007. 
[9] D. J. Hatley and I. A. Pirbhai, Strategies for Real-Time System 
Specification, Dorset House Publishers Co., 1987. 
[10]  M. Fowler, Refactoring, Dae-Chung Media, 2003. 
[11] K. S. Choi, H .G. Jung, and T. Y. Park, “Mission Analysis Research 
on UAV System Operation Effectiveness”, Korea National Defense 
Management Analysis Society Conference Division 3: Management 
Science/ OR, 2011. 
[12] ROK Army, Principle of Ground Weapon System(I), Chapter 4, ROK 
Army Press, 2010.  
[13] ROK Army Training & Doctrine Command, Combat21 User 
Manual(I), ROK Army Press, 2003. 
 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

