Secure PMIPv6-Based Mobility Solution for LoRaWAN
Hassan Jradi∗†, Abed Ellatif Samhat∗, Fabienne Nouvel†, Mohamad Mroue∗, Jean-Christophe Pr´evotet†
∗Lebanese University — CRSI, Hadath, Lebanon.
email: {samhat, mohamad.mroue}@ul.edu.lb
†INSA de Rennes — IETR, Rennes, France.
email: firstname.lastname@insa-rennes.fr
Abstract—The widespread use of Internet of Things (IoT) has
stimulated the invention of new communication technologies like
Long Range Wide Area Network (LoRaWAN) and Narrow Band-
Internet of Things (NB-IoT) belonging to Low Power Wide Area
Network (LPWAN) technologies. The wide use of these technolo-
gies brings new requirements like mobility management. Proxy
Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) is a network-based mobility management
protocol. However, integrating PMIPv6 in LPWAN rises a special
challenge due to LPWAN constraints. In addition, PMIPv6 does
not provide secure access to the operator domain. In this paper,
we propose a new PMIPv6-based mobility solution for LoRaWAN
boosted with an authentication scheme to access the operator
domain and make this solution resist several types of attacks.
In addition, we evaluate the performance of our scheme and we
compare it with other works. Finally, we evaluate the security of
the new scheme using Automated Validation of Internet Security
Protocols and Applications (AVISPA) tool.
Keywords – IoT; LPWAN; LoRaWAN; Mobility; Authen-
tication.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the novel era of wireless
communication carrying out several services ranging from data
sensing to command execution [1]. New communication tech-
nologies designed to meet the needs of long communication
range with low data rates and power consumption are invented
and categorized under Low Power Wide Area Network (LP-
WAN) [2]. Long Range Wide Area Network (LoRaWAN) is
one of the most prominent LPWAN technologies operating in
the unlicensed Industrial, Scientific, and Medical radio band
(ISM band) [3].
However, several applications like healthcare supervising
and supply chain monitoring, require a secure mobility man-
agement protocol to ensure session continuity and secure ac-
cess to the operator network [4]. Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6)
[5] is one of IPv6 protocol extensions designed to provide
network-based mobility protocol. The mobility procedure is
executed by an entity on behalf of the Mobile Node (MN)
which minimizes the power consumed by it.
However, PMIPv6 does not deploy an authentication mech-
anism which is essential in case of an MN wishing to join the
network. Several authentication schemes are proposed to be
used in PMIPv6 as in [6][7]. Nonetheless, the used solution
should be well adapted to work in LoRaWAN environment
taking into consideration LPWAN constraints like payload
length, data rate range, and number of messages per day.
Contribution. The main contribution of this paper is the
proposal of a new mobility solution based on PMIPv6 protocol
with an authentication scheme providing both intra-domain
and inter-domain authentication for LoRaWAN.
Paper Organization. In Section II, we present some related
work and we describe the problem. In Section III, we present
the proposed mobility solution along with the authentication
scheme. Section IV shows the results and the comparison with
related work and Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
Mobility is the movement of an MN leading to the release
of the connection with the current Point of Attachment (PoA)
and the establishment of the connection with a new PoA
[8]. The deployed mobility management protocol has a major
role in the connection release/establishment procedures from
performance and security points of view.
Several types of mobility can be identified according to
the handoff scenario. Handoff is the process of release of
the old connection and establishment of the new connection.
Thus, mobility can be homogeneous or heterogeneous if the
previous and the new PoAs use the same or different link layer
technologies, respectively. Mobility can be also intra-domain
or inter-domain (also known as roaming) if the previous and
the new PoAs belong to the same or different network opera-
tors, respectively. Consequently, several schemes are proposed
to deal with the mobility challenge in LPWANs taking into
consideration the security aspect.
The work done by Moosavi et al. [9] aims to provide a
mobility management solution for IoT by splitting the network
into two virtual layers. The intermediate processing layer
consists of smart gateways that manage devices mobility, and
the cloud layer consists of data analysis servers. This solution
enables an end-to-end security solution between the MN and
the end-user by providing authentication and data encryption,
and at the same time provides session resumption after the
handoff phase.
Another work done by Kang et al. [6] addresses the
problem of lack of authentication in PMIPv6 protocol. This
work focuses mainly on the PMIPv6 protocol without taking
into consideration the IoT requirements. Thus, the proposed
solution is a general solution and could not be adapted directly
to IoT or LPWANs.
In Sharma et al. [7] work, the authors proposed a mobility
management solution based on Fast Proxy Mobile IPv6 (FP-
MIPv6) to provide a proactive handoff approach, and based on
Media Independent Handover (MIH) framework [10] which
is a framework providing heterogeneous handoff using three
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

MIH services. Moreover, the authors propose an authentication
scheme based on pre-shared keys to provide secure MIH
communication between the MN and the network entities.
This solution was intended for IoT and not for LPWAN
having more constraints, thus it cannot be directly adapted
into LPWANs.
In the work of Ayoub et al. [11], the authors proposed to use
a modified version of Static Context Header Compression pro-
tocol (SCHC) [12] protocol named Dynamic Context Header
Compression (DCHC) protocol along with the use of Mobile
IPv6 (MIPv6) and a light version of MIH framework. This
work was designed to operate in an LPWAN environment es-
pecially with LoRaWAN and Narrow Band-Internet of Things
(NB-IoT).
Thus, as shown, several works try to deal with the mobility
aspect of devices. However, these works either cannot be
directly integrated into LPWAN, or do not provide a se-
curity mechanism for network access. In the next section,
we present a new PMIPv6-based mobility solution boosted
with an authentication mechanism taking into consideration
LPWAN constraints.
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
In this section, we present our mobility solution that pro-
vides both intra-domain and inter-domain mobility types for
LoRaWAN, where the MN may move inside or outside its
home operator network coverage.
A. Protocol Stack
The protocol stack used for the communication between the
MN and the network is represented in Figure 1.
The upper layers consist of application and transport lay-
ers which are dependent on the deployment purpose of the
network. These layers are used to send/receive the application
data.
The network layer consists of IPv6 as a routing protocol and
PMIPv6 as a network layer mobility management protocol.
As we are dealing with LoRaWAN technology which is
considered as a layer 2 or link-layer technology, we propose
to modify the LoRaWAN protocol stack to be operable with
the added IPv6 and PMIPv6 network layer functions. The
integration of PMIPv6 requires the adoption of PMIPv6 net-
work architecture, as discussed in the following subsection.
However, the addition of this layer leads to additional overhead
which should be examined carefully in LoRaWAN since the
maximum payload length is 256 bytes. The advantage of using
IPv6 is to achieve global mobility independently of the lower
layer technology, since each technology can deploy its lower
layer mobility protocol.
For that, we propose to use an adaptation layer to overcome
the previous problem. In this layer, Static Context Header
Compression protocol (SCHC) [12] is used to compress the
IPv6 packet headers in order to fit suitable payload lengths
for LPWANs. Upon a connection establishment, the sender
and the receiver agree on a SCHC context. This context
Figure 1. Mobile Node Protocol Stack.
contains several rules identified by RuleID. Each rule con-
tains a list of entries. An entry contains a field identifier, a
Compression/Decompression (C/D) action, a target value and
a matching operator. An uplink packet header field is compared
with the target value according to the matching operator, and
if the comparison test succeeds, the C/D action is executed.
In this way, the RuleID and the compression residues are sent
instead of sending the entire header. At the receiver side, the
reverse process is executed.
The lower layers consist of the data link and physical layers
of the used LPWAN technology. In the case of LoRaWAN, the
data link layer is LoRaWAN Media Access Control Layer and
the physical layer is LoRa physical layer.
B. Network Architecture
The main entities in LoRaWAN are the Network Server
(NS), the Join Server (JS) and the Gateways (GWs). The
improved LoRaWAN architecture is called evolved LoRaWAN
and is shown in Figure 2. We endeavored to integrate the
two necessary PMIPv6 entities, which are the Media Access
Gateway (MAG) and the Local Mobility Anchor (LMA), in
the LoRaWAN architecture.
We propose to place the LMA functionalities within the
NS since the latter is the anchor point of LoRaWAN architec-
ture. Furthermore, a new entity called LoRa Mobile Access
Gateway (LoRaMAG), is inserted between GWs and NS.
Therefore, several GWs will be connected to one LoRaMAG
and an MN should authenticate itself with the new LoRaMAG
when it moves from a GW to another connected to a different
LoRaMAG. LoRaMAG will play the role of the MAG of
PMIPv6 architecture. It is responsible for the detection of MN
movement, initiating the mobility signaling with the LMA, and
data forwarding between MN and LMA through the dedicated
tunnel.
The use of PMIPv6 adds more scalability where the NS
functions are divided over several LoRaMAGs like the down-
link GW selection. In addition, PMIPv6 is known to be to
suitable for constrained devices since MIPv6 binding update
messages are executed by MAG on the MN behalf.
Another entity used for the authentication between the MN
and the LoRaMAG called the Authentication Server (AuS) is
added also in each PMIPv6 domain (which is in this case the
LoRaWA network). The detailed operation of the AuS function
is shown in the next subsection.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

Figure 2. Evolved LoRaWAN Network Architecture.
C. Authentication Scheme
The proposed authentication scheme is used to authenticate
the MN with the LMA in the PMIPv6 domain using AuS
entity. In the following, we distinguish between two scenarios:
intra-domain mobility and inter-domain mobility (or roaming).
In case of intra-domain mobility, the MN moves inside the
coverage of a GW connected to a LoRaMAG belonging to its
home domain, thus MN credentials are saved in the domain
AuS where the MN is initially registered.
In case of inter-domain mobility, the MN moves towards
the coverage of GWs of a visited domain having its visited
LMA (vLMA), visited AuS (vAuS), and will be connected
through visited LoRaMAG (vLoRaMAG). The MN is initially
registered in its home domain in home AuS (hAuS) having
MN credentials.
The proposed scheme consists of two phases: the registra-
tion phase and the authentication phase. We will present the
authentication phase in case of roaming (device moving in the
visited operator coverage).
In this scheme, we tried to integrate the PMIPv6 signaling
with the authentication scheme signaling. This solution is
compatible with class A LoRaWAN devices based on one
transmission frame followed by two reception frames.
1) Registration Phase: The hAuS holds two secret keys X
and Y which are only known by itself. Then, a MNi having
an identity IDi and the hAuS holds two pre-shared keys:
• Xi = H(H(X) ⊕ IDi).
• Yi = H(H(Y ) ⊕ IDi).
We presume that we have secure links between {GWs and
vLoRaMAG}, {vLoRaMAG and vAuS}, {vAuS and hAuS}.
so that data confidentiality and integrity are ensured on these
links. These links can be secured using Public Key Infras-
tructure (PKI) [13] or any authentication and key agreement
scheme. We focus on the {MN and vLoRaMAG} link where
LoRaWAN limitations are present.
2) Authentication Phase: In this phase, the MN tries to
authenticate itself in the visited PMIPv6 domain with the
vLoRaMAG through vAuS and hAuS, using the exchanges
shown in Figure 3. Since the GWs only forward the messages,
we do not represent them for more clarity. Moreover, this
phase is divided into two sub-phases: home authentication sub-
phase, and visited authentication sub-phase.
In home authentication sub-phase (red part in Figure 3), the
MN sends its authentication request which passes to hAuS
through vAuS. The hAuS checks the authentication request
validity and derives two keys and shares them with vAuS. This
sub-phase is executed in case of roaming only and once per
visited domain.
In visited authentication sub-phase (green part in Figure
3), after the vAuS gets the visited keys from the hAuS, it
uses them to authenticate the MN as long as it is in the
visited domain without the need to send requests to hAuS.
So after the first sub-phase, the second sub-phase can be
repeated several times to authenticate the mobile when it
moves between different vLoRaMAGs.
The message exchanges are detailed below. T1 through T4
are timestamp variables used to prevent replay attack.
1) MNi computes Ki = H(Xi) ⊕ H(Yi) and MIC1 =
H(IDi ∥ T1 ∥ Ki) then sends a message with AuthReq
tag consisting of {IDi ∥ IDhAuS ∥ T1 ∥ MIC1}.
2) vAuS checks the requested AuS by inspecting the second
field of the request. In this case, the requested AuS is
hAuS thus vAuS forwards this request to hAuS.
3) hAuS receives the request and gets the identity IDi, then
hAuS queries its database for the corresponding keys Xi
and Yi. Thereafter, hAuS computes Ki = H(Xi)⊕H(Yi)
and checks if MIC1 = H(IDi ∥ T1 ∥ Ki).
4) hAuS
generates
a
random
nonce
N
and
com-
putes two derived keys vXi
=
H(Xi ⊕ N) and
vYi = H(Yi ⊕ N). These two derived keys are in-
tended to be sent to vAuS. Moreover, hAuS com-
putes MIC2
=
H(IDi ∥ N ∥ T2 ∥ Ki). hAuS sends
a message with RoamingAuthResp tag consisting of
{IDi ∥ vXi ∥ vYi ∥ N ∥ T2 ∥ MIC2}. Note that this mes-
sage is sent over a secure link.
5) vAuS receives the response and gets vXi and vYi, then
saves them along with IDi in its database. Thereafter,
vAuS forwards the rest of the response to MNi with its
identity IDvAuS. A mapping between IDi and DevAddi
is saved in the vLMA/NS.
6) MNi receives the response and checks if MIC2 =
H(IDi ∥ N ∥ T2 ∥ Ki). MNi gets N from the message
then computes vXi = H(Xi ⊕N) and vYi = H(Yi ⊕N)
to be used for the authentication in the visited domain. At
this step, home authentication sub-phase is finished and
should not be executed again as long as MNi is inside
this domain.
7) After the reception of the RoamingAuthResp by the
vLoRaMAG in case of first authentication request (home
authentication sub-phase), or in case of attach event
detection by vLoRaMAG in second or upper MNi at-
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
⊕
←
←
←
←
Figure 3. Message Exchange During Authentication Phase.
tachment (after a successful LoRaWAN Join Procedure);
vLoRaMAG sends a message with AttachEvent tag con-
sisting of {DevAddi} to vAuS. This step is the first step
of visited domain authentication sub-phase.
8) vAuS receives the attach event notification from vLo-
RaMAG then sends a message with ProfileCheck tag con-
sisting of {DevAddi} to vAuS/NS. vAuS/NS in its turn
replies with a message with ProfileFound tag consisting
of the corresponding {IDi}.
9) vAuS queries its database based on IDi to get vXi and
vYi, then it computes vKi = H(vXi) ⊕ H(vYi) and
sends a message with AttachVerifier tag consisting of
{IDi ∥ vKi} to vAuS/NS. Note that this message is sent
over a secure link.
10) After elapsing the timer launched by MNi after the
link layer attach, which is configured to be equivalent
to the duration of the four previous exchanges, MNi
computes vKi = H(vXi) ⊕ H(vYi) and MIC3 =
H(IDi ∥ T3 ∥ vKi). Then sends a message with RtrSol
tag consisting of {IDi ∥ T3 ∥ MIC3} to vLoRaMAG in
order to get a RtrAdv message to configure its network
layer interface.
11) vLoRaMAG receives the RtrSol message and checks if
MIC3 = H(IDi ∥ T3 ∥ vKi). If so, vLoRaMAG sends a
Proxy Binding Update (PBU) message along with IDi to
vLMA which is also the NS. Therefore vLMA performs
the needed operations according to PMIPv6 protocol to
register/update the Binding Cache Entry (BCE) of MNi.
Then it replies with Proxy Binding Acknowledgment
(PBA) message along with IDi to vLoRaMAG.
12) vLoRaMAG
accepts
the
PBA
message
and
com-
putes
MIC4
=
H(IDi ∥ HNP ∥ T4 ∥ vKi)
and
sends
a
message
with
RtrAdv
tag
consisting
of
{IDi ∥ HNP ∥ T4 ∥ MIC4} to MNi. Home Network
Prefix (HNP) is the network prefix corresponding to
MNi. vLoRaMAG sends another message with AuthSucc
tag along with IDi to vAuS to confirm the authentication
success.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

13) MNi
receives the RtrAdv message and checks if
MIC4 = H(IDi ∥ HNP ∥ T4 ∥ vKi) where it can now
configure its network layer interface using HNP.
14) MNi and vAuS update the two derived keys by per-
forming the following operations vXi ← H(vXi) and
vYi ← H(vYi) which will be used in the next authenti-
cation trial.
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the performance evaluation and
the security analysis of our solution. In addition, we compare
the performance evaluation and the security features of our
solution with related work.
A. Performance Evaluation
We evaluated the performance of the proposed authentica-
tion scheme by simulation using Network Simulator 3 (NS-3).
The simulation scenario consists of the entities used in the
authentication scheme. The link between MN and GW is a
LoRaWAN radio link and is considered an unsecured link. The
MN is trying to authenticate itself to the visited domain using
the proposed scheme. The source code of implementation can
be found in [14].
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Datarate (kbps)
200
300
400
500
600
700
Authentication Time (ms)
Channel Delay
100 ms
50 ms
30 ms
20 ms
10 ms
Figure 4. Authentication Time for Variable Data Rates and Channel Delays.
The evaluation metric is the time needed to perform the
authentication scheme and the simulation parameters are the
data rate (Rb) and the channel delay (τ) for the link between
MN and GW. For that, we run simulations at LoRaWAN
data rate range, i.e., Rb from 20 to 200 kbps and at τ ∈
{10, 20, 30, 50, 100} ms. The results are shown in Figure 4.
In Figure 5, we show the overall handoff latency for
related work presented in Section II. The results show that
our solution provides competitive results with other solutions
where we work on low data rates and we provide inter-domain
authentication. Moosavi et al. [9] and Sharma et al. [7] use
high data rates reaching 8 Mbps whereas in Ayoub et al.
[11], and in this work, the data rates used are that used in
LoRaWAN (between 20 to 200 kbps) forming a low latency
mobility solution.
Moreover, the longest message payload on the LoRaWAN
link is that tagged with RoamingAuthResp. The hash used
in this scheme is SHA-256 thus hash length (LHash
=
32 Bytes). The lengths of identities, nonce and timestamp
are respectively LID = 4 Bytes, LNonce = 8 Bytes and
LT imestamp = 10 Bytes . Thus LP ayload = 2 × LIDi +
LNonce + LT imestamp + LHash = 58 Bytes < 256 Bytes
(Maximum LoRaWAN payload length). Thus, the authenti-
cation mechanism is suitable for LoRaWAN technology and
more particularly for class A devices since it is based on
reception after transmission.
Figure 5. Performance Comparison of the Proposed Mobility Solutions.
B. Security Analysis
We assess the security of the proposed authentication
scheme based on attacks related to device mobility as men-
tioned in our previous work [2].
⋄ Device
re-authentication:
the
proposed
authentication
scheme aims to provide secure access when the mobile node
moves between different domains, thus it can be identified
and authenticated in case of intra-domain and inter-domain
mobility.
⋄ Spoofing signaling message: the exchanged signaling mes-
sages between MN and network entities are integrity pro-
tected using MIC field through Ki or vKi keys only known
by the concerned entities. Thus, an attacker cannot modify
the content of these messages without being detected.
⋄ Address squatting and spoofing: an attacker cannot squat
or spoof the device address since HNP is provided to
MN during the authentication phase based on PMIPv6
specifications. And the network layer interface is configured
after the authentication phase based on the provided HNP.
⋄ Old address control: the MN IPv6 address is re-configured
after the handoff phase based on the received IPv6 HNP.
Thus, an attacker uses a device address without the comple-
tion of the authentication phase.
⋄ Mutual authentication: the authentication between the mo-
bile node and the hAuS is ensured using the hash key Ki,
and between the MN and the vLoRaMAG using the hash
key vKi. These keys are confidential and cannot be derived
by an attacker since it does have and cannot predict the key
materials Xi, Yi, vXi and vYi.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

⋄ Key freshness: the hash key vKi is calculated during each
authentication trial by a way it cannot be predicted in the
next authentication trial based on the use of vXi, vYi. Even
if vLoRaMAG having vKi cannot predict it at next trial.
⋄ Replay attack: this kind of attack is prevented by the use of
timestamps T1 through T4.
In Table I, we compare the security features provided by
related work presented in Section II.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF SOLUTIONS ACCORDING TO SECURITY ISSUES
Kang et al.[6]
Sharma et al.[7]
Moosavi et al.[9]
Ayoub et al.[11]
Proposed Solution
Device re-authentication
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
Spoofing signaling message
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
Address squatting and spoofing
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
Old address control
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
Mutual authentication
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
Key freshness
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
Replay attack
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
Suitable for LPWAN
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓ : Resistant ✗ : Vulnerable
C. Security Validation using AVISPA
We used Automated Validation of Internet Security Pro-
tocols and Applications (AVISPA) [15] as a validation tool
for the security of the proposed authentication scheme. The
implementation codes using HLPSL language can be found in
[14]. Testing the implemented scheme using AVISPA shows
that our solution is secure, as shown in Figure 6.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed an inter-domain mobility solution
for LoRaWAN. We tried to solve the problem of domain access
in PMIPv6 protocol by the use of the proposed authentication
mechanism. Our solution is simulated using NS-3 and presents
Figure 6. AVISPA Validation of the Proposed Authentication Scheme.
competitive results compared to other works in the literature.
We conducted our scheme also through AVIPSA validation
tool to prove its security.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Lin et al., “A survey on internet of things: Architecture,
enabling technologies, security and privacy, and applications,”
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, pp. 1125–1142, 2017.
[2]
H. Jradi, A. E. Samhat, F. Nouvel, M. Mroue, and J.-C.
Pr´evotet, “Overview of the mobility related security chal-
lenges in lpwans,” Computer Networks, p. 107 761, 2020.
[3]
K. Mekki, E. Bajic, F. Chaxel, and F. Meyer, “A comparative
study of lpwan technologies for large-scale iot deployment,”
ICT express, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2019.
[4]
W. Ayoub, A. E. Samhat, F. Nouvel, M. Mroue, and J.-C.
Pr´evotet, “Internet of mobile things: Overview of lorawan,
dash7, and nb-iot in lpwans standards and supported mobility,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 2,
pp. 1561–1581, 2018.
[5]
S. Gundavelli et al., “Proxy mobile ipv6,” IETF RFC 5213,
Aug. 2008.
[6]
D. Kang, J. Jung, D. Lee, H. Kim, and D. Won, “Security
analysis and enhanced user authentication in proxy mobile
ipv6 networks,” Plos one, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1–20, 2017.
[7]
V. Sharma et al., “Mih-spfp: Mih-based secure cross-layer
handover protocol for fast proxy mobile ipv6-iot networks,”
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 125,
pp. 67–81, 2019.
[8]
C. Perkins et al., “Ip mobility support,” IETF RFC 2002, Oct.
1996.
[9]
S. R. Moosavi et al., “End-to-end security scheme for mobility
enabled healthcare internet of things,” Future Generation
Computer Systems, vol. 64, pp. 108–124, 2016.
[10]
V. Gupta et al., “Ieee802. 21 standard and metropolitan area
networks: Media independent handover services,” Draft P802,
vol. 21, p. D00, 2009.
[11]
W. Ayoub et al., “Media independent solution for mobility
management in heterogeneous lpwan technologies,” Computer
Networks, vol. 182, p. 107 423, 2020.
[12]
A. Minaburo, L. Toutain, C. Gomez, D. Barthel, and J.-C.
Z´u˜niga, “Schc: Generic framework for static context header
compression and fragmentation,” Technical Report RFC8724,
Tech. Rep., 2020.
[13]
C. Adams and S. Lloyd, Understanding public-key infras-
tructure: concepts, standards, and deployment considerations.
Sams Publishing, 1999.
[14]
H. Jradi, ns-3 and AVISPA Implementation source codes,
retrieved: Mar, 2022. [Online]. Available: github . com /
HassanJradi/secure-mobility-secure.git.
[15]
L. Vigano, “Automated security protocol analysis with the
avispa tool,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Sci-
ence, vol. 155, pp. 61–86, 2006.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-940-9
ICN 2022 : The Twenty-First International Conference on Networks

