Caching Data Protection Scheme for Information-Centric Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
Shintaro Mori 
Department of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science 
Fukuoka University 
8-19-1, Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan 
e-mail: smori@fukuoka-u.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract— Internet of things is widespread in our daily life, such 
as smart cities (homes), health care, and our activity lifelogs. In 
these use cases, sensing data must be managed not only 
effectively but also securely. From this perspective, we adopt the 
information-centric network design into wireless sensor 
networks for efficient peer-to-peer data collection, delivery, and 
publication. In the study of information-centric schemes, 
caching technology is significantly important; thus, we focus on 
a secure caching mechanism to privacy and security protections. 
In particular, the caching data protection mechanism, i.e., to 
prevent cache pollution attacks, is an essential challenge for data 
retrieving in information-centric wireless sensor networks. In 
this paper, therefore, we propose a novel effective and secure 
caching scheme for wireless sensor networks using the 
information-centric network design and the blockchain 
technology. In particular, for caching data management, to 
maintain the blockchain-based ledger requires exhaustive 
computer calculation resources and energy consumption in 
mining-based verification tasks; nevertheless, resource-limited 
wireless node devices are not suitable. Therefore, we propose a 
novel light-weight verification mechanism based on proof-of-
consensus, and we reveal its fundamental features using 
computer simulation. 
Keywords-Wireless sensor network; Information-centric 
network; Blockchain; Caching scheme. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The growing number of devices connected to the Internet 
has made the ubiquitous Internet a part of all aspects of 
modern life. Countless new Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices 
are widely used by smart cities/homes, healthcare services, 
and other sensor and actuator solution providers. Future IoT 
systems are expected to communicate with each other directly, 
sending and receiving an enormous amount of sensing data 
(Figure 1). These privacy-sensitive sensing data have been 
under various attacks in the already deployed terminals, 
causing serious security concerns [1]. For example, if smart 
city applications are hacked and users’ activities are leaked, 
people’s personal safety can be compromised. In another 
example, if healthcare and smart medical devices for fitness, 
diet, and health monitoring do not work adequately, 
emergency notifications and early detection of illnesses 
cannot be sent. That is why Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSNs) in key wireless technologies underpinning IoT 
services should evolve and be replaced by a modern 
autonomous, decentralized, efficient, secure, and privacy-
aware network design. These concerns motivated us to 
develop an effective and secure data management scheme 
(including storing, forwarding, and providing) based on 
Information-Centric Network (ICN) design and blockchain 
technology. In comparison with the traditional scheme, the 
proposed scheme has a significant characteristic and 
advantage that the proposed scheme can be constructed based 
on an overall distributed and decentralized design due to a 
combination of WSNs, ICN, and blockchain. 
The ICN is emerging as a promising network architecture 
that supports efficient data provision and retrieval with in-
network caching, i.e., users could obtain their desired content 
data from a nearby copy-holder in ICN-based systems [2]. To 
initiate this mechanism, users send a content request with the 
desired content feature in an interest packet; then, the content 
is sent back to the requester in a data packet when the interest 
packet reaches the original node or cache-available node. The 
reason for introducing ICN into WSNs is that the address-free 
structure is suitable for mobile and ad-hoc network 
environments, allowing ICN-WSNs to reduce the protocol 
overhead of data collection and retrieval in comparison with 
HTTP and other simplified protocols [3]. In implementation 
of ICN-WSN systems, the caching scheme is one of the 
essential technologies in the ICN framework, resulting in 
failed cache poisoning attacks due to the actuators performing 
wrong actions founded on the polluted data. 
To protect the caching data of ICN-WSNs, we use the 
blockchain technology [4]. These three key technologies, the 
 
Figure 1.  Transition of IoT framework architecture. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

WSN, the ICN, and the blockchain, work in an autonomous 
and decentralized environment. A blockchain-based ledger 
has several advantages: it can be constructed among 
anonymous nodes; the verification process is simple and 
common manner; the users can easily identify and 
authenticate the verified caching data without central brokers 
or certification authorities, and the blockchain architecture 
protects it from the risk of being a single point of failure when 
faced with malicious attacks. Moreover, when a verified block 
is appended into the blockchain, the users do not need any 
additional certification process. 
A typical blockchain verification process needs exhaustive 
computer calculations called Proof-of-Work (PoW). Such 
PoWs are used, for example, by Bitcoin [5] and other crypto-
currencies but cannot be applied in ICN-WSNs consisting of 
cheap and resource-constrained devices. Even if the proposed 
scheme will utilize movable vehicle nodes, such as drones and 
small vehicles, for data collection, accumulation, and 
provision, the hardware limitations can be alleviated, but the 
essential issues will remain. Unlike PoWs, Proof-of-Stake 
(PoS) utilized in Ethereum [6] does not require heavy-weight 
computational operations, i.e., the next block generator is 
selected in a pseudo-random way. However, the verification 
task depends on the wealth or stake of a node, i.e., the more 
money the node has, the higher its chances for validation, 
making some nodes unbalanced. 
To mitigate these problems, we investigate a novel 
blockchain-based secure caching and data retrieving scheme 
for ICN-WSNs. In particular, we propose a novel light-weight 
verification scheme where blocks are verified while relay 
nodes forward unverified blocks in ad-hoc and multi-hop 
networks among validators in the usual WSN data transfer. In 
this paper, we describe the overall blueprint of our work in 
progress and propose a novel verification mechanism. We 
perform a fundamental evaluation of the proposed mechanism 
using computer simulation. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II provides related work. Section III describes the 
proposed scheme. Section IV presents the numerical results. 
Finally, in Section V, we summarize our findings and 
conclude the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In legacy cloud based IoT frameworks, the authentication, 
authorization, and access control methods are applicable and 
selected as centralized controllers that currently deal with 
these services. While WSN systems are shifting towards 
decentralization, as in the edge-computing and the fog-
computing, 
alternative 
security 
mechanisms 
for 
authentication, confidentiality, privacy, access control, 
resource 
provenance, and 
integrity 
are required [7]. 
Blockchain technology can address various security issues by 
constructing a secured and distributed ledger. Alphand et 
al. [8] proposed a combination scheme of the authorization 
blockchain and the group key for providing secure-authorized 
access to IoT resources. From the viewpoint of ICN caching 
data protection, several studies should be mentioned. Li et 
al. [9] proposed a blockchain-based protection scheme of the 
data life cycle; Guo et al. [10] investigated a public 
permissionless blockchain in named data networking, and Li 
et al. [11] proposed a trust-enhanced blockchain-based ICN 
architecture for content delivery. 
On the other hand, in wireless networks, Liu et al. [12] 
proposed 
a 
mobile 
edge-computing-enabled 
wireless 
blockchain framework where the computation-intensive 
mining tasks and verified blocks can be offloaded and cached 
to neighboring nodes. Chai et al. [13] and Sharma et al. [14] 
suggested replacing fixed terminals with mobile (aerial) 
vehicles. These proposals represent an evolution in the content 
delivery network; however, they are still far from adopting the 
ICNs in WSNs. In other words, the conventional approach 
places the content servers in the mobile-edge nodes, which is 
different from the ICN principle of an individual node copying 
and storing the caching data. Similar to our study, Lei et 
al. [15] proposed a novel and systematic framework to protect 
the in-network caching mechanism; it enables fast and 
efficient content dissemination in mission-critical ad-hoc 
networks. However, this proposal has a drawback in that it 
involves an exhaustive verification process, the proposed 
scheme can improve the burden of verification calculations. 
III. 
PROPOSED SCHEME 
In the data life cycle of ICN-WSNs, the atomic data 
collection, caching, and retrieval processes may suffer from 
various attacks. The ultimate goal of our study is to develop 
an anti-tamper caching scheme. 
A. System Description 
In the proposed scheme, Sensor Nodes (SNs) are 
massively deployed in the observation field, which is divided 
into several regions and the segmented area has one 
coordinator for comprehensive management, as shown in 
Figure 2. There are four network components, and the entities 
that logically play roles in content data dissemination are as 
follows. 
• 
SNs periodically generate atomic data that is a data 
unit of the ICN content. 
• 
Validators gather atomic data from SNs and 
summarize them into a block that is a data unit of the 
blockchain. Validators are implemented using 
 
Figure 2.  Overview of the proposed scheme. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

movable nodes, such as drones and small vehicles, 
and blockchains are constructed on them. Validators 
have less hardware limitations compared with SNs. 
• 
Coordinators decide which block to append into the 
blockchain among verified blocks. Coordinators 
mediate between regional blockchains and global 
blockchains to achieve scalable data retrieval. 
• 
Users behave as subscribers, i.e., send data retrieval 
requests, such as interest requests, to validators and 
obtain data from the original content or the caches in 
the validators’ blockchain network. 
In the proposed scheme, blockchains can be functionally 
systematized as local blockchains and global blockchains. 
Local blockchains manage not only the atomic data but also 
the validity keys for atomic data verification. Thus, 
coordinators exchange the extracted and summarized 
information of verified blocks between the global blockchain 
and the local blockchain of the atomic data to share inventory. 
Namely, they produce knowledge data, which refers to the 
data summarized from the local blockchain, including the 
atomic data, signature, meta tag information necessary for the 
ICN search. By adopting this mechanism, users can obtain 
content data from the cross-sectional observation areas. 
Although the implementation cost occurs to introduce a 
blockchain-based ICN’s caching mechanism into WSNs, we 
believe that it would be a move well worth the cost because 
blockchain-based ledgers can also use extensive solutions, 
such as certification key protection, user access control, and 
resource management. 
B. Verification Procedure 
Before entering into a block certification process, when 
the SN joins in and connects to the WSN, a secret key should 
be provided in order to sign an atomic data digitally. As shown 
in Figures 3 and 4, in the initialization process, the new SN 
sends a request for its secret key provision to the neighboring 
validator (○
1 ), and then the validator generates a public key, 
𝒫𝒦, for validation and a secret key, 𝒮𝒦, for signature (○
2 ). 
𝒫𝒦 is appended to the validation key’s blockchain (○
3 ) and 
𝒮𝒦 is provided to the SN (○
4 ). 
In the proposed scheme, there are three types of blocks: a 
candidate block, a verified block, and a chained block. 
Candidate blocks that have not yet been verified are generated 
by collecting and summarizing several atomic data ( ○
5 ). 
Besides, candidate blocks include not only the atomic data but 
also header parts, such as meta-data for ICN retrieval, as well 
as a sequential number and a unique fingerprint to distinguish 
one block from another. The reason for using both the 
sequential number and the unique fingerprint is that the same 
sequential number cannot be allocated to different candidate 
blocks. 
Candidate blocks are cross-verified based on Proof-of-
Consensus (PoC) used in Ripple [16]. In the proposed 
validation process (○
6 ), if a candidate block obtained the 
sufficient consensus of almost all reliable validators, it can be 
regarded as a correctly verified block. In the event that a 
number of validators are hijacked and an illegal validation is 
carried out, the proposed scheme will maintain the robustness 
of the blockchain tanks to the distributed verification feature. 
The proposed scheme does not require exhaustive mining-
based computer calculations for block verification; hence, it is 
suitable for resource-scarce WSN environments. Candidate 
blocks are exchanged based on multi-hop wireless 
transmissions among validators (edge-nodes or fog nodes), 
i.e., the candidate block can gain the consensus of validity 
during data forwarding. Note that in the validation process, 
extra-data transmission with the proposed validation 
mechanism does not occur. The validator can approve the 
validity of the atomic data using 𝒫𝒦 based on the public key 
cryptosystem technique (in particular, the digital signature 
method) to guarantee the integrity and authenticity of the 
candidate blocks. 
The coordinator selects the head (representative) validator 
(○
7 ), which will be the nearest validator to the coordinator to 
avoid complexity in this paper. The head validator selects a 
new chained block (that might not necessarily be appended to 
the blockchain) among the verified blocks within its cache 
memory. Namely, the head validator sends a request of the 
verified block appending to the coordinator (○
8 ), and the 
 
Figure 3.  Procedure of the proposed validation process and appending 
verified blocks into blockchains. 
 
Figure 4.  Message and data flow of the proposed scheme. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

coordinator approves the request if there are no complications 
(○
9 ). In addition, the coordinator calculates a new hash value 
of the final and fixed chained blocks, instead of a fingerprint 
in candidate block, consensus information, and the previous 
block’s hash value. In updating the local atomic data’s 
blockchain, the renewal chained block is copied, stored, and 
cached among validators. Moreover, the coordinator 
summarizes the inventory of the chained blocks and shares the 
information with the outside coordinator networks. When the 
current head validator has no more verified blocks or goes out 
of the coordinator’s coverage, the current head validator 
swaps with a new one that the coordinator re-selects. Note that 
the position and the privilege of the head validator are rotated 
among validators because validators move with time; 
therefore, we expect that verified blocks are uniformly and 
fairly appended into the blockchain. 
IV. 
COMPUTER SIMULATION 
In this section, we provide fundamental analysis prior to 
the demonstration in a realistic environment and to compare 
with other related schemes in our future work. Computer 
simulator is implemented using C++ language and its program 
code is run on PC (Windows 10 OS, Intel Core i5-9400 CPU, 
and 16 Gbyte RAM). 
Figure 5 illustrates how many validators are necessary to 
communicate with all the SNs in the observation area 
(400 km2 square) and how many SNs does one validator 
dominate: 4,000,000 SNs are deployed in an equally-spaced 
grid pattern, and validators are placed randomly. We assume 
that the radius of circular-shaped wireless communication 
coverage between the SN and the validator is set to 1 km, and 
we ignore the shadowing and the fading depending on the 
validator’s mobility, ground surface, and radio propagation 
conditions to avoid complexity in the analysis. As a result, 
95% of SNs and 98% of SNs can be covered by 400 and 500 
validators, respectively. In addition, a scheme for interference 
reduction should be considered because multiple validators 
cover almost all SNs. Although the communication range 
should be small to avoid interference among validators and 
reduce energy consumption, numerous multi-hops forwarding 
among validators is necessary for the success of block 
validations. 
Figure 6 shows a relationship between the probability of 
the validation being completed (and the number of the multi-
hops necessary for it) and the communication range. As a 
result, 95% of blocks can be successfully validated when the 
communication range is 4 km and the candidate block is 
forwarding more than four times. In the case when the radius 
of 
communication 
area 
is 
large, 
the 
number 
of 
communications for sufficient consensus becomes small, i.e., 
the average number of multi-hops also becomes small. On the 
basis of this scenario, Figure 7 shows the tolerance for caching 
data pollution, i.e., the number of maliciously taken validators 
and illegally accepted verified blocks. For example, when the 
number of maliciously hijacked validators is 1%, 2%, and 3%, 
the probability of wrongfully verified block is 3.21%, 7.66%, 
and 12.6%, respectively. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we adopted the ICN design into WSNs for 
efficient 
peer-to-peer 
data 
collection, 
delivery, 
and 
publication, and we focused on a secure caching mechanism 
 
Figure 5.  Validators coverage for SNs versus number of validators. 
 
Figure 6.  a) Probability of validation being completed and b) average 
number of multi-hops for block verifying versus radius of communication 
area between validators. 
 
Figure 7.  Probability of wrongfully verified blocks versus percentage of 
maliciously hijacked validators 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

to privacy and security protections. In order to achieve them, 
we proposed a novel effective and secure caching scheme 
using blockchain technology in order to prevent cache 
pollution attacks. In particular, we proposed a novel light-
weight verification mechanism based on proof-of-consensus, 
and we reveal its fundamental features using computer 
simulation. As future work, we will consider a data retrieval 
mechanism based on global blockchain and an incentive 
mechanism, such as a reward in Bitcoin, and evaluate them 
using comprehensive simulations. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A part of this work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number JP19K20261. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Hassija, et al., “A Survey on IoT Security: Application 
Areas, Security Threats, and Solution Architectures,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 7, pp. 82721–82743, 2019. 
[2] B. Ahlgren, C. Dannewitz, C. Imbrenda, D. Kutscher, and 
B. Ohlman, “A Survey of Information-centric Networking,” 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 26–36, July 2012. 
[3] S. Arshad, M. A. Azam, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Loo, “Recent 
Advances in Information-Centric Networking-Based Internet 
of Things (ICN-IoT),” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, 
no. 2, pp. 2128–2158, Apr. 2019. 
[4] K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and Smart 
Contracts for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, 
pp. 2292-2303, 2016. 
[5] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-peer Electronic Cash 
System,” Tech. Rep., 2008. 
[6] Ethereum, https://www.ethereum.org/ [retrieved: Jan. 2020]. 
[7] T. Salman, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, and M. Samaka, 
“Security Services Using Blockchains: A State of the Art 
Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, 
pp. 858–880, First-quarter 2019. 
[8] O. Alphand et al., “IoTChain: A Blockchain Security 
Architecture for the Internet of Things,” Proc. 2018 IEEE 
Wireless Commun. and Networking Conf. (WCNC’18), Feb. 
2018, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/WCNC.2018.8377385. 
[9] R. Li and H. Asaeda, “A Blockchain-Based Data Life Cycle 
Protection Framework for Information-Centric Networks,” 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 20–25, June 2019. 
[10] J. Guo, et al., “Enabling Blockchain Applications Over Named 
Data Networking,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.(ICC’19), 
May 2019, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2019.8761919. 
[11] H. Li, et al., “Trust-Enhanced Content Delivery in Blockchain-
Based Information-Centric Networking,” IEEE Network, 
7 pages (in press). 
[12] M. Liu, F. R. Yu, Y. Teng, V. C. M. Leung, and M. Song, 
“Computation Offloading and Content Caching in Wireless 
Blockchain Networks with Mobile Edge Computing,” IEEE 
Trans. Vehicular Tech., vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 11008–11021, Nov. 
2018. 
[13] H. Chai, S. Leng, M. Zeng, and H. Liang, “A Hierarchical 
Blockchain Aided Proactive Caching Scheme for Internet of 
Vehicles,” Proc. 2019 IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC’19), 
May 2019, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2019.8761482. 
[14] V. Sharma, I. You, D. N. K. Jayakody, D. G. Reina, and 
K. R. Choo, “Neural-blockchain based Ultra-reliable Caching 
for Edge-enabled UAV Networks,” IEEE Trans. Industrial 
Informatics (in press). 
[15] K. Lei, Q. Zhang, J. Lou, B. Bai, and K. Xu, “Securing ICN-
Based UAV Ad Hoc Networks with Blockchain,” IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 26–32, June 2019. 
[16] Ripple, http://ripple.com/ [retrieved: Jan. 2020]. 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

