Achieving connectivity in an Unstructured Wireless Sensor Network using Optimal
Assignment of Mobile Nodes
Paritosh Ramanan, Prathamesh Gaikwad, Sreejith Vidyadharan
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems
BITS-Pilani, K.K. Birla Goa Campus
Email: paritosh.ramanan@gmail.com, prathameshgaikwad09@gmail.com, srev@ymail.com
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have been pro-
posed as a solution to problems in a variety of monitoring
applications. Most of the random deployments in sensor networks
lack proper connectivity. In this paper, an approach is presented
to achieve connectivity in a disconnected random deployment
of sensor networks. This can be accomplished by using mobile
nodes for establishing connectivity in the network as well as for
information gathering. The concept of Steiner point has been
used to ﬁnd the co- ordinates for placing the mobile nodes. The
paper proposes a variant of Hungarian algorithm for placing
mobile nodes in the ﬁeld in minimum time. The simulation results
indicate that the proposed approach can be effectively used in
an unstructured deployment of WSN.
Keywords-WSN, Mobility, Assignment Problem
I. INTRODUCTION
The ﬁeld of WSNs has emerged over recent years with
a wide variety of applications. WSNs have been applied in
scenarios such as health-monitoring, industrial and consumer
applications. Another application of WSNs is that of intruder
detection in remote areas, where sensor nodes continuously
monitor any movement in their vicinity [1].
A WSN, typically, consists of a sensor node-a PCB
(Printed Circuit Board) having a micro-controller, source of
power supply, sensors for measuring the physical parameters
and a radio transceiver for sending and receiving data. Nodes
are deployed over a wide area forming a multi hop network in
order to relay the data to a central node commonly referred to
as a base station. The base station in a WSN has a dedicated
power supply and a higher processing capability. The base
station receives the information from the static nodes relayed
over the network and processes the data.
There are many constraints associated with the maintain-
ability of WSNs; one of the main constraints is connectivity.
In case the node runs out of power it will disconnect from
the network, which might have serious consequence on the
connectivity of the network. In most of the applications the
node once deployed cannot be accessed manually thereby
highlighting the importance of maintaining connectivity.
In this paper, the issue of connectivity in the network has
been addressed in order to ensure a seamless communication
between each node and the base station. In case of a random
deployment of sensor nodes, clusters of nodes may be formed
which are disconnected from the base station. Such networks
consist of clusters of nodes which are connected to each
other but may not be connected to the base station. This may
lead to a breach of communication between the individual
nodes which are part of such clusters and the base station.
A mechanism is hence required to ensure that the network
remains connected.
The paper aims for an efﬁcient placement of mobile nodes to
connect the network. Since the problem calls for a technique
of graph augmentation, the concept of Steiner point [2] has
been used to determine positions of the mobile nodes with
respect to the individual clusters. As mobile nodes themselves
are scattered across the area, they must be assigned to points
within the ﬁeld such that the total time for the entire assign-
ment is minimized.
The technique illustrated in this paper can ﬁnd applications
in unstructured deployments where clusters of nodes may
be formed leading to a disconnected network. It will be
useful in scenarios such as deploying nodes for volcanic
activity monitoring, military purposes like object tracking and
monitoring environmental conditions in remote areas. The
approach also could be adapted with little modiﬁcation in
cases where a deployed network might get disconnected due
to malfunctioning of sensor nodes.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II talks about
the problem of connectivity in the network and an overview of
the techniques to solve them. Section III describes the network
architecture explaining the various phases like deployment,
discovery, calculation of mobile nodes’ positions, optimal
assignment of mobile nodes and ﬁnally communication to the
base station. Section IV illustrates the sequence of events dur-
ing the simulation along with the results. Section V concludes
the paper and highlights the future plans.
II. BACKGROUND
Achieving connectivity is a signiﬁcant challenge in WSNs.
Connectivity can be achieved by calculating the exact density
of nodes required for covering an area. The greater the density,
the higher is the chance of attaining connectivity. However
in the case of random deployment, covering the entire area
becomes a problem due to an uneven distribution of nodes.
This paper proposes the use of mobile nodes to address the
problem of connectivity in the case of random deployment.
Mobile nodes have been used for data collection as well as
for node discovery. Various techniques can be employed for
data collection as illustrated in [3]. The concept of mobility
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

has already been employed through Data MULEs (Mobile
Ubiquitous LAN Extension) and mobile gateways in this
regard.
Data collection and transfer to the base station could be
accomplished by using a Data MULE which are based on the
concept of DTNs (Delay Tolerant Networks). These devices
are nothing but miniature mobile computers which roam
around the whole ﬁeld and gather data and remain in motion
during most of the lifetime of the network. Data MULES
transmit the data to the base station wirelessly through ZigBee,
Wi-Fi or Bluetooth, by physically travelling to the base station
to complete the data transfer. In [4], an approach to optimally
patrol disconnected clusters of static nodes using Data MULES
is presented. However, the Data MULES need to be aware of
a certain optimal path which they must follow to reach the
destination. An attempt has been made in [5] to address this
issue.
In cases where the sensor node is at a considerable distance
from the base station, a lot of energy is used for multi-hop
routing. To avoid such energy losses, a device known as a
mobile gateway is used in the ﬁeld. The primary aim of this
device is to act as a mobile base station. In [6], an attempt has
been made to reduce the energy consumption due to excessive
communication trafﬁc between the static nodes and the mobile
gateways.
Many problems may arise during the deployment of an
unstructured sensor network. Also the sensor nodes do not
have a reliable collision detection mechanism and they do
not have knowledge about the network topology. Various
techniques to solve the above problems are mentioned in [7].
In this approach, the base station is required to communicate
with all the mobile nodes in the network not only for instruct-
ing them to occupy particular positions in the network, but also
for collecting data about all the clusters and their respective
centroids. There is, therefore, a requirement for a technique
which enables such a communication over a long range. This
can be achieved by using cellular technology. Since cellular
technology consumes more power, it is not advisable to use
the same for a long duration communication.
In order to save energy, the bulk of data transfer in
the network is done through ZigBee [8] although cellular
technology is used for communicating with mobile nodes.
ZigBee is an IEEE speciﬁcation which is used extensively in
sensor networks due to its low power consumption and longer
battery life compared to speciﬁcations like Bluetooth or Wi-Fi
(Wireless Fidelity). Cellular technology is used mainly during
the initial deployment to gather data and to instruct mobile
nodes. Cellular technology consists of a variety of standards
developed over the years, including GPRS (General Packet
Radio Service), EDGE (Enhanced Data Rates for Global
Evolution), and so on, which are used for data transfer.
The mobile node communicates on two fronts, with sensor
nodes through ZigBee and with the base station through
cellular radio. An implementation similar to [9] and [10] could
be used in this regard which has both ZigBee and cellular
module (GPRS) on the same node.
The concept of Data MULES could be used instead of
cellular technology. However, in such a case the mobile node
will have to travel quite a distance to transmit data to the base
station, which leads to an increase in battery consumption and
introduce a considerable delay in the assignment of mobile
nodes.
Though the use of cellular technology itself to transfer
sensor data from static nodes to base station appears more
convenient, it is however power expensive. Cellular technology
will put a massive strain on the limited power source of a
sensor node for it to be used effectively. Therefore in this
paper it is proposed that cellular technology be used only in
the initial stages. Once mobile nodes are assigned to positions
in the ﬁeld, the cellular radio can be put to sleep.
Further, for assigning the mobile nodes to the respective
positions, the Hungarian method [11] is used. It assigns jobs by
a one-is-to-one matching to identify the lowest-cost solution.
Each job must be assigned to only one machine. It is assumed
that every machine is capable of handling every job, and that
the costs or values associated with each assignment combina-
tion are known and ﬁxed. The above mentioned algorithm after
modiﬁcation could be used in optimal placement of mobile
nodes. The detailed algorithm and the steps involved are
explained in the following work [11]. Although [3] mentions
some techniques for data collection using mobile elements, the
focus of our paper is network connectivity.
The routing algorithm for communication between the
nodes and the base station is explained in Section IV.
Assumptions
In this work, the following assumptions have been made:
• The static nodes in the network have already been local-
ized, and have prior knowledge of their global positions.
The localization of the nodes can be done using range
free techniques such as the APIT (Approximate Point-
In-Triangulation Test) algorithm [12].
• The mobile nodes are equipped with a GPS (Global
Positioning System) module for localization.
• The mobile node also has a GPRS module with which it
can communicate with the base station. The base station
using GPRS, can instruct these mobile nodes to occupy
certain positions in the network.
III. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
The network architecture will be described in 5 phases. The
phases are divided according to the sequence of operations
which take place in the network right from deployment of
the nodes to the ﬁnal seamless communication establishment
between each node and the base station. Subsection A elab-
orates on the modules that are used for communication and
basic assumptions about static and mobile nodes. Subsection B
outlines the various steps involved in data collection by mobile
nodes. In Subsection C, the exact process of calculating the
positions of mobile nodes using the Steiner point algorithm is
described. Subsection D illustrates the requirement for optimal
assignment of mobile nodes and the Modiﬁed Hungarian
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

algorithm which is used to accomplish the same. Finally, in
Subsection E, the routing algorithm which can be used to send
data from the nodes to the base station is presented. It is to be
noted that all the phases henceforth are executed only during
the initial stage.
A. Deployment Phase
In the ﬁeld of WSNs, nodes are often deployed without
an organized structure. In such cases the nodes are randomly
deployed over the area of interest and often lead to cost
effective deployment scheme. However, such a deployment
can give rise to issues in network connectivity, wherein the
static nodes form disconnected clusters amongst themselves.
B. Discovery Phase
The discovery phase involves data collection, i.e., the po-
sitions of each individual node along with the centroid of its
cluster. Each static node in the network maintains a discovery
bit, which is initially set to zero. This work assumes that there
are enough mobile nodes to carry out this step initially. The
mobile nodes take a random walk and establish contact with
any static nodes in the vicinity. Such static nodes are referred
to as gateway nodes and facilitate the gathering of information
by the mobile node. The discovery bit is required by each
static node in the network to determine whether its position
has been relayed to the base station or not. This is done to
avoid repeating the same sequence of steps if any another static
node is contacted by a mobile node in the future. There are
three different types of messages which are exchanged, they
are:
• co − ordinate request: It is sent by the gateway to all
the nodes in the cluster to gather their co-ordinates.
• co − ordinate response: It is sent by the node to the
gateway containing its co-ordinates.
• discovered: It is sent by the gateway to all the nodes
in the network to change the discovery bit from default
zero to one.
The following are the sequence of events for node discovery,
from the individual cluster to the base station:
STEP 1: The mobile node initially establishes contact with
the nearest node which is part of a cluster. The node which
is contacted by the mobile node now serves as the gateway
which employs a one way broadcasting [13] to gather co-
ordinates of each node. It broadcasts a co−ordinate request
packet into the network.
STEP 2: On receiving the co − ordinate request packet,
a node responds back to the gateway with a co − ordinate
response, and in turn forwards this co − ordinate request
packet to its own neighbours. This process repeats until all
nodes in the cluster have been covered.
STEP 3: On receiving the responses from nodes, the gate-
way forwards individual positions of the nodes to the mobile
node.
STEP 4: On receiving the co-ordinates from all nodes, the
mobile node calculates the centroid of the entire cluster. The
mobile node in turn relays the data obtained to the base station
using cellular network.
STEP 5: The gateway now sends a discovered message
back to all the nodes. On receiving this message all nodes
will set their discovery bit to one.
STEP 6: The base station now has the information of all
nodes in the form of tuples <position of node, centroid of
cluster>. The centroid can be used to uniquely identify a given
node as part of a particular cluster.
STEP 7: In case another mobile node approaches the above
cluster, it will ﬁnd the discovery bit of the node already set to
one, and will move ahead in search of an undiscovered cluster.
The centroid obtained from each cluster is used as an
identiﬁer to the cluster.
In [14], the time distribution required for the mobile nodes
to visit all the sensor nodes is given.
C. Calculation of the positions of the mobile nodes
On the successful completion of the discovery phase, the
base station has obtained the information regarding all the
static nodes and the position of the centroid of their clusters.
It now seeks to calculate positions for the assignment of the
mobile nodes for obtaining connectivity using the minimal
number of mobile nodes. To achieve this the concept of Steiner
point in geometry is used.
1) Steiner Point: Steiner Point [2] in a graph is an extra
vertex, not originally part of the vertex set of the graph,
which is introduced into the graph with the aim of making
the graph connected in an efﬁcient way. The Steiner Point
has the property that the sum of the distances from itself to
all the other vertices is minimum. When the Steiner Point is
determined with respect to three other vertices, it is also known
as the Fermat’s point.
Geometrically the construction of the Steiner point is as
follows.
• Let the triangle whose Steiner Point is to be calculated
be ABC.
• Initially, construct two equilateral triangles on any two
out of the three sides of the triangle, wherein the equilat-
eral triangles so constructed have one side common with
the original triangle ABC.
• For each of the equilateral triangles, draw a line from its
non-common vertex, i.e., the vertex which does not lie on
the shared side with ABC, to the vertex of ABC which
lies opposite to the shared side.
• The Steiner Point is obtained from the intersection of the
two lines.
The Steiner Point with respect to three vertices is calculated
in the following way.
• Calculate the barycentrics of the Steiner Points
f(a,b,c) : f(b,c,a) : f(c,a,b), where
f(a, b, c) = a4−2(b2−c2)2+a2(b2+c2+4(
√
3)Area(ABC))
(1)
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

where a,b,c are the edge lengths of the triangles and
f(a,b,c),f(b,c,a),f(c,a,b) are the barycentric co-ordinates.
• Let A,B,C be the cartesian co-ordinates and let the
barycentrics be p, q, r then the cartesian co-ordinates of
the Steiner point can be obtained by
pA + qB + rC
p + q + r
(2)
2) Iterative Procedure for connecting clusters: The concept
of the Steiner point can now be employed by the base station
to calculate positions in the graph which the mobile nodes will
eventually occupy. As mentioned earlier, the base station has
the knowledge of the centroid of each cluster. The centroid
positions can now be used along with the Steiner point to
connect the graph in an iterative procedure.
centroid[i] ← centroid of ith cluster
Algorithm 1 Steiner Point algorithm
c1 ← centroid[j], where j is index of base cluster
n1 ← number of nodes in base cluster
S = set of centroids
S = S − c1
while S ̸= φ do
find clusters 2 and 3 such that their centroids c2, c3
are nearest to c1
n2 ← number of nodes in cluster2
n3 ← number of nodes in cluster3
calculate Steiner Point w.r.t c1, c2, c3
c1 ← n1∗c1+n2∗c2+n3∗c3
n1+n2+n3
S = S − c2 − c3
end while
The algorithm initially isolates the centroid of the base
cluster and stores it in c1. By comparing the distance of c1
with all other centroids, it obtains the centroids of two clusters
c2 and c3 nearest to c1. It calculates the Steiner point with
respect to c1,c2 and c3. It now sets c1 to the centroid of all
three clusters.
After having obtained the Steiner Point with respect to
the clusters, optimally connecting it to the cluster is also
important. Fig. 1 illustrates the connection between the Steiner
Point and the cluster. In order to connect to the cluster, the
base station selects a point on the periphery of the cluster such
that it is at an optimal distance from the Steiner point itself.
The cluster is initially divided into two regions (region I
and region II) based on the line L which passes through the
centroid C and L ⊥ AC. Let the nodes falling in the region
(region I) on whose side the Steiner point lies, be part of a
set Q. Now, only nodes belonging to set Q are considered.
The Steiner point is located at A(x2, y2), the centroid is
located at point C(x3, y3)
Let D=max distance of ith node∀ iϵ Q
Fig. 1: Cluster Head
let pi=perpendicular distance of the ith node in cluster to
the line joining AC.
Select point B(x1, y1) such that,
if, E(i)=D − di + pi
then, E(B)=min E(i)∀ iϵ Q
Fig. 2: Bisection of line AB
After the clusterhead is determined mobile node positions
are calculated by dividing the line joining the Steiner point to
the clusterhead.
In Fig. 2, points A(X4,Y4) and B(X2,Y2) are the cluster-
head and Steiner point respectively. The paper discusses the
bisection algorithm to divide line AB. The distance between
A and B is D. The slope of line AB is given by:
k = Y4 − Y2
X4 − X2
(3)
Assuming a spherical range pattern of all nodes, Fig. 2
illustrates the positions obtained after applying the bisection
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

algorithm on line AB.
The mobile nodes are to be placed in such a way that
the successor mobile nodes are just within the range of their
predecessor. In Fig. 2, the successor N of mobile node M is
placed on line AB and in such a way that it is just within the
range of mobile node N. However, the predecessor of node
M is the clusterhead itself. The given equations express this
relation,where d is the range of a mobile node and points (p,q)
are the co-ordinates of the ﬁnal mobile node position.
(X4 − p)2 + (Y4 − q)2 = d2
(4)
Y4 − q
X4 − p = k
(5)
On solving equations 4,5 :
p =
±d
√
k2 + 1
+ X4
(6)
q =
±kd
√
k2 + 1
+ Y4
(7)
In the case wherein the x co-ordinates of points A and B
are equal, the slope of line AB is undeﬁned. In this case, the
x co-ordinate of the ﬁnal mobile node position will be equal
to that of A and B, and the y co-ordinate can be obtained by
adding the range directly to the y co-ordinate of A.
Algorithm 2 calculates the co-ordinates of the mobile nodes
on a line AB with slope k. Using the maximum range of
the mobile nodes, it determines the number of mobile nodes
required to connect AB.
Algorithm 2 Bisection Algorithm
dist = distance(A, B)
ratio = dist/d
n = ⌈ratio⌉ − 1
for i = 0 → n do
range = d ∗ (i + 1)
if A.x! = B.x then
find p1 p2 using 6
find q1 q2 using 7
else
if A.y < B.y then
q1 = A.y + range
q2 = A.y + range
else
q1 = A.y − range
q2 = A.y − range
end if
end if
calculate d11 = distance of (p1, q1) from B
calculate d12 = distance of (p2, q2) from B
choose the lesser one as final position
end for
Equations 6 and 7 give two sets of co-ordinates (p1, q1) and
(p2, q2) and one of these is chosen as the correct point on the
basis of its distance from B. In order to get the next mobile
node position, iteratively increase the range in multiples of
d.
D. Optimal Assignment of mobile nodes
Since the mobile nodes are scattered all over the network,
the base station needs to assign a particular mobile node to
one of the previously calculated positions. The mobile nodes
use GPS to navigate to their calculated positions and will
cease to use GPS on occupying the positions and hence save
power. There are implementations like [15] which provide a
low power GPS solutions which is useful for saving energy
of the mobile nodes. Since it is an assignment problem, a
modiﬁed form of the Hungarian algorithm is used to achieve
this.
Modiﬁed Hungarian Algorithm: This approach however
demands an algorithm which can minimize the maximum time
taken for the simultaneous movement of all mobile nodes from
their current positions to the calculated positions. This problem
is therefore a BAP (Bottleneck Assignment Problem). The
paper uses the technique illustrated in [16] to solve the BAP.
This modiﬁed hungarian algorithm takes a two dimensional
array as input with each element pq having the value of the
distance of the current position of the pth mobile node from the
qth calculated position. It gives as output n assignments such
that each node is assigned to a particular calculated position
and also such that maximum time taken for the entire process
is minimized.
The algorithm illustrated in [16] follows the following steps
STEP 1: Given a n × n matrix
A =






a00
a01
......
a0n
a10
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
an0
an1
......
ann






arrange the elements in non descending order and assign
ranks to each element according to its position. Equal
elements will have the same rank. Calculate another two
dimensional array of size n × n B with O(n2 log n)
bij=rank of element aij
The above can be done by quicksort algorithm with an
input of n2 elements in .
STEP 2:
Choose α in such a way that
bα
ij ≥ n ∗ (bij − 1)α ∀ bij
Set,
bij = bα
ij ∀ elements bij ϵ B
This can be done in O(n2)
STEP 3: Apply Hungarian algorithm as illustrated in [16]
to get the assignment. This is done in O(n3).
Hence the total complexity for the entire process comes out
to be O(n3), with O(n2 log n) complexity for arranging the
elements and O(n2) for setting the values in matrix B and
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

O(n3) for the Hungarian algorithm itself. Since the algorithm
works in polynomial time, its time complexity is better than
a non polynomial time one.
E. Communication
The assignment phase must be followed by the setting
up of a communication protocol in the network, so that the
nodes can communicate with the base station seamlessly. At
this stage, the mobile nodes will occupy the positions as
calculated in the previous section. The mobile nodes augment
the network by establishing connectivity with respect to cluster
nodes and the base station. Hereafter there is a requirement
for a routing mechanism to route the data generated from
the sensor nodes to the base station. The Ad-hoc On-demand
Distance Vector (AODV) is used as a routing protocol in this
regard. The advantages of AODV are that it is an on demand
protocol which creates the route only when required by a
particular node and also scales well with increase in number of
nodes in the network. An application of AODV to a network
consisting of ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4) along with minimum
battery consumption is provided in [13].
In the case presented herein, the base station propagates a
one way broadcast message in the network. Each successive
node on receiving this message updates the address of its
parent node and in turn broadcasts another such messsage with
its own address as the source address to its neighbours. This
process continues until all nodes in the network know their
parent node. If a sensor node is required to send data, it will
forward it to its parent node.
IV. RESULT
The testing and simulation of the proposed algorithm as
discussed in Section III is done using Omnet++ simulator [17].
The MiXiM framework of Omnet++ is used in this regard.
The modules and ﬂow is as shown in Fig. 3. Once the base
station node has the cluster information, it will calculate the
positions of the mobile nodes. The algorithm begins initially
by choosing the cluster which contains the base station node
and it is designated as the base cluster. The nearest two clusters
with respect to the base cluster are determined. The Steiner
point is calculated with respect to three clusters. The centroids
of the three clusters are taken as the three vertices of a triangle.
If the Steiner point does not lie within any of the three cluster,
the cluster head is calculated with respect to the Steiner point.
Otherwise, if the Steiner point is within the range of the
three clusters, the cluster head is calculated by choosing a
pair of nodes belonging to two different clusters with the
least distance. Using the bisection algorithm the mobile node
positions are calculated. As all the three clusters are now
connected, a bigger cluster comprising of all the three clusters
is now formed. This bigger cluster is now designated as the
base cluster for the next iteration. This process repeats until
all clusters are exhausted.
After all the mobile node positions are determined, the
modiﬁed Hungarian algorithm as illustrated in Section III(D)
Fig. 3: Flowchart
will be applied to the given scenario to assign the mobile nodes
to their respective positions.
Once the network is connected, AODV routing technique
is used to form the path from every sensor node to the
base station. Sensor nodes will send data using multihop
communication to the base station using the route obtained
using AODV.
Fig. 4: Mobile nodes vs Static nodes
In order to determine the relation between the number of
static nodes to the number of mobile nodes, a graph between
the average number of mobile nodes required for a particular
number of static nodes has been illustrated in Fig. 4.
In Fig. 4, the graph was generated by simulating the average
number of mobile nodes required for a particular number of
static nodes spread across an area of 1000m X 1000m with
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Fig. 5: Connected nodes vs Static nodes
each node having a range of 103.7m.
It can be inferred from Fig. 4 that the number of mobile
nodes required to connect the network keeps increasing. Ini-
tially as the network is sparse, with an increase in the number
of static nodes, the number of mobile nodes also increases.
Gradually as the density of static nodes increases, the number
of mobile nodes stabilizes. With further increase in density
of static nodes the number of mobile nodes starts to decline.
This is due to the fact that with an increase in density of static
nodes there are lesser number of disconnected clusters formed
and hence a lesser number of mobile nodes required.
Fig. 5 plots the number of static nodes deployed in the
network to the number of static nodes connected to the base
station. The straight line denotes the number of static nodes
connected to the base station after mobile nodes have been
deployed.
It can be seen that with the use of mobile nodes all
the static nodes are connected to the base station. Whereas,
without the use of mobile nodes there are static nodes which
are unconnected to the base station. The number of nodes
connected to base station keep increasing as the network
becomes more dense.
Scenario
The algorithm has been simulated for a number of combina-
tions of area and network size. One such scenario is illustrated
in Fig. 6., which depicts a network of 36 nodes randomly
deployed over an area of 700m × 700m with the range of a
node being 103.7m. The node 35 is designated as the base
station.
Fig. 6 shows the screenshot of Omnet++ simulation with 36
nodes. As shown in the ﬁgure, clusters of nodes are formed
which are disconnected from the base station. From Fig. 6 it
is clear that none of the clusters are connected to the base
station and hence the packet delivery is null.
Fig. 7 shows the screenshot of the simulation after applying
the algorithm. The resulting network is connected to the base
station with ten mobile nodes.
Fig. 6: Before assignment of mobile nodes
Fig. 7: After assignment of mobile nodes
Once the mobile nodes are placed, the connectivity is
established between all the nodes and the base station.The
simulation results show that the base station received packets
from all the nodes in the network, hence it can be inferred
that all the nodes in the network are connected with the base
station.
After the assignment of mobile nodes, the throughput has
been measured as indicated in Table 1. The data in Table 1
is obtained by varying the delay time. Delay time refers to
TABLE1 : Throughput
Delay Time
Sending Rate(B/s)
Receiving Rate(B/s)
Throughput
0.5s
700
415.5
59.3
1s
350
230.5
65.8
2s
175
147.5
84.2
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

the time interval between two successive transmissions of a
sensor node.
ZigBee uses Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA) to
send a packet, so that it doesn’t interfere with any of the
transmission occurring in the vicinity. This causes hold up of
some packets in the network thereby affecting the throughput.
The throughput before deploying the mobile nodes is zero.
The results in Table 1 show the throughput for different delay
times after deploying the mobile nodes.
From the simulation results it is clear that the connectivity
is established by optimally assigning mobile nodes in the
network.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper addressed the problem of connectivity in unstruc-
tured WSNs by using mobile nodes. The network architecture
suggested in the paper is suitable for connectivity issues in
large area WSNs. The paper uses ZigBee for majority of the
communication leading to low power consumption and hence
a low cost solution. Using this approach the number of mobile
nodes required for connectivity are found to be minimal.
The placement of mobile nodes has been optimised using a
variant of the Hungarian algorithm and hence saves time. The
throughput can be further improved by solving the problem
of bottlenecks which arise at some points in the network.
The plan for future work includes solving the problem of
bottlenecks so as to improve the performance. optimised using
a variant of the Hungarian algorithm and hence saves time.
Considering large scale WSNs the approach suggested here
can ﬁnd many applications in sensor networks.
The future extension of this work consists of performance
improvement in the network by removing bottlenecks and
addressing the localisation issues. The throughput can be
further improved by solving the problem of bottlenecks which
arise at some points in the network. The plan for future work
includes solving the problem of bottlenecks so as to improve
the performance.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Dr Shalu M.A, IIITDM, Kancheep-
uram, Prof. Abhiram G. Ranade, Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bom-
bay and Dr. Saby John, BITS-Pilani Goa Campus for their
guidance and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] J.
Yick,
B.
Mukherjee,
and
D.
Ghosal,
“Wireless
sensor
network
survey,”
Computer
Networks,
vol.
52,
no.
12,
pp.
2292
–
2330,
2008.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128608001254
[2] Encyclopedia
of
triangle
centres.
[Online].
Available:
http://faculty.evansville.edu/ck6/encyclopedia/ETC.html
[3] M. Di Francesco, S. K. Das, and G. Anastasi, “Data collection in
wireless sensor networks with mobile elements: A survey,” ACM Trans.
Sen. Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 7:1–7:31, Aug. 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1993042.1993049
[4] C.-Y. H. Chih-Yung Chang, Chih-Yu Lin and Y.-J. Ho, “Patrolling
mechanisms for disconnected targets in wireless mobile data mules net-
works,” in Parallel Processing (ICPP), 2011 International Conference
on, October 2011, pp. 30 – 41.
[5] R. Sugihara and R. Gupta, “Improving the data delivery latency in
sensor networks with controlled mobility,” in Distributed Computing in
Sensor Systems, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, S. Nikoletseas,
B. Chlebus, D. Johnson, and B. Krishnamachari, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2008, vol. 5067, pp. 386–399.
[6] W. Seino, T. Yoshihisa, T. Hara, and S. Nishio, “A sensor data
collection method with a mobile sink for communication trafﬁc
reduction by delivering predicted values,” in Proceedings of the 2012
26th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking
and Applications Workshops, ser. WAINA ’12.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp. 613–618. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WAINA.2012.133
[7] F. Kuhn, T. Moscibroda, and R. Wattenhofer, “Initializing newly
deployed ad hoc and sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking,
ser. MobiCom ’04.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 260–274.
[Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1023720.1023746
[8] Zigbee alliance. [Online]. Available: http://www.zigbee.org
[9] S. H. Yujie Zhang, “The design of network coordinator based on
zigbee and gprs technology,” in Proceedings of the 2012 International
Conference on Computer Science and Electronics Engineering, 2012.
[10] W. Z. Hujing, “Design of remote intelligent home system based on
zigbee and gprs technology,” in Consumer Electronics, Communications
and Networks (CECNet), 2012 2nd International Conference on, 2012.
[11] H. W. Kuhn, “The hungarian method for the assignment problem,” Naval
Research Logistics Quarterly., 1955.
[12] T. He, C. Huang, B. M. Blum, J. A. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher,
“Range-free localization schemes for large scale sensor networks,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
9th
annual
international
conference
on
Mobile
computing
and
networking,
ser.
MobiCom
’03.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2003,
pp.
81–95.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/938985.938995
[13] A. Bhatia and P. Kaushik, “A cluster based minimum battery cost aodv
routing using multipath route for zigbee,” pp. 1 –7, dec. 2008.
[14] H. Z. Qinghai Gao, “Improving probabilistic coverage and connectivity
in wireless sensor networks: Cooperation and mobility,” 2010.
[15] T. Horng-Wen Lee, Meng, “A low power gps receiver architecture,” in
Global Telecommunications Conference, 1999. GLOBECOM ’99, 1999.
[16] E. S. Page, “A note on assignment problems,” Computer Journal 6, p.
241243, 1963.
[17] Omnet++,
discrete
event
simulation
system.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.omnetpp.org
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

