A Fuzzy Inference System for Increasing of Survivability and Efﬁciency in Wireless
Sensor Networks
Jose V. V. Sobral∗, Aldir S. Sousa∗, Harilton S. Araujo∗, Rodrigo A. R. S. Baluz†, Raimir Holanda Filho†,
Marcus V. S. Lemos‡ and Ricardo A. L. Rabelo‡
∗Computer Science Coordination
Uniﬁed Center of Teresina (CEUT), Teresina, Piaui, Brazil
Email: victormld@gmail.com, aldirss@yahoo.com.br, HariltonAraujo@ceut.com.br
†University of Fortaleza (UNIFOR - PPGIA)
Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil
Email: rodrigobaluz@gmail.com, raimir@unifor.br
‡LABoratory of Intelligent Robotics, Automation and Systems (LABIRAS)
State University of Piaui (UESPI), Teresina, Piaui, Brazil
Email: marvinlemos@gmail.com, ricardor usp@ieee.org, labiras.ctu@gmail.com
Abstract—The nodes of a Wireless Sensors Network (WSNs)
are composed of small devices capable of sensing and trans-
mitting data related to some phenomenon in the environment.
These devices, named sensor nodes, have severe constraints,
such as lower processing and storage capacity, and, mainly, they
have severe constraints related to battery energy. Therefore,
the developing of strategies to reduce the power consumption
is one of the main challenges in WSNs, and thereby helping
to increase the survivability and efﬁciency of these networks.
This paper proposes a new approach to help multi-path routing
protocols to choose the best route based on Fuzzy Inference
Systems and ant colony Optimization (ACO). The Fuzzy System
is used to estimate the degree of the route quality, based on
the number of hops and the lowest energy level among the
nodes that form the route. The Ant Colony Optimization (ACO)
algorithm is used to adjust the rule base of the fuzzy system in
order to improve the classiﬁcation strategy of the route, and
hence increasing the energy efﬁciency and the survivability
of the network. The simulations showed that the proposal is
effective from the point of view of the energy, the number
of received messages, and the cost of received messages when
compared against other approaches.
Keywords-WSN; Energy; Routing; Fuzzy Inference Systems;
Ant Colony Optimization; Sink Nodes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) consist of a large
number of sensor nodes distributed over a geographic area.
Each node belonging to the network has the property to
sense and transmit events, such as: luminosity, humidity,
atmospheric pressure, pollution levels, temperature, among
other. It is import to stress that each node has one or more
sensors, processing capacity, storing and communication.
The WSN has motivated the interest of the research
community because of its applicability in many areas, for
instance, household applications [1], medical [2], military,
environmental, farming [3] and vehicular environments. The
WSNs differ from the traditional networks in many aspects,
such as: the WSN are composed of a large number of sensor
nodes; sensor nodes have a limited power supply, lower
processing capacity and memory. In addition, some WSN
applications require self-organization, in which the nodes
must adjust themselves in an autonomous way, responding to
structural changes, due to failure in some equipment, battery
depletion, or by an external user request.
According to Araujo et al. [4], the main goal of a WSN
is to collect data from the environment and transmit this
data to a special node, called sink-node. In addition, the
WSNs must provide some interface to permit the extraction
of this information by external entities (i.e., users, or others
information systems). Because of the sensor nodes limited
power supply, the energy consumption is a relevant factor at
all the stages of the life cycle in WSN applications [5].
Communication in WSNs consumes more energy than
processing and sensing performed by the network nodes. An
important challenge in WSN ﬁeld is the energy consumption
reduction, since in most cases these nodes are deployed in
a harsh environment, making hard the battery replacement.
The importance of energy consumption in WSNs is also
depicted by Pinz et al. [6]. The authors have showed that
transmission is the main cause of energy consumption.
This feature requires the implementation of routing poli-
cies that enable the sensor nodes to communicate efﬁciently
and effectively with minimum power consumption. For this
reason, the routing protocols must work with information
based on the quality of routes, related to relevant network
metrics, such as the energy level of the network sensor
nodes.
Thus, the routing protocols for WSNs must have self-
conﬁguration properties, enabling to ﬁnd out which is the
best way to transfer information, considering the guaranteed
delivery and energy level among the nodes of the network. If
a sensor node will fail due to lack of energy, routes must be
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

recalculated, so that the information collected can reach the
destination node. The communication between the sensor
nodes must optimize the energy consumption in order to
increase the lifetime of the network.
This work proposes a Fuzzy Inference System [7], [8] to
help the Directed Diffusion routing protocol [9] to choose
a route for the communication between any nodes in the
network. The Directed Diffusion was chosen because of
its wide acceptance in current works and the multi-path
properties. The proposed fuzzy system uses as input to the
inference process, the number of hops and the lowest energy
level among the nodes that comprise the route. From the
quantitative values of the inputs, the system estimates a
quantitative value associated with the quality of each route,
in order to assist the routing protocol in the selection of
several feasible routes. Therefore, based on the quality of
the route, the routing protocol should deﬁne which route
to be used for sending the data collected with the aim of
increasing the network lifetime.
The design of a fuzzy inference system can be seen as
a search/optimization problem in a search space of high
dimensionality (multidimensional). Each point of the search
space represents a particular fuzzy knowledge base (fuzzy
database + fuzzy production rules base). Therefore, ﬁnding
the best design of a fuzzy inference system means to obtain
an optimal point on the search space. However, this search
space is characterized as inﬁnitely large, non-differentiable,
complex, noise, multimodal and deceptive [10]. Thus, ob-
taining a fuzzy inference system optimized for a particular
application can be a very complex task. In the proposed
approach, the adjustment of the Fuzzy Inference System for
classiﬁcation of routes is performed automatically by the Ant
Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithm [11]. ACO is a com-
putational model for optimization inspired by the foraging
behavior of real ants [12]. Speciﬁcally, ACO algorithms are
based on the ability of real ants for ﬁnding the shortest path
from their nest to the food source by exploiting pheromone
information. Pheromone is a chemical substance layed by
real ants while walking. Paths that have higher concentra-
tions of pheromone have more chances to be followed by
the other ants. Therefore, the pheromone plays an important
role by biasing the decision mechanism of the real ants. By
following a speciﬁc path, the ants lay its own pheromone
in order to reinforce the pheromone concentration. Based
on trail-laying and trail-following mechanism, the real ants
can ﬁnd the shortest path connecting the nest and the food
source.
The main beneﬁts of the proposed approach are:
• Application of fuzzy inference systems for inferring
the quality degree of routes. Therefore, the process
for calculating the quality degree of each route can be
accompanied and tracked from the linguistic viewpoint.
Additionally, fuzzy inference systems are able to ex-
press and manipulate qualitative information, which can
help the domain experts in understainding the results
produced;
• As sensor nodes have limited resources, the sink nodes
are responsible for calculating the quality degree of
each route. This means that the fuzzy inference system
is executed inside the sink nodes instead of inside
sensor nodes. The sink nodes are not strongly limited
as the sensor nodes;
• Application of an ant colony optimization algorithm for
adjusting the rule base of the fuzzy inference system.
The ACO algorithm implemented is the Ant System
[13]. As a heuristic algorithm, ant colony optimization
does not require special properties of the search space
such as convexity, smoothness, existence of derivatives.
Additionally, ACO algorithm is a population-based
technique and includes stochastic components to update
the solutions which results in lower chances of the
optimization process to get trapped in local minima.
It is noteworthy that the rule base stores the strategy
of action/control implemented on the fuzzy system.
Therefore, an optimal adjustment of the rule base must
result in an efﬁcient strategy for dealing with the limited
resources in a WSN;
• Besides the use of pheromone information by artiﬁcial
ants, a heuristic function is used for enhancing the pro-
cess of constructing solutions to the problem. Although
ACO algorithms are able for solving problems without
using a heuristic function [14], the incorporation of
a heuristic information normally results in better so-
lutions [15]. The use of a heuristic function requires
specialized information related to the problem being
solved. For this purpose, the experience of the expertise
in WSNs is used as heuristic information for guiding
the construction of solutions by artiﬁcial ants;
• In order to represent realistically the behavior of a
Wireless Sensor Network, an energy dissipation (con-
sumption) model is applied in the proposed approach.
Most of the works in WSNs are focused on the routing
protocols itself, without taking into account the energy
consumption that happens in the sensor nodes [16].
The sensor nodes are highly dependent on the limited
battery source for its communication (data collection
and transmission) and computation operations [17].
Since energy is drawn for both operations, it is im-
portant to consider the rate at which the energy is
consumed for both operations. As the energy consump-
tion in transmission is greater than the consumption
in computation operations, the majority of the works
only handles the consumption of energy during the
communication. Therefore a energy consumption is
included for avoiding misleading calculation to the
overall energy consumption of the WSN.
The article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

description of the problem to be solved. Section 3 describes
the proposed approach. The evaluation of results is discussed
in Section 4, followed by conclusions in Section 5.
II. ROUTING IN WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS
A. Routing Protocol
The Directed Diffusion [9] routing protocol was used
for the communication between the sensor nodes and the
sink nodes, which is designed for Wireless Sensor Networks
where the network designer is responsible for deﬁning
the type of event that must be observed by sensors and
monitored area [5], [18], [19], [20].
Directed Diffusion protocol has its operation based on
the following elements: named data, interest, gradient, and
reinforcement. Data are named by using a pair (attribute,
value) and represent an event detected by the sensor nodes.
The interest is the phenomenon that represents the search
attributed to the network. The gradient is the pointer that
represents the reverse path addressed to the sink node. The
task to be sensed is diffused by the sensors network through
a interest message sent by the sink node through periodic
broadcasts. The interest messages can be originated by one
or more sink nodes, according to the network design. Be-
cause of this feature, interest messages, when disseminated
by the network, create gradients, which are states stored
by the sensor nodes that have received interest messages,
identifying the nodes that sent interest. Thus, the gradients
deﬁne the nodes that should receive data related to the
disclosed interests. Finally, there is the reinforcement, where
the sink node receives messages from events occurring at
a low rate of transmission through various available paths,
and then it chooses one of these paths and reinforces the
transmission rate for the event to be informed through this
path at a higher transmission rate. The sink performs rein-
forcement by resending the original interest to the selected
path, forcing the data source node (node that detected the
event) to increase its transmission rate of data collected
through this path.
Figure 1 illustrates some aspects of Directed Diffusion.
The propagation of interest is shown in Figure 1 (a), at this
initial moment, the sink node broadcasts over the network a
interest message containing the named data (attribute, value)
from which it wants to receive information. The interest
message is periodically updated by simply changing the
time stamp of interest. This is necessary because the sensor
network is not reliable in transmitting packets.
After broadcasting the interest message, sensor nodes in
the network associate gradients to each interest message
received, creating routes between the sink and the data
source node, as shown in 1 (b). Through the use of interests
and gradients, several paths are established between the sink
node and source node, but only one of these paths is selected
by the reinforcement mechanism, as illustrated in Figure 1
(c).
Figure 1.
Directed Diffusion
The Directed Diffusion protocol meets dynamic networks
by a trading scheme with the spread of interest and rein-
forcements paths, allowing the network to converge before
any topological change. Moreover, the Directed Diffusion
uses delay as a metric for route choosing, which usually is
the better choice.
A disadvantage of this approach is the high cost of
communication for route repair when failures occur due to
the need of periodically broadcast in network in order to
reinforce others routes.
B. Related Works
A proposal for optimization of energy consumption is
treated in Chan et al. [21]. The idea of this proposal is
to put some sensor nodes in sleep mode (off) to conserve
energy while maintaining connectivity between the nodes
that comprise the network. This strategy has the beneﬁt of
energy savings due to switching execution between sensor
nodes.
Shah and Rabaey [22] describe the protocol EAR (Energy
Aware Routing). The basic operation is the occasional use
of a set of paths chosen by a probability function (which
is dependent on the power consumption of each path).
This prevents that the best route has its energy exhausted.
Therefore, the network lifetime is increased. It is assumed
that each node has an address and information about your
location. This proposal has advantages due to which route
selection is performed by probability function allowing the
selected route is not used until the death of the nodes that
make up said route.
A fuzzy expert system for clustering of sensor nodes
[23] is presented with the target of conserving energy.
Three linguistic variables are employed in the design of
fuzzy expert system, including the selection probability, the
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

distance from the base station, and the sum of the distances
between the selected node and the other nodes with lower
energy than the average energy.
Most of the energy consumed in WSNs is the transmission
of data to the sink node. Singh et al. [24] propose mobile
sink to minimize power consumption. The movement of
the sink is determined by the mechanism based on fuzzy
logic. The authors state that the base station can only
move in a predeﬁned circular path in accordance with input
variables, such as the node residual energy, and distance to
the base station. The simulation results are compared with
the methods that have a stationary base station.
A hybrid approach involving a Mamdani fuzzy system
optimized with Genetic Algorithms is presented in [25]. The
hybrid intelligent system is employed to assist the routing
protocol Directed Diffusion [9]. The sensor nodes have a
fuzzy inference system implemented, which is tuned by
a Genetic Algorithms, resulting in a fuzzy-genetic system
[26]. The fuzzy system set is used to estimate the quality
of each route associated with the sensor node. The results
show that the use of genetic fuzzy system in conjunction
with the protocol Directed Diffusion increases the lifetime of
the network protocol when compared to Directed Diffusion
without the use of fuzzy systems. However, the proposed
approach does not consider a dissipation energy models
in the sensor nodes, i.e, the approach does not account
consumption (dissipation) of energy during the calculation
of the degree of quality of the route through fuzzy inference
system (fuzziﬁcation, inference procedure and defuzziﬁca-
tion). The adoption of a dissipation energy model would
make the processing more realistic, since the fuzzy system
is implemented in sensor nodes, reducing the level of battery
power consumption.
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
A. Fuzzy Inference System
Fuzzy inference systems are capable of dealing with
highly complex processes, which are represented by qual-
itative information. Normally, fuzzy inference systems are
based on linguistic rules of the type “if condition then
action”, in which the fuzzy set theory [27] and fuzzy logic
[28] provide the necessary mathematical basis to deal with
qualitative information and with the linguistic rules.
A fuzzy inference system, generally, is composed by four
components (Figure 2):
• Fuzziﬁcation Interface: responsible for mapping the
quantitative input variable to the fuzzy domain, rep-
resenting the assignment of linguistic values (primary
terms), deﬁned by membership functions, to the input
variables;
• Knowledge Base: is formed by two components, the
Data Base and the Rule Base. The data base contains
the primary terms for each variable considered in the
Figure 2.
Fuzzy Inference System
linguistic rules and the membership functions associ-
ated to each primary terms. The rule base is comprised
of linguistic rules that determine the policies of control-
action strategy and decision-making. The rule base
realizes the mapping from the input domain to the
output domain, and this way, plays an important role
to generate the results produced by the fuzzy inference
system;
• Inference System: responsible for evaluating the pri-
mary terms of the input variables, by applying linguistic
production rules contained in rule base, in order to
obtain the fuzzy output value of the inference system.
Therefore, the fuzzy output value is function of the rule
base speciﬁed;
• Defuzziﬁcation Interface: responsible to assign a nu-
merical value to the output fuzzy value. Thus, defuzzi-
ﬁcation can be considered a kind of synthesis of the
ﬁnal fuzzy output set by means of a numerical value.
B. Ant Colony Optimization
Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) algorithms constitute
a relevant subset of ant algorithms. ACO is composed of
algorithms for optimization/search problems and is inspired
on observations of how some ant species forage for food.
Therefore the ACO meta-heuristic concerns about devel-
oping algorithmic models of the foraging behavior of real
ants. Besides of the complex behavior for foraging, other
collective behaviors of real ants that have been proposed
and applied include the division of labour, cemetery organi-
zation, brood care and construction of nests.
The emergence of shortest path selection in foraging
behavior is explained by the differential path length effect
and autocatalysis (positive feedback, reinforcement learning
through pheromone deposit) [11], [15].
The ACO algorithm involves two basic procedures:
• Procedure for building a solution, in which Na (number
of ants) ants build in parallel way Na solutions to the
problem.
• Procedure for updating the pheromone concentration.
The built solutions by the ants are evaluated through
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Figure 3.
Design Process of the Fuzzy Inference System
an evaluation function in order to measure the quality
of the solutions produced. The update of the pheromone
concentration is based on the evaluation function, this
way, better solutions result in more pheromone de-
posited in its parts.
C. ACO Algorithm for Adjusting the Rule Base of the Fuzzy
Inference System
In our approach, an Ant Colony Optimization algorithm
has been used for adjusting in an optimal way the rule
base of the fuzzy inference system. This way, the tour of
an artiﬁcial ant is regarded as a combination of primary
terms to the output linguistic variable (route quality) from
every rule of the rule base. Therefore, for each rule, Npt
linguistic values are available to be selected, where Npt
is the number of primary terms for the output linguistic
variable. During its tour, the ant has to choose one primary
term for each rule from a total of Npt options. This way, the
complete speciﬁcation of the rule base of the whole fuzzy
inference system is given by the tour of an ant. Suppose
that Nr is the number of linguistic rules present on the rule
base, there are N Nr
pt
combinations associated to the output
linguistic variable. As the rule base relates the mapping of
input values to the output value, an optimal adjustment of
the rule base enhances the results produced by the fuzzy
inference system. For our purpose, the result produced by
the fuzzy inference system is the quality degree of the routes
(route quality). As better the result produced by the fuzzy
system, higher is the lifetime of the WSN. Our target is to
ﬁnd the best combination that maximizes the performance
of the fuzzy inference system to classify the routes at the
WSN. Therefore, after the training phase (learning process)
via ACO algorithm, the fuzzy inference system is optimally
adjusted and is ready to be incorporated in a sink node of
a real Wireless Sensor Networks for classifying the routes
associated to itself (Figure 3). The route quality is used by
the routing protocol for selecting a speciﬁed path to send a
message.
The fuzzy inference system proposed has two input vari-
ables: the lower energy level associated to some sensor node
of a determined route and the number of hops necessary
for sending the message to the sink node. The deﬁnition of
the partition fuzzy for each input variable has been made
in advance, based on the knowledge of the expertise. 5
primary terms were deﬁned for the variable related to the
lower energy level, and 3 primary terms were deﬁned for
the variable associated to the number of hops. This way,
the rule base contains 15 rules. The output variable which
determines the quality degree of the route has 5 primary
terms. Therefore, for each rule, 5 options are available
for the linguistic value. The artiﬁcial ants have to ﬁnd an
optimal setting for the linguistic rules from a total of 515
(30517578125) combinations.
Besides of using artiﬁcial pheromone to help the choice
of a speciﬁed path by the ants, the Ant System algo-
rithm incorporates a heuristic function. The inclusion of an
heuristic information normally results in better solutions but
requires specialized information related to the problem being
solved. The problem of designing the heuristic information
is solved by using the expertise knowledge. Therefore, the
accumulated experience of the expertises is used for helping
the decision-making process by the ants.
The main aspects involved with the optimization of the
fuzzy rule base are:
• Initialization of the parameters: at this step, the param-
eters of the ACO algorithm are initialized. The number
of ants, the evaporation rate, the parameters that con-
trol the relative importance of pheromone information
versus heuristic information.
• Initial placement of the ants: all the ants are placed on
the start node which can resemble the nest.
• Selection of the primary term for each rule: the ants ex-
ecute a probabilistic decision-making concerning what
node should be visited. The decision-making process
is based on the pheromone information and heuristic
function. The primary term represented through the
selected node by the ant is inserted in the linguistic
value of the associated rule. This way, the selection of
the primary term represents the process of building a
solution which is equivalent to determine the primary
term for each rule.
• Evaluation of the built solutions (produced tours): after
the ants ﬁnish the solution construction process, it is
necessary to measure the obtained solutions. The eval-
uation of the produced solutions is used for determining
the quality of the solutions with respect to the problem
being optimized. This way, it is possible to indicate
what ant adjusted better the rule base. For evaluating
the solution produced by a speciﬁc ant, the rule base
obtained is inserted in the fuzzy inference system and a
simulation of the WSN is realized. The lifetime of the
WSN is used as the value for measuring the quality of
the fuzzy inference system because this value represents
the energy level of the sensor nodes. Therefore, as
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

higher the lifetime of the WSN, better is the rule base
obtained.
• Updating of the pheromone concentration: in the last
stage, the ants deposit their own pheromone. The
pheromone deposited is proportional to the lifetime
of WSN. Therefore, the highest value of pheromone
deposited is obtained by the fuzzy inference system
that classiﬁed better the routes and this way extends
the lifetime of the WSN.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In order to verify the applicability of the proposed ap-
proach, the Sinalgo simulator [29] has been used. Sinalgo is
a framework developed in Java that allows the simulation of
wireless network, abstracting the lowest layers of the proto-
col stack. The proposed solution is compared to the Directed
Diffusion routing protocol (DD) and the Directed Diffusion
routing protocol with a fuzzy inference system (DDF) in-
corporated, but designed in a manual way. The simulator
scenario was designed to allow a didactic comprehension of
the proposed algorithm, with a topology containing 10 X
10 sensor nodes. The initial energy stored at the battery
was considered equal to 1,0 Joule. The simulations took
into account the energy consumption model proposed in [30]
and used in [17]. It is noteworthy that the fuzzy inference
procedures for obtaining the route quality are realized at
sink nodes, therefore the cost of the energy consumption
associated to fuzzy operations (fuzziﬁcation, inference and
defuzziﬁcation) is not considered because the sink nodes
are not limited for energy. However, the cost for receiving,
processing and sending messages is taken into account at all
sensor nodes.
We choose the following four metrics in order to eval-
uate the proposed approach (DD-ACO-Fuzzy), against the
Directed Diffusion (DD) and Directed Diffusion with fuzzy
system manually adjusted: number of received messages,
residual power, number of received messages versus time
simulation, and the cost of incoming messages. The number
of received messages corresponds to the amount of incoming
messages versus the time simulation measured on rounds
(time scale of the simulator). The residual power measures
the amount of remaining power in the sensor node after
sending messages to the sink node. The number of received
messages versus the time simulation corresponds to the
amount of messages that the sink node received during
the network simulation. The cost of incoming messages is
the ratio between the consumed power and the amount of
received messages into the sink node. The network lifetime
is the elapsed time between the start of the simulation till the
moment that the sink node is unable to receive messagens
collected and sent by the network.
Figure 4 shows that using the proposed approach in
this work, the number of received messages into the sink
node versus the time is greater than in the DD and DDF
Figure 4.
Number of received messages into the sink node versus the time
Figure 5.
Simulation time necessary for a speciﬁed number of received
messages
approaches. This way, the proposed approach is able to
increase the number of messages for the same simulation
time. This means that a highest number of messages is
capable of be transmitted, which maximizes the beneﬁts
of the limited resources of the sensor nodes. The Figure
5 complements the Figure 4 by showing the necessary
time for the other approaches be able to receive the same
number of messages received by the DD-ACO-Fuzzy. The
proposed approach reaches a higher amount of delivered
messages to the sink node during the simulation and requires
a lowest quantity of time for receiving a speciﬁed number
of messages. The difference was about 8,000 rounds.
The remainder amount of power in the sensor nodes after
the receiving of messages into the sink node is greater with
the DD-ACO-Fuzzy approach, as showed in the Figure 6.
This is reached because the proposed approach guarantees
a higher delivery rate by sellecting smartly the route with
the lower number of hops and the greater residual power
of the sensor nodes along the route. Therefore, the routing
protocol uses an information, the route quality, which is
inferred from the number of hops and the residual power of
the sensor nodes. The route quality is adjusted whenever the
network conditions (metrics) are modiﬁed. This adjustment
increases the reliability of the route quality because it takes
into account instantaneously any modiﬁcations in energy
level of the sensor nodes, for instance.
The Figure 7 shows that the cost of incoming messages,
using the DD-ACO-Fuzzy approach, is decreased of approxi-
mately 60% if compared against the Directed Diffuzion and
Directed Diffusion Fuzzy approaches. Therefore, a lowest
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Figure 6.
Residual power (energy) in the sensor nodes for a speciﬁc
number of received messages
Figure 7.
The cost of incoming messages
cost for the message communication is realized by using
the proposed approach. This implies that a highest level of
energy will be available which results in a highest life time
for the wireless sensor network.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work proposes a Fuzzy Inference System to help
the Directed Diffusion routing protocol to choose a route
for the communication between any nodes in the network.
The proposed fuzzy system estimates a quantitative value
associated with the quality of each route, in order to assist
the routing protocol in the selection of several feasible
routes. Therefore, based on the quality of the route, the
routing protocol should deﬁne which route to be used for
sending the data collected with the aim of optimizing the
network lifetime, the number of received messages, the
necessary time to send a speciﬁed number of messages and
the cost of received messages. As a hard task, the adjustment
of the Fuzzy Inference System for classiﬁcation of routes is
performed automatically by the Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO) algorithm. The ACO algorithm is used for adjusting
the rule base of the fuzzy inference system. The rule base
stores the strategy of action/control implemented on the
fuzzy system, and therefore, an optimal adjustment of the
rule base must result in an efﬁcient strategy for dealing with
the limited resources in a WSN.
The results showed that the Directed Diffuzion with
Fuzzy approach using the ACO algorithm, for all metrics,
is more efﬁcient than the others, showing positive results
with relation to the amount of received messages, residual
power, number of received messages verus time simulation
and the cost of incoming messages. Therefore the inclusion
of a fuzzy inference system is capable of improving the use
of limited computational resources associated to a wireless
sensor netowrk. Although the use of a fuzzy inference
system adjusted by trail and error approach (DD-Fuzzy)
makes a better use of informations to classify the routes,
this kind of adjustment is not so powerful as the automatic
adjustment by ACO. The ACO algorithm is able to explore
the search space and identify good regions to be exploited,
in order to optimize the beneﬁts of using a fuzzy inference
system for helping a routing protocol. As future works, the
authors are applying ACO algorithms for a simultaneous
adjustment on fuzzy data base and fuzzy rule base.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Hussain, S. Z. Erdogen, and J. H. Park, “Monitoring user
activities in smart home environments,” Information Systems
Frontiers., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 539–549, 2009.
[2] W. Chen, S. Hu, J.and Bouwstra, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs,
“Sensor integration for perinatology research,” International
Journal of Sensor Networks, vol. 9, pp. 38–39, 2011.
[3] M. E. Martnez-Rosas, H. C. vila, J. I. N. Hiplito, and
J. R. G. . Lpez, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) Applied
in Agriculture.
IGI Global, 2011, pp. 115–135.
[4] H. S. Arajo, W. L. T. Castro, and R. Holanda Filho, “Wsn
routing: An geocast approach for reducing consumption
energy.” in IEEE Wireless Communications & Networking
Conference, 2010.
[5] ——, “A proposal of self-conﬁguration in wsn for recovery
of broken paths.” in IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium -
SAS 2010, 2010.
[6] A. Pinz, M. Prantl, H. Ganster, and H. K. Borotschnig,
“Active fusion
a new method applied to remote sensing
image interpretation,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 17,
pp. 1349–1359, 1996.
[7] L. A. Zadeh, “The Concept of a Linguistic Variable and
its Application to Approximate Reasoning -I,” Information
Sciences, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 199–249, 1975.
[8] W. Pedrycz and F. Gomide, Fuzzy Systems Engineering:
Toward Human-Centric Computing.
John Wiley & Sons,
2007.
[9] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann,
and F. Silva, “Directed diffusion for wireless sensor network-
ing,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 2–16, 2003.
[10] Y. Shi, R. Eberhart, and Y. Chen, “Implementation of Evo-
lutionary Fuzzy Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Sys-
tems, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 109–119, 1999.
[11] M. Dorigo and T. Stutzle, “The ant colony optimization meta-
heuristic: Algorithms, applications, and advances,” Handbook
of metaheuristics, pp. 250–285, 2003.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

[12] A. P. Engelbrecht, Computational Intelligence: An Introduc-
tion.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2007.
[13] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni, “Ant system: Opti-
mization by a colony of cooperating agents,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics,
vol. 26, pp. 29–41, 1996.
[14] M. Dorigo and T. Stutzle, “An experimental study of the sim-
ple ant colony optimization algorithm,” in WSES International
Conference on Evolutionary Computation, 2001.
[15] M. Dorigo, E. Bonabeau, and G. Theraulaz, “Ant algo-
rithms and stigmergy,” Future Generation Computer Systems,
vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 851–871, 2000.
[16] K. Yang and H. Wu, Y. Zhou, “Research of optimal en-
ergy consumption model in wireless sensor network,” in
2nd International Conference on Computer Engineering and
Technology, 2010, pp. 421–424.
[17] D. P. Dahnil, Y. P. Singh, and H. C. Kuan, “Minimum energy
dissipation protocol in degree-based clustering in wireless
sensor networks,” in International Conference on Computer
and Communication Engineering (ICCCE 2012), 2012, pp.
582–586,.
[18] A. N. Eghbali and M. Dehghan, “Load-balancing using
multi-path directed diffusion in wireless sensor networks,” in
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Mobile
ad-hoc and sensor networks (MSN’07), 2007.
[19] M. Chen, T. Kwon, Y. Yuan, Y. Choi, and V. C. M. Leung,
“Mobile agent based directed diffusion in wireless sensor
networks,” EURASIP Journal of Applied Signal Processing,
2007.
[20] X. Zhu, “Pheromone based energy aware directed diffusion
algorithm for wireless sensor network.” Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 4681, pp. 283–291, 2007.
[21] B. Chan, K. Janieson, H. Balakrishnan, and R. Morris,
“Span: An energy-efﬁcient coordination algorithm for topol-
ogy maintenance in ad hoc networks,” ACM Wireless Net-
works Journal, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 481–494, 2002.
[22] R. Shah and J. Rabaey, “Energy aware routing for low energy
ad hoc sensor networks,” in Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC2002), 2002, pp. 350–355.
[23] Y. Shen and H. Ju, “Energy-efﬁcient cluster-head selection
based on a fuzzy expert system in wireless sensor networks,”
in 2011 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Green Com-
puting and Communications (GreenCom), 2011.
[24] A. Singh, A. Alkesh, and N. Purohit, “Minimization of
energy consumption of wireless sensor networks using fuzzy
logic,” in 2011 International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Communication Networks (CICN), 2011.
[25] R. A. L. Rabelo, M. V. S. Lemos, L. B. Leal, R. Holanda,
and F. A. S. Borges, “An integration of fuzzy inference
systems and genetic algorithms for wireless sensor networks,”
International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, pp.
61–74, 2012.
[26] F. Herrera, “Genetic Fuzzy Systems: Taxonomy, Current
Research Trends and Prospects,” Evolutionary Intelligence,
vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 27–46, 2008.
[27] L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Sets*,” Information and control, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 338–353, 1965.
[28] L. A. Zadeh, “Fuzzy logic = computing with words,” IEEE
Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 4, no. 2, 1996.
[29] Sinalgo.
Last
Access:
21/02/2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://dcg.ethz.ch/projects/sinalgo/
[30] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrisnan,
“An application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless
microsensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Com-
munications, vol. 1, pp. 660–670, 2002.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

