Early Detection of Censorship Events with Psiphon Network Data 
Abstract—Over the past decade, circumvention tools have had 
a significant impact in ensuring access to censored content and 
preserving user privacy online. In addition, circumvention 
network data can be used to detect early indicators of Internet 
censorship and identify population-level effects of changes in 
the network environment. Monitoring network traffic for key 
indicators provides an opportunity to diagnose, analyze, and 
respond to online censorship events in real time. This paper 
examines the performance of Psiphon, a free and open source 
circumvention tool, during blocking events that occured over 
the past year in Iran, Iraq, and Turkmenistan. The study also 
offers insight into how Psiphon network data detected early 
signs of blocking in these examples. Through three case 
studies, we explore detailed data that were leveraged to 
improve Psiphon network resiliency during socially and 
politically critical times in various contexts. 
Keywords-information controls; online censorship; Internet 
shutdown; circumvention tools; social media blocking; psiphon. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This study presents analysis of three major censorship 
events that occurred in 2018 in the context of observable 
anomalies in discrete time series data from Psiphon 
network. Psiphon offers free, open source tools that are 
accessible, easily operated, and trusted worldwide. Psiphon 
provides recourse to online censorship by routing a user’s 
Internet connection via a distributed global network of 
servers. Like other Virtual Private Network (VPN) software, 
an encrypted tunnel is established between the user’s device 
and a Psiphon server, allowing traffic to be transmitted 
securely and thereby circumvent filtering on censored 
networks. Although encrypted, VPN traffic tends to have 
identifiable characteristics and traffic patterns increasingly 
vulnerable to blocking by deep-packet inspection (DPI) and 
traffic fingerprinting. Psiphon is designed to mitigate the 
risk of direct attempts to disrupt network traffic by using 
sophisticated traffic obfuscation techniques that disguise 
and vary readily-identifiable features in Internet traffic and 
provide resilience to fingerprinting. Moreover, a multi-
protocol architecture of transports ensures network 
resiliency in the event that censors successfully fingerprint 
and block a subset of those protocols. Amid intensifying 
censorship against VPNs and circumvention tools, the 
reliability of the Psiphon network has driven widespread 
adoption in countries that continuously censor the Internet 
as well as in response to spontaneous censorship events.   
Consequently, both in regions where the use of 
circumvention tools is a persistent need, and where 
politically-motivated, isolated, and unexpected censorship 
and network attack events occur, Psiphon has consistently 
provided 
a 
statistically 
significant 
snapshot 
of 
circumvention tool usage patterns. Disruptions in network 
performance typically follow social and political contours. 
They also offer an opportunity to investigate blocking 
events in real time. Given that the dynamics and internal 
workings of Internet censorship are highly opaque to media 
and civil society, this network vantage point provides 
unique insight into the technical context behind these 
critical events. 
 
By reviewing case studies from three different contexts, 
this paper offers a baseline for targeted and strategic 
blocking events that occurred in response to emerging 
Internet policy developments and critical socio-political 
events. The remainder of the paper comprises of the 
following:  
 
Section II provides an overview of related work in this 
space. Section 3 explores Psiphon network data of three 
blocking events from 2018 that occurred in Iran, Iraq, and 
Turkmenistan with a population-level effect. Section IV 
discusses how this approach can contribute to the accurate 
identification of periods of anomalous Psiphon usage as an 
early warning sign of censorship and targeted Psiphon 
blocking. Finally, Section V concludes by discussing the 
implications of anomalies and early detection of online 
blocking events for Psiphon’s ability to rapidly scale and 
reach populations at the height of critical times. It also 
offers some direction for future work in this space. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
While 
circumvention 
network 
data 
remains 
an 
underutilized point of analysis, past research in this area has 
used metrics from the Tor network and quantitative 
statistical models. The anomaly-based censorship detection 
system developed by Danezis analyses time series 
connection data over seven-day periods, flagging an 
anomaly whenever total Tor connections from a country 
deviate from the normal distribution of the top 50 Tor-using 
countries [1]. Wright, Darer, and Farnan refine this 
methodology to create a multivariate anomaly detection 
system using principal component analysis, to allow 
ongoing per-country detection of more nuanced internet 
Keith McManamen 
Psiphon 
Toronto, Canada 
email: k.mcmanamen@psiphon.ca 
Simin Kargar 
Psiphon 
Washington, D.C. 
email: s.kargar@psiphon.ca 
Jacob Klein 
Psiphon 
Washington, D.C. 
email: j.klein@psiphon.ca  
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

filtering events [2]. The latter emphasize the applicability of 
this approach to usage data of other services, including 
Psiphon.  
 
While quantitative approaches are robust, one of their 
limitations is a tendency to be passive towards the changing 
social and political conditions on the ground. Two 
noteworthy studies have analyzed Psiphon network data 
using an events-based methodology. First, in 2013, Psiphon 
collaborated with the civil society organization ASL19 on 
an analysis of information controls in Iran during the 2013 
Presidential elections, where censors actively endeavoured 
to disrupt Psiphon network traffic [3]. This study conducted 
a detailed examination of Psiphon data over a six-month 
period in the context of evolving developments in Iranian 
Internet policy and in the political cycle, and effectively 
formalized this mixed-methods approach to examining the 
impacts of information controls. Second, in a recent paper 
using data provided by Psiphon, Deibert, Oliver, and Senft 
build on the previous study by conducting a comparative 
analysis of Iranian information control regimes, contrasting 
tactics used to disrupt the Psiphon network during the 2016 
Parliamentary elections with those employed during the 
prior election blocking in 2013 [4]. Likewise following this 
mixed-methods approach, the analysis in this study couples 
network analytics with the evolving sociopolitical dynamics 
of online censorship to enhance the blocking resilience of 
Psiphon tools in the unfolding local contexts.  
III. 
CASE STUDIES 
Over the past year, Psiphon registered the scale and 
impact of many online blocking events. Among these, the 
cases of Iran, Iraq, and Turkmenistan stand out due to their 
scope and population-level effects. The unprecedented 
blocking of Telegram and Instagram in Iran in late 2017 and 
early 2018, and the ostensibly permanent blocking of 
Telegram in May 2018, brought about a surge in the use of 
circumvention tools, in particular Psiphon [5]. A crackdown 
on VPN usage in Turkmenistan between January and April 
2018 [6] involved intensified traffic fingerprinting that 
degraded the general performance of VPNs and other 
circumvention tools, and shifted the protocol distribution of 
Psiphon traffic. The government-imposed Internet [7] and 
social media shutdown in Iraq in July 2018 [8] led to similar 
surges in the Psiphon usage. Psiphon network data captured 
noteworthy intricacies of these events. 
 
The following will investigate these cases in further 
detail to address two main research questions: (1) to what 
extent does data-based analysis of Internet censorship 
correspond to the social and political contours of a given 
society, and (2) how can Psiphon data be applied to develop 
narratives 
of 
Internet 
censorship 
in 
adversarial 
environments?  
 
Figure 1. Iran Telegram and Instagram Blocking (Dec 2017-Jan 2018) 
 
A. Iran 
For those circumventing Iran’s filtering apparatus, 
Psiphon has been a popular tool since its inception in 2006. 
Between late December 2017 and the second week of 
January 2018, anti-government demonstrations broke out 
across Iran as a reaction to economic grievances. Protesters 
effectively utilized Telegram and Instagram to organize, 
which precipitated a temporary ban on both platforms [9]. 
The government of Iran lifted the ban as the protests 
subsided [10], but reinstated the ban on Telegram four 
months later. As Figure 1 indicates, the December 31 
disruption of international Internet traffic and the blocking 
of two popular communication tools resulted in a 600%       
a   
 
Figure 2. Iran Ban on Telegram Messenger (Apr-May 2018) 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

surge in Psiphon unique users and network bandwidth usage 
within 24 hours, and a 900% increase from baseline usage 
over the next seven days. 
 
In late April 2018, as the permanent blocking of 
Telegram became imminent, Telegram servers actually 
faced a major outage that affected users across the UK, 
Europe, Russia and the Middle East [11][12]. However, 
concerned users in Iran attributed this problem to Iran’s 
censorship apparatus and turned to Psiphon to restore access 
to the Telegram network. As Figure 2 indicates, this caused 
a surge in the Psiphon network on April 28, two days before 
Telegram was officially blocked in Iran. At the time, 
Telegram was the most popular messaging application with 
an estimated 40 million users in Iran [13]. When Iran’s 
judiciary officially announced the ban on April 30, it drove 
unprecedented adoption of Psiphon on all platforms. The 
surge peaked at 8.5 million daily unique users, transferring 
900 TB across the network. As Iranian authorities 
confirmed, the broad-scale adoption of circumvention tools, 
including Psiphon, helped mitigate the intended effects of 
the blocking orders [14].  
B. Iraq 
On July 9, 2018, protests broke out in the southern Iraqi 
city of Basra. Citizens took to the streets to demonstrate 
against 
widespread 
unemployment, 
corruption, 
and 
inadequate public services. In the days that followed, the 
protests spread to several other cities, making this the 
country’s longest and most widespread protest period in 
recent history [15]. The government responded by declaring 
a state of emergency and censoring access to major social 
media platforms Facebook and Twitter, and messaging apps 
WhatsApp and Viber. Subsequently, reports of complete 
Internet shutdowns were received from several Iraqi cities, 
  
 
Figure 3. Iraq Social Media Shutdown (Jul 2018) 
including the capital of Baghdad, on July 14 [16]. Psiphon  
connections from Baghdad were observed to drop from a 
rate of 500,000 connections per hour to zero, simultaneously 
across all ISPs, for the hours the shutdown persisted. This  
trend was reflected across 15 other Iraqi cities, indicating 
that a widespread Internet shutdown had been implemented. 
However, in regions where Internet access was not entirely  
blocked, such as in the Kurdistan region where Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs) remain moderately autonomous 
from central Iraqi authorities, data transfer reflected users 
circumventing app or site-specific blocking. A second 
shutdown occurred on July 19, when Psiphon connections 
from Baghdad decreased by 98% and network bandwidth 
transfer fell to nearly zero. Initially unconfirmed by news 
media covering the story, Psiphon data registered a second 
nationwide Internet shutdown in near-real time after the 
termination of traffic at the ISP-level, consistent with an 
intentional service blackout. 
 
Soon after the onset of the first nationwide shutdown, 
Psiphon experienced the beginning of a surge in users as 
Iraqis turned to the Psiphon network to circumvent the 
ongoing 
blocking. 
Though 
the 
nationwide 
Internet 
shutdowns were lifted, blocks on specific social media and 
messaging platforms remained in effect until July 26 [17], 
driving up demand for circumvention tools. Following the 
July 19 shutdown, eight of the top ten apps in Iraq’s Google 
Play store were VPNs, with Psiphon holding the top spot 
[18]. As indicated in Figure 3, Psiphon’s user base grew 
from 50,000 to over 4 million between July 12 and July 20, 
and elevated usage persisted until the social media blocking 
was lifted. Since these events, the baseline number of users 
connecting to Psiphon from Iraq has increased 2.9% on the 
pre-blocking monthly average. 
C.  Turkmenistan 
Beginning in early 2018, the state-owned and only 
operating ISP in Turkmenistan, TurkmenTelecom, initiated 
a crackdown on VPNs. Media sources reported that 
TurkmenTelecom was using newly acquired high-speed DPI 
filtering technology at scale to identify and block 
circumvention traffic [19]. As Radio Free Europe’s 
Turkmen service reported, the ISP targeted individual 
Internet users and notified them that continued use of VPNs 
or proxy tools would result in disconnection from the 
Internet [20]. According to research conducted by the 
OpenNet Initiative, DPI technology has been in use in 
Turkmenistan since at least 2010 to maintain an extensive 
blacklist of websites and keywords [21]. More sophisticated 
traffic fingerprinting based on protocol type was not 
previously observed at national scale. 
 
Psiphon network data corroborated these early reports 
and anecdotal claims. Beginning January 23, Psiphon’s 
daily unique users and overall network bandwidth usage 
consistently decreased over the next 30 days, as indicated in 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 4. Turkmenistan VPN Filtering (Jan-Apr 2018) 
 
Figure 4. The degradation of directly-connecting protocols 
in Turkmenistan was also evident in fluctuations in the 
normal Psiphon network protocol distribution. As shown in 
Figure 5, direct connections in blue and purple gradually 
became less viable, resulting in network tactics shifting the 
balance of traffic to more resilient transport protocols. 
While redundancy in Psiphon’s protocol architecture 
allowed the network to adapt to enhanced filtering 
measures, 
the 
interference 
observed 
against 
direct 
connections 
corroborates 
reports 
that 
general 
VPN 
performance was effectively disrupted. 
 
 
Figure 5. Turkmenistan Connections by Protocol Type (Jan-Apr 2018) 
 
Normal network performance appeared to be restored by 
August 2018, but similar network interference against direct 
connections was observed again throughout September and 
November 2018, and developments remain ongoing. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the case studies reviewed herein, our approach 
can contribute to the accurate identification of periods of 
anomalous Psiphon usage as an early warning sign of 
censorship events and, specifically, interference with 
Psiphon network traffic. Anomalies detected in the Psiphon 
network data correspond to other indicators of Internet 
interdiction in countries with a record of policies and tactics 
adversarial toward Internet freedom [22].  
 
While this analysis demonstrates the strength of a 
mixed-methods appreach, it is important to acknowledge 
some future directions for information controls research of 
this nature. First, technical, quantitative analyses still remain 
largely decoupled from granular social and political case 
studies, though the dynamics of Internet censorship involve 
vast and inextricable dimensions of each. Certainly, the 
computational methodologies discussed in Section II 
provide important macro-scale insights that can serve as a 
focal point for in-depth social scientific research, but often 
are not intrinsically actionable intelligence for media and 
civil society advocacy. Second, the event-mapping 
methodology as applied to selected case studies here can 
benefit from integration with systematized, automated 
anomaly-detection on data feeds to allow precise real-time 
alerting of such events across a broader spectrum of 
censored countries. Third, looking forward, exploring the 
application of machine-learning approaches in order to more 
comprehensively identify the various indicators, even 
precursors, of critical censorship events to facilitate rapid 
detection and response is seen as a valuable direction for 
further research. 
 
As Crete-Nishihata, Deibert, and Senft explain, the study 
of information controls is a multidisciplinary challenge [23]. 
Technical measurements are essential but will lead to 
greater insights into online censorship if we interpret such 
data with contextual knowledge and social science methods. 
Performing analysis on real-time filtering events as well as 
historical filtering behavior provides an opportunity for 
collaboration with academic researchers, advocacy groups, 
and the media. This can, in particular, offer insights into the 
unfolding events in places that do not often receive 
sufficient media coverage and international attention.  
 
Additionally, partnerships between circumvention tool 
providers and other stakeholders can support consistent 
methods of comparing approaches taken by authoritarian 
regimes to their previous actions in order to further analyze 
their learning in the realm of online censorship [24]. This 
will provide a consistent baseline for comparative 
scholarship and investigations of online censorship cases by 
academic researchers, advocacy groups, and the media. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Detecting anomalous events within Psiphon data enables 
us to identify anomalies in the status of Internet freedom 
globally, and more specifically, in countries with a poor 
record of securing freedom of expression and access to 
information. Anomalies in multiple variants such as the 
number of users, bytes transferred, session duration, and 
length 
of 
establishing 
connections 
demonstrate 
the 
seasonality in online censorship events. Such data coupled 
with contextual narratives from users of circumvention 
tools, media, advocacy groups, and other researchers can 
significantly enhance our understanding of network 
disruptions worldwide. Through these examples, we have 
demonstrated how Psiphon data correspond to imminent, 
potential, and actual online censorship events on a national 
or local level. In addition, combining multiple network 
metrics helps to identify anomalies in Psiphon network 
performance as an indicator of both degraded domestic 
Internet performance and direct interference against Psiphon 
traffic. Applying this knowledge can result in a customized 
experience of Psiphon services, which is tailored for the 
unique needs of specific censorship environments, both 
known and emerging. Comprehensive analysis of anomalies 
and early detection of online blocking events enhance 
Psiphon’s ability to rapidly scale and reach populations at 
the height of critical times.  
 
Beyond the technicalities of this approach, the analysis 
presented herein focused on two types of state actors: (a) 
those that are known to engage in active filtering, and (b) 
states that often do not receive significant attention from the 
media and Internet freedom community. Partnerships 
between circumvention tool providers and more diverse 
actors will be conducive to detailed investigations of these 
cases and will ultimately serve a broader spectrum of 
stakeholders.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
G. Danezis, An Anomaly-Based Censorship Detection System for 
Tor”, 
2011. 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from:  
https://censorbib.nymity.ch/pdf/Danezis2011a.pdf.  
[2] 
J. Wright, A. Darer, and O. Farnan, On Identifying Anomalies in Tor 
Usage with Applications in Detecting Internet Censorship, 
Association for Computing Machinery, 2018.  Retrieved 2019.02.26 
from:  https://doi.org/10.1145/3201064.3201093. 
[3] 
ASL19 and Psiphon, Information controls: Iran’s presidential 
elections, 
2013. 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from: 
https://asl19.org/cctr/iran-2013election-report/.  
[4] 
R. Deibert, J. Oliver, and A. Senft, Censors Get Smart: Evidence 
from Psiphon in Iran. Review of Policy Research, e0001, 2019. 
Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12333. 
[5] 
S. Kargar and K. McManamen, Censorship and Collateral Damage: 
Analyzing the Telegram Ban in Iran, September 2018, Berkman 
Klein Center Research Publication No. 2018-4. Retrieved 2019.02.26 
from: https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3244046. 
[6] 
RFE/RL (Azat Habar), Users of proxy servers in Ashgabat are denied 
access to the Internet, January 29, 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: 
https://rus.azathabar.com/a/29004792.html.  
[7] 
NetBlocks, Study shows extent of Iraq internet shutdown and social 
media restrictions during protests, July 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 
from: 
https://netblocks.org/reports/study-shows-extent-of-iraq-
internet-shutdown-and-social-media-restrictions-during-protests-
zPyXjzAE. 
[8] 
T. Rami and L. Taha, The Iraqi government turns off the Internet in 
response to protesters demanding water and electricity, August 2018. 
Retrieved 2019.02.26 from:  https://asl19.org/ar/blog/2018-08-01-
iraqi-government-shuts-down-the-internet-in-response-to-protestors-
demanding-water-and-electricity.html.  
[9] 
A. Filastò and M. Xynou, Iran Protests: OONI data confirms 
censorship events (Part 1), January 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: 
https://ooni.torproject.org/post/2018-iran-protests/.  
[10] Deutsche Welle, Iran unblocks Telegram messenger service shut 
down during country-wide protests, January 2018. Retrieved 
2019.02.26 from: https://www.dw.com/en/iran-unblocks-telegram-
messenger-service-shut-down-during-country-wide-protests/a-
42141829.  
[11] D. Snelling, Telegram DOWN - Popular messaging app not working 
as major outage confirmed, April 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26  from: 
https://www.express.co.uk/life-style/science-
technology/952670/Telegram-down-messaging-app-not-working-
outage-confirmed-WhatsApp-rival. 
[12] Status overview of problems at Telegram, Retrieved 2019.02.26 
from: 
https://downdetector.com/status/telegram/news/212777-
problems-at-telegram-2. 
[13] A. Vahdat, Iran orders internet providers to block Telegram, April 
2018. 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from: 
https://apnews.com/22e81a82289745a49b991bae413e9b71. 
[14] R. Faghihi, Iran's conservatives return to Telegram after failed ban, 
November 28, 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: https://www.al-
monitor.com/pulse/originals/2018/11/iran-telegram-ban-conservative-
media-rejoin-tasnim-fars.html. 
[15] P. Cockburn, Iraq protests: Demonstrators blame ‘bad government, 
bad roads, bad weather, and bad people’, July 17, 2018. Retrieved 
2019.02.26 from: https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/iraq-
protests-bad-government-roads-weather-people-haider-abadi-sadr-oil-
a8451736.html.  
[16] D. Madoury, Internet in Iraq Returns After Two-Day Blackout, July 
18, 
2018. 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from: 
https://blogs.oracle.com/internetintelligence/internet-in-iraq-returns-
after-two-day-blackout.  
[17] Middle East Monitor, Iraq lifts ban on social networking sites, July 
27, 
2018. 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from: 
https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20180727-iraq-lifts-ban-on-
social-networking-sites.  
[18] Appbrain 
analytics 
dashboard, 
Retrieved 
2019.02.26 
from 
https://www.appbrain.com/.  
[19] RFE/RL (Azat Habar), Expert: Turkmen authorities buy spyware for 
Internet control, March 12, 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: 
https://rus.azathabar.com/a/29091514.html.  
[20] RFE/RL (Azat Habar), Users of proxy servers in Lebap are faced with 
the shutdown of the Internet, February 2, 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 
from: https://rus.azathabar.com/a/29024861.html.  
[21] R. Deibert, J. Zittrain, R. Rohozinski, and J. Palfrey, Access 
Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, p 244, 2010. 
[22] A. Shahbaz, Freedom on the Net 2018; The Rise of Digital 
Authoritarianism, Freedom House, 2018. Retrieved 2019.02.26 from: 
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-net/freedom-net-2018/rise-
digital-authoritarianism. 
[23] M. Crete-Nishihata, R. Deibert, A. Senft, Not by Technical Means 
Alone: The Multidisciplinary Challenge of Studying Information 
Controls, IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 34-41, May-
June 2013.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

