Resource Management for Advanced, Heterogeneous Sensor-Actor-Networks
Matthias Vodel, Mirko Lippmann, and Wolfram Hardt
Dept. of Computer Science
Chemnitz University of Technology
Chemnitz, GERMANY
Email: { vodel | limir | hardt }@cs.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract—Sensor-Actor-Networks (SANET) consist of sev-
eral heterogeneous subsystems, which provide speciﬁc capa-
bilities for measuring or manipulating its environment. Dur-
ing the runtime, the communication infrastructure as well
as communication tasks and the available communication
resources are changing dynamically. Furthermore, advanced
application scenarios in this domain have strict requirements
regarding to the minimal system uptime, QoS features or
backup strategies. In this context, one of the most challenging
objectives for researchers all over the world is the efﬁcient
integration and handling of heterogeneous, distributed SANET
components to ensure a reliable and stable system operation.
In respect of this issue, we present a novel cross-layer resource
management approach for advanced SANET. We are now able
to reallocate communication resources for each subsystem on-
demand during the runtime. For this purpose, we developed
a real-time radio standard integration concept and respective
routing strategies with adaptive multi-standard, multi-interface
metrics. A respective real-world demonstrator was designed
and implemented. Based on this platform, we start a proof
of concept evaluation and analyse the operational behaviour
of a given SANET testbed conﬁguration. The proposed mea-
surements clarify the necessity as well as the feasibility of an
intelligent, integrated resource management unit for advanced
SANET architectures.
Keywords-Energy Efﬁciency, Resource Management, Chan-
nel Reallocation, Dynamic Optimisation, Embedded Systems,
Wireless
Sensor
Networks
(WSN),
Sensor-Actor-Networks
(SANET)
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensor-Actor-Networks (SANET) as well as Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSN) represent distributed embedded
systems which are able to sense its environment for spe-
ciﬁc events or behaviour. Based on wireless communication
interfaces, the subsystems (nodes) are able to exchange in-
formation. Actuator nodes are additional entities of SANET,
which allows the system to manipulate the environment
based on a predeﬁned set of rules. Figure 1 illustrates a
given SANET architecture, its different abstraction layers
and the respective operational tasks on each layer.
To operate autonomously, each subsystem has limited
energy resources. Here, the efﬁcient management of these
resources is essential. To maximise the system runtime,
developers have to ﬁnd a trade-off between working per-
formance and power consumption of the hardware system
architecture. In this respect, the trade-off starts with the used
sensor components (accuracy, sample rate, size), resource
limitations regarding to the µController (memory, number of
I/O pins, speed) and ends with the wireless communication
interfaces (data rate, transmission range, latency, interfer-
ence liability). Besides these hardware aspects, the concrete
application scenario implies further operational restrictions.
In this context, scenario-speciﬁc communication protocols
in the several abstraction layers are critical to optimise the
system efﬁciency [1], [2].
Monitoring Scenario
Appnode1
Appnode2
Appnode3
Appnode4
Distributed Mission Management
- Task Scheduling
- Synchronisation / Coordination
- Resource Management
- Information Analysis
Local Application Tasks
- Sensor Measurements
- Data Storage
- Data Aggregation
- Data Transmission
API
HW1
HW2
HW4
Middleware
- Hardware Abstraction Layer
- Hardware Access
- System Status Information
Hardware / Communication Infrastructure
- Heterogeneous Sensor- / Actor-Hardware
- Limited Memory / Energy Resources
- Reduced Computing Power
- Wireless Network Interface
HW3
Figure 1. A given SANET architecture including four different abstrac-
tion layers. The ﬁrst one includes the different hardware components. A
middleware provides uniform access to the available subsystems for all
applications. Single operational tasks are executed on capable nodes. A
global mission management is responsible for calculating and coordinating
all the tasks in order to fulﬁl the given mission objectives.
This paper proposes a resource management approach for
coordinating the overall communication behaviour within
SANET applications dynamically. It integrates different fea-
tures for distributed, embedded system to ensure a reliable
and robust communication infrastructure. It is structured
as follows: After this introduction, section II provides
an overview about related technologies in the domain of
energy-efﬁcient and robust SANET. This includes cooper-
ative routing strategies, cross-layer approaches and further
communication techniques. The proposed resource manage-
ment concept and its basic components are introduced in
section III. This section also provides respective examples
and application scenarios. Section IV describes the chosen
testbed conﬁguration based of a capable hardware prototype
platform. The results are discussed in section V. Finally, the
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

paper concludes with a summary and an outlook for future
work in this research area.
II. RELATED WORK
A primary objective of basic network optimisation tech-
niques are stable and robust end-to-end communication
channels through a given heterogeneous multi-hop topology.
Channels represent the essential logical resource on top of
the physical network interfaces. In order to balance the
network load through these channels, a lot of research was
done in the domain of multi-path routing [3], [4]. The idea
is to split a data stream into multiple, potentially prioritised
sub-streams and transmit these parts over different route
path to the sink. Here, several problems have to be solved.
On the one side, we have to ﬁnd stable communication
paths in dynamic, heterogeneous network infrastructure for
a lossless date transmission. On the other hand, require-
ments for worst-case latencies and minimum transmission
data rates have to be fulﬁlled. Most of the related multi-
path concepts operate on a homogeneous network topology
and uses unidimensional routing metrics. Regarding to our
proposed work, these metrics have to extended for the
multi-interface, multi-standard domain (e.g., EBCR - Energy
Balanced Cooperative Routing [5], [6]).
Other routing approaches use multi-dimensional metrics
for optimising the route paths. [7] and [8] describe concepts
for gathering network information as well as additional
system information from different abstraction layers. Such
cross-layer (X-layer) approaches, like in [9], have a much
better knowledge about the current network situation than
traditional, uni-dimensional routing algorithms on the net-
work layer.
In a further step, advanced research projects are looking
for approaches to balance the network communication over
multiple interfaces with different communication standards
[1]. The main idea is to use the advantages of multiple radio
standards. At the same time, we bypass the disadvantages of
using one single technology, which result from their speciﬁc
application ﬁelds. Accordingly, the developed radio standard
integration concept provides a heterogeneous network in-
frastructure and an efﬁcient real-time protocol conversion
approach [10], [11].
Further technology integration approaches, like Cognitive
Radios (CR) as well as Software Deﬁned Radios (SDR)
represent other concepts for optimising the communication
in mobile application scenarios. CR is operating on the
hardware-near layer to minimise radio interferences and to
adapt the communication channel dynamically [12], [13].
SDR stands for a modular framework, which implements the
whole protocol stack of a given communication standard in
software. Accordingly, SDR provides an outstanding ﬂexibil-
ity and allows a real-time conversion between different radio
standard [14]. Unfortunately, due to the required hardware
resources, SDR is not applicable for the embedded mobile
domain like WSN or SANET [15]. Another promising
research project represents Ambient Networks [16], [17],
which are focusing on a platform-spanning communication
infrastructure based on Ambient Services - an additional
abstraction layer on top of the user application.
III. DYNAMIC RESOURCE MANANGEMENT
Regarding to our proposed concept and with focus on
dynamic scenarios, one challenging problem deals with the
varying communication resources and changing environmen-
tal conditions during the runtime. Dependent on the applica-
tion scenario, different capacities for the data transmission
are required. An advanced resource management for multiple
physical interfaces has to consider several additional param-
eters, which includes the local system status and distributed
network information.
Application Layer
User Application
Network  
Presentation  
 
Session  
Transport  
Physical  
Link  
Resource
Management
Unit
(RMU)
HW / Interface
Errors
Packet
Checksums
LQI / RSSI
Wireless Communication Device
IP
UPD / TCP
Device-specific Protocol
Data
Application Data
Control / State Date
Resource Managment API (RMAPI)
Driver Interface
Figure 2. Resource Management Unit (RMU) and its integration into the
protocol stack.
Figure 2 represents typical communication architecture
and the integration of our proposed Resource Management
Unit (RMU). In contrast to related X-layer routing and
communication approaches, the RMU uses standardised in-
formation, which are provided by the hardware components,
the respective drivers or the embedded operating system.
Speciﬁc modiﬁcations or adaptations in the hardware archi-
tecture or the protocol stack are not required.
In order to establish a logical communication channel
from a source application to another remote application
over a multi-hop network infrastructure, communication
resources have to be allocated. Therefore, the usual way is
to request a new communication socket from the operating
system based on the respective transport protocol. In our
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

proposed concept, instead of opening a communication
socket directly, each application handles its requests over
the RMU. The RMU operates as a software component
in the application layer and provides a dedicated Resource
Management API (RMAPI). Based on a set of services, the
RMU is able to monitor the network communication and to
allocate communication channels for the user applications.
Furthermore, the RMU allows a proactive channel analy-
sis for high prioritised data streams. For this purpose, two
or more nodes exchange special RMU tracker packets. Even
if it takes more energy and computing time, this technique
is essential for data critical application scenarios, in which
a simultaneous and continuous channel monitoring is not
capable. In such critical cases, the RMU is responsible for
backup channels and the respective reallocation.
The RMU is able to manage multiple interfaces and
radio standards simultaneously. In order to use these advan-
tages within the system architecture, a real-time on-demand
switching technique is required. Therefore, an efﬁcient radio
module integration concept has to operate directly on top of
the hardware devices as a kind of embedded middle-ware.
For this purpose, the EAN (Embedded Ambient Networking)
concept was developed and allows a dynamic conversion
between different radio standards [1], [10], [11]. Currently,
several international cooperation projects research for an
embedded high-performance platform based on this EAN
approach. In combination with the RMU, an adaptive and
ﬂexible communication architecture will be created.
A. Channel Modeling & Reallocation Schemes
As already mentioned the resource management metric
includes local system information and distributed network
information. In this context, rules and calculations are very
similar to related cross-layer routing metrics. In contrast to
multi-dimensional routing metrics on the network layer, the
channel management operates parallel to user application
on the ISO/OSI layer 7. Accordingly, the RMU coordinates
all communication requests between user applications and
network interface. For providing a optimised, scenario-
speciﬁc reallocation scheme, a multi-dimensional set of
parameters is required for estimating the current situation.
These parameters are categorised as follows:
1) Latency:
• hop count (ﬂat network hierarchy)
• number of protocol conversion (use less different inter-
faces as possible)
2) Data throughput:
• minimum or average data rate
• stream splitting / multi-path capabilities
3) Energy consumption:
• interface power consumption (standby, rx/tx)
• trade-off transmission range and route path length
4) Security:
• channel stability / robustness (based on channel moni-
toring techniques)
• channel prioritisation
5) Capacity utilization:
• interface load
• protocol overhead
B. Example Scenario I - Balancing & Optimisation
The decision making processes of the RMU represents a
challenging problem. Figure 3 illustrates a typical scenario.
In order to optimise the network communication, Nodenew
can be integrated in different ways. It is possible to split the
data streams into two subchannels between Nodenew and
Node2 over the radio standards RS1 and RS2. In this case,
both interfaces are used to balance the net load or to realise
a multipath data prioritisation. Otherwise, one interface
has to be preferred. Hereby, the remaining communication
capacities in Node2 (20% left) and Node3 (50% left) have
to be considered.
Node1
Node2
Channel2_1
Node3
Channel3_1
Interface Load: 80%
Interface Load: 50%
Multi-Interface
Multi-Standard
?
?
RS1
RS2
RS2
RS2
RS1
Nodenew
RS1
RS2
?
Figure 3. Channel allocation and reallocation scenario I. Nodenew has
to be integrated into the existing node topology. Usually, each node
has wireless network interfaces with different radio standards (RS1 and
RS2). Node1 and Node2 integrate two interfaces. In Node3, only one
interface is available. The established channels between the nodes bind
communication resources. The resource management has to decide about
the channel balancing in a cooperative process.
C. Example Scenario II - Fault Response
Concerning the decision process, the RMU calculates the
remaining interface capacities with theoretical parameters
of the respective communication standard speciﬁcations. In
real-world multi-hop application scenarios, environmental
disturbances and unexpected effects also have an huge
inﬂuence on the communication behaviour. Especially in
dynamic scenarios, obstacles represent critical limitations for
a stable, continuous data transmission. Figure 4 visualises
such a situation.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

Node1
Channel2_1
Node3
Channel3_1
Interface Load: 50%
Multi-Interface
Multi-Standard
?
RS1
RS2
RS2
RS1
Nodenew
RS1
RS2
Node2
Interface Load: 80%
?
Figure 4. Channel allocation and reallocation scenario II. Typically, radio
standard 1 (RS1) provides more transmission capacities than RS2 (backup
channel). Due to obstacles, the usable channel capacity is not equal to the
maximal capacities of the radio speciﬁcation. The generated data stream in
Nodenew requires situation-speciﬁc channel resources. In order to decide
about the channel allocation, the RMU has to estimate the remaining
capacities.
In consequence, the RMU monitors active channels for
detecting bottlenecks in the communication. Accordingly,
based on the given metric, critical data stream can be
reallocated. Furthermore, such a proactive channel analysis
allows a re-prioritisation of all active channels in order to
optimise the network communication.
IV. TESTBED CONFIGURATION
Figure 5. Prototype evaluation platform. The system architecture integrates
different COTS wireless network interfaces into one integrated network
node.
Based on the proposed concepts for a RMU, the ra-
dio standard integration and respective simulation results
in [18], [11], we decided to design a prototype platform
which implements the features in a multi-interface, multi-
standard communication environment [10]. The platform
interconnects up to four different network adapters with
different communication standards. The wireless interfaces
are connected via modular communication slots, which are
compatible to COTS (commercial off the shelf) hardware
components. Figure 5 illustrates the system structure with
the central ARM7 microcontroller. The platform is designed
as an evaluation board on a proof of concept level. With
respect to this application domain, the ARM7 provides a lot
of computing performance for many possible test scenarios.
Further developments will shrink the design to an ultra-low-
power sensor board with a MSP430 microcontroller [19],
[20]. Alternatively, an Artix-7 FPGA implementation is also
possible.
This prototype platform allows us to test and analyse
essential features of the proposed channel management
concept, including the radio standard integration, the Ad Hoc
communication standard switching as well as the dynamic
resource reallocation. In this paper we present essential
results regarding to the real-time protocol conversion and
the respective channel reallocation capabilities.
Sensor-Actor-Node 1
Sensor-Actor-Node 2
Sensor-Actor-Node 3
Sensor-Node
Sensor-Node
Figure 6. Demonstrator testbed environment. Each node provides several
wireless network interfaces and capabilities for prioritised communication
channels. The key challenge represents a cooperative management of
different communication technologies.
Figure 6 shows the realised multi-hop network topol-
ogy as a heterogeneous sensor-actor scenario. The given
network infrastructure integrates three communication stan-
dards, based on IEEE 802.11, 802.15.1 and 802.15.4. During
the test scenarios, each node generate sensor and control
data with different priorities and different data volumes
(acceleration, temperature, noise level, visual/audio data).
Each communication standard is represented by a dedicated
IP subnet. Accordingly, each node has the knowledge about
technology-speciﬁc channel properties. Furthermore, addi-
tional information about the actual channel load and channel
quality are available within the RMU. All the data streams
have to be transmitted simultaneously. In consequence, the
RMU allocates and reallocate various end-to-end channels.
In case of a switching communication standard, the data
payload will be converted dynamically in real-time. The
conversion processes includes a header analysis, the packet
reassignment and, if required, a re-segmentation of the
payload.
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

V. RESULTS - PROTOCOL CONVERSION
The described testbed conﬁguration represents an ad-
vanced multi-interface, multi-standard SANET. Based on
this topology, we evaluate the channel reallocation capabil-
ities, represented by the overall transmission times as well
as the node internal protocol conversion times.
In a ﬁrst scenario, we measure the latency for the protocol
conversion during a bidirectional communication. As already
mentioned, the conversion process is done on a hardware-
near middle-ware between the ISO/OSI layer 2 and 3 (EAN).
During the test cycles in ﬁgure 7, the data rate was increased
step-by-step.
The illustrated diagrams visualise average values of 1000
continuous transmission cycles. As we can see, system
architecture as well as the protocol conversion operate stable
and efﬁcient with delay times under 3ms. Anyway, each
conversion process increases the communication overhead
for a given channel. The overhead ratio is dependent on
the data payload and the packet size. The key question is,
how critical such a conversion process in relation to the
overall multi-hop transmission is. If we take a closer look
on our ﬁrst scenario, the data forwarding latency increases
minimally. Figure 8 illustrates the results for a ZigBee to
Bluetooth conversion with a normal packet size.
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
2,2
2,4
2,6
2,8
1
10
20
50
100
200
500
1000
2000
5000
Conversion Latency in ms
Data Rate in Byte/second
1
1,4
1,8
2,2
2,6
1
100
1000
10000
Conversion Latency in ms
Data Rate in Byte/second
Figure 7. Top: Continuous protocol conversion measurements from Wiﬁ
(IEEE 802.11g) to ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4). The transmission data rate
starts with 1 Byte/second and ends with 10000 Bytes/second.
Bottom: Long term protocol conversion measurements from Bluetooth
(IEEE 802.15.1) to Wiﬁ (IEEE 802.11g) with different transmission data
rates.
In contrast, the oscilloscope screenshot in ﬁgure 9 rep-
resents a detailed waveform diagram of another conversion
scenario from ZigBee to Wiﬁ. This scenario uses very small
data packets with minimal data payload. The environmental
properties are similar to the ﬁrst test scenario. The global
addressing protocol is IP. As expected, the inﬂuence of
the conversion process on the overall transmission delay is
higher.
Transmission 
Time tZB
Transmission Time tBT
Internal Conversion Time tC
31 ms                
8 ms  
2 ms
Figure 8. Bidirectional multi-hop communication measurement including
a protocol conversion process from Bluetooth (tBT ) to ZigBee (tZB)
and vice versa. The results were measured with an oscilloscope directly
at the connectors without overhead from the operating system, especially
by scheduling-based inaccuracies.
These results clarify the importance of an intelligent
channel management, which is able to analyse the actual
situation and considers both application-speciﬁc parameters
and network behaviour.
Anyway, all test results provides a normal transmission
behaviour without errors or disturbances. The dynamic
channel reallocation between several multi-hop commu-
nication paths works stable. Hence, the proposed multi-
interface channel management is feasible and very efﬁcient
for advanced application scenarios in the WSN and SANET
domain.
1.6 ms         
1.8 ms       
0.8 ms  
Protocol Conversion
Receive Data  
Send Data
Figure 9. Detailed measurement of an Ad Hoc protocol conversion process
from ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4) to Wiﬁ (IEEE 802.11g) standard on layer 3
(IP).
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel channel manage-
ment concept for advanced WSN and SANET scenarios in
heterogeneous communication environments. It focuses on
dynamic channel switching techniques in order to realise
an intelligent load balancing over the available wireless
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

capacities. We clarify the importance of such concepts for
critical application scenarios to ensure guaranteed resources.
In combination with an innovative radio standard integra-
tion concept, we are able to optimise the communication
behaviour signiﬁcantly.
The presented test scenarios were done on a research
prototype platform. The results demonstrate the feasibility
of the proposed concepts. The realised network topology
integrates several COTS sensor entities as well as multi-
interface, multi-standard sensor-actor-nodes. All the mea-
sured timings for the protocol conversion need less the
3ms. Accordingly, the protocol overhead within a multi-
hop communication increases minimal. At the same time,
we create a reliable network infrastructure and improve the
connectivity signiﬁcantly.
Further research work combines the proposed resource
management approach with wake-up-receiver technologies
(WuRx [19], [20]) to evaluate innovative communication
concepts for WSN/SANET applications. Another point of
research deals with the integration of advanced transport
protocols for WSN and SANET scenarios [21], [22].
REFERENCES
[1] M. Vodel.
Radio Standard Spanning Communication in
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. PhD thesis, Chemnitz University
of Technology, Germany, 2010.
[2] M. Vodel, M. Lippmann, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
Dis-
tributed High-Level Scheduling Concept for Synchronised,
Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks.
Journal of Com-
munication and Computer, pages 27–35, 2010.
[3] S. Mueller, R.P. Tsang, and D. Ghosal. Multipath Routing in
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Issues and Challenges. Springer
Verlag, 2004.
[4] D. Ganesan, R. Govindan, S. Shenker, and D. Estrin. Highly-
Resilient, Energy-Efﬁcient Multipath Routing in Wireless
Sensor Networks. SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Com-
munications, 5(4):11–25, 2001.
[5] M. Vodel, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
EBCR - A Routing
Approach for Radio Standard Spanning Mobile Ad Hoc Net-
works. In Proceedings of the 4th Confernence on Computing
and Inforamtion Technology, pages 57–58, May 2008.
[6] M. Vodel, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
Energy-Balanced
Cooperative Routing Approach for Radio Standard Spanning
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks.
In Proceedings of the 6th In-
ternational Information and Telecommunication Technologies
Symposium, pages 42–47. IEEE, December 2007.
[7] G. Yang, M. Xiao, H. Chen, and Y. Yao. A Novel Cross-
Layer Routing Scheme of Ad Hoc Networks with Multi-Rate
Mechanism. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Com-
puting, volume 2, pages 701–704. IEEE Computer Society,
September 2005.
[8] L. Iannone, R. Khalili, K. Salamatian, and S. Fdida. Cross-
Layer Routing in Wireless Mesh Networks. In 1st Interna-
tional Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems, pages
319–323. IEEE Computer Society, September 2004.
[9] Y. Zhang, J. Luo, and H. Hu. Wireless Mesh Networking:
Architectures, Protocols and Standards. 2006.
[10] M. Vodel, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt. A Capable, Lightweight
Communication Concept by Combining Ambient Network
Approaches with Cognitive Radio Aspects. In Proceedings
of the 17th IEEE International Conference on Telecommuni-
cations (ICT), 2010.
[11] M. Vodel, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
Embedded Ambient
Networking - A New, Lightweight Communication Concept.
In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2010.
[12] W.Y. Lee and I.F. Akyildiz.
Optimal Spectrum Sensing
Framework for Cognitive Radio Networks. Transaction on
Wireless Communications, 2008.
[13] K.R. Chowdhury and I.F. Akyildiz. Cognitive Wireless Mesh
Networks for Dynamic Spectrum Access. Journal of Selected
Areas in Communications, 2008.
[14] A.S. Harrington, C.-G. Hong, and A.L. Piazza.
Software
Deﬁned Radio - The Revolution of Wireless Communication.
International Engineering Consortium, 2004.
[15] F.K. Jondral. Software-Deﬁned Radio-Basics and Evolution
to Cognitive Radio. EURASIP Journal on Wireless Commu-
nications and Networking, 3:275–283, April 2005.
[16] P. Magnusson, F. Berggren, I. Karla, R. Litjens, F. Meago,
H. Tang, and R. Veronesi. Multi-Radio Resource Management
for Communication Networks beyond 3G. In Proceedings of
the 62nd Semiannual Vehicular Technology Conference, pages
1653–1657. IEEE Computer Society, September 2005.
[17] B. Ahlgren, L. Eggert, B. Ohlman, and A. Schieder. Ambient
Networks: Bridging Heterogeneous Network Domains.
In
Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Personal
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, page no pp.
given. IEEE Computer Society, September 2005.
[18] M. Vodel, M. Sauppe, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt. A Large
Scalable, Distributed Simulation Framework for Ambient
Networks. Journal of Communications, pages 11–19, 2009.
[19] nanett Germany. Nano System Integration Network of Excel-
lence, http://nanett.org, 2011.
[20] M. Vodel, M. Caspar, and W. Hardt.
Wake-Up-Receiver
Concepts - Capabilities and Limitations. Journal of Networks,
2011.
[21] C.-Y. Wan, A.-T. Campbell, and L. Krishnamurthy. PSFQ: a
reliable transport protocol for wireless sensor networks. In
Proceedings of the ACM International Workshop on Wireless
Sensor Networks and Applications, pages 1–11. ACM, 2002.
[22] K. Sundaresan, V. Anantharaman, H.-Y. Hsieh, and R. Sivaku-
mar.
ATP: A Reliable Transport Protocol for Ad Hoc
Networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 4:588–
603, 2005.
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

