Lepida: a Passive WDM Fiber Access Technology Example in Europe
Andrea Odorizzi∗, Denis Ferraretti† and Gianluca Mazzini‡
LepidaScpA
Via della Liberazione, 15 - 40128 Bologna, Italy
Email: ∗andrea.odorizzi@lepida.it, †denis.ferraretti@lepida.it, ‡g.mazzini@ieee.org
Abstract—Likely unique in Europe, due to its own peculiar service
delivery paradigm Lepida, the network of the public government
organizations of the region Emilia-Romagna, in the north of Italy,
chooses a passive Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) ﬁber
access technology. Passive WDM deeply exploits the frequency
domain in order to multiplex multiple signals in the same optical
ﬁber. In particular, a full Coarse WDM (CWDM) approach,
deployed in a pre-existent network, can increase reliability,
bandwidth, security and conﬁguration cleanliness in a pay-as-
you-grow way. In this paper, we present beneﬁts, costs, pros
and cons, and how we achieve them, of an interesting concrete
implementation of WDM ﬁber access technology in a wide and
complex territory.
Keywords–Passive WDM; CWDM.
I.
LEPIDA NETWORK INTRODUCTION
Lepida Network (Lepida for simplicity in the following)
is the ﬁber optic network that reaches almost all the public
administration ofﬁces in the Emilia-Romagna (Italy) regional
territory; one of its design constraints is that Customer Premise
Equipment (CPE) uplinks should be GigaEthernet (GE) links
or 10GE links. A second design constraint is the CPE capa-
bilities: they have to be simple and cheap switching devices.
LepidaScpA [1], the entity that currently owns Lepida
Network, is an in-house providing company established by a
Regional Law (11/2004, “Regional Development of the In-
formation Society”) to represent the operational instrument in
the service of its shareholders (Public Administrations, Public
Entities, Universities). Currently, it counts 436 shareholders,
all Public Administrations and Public Entities. LepidaScpA is
involved in the governance of the regional Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) plan and has been given
responsibility for planning, development and management of
the ICT infrastructures and for development and supply of ICT
services for the Public Administrations.
Lepida has been originated by a public investment in which
public organizations contributed to build multiple networks
cooperating with different network operators, retaining a frac-
tion of ﬁber in each ﬁber cable. After that, from 2010, a
single network has been obtained by combining all the local
infrastructures; because of the original design each backbone
cable of the uniﬁed network Lepida consists of at most of 24
ﬁbers. Moreover, in 2010, in order to cut the Total Cost of
Operation (TCO), the Points of Presence (POPs) number has
been minimized and typical inter POP distances are since close
to 80km.
As seen in Figure 1, the 12 ﬁber optic pairs in each section,
i.e., a network segment between Lepida POPs, have to be used
both to interconnect POPs and to connect the end-users to
POPs. As the need of a network growth appeared, the impact
of the increase in the number of users was essentially twofold:
•
counterintuitive ﬁber optic pair routes design, i.e.,
users positioned in the same backbone cable (Users
3 and 4) could be connected to a different couple of
POPs;
•
transit on CPEs in order to connect new users, i.e.,
some CPEs, in Figure 1 Users a, b, c, d, e and f, have
been conﬁgured as if they were a POP.
We point out that, if the ﬁrst point “just” leads to a greater
effort to the Network Operations structures, the second one will
be deeply investigated. First of all, the latter leads to a more
complicated network topology and, in order to achieve better
uptime, to build CPE meshes, i.e., User a relies on POP a and
User b in order to reach POP c instead of being connected to
POP a only. This interdependence leads to a more complicated
troubleshooting effort and to upgrade most of the equipment
of the mesh on the basis of a single user needs, e.g., if User b
needs a 10 Gigabits bandwidth, Users a, c and d should also
be upgraded.
In this paper, we present how LepidaScpA faced the above
presented issues, implementing a passive Wavelength Division
Multiplexing (WDM) ﬁber access technology in its network,
over a wide and complex territory. Beneﬁts, costs, pros and
cons, and comparison between different technology approaches
are also discussed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
brieﬂy presents the previously used technology and then it
introduces the passive WDM solution; Section III describes the
events that lead LepidaScpA to choose a full passive WDM
access approach; Section IV brieﬂy illustrates the used solution
in order to track passive WDM uses; Section V describes
and compares passive WDM costs between different solutions;
Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
PON VS PASSIVE WDM
A Passive Optical Network (PON) [2] is a ﬁber access tech-
nology used to provide ﬁber to the end-user. PON implements
a point-to-multipoint architecture, in which unpowered ﬁber
optic splitters/combiners are used to enable a single optical
ﬁber to serve multiple end-points. PON consists of an Optical
Line Terminal (OLT) at the service provider’s POP (hub)
and a number of Optical Network Units (ONUs) or Optical
Network Terminals (ONTs), near end-users. Typically, down-
stream signals are broadcast to all premises sharing multiple
ﬁbers. Upstream signals are combined using a multiple access
protocol, usually Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA).
Downstream signals are combined by OLT and transmitted
at the same wavelength. When the signal reaches a splitter,
it does not strip off the individual signal but instead splits
the signal. This results is a duplication of the same signal
with reduced power. At this point, the split signal is sent into
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1. An arrangement of a group of 12 ﬁber optic pairs in a network segment between Lepida POPs.
ONU/ONT and it pulls off the data that is meant for that user
based on addressing. In the upstream, all the subscribers go
through the ONU or ONT and get put together again, though
not necessarily sequentially, and sent upstream on another
wavelength.
Passive WDM [3] deeply exploits the frequency domain
in order to multiplex multiple signals in the same optical
ﬁber. There is no need of point to multi-point media access
control or to deﬁne different roles such as OLT and ONTs:
each signal is assigned to a wavelength, also named “Color”,
at the device port. This means that the switch or router that
originates the signal will utilize a WDM transceiver instead of
a standard 1310nm or 1550nm one. Moreover, it also means
that signals are combined, multiplexed, but do not interact.
In Passive WDM technology there are two main kinds of
multiplexer: simple multiplexer (MUX) and Optical Add and
Drop Multiplexer (OADM). The ﬁrst one picks the Colors
from single Color ﬁber pairs (of ﬁber patches) and multiplexes
them into a single ﬁber pair. The second one adds and drops
a selected subset of Colors to and from dedicated ﬁber pairs
and allows all the others to pass.
III.
FULL PASSIVE WDM ACCESS APPROACH
In this section, we focus on the events that lead to choosing,
in the Lepida network, a passive WDM solution as the main
ﬁber access technology.
The ﬁrst attempts of passive WDM multiplexing were done
at the beginning of 2013. The goal was to free ﬁber pairs in
a ﬁber cable and the key idea was to exploit WDM (both
Coarse and Dense WDM) instead of buying new dark ﬁbers
or building new infrastructures.
Subsequently, we started replacing some active devices
with passive WDM ones in order to reduce some housing
costs. In the previous SDH-like [4] network topology (Figure
2.a) the backhaul devices were located in other Internet Service
Provider (ISP) sites. The updated network topology became an
hub-and-spoke one: passive WDM devices are fully transparent
and all the end-user are logically connected to the main Lepida
POP site by means of a Color, i.e., a single GE WDM signal
(Figure 2.b).
The focal point was the awareness of a new capability:
introducing passive WDM equipment, the physical topology
and the “colored topology” can be splitted. The passive WDM
quickly became a design weapon that has been used to
overcome the exhaustion of optical ﬁbers or simply to redesign
the access network.
Due to the introduction of passive WDM, the paths of the
Colors stretch to longer distances compared to the ones of
the links in the outdated network topologies. The availability
of cheap WDM transceivers whose power budget can span
up to 41 dB allows us to overcome the distance constraints.
A ﬂexibility improvement leads to a network redundancy
improvement like in Figure 2.c . If we compare Figures 3
and 1, we see that passive WDM is exploited in order to free
6 ﬁber pairs and to remove a POP site (POP C).
Until the end of 2015, passive WDM devices have been
installed close to the active devices (see Figure 3). The
capability to route WDM signals directly inside the ﬁber optic
splice closure leads to a Color path optimization like in Figure
4; moreover, by means of the integration between passive
WDM device and ﬁber splice closure each signal in ﬁber pair
can be added (and dropped) into another ﬁber pair without any
kind of cabinet or power supply.
The end of 2016 was the end of the experimentation phase.
A massive transition to passive WDM ﬁber access technology
was rolled out after a 4-year test, more than two hundred
passive WDM devices installed and about ﬁve hundred CWDM
transceiver plugged in existing equipment. The transition has
been split into two steps:
1)
the standard transceivers have been and will be re-
placed by WDM ones taking advantage of the POP
devices upgrade planned between 2017 and 2019
without any ﬁber optics rerouting;
2)
deploying a passive CWDM solution, FIST-FCASA2
[6], that can be smartly managed within the Fiber
Infrastructure System Technology (FIST) ﬁber splice
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 2. Evolution of implemented multiplexing solutions.
Figure 3. An arrangement of a group of 12 ﬁber optic pairs in a network segment between Lepida POPs exploiting CWDM Multiplexing devices.
closures, i.e. the most common ﬁber splice closure in
Lepida.
In order to shrink the supply chain, a framework agreement
with CommScope [5], the owner of the FIST brand, has been
done.
A representative ﬁgure: the 6-month forecast of June 2017
indicates a need for more than 3 hundred (about 10% of the
number of Lepida users) of FIST-FCASA2 devices. Each FIST-
FCASA2 should have added and dropped a single CWDM
Color toward a Lepida end-user. The aim is to connect each
end-user to a couple of POPs by means of a single Color like
in Figure 4.
What are the advantages of this full passive WDM ap-
proach? Those pursued by Lepida are the following:
•
In each section between two POPs, the maximum
number of end-users directly connected to two POPs
are constrained by the amount of the available ﬁber
pairs. The end-user maximum number is the product
of the available ﬁber pairs and the number of Colors
admitted by the chosen passive technology, e.g., pas-
sive CWDM solutions ﬁx the gain to 8 or 18 compared
to the solution without WDM.
•
Switching from a dedicated ﬁber pairs approach to
a dedicated WDM Colors approach frees ﬁber pairs
that can be rented or exploited in order to connect
new users.
•
Each user can be connected directly to POP without
any aggregation equipment: a) Each user can be in-
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 4. An arrangement of a group of 12 ﬁber optic pairs in a network segment between Lepida POPs exploiting CWDM Multiplexing devices inside the
ﬁber optic splice closure.
dependently upgraded from 1GE links to 10GE links
b) Aggregation network devices can be avoided (nor
maintained or upgraded).
•
The same regular “colored” network topology (and
also the same set of conﬁguration rule between CPE
and POPs) can be achieved in distinct ﬁber optic
network topologies.
IV.
PASSIVE WDM COLORS TRACKING AND
TROUBLESHOOTING
Each Color spans over multiple ﬁber links and has its own
path. Working in a network environment without the Colors, a
signal loss can be related to different failures: an electrical
failure, a device failure or a ﬁber cut. On the other hand,
working in a network environment that exploits the Color
paths, a ﬁber cut can be located by overlapping the path of the
Colors involved in the failure event. Vice versa, single active
equipment failure can suggest an electrical or device failure.
At the end, the color path diversity can help to improve the
troubleshooting process.
Colors are essentially a new degree of information about
the network and have to be mapped on top of a traditional
ﬁber network documentation. Maintaining all the information
related to the Color paths require a new asset management
layer. This new layer should also aid the correlation between
the Color path diversity and the failure events.
In order to operate and to maintain a such complex network
architecture, in a business environment, it is crucial to provide
reliable and complete information about network topologies,
free/used ﬁbers and Color paths. LepidaScpA implemented
a resource manager software, provided with a web-based
interface and a relational database.
This resource managers software adds to the main Lep-
ida geo-database, that stores all the network asset data, all
the Color-related information. This Colors tracking function,
available through web URL endpoints, provides a simple web
interface that the network manager can use to check the paths
Figure 5. Resource Manager: selection of a ﬁber pair.
of the failure affected Colors (Figure 5) and network designer
can use to manage name and path for each selected Color
(Figure 6).
V.
PASSIVE WDM EQUIPMENT COSTS
An application on such a large scale of Passive WDM is
not so common in Europe and ﬁnding a partner that can deliver
a complete solution has not been easy.
CommScope proposes a CWDM FIST-FCASA2 Solution
in EMEA but It is not able to share detailed information on its
end customers; It only declares, referring to applications such
as mobile backhauling and point-to-point interconnection, that
widespread use of this technology can be found only in the
Far East (Korea or Malaysia).
Nevertheless, the transition to a passive WDM approach
can be achieved step-by-step in a pay-as-you-grow model and
without large investments.
Which is the right passive WDM technology? It depends
only on the number of users. CWDM ones range between 8 and
16 end-users, DWDM ones range between 40 and 96. CWDM
solutions are cheaper than the DWDM ones but, today, all
the solutions settle down, if exploited to reach the maximum
number of users, to 300 e per user (see Figure 7).
Lepida users are not so dense, hence we started by choosing
a CWDM solution in order to reduce the initial economic
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 6. Resource Manager: Color assignment to a ﬁber pair.
Figure 7. Cost per user comparison between WDM solutions.
effort; the main obstacle to starting the transition to the passive
CWDM solution was to ﬁnd a product that could be integrated
inside a ﬁber optics splice closure.
Thanks to the frame agreement with CommScope, FIST-
FCASA2 device series have been re-introduced in the Italian
market and now it is the easiest-to-install and highest reliable
solution.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Both PON and Passive WDM are broadband access tech-
nology for optical networks.
PON and its evolution (G, XG, etc.) have the advantage of
a huge deployment that has lead to product maturity and to
shrink the equipment cost. Nevertheless, OLT and ONT intro-
duce power budget constraints, i.e., a short distance between
OLT and ONT. PON is designed to match a small point-to-
multipoint environment with a huge number of end-users with
shared bandwidth and shared computational resources.
Passive WDM addresses point-to-point systems that can be
managed or upgraded independently. A passive WDM solution
can decouple the ﬁber pair routes and the Color routes over the
same network. Moreover, Colors with very high power can be
exploited in order to span between a very long distance. The
result is that Passive CWDM can be exploited in a pre-existent
network in order to increase reliability, bandwidth or con-
ﬁguration cleanliness in a pay-as-you-grow approach. Passive
WDM Color routing can also achieve greater security: using
a dedicated channel per each subscriber is often considered to
be safer than sharing resources. At last, passive WDM can aid
fault handling.
What is the best technology? No one. They target different
applications: XG-PON is envisioned for residential applica-
tions while Passive WDM is investigated for business or
bandwidth intensive backhaul. Passive WDM is quite unused in
Europe but has found in Lepida the perfect match as described
in this contribution.
REFERENCES
[1]
Lepida
ScpA
company
website
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.lepida.it, 2019.01.11.
[2]
A. Banerjee et al. , “Wavelength-division-multiplexed passive optical
network (WDM-PON) technologies for broadband access: a review”,
Journal of Optical Networking Vol. 4, Issue 11, 2005, pp. 737-758.
[3]
Passive
DWDM
vs
Active
DWDM,
Fs.com
website
[Online].
Available
from:
https://community.fs.com/blog/passive-dwdm-vs-
active-dwdm.html, 2019.01.11.
[4]
ITU-T, “Architecture of transport networks based on the synchronous
digital hierarchy (SDH)”, International Telecommunication Union, Rec-
ommendation No. G.803, Geneva, March, 2000.
[5]
COMMSCOPE
company
website
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.commscope.com, 2019.01.11.
[6]
FIST-FCASA2
datasheet
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.commscope.com/Docs/FIST-FCASA2-Field-Installable-
CWDM-322644EU.pdf, 2019.01.11.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

