A Dynamic Bandwidth Allocation Scheme for Interactive Multimedia Applications
over Cellular Networks
Kirti Keshav
Samsung India Software Operations Pvt Ltd.
Block B, No 66/1 Bagmane Tech Park
C V Raman Nagar, Bangalore, India
kirtik@ece.iisc.ernet.in
Pallapa Venkataram
ECE Department
Indian Institute of Science
Bangalore, India
pallapa@ece.iisc.ernet.in
Abstract—Cellular networks played key role in enabling high
level of bandwidth for users by employing traditional methods
such as guaranteed QoS based on application category at
radio access stratum level for various classes of QoSs. Also,
the newer multimode phones (e.g., phones that support LTE
(Long Term Evolution standard), UMTS, GSM, WIFI all at
once) are capable to use multiple access methods simulta-
neously and can perform seamless handover among various
supported technologies to remain connected. With various
types of applications (including interactive ones) running on
these devices, which in turn have different QoS requirements,
this work discusses as how QoS (measured in terms of user
level response time, delay, jitter and transmission rate) can be
achieved for interactive applications using dynamic bandwidth
allocation schemes over cellular networks. In this work, we
propose a dynamic bandwidth allocation scheme for interactive
multimedia applications with/without background load in the
cellular networks. The system has been simulated for many
application types running in parallel and it has been observed
that if interactive applications are to be provided with decent
response time, a periodic overhauling of policy at admission
control has to be done by taking into account history, criticality
of applications. The results demonstrate that interactive appli-
cations can be provided with good service if policy database
at admission control is reviewed dynamically.
Keywords-Cellular networks; interactive applications; dynamic
bandwidth allocation.
I. INTRODUCTION
As the bandwidth available to the wireless network
users increases, applications (APPs) are becoming more
bandwidth hungry. Apart from the bandwidth, other main
requirements for current day interactive applications are
tight temporal relations, less loss rates and energy efﬁcient
data transfer for battery operated hand held devices. This
is because session time of interactive applications tends to
be longer with intermittent data transfer and in such cases
mobile phone’s energy consumption should be minimized.
Various radio resource management (RRM) techniques has
been developed for provisioning QoS for wireless cellular
networks. Usually network operators chooses proper access
methods and proper RRM policies for multi mode mobile
phones.
Interactive trafﬁc classes are meant for bursty, intermittent
data transmission. During interactive session, key factor is
the response time to users at both the ends. Amount of data
transfer could be huge, but it would be bursty in nature.
Examples of such applications include instant messenger
for voice, chat & video, placeware (conference), netmeeting
whiteboard, video messaging, online trading or transactional
data client/server applications (such as SAP’s, Peoplesoft’s
and Oracle’s), and telnet. Another example of interactive
applications is Navigation using off board method, in which
the map to be presented on user’s screen depends upon,
which direction user would take on road. Apart from these
applications, many time critical application such as in health-
care sector wherein the doctor needs to instruct interactively
for surgery remotely to his colleagues or systems at far off
distance. In summary, the main characteristic of interactive
class trafﬁc is the strict response time requirement with
interactive class trafﬁc while other trafﬁc types are not so
delay sensitive.
There are major complexities involved for running real
time interactive multimedia applications over cellular net-
works. Few examples are given here. As the network delays
are not predictable, many time critical applications like
online trading can suffer and can cause ﬁnancial losses to
users. Similarly for interactive wireless games, if bandwidth
and tight temporal requirements are not met, the whole
gaming experience can be of very poor quality. For inter-
active news, if temporal relations between audio/video are
not maintained, then it can lead to poor user experience.
Apart from the requirement of necessary required data
rate, temporal requirements and necessity of mitigating
effects of wireless problems such as fading, frequent han-
dovers due to mobility pose the major challenge for seamless
interactive multimedia experience. With the increasing de-
mand for multimedia services in wireless networks, a great
deal of attention needs to be paid to resource allocation for
time critical interactive multimedia application data and on
ways to provide seamless multimedia access in the next
generation mobile communication networks. Problem of
intelligent usage and allocation of the available bandwidth
273
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

in a wireless environment is still a challenge due to client
mobility and radio born errors.
In the remaining of this sections, QoS requirements of
interactive applications and problems faced by interactive
applications in cellular network environment are discussed.
Following the discussion about related work in Section II,
in Section III, the proposed bandwidth allocation scheme
is pre- sented by giving details of components present
in base sta-‘ tion. After providing detailed algorithm for
selecting pri- orities according to host of factors to provide
for reliable service to interactive applications, in Section IV,
the simulation environment is presented. Thereafter, details
of simulation procedure employed in designing of discrete
event simulator are presented in Section V. Modelling as-
pects for various technologies such as LTE (Long Term
Evolution), WCDMA (Wideband Code Division Multiple
Access) are presented in Section VI. Sections VII and VIII
contain details of results and conclusion, and ﬁnally, in
Section IX, direction for future works is provided.
A. QoS requirements for interactive applications
Interactive class applications mainly comprise of a human
or a machine or a remote server at both the ends of
communication link and having a response time constrained
data transfer. It is characterized by the request response
pattern of the end user. Also interactive applications are
generally foreground operations in which user waits for the
operation to complete before proceeding further and have
very tight response time (latency) requirements. Multimedia
data can include text, graphics, images, audio and video in
various combinations. By strict temporal relations it is meant
that the different data types must be received and presented
to user as per critical timing relationships. An entity at the
destination is usually expecting a response message within a
certain period of time. Therefore, the round trip propagation
delay (RTD) and delay jitter are the key requirements for
such applications [9]. The examples of typical interactive
applications such as interactive games and interactive class
room illustrates such requirements. For example, interactive
games are the one which use the network to interact with
other users or systems. Although requirements would depend
upon speciﬁc application, bandwidth, delay, delay jitter,
response time are the key parameters. Many interactive
applications try to exchange high volumes of data, but
demand very short delays and response time of 100-250 ms
is a typical requirement.
B. Problems in using interactive applications over cellular
networks
The data encoding methods affect the experience of in-
teractive applications and proper encoding methods should
be choosen carefully. Various advances has occurred in data
representation schemes for multimedia (MPEG-2, MPEG-
4 etc). MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 employ frame based coding
techniques in which each rectangular video frame is treated
as a unit for compression. The main concern was high
compression ratio and satisfactory quality of video under
such compression techniques. MPEG-2 had small interaction
and is therefore not much helpful for interactive features
of communication over cellular communication. MPEG-
4, besides compression enables features required for user
interactions. It adopts to a new object based coding approach
- media objects are now entities for MPEG-4 coding. Media
objects can be either natural or synthetic. The bandwidth
requirement vary from 5 Kbps to 10 Mbps, so MPEG-4 is
highly suitable for interactive multimedia.
To support various kinds of quality of service (QoS)
requirements for interactive multimedia in wireless net-
works, resource provisioning is a major issue. Call admission
control (CAC) and dynamic bandwidth management are
such provisioning strategies to limit the number of call
connections into the networks and to down grade other low
priority classes in order to reduce the network congestion
and call dropping.
In wireless networks, another dimension is added: call
drop due to high users mobility. A good CAC scheme has
to balance the call blocking and call dropping in order
to provide the desired QoS requirements. Reservation of
resources in the network is required to help smooth working
of interactive multimedia. This also requires coordination
amongst all parties such as admission control, policing, etc.
II. EXISTING RELATED WORKS
One can ﬁnd lots of work in the literature and standards
which talk about providing QoS to various classes of trafﬁc
in wireless networks.
One of the most popular strategies for wireless mobile
multimedia networks which serve different types of cus-
tomers with differing bandwidth requirements is the re-
serve channels (RC) CAC strategy. Call admission control
schemes can be categorized based on their handoff-priority
policy or queuing priority schemes [5] [6].
1. Guard channel (GC) schemes: In this type of scheme,
some channels are reserved for handoff calls. Four different
types of CAC schemes have appeared in the literature: Cutoff
priority scheme, fractional GC scheme, rigid division-based
scheme and new call bounding scheme.
2. Queuing priority (QP) schemes: In this type of scheme,
calls are accepted whenever there are free channels. Depend-
ing on the approach, new calls are blocked and handoff calls
are queued, vice versa, or all calls are queued and the queue
is rearranged based on certain priorities.
The work presented in this paper falls conceptually within
the second category, that is, of the QP schemes, as in
our CAC scheme, both handoff calls and the new calls
originating from within the cell are accepted if enough free
channel bandwidth exists to accommodate them, and no
portion of the bandwidth is restricted for access of either
274
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Traffic Analyzer
Prioritized Handoff
 Controller
A d m i s s i o n
 Controller
Application 
Classifier
     Application
        Queues
P o l i c y  D a t a b a s e
M a i n  C o n t r o l l e r
B a s e  S t a t i o n  A r c h i t e c t u r e
A P P  H i s t o r y  
M o n i t o r
Figure 1.
Architecture of bandwidth allocation scheme at base station
type of call (therefore, our scheme is conceptually similar
to [8]).
III. PROPOSED BANDWIDTH ALLOCATION SCHEMES
In this paper, we propose a scheme to be considered at
network side, to effectively allocate and maintain bandwidth
in such a way that QoS requirements of various applications
do not suffer and at the same time, deserving interactive
applications get their bandwidth allotment easily and the
network maintains the interactiveness with high ﬁdelity.
A. Architecture of the bandwidth selection scheme at a base
station
The architecture to be used by the base station (or Node B,
e-NodeB, whichever is applicable based on communication
system ) to implement proposed bandwidth selection scheme
is depicted in Figure 1 and as can be observed the main
components are Application History Monitor, Trafﬁc An-
alyzer, Application Classiﬁer, Policy Database, Admission
Controller, Prioritized Handoff Controller and Application
Queues.
In the proposed system, base station maintains the QoS for
interactive applications using admission control and trafﬁc
shaping operations based on dynamic policies which are
derived from history of trafﬁc using trafﬁc analyzer and
application history monitor component. Based on regular
updating of policy database, intelligent maintenance of ap-
plication queues, admission control and prioritized handoff
control operations, an optimal trafﬁc level is maintained in
the system.
Here is the brief description of these components.
Application Classiﬁer: Whenever a user invokes an ap-
plication, application would request a particular QoS for
channel access. Based on QoS parameters of these APPs,
and other related parameters applications are classiﬁed at
two levels - group category level and intra-group category
level. Group category level is the broad classiﬁcation while
in intra group category, applications are categorized further
inside groups and are assigned priorities.
Application Queues: This component stores the the vari-
ous arriving applications and considers restrictions such has
whether application QoS allows for waiting and channel
capacity.
Trafﬁc Analyzer: This component monitors the trafﬁc over
a long period of time and maintains the statistics such as
application wise drop rate, degradation of QoS, etc. This
component along with application history monitor, helps
in predicting the application behaviors in better way and
hence helps in adaptation of BSC according to current trafﬁc
proﬁle.
Policy Database: This component has a database of
dynamic policies, which helps in working of admission
controller and handoff controller. Policies are dynamic in
the sense that a more optimized set of policies are used
dynamically based on result of monitoring of trafﬁc by
the trafﬁc analyzer and application history due to previous
set of policies over a period of time. This means that
effect due to one set of policies is analyzed and based
on feedback, the policies are updated dynamically for new
arriving applications.
Main Controller: This is the central controller in the base
station which maintains the central thread in the system.
It negotiates with the core network component such as
RNC, MSCs and other BSCs. It coordinates application
queues, policy database, admission controller and handover
controller.
Admission Controller: This component decides the fate
of applications when they arrive. If channel doesn’t have
sufﬁcient suitable amount of bandwidth, when application
arrives, a decision to block or drop the call is taken here.
This component works in tandem with policies component
and main controller. Specially for interactive applications,
more restricted admission control mechanism is used. Even
if manageable bandwidth is available, an interactive appli-
cation is admitted only after making sure the current appli-
cation would survive the predicted scarcity of bandwidth in
near future based on experience from previous application
history.
Handover Controller: This component takes a decision
regarding handover of current application to another cell,
if current cell is totally occupied and neighbor cell can
provide the required QoS. It also checks the direction of
movement (to be negotiated through the main controller
from other BSCs and RNC), serving cell signal strength,
neighbor cell capabilities, application history for making
the appropriate handover commands to users. This feature
is very helpful especially in off-board Navigation, wherein
application has to pre-download the map from server, based
on the prediction of route which user might adopt.
Application History Monitor: This component monitors
at detailed level, the history of application calls at the local
level (BSC).
In this scheme priorities are assigned in a very dynamic
way. Proposed scheme involves monitoring of various call
performance parameters in every ﬁxed interval and after
275
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Algorithm 1 Algorithm of proposed scheme
1: Begin
2: Input: Application is to be dequeued from the APP
wait List for admitting in system
3: Output: APP to admitted - Yes/No ?
4: Initial priorities assigned to various APP categories
based on APP characteristics
5: At every departure, priorities are reviewed
6: APP with maximum priority are chosen
7: if New APP doesn’t meet bandwidth Requirement then
8:
Do not drop the APP, wait for next departure. max
wait time depend on APP.
9: else
10:
Admit the APP
11: end if
12: Next admission decision taken at next departure
13: End
Algorithm 2 Simulation - Priority review algorithm
1: Begin
2: Input: Periodic review timer has expired
3: Output: New updated policies
4: Check and consult trafﬁc analyzer, policy database, APP
history monitor, interactive application response time.
5: Update priorities to be used in APP Wait Queue accord-
ingly.
6: End
observing key characteristics a fresh decision regarding
priorities for the next interval is taken. These priorities are
then taken into account for decisions such as admission,
dropping, reducing bandwidth of already accommodated
application. Example of various decision factors which can
be used in deciding priority are:
a) History of trafﬁc pattern during the day: Trafﬁc pattern
in a given time interval of the day.
b) Geographical Area: (i) e.g., if it is hospital - voice
trafﬁc is generally given highest priority, however interactive
health care applications are also taken care with more prior-
ity. (ii) for residential area, applications such as interactive
games and shared video news are given more priority.
c) For ofﬁce areas, application ﬂows involving stocks,
email, video conferencing are given high priority.
d) In the rural areas, interactive class room and other
applications basted on history are decided to be of higher
priority.
e) While in UMTS case, priorities are changed dynam-
ically based on interference, in case of LTE, priorities of
applications are updated dynamically based on location in
the cell (cell edge users etc). For GSM cells, for various
application types, differentiation is not done within cell.
Thus in proposed scheme, always a fare treatment to
applications is done by network. Our scheme is shown, via
an extensive simulation study comparison and a conceptual
comparison, to clearly excel in terms of QoS provisioning
to users for interactive applications while balancing overall
network parameters such as overall reduction in cellular
interference, overall throughput, edge-user throughput, cell
user blocking probability and cell capacity . To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work in the relevant literature
where such an approach has been proposed.
IV. SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT & PROCEDURE
For simulation, discrete event simulation methodology
has been employed. In the simulation, application arrivals
are assumed to be random, and are considered as poisson
arrivals. When an arrival occurs, it is classiﬁed into one of
the application types as mentioned in the table 1 and whether
it is same cell generated or its a handover-ed application
from another neighboring cell is decided.
Application category is decided randomly using a uniform
random variable. Different application types are assigned
higher/lower rate according to the arrival rate desired for
simulation. For example if APP1 type of application are
desired to be of higher arrival rate type, then they are
assigned more range in the uniform random variable output
while determining their probability of arrival.
Algorithm 1 describes the procedure of admitting new
application in the system. Based on application’s type, char-
acteristics such as bandwidth required and time it will stay
in the cell are calculated. In the simulation, while bandwidth
required are hard coded, stay time in cell is estimated using
exponential distribution, with each application type having
different mean stay time. During simulation, interactive
applications are assigned longer call duration as shown in
Table 1.
After determining application characteristics, available
bandwidth in the channel is checked by the cell’s band-
width allocation module. If this module detects that it can
accommodate the currently arrived call without affecting its
current application performance, then the call is admitted. If
however, bandwidth allocation module ﬁnds that the arriving
call cannot be admitted, then the call is put into queue.
As shown in Algorithm 1, applications are not immediately
dropped if bandwidth is not sufﬁcient at the time of new
application arrival, rather a fresh assessment of situation is
done at every departure of application to know if the leaving
application has freed the necessary bandwidth in which new
application can be accommodated. Each application category
has separate queue having different sizes, with sizes deﬁned
by mean bandwidth requirement of respective application
category. Each of this queue is assigned with a priority,
which depends on many factors such as response time,
application’s history and criticality of application. Each of
276
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Table I
CHARACTERSTICS OF APPLICATION TYPES
Reqd APP bandwidth(Kbps)Mean call durationMax wait timePercentage of App
Example
APP1
20
5
1
40
Voice Call
APP2
40
2
2
10
InterAct Video News
APP3
10
1
1
20
InterAct Share Mkt Trading
APP4
60
10
1
30
InterAct Wireless Games
Figure 2.
Simulation Model
the application type has a maximum wait period, on whose
expiry, if application is still not scheduled to be taken into
channel, the application is dropped.
Now whenever, an application leaves the channel, the
bandwidth allocator sees if some applications are pending
in the queues. It checks the queue priority wise, with
higher priority given to more real time interactive application
categories and with those APPs having less wait time.
Hence by controlling priority of queues and wait time of
different queue types, QoS for interactive applications can
be guaranteed. Applications ﬂow characteristics are depicted
in Table 1. As described above, simulation environment
is simulated by performing simulations as per the simu-
lation model depicted in Figure 2. Special care is taken
for interactive applications. In today’s smart phone, various
types of applications are simultaneously running. However
it is the interactive applications, which demands most real
time behavior from network. For this reason, as described
in Algorithm 2, policies are revised periodically based on
consultation from trafﬁc analyzer, APP history monitor and
interactive application speciﬁc response time. Accordingly
whenever the network sees that new application type is of
interactive type, the main controller in our proposed scheme,
learns from previous experience by discussing with App
history monitor to check if the available bandwidth with
Network is sufﬁcient for future needs of this type of Inter-
active application. So in essence, apart from assigning higher
priorities to interactive applications, our scheme takes care
of smooth running of interactive applications by learning in
advance about the future need of similar application. This
learning of behavior of various applications is done for all
users of Network and a central database about application
history is maintained. Every e-NodeB/RNC consults this
database and takes action at NodeB level at the time of
admission of new interactive applications.
V. MODELING ASPECTS
The actual radio resource management (RRM) algorithm
deﬁnitely depends upon the technology been used at physical
layer. For example, if a CDMA- or WCDMA-based (3G)
system is considered, then, the fact that system capacity of
radio channels (e.g., in 2G systems), but is rather affected by
so called “Soft Limited” interference based CDMA behavior
has to be kept as a criteria for RRM algorithms. Similarly,
if OFDMA is considered at physical Layer (4G, LTE), then
apart from usual parameters such as users requirements on
the radio and the channel condition, the location of the user
in the target cell becomes a signiﬁcant factor. This is because
in LTE, because of OFDMA, there is almost nil intra cell
interference, but a high inter-cell interference exist as cell
edge users share the same bandwidth in neighboring cell.
So to provide good QoS to interactive applications in terms
of upper limit on response time, application speciﬁc needs
have to be taken care by bandwidth allocation and trafﬁc
shaping schemes in a cross layer way.
In WCDMA case, the parameters the energy per data bit to
effective noise power density ratio Eb
Nt and data rate Rb help
in decoupling load control with physical layer parameters
[3], [4]. It turns out that relationship between data rate and
resource consumption is non linear. This is because resource
consumption also depends on QoS requirements [4].
Uplink direction:
Eb
Nt

j
=
W/Rbj. ˆPj
(1 − k). P
i̸=j ˆPi + Iother + Ith
(1)
W - The chip rate of the system.In UMTS the rate is
@=3.84 MChips/S
ˆPi, ˆPj- the mean received powers from users i, j respec-
tively.
k - Describes the inﬂuence of interference reduction
schemes, such as multi user detection (MUD)
277
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Figure 3.
Call Drop Performance in this Scheme
Iown − P
i̸=j ˆPi - the interference from other users in
the same cell(cell of user j)
Iother - The interference from all users in other cells(other
than user jth cell) where the signal is not destined to the
referenced Node B (Base station of user j).
Ith - The thermal background noise.
The current uplink load can be estimated using ηul =
Io−Ith
Io
, where Io is the total power received at Base Station.
Downlink Direction:
In the downlink direction, similar analogous results can
be derived with the difference that in downlink, one Node
B transmits data to many mobile users (mobile stations) and
reference point for the downlink investigations is at the user
j. The current downlink load can be estimated using ηdl =
Io−Pp
Io
, where Io is the total power received at base station.
Similarly for LTE, the model followed is similar to “Softer
Frequency Reuse based Resource Scheduling Algorithm”, as
mentioned in [7], in which cell edge users are having greater
probability to use the frequency band with higher power and
the cell center users are having the higher probability of
using frequency band with lower power.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Using the above mentioned method of periodic over-
hauling of policy for admission and trafﬁc shaping for
dynamic bandwidth management, after simulations it is seen
that apart from being able to provide better QoS, response
time to interactive applications, the over all call drop is
also kept in check (Figure 3). Since the proposed scheme
involves monitoring of various call/application performance
parameters every ﬁxed interval and since after observing
key characteristics a fresh decision regarding priorities for
the next interval is taken, the result obtained suggest that
for interactive applications, dynamically adapting of policies
is must in order to give good experience to interactive
application users while maintaining the QoS of background
services under check.
VII. CONCLUSION
As we have seen in above sections, the proposed band-
width allocation scheme is an efﬁcient one and when com-
pared to other works, its performance is proved to be better.
This shows that in order to provide time critical response
to interactive users in reliable way, bandwidth management
policies should be reviewed periodically and should take into
account the response time, trafﬁc pattern, previous call drop
rates, application history (which applications are critical and
which ﬂows have given maximum proﬁt in past to network
operator).
VIII. FUTURE WORK
We are working on design of comprehensive framework
to include all aspects of radio resource management such as
admission control, scheduling, policing, etc., so as to provide
best service for interactive applications.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Xu, H. Liu, and Q. Zeng, “Resource management and
QoS control in multiple trafﬁc wireless and mobile Internet
systems”, 14th International Conference on Computer Com-
munications and Networks, vol. 17, no. 19, pp. 125-130, Oct.
2005.
[2] A. Kind, X. Dimitropoulos, S. Denazis, and B. Claise, “Ad-
vanced Network Monitoring Brings Life to the Awareness
Plane” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 10, pp.
140-146, October 2008.
[3] 3GPP Speciﬁcations, Radio Resource Control (RRC) Protocol
speciﬁcation, 25.331, version 3.21.0, Release 99
[4] U. Bernhard, E. Jugl, J. Mueckenheim, H. Pampel, and M.
Soellner, “Intelligent Management of Radio Resources in
UMTS Access Networks” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol.
7, no. 3, pp. 109-126, 2003.
[5] Y. Fang and Y. Zhang, “Call Admission Control Schemes and
Performance Analysis in Wireless Mobile Networks” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 371-
382, 2002.
[6] H. A. Mohamed, “Call Admission Control in Wireless Net-
works: A Comprehensive Survey” IEEE Communications Sur-
veys & Tutorials, vol.7, no.1, pp. 49-68, 2005
[7] S.
Hussain,
“Dynamic
Radio
Resource
Management
in
3GPP LTE”, http://www.bth.se/fou/cuppsats.nsf/all/c858bf5b
4979a6b3c1257552004262f6$ﬁle/Sajid Hussain MSc Thesis
Report.pdf, last accessed on 1-11-2010
[8] C. J. Haung, W. K. Laib, and Y. L. Yanb, “A self-adaptive
bandwidth reservation scheme for sectored cellular communi-
cations” Information Sciences, vol. 166, no. 1-4, pp. 127-146,
2004.
[9] B. Zheng and M. Atiquzzaman, “System Design and Network
Requirements for Interactive Multimedia” IEEE Transactions
on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 15, no. 1,
pp. 145-153, 2005
278
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

