Adaptive Data Transmission Control for Reliable and Efﬁcient Spatio-Temporal
Data Retention by Vehicles
Hiroki Teshiba∗, Daiki Nobayashi†, Kazuya Tsukamoto† and Takeshi Ikenaga†
∗ Graduate School of Computer Science and System Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology
† Network Design Research Center, Kyushu Institute of Technology
680-4 Kawazu, Iizuka-shi, Fukuoka, 820-8502, Japan
Email: ∗teshiba@infonet.cse.kyutech.ac.jp, †{nova, tsukamoto, ike}@ndrc.kyutech.ac.jp
Abstract—Vehicles, which have penetrated deeply into society and
have become essential to our daily lives, have two major charac-
teristics that are comparable with conventional communication
devices (such as cellular phones). First, since each modern vehicle
is now equipped with large computational power and vast data
storage capacity, they can easily collect, process, and individually
store vast amounts of data. Second, they have remarkably high
mobility, and can thus transport and spread stored data to
everywhere very effectively. Therefore, in this study, we focus
on vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs) constructed solely with
vehicles, and without any support from outside infrastructure.
On one hand, although users can usually receive various ap-
plication services through the Internet, some speciﬁc services,
such as those handling trafﬁc and local weather information,
are strongly dependent on geographical location and time (and
so this information is referred to as spatio-temporal data in
this paper), which is not readily available via the Internet.
Therefore, as a means to providing spatio-temporal data reliably
and effectively by exploiting VANET, we propose an adaptive
transmission control method in which each vehicle controls data
transmission probability by considering the data retention density
of neighboring vehicles. Through simulations, we found that our
proposed method is effective for retaining spatio-temporal data.
Keywords–VANET, Data retention, Adaptive data transmission
control
I.
INTRODUCTION
With
the
progress
and
widespread
dissemination
of
machine-to-machine (M2M) and Internet of Things (IoT)
technologies, the number and types of devices equipped with
various wireless modules have expanded rapidly. In current
Internet paradigms, most data are ﬁrst gathered into remote
servers connected to networks, after which they are provided
to applications as required. However, according to an Organi-
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
report [1], the number of M2M devices will grow to ﬁfty bil-
lion by 2020, and enormous amounts of small data will ﬂow to
the Internet. In order to store and process these data effectively,
the acquisition of large-capacity storage modules and high-
performance central processing units (CPUs) is essential.
From the viewpoint of data contents, some speciﬁc appli-
cations such as weather and trafﬁc information are strongly
dependent on location and time. Therefore, the utilization of
data collected from the IoT devices, which are referred to as
spatio-temporal data in this paper, can be expected to improve
the quality and accuracy of such information. Since the “locally
produced and consumed” paradigm of spatio-temporal data
use is effective for location-dependent applications, a novel
network architecture that can achieve data retention within a
speciﬁc area is crucial.
In this paper, we focus on vehicular ad-hoc networks
(VANETs) as an important network infrastructure that can
achieve the required level of spatio-temporal data retention.
Modern vehicles have two remarkable features. First, data
can be collected by and analyzed within individual vehicles
because they are now equipped with signiﬁcant amounts of
storage space, battery power, and high-level computational
resources. Second, since there are enormous numbers of highly
mobile vehicles operating all over the world, they can provide a
foundation from which data can be collected and/or distributed
efﬁciently.
Furthermore, the potential for spatio-temporal informa-
tion communication between vehicles in a VANET allows
us to advocate a new promising network infrastructure. In
our study, we utilize vehicles with spatio-temporal data as
regional information hubs, or InfoHubs, in order to disseminate
spatio-temporal data within some pre-deﬁned area. The spatio-
temporal data are ﬁnally received by users (not vehicles).
Spatio-temporal data management by InfoHub vehicles brings
us the following advantages:
•
Users can obtain the spatio-temporal information
quickly.
•
Thanks to distributed data management, an acceptable
level of fault tolerance can be achieved.
•
Internet server loads can be reduced.
If spatio-temporal data are managed in a distributed man-
ner, users can obtain the data from neighboring vehicles,
thereby achieving real-time data acquisition. Moreover, if data
are replicated among multiple vehicles in advance, spatio-
temporal data retention can be maintained even when some
vehicles break down. Finally, data management by InfoHub
vehicles has the potential to decrease power consumption by
Internet-based (cloud) servers.
However, since all vehicles in a VANET generally utilize
the same communication channel, frame (data) collisions are
inevitable and a certain level of interference is inherent.
In networks with large numbers of vehicles (dense trafﬁc
environments), each vehicle could suffer multiple and fre-
quent frame collisions, leading to a decline in communication
quality. On the other hand, in networks with small numbers
of vehicles (sparse trafﬁc environments), each vehicle must
accelerate data transmission activity due to the lack of data
transmission timing. With these points in mind, it is clear that
the use of adaptive data transmission control in response to
vehicle density could provide an indispensable component for
distributed data management by exploiting the capabilities of
InfoHub vehicles.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Accordingly, in this paper, we propose an adaptive data
transmission control method in which vehicles adaptively
change data transmission probabilities in response to the
density of neighboring vehicles in order to maintain spatio-
temporal data retention within a pre-deﬁned area, and thus
allow area users to efﬁciently obtain local spatio-temporal
data. In our proposed method, each vehicle estimates not only
the number of neighboring vehicles based on the number of
beacons but also the number of received data based on the
number of data received thus far. Then, based on the estimated
values, each vehicle dynamically changes data transmission
probability in a way that facilitates overall spatio-temporal data
retention within the speciﬁed area. Through simulation-based
evaluations, we clariﬁed that our proposed method can always
achieve an acceptable level of data retention within the target
area, irrespective of vehicle density changes.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we review related works. In Section III, we describe our spatio-
temporal data retention system. Section IV shows the detailed
mechanisms of our proposed method. Section V provides the
simulation model and simulation results. Finally, Section VI is
our conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
Fan Li et al. discussed various VANET-related problems
such as data dissemination and data sharing caused by the high
mobility of vehicles [2] and proposed the Geocast Routing-
based protocol, which is basically a location-based multicast
routing, in order to deliver data from a source vehicle to
all other vehicles within the target area. Maihofer et al. [3]
proposed an abiding geocast in which data are delivered to
all vehicles within the target area and then maintained within
them during the lifetime of the network. They provided three
solutions for retaining the geocast data within the target area:
(1) server approach, (2) election approach, and (3) neighbor
approach. We will provide an overview of these approaches
in the following paragraph.
In the server approach, a pre-deﬁned ﬁxed server within
the target area is used to store and periodically transmit data
to other vehicles within the target area based on a geocast
routing protocol. Since the server sends data and exchanges
location information among all vehicles within the target area,
it is susceptible to overloading. Should that occur, the server
would not be able to effectively communicate with vehicles
if many failures appear, thereby degrading its dissemination
performance. In the election approach, only the elected vehi-
cles maintain the data and periodically send the data to other
vehicles within the target area. In both of these two approaches,
broadcasting from a restricted number of vehicles can result
in spatio-temporal data retention performance degradation.
Finally, the neighbor approach, which consists of only the
vehicles without a dedicated server or elected vehicle, has been
actively studied recently due to its high feasibility, and a num-
ber of systems such as that of [4], Floating Content [5], Locus
[6], and our previous work [7], have been proposed. In the
method of [4], a vehicle exchanges navigation information with
neighboring vehicles, identiﬁes other vehicles that are moving
towards the target area, and then delivers the data to them. In
the Floating Content and Locus systems, each vehicle has a list
of data and exchanges its list with the lists of other vehicles
that it encounters. If any vehicle has data that are not stored
in a neighboring vehicle, the neighboring vehicle can acquire
the data from the vehicle that has the data. In this situation,
the vehicle that has the data decides what data to send based
on the transmission probability. The transmission probability
changes dynamically depending on the distance from where
the data were generated. More speciﬁcally, the transmission
probability decreases as the vehicle moves away from the
center of the target area, thereby indicating that some outlying
recipients will be unlikely to receive the data. In contrast, if
there are numerous vehicles near the center of the target area,
data collisions tend to occur frequently in VANETs because
each vehicle attempts to send high transmission probability
data at the same time.
Meanwhile, unlike Floating Content and Locus, our previ-
ous work [7] aims to deliver data to all vehicles within a target
area at set pre-determined intervals, employing a geolocation-
based broadcasting method. In this method, the transmission
probability for periodical data dissemination is determined
based on the “location information of all neighboring vehi-
cles”. Thus, this method needs a complicated calculation by
vehicles.
In our research, like [7], we focus on a VANET-based
system that disseminates and maintains spatio-temporal data
within a target area by adaptively controlling data transmis-
sion probability in response to the vehicle density, which is
estimated from the number of received data transmissions only.
In our proposed method, the decision process of transmission
probability is simpliﬁed because only the message information
are employed without the location information of all vehicles
like [7]. More speciﬁcally, although existing study [7] requires
accurate location information of all vehicles in order to cal-
culate the distance between vehicles, it is quite difﬁcult in
terms of computational overhead in a practical environment.
Therefore, our proposed method only requires the number
of broadcast messages to decide the transmission probability.
That is, no complex information (e.g., location information) is
required. We refer to our VANET-based system as a spatio-
temporal data retention system.
III.
SPATIO-TEMPORAL DATA RETENTION SYSTEM
In this section, we describe the assumptions behind our
spatio-temporal retention system (III-A), the objective of our
system design (III-B), and its requirements (III-C).
A. Assumptions
Spatio-temporal data are assumed to have originated at a
speciﬁc location and have a target area within a predetermined
radius. Information related to the data’s origination location
and target area are hereafter referred to as the “retention
requirement” and are included in the spatio-temporal data by
the user generating the data.
Since each vehicle can obtain location information by using
its GPS receiver and has a unique ID, it can estimate the
number of neighboring vehicles based on the received beacon
messages broadcast by the InfoHub vehicles. Note that these
InfoHub vehicles are equipped with an on-board wireless
interface employing IEEE 802.11p speciﬁcation. Moreover,
each vehicle performs an operation that determines whether
it is within the target area.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 1. Data transmission procedure.
Figure 2. Target area and Auxiliary area.
B. System Objective
The objective of this system is to facilitate data retention,
especially for spatio-temporal data such as those on weather
and trafﬁc, within a target area. To achieve this, we focus
on VANET constructed from vehicles with InfoHub charac-
teristics. By using this system, a user who enters an area
can obtain the spatio-temporal data on that area very quickly.
Furthermore, since multiple vehicles have the same data, fault
tolerance can be achieved. Finally, since the spatio-temporal
data are stored only on VANET, there is no burden imposed
on Internet (cloud) servers. In the next section, we will discuss
the system requirements to achieve our objective.
C. System Requirements
In this paper, we deﬁne coverage rate as the performance
index that indicates how fast users can receive the spatio-
temporal data. To facilitate rapid data delivery to users, the
entire target area should be covered within the transmission
range of InfoHub vehicles. That is, users should be able to
obtain the spatio-temporal data from a neighboring vehicle via
one-hop broadcast communication. Note that we assume that
the transmission range is less than the target area radius, and
we calculate the coverage rate at the predetermined interval.
The coverage rate formula is shown below:
Coverage Rate = SDT
ST A
where ST A denotes the size of target area, and SDT denotes the
size of total area where the user can obtain the data transmitted
Figure 3. Outline of transmission probability decision.
from either of InfoHub vehicles within the transmission inter-
val. A high coverage rate means that users can automatically
receive the spatio-temporal data from anywhere within the
target area. Moreover, the slope of the change in the coverage
rate indicates the dissemination speed of spatio-temporal data.
Therefore, the coverage rate can reveal the responsiveness of
the proposed system. Since the proposed system requires rapid
acquisition of spatio-temporal data from anywhere within the
target area, each vehicle within the area needs to transmit the
data as frequently as possible. However, high vehicle density
results in frequent data transmissions, which inevitably cause
data collisions that can adversely impact the coverage rate. On
the other hand, if the vehicle density within the area is low,
all vehicles should transmit data as often as possible in order
to boost the coverage rate.
In this way, the appropriate transmission probability will
change in response to the density of neighboring vehicles. In
Section IV, we describe our proposed adaptive transmission
control method for achieving the spatio-temporal data retention
using InfoHub vehicles.
IV.
NODE DENSITY-AWARE TRANSMISSION CONTROL
In this section, we describe our proposed transmission
control method, which is based on the number of neighboring
vehicles (neighboring vehicle density), and which aims at
effective retention of the spatio-temporal data within a target
area. Note that, hereafter, InfoHub vehicles are deﬁned as
nodes. This method aims to disseminate spatio-temporal data
by utilizing the appropriate number of nodes in the target area.
Consequently, our spatio-temporal data retention system can
maintain a high coverage rate while reducing the total number
of data transmissions to the minimum necessary.
A. Data Transmission Timing
In our method, after a node receives data from another
node, it needs to re-transmit the received data, as necessary, to
ensure spatio-temporal data retention within the target area.
However, in order to minimize transmission collisions, the
transmission timing of each node is different. This minimizes
radio channel collisions among the nodes.
Figure 1 shows the data transmission procedure. In our
proposed system, each node periodically transmits the beacon
message, but data are only transmitted when necessary. The
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

beacon broadcast interval is ﬁxed at b seconds. On the other
hand, the data are transmitted based on the following pro-
cedure. When a node vi receives data from another node, it
ﬁrst checks the transmission intervals of d seconds included in
the data. Then, that node randomly determines the next trans-
mission time s(i,t) seconds. Note that the actual transmission
time is determined at the start time of the t-th cycle. Here,
a cycle lasts d seconds. The random determination within d
seconds allows the node to avoid data transmission collisions.
This interval d differs between applications, and we assume
that the user originating the spatio-temporal data also decides
this interval.
B. Adaptive Transmission Control Method
If all nodes are capable of transmitting data at different
timing intervals, data collisions can be completely avoided.
However, when the number of neighboring nodes within
the transmission coverage area is larger than the number of
transmission slots, collisions inevitably occur. Accordingly,
we designed a new transmission control method in which the
transmission probability is dynamically changed based on the
neighboring node density, thereby providing a high coverage
rate with the minimum number of data transmissions. In our
method, nodes around the target area are classiﬁed into three
types based on distance from the center of the target area (data
origin point), as shown in Figure 2. The speciﬁc conditions are
described below:



0 ≤ x ≤ R :
internal area
R < x ≤ R + r :
auxiliary area
otherwise :
independence
where x denotes the distance between the node and the center
of target area. This distance is calculated from both GPS
information and the data origin point, which is included in the
data. R shows the radius of the target area, which is referred to
as the internal area. r is the range of the auxiliary area, which
is very close to the internal area. The values of R and r are
also contained in the data. In Sections IV-B1 and IV-B2, we
show how the transmission probability is determined in each
area.
1) Internal Area Nodes: The nodes in the internal area
autonomously adjust the transmission probability based on
the density of neighboring nodes in order to provide a high
coverage rate. Figure 3 shows an outline of the transmis-
sion probability decision process. The transmission probability
p(i,t), which indicates the transmission probability during the
t-th cycle, is always set at the start time of the t-th cycle. Note
that i represents a unique node ID and t represents a number
of cycle.
In the ﬁrst step, when a node initially receives the data
from other nodes, the transmission probability during the ﬁrst
cycle, i.e., p(i,1), is set to 1. That is, the node makes sure
to transmit the data because the other nodes cannot provide
the data within the receiving node’s transmission coverage.
This allows us to improve the coverage rate quickly. In the
subsequent cycle (t ≥2), p(i,t) is determined based on the
number of neighboring nodes n(i,t−1). Here, when the number
of neighboring nodes is more than four, the node’s own
transmission range has the potential to be completely covered
by that of all neighboring nodes. For example, when the
neighboring four nodes are located to its north, south, west, and
south (ideal arrangement), the node’s potential transmission
cover area is already completely enclosed by that of other
nodes. Threfore, the decision method of data transmission
probability p(i,t) is classiﬁed into the following two cases
based on the number of neighboring nodes n(i,t−1).
•
case 1 n(i,t−1) ≤ 3:
p(i,t) is set to 1. Since the node’s own transmission coverage
cannot be completely covered by that of the neighboring nodes,
it has to transmit, i.e., p(i,t) is set to 1.
•
case 2 n(i,t−1) ≥ 4:
p(i,t) is determined based on the number of neighboring nodes
and the number of received data. However, since such high
node density inherently poses transmission collision risks,
only the minimum number of nodes required to maintain the
high coverage rate should transmit the data. Conversely, in
situations where the location of neighboring nodes is radically
asymmetrical and has the potential to become imbalanced, the
transmission coverage may not be complete, even if there are
a large number of neighboring nodes. This can prevent a node
from being able to cover its own transmission range.
To solve these abovementioned problems, we deﬁne m(i,t)
as the estimated value of the number of received data during
t-th cycle and adjust the transmission probability based on the
m(i,t). The predicted value m(i,t) is given as equation (1),
where m(i,t−1) is the predicted value of the previous cycle,
l(i,t−1) is the number of received data in the previous cycle
(actual value), and α is the moving average coefﬁcient.
m(i,t) = α ∗ l(i,t−1) + (1 − α) ∗ m(i,t−1)
(1)
The node adjusts its transmission probability so that the
number of data transmissions in the t-th cycle becomes the
given target value β. If m(i,t) is less than β, the node can
predict that the number of data transmissions is likely to be
insufﬁcient to cover the area. Therefore, it must increase its
transmission probability. On the other hand, if m(i,t) is more
than β, the node needs to decrease its transmission probability
because excessive data transmissions will occur in the next
cycle. At the start of the t-th cycle, each node estimates
m(i,t) and then adjusts its transmission probability. Equation
(2) describes how the transmission probability is adjusted.
p(i,t) =





p(i,t−1) +
β−l(i,t−1)
n(i,t−1)+1
(0 < m(i,t) < β)
p(i,t−1)
(m(i,t) = β)
p(i,t−1) −
l(i,t−1)−β
n(i,t−1)+1
(m(i,t) > β)
(2)
In this case, the initial value of transmission probability
at the ﬁrst cycle is set to
β
n(i,t−1)+1. This means the average
transmission probability of all nodes (including itself and the
number of neighboring nodes n(i,t−1)) is set to control the
number of data transmissions as β. If m(i,t) is less than β, all
n(i,t−1) + 1 nodes increase their individual data transmission
probabilities by
β−l(i,t−1)
n(i,t−1)+1 because their estimates will show
that the number of transmitted data does not reach β. On the
other hand, if m(i,t) is more than β, the individual nodes
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 4. Node behavior in auxiliary area.
Figure 5. Simulation model.
decrease the transmission probability by
l(i,t−1)−β
n(i,t−1)+1 because
they can predict that excessive transmissions will occur. If
m(i,t) is equal to β, p(i,t) is set to p(i,t−1) because the current
data transmission probability is appropriate. Note that if the
value of
β−l(i,t−1)
n(i,t−1)+1 or
l(i,t−1)−β
n(i,t−1)+1 is less than zero, p(i,t) is set
to p(i,t−1), and the transmission probability range is varied
from
β
n(i,t−1)+1 to 1.
2) Auxiliary Area Nodes: In our proposed method, aux-
iliary area nodes are also employed to maintain the high
coverage rate. To maximize the effect of this extension, just
the following two types of nodes are required. The ﬁrst
are nodes that remain in the auxiliary area. The second are
nodes approaching the target area (i.e., the angles between the
direction of advance and the central direction that are less than
θth, which is the given threshold value, as shown in Figure 4).
Since data transmission from these nodes in the auxiliary area
can cover the area near the boundary of internal area, these
nodes always set p(i,t) to 1. That is, these nodes must transmit
the data in order to achieve the high coverage rate.
Finally, the nodes out of the auxiliary area delete the data
in order to avoid leaking the spatio-temporal data outside the
target area.
V.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we report on a simulation-based perfor-
mance evaluation of our proposed method. We begin by
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Internal area
750 m
Auxiliary area
250 m
Transmission range
300 m
α
0.5
Beacon interval
1 s
Transmission interval
5 s
describing the simulation environment in Subsection V-A.
Subsections V-B and V-C present simulation results when the
node density and the value of β are changed, respectively. Fi-
nally, Subsection V-D shows how the change in node location
impacts both the actual number of data transmissions and β.
In order to show the effectiveness of our proposed method,
we utilized the comparison method called the naive method,
in which the transmission probability (p(i,t)) of all nodes in
the simulation area always set to 1.
A. Simulation Model
We evaluated our proposed method on the Veins [8] simu-
lation platform. The Veins platform implements both the IEEE
802.11p speciﬁcation for wireless communications and the
VANET mobility model, simultaneously. As a result, Veins
can combine the network simulator OMNeT++ [9] and the
road trafﬁc simulator SUMO [10].
Table I shows our simulation parameters. Here, we assume
a grid-shaped road network. The radius of the target area R
(distance from the data origination point) is 750 m and the
range of the auxiliary area r is set to 250 m, as shown in
Figure 5. The velocity of each node on the roads is set to 40
km/h. These nodes run alternately from east to west and from
west to east. The communication range of each node is just
300 m. The transmission and the beacon intervals are set to 5
seconds and 1 seconds, respectively.
The moving average coefﬁcient α is 0.5. We evaluated our
proposed method from the viewpoint of coverage rate and total
data transmission reduction over 100 seconds.
B. Node Density Impact
In this subsection, we set β = 4 because the minimum
number of nodes necessary to provide total transmission cover-
age over the target area is four. In other words, with four nodes
available, users can receive data anywhere within the target
area. In this environment, we evaluated the performance of our
proposed method in cases where the node density changes. The
distance between nodes varies from 100 to 300 m. As a result,
the average number of nodes within the transmission range
of some node (i.e., 300 m) is also varied from approximately
5.5 to 16.4. Therefore, in this subsection, we investigated how
node density impacts the coverage rate and the total number
of data transmissions.
Figure 6 (a) shows the average steady state coverage rate.
This steady state denotes a period of 75 to 95 seconds because
data retention has already been completed. Since the cycle
period is ﬁve seconds long, the coverage rate is the average
value measured over four cycles (i.e., 20 seconds). From this
result, it can be seen that a coverage rate of 99 % or more can
be maintained regardless of node density changes.
Figure 6 (b) shows the reduction rate in the total number
of data transmissions compared with that of the naive method.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 95
 96
 97
 98
 99
 100
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
Average Coverage Rate [%]
Average Number of Neighboring Nodes
proposal
naive
(a) Average coverage rate.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
Transmission Reduction Rate [%]
Average Number of Neighboring Nodes
(b) Transmission reduction rate.
 0
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
Number of Packet Loss
Average Number of Neighboring Nodes
proposal
naive
(c) Total number of packets lost.
Figure 6. Performance with varying node density.
 90
 92
 94
 96
 98
 100
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Average Coverage Rate [%]
β
proposal
naive
(a) Average coverage rate.
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
Transmission Reduction Rate [%]
β
(b) Transmission reduction rate.
Figure 7. Performance achieved by varying the value of β.
Although the reduction rate is limited to 10 % at the low node
density, it can be seen that our proposed method can reduce
the total number of data transmissions by 42 % at times of
high node density (such as in the case of 16.4 neighboring
nodes). This result shows that our proposed method can limit
redundant data transmissions effectively as the node density
increases. We can also conﬁrm that high transmission proba-
bility is set with low node density, whereas low transmission
probability is set with high node density.
Furthermore, Figure 6 (c) shows the total number of
packets lost when the naive and the proposed method are
employed. In particular, it can be seen that, compared with
the naive method, our proposal method efﬁciently reduces
the number of total packets lost when the node density is
high. From these results, we could conﬁrm that our proposed
method can adaptively control the data transmission probability
in response to the node density changes while maintaining a
coverage rate of approximately 100 %.
C. Impact of the Value of β
In this subsection, the number of neighboring nodes is ﬁxed
at approximate 16.4 and the value of β is varied from 2 to 12.
Figure 7 (a) shows the steady state coverage rate with changes
in the value of β. This result shows that our proposed method
achieves a coverage rate of nearly 100 % except for the case
in which β is two. A low β value creates frequent oppor-
tunities for data transmission probability decreases, thereby
aggressively limiting transmissions. Therefore, the coverage
rate cannot reach 100 % if the value of β is low. Figure 7
(b) shows the reduction in the total data transmission rate
when the value of β is varied. This result shows that the
rate linearly decreases as the value of β increases, and that
our proposed method can reduce transmissions by up to 49 %
while maintaining a coverage rate of 100 %.
Since the proposed method dynamically changes the data
transmission probability in response to location, it is necessary
to investigate the change in the transmission probability that
occurs with the location consideration discussed in Section
V-D.
D. Discussion: Location-aware Analysis
In this subsection, we investigate the number of data
transmissions that result when the location within the internal
area is changed. To achieve this, we separate the internal area
into two different sub-areas. (1) Edge Area: nodes in this
area can receive data transmitted from nodes in the auxiliary
area; (2) Center Area: nodes in this area do not receive data
transmitted from the auxiliary area. The radius of the Center
Area is 450 m. The Edge Area is deﬁned as the area within
a radius of 750 m but outside the Center Area. We evaluate
how the difference of location impacts the number of data
transmissions.
Figure 8 (a) shows the average number of data transmis-
sions in Center/Edge Areas. From this result, it can be seen that
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
The Number of Data Transmission
β
Center area
Edge area
(a) Under proposed method Area.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
The Number of Data Transmission
β
Center area
Edge area
(b) Without data transmissions from auxiliary area.
Figure 8. Average number of data transmissions for nodes in the Center
Area and nodes in the Edge Area.
in the Center Area, the number of data transmissions can be
controlled to nearly β. However, when the value of β is low, the
number of data transmissions in the Edge Area is clearly larger
than β. This is because nodes in the Edge Area can receive data
from those in the auxiliary area, thereby experiencing many
data receptions. Because multiple nodes in the auxiliary area
always try to transmit the data, redundant data transmissions
occur.
Therefore, to show the contribution of data transmission
from nodes in the auxiliary area, we set the probability of those
nodes p(i,t) to 0. Figure 8 (b) shows the average number of data
transmissions while excluding data transmissions from nodes
in the auxiliary area. From this result, we can see that nodes
in the Center Area adjust the number of data transmissions to
the nearly β. On the other hand, the number of transmitted
data from nodes in the Edge Area is insufﬁcient to achieve β,
especially in case of high β. This is because the density of
nodes in the Edge Area is insufﬁcient and data transmissions
from nodes in the auxiliary area are not supported.
From these results, it is clear that the precise control of data
transmission from nodes in the auxiliary area is very important
for adjusting the number of transmitted data to β. This, in
turn, indicates that our proposed method still has an issue that
needs to be resolved. Therefore, we will extend our proposed
method to permit data transmission probability adjustments for
nodes in the auxiliary area, thereby effectively limiting the total
number of transmitted data.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this study, our objective was to achieve spatio-temporal
data retention within a target area, which would allow users
to automatically receive spatio-temporal data from anywhere
within the target area. To achieve this, we proposed a new
spatio-temporal data retention system that utilizes a VANET
constructed from InfoHub vehicles. We also proposed an adap-
tive decision making method for data transmission probability
that is based on the density of neighboring vehicles. In our
proposed method, each vehicle ﬁrst estimates the number of
neighboring vehicles based on the received beacon messages.
Then, the probability is adaptively set with consideration of
both the number of neighboring vehicles and the number of
transmitted data during the previous time slot. Furthermore,
the decision method used differs depending on the vehicle’s
location (internal or auxiliary area).
Through simulations, we clariﬁed that our proposed method
can roughly control data transmissions in response to vehicle
density changes. However, we also conﬁrmed that our pro-
posed method still has a problem in which vehicles in the
auxiliary area cannot determine an appropriate transmission
probability. Thus, in our future work, we will extend the
method and then evaluate the improved method under actual
trafﬁc environment conditions (such as by using actual trafﬁc
data in a real city). Furthermore, although only one type of data
is treated in this paper, various types of data would coexist in
real environments. Therefore, we will also extend the proposed
method in order to treat various types of data simultaneously.
REFERENCES
[1]
OECD, “M2M Communications: Connecting Billions of Devices,”
OECD Digital Economy Papers, No. 192, 2012.
[2]
F. Li, and Y. Wang, “Routing in vehicular ad hoc networks: A survey,”
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, Vol. 2, Issue 2, pp. 12-22, 2007.
[3]
C. Maih¨ofer, T. Leinum¨uller, and E. Schoch, “Abiding Geocast: Time-
stable Geocast for Ad Hoc Networks,” In Proc. ACM VANET, pp. 20-29,
2005.
[4]
I. Leontiadis, P. Costa, and C. Mascolo, “Persistent content-based in-
formation dissemination in hybrid vehicular networks,” In Proc. IEEE
PerCom, pp. 1-10, 2009.
[5]
J. Ott, E. Hyyti, P. Lassila, T. Vaegs, and J. Kangasharju, “Floating
Content: Information Sharing in Urban Areas,” In Proc. IEEE PerCom,
pp. 136-146, 2011.
[6]
N. Thompson, R. Crepaldi and R. Kravets, “Locus: A Location-based
Data Overlay for Disruption-tolerant Networks,” In Proc. ACM CHANTS,
pp. 47-54, 2010.
[7]
T. Higuchi et al., “Regional InfoHubs by vehicles: balancing spatio-
temporal coverage and network load,” In Proc. IoV-VoI’16, pp. 25-30,
2016.
[8]
“Veins,” [Online]. Available from: http://veins.car2x.org/2017.3.11.
[9]
“OMNeT++,” [Online]. Available from: https://omnetpp.org/2017.3.11.
[10]
“SUMO,” [Online]. Available from: http://www.dlr.de/ts/en/
desktopdefault.aspx/tabid-9883/16931 read-41000/2017.3.11.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

