Integrating CARMNET System with Public Wireless Networks
Przemyslaw Walkowiak
Institute of Control and Information Engineering
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
przemyslaw.walkowiak@put.poznan.pl
Radoslaw Szalski
Institute of Control and Information Engineering
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
radoslaw.szalski@put.poznan.pl
Salvatore Vanini
Institute for Information Systems and Networking
The University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland
Manno, Switzerland
salvatore.vanini@supsi.ch
Armin Walt
Administrator of Lugano WiFi
wlan-partner.com AG
Zurich, Switzerland
armin.walt@wlan-partner.com
Abstract—In
this
paper,
we
present
two
scenarios
of
the
CARMNET
system
application
in
wireless
networks.
The
CARMNET system is an advanced experimental resource allo-
cation framework based on the Network Utility Maximization
model that may be integrated with a standard telecom operator
infrastructure. Having developed the CARMNET system, we
tested it in a publicly available wireless network, operated by
the city of Lugano, Switzerland. In the presented scenarios, the
CARMNET was employed to extend the network coverage and
to improve it by providing the feature of seamless handover.
The results indicate the ability of successful integration of the
CARMNET system with an existing real-world network.
Keywords-Wireless Mesh Networks; Network Utility Maximisa-
tion; network scalability; DANUMS; seamless handover
I.
INTRODUCTION
The main idea behind the Carrier-grade delay-aware
resource management for wireless multi-hop/mesh networks
(CARMNET) [1] system is to make the user-provided Internet
access a viable alternative to the currently widespread 3G/4G-
based mobile Internet access. Simultaneously, the CARMNET
system introduces an advanced, distributed resource manage-
ment mechanisms integrated with a telecom operator’s IP Mul-
timedia Subsystem (IMS) and Authentication, Authorisation
and Accounting (AAA) infrastructure and provides support
for generalized network node mobility. Put into practice, these
ideas allow us to improve existing, wireless networks with
features like transparent extension of range and better network
resource utilisation.
A. Drawbacks of traditional wireless networks
Traditional networks, including wireless ones, require hard-
ware investments in order to scale. To support more users
and provide a larger network range, wireless access points
must be either upgraded, or their number simply has to be
increased. The issue is even more noticeable the higher the
number of users and the wider the required coverage. However,
the cost of new hardware is not the only one. There is also
the price of additional service and management. The proposed
system shifts the costs of the hardware towards the users of the
network, giving in return beneﬁts to those users who share their
network access. Another issue of standard wireless networks is
that they seldom incorporate any resource management system,
the lack of which may lead to degradation of user experience.
This is particularly evident in cases when many users, with
different delay and throughput requirements, are connected to
the network at the same time. For example, if one of them
establishes a Voice over IP (VoIP) connection (delay sensitive
ﬂow) and the other downloads a large ﬁle via File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) (throughput demanding ﬂow), the characteristic
of FTP protocol will cause the decrease of the VoIP call quality
and dissatisfaction of its recipients. Most of Internet providers
deal with the problem by limiting the available throughput
to the user or by blocking unwanted services. However, the
CARMNET system, thanks to the adoption of the Delay-aware
Network Utility Maximisation (DANUM) [2] framework and
the introduction of applications’ and users’ speciﬁc proﬁles,
can serve heterogeneous trafﬁc according to its requirements
[3]. This allows the delay of VoIP call to be minimized and
the throughput of ﬁle transmission to be maximized, while
providing a high level of user experience in both cases. Finally,
the extension of the network’s range can be achieved using a
mobile node sharing its Internet access with remote nodes.
The switch should be done transparently, ensuring the correct
routing of packets without degradation of QoS perceived by the
users. Thanks to the integration with the WiOptiMo framework
[4], the CARMNET system is able to manage this scenario as
well.
In this paper, we describe two scenarios where the
CARMNET system was integrated with the Lugano WiFi
network infrastructure. Each scenario is presented with a
description of a real-world use case of the CARMNET ar-
chitecture and its advantages. Issues regarding the integration
of the CARMNET system into an existing wireless networks
are presented in Section IV. The CARMNET system itself is
thoroughly described in Section III. To validate our system
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

integration, we executed ﬁeld tests, since this approach allows
to uncover most of the problems and it is also more adequate
from integration perspective. Lugano, Switzerland, was chosen
for our tests. It is a city of 65, 015 inhabitants and an area
of 75.81 km2. Free WiFi access is available for tourists in
the city centre. Details about the conﬁguration of the Lugano
WiFi network are presented in Section V. To test the integra-
tion outcome, we carried out two experiments (described in
Section VII), whose results are presented in Section VIII. It
is important to highlight that although the experiments were
performed in Lugano, the CARMNET system can be easily
integrated with any wireless WiFi infrastructure.
II.
RELATED WORK
Many resource allocation systems based on the Network
Utility Maximisation (NUM) model exist [5]–[7] and deter-
mine the utility of ﬂows according to their measured prop-
erties. However, only a few of them were implemented and
tested in a real wireless mesh network [5], [6]. It is an
important step in an attempt to integrate proposed solutions
with public networks. Unfortunately, such approaches were
not sufﬁcient to effectively measure the utility of both delay-
sensitive and throughput-oriented ﬂows. The system proposed
in [2](DANUM System (DANUMS)) takes both parameters
into consideration. Moreover, DANUMS has a well-tested
implementation, which allows researchers to focus on speciﬁc
parts of the CARMNET system.
Network mobility support is addressed in RFC 4886 [8]
and in several architectural solutions presented in literature.
SyncScan [9] is a Layer-2 procedure for intra-domain (be-
tween Access Points (APs)/same domain) handoff in 802.11
infrastructure mode networks. It achieves good performance
at the expense of a required global synchronization of bea-
con timings between clients and access points. iMesh [10]
provides low handoff latency for horizontal (same network
technology) Layer-3 handoffs in Wireless Mesh Networks
(WMNs). Its main drawback is that handoff delay depends
on the number of nodes along the path between the new
AP and the old AP. BASH [11], focuses on the design of a
horizontal—intra-domain—Layer-2 seamless handoff scheme
for 802.11 WMNs. BASH’s main drawback is that it requires
modiﬁcations on the mobile client’s side for managing the
handoff protocol. The method proposed in [12] uses tunnelling,
as it is the case with RFC 4886 and the standard Mobile
IPv6 solution [13]. Tunnelling introduces extra delay for the
encapsulation/decapsulation of packets and has low ﬂexibility
intrinsically. Finally, SMesh [14] provides a 802.11 mesh
network architecture for both intra-domain and inter-domain
handoffs (between Internet-connected APs/different domains).
For intra-domain handovers, SMesh generates high network
overhead, which grows linearly with the number of clients. In
case of inter-domain handovers, network overhead is directly
proportional to the number of connections each client has.
III.
CARMNET SYSTEM
A. Integration of WMN and IMS
The integration of WMNs and IMS infrastructure provides
many beneﬁts for both users and telecom operators. WMNs
enable extended network coverage without the need to expand
the static infrastructure. At the same time, telecom operators
may easily manage users and offer them additional services.
In the presented solution, Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)
is used as an integration protocol. Each node acts as a SIP
User Agent (SIP UA). SIP, however, is designed to control
access to the mesh network only. The IMS infrastructure is
used for authentication, authorization, storage of user proﬁle
information as well as for accounting and charging. The
registration is performed by the SIP UA implementing the
authentication/authorization functions of IMS AAA by means
of the standard SIP REGISTER message. The SIP SUB-
SCRIBE/NOTIFY mechanism has been applied to transport
the user-related information.
B. The Architecture of the System
The architecture of the CARMNET system [1], [15] con-
sists of multiple components located both on the client- and
server-side (see Figure 1).
Internet
CARMNET Node
User space
Kernel space
DANUMS SIP 
User Agent
IP Stack
DANUMS 
LKM
OLSRd
DANUMS 
plug‐in
netlink
traffic
WebGUI
P‐CSCF
S‐CSCF
HSS
AS + SIP Servlets
IMS
REST Service
CNAPT
SNAPT
SNAPT
Figure 1: Interactions between CARMNET components.
DANUMS Loadable Kernel Module (LKM) [2] is an
implementation of the DANUM model developed for the Linux
environment. This subsystem works at the kernel level, which
allows for a deep integration in the networking stack, necessary
to introduce custom queuing and scheduling subsystems. For
the network path resolution, the Optimised Link State Routing
Protocol daemon (OLSRd) — a popular implementation of
the Optimised Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR) protocol
— is used. Since OLSR messages’ additional purpose is to
distribute data needed by the packet scheduler, a special way
of communication between user-space (OLSRd) and kernel-
space (DANUM LKM) had to be applied. The Netlink protocol
serves that role. Network mobility support is performed by
the CARMNET mobility subsystem, which is based on the
WiOptiMo framework. A client proxy (CNAPT) installed on
any CARMNET wireless node provides mobility services to
users who subscribed for them. It intercepts trafﬁc ﬂows
associated to the mobility service and relays them to a server
proxy (SNAPT) according to their requirements in terms of
bandwidth and delay, in order to provide the desired Quality
of Service (QoS). Multiple SNAPTs are located on the Internet
to manage scalability and avoid concentrating trafﬁc ﬂows
in a single spot. The WiOptiMo framework is also used for
providing the DANUMS LKM with throughput and delay mea-
surements for ﬂows endpoints that are beyond the CARMNET
network. This is done through procfs interface [16]. The
direct communication of DANUM LKM located at the client’s
node with the IMS infrastructure located in a network is
a difﬁcult task. A high-level SIP protocol in the low-level
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

kernel module has to be implemented, in a way that preserves
the high efﬁciency of the Linux kernel. Therefore, we have
developed a SIP UA in the user-space running on the client
side, which is responsible for asynchronous communication
between LKM and IMS. The communication between LKM
and SIP UA is realized using the Netlink protocol, whereas
the communication between SIP UA and IMS is realized using
the custom CARMNET protocol, based on XML encapsulated
in the standard SIP messages. This allows the design to be
further compatible with the IMS architecture. The Web User
Interface (WebGUI) is a WWW application dedicated to users
of the CARMNET network. Users are allowed to conﬁgure
their own proﬁles and to bind the utility function (and its
arguments) to the type of trafﬁc (e.g., WWW, e-mail, Skype).
Moreover, WebGUI shows the utility unit account balance
and reports about transmitted trafﬁc and its ‘price’ in virtual
currency. The concept of virtual currency (Denarii) is described
in detail in Subsection VI-C. Two types of servlets are located
on the application server. The ﬁrst one is responsible for
managing AAA functions and user proﬁles in the CARMNET
network. After connecting to the network, each client has
to be authenticated and authorized in the SIP servlet before
starting an Internet session. During the session, each node in
the network reports to the SIP servlet the amount and the type
of trafﬁc it has served. All CARMNET-speciﬁc information
about users is accessible through the second servlet. As the
information transport protocol, the servlet implements REST-
like service and WebGUI acts as a REST client. To be part
of the CARMNET network, users must install the abovemen-
tioned, client-side software, on their devices.
IV.
INTEGRATION WITH EXISTING NETWORKS
In general, there are two different approaches to integrating
systems, such as CARMNET, into 3rd party, already estab-
lished network solutions. The ﬁrst one limits the integration to
the network clients only, but reuses existing network’s AAA
system at the same time. This approach is aimed mainly at
the extension of range of an existing wireless network, so
that it covers the previously inaccessible areas, without the
use of any additional static infrastructure. This is achieved by
deploying additional software on clients’ devices only. This
software is responsible for advanced resource management as
well as for network access sharing and has to be installed by all
the connecting clients. As mentioned above, the optimization
of resource usage is done in a distributed way by each of the
CARMNET-compatible network components. In this scenario,
optimization is performed locally, between clients’ nodes and
not throughout the network. Access points are not modiﬁed.
Advantages of the CARMNET system are most visible when
the DANUMS-enabled client shares its connection to another
client.
The second approach, requires an additional modiﬁcation
to the software of the existing infrastructure, i.e., DANUMS
has to be installed on all access points. Besides expanding the
range and optimizing local resource usage, the CARMNET
system provides a distributed optimization across the entire
network. Another requirement of the CARMNET system is
the integration with the existing AAA subsystem, which is
necessary to allow clients to set up their proﬁles via the
CARMNET WebGUI. This way, a more ﬂexible accounting
system based on users’ perception of ﬂows utility might
be applied. This integration relies on implementation of an
additional authorization plug-in for the CARMNET IMS sub-
system.
For real-world scenarios, the ﬁrst approach is easier to inte-
grate. Many already existing network infrastructures have well
established AAA capabilities. Integrating with those would re-
quire additional implementation effort making the solution less
interesting. Moreover, we are currently not prepared to support
any other platform than the Linux-based one. Therefore, we
have used the ﬁrst approach, which is less complex and easier
to be fully realized. Furthermore, many use cases (including
our proposed scenarios) are still viable without full integration.
V.
THE LUGANO WIFI NETWORK CONFIGURATION
The Lugano WiFi network is available in different discon-
tinuous areas of Lugano. For our experiments, we have decided
to focus only on the city centre area which, due to the way it
is covered, is more appropriate for the scenarios presented in
this paper.
Figure 2: Lugano WiFi coverage in the city centre.
Figure 2 describes the actual conﬁguration of the Lugano
WiFi network in the city centre. It was obtained using the
Kismet layer-2 wireless network detector to eavesdrop on
802.11 beacons and register the Global Positioning System
(GPS) coordinates of the points where WiFi ﬁngerprints were
collected. In the picture, these points can be seen as circles with
different colours, whose gradients vary from red, to yellow,
green, and blue. They indicate gradual changes in Received
Signal Strength (RSS), from strong to weak respectively.
Lugano WiFi
VPN tunnel
Multiprovider
Portal
(MPP)
Internet
Other
Providers
Landing page
Figure 3: Lugano WiFi architecture.
The network is managed by the WLAN-Partner company
[17], which is located in Zurich. The solution currently used
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

by Lugano WiFi to manage handovers is based on tunnelling
(Figure 3). A Virtual Private Network (VPN) tunnel is opened
between the core router and the WLAN-Partner data centre.
A software called Multiprovider Portal (MPP) performs AAA
functions. It is based on the Linux application for packet
ﬁltering iptables and consists of a combination of rules and
rulesets. Those rules mark the network trafﬁc and determine
if it belongs to an authorized session, with Internet access
capability, or an unauthorized (new) session. In the latter case,
trafﬁc is redirected to a landing page. The MPP system allows
each mobile client (identiﬁed by its Medium Access Control
(MAC) address) to keep the same Internet Protocol (IP) address
when moving and associating to a different access point. A
lease tracker daemon checks for a session timeout, which
is set to 30 minutes—after that time is elapsed, the user is
redirected to the landing page and has to reconnect to access
the network again. During the experiments, a set of special
accounts without session time limit were used, for practical
reasons. Finally, the average number of devices connected to
the network is 1340 per month (about 45 per day), while
the number of sessions per workday is 5050 and the average
duration is about 25 minutes.
VI.
CARMNET USAGE SCENARIOS
A. Network Coverage Extension
Extending the range of static wireless networks requires
the deployment of additional access points. This process is
often complicated because of power or network infrastructure
requirements. The CARMNET system allows for transparent
extension of range using not only static infrastructure, but the
clients’ devices as well. Each user’s device is equipped with
the CARMNET client software, which enables the sharing of
Internet access with other CARMNET clients. The process of
sharing is managed by a resource management system, which
takes care of the users’ preferences in terms of how to serve
their incoming and outgoing trafﬁc. Additionally, our system
introduces a uniﬁed charging system based on the transfer
of virtual currency, which enables incorporation of a more
complex model of incentives and collaboration enforcement
(i.e., access to additional services). The Lugano WiFi network
may provide coverage in locations where it previously was not
possible. This would allow users to access the Internet even
while being outside of the standard infrastructure. What might
be especially beneﬁcial to the telecom operators is the potential
this scenarios has, to reduce last mile network operational
costs. We can imagine a situation in which a single user is
sharing Internet access to ﬁve other users. From the operator’s
perspective, the amount of bandwidth used by these six people
is limited to the bandwidth accessible to the sharing user only.
Another beneﬁt is that each additional sharing user extends
the signal range by the range provided by her device. Every
network user and local facility, in public WiFi’s range, can be
a sharing node. Local facilities, since they are usually static,
can continuously share the Internet connection.
B. Seamless Horizontal Handover
The CARMNET infrastructure can be used to bridge the
gap between two (or more) scopes of WiFi signal. For this
solution to be truly usable to the users, we need to provide
handover functionality between the CARMNET network and
Figure 4: The area not covered by Lugano WiFi, chosen for
the handover experiment.
the public WiFi. This way users’ ongoing sessions will not be
affected as they move from one device’s WiFi signal range
to the other. We have identiﬁed an uncovered area of the
Lugano WiFi network and used CARMNET’s sharing nodes
to set up a simple WiFi network, and provide coverage in
the indicated area (see Figure 4). The CARMNET’s nodes
were behind NAT gateways with different IP addresses. We
wanted to test the capability to support WiFi micro-mobility
(handover between access points of the same provider). For
this purpose, a mobile CARMNET node moved linearly across
the coverage area of the other CARMNET’s sharing nodes.
Using this conﬁguration, we collected measurements about
goodput, handoff latency (time to perform a complete handover
procedure) and packets loss rate.
C. The Usage of Virtual Currency
The CARMNET system provides a concept of virtual
currency [2] called Denarii. It is used internally for ﬂow
management, but this is not its only possible use. In one
scenario, it could be used for city promotion through discounts
and vouchers for various attractions. Tourists may collect
Denarii for selﬂess behaviour and turn them into various
rewards, such as museum tickets. Cities could provide many
other incentives for users, who would be encouraged to share
their Internet connection. This would be beneﬁcial to the whole
network and local community.
VII.
EXPERIMENTS
Two experiments have been carried out on site, to verify
the effectiveness of integration. Their results are presented in
Section VIII. Before performing the experiments in the ﬁeld,
each one has been performed locally in a wireless network
testbed [3] developed for CARMNET testing purposes. This
testbed allows for an automated scenario execution using a set
of ALIX integrated network nodes equipped with two network
interfaces (a wired one for commands execution and a wireless
one for experiment trafﬁc). Those nodes are managed centrally
using the wnPUT2 server capable of booting, restarting and
issuing commands to groups as well as individual machines.
This testbed helped us validate the following experiments.
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

A. Network Coverage Extension
An additional wireless CARMNET network, consisting of
3 nodes, has been set up. A stationary node n1 was connected
to Lugano WiFi network, during the whole experiment, and
was acting as a ﬁnal gateway for both nodes n2 and the user
node. Node n2 was located such that it was connected to
n1 but was not in range of the public WiFi network. It had
Internet access by means of Internet sharing from node n1
only. The third node was simulating a user travelling along a
linear path, from n1, towards n2 and beyond (see Figure 5).
The user was initially connected to node n1. While moving
away from n1, as the signal strength of n1 lowered, it changed
the default gateway to n2. This was possible thanks to the
OLSR daemon monitoring the Expected Transmission Count
(ETX) routing metric extension, determining changes in path
quality. Simultaneously, the user node lost the signal of public
WiFi network. During movement, the user node was issuing
Internet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) Echo Requests to
an external address, reachable through the Internet, to check
connectivity. At the end of the path, a Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) connection was established to download a 15
MB ﬁle using the wget application.
User's Travel Path
user
n1
n2
Public WiFi's 
signal range
CARMNET n2's 
signal range
Figure 5: Network coverage extension experiment topology.
Note that node n1’s signal range has been omitted for clarity.
B. Seamless Handover
There is a gap between signal ranges of the Public WiFi
network at the experiment site. A CARMNET network, con-
sisting of 3 nodes, has been set up to cover the signal gap.
Nodes were arranged in a linear topology, so that the ﬁrst
(n1) and last (n2) nodes were connected to the Public WiFi
network, to ﬁll in the gap. Another, third CARMNET node
was simulating a user travelling along the indicated path (see
Figure 6). During its movement, it would eventually move out
of the Public WiFi’s signal #1 range. Since the mobile node
was a CARMNET node, once the signal #1 strength decreased
under a certain threshold, OLSRd automatically changed the
routes and, as expected, the node was connected to the existing
CARMNET network. A similar situation had taken place
as the user node was leaving CARMNET network’s range
and approaching Public WiFi’s signal #2 range. During the
experiment, trafﬁc logs across all of the nodes were collected.
VIII.
RESULTS
The ﬁrst experiment proved a successful extension of the
Public WiFi network range, using the CARMNET system.
Being connected to the CARMNET network, the user node
was still able to access the Internet provided by Lugano WiFi,
while being out of range of its infrastructure. No modiﬁcations
CARMNET gateway 
signal ranges
n1
n2
user
Public WiFi's 
signal range #1
Public WiFi's 
signal range #2
User's Travel Path
Figure 6: Handover experiment network topology.
to existing infrastructure were necessary. Figure 7 shows the
Denarii balance over time for each node participating in the
experiment, which indicates how much each node shared/used
the Internet connection. User node was initiating all the trafﬁc
and thus paying for it: this can be inferred from a constantly
dropping Denarii balance. Nodes n2’s virtual unit balance was
oscillating around 0, since it was forwarding trafﬁc only. It is
worth noting, that ultimately, node n1 was sharing the Internet
connection for the rest of the nodes. It was thus rewarded by
the CARMNET system with the highest amount of Denarii.
Figure 7: Denarii balance for the three CARMNET nodes
during the ﬁrst experiment.
Figure 8 shows a graph of TCP throughput for each of the
CARMNET nodes participating in the second experiment. In
the initial phase of the experiment, only node n1 was in the
range of the user node. It was thus chosen as a default gateway
and shared Internet access from the Lugano WiFi network.
As the user moved away from n1, its RSS lowered and the
default route began to degrade (the value of ETX metric was
rising). During this time, all of the trafﬁc was sent through
node n1, which can be seen in Figure 8. Around the middle
of the experiment, user node began to detect signal from the
second gateway (n2). Once the alternative route had good
enough ETX metric, the CARMNET mobility module based
on WiOptiMo had switched routes. This corresponds to a gap
in ﬂow’s throughput around 103rd second. The connectivity
was not interrupted as the ﬂow was forwarded by the second
node n2. The steep, brief increase in throughput, seen on the
graph around 105th second, is caused by an accumulation
of packets in the DANUMS queue after the handover has
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 8: Throughput and total bits sent, registered at the 3
CARMNET nodes during the seamless handover experiment.
been completed. The overall goodput of the ﬂow, measured
during the experiment, was 1.01 Mbit/s. It took 3.78 seconds
to complete the handover. Another metric is the rate of packet
loss, which was around 0.21% during the transmission. From
the above measurements, we can conclude that the handover
was performed correctly and successfully.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have shown that the CARMNET system can be suc-
cessfully integrated into existing public wireless networks.
Experiments presented in the paper illustrate the two most
important real-word use cases of the system. The key factor
enabling integration is the system’s compatibility with standard
AAA mechanisms used by the telecom operators such as
the one implemented in the IMS platform. Even without
modiﬁcation of existing software, CARMNET provides many
beneﬁts for network users and Internet providers, e.g., network
coverage increase, potential to reduce last mile operational
costs and seamless handover.
In order to operate inside the CARMNET system, new
users need an initial amount of virtual currency, which allow
them to pay for their trafﬁc when they have not yet got paid
for serving ﬂows themselves. Currently, new users are granted
a ﬁxed amount of Denarii. Our future work includes testing
what amount of initial virtual currency is appropriate. It cannot
be too small, because sharing users would not have a chance to
earn enough, which might lead to a deadlock. It cannot be too
big, since users would not be compelled to earn Denarii and
thus share the Internet access. There is also the risk that users
will not be paid for Internet sharing [1]. Our aim would be to
minimise this risk by incorporating trust mechanisms akin to
those implemented in Peer-to-Peer (P2P) networks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by a grant from Switzerland through
the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged European Union (PSPB-
146/2010, CARMNET).
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Glabowski and A. Szwabe, “Carrier-Grade Internet Access Sharing
in Wireless Mesh Networks: the Vision of the CARMNET Project,”
The Ninth Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications,
Jun. 2013.
[2]
A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Delay-Aware NUM
system for wireless multi-hop networks,” in European Wireless 2011
(EW2011), Vienna, Austria, Apr. 2011, pp. 530–537.
[3]
P. Walkowiak, M. Urbanski, M. Poszwa, and R. Szalski, “Flow clas-
siﬁcation in delay-aware num-oriented wireless mesh networks,” in
MESH 2013, The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Mesh
Networks, 2013, pp. 33–38.
[4]
S. Giordano, D. Lenzarini, A. Puiatti, M. Kulig, H. Nguyen, and
S. Vanini, “Demonstrating seamless handover of multi-hop networks,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd international workshop on Multi-hop ad
hoc networks: from theory to reality, ser. REALMAN ’06.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006, pp. 128–130. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1132983.1133011
[5]
U. Akyol, M. Andrews, P. Gupta, J. D. Hobby, I. Saniee, and A. Stolyar,
“Joint scheduling and congestion control in mobile ad-hoc networks,” in
The 27th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2008), Apr 2008, pp. 619–627.
[6]
B. Radunovi´c, C. Gkantsidis, D. Gunawardena, and P. Key, “Horizon:
Balancing TCP over multiple paths in wireless mesh network,” in
Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Mobile
computing and networking, MobiCom 2008, 2008, pp. 247–258.
[7]
M. Neely, “Delay-based network utility maximization,” In Proc. IEEE
INFOCOM 2010, 2010, pp. 1–9.
[8]
T. Ernst and L. H., “Network mobility support goals and requirements,”
in RFC 4886, July 2007.
[9]
I. Ramani and S. Savage, “Syncscan: Practical fast handoff 802.11
infrastructure networks,” in 24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies (INFOCOM 2005), vol. 1,
2005, pp. 675–684.
[10]
V. Navda, A. Kashyap, and S. R. Das, “Design and evaluation of imesh:
an infrastructure-mode wireless mesh network,” in IEEE International
Symposium on a World of Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks
(WOWMOM), Italy, June 2005.
[11]
Y. He and D. Perkins, “Bash: A backhaul-aided seamless handoff
scheme forwireless mesh networks,” in International Symposium on
a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM
2008).
IEEE, June 2008.
[12]
R. Huang, C. Zhang, , and Y. Fang, “A mobility management scheme
for wireless mesh networks,” in IEEE GLOBECOM 2007, Washington
DC, USA, November 2007.
[13]
D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility support in ipv6,” in
RFC 3775, June 2004.
[14]
R. M.-E. Y. Amir, C Danilov and N. Rivera, “The smesh wireless mesh
network,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems, vol. 28, no. 3,
September 2010.
[15]
P. Walkowiak, M. Urba´nski, A. Figaj, and P. Misiorek, “Integration of
danum-based carrier-grade mesh networks and ims infrastructure,” in
Ad-hoc, Mobile, and Wireless Network.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013, pp. 185–196.
[16]
S. Vanini, D. Gallucci, S. Giordano, and A. Szwabe, “A delay-aware
num-driven framework with terminal-based mobility support for hetero-
geneous wireless multi-hop networks,” in ICTF 2013 Information and
Communication Technology Forum.
[17]
“WLAN PARTNER.” [Online]. Available: http://www.wlan-partner.
com/
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

