An Alleviating Traffic Congestion Scheme Based on VANET with a Function to 
Dynamical Change Size of Area for Traffic Information in Urban Transportations 
 
Shinji Inoue, Yousuke Taoda, Yoshiaki Kakuda 
Graduate School of Information Sciences 
Hiroshima City University 
Hiroshima, Japan 
{shnj-496@, taoda@nsw.info., kakuda@}hiroshima-cu.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— The traffic congestion frequently occurs in urban 
transportations. Network services for alleviating the traffic 
congestion    based on vehicle networks have been studied 
currently. Vehicle Information and Communication System 
(VICS) is one of the network services. It has been developed    in 
Japan. However, since each vehicle can obtain global 
information on traffic congestion using VICS, all vehicles in 
the congested areas tend to move to non-congested areas.  As a 
result, the non-congested areas become congested areas.  To 
avoid such an oscillation between the congested and non-
congested areas, we have proposed an Alleviating Traffic 
Congestion method (ATC). In the ATC method, each vehicle 
gathers traffic information in a limited area where the vehicle 
exists by using a Vehicle Ad hoc Network (VANET). The size 
of limited area is constant in the original ATC method. 
However, we consider that the size of the limited area should 
be adaptive depending on traffic condition. This paper 
proposes a modified ATC method, which can change the size of 
the limited area depending traffic condition. Through 
simulation experiments, this paper shows that the proposed 
method provides faster velocity and shorter trip time than 
VICS in the environments that traffic varies temporally and 
spatially, which occur in urban transportations. 
Keywords-alleviating traffic congestion; vehicle density; 
average velocity; VANET; simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In order to alleviate the traffic congestion, the Vehicle 
Information and Communication System (VICS) [1] is 
famous in Japan. In VICS, ultrasonic vehicle detectors or 
other vehicle detectors, which are deployed by traffic control 
centers, report traffic information at the point where each 
detector is deployed to VICS center. The VICS center 
analyzes global traffic information reported by the vehicle 
detectors and generates traffic congestion information. The 
traffic congestion information is broadcasted by character 
multiplex, radio beacons, or optical beacons to vehicles. 
Vehicles which receive traffic congestion information can 
select driving routes where the routes do not go through 
congested areas. However, VICS depends on road-side 
infrastructure, for example vehicle detectors. If traffic 
congestion happens in an area where vehicle detectors are 
not deployed, VICS cannot broadcast the above traffic 
congestion information. Moreover, a research report [2] says 
that new traffic congestion would be caused when ratio of 
the number of vehicles in which a VICS terminal is installed 
to the number of all vehicles exceeds 50%. It is because 
vehicles in which a VICS terminal is installed would perform 
a similar behavior and the vehicles would pass through the 
same roadway segment. 
Vehicle route management systems based on centralized 
servers have been proposed in [3] [4]. In [5], a distributed 
traffic navigation system has been proposed but road-side 
infrastructure should be required for each intersection. 
Instead of global information obtained by VICS, this 
paper utilizes local information obtained by the Vehicle Ad 
hoc Network (shortly, VANET). There are lots of research 
results on collection of traffic congestion information using 
VANET. Shibata et al. [6] proposes a method to divide a 
transportation network into non-overlapped areas and to 
detect areas where congestion occurs in the transportation 
network using VANET. In the proposed method, each 
vehicle records not only the traffic congestion degree of 
roads through which the vehicle has passed but also the 
traffic congestion degree of roads through which the other 
vehicles have passed by exchanging it with them. As time 
proceeds, the entire traffic congestion information in the 
transportation network can be obtained by integrating the 
recorded information. Shinkawa et al. [7] proposes another 
method to obtain the entire traffic congestion information in 
the transportation network using cyclic vehicles such as fixed 
route buses. Yamashita et al. [8] proposes a method to 
suggest an appropriate route using the road-to-vehicle 
communication as follows. First, each vehicle sends route 
information to reach the destination to a central server 
located in the roads using the road-to-vehicle communication. 
Next, the central server, which received the route 
information from many vehicles, calculates an appropriate 
route to the destination and sends back the calculated route 
information using the road-to-vehicle communication. 
However, to our knowledge, there are no proposals which 
are based on the traffic congestion information collected by 
VANET, each vehicle independently decides a route to 
alleviate traffic congestion in the transportation network. 
In [11], we have proposed an Alleviating Traffic 
Congestion method (shortly, original ATC method.) The 
original ATC method works on each vehicle. Also the 
method suggests driving route information to each vehicle 
based on traffic information in a limited area around the 
vehicle. 
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

In the original ATC method, the size of a limited area is 
constant. However, we consider that the size of a limited area 
should be changed depending traffic condition. In this paper, 
we propose a modified Alleviating Traffic Congestion 
method (shortly, a modified ATC method.) 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we explain transportation engineering. Next, we propose 
the modified ATC method in Section III. Section IV shows 
results of simulation experiments. Finally, we conclude our 
paper in Section V. 
II. 
TRANSPORTAION ENGINEERING 
In transportation engineering, a stream of vehicles on a 
roadway segment is mainly characterized by three kinds of 
variables. They are traffic volume, density, and velocity. A 
roadway segment is a part of roadway where there exist 
neither junctions nor road forks in the part. Traffic volume is 
the number of vehicles which pass through a fixed measuring 
point per unit time. Density is defined as the number of 
vehicles per unit length of roadway. A velocity of each 
vehicle is individual. So, in order to characterize a stream of 
vehicles, time average velocity and space average velocity 
are calculated. Time average velocity is the average of 
vehicles velocity when each vehicle passes through a fixed 
measuring point during a fixed period. Space average 
velocity is the average velocity of the vehicles in a whole 
roadway segment at a fixed time instance. Both time average 
velocity and space average velocity would be influenced by 
traffic signals. 
There exist some relations among traffic volume, density, 
and velocity. First, we mention that a relation between 
density and velocity. The higher density of vehicles is, the 
slower velocities of vehicles are. Relations between density 
and velocity are observed by many researchers and several 
relation models are proposed. In this paper, we adopt an 
equation of Greenshields model [9], 
 
v = vf(1-k/kj) 
(1) 
where v is velocity, vf is a parameter, which is called as 
free velocity, where a driver chooses velocity under a 
situation where no traffic flows affect the driver, k is density, 
and kj  is a parameter which is called as jam density which is 
the upper bound of density. Next, we mention that a relation 
between density and traffic volume. If density of vehicles is 
zero, traffic volume is obviously zero. While density of 
vehicles is less than some threshold, increasing the density 
causes increasing traffic volume. However, increasing the 
density makes velocities of vehicles slower. Consequently, 
when the density of vehicles is over the threshold, increasing 
the density causes decreasing traffic volume. At last, it 
makes velocities of vehicles to be zero because density of 
vehicles becomes saturated. Then traffic volume becomes 
zero. The threshold is called as critical density. 
III. 
MODIFIED ATC METHOD 
In this section, we describe the modified ATC methods. 
A. Assumptions 
In this paper, we assume the following matters on each 
vehicle. 
• 
Each vehicle has a wireless communication function 
in order that such vehicles can form a VANET. 
• 
Each vehicle has a GPS or a function showing an ID 
of roadway segment in which the vehicle currently 
exists. 
• 
Each vehicle has road map information in order to 
show a receiving side vehicle’s position to a road 
map. 
Also, we assume the following matter on each roadway 
segment. 
• 
Each roadway segment is not a one-way street, that 
is, each roadway segment is bi-directional way. 
B. Outline of the Original ATC Method 
In the original ATC method [11], since traffic congestion 
varies as time advances, each vehicle independently 
performs the following actions. 
• 
Action 1: Each vehicle periodically broadcasts a 
request message through a VANET to obtain 
information of vehicles in the limited area around the 
vehicle. 
For convenience, we call a vehicle which broadcasts the 
message a sending side vehicle. Also we call a vehicle which 
receives the message a receiving side vehicle. 
All request messages have a same Time-To-Live (shortly, 
TTL) value. If TTL value of the request messages is equal to 
N, the request messages are re-broadcasted N times by 
receiving side vehicles. 
• 
Action 2: Each receiving side vehicle replies a 
response which includes information about the 
vehicle (vehicle ID, velocity of the vehicle, roadway 
segment ID in which the vehicle exists, etc.)  
• 
Action 3: The sending side vehicle receives 
responses from the receiving side vehicles and 
evaluates each roadway segments based on the 
responses. 
To evaluate a roadway segment is estimating trip time 
where a vehicle goes through the roadway segment. In 
Action 3, each vehicle receives responses. Therefore, each 
vehicle knows density of vehicles in roadway segments. 
Following relations between density and velocity are well 
known. The higher density of vehicles is, the slower 
velocities of vehicles are. That is, each vehicle estimates 
velocity of vehicles in a roadway segment by density of 
vehicles in the roadway segment. 
• 
Action 4: The sending side vehicle calculates a route 
for a destination of the sending side vehicle. 
By the estimating trip time of roadway segments, each 
vehicle finds time-shortest path to a destination of the 
vehicle. A situation of each roadway (congested, non-
congested) is varying as time goes by. In order to adjust 
current roadways’ situations in real time, the above 
instructions are performed repeatedly. 
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

C. The Modified ATC Method 
Basic ideas of the original ATC method are as follows. 
First, the original ATC method leads vehicles to go through 
in time-shortest path. Next there might exist many roadway 
segment whose density of vehicles are small in the time-
shortest path. As a result, vehicles which are in congested 
area would go to non-congested area. 
However, suppose that the TTL value of request 
messages is small. In heavy vehicle traffic, the original ATC 
method could not find roadway segments whose density of 
vehicles is small. Also, it becomes fail to lead vehicles from 
congested areas to non-congested areas. 
Conversely, suppose that the TTL value of request 
messages is large. Even in heavy traffic, the original ATC 
method might find roadway segments whose density of 
vehicles is small. However, the larger the TTL value is, the 
more vehicles know the low density roadway segments. 
Therefore, a large number of  vehicles tend to gather in the 
low density roadway segments. As a result, a new traffic 
congestion would happen in the low density roadway 
segments. 
We consider that the TTL value of request packets is 
adaptive to traffic conditions. A basic policy of the modified 
ATC method is to control the TTL value where the number 
of non-congested roadway segments which each vehicle can 
find is some fixed range (for example, the number of non-
congested roadway segments is more than beta and less than 
gamma.) 
Here, we describe the modified ATC method. The 
modified ATC method is same as the original ATC method 
except the followings. 
After Action 3 of the original ATC method, the modified 
ATC method performs an adjusting TTL value operation. 
 
Adjusting TTL value operation: 
 
(1) Select responses which are sent from receiving 
vehicles in a half circle facing to a destination as depicted in 
Fig. 1. There exists Car X in the center of a circle. A 
destination of Car X is the corner of top right. In this case, 
the adjusting TTL value operation selects responses form a 
half circle of A. 
(2) Count the number of non-congested roadway 
segments. (A density of vehicles parameter alpha is given. 
When density of vehicles of a roadway segment is less than 
alpha, the modified ATC method recognizes that the 
roadway segment is non-congested.) 
(3) Suppose that the number is equal to K. If K is less 
than beta, increment TTL value by one. If K is greater than 
gamma, decrement TTL value by one. (Parameters beta and 
gamma are given. Beta is less than gamma. In order to avoid 
that TTL value becomes too large or too small, an upper 
bound and an lower bound of TTL value are set.) 
IV. 
EVALUATIONS 
In order to evaluate influence of parameters beta and 
gamma in the modified ATC method, we performed 
simulation experiments. For evaluating influence parameters,  
 
Figure 1.  Area for selecting responses 
we performed the following combinations of beta and 
gamma, (15, 25), (20, 30), (40, 50), (25, 40), (10, 30), (30, 
50), (20, 50). (The first element means beta. The second 
element means gamma.) 
In this simulation experiments, we adopt that congestion 
threshold density alpha is equal to 60 vehicles per a 
kilometer. 
We performed one simulation experiments for each 
combination. 
A. Simulation Environments 
There exist no traffic flow simulators supporting inter-
vehicle communications to our knowledge. So, we have 
developed a traffic flow simulator supporting inter-vehicle 
communications. 
 
(1) Inter-Vehicle Communications 
In the simulator, any two vehicles can communicate at 
any time in a single-hop communication if a distance 
between the two vehicles is less than a wireless 
communication range which is a given parameter. Moreover, 
the simulator does not take into consideration the 
communication delay time. In our simulation experiments, 
we set a wireless communication range 250 m. 
(2) Setting Roadway Parameters 
We have performed simulation experiments under the 
following road parameters. (See Table I) 
(3) Setting Vehicle Parameters 
(3-a) Control of Acceleration and Deceleration 
The simulator prepares a function where each vehicle 
accelerates or decelerates based on a traffic flow model 
which is called as “Optimal velocity model” [10]. In this 
model, an optimal velocity is determined by a non-linear 
monotonic function of headway distance. 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS ON ROADWAY SEGMENTS 
Road network pattern
Road network pattern
Road network pattern
Road network pattern    
Square grid 
Size
Size
Size
Size    
12 grid x 12 grid 
Size of each grid
Size of each grid
Size of each grid
Size of each grid    
500 m x 500 m 
Traffic signals
Traffic signals
Traffic signals
Traffic signals    
One 
for 
every 
intersection 
Time period for red signal
Time period for red signal
Time period for red signal
Time period for red signal    
67 s 
Time period for yellow signal
Time period for yellow signal
Time period for yellow signal
Time period for yellow signal    
3 s 
Time period for green signal
Time period for green signal
Time period for green signal
Time period for green signal    
60 s 
 
 
 
: Car_X 
 
: Distination of 
car_X 
 
: Limited area 
by car_X 
A 
B 
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

TABLE II.  
TOTAL NUMBER OF THAT EACH ROADWAY SEGMENT 
BECOMES CONGESTED 
beta, gamma
beta, gamma
beta, gamma
beta, gamma    
Total number of congestions
Total number of congestions
Total number of congestions
Total number of congestions    
15, 25 
24984 
20, 30 
22608 
40, 50 
19979 
25, 40 
20083 
10, 30 
19132 
30, 50 
18895 
20, 50 
16034 
 
(3-b) Scenario of New Vehicles’ Appearances 
In these simulations, we prepared the same scenario 
where congested areas and non-congested areas appear and 
these areas relocate as time progresses. We omit the details 
of the scenario because of a page limit. 
B. Results 
Table II shows the results on total number of that each 
roadway segment becomes congested. 
C. Considerations 
The simulation results show that the number of 
congestion becomes small when the difference of beta and 
gamma is large. In the simulation of combination (15, 25), 
we consider that low value of gamma forces that TTL value 
becomes too small. In this case, changing operation of TTL 
value is influenced from value of gamma rather than traffic 
conditions. 
Conversely, in the simulation of combination (40, 50), 
we consider that high value of beta forces that TTL value 
becomes large. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has proposed the modified ATC method. In 
the modified ATC method, size of area for gathering traffic 
information is changeable depending on traffic conditions. 
For changing size of area, the modified ATC method 
introduces two parameters. Simulation results show that 
various combinations of parameters make a different 
influence for alleviating traffic congestions. In future work, 
we would like to analyze influences of parameter 
combinations for alleviating traffic congestion. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant-
in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), No.24300028) and MIC 
Strategic Information and Communications R&D Promotion 
Programme 
(ICT 
Innovation 
Creation 
R&D, 
No. 
131408006). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] VICS home page, http://www.vics.or.jp/ (in Japanese) [retrieved: 
December, 2013] 
[2] I. Tanahashi, H. Kitaoka, M. Baba, H. Mori, S. Terada, and E. 
Teramoto, “NETSTREAM, a traffic simulator for large-scale road 
networks,” R&D Review of Toyota CRDL, vol. 37, no. 2, 2002, pp. 
47-53. 
[3] T. Yokota, T. Nagai, K. Takahashi, Y. Kobayashi, N. Hamada, and M. 
Imaizumi, “Traffic flow optimization over a wide area,” Proc. of 
Vehicle Navigation and Information Systems Conference, September 
1994, pp. 193-197. 
[4] K. Collins and G. Muntean, “A vehicle route management solution 
enabled by wireless vehiclar networks,” Proc. of Infocom, April 2008, 
pp. 1-6. 
[5] R. K. Guha and W. Chen, “A distributed traffic navigation system 
using vehicular communication,” Proc. of 1st. IEEE Vehicular 
Network Conference, Octorber 2009, pp. 1-8. 
[6] N. Shibata, T. Terauchi, T. Kitani, K. Yasumoto, M. Ito, and T. 
Higsashino, “A method for sharing traffic jam information using 
inter-vehicle communication,” Proc. 3rd Annual International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems Workshop, July 2006, 
pp. 1-7. 
[7] T. Shinkawa, T. Terauchi, T. Kitani, N. Shibata, K. Yasumoto, M. Ito, 
and T. Higashino, “A technique for information sharing using Inter-
vehicle communication with message ferrying,” Proc. of International 
Workshop 
on 
Future 
Mobile 
and 
Ubiquitous 
Information 
Technologies, May 2006, pp. 221-225. 
[8] T. Yamashita, K. Izumi, and K. Kurumatani, “Effect of car navigation 
with route information sharing on improvement of traffic efficiency,” 
Proc. of ITSC 2004, September 2004, pp. 465-470. 
[9] S. Kawakami and H. Matsui, “Transportation engineering,” Morikita, 
2004. (in Japanese) 
[10] M. Bando, K. Hasebe, A. Nakayama, A. Shibata, and Y. Sugiyama, 
“Dynamic model of traffic congestion and numerical simulation,” 
Phys. Rev. E51, 1995, pp. 1035-1042. 
[11] M. Kimura, S. Inoue, Y. Taoda, T. Dohi, and Y. Kakuda,"A novel 
method based on VANET for alleviating traffic congestion in urban 
transportations," Proc. 11th International Symposium on Autonomous 
Decentralized System (ISADS2013), March 2013, pp. 131-137. 
 
 
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

