Towards Efﬁcient Energy Management: Deﬁning HEMS, AMI and Smart Grid
Objectives
Ana Rossell´o-Busquet, Georgios Kardaras, Jos´e Soler and Lars Dittmann, IEEE members
Networks Technology & Service Platforms group, Department of Photonics Engineering,
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
{aros, geka, joss, ladit}@fotonik.dtu.dk
Abstract—Energy consumption has increased considerably
in the recent years. The way to reduce and make energy
consumption more efﬁcient has become of great interest for
researchers. One of the research areas is the reduction of energy
consumption in users’ residences. Efﬁciently managing and
distributing electricity in the grid will also help to reduce the
increase of energy consumption in the future. In order to reduce
energy consumption in home environments, researches have
been designing Home Energy Management Systems (HEMS).
In addition, Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) and
smart grids are also being developed to distribute and produce
electricity efﬁciently. This paper presents the high level goals
and requirements of HEMS. Additionally, it gives an overview
of Advanced Metering Infrastructure beneﬁts and smart grids
objectives.
I. INTRODUCTION
Despite the fact that home appliances have become more
energy efﬁcient, electricity consumption in households has
increased 30% over the last 30 years [1]. This is due to
the fact that the number of appliances that can be found in
households is also increasing. According to the International
Energy Agency (IEA), European electricity consumption
is going to increase 1.4% per year up to 2030 unless
countermeasures are taken [2].
Residential buildings can reduce their energy consumption
by becoming more energy efﬁcient. This paper will try to
identify the objectives that need to be fulﬁlled in order to
deploy an energy efﬁcient infrastructure. This infrastructure
will help reduce the electricity consumption in users’ resi-
dencies and make the electric grid more efﬁcient.
The research areas of efﬁcient energy management have
divided into three more speciﬁc research areas: energy
management in-home environments, consumers and utilities
cooperation and energy management in the electrical grid.
In this paper we treat ‘utilities’ as the parties involved
in the production and distribution of electricity through the
electrical grid. In addition, we use the term distribution
to refer to the process of electricity transport from the
generation plants to the users’ residences.
As shown in table I, energy consumption in home envi-
ronments can be reduced by installing Home Energy Man-
agement System (HEMS) [3] in users’ residences. HEMS
will give the users the necessary tools to manage and reduce
their consumption. Advanced Metering Information (AMI)
will enable two way communication between the households
and the utilities. AMI will beneﬁt the users as it will enable
the provision of real time rates and billing status through
the smart meter. If users take into consideration the price of
electricity while consuming and reduce their consumption
when the price is high, consumption will be optimized as
demand peaks will be reduced. In addition, providing this
exchange of information is one of the ﬁrst steps towards
optimization of energy distribution and production as it will
provide the utilities with statistics that will help predict
energy consumption. In order to reduce losses and optimize
energy distribution and production the electrical grid needs
to be upgraded. Upgrading the electrical grid will lead to
the so called smart grid. The smart grid will include new
elements to efﬁciently manage the electricity distribution and
production.
In this paper, the different goals that should be achieved
in these areas in order to reduce energy consumption in
home environment and make more efﬁcient distribution and
production of electricity are presented. When designing such
systems, researchers usually focus on one of the goals.
However, it is important that when designing these systems,
researchers design them in the framework they are going
to be deployed and keep in mind all the goals they should
achieve to maximize the beneﬁts. This paper summarizes
the different objectives of these research areas which can be
used as a guideline.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II introduces the concept of Home Energy Man-
agement System (HEMS) and describes the high level goals
and requirements to deploy it successfully. Section III will
present the concept of smart meters and AMI. In addition,
the possible information exchange between households and
utilities will be explained. Finally, section IV will present
the concept of smart grid and the objectives that need to be
achieved to optimize energy production and distribution.
II. ENERGY MANAGEMENT IN HOME ENVIRONMENTS
Energy consumption in households should be reduced in
order to decrease greenhouse gas emissions. Introducing
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) into
home environments can help reduce users’ energy consump-
tion. A HEMS is a system that includes all the necessary
elements to achieve reduction of electricity consumption in
home environments. One of its main elements is the so
335
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Table I
IMPROVING ENERGY MANAGEMENT
hhhhhhhhhhh
Issues
Research areas
Home environments
Cooperation
Electrical Grid
Energy Goals
Reduce energy consumption
Optimize energy consumption,
Reduce losses and optimize energy
distribution and production
distribution and production
Who beneﬁts?
Users
Users and utilities
Utilities
How?
HEMS
AMI
Smart grid
Figure 1.
Home Energy Management System Goals
called home gateway or residential gateway which is able to
communicate and manage the rest of the home appliances
and offers to users’ tools to reduce their consumption. Using
context-aware information in HEMS will provide knowledge
of the environment which can be used to further decrease
energy consumption.
Section II-A will present the goals HEMS should achieve
and the high-level requirements it should fulﬁl. Section II-B
will present the major challenges when designing HEMS.
A. HEMS High-Level Objectives and Requirements
The main objectives of HEMS are shown in Fig. 1.
HEMS main goal is to reduce the energy consumption.
However, to achieve this, monitoring energy consumption
and managing appliances are needed. In order to reduce
energy consumption, ﬁrst it is necessary to know how energy
is consumed. Therefore monitoring is needed. Secondly,
it is necessary to manage the appliances to apply energy
reduction strategies.
We consider that HEMS has to fulﬁl the requirements
summarized in Fig. 2 to achieve these goals satisfactorily:
• Easy to deploy: It has to be taken into consideration
that HEMS should be easy to deploy into users’ houses
because deploying new cables or infrastructure is not
the best solution. This requires using already installed
communication systems, such as wireless communica-
tion or power line communication which will minimize
the costs and gain users’ acceptance.
• Interoperability: in order to monitor and manage users’
appliances efﬁciently a home network has to be in-
troduced where devices can exchange information and
commands without interoperability conﬂicts.
• Data security: Security has to be incorporated into
HEMS in terms of data encryption and authentication
to protect the system against external threats. However,
security issues will not be analyzed as they are out of
scope of this paper.
Figure 2.
Home Energy Management System Requirements
• Auto-conﬁguration or easy set-up: HEMS is going to
be used by users that may not have enough knowledge
to perform difﬁcult network conﬁguration tasks. Taking
into consideration that users may add or change their
home appliances, HEMS should provide easy to use
conﬁguration tools or in the best case the network
should be auto-conﬁgurable.
• Display energy consumption: One of HEMS goals is to
monitor energy consumption. This information should
be available to users through the user interface.
• User friendly interface: The user interface should pro-
vide information about the current consumption and
also previous consumptions, providing daily, monthly
and even annual reports. Additionally, it can offer
the possibility to compare the electricity consumption
between months or even compare it to other sources,
such as average neighbourhood consumption or other
users’ consumption. This option could be a new service
provided by the smart grid through the smart meter.
This interface should also provide management options,
where the users can modify their preferences and con-
trol their appliances. User preferences are related to
the strategy used to reduce users’ energy consumption
and can vary from system to system. Providing the
possibility of controlling devices is also important as
the system may apply undesired conﬁgurations and the
user has to be able to correct them.
• Intelligent and context-aware: HEMS should have some
intelligence to facilitate efﬁcient energy management.
This can be achieved by creating a context-aware
system. A context-aware system is capable of collecting
information from the environment, or context, and react
accordingly. We consider that a context aware system
can signiﬁcantly improve the reduction of energy con-
336
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

sumption. There are different ways in which context-
aware systems can be implemented in HEMS: by deﬁn-
ing energy polices or rules or by creating ubiquitous
computing system.
In HEMS, a system that uses energy policies is a
context-aware system which collects information from
the environment and then uses this information together
with the rules to reduce energy consumption.
Ubiquitous computing requires a more complex system.
We deﬁne that a HEMS using ubiquitous computing
reduces energy consumption by using context-aware
information to predict users’ behaviour and then applies
the energy management strategy without compromising
the users’ comfort. Before being able to predict users’
behaviour and apply the energy management strategy,
there has to be a learning process. This learning pro-
cess includes (1) collecting context-aware information,
which can include location-aware information, and (2)
analyze and process this information to extract the
users’ routines and patterns. Once the learning process
is completed, the system can extract the settings needed
to reduce energy consumption.
• Communication with smart meter: Enabling this com-
munication will provide the user with real-time price
and billing status, energy consumption information, as
well as possible services that may arise. An example of
a new service could be comparing the household energy
consumption to other users’ consumption.
In the next section the challenges found when designing
HEMS when trying to comply with the above requirements
will presented.
B. Issues and challenges
The main challenge to provide an efﬁcient HEMS is
interoperability. HEMS should provide seamless interaction
between devices. However, there are a number of different
home appliance manufacturers and communication technolo-
gies available for the user which makes device interoperabil-
ity problematic. In addition, devices of the same type, such
as washing machines, can have different functionalities de-
pending on the model. Technical incompatibility has limited
market possibilities. Users are looking for a ‘one size ﬁts
all’ solution without having to worry about compatibility
requirements. An example of how to solve this problem can
be found in [4].
Additionally, there are other challenging users’ expecta-
tions that have to be fulﬁlled related to the following re-
quirements: auto-conﬁguration or easy set-up, user friendly
interface and easy to deploy:
• Easy to use and easy device control: there is diversity
in users’ preferences and expectations when interacting
with HEMS. Some users would like an interface that
will give them advanced options while others would
just like a simple system but without losing control of
their devices [5]. Furthermore, users have different user
interface display preferences, some users would like to
use their mobile phone or PDA, while others would
rather use their computer or a controller. An example
of how to deal with this can be found in [6].
• Easy to conﬁgure: complex conﬁguration or need of a
professional to conﬁgure the network is a drawback.
HEMS should be easy to conﬁgure or even be auto-
conﬁgurable. However this can be a challenge due
to the heterogeneity of home appliances and home
technologies.
• Easy software upgrade: home appliances can have
software installed, which in some occasions has to be
updated. Software update should be easy for users to
do. An example of how to deal with this can be found
in [7].
Moreover, designing HEMS as an intelligent and context-
aware system is not an easy task and presents the following
challenges:
• Design of context-aware systems, data collection and
interpretation: HEMS may use sensors to collect in-
formation about the users’ behaviour. The system may
have to work with different types of sensors and from
different brands. This will force the system to be de-
signed to deal with different sensor details which sets a
barrier to interoperability. [8] proposes an infrastructure
to support software design and execution of context-
aware applications using sensors to collect data.
Another issue is coping with the amount of data trans-
mitted from home appliances and possible sensors. An
example of how to deal with this can be found in [9].
• Policies and rules: There are two main challenges
when using policies to implement energy management:
coordination and contradiction. As the number of ap-
pliances in the house increases so does the number
of policies, which can lead to coordination problems
and contradictory rules. Tools to identify interactions
and detect contradiction between policies should be
incorporated into HEMS to manage rules and policies
more efﬁciently. An example of this can be found in
[10] and [11].
• Ubiquitous computing: HEMS using ubiquitous com-
puting should include an algorithm which after process-
ing the collected data will be able to learn and predict
the users’ behaviour . Examples of such algorithms can
be found in [12] and [13].
• Multiple-inhabitants: Prediction of users’ behaviour
when there is more than one user in the home envi-
ronment adds complexity to the predicting algorithm
as each user has his/her own routines and practices.
• Not compromising users’ comfort: HEMS should not
have undesirable outcomes, it should be an intelligent
system that can adapt to different situations and user
behaviour.
337
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Figure 3.
Communication between users’ residences and utilities
III. CONSUMERS AND UTILITIES COOPERATION
Efﬁcient distribution and production of energy requires
knowledge about users’ energy demand. Collecting data of
the energy consumed in households can help built up statis-
tical information about consumption patterns. By providing
this knowledge to the utilities, they can foresee the energy
needs of their consumers and avoid electricity shortages or
blackouts.
Deployment of renewable energies, such as photovoltaic
panels or solar thermal panels, is increasing in home en-
vironment. These renewable energies help reduce the user
electricity consumption from the grid, and, if excess of
electricity is produced, they can insert electricity into the
grid. Utilities can also use renewable energy production data
to foresee the energy demand.
Furthermore, it is expected that electric vehicles will
replace fuel vehicles. These new electric vehicles are going
to be equipped with a battery that will be charged directly
from the grid. When demand peaks occur the users can use
the electricity already stored in their vehicles to lower the
load in the grid.
In order to collect all these data a cooperation between
consumers and utilities has to be established. This cooper-
ation involves incorporating a bidirectional communication
system between utilities and users. Users will also beneﬁt
from this communication as utilities can provide them real
time information about electricity price and billing status. In
addition, there will be no need for having utilities employers
coming to read the electrical meter as that information will
be obtained through this communication system providing
Advance Metering Reading (AMR).
As shown in Fig. 3, the upstream communication is deﬁne
as the transmission of data from the user to the provider and
the downstream is deﬁned as the one from provider to user.
As stated before, the data transmitted in the upstream will
include information about users’ electricity patterns taking
into consideration their renewable energies. The downstream
communication is the transmission of electricity price and
billing information from the utilities to the users. Having
access to real time price and billing information will make
the users become more conscious about their electricity
consumption and they may try to reduce the associated
costs, by avoiding peak hours, leading to a more distributed
and efﬁcient consumption. In addition, the utilities can use
this downstream to ask their users to reduce their demand
when demand peaks occur. This communication system will
enable utilities to be proactive, acting before the problem
occurs instead of reacting to it. Furthermore, utilities can
offer new service that can be access by the user through
this downstream.
This bidirectional communication channel will have ben-
eﬁts for both sides.
A. Requirements
To enable a bidirectional communication between users’
and utilities some changes have to be performed in users’
residences and in the electrical grid. Traditional electricity
meters have to be upgraded to make communication be-
tween users and utilities possible. Smart meters are similar
to traditional meters, they collect data about the users’
consumption, but they additionally support communication
between utilities and users. In addition to smart meters, an
Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) has to be deployed
in the electricity grid. AMI is a system capable of measuring,
collecting and analyzing energy usage which is expected
to be deployed within the electrical grid. Smart meters
comprise a major component of AMI and one of the ﬁrst
necessary steps for bidirectional communication between
users and utilities.
B. Issues
AMI is a communication infrastructure that can involve
the communication of different utility sectors and compa-
nies. The electrical grid is mainly divided into: (1) gener-
ation: production of electricity, (2) transmission: transmis-
sion of electricity from generators to distribution systems,
(3) distribution: connection of power lines to consumers,
and (4) consumers. Deploying AMI will require that these
parties work together to obtain the maximum beneﬁts. This
may require data interfaces between the different parties
to deal with interoperability issues. Integrating AMI into
the grid may require (1) to deploy a new communication
infrastructure in the grid, (2) to use wireless networks such
as mobile networks, (3) to use web-based communication.
In addition, the communication should be secure to prevent
cyber-attacks.
IV. ENERGY MANAGEMENT IN ELECTRIC GRIDS
As stated before, energy consumption in home environ-
ments is increasing and consumption patterns have consid-
erably changed in the last years. However, the electrical
grids have not changed signiﬁcantly during the last century,
therefore an upgrade is needed to achieve efﬁcient energy
distribution and production. This upgrade in the electrical
grid will lead to the so called smart grid. [14] deﬁnes the
smart grid as “electricity networks that can intelligently
integrate the behaviour and actions of all users connected
to it - generators, consumers and those that do both - in
order to efﬁciently deliver sustainable, economic and secure
electricity supplies”. Smart grids will incorporate AMI and
agents to fulﬁl the requirements for energy efﬁciency. In the
next section, the objectives of the smart grid are described.
338
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Figure 4.
Smart Grid Goals
A. Smart Grid Objectives
Fig. 4 summarizes the main high-level objectives the
smart grid should fulﬁl. When designing the smart grid these
goals should be taken into consideration and be integrated
together in order to maximize the beneﬁts.
• Enable active participation of consumers: The grid
should accept injections from renewable energies in-
stalled in the users’ residences. In addition, the grid
can ask the users to reduce their consumption to avoid
demand peaks or shortages and reward them with eco-
nomical beneﬁts. This process is referred as Demand
Response (DR).
• Reliable electrical grid: the smart grid should improve
security and quality of supply and reduce the number
of blackouts and shortages.
• Self-healing: the smart grid should be more resilient
than the electrical grid we have today. Smart grids
should be easily reconﬁgurable and dynamic in order
to achieve self-healing which will make the grid more
resilient and reliable.
• Optimization and efﬁcient operation: Optimization and
efﬁcient operation of the grid implies a reduction of
energy losses in power lines. This can be achieved by
upgrading the grid components and by using consump-
tion statistics to foresee the electricity usage.
• Accommodation of all types of generation and storage:
The smart grid has to accommodate from large central-
ized power plants to renewable energies installed in the
users’ premises or distribution systems. In addition, it is
foreseen that new storage systems, such as community
storages, may be included in the smart grid. To properly
manage and control these new elements, the smart grid
should be designed as a decentralized and distributed
grid.
• Efﬁcient control of the grid: As explained in the
previous section, AMI will enable the transmission
of energy consumption which can be used by the
utilities to forecast users’ demands. This information
will enable an efﬁcient control of the grid as load
scheduling and management can be carried out to avoid
blackouts and electricity shortages. In addition, smart
grids should enable control information communication
among different elements of the grid to achieve an
efﬁcient control of the grid.
• Accommodation of PHEV and PEV: Even though Plug-
in Hybrid Electric Vehicles (PHEVs) and Plug-in Elec-
tric Vehicles (PEVs) are not yet wide-scale adopted,
they should be taken into consideration when designing
the smart grid. It is foreseen that the amount of PHEV
and PEV will increase which will lead to a considerable
increase of electricity demand.
• Real time price and billing: AMI will provide the
infrastructure to transmit real time price and billing
information to the user. The smart grid should incor-
porate the necessary elements to make this information
available such as billing databases.
B. Towards Smart Grid
The electrical grid has to undertake a transformation to
reach the smart grids objectives. Introducing AMI into the
grid will provide the communication tools to help reach
some of the smart grids objectives. However, further changes
in the smart grid components have to be done to successfully
fulﬁl these goals. Advanced components, advanced control
methods and communication and improved decision sup-
port will be introduced in the electrical grid as it moves
towards becoming a smart grid. In addition, sensing and
measurements technologies should also be incorporated to
evaluate the correct functionality of all elements in the grid
and enable and efﬁcient control.
V. CONCLUSION
There is considerable literature on energy management
and smart grid. This paper has tried to outline the main goals
that have to be fulﬁlled by the Home Energy Management
System, AMI and smart grids. When developing systems
to reduce or make energy consumption more efﬁcient, such
systems usually focus on one speciﬁc capability. It is impor-
tant that the overall framework and objectives are taken into
consideration during the design of such systems to maximize
their beneﬁts. This paper can be upstream communication
theused as a guideline of the objectives that should be
fulﬁlled by HEMS and smart grids.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Consortium, “D2.1: Service requirement speciﬁcation,”
2009.
[2] E. Commission, European Technology Platform SmartGrids
- Vision and Strategy for Europe’s Electricity Networks of
the Future.
Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European
Communities, 2006.
[3] H. Kudo, “Energy conservation technologies and expectation
in japan,” 2008.
339
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

[4] D. Bonino, E. Castellina, and F. Corno, “The dog gateway:
enabling ontology-based intelligent domotic environments,”
Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 4,
pp. 1656 –1664, 2008.
[5] L. T. McCalley, C. J. H. Midden, and K. Haagdorens,
“Computing systems for household energy conservation: Con-
sumer response and social ecological considerations,” in in
Proceedings of CHI 2005 Workshop on Social Implications
of Ubiquitous Computing, 2005.
[6] R. Kistler, S. Knauth, D. Kaslin, and A. Klapproth, “Caruso
- towards a context-sensitive architecture for uniﬁed super-
vision and control,” in Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation, 2007. ETFA. IEEE Conference on, 25-28 2007,
pp. 1445 –1448.
[7] S. Grilli, A. Villa, and C. Kavadias, “Comanche: An architec-
ture for software conﬁguration management in the home envi-
ronment,” in NBiS ’08: Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on Network-Based Information Systems.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 283–292.
[8] G. D. A. Anind K. Dey, Daniel Salber, “A context-based
infrastructure for smart environments,” Georgia Institute
of
Technology,
Tech.
Rep.,
1999.
[Online].
Available:
http://hdl.handle.net/1853/3406
[9] N. Shah, C.-F. Tsai, and K.-M. Chao, “Monitoring appliances
sensor data in home environment: Issues and challanges,” in
Commerce and Enterprise Computing, 2009. CEC ’09. IEEE
Conference on, 20-23 2009, pp. 439 –444.
[10] M. Shehata, A. Ebertein, and A. Fapojuwo, “Iris-ts: Detecting
interactions between requirements in doors.” INFOCOMP
Journal of Computer Science, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 34–43, 2006.
[11] M. Shehata, A. Eberlein, and A. Fapojuwo, “Managing policy
interactions in knx-based smart homes,” vol. 2, pp. 367 –378,
2007.
[12] M. M. Hua Si, Shunsuke Saruwatari and H. Morikawa,
“A ubiquitous power management system to balance energy
saving and response time based on device-level usage predic-
tion,” IPSJ Journal, vol. 18, pp. 147–163, 2010.
[13] S. K. Das and D. J. Cook, “Designing smart environments: A
paradigm based on learning and prediction,” in International
Conference on Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence
(PReMI), 2005.
[14] E. T. P. S. for the Electricity networks of the Future.
[Online]. Available: http://www.smartgrids.eu/?q=node/163,
accesed June 2010
340
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

