Reliable Technology for Wireless Mesh Networks with Low System Requirements
Vladimir Sulc 
MICRORISC s.r.o. 
Jicin, Czech Republic 
sulc@microrisc.com 
Radek Kuchta | Radimir Vrba 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
kuchtar | vrbar @feec.vutbr.cz
Abstract – In this paper IQMESH, new networking technology 
for wireless mesh networks, its basic principles and related 
routing algorithms are presented. The presented technology 
was developed especially for applications in the field of 
buildings 
automation 
and 
telemetry. 
However, 
other 
applications such as smart grids or street lighting can also 
benefit from straightforward implementations and low system 
resources requirements. An implementation for IQRF 
communication platform, described at the end, shows actual 
system resources requirements in a specific scenario limited by 
240 hops and 65 thousand devices. 
Keywords-wireless; mesh; networking; routing; algorithm; 
IQRF; IQMESH. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
IQMESH is a networking technology developed for 
Wireless 
Mesh 
Networks 
(WMN) 
utilizing 
packet 
transmissions. In such networks, messages are sent in 
smaller parts called packets. A packet has information about 
a recipient and, in general, the mesh network. This is 
transmitted from a sender to its recipient through nodes 
connected in the mesh network. A strategy for sending 
packets from one node to another is commonly known as 
routing, and its goal is to deliver packets efficiently and 
reliably. 
A mesh network in which every node has a direct link to 
another node is a fully connected mesh network. In real 
WMN only partially connected mesh networks are used, 
which means that there is no universal direct link between 
devices. As an illustrative example of such mesh network 
topology and related routing is to compare it to vehicles 
traveling between cities. The whole path from the origin to 
the destination consists of numerous individual roads 
connecting cities. Searching for the best connection between 
two cities is similar to mesh networks finding the shortest 
and most efficient path, from the origin to the destination, 
between two selected nodes. 
A link can be established between any two nodes in a 
mesh network. In a network consisting of n nodes and one 
coordinator, the number of possible links will always be 
lower or equal to NMAX calculated as (1). 



Devices in WMN communicate with each other 
wirelessly, so communication between two devices is usually 
limited by the communication distance, or so called range 
limitation of these two devices. Positions of devices in 
general WMN are not known and the range limitation can 
depend on many conditions, therefore the routing is usually a 
great algorithmic challenge to find the best path the packet 
should travel along. More nodes result in more possible links 
and consequently to more combinations of links.  
Many different routing algorithms are used practically. A 
flooding, routing based on tables and random routing are just 
a few basic examples of such algorithms. Unfortunately, due 
to the many specifics of WMN and limitations of the target, 
application is not possible to easily utilize such algorithms. 
Flooding in a general mesh network is based on 
propagation of the packet over the whole network and is to 
be considered as the most reliable for WMN. Real 
implementations of WMN in industrial, scientific and 
medical ISM radio bands are limited physically by the 
connection speed, the so called bit rate, resulting in big 
delays and low network responsiveness.  
Routing algorithms based on the sharing and distribution 
of routing tables or vectors are usually considered to be the 
most efficient. High memory demands and big overload in 
the case of distribution routing tables usually limit usage of 
such algorithms for larger WMNs where resources of nodes 
controllers are not limited by the economy of the project.  
Possible packet collisions in connection with lower bit 
rates limits real implementations of random routing in WMN 
and 
practically 
disqualifies 
telemetry 
and 
control 
applications where the highest reliability should be achieved. 
WMNs are nowadays considered and already used as a 
communication platform for many different applications in 
the field of telemetry and automation. Automatic meter 
reading AMR, street lighting control or smart grids are just 
few examples of such applications utilizing networks with 
hundreds or thousands of devices. Therefore both the cost of 
communication devices and high reliability of the routing 
should be priorities. Technology described in this paper 
provides both reliable and effective packet delivery solutions 
with minimal demands on system resources. 
In this paper IQMESH, networking technology for 
wireless mesh networks, is presented. Basic principles of the 
technology is followed by explanation of discovery and 
routing. Reliability and efficiency aspects will be discussed 
further on. Specific implementation of IQMESH routing 
technology will be described in the end. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Efficient and reliable packet delivery in large wireless 
networks consisting of hundreds or even thousands of 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

devices and supporting up to several hundred hops is a big 
algorithmic challenge. Considering actual speed, output 
power and spectrum limitations, as well as economic factors, 
a flooding mechanism seems to be the most viable for most 
target applications. 
Therefore, flooding is commonly used in wireless ad-hoc 
networks. There are many techniques of flooding differing in 
control algorithms, efficiency, reliability and overhead.  
The simplest flooding technique is based on re-
transmitting only new, not yet registered packets. In this 
scheme every packet should be identified and is re-
transmitted only once. This mechanism guaranties that a 
packet is delivered to all nodes at minimal costs. In the real 
environment 
of 
a 
WMN, 
collisions 
would 
affect 
functionality and result in high traffic [1]. Reducing flooding 
traffic is the goal of many approaches to make the flooding 
mechanism more reliable and efficient [1]. Proposing a 
probable flooding scheme, e.g., distance-based, location-
based or cluster-based flooding. 
Schemes in category 1-hop neighborhood are based on 
knowledge of the closest neighbors reachable directly in one 
hop. Different approaches [2-5] are based on 1-hop 
neighborhood knowledge. Cai et al. [2] propose adding the 
list of its 1-hop neighborhood to the packet, and recommends 
to the receiver not to forward the message if its complete 1-
hop neighborhood is already included in the received list. 
Schemes in the category 2+ hops neighborhood are based 
on storage of the neighborhood, which is limited by the 
number of hops from each node. In this category every node 
knows the network topology up to n-hops. In [6] Qayyum et 
al. propose a heuristic algorithm to compute multiple relays. 
Ko et al. in [7] propose improving broadcast operations for 
ad-hoc networks using 2-hop connected dominating sets. 
Spohn et al.  in [8] argue by simulations that protocols 
focused on making an optimal broadcast tree with the 
implicit assumption that all nodes should be reachable from 
the source may no longer be true because flooding protocols 
in wireless sensor networks are used to deliver data packets 
towards a single, or only subset, of destination nodes and 
proposes a new flooding protocol for utilizing directional 
information to achieve efficiency in data delivery. 
Time Synchronized Mesh Protocol, described in [9] is 
based on TDMA and requires sharing time information and 
precise time synchronization of all nodes. Overall power 
consumption would benefit from the time synchronization, 
but on the other hand interference, collisions and 
environment influences would impact delivery reliability. 
III. 
IQMESH 
IQMESH is the networking technology developed for 
WMN with a coordinator and utilization of packet 
transmissions. Reliability is achieved through a flooding 
mechanism, collisions are avoided by TDMA and its routing 
efficiency is based on the virtual routing structure VRS, 
created by the coordinator during discovery. The following 
paragraphs provide a step by step analysis of particular parts 
of the IQMESH technology. 
A. Basic principles 
WMN is a general network of devices connected 
wirelessly. Every device in the network has some unique 
information (address) enabling addressing inside of the 
network - MAC, node ID, index, address, etc. Packets sent in 
such network include the address of the recipient. The 
principle of IQMESH technology is to extend this addressing 
space and define a new virtual routing structure in the 
network. A coordinator will dedicate to every device, found 
during discovery process, a unique Virtual Routing Number 
VRN, which will be used for future routing. Figure 1a shows 
an illustrative example of a standard network, where its 
nodes can be addressed by their address N1 – N5, after 
discovery, additional routing information is added as shown 
in figure 1b. Only VRN are used for the routing, while 
devices’ addresses are used solely for addressing. Flooding 
and other routing algorithms can benefit from systematic 
indexing of nodes by VRN, e.g., if the VRN reflects distance 
by the number of routing hops from coordinator to the node.  
 
        Fig. 1a  Network example 
          Fig. 1b  Network after discovery 
B. Discovery 
During discovery, the coordinator seeks out nodes 
connected to the network and dedicates them to a unique 
VRN, reflecting their distance from the coordinator. For 
example, an incremental indexing can be used. The 
coordinator starts to search its neighbors. All devices 
responding to its “Answer Me” type message will receive 
their VRN. Based on received response it is assumed that the 
link between coordinator and responding nodes should be 
symmetrical, enabling future routing both to and from the 
coordinator. All nodes directly responding to the coordinator 
have a direct link to the coordinator, so they should belong to 
Zone 0, being directly accessible without routing. Then, the 
coordinator incrementally asks all nodes from Zone 0 to 
discover their 1-hop neighborhood and then dedicates a VRN 
to all newly found nodes which have not been found in the 
previous step, and thus not belonging to the Zone 0. Each 
node can also store some additional information in this step, 
e.g., respective zone number, parent's VRN, parent's network 
address or VRN of the first node in respective zone. This 
information would later be used for routing optimization. 
Processing all answers from nodes belonging to Zone 0, the 
coordinator will know all nodes belonging to Zone 1, which 
are nodes accessible to the coordinator by one routing hop. 
The same procedure will be then invoked recursively for all 
nodes belonging to zones Zone 1 and higher until all nodes 
are found or until there are some further zones available. At 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

the end of discovery every found, and thus discovered, node 
has a unique VRN reflecting its distance from the 
coordinator. In typical applications such as smart buildings, 
telemetry systems and street lighting the discovery is made 
just once during the installation phase. 
C. Routing 
The goal of packet routing in target applications is to 
reliably and efficiently deliver data over the network. In 
IQMESH based networks, the flooding mechanism is 
primarily used. VRS created during discovery process is 
directionally flooded. The network would be flooded from 
the coordinator to the node for all control purposes or from 
the node to the coordinator for data collection. A special 
order of VRS together with TDMA enables a directional, 
efficient and collision free flooding mechanism based on 
VRN. Every node routing packet in its dedicated time slot 
will also add to the packet its own VRNX enabling other 
nodes to know and consequently synchronize to their 
respective time slot. The coordinator uses VRNC equal to 0. 
The network routing mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Fig. 2  Routing mechanism 
D. Time synchronization 
In contrast to many other techniques, e.g., [9], there is no 
need to share precise time information over the network. 
Routed packets keep track of number of hops made. This 
number corresponds with the respective time slot based on 
VRN for every device. This mechanism, together with 
adding information of length of time slot, enables efficient 
re-synchronization of all devices based on packet reception. 
In addition, dynamic timing based on packet length can be 
supported.  
E. Resources 
Generally, the coordinator needs to hold the information 
of the discovered nodes, whereas each node should keep 
VRN information only. This means no special HW resources 
are required to implement IQMESH technology. Storing 
some additional information recognized during discovery, as 
described in future paragraphs, can dramatically increase the 
efficiency of the routing. Specific IQRF implementation 
showing real system requirements will be mentioned further 
on. 
 
 
F. Optimizations 
Additional system resources dedicated to the coordinator 
or to each node can increase future routing efficiency. 
Storing the address or VRN of a parent node by each node 
could be mentioned as a good example. In such case, every 
node can reach the coordinator quite efficiently by tree 
topology via parent nodes. Also, the storing of minimal VRN 
in the respective zone, or equivalent saving of the maximal 
VRN of the previous zone by each routed node can be used 
to increase routing efficiency. Software techniques used 
during discovery or following discovery process can also 
increase the final efficiency of the routing, e.g., the 
coordinator can exclude all leaf nodes without child links 
from VRS during discovery. 
G. Reliability 
The described IQMESH technology ensures reliable and 
efficient directional flooding. Due to the expected redundant 
links in many real WMNs, it dramatically increases 
reliability. A temporarily lost link will obviously not cause 
failure of packet delivery. Routing mechanisms making use 
of underlying TDMA avoid conflicts as every routing node 
has just one dedicated time slot corresponding to its VRN. 
Many tests with environment noise simulations have 
confirmed reliability increase. Usually only noise generated 
during time slots dedicated for devices without redundant 
links can cause failure in packet delivery. Noise generated 
during the first time slot usually affects delivery, as no 
redundant links have yet to be created, which is a first time 
slot issue FTSI. Overall performance in standard office 
building environments was measured and a fail rate based on 
several weeks of experimentation resulted in 1 not delivered 
packet from 17 250 transmissions. Two additional slots for 
the coordinator were used to fix the FTSI. 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

H. Efficiency - routing from coordinator 
As redundant paths resulting from the principle of VRS 
flooding are expected and packet collisions are eliminated by 
TDMA, it might not be obvious to use reception 
acknowledgment during flooding. However, this assures fair 
routing efficiency without any impact to reliability. Based on 
the TDMA, flooding routing realized via VRS for nodes with 
VRNX < VRNA, where VRNA is VRN of addressed node, 
and assumption that every node is addressed in the same 
frequency, the average frame will consist of time slots, 
where n is the number of nodes in a WMN: 




Generally, blind flooding efficiency in similar cases 
would be calculated as a number of links to ensure 100% 
reliability of packet delivery. Comparing (1) and (2), we can 
see dramatic efficiency increase. 
For any addressed node within the zone Zx, only nodes 
belonging to previous zone Zx-1 should make the routing 
without any strong impact to the reliability. The resulting 
efficiency based on this presumption will be higher, but 
always dependent on the topology of the specific WMN. The 
following formula reflects expected system efficiency for 
such a scenario:  




Efficiency of this routing scenario, skipping redundant 
routes by nodes in the same zone Zx for specific node X, can 
be expected as (4), where VRNZx-1 is VRN of the last node 
related to the zone Zx-1. Based on this principle, all nodes 
related to the zone Z0 can be addressed directly without 
routing. 



I. 
Efficiency - routing to coordinator 
As the matter of fact, there is information about parent 
nodes recognized and stored during discovery of every node. 
This information means that there is a tree topology available 
for routing packets from nodes to the network coordinator. In 
such a scenario, every routing node in its time slot sends a 
packet exclusively to its parent. Therefore in using TDMA, 
the number of time slots is equal to the number of hops and, 
for each frame, corresponds to the zone number ZX for the 
node originating communication. Assuming ZMAX as a 
maximum zone number in the network while indexed from 
0, it would be generally proven: 



Reliability increase is mostly preferred in typical WMN 
applications. Oriented flooding with redundant backup paths 
can be used for such applications. In this case, each node 
originating communication to the coordinator will use its 
own VRNX number as a limit of hops. For such routing, 
similar efficiency like (2) is expected. 
Avoiding redundancy of routing by nodes from the same 
zone, routing efficiency for a specific node X can be 
expressed similarly like in formula (4), where is a VRN of 
the last node related to the zone ZX-1. 
IV. 
IQMESH IMPLEMENTATION IN IQRF PLATFORM 
IQRF is the communication platform and related 
technologies [10]. The name IQRF stands for an Intelligent 
Radio Frequency. Basic specifications and early designs 
were made in 2004, when, in Malaga, Spain, the first 
integrated modules were introduced. IQRF is the platform 
integrating a variety of components for building LR-WPAN 
in an easy way, simplifying and shortening the design phase 
of 
a 
wireless 
communication 
system. 
Specific 
implementation of IQMESH routing technology will be 
described in following paragraphs. 
A. Network abstraction and limitations 
IQRF 
platform 
addresses 
mainly 
LR-WPAN 
applications, such as building automation systems and 
telemetry systems. In such applications many devices can be 
connected in a fixed infrastructure, usually created during the 
installation process, and provides permanent links to other 
devices in this infrastructure. There are commonly other 
devices connected in the network without permanent links to 
the other devices in the network, e.g., because of the mobility 
of such devices or because of power supply limitations. 
Based on these criteria, IQRF abstracted network topology is 
described in Fig.3.  
 
 
 
Fig. 3  IQRF abstracted network topology 
The routing backbone usually consists of devices 
providing permanent links and bonded to the network during 
the installation process. Typical examples for such devices 
would be equipment like gateways, actuators or sensors 
mounted in specific locations. Such devices can be used as a 
routing backbone. IQMESH defines Virtual Routing 
Structure (VRS) to be used for directionally oriented 
flooding. VRS would be created from such infrastructure 
during the installation process (or later on). IQRF OS 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

available on every transceiver module provides functionality 
for automation of such processes through function 
discovery(x) instigated by the coordinator and via servicing 
of system packets by node devices.  
As visible from Figure 3 and description available in 
[10], several limitations were applied to increase efficiency 
of the network. Routing backbone consists of up to 239 
devices, allowing very efficient one byte addressing, 
broadcast and also group messages. VRS is created from 
routing 
backbone 
devices 
very 
simply 
by 
calling 
discovery(x) function, where parameter x limits the number 
of zones, which is related to a depth of the network. Other 
devices will receive logical network address 0xFE from the 
coordinator during bonding. To extend the addressing 
scheme for addressing 65k devices, additional two byte user 
addresses are used. Every IQRF device can work 
simultaneously in two wireless networks, further extending 
the network or chaining of several networks allowing the 
possibility to build up larger systems.  
IQRF specific implementation of IQRF OS 3.0x on TR-
5xx transceiver modules supports several non-routing and 
routing schemes. A specific routing scheme is chosen in 
application based on requested efficiency and purpose by 
setting system variable RTDEF. Routing based on network 
logical address, tree routing to the coordinator and routing 
based on VRS are three basic routing schemes supported by 
current implementation of IQRF OS. Addressing in the 
network is realized via the logical network address obtained 
during bonding which is one byte long or via a two byte  user 
address dedicated by the user by calling function 
setUserAddress(x).  
B. Dynamic time slots 
To avoid conflicts within the network during routing, 
TDMA is used. One frame can include up to 240 time slots, 
allowing for up to 240 hops in the network. In IQRF, time 
slots are measured and set up in ticks, every tick is 10 ms 
long. As data load in the packet can consist from 1 byte up to 
128 bytes, and 19.2 kb/s is the typical bit rate used for 
transmissions, 1.2 kb/s up to 115 kb/s are supported, the 
length of the frame would be too long if a fixed time slot is 
used.  
Support of dynamic time slots based on the data load in 
the packet and requested purpose dramatically increased 
routing efficiency. Time slot is defined by setting the 
variable RTSLOT to the number of ticks convenient for a 
specific purpose. Polling request of the coordinator, e.g., can 
include just a specification of one or more nodes which 
should send data to the coordinator. In such a case, a 
minimum time slot 1 tick long can be used to propagate this 
request over the network, assuring delivery in 2.4 s in the 
worst case to any device. Time slot 5 ticks long together with 
simultaneous choosing of tree routing schemes can be used 
for a 128 byte long answer to assure maximum time 
efficiency.  
Routing description, such as examples demonstrating 
routing and right parameters setup for specific purposes are 
available at User's and Reference guides, download-able 
from [10].  
C. System resources 
IQRF OS, including complete support both for the 
coordinator and nodes, is ported to TR-52Bx modules based 
on a PIC16F886 microcontroller. System resources used for 
routing and related services: 
 
Program memory:  
< 2k instructions 
Data memory: 
 
< 40 bytes (node mode) 
 
 
 
< 300 bytes (during discovery) 
EEPROM: 
 
< 40 bytes (node mode) 
 
 
 
< 2k bytes 
Packet overload:  
+ 6 bytes  
D. Development, testing, results  
The standard testing environment during development 
was based on a set of 200 node devices, each device 
including transceiver module TR-52BA inserted into a DK-
EVAL-03 evaluation board and a GW-USB-04 In Circuit 
Wireless Programmer enabling bulk programming of all 
devices by one click and from one coordinator device 
consisting of transceiver module TR-52BA and CK-USB-02 
universal programmer / debugger.  
In-building applications mainly for lighting and dimming 
control realized in networks consisting of hundreds and 
thousands of devices confirmed reliability and the ability to 
work in real time. On the other hand, due to such a local 
environment, just a few hops were needed to cover the whole 
building.     
The real challenge was street lighting control, covering 
large parts of towns, with networks composed of up to 200 
devices with different networks using different channels to 
avoid spectrum concurrency. Fig. 4 shows one of such 
implementations realized in the suburb of Nitra, Slovakia, 
EU. Several kilometers range were covered by devices based 
on transceivers supporting only 3.2 mW of output power 
with small PCB antenna.  
 
 
 
Fig. 4  Real implementation of street lighting application 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

V. 
CONCLUSION 
IQMESH networking technology for wireless mesh 
networks, its basic principles and related routing algorithms 
were 
presented. 
Specific 
implementation 
in 
IQRF 
communication platform was described. Like with any other 
technology or algorithm, IQMESH applications can benefit 
from technological advantages and would be affected by its 
limitations. The flooding scheme would be an excellent 
option for telemetry systems, e.g., AMR applications for 
water meters providing data just a few times a day or for 
street lighting applications. On the other hand, many 
redundant links and consequent time delays can generate 
difficulties in real time applications and missing support for 
node 
to 
node 
communication 
would 
create 
more 
programming work on the application layer.  
VI. 
FUTURE WORK 
Spreading over frequency spectrum instead of TDMA, a 
combination of both methods, achieving higher efficiency of 
the routing, increasing reliability in noisy environments and 
the usage of described technology are just few topics for 
future research. Future advanced data aggregation algorithms 
can benefit from VRS and routing schemes. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research has been supported and co-financed by the 
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic under 
contracts FR-TI1/058 "Project Smart House - Open 
Platform" and FR-TI3/27, project "Open Platform for 
Modern Cities". 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sze-Yao Ni, Yu-Chee  Tseng, Yuh-Shyan  Chen, and Jang-
Ping  Sheu. The Broadcast Storm Problem in a Mobile Ad 
Hoc Network. ACM MOBICOM, pp. 51-162, Aug' 1999. 
[2] Ying Cai, Kien A. Hua, and Aaron Phillips, “Leveraging 1-
hop Neighborhood Knowledge for Efficient Flooding in 
Wireless Ad Hoc Networks”, 24th IEEE International  
Performance  Computing  and  Communications  Conference 
(IPCCC), April 7-9, 2005, Phoenix, Arizona.  
[3] Xinxin Liu, Xiaohua Jia, Hai Liu, and Li Feng, “A Location 
Aided Flooding Protocol for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks”, 
MSN 2007, LNCS 4864, pp.302-313, 2007.  
[4] Hyojun Lim and Chongkwon Kim, “Multicast Tree 
Construction and Flooding in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” In 
Proc. of the ACM Int’l Workshop on Modeling, Analysis and 
Simulation of Wireless and Mobile System (MSWIM), pp 61-
68, Aug. 2000.  
[5] Hai Liu, Pengjun Wan, Xiaohua Jia, Xinxin Liu and Frances 
Yao, “Efficient Flooding Scheme Based on 1-hop Information 
in Ad Hoc Networks”, in proceedings IEEE infocom, 
Communications Society subject, 2006.  
[6] Amir Qayyum, Laurent Viennot, and Anis Laouiti, 
“Multipoint Relaying for Flooding Broadcast Messages in 
Mobile Wireless Networks,” In Proceeding of the 35th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2002.  
[7] Marco Aurelio Spohn, Jose Joaquin Garcia-Luna-Aceves, 
“Improving Broadcast Operations in Ad Hoc Networks Using 
Two-Hop Connected Dominating Sets,” In Proceedings of 
IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference Workshops, 
2004.  
[8] Young-Bae Ko, Jong-Mu Choi and Jai-Hoon Kim, " A New 
Directional Flooding Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks 
Information Networking. Networking Technologies for 
Broadband and Mobile Networks Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 
2004, 
Volume 
3090/2004, 
93-102, 
DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-540-25978-7_10  
[9] Kristofer S. J. Pister and Lance Doherty, "TSMP: Time 
Synchronized Mesh Protocol," In Proceedings of the IASTED 
International Symposium, Orlando, 2008. 
[10] MICRORISC. IQRF - wireless technology. <retrieved: 12, 
2011> Available: www.iqrf.org 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

