Energy Efficiency and Cost Optimization of OTDR Supervision Systems for 
Monitoring Optical Fiber Infrastructures 
J. Montalvo, José A. Torrijos, R. Cantó, I. Berberana 
Access Evolution 
Telefónica I+D 
Madrid, Spain 
jmg@tid.es  
 
 
Abstract—A new optical fiber supervision architecture based 
on Multi-Wavelength Optical Time Domain Reflectometer 
(OTDR) and hybrid active/passive fiber-optic cross-connect 
system (FOCS) using Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
(WDM) multiplexer-demultiplexers is reported. The results of 
our study show that up to 60% cost reduction and 50% energy 
savings can be obtained using a 4 wavelengths OTDR-based 
supervision 
system. 
Experimental 
validation 
of 
the 
architecture is also reported. 
Keywords-Optical Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR); 
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM); optical fiber, optical 
supervision. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In today’s Passive Optical Network (PON) systems, the 
physical infrastructure is not entirely visible to the Network 
Management System (NMS). As a direct consequence, a 
physical failure is not detected before creating service outage 
in upper layers, which in turn may lead to tremendous loss in 
business for the operators. These arguments have been 
gaining importance as the warranty on the quality of the 
infrastructure becomes a deciding factor in the strongly 
competitive market place [1]. The aim of preventive 
maintenance is to detect any kind of deterioration in the 
network that can cause suspended services and to localize 
these faults in order to avoid specially trained people 
deployed with dedicated and often expensive equipments, 
which 
increases 
operation-and-maintenance 
expenses 
(OPEX). 
PON infrastructure does not only suffer from accidental 
damages and environmental effects (e.g. water penetration in 
splice closures) but are also subject to a lot of changes after 
the network is installed and activated. As an example, the 
optical access network may not be initially fully loaded; 
subscribers would be turned up, possibly over an extended 
period of time [2]. Hence, network operators should 
continuously be aware if a change noticed by its monitoring 
system is service oriented or indeed a fault. So, the existing 
maintenance methods in PONs [3] need to be updated. 
The most common maintenance tool employed for 
troubleshooting in long-haul, point-to-point fiber optic links 
is an Optical Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR). 
OTDR measurements can also be applied to PON 
systems, and there are three main approaches for doing that: 
 
Using dark fibers accompanying the feeder fibers of 
PONs, physically bypassing the first level of 
splitting up to the second level splitting. The 
efficiency of this approach relies on the gathering of 
information from active elements [4] and the fact 
that PON fibers can probabilistically share a high 
percentage of the same fiber cable infrastructure. 
 
Performing in-line measurements inside each PON 
fiber infrastructure by multiplexing an OTDR signal 
inside each PON feeder fiber at the Central Office, 
using Wavelength Division Multiplexers. In this 
approach, the OTDR signal is generated by an 
external optical source at a different wavelength than 
data signals. 
 
Performing in-line measurements inside each PON 
fiber infrastructure by generating the OTDR signal 
inside the PON transceiver at the OLT. 
The management of the optical layer in PON systems is 
being standardized in [5]. 
The in-line measurements using the integrated OTDR 
signal inside the PON data transceiver is a challenging 
approach [6] whose implementation depends on the 
transceiver 
implementation 
and 
the 
physical 
media 
dependant layer of a particular PON technology. Even 
though GPON and EPON standards are completely closed, 
and XG-PON1 is on its way, no commercial product has 
appeared up to now for those systems; the technological 
uncertainty of XG-PON2 and NG-PON2 makes even more 
difficult the commercial adoption of this approach for PON 
supervision in a massive way. 
On the other hand, external OTDR approaches, either 
using dark fibers or by multiplexing the OTDR signal inside 
the PON feeder fibers by using WDMs is an already 
commercially available tool. 
Central Offices (CO) with PON technologies can 
typically cover between 10 to 50 thousand homes passed 
(HP), and even higher in Long-Reach PON scenarios [7]. For 
a splitting ratio of 1:64, this means that there would be 
required up to 800 PON interfaces from a single CO. 
Additional fibers used for metro and core systems must also 
be considered. 
In order to share the cost of OTDR measurement 
equipment between all these PON interfaces, fiber switches 
are typically used, thus launching the OTDR pulses on a 
selected fiber at a certain time either in a periodic way 
(preventive measurement) or on demand (after a detected 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

alarm), switching to other fibers when required. Fiber Optic 
Cross-Connected Systems (FOCS) are used to address this 
need. 
The most suitable optical fiber switching technologies for 
FOCS 
implementations 
are 
Micro-Electro-Mechanical 
(MEM) switches [8] and opto-mechanical switches [9], 
being both types active elements which require power supply 
for operating. 
The OTDR implementation inside PON transceivers is a 
very interesting proposal, but suffers from a high uncertainty 
due 
to 
both 
technological 
challenges 
and 
slow 
standardization advances, thus being difficult to have a 
commercial solution and massive deployment able to address 
the current and mid-term supervision requirements of FTTx 
network operators. 
Regarding the existing external OTDR approaches,  
 
they lack of efficient scalability as more fibers are 
deployed requiring to be monitored as FTTx services 
become to be massively deployed. As new FTTx 
feeder fibers are deployed smoothly, a large number 
of active switches are required increasing the power 
consumption of the system. 
 
they require a high number of fibers or electrical 
supply points to be installed in order to increase the 
number of test ports of a OTDR supervision system. 
If a new active switch is installed close to fibers 
under test, a new electrical supply is required. If the 
same active switch is installed close to an already 
available electrical supply, longer fiber links are 
required to deliver the test signal to the fibers to be 
monitored. 
 
they have the risk of blocking a fiber connection in 
case of power supply failure at a certain switching 
stage of the fiber-optic cross-connects. 
 In this paper, we propose a new approach for optical 
fiber infrastructure supervision from Central Offices, using 
Tunable/Multiple-Wavelength 
OTDR 
and 
Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (WDM) techniques, see Fig. 1, by 
employing hybrid switching elements which combine active 
and passive elements, see Fig. 2. 
II. 
PROPOSED MULTI-WAVELENGTH OTDR 
SUPERVISION SYSTEM 
Instead of having a single wavelength operating OTDR, 
we propose to use N different wavelengths and WDM 
passives in the FOCS. By tuning the OTDR wavelength, the 
WDM passives combined with optical switches will deliver 
the test signal to the desired fiber under test, which may be 
part of the PON, metro and/or long haul fiber transmission 
operator infrastructures. 
The proposed solution relies on two key factors: 
 
OTDR wavelength tunability. The OTDR pulses can 
be launched at different wavelengths, all of them 
within the legacy waveband already established for 
fiber monitoring. In the case of in-line monitoring, 
this can be the U-band (1625-1675nm) for access 
systems [10], and any available channel of the 
employed wavelength grid in WDM metro/core 
systems. Dark fiber supervision can be performed 
using arbitrary wavelengths. 
 
Wavelength multiplexer-demultiplexer filters at 
some stage/s of the FOCS. The OTDR pulses are 
delivered to a selected fiber in a passive and inherent 
way depending on the wavelength of the OTDR. At 
certain parts of the optical fiber switching system, 
wavelength demultiplexing of OTDR signals is used 
as a fiber selection mechanism, instead of 
mechanically moving input fiber to a desired fiber 
output or using MEM switches. 
A. Supervision NMS operation 
The Supervision NMS communicates with the local 
management system in the CO for monitoring the M fibers 
of the system. The local management system is a local 
subsystem performing as interface for the NMS to obtain 
measurements on specific fibers, thus configuring the OTDR 
as well as all the switches in all the stages to prepare an 
optical path for delivering the test signal to a specific fiber to 
test. The local management should link the inventory 
information to the physical interconnections of the fiber ports 
of the different switching stages between them, and with the 
M fibers under test. 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed hybrid Fiber Optic Cross-Connect System (FOCS) for 
OTDR fiber supervision. T-OTDR: Tunable Optical Time Domain 
Reflectometer. 
 
Figure 2.  Generic architecture of the proposed hybrid switching element 
sij. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

B. Switching elements description 
We propose a hybrid switch element sij design, reducing 
the active switching components and/or using optical 
wavelength multiplexer-demultiplexers WDMijk, see Fig. 2. 
At each of the Mij ports of the active switch, a 1xNijk 
WDM (k=1...Mij) passive is used. The number of output 
ports of sij is:  

ij’ijkk=1...Mij

This configuration allows two relevant advantages: 
 
FOCS WDM passive scalability: An increased 
number of ports (Mij>Mij) can be achieved in a 
passive and cost-effective way by increasing each sij 
output port of an active switch with Nijk ports (Nijk
≥1). 
 
Reduced active components in switching elements 
sij. In case that an increase in the number of output 
ports is not desired for a particular FOCS design, it 
is possible to reduce the value of Mij and use WDM 
filters to keep the total number of desired outputs. 
This allows a reduction in the cost and energy 
consumption of the switching elements in the FOCS. 
 
The proposed hybrid switching elements can also be 
implemented in a totally passive way (without active switch). 
In that particular case, an active switch is completely 
replaced by a passive wavelength multiplexer-demultiplexer. 
Fiber selectors sij can either replace a design with less 
active elements while keeping the same number of fiber 
outputs (M) for system cost and power consumption 
reduction, or they can increase the number of output fibers in 
a cost effective way using the WDM scalability approach of 
the invention without increasing the power consumption. 
The WDM filters may slightly increase the insertion loss 
of the OTDR signal through the FOCS with regards to active 
switches, see Tab. 1. Nevertheless this should not be 
considered a restriction in most cases, as the loss of dynamic 
range of OTDR will not be very significant compared with 
the total range (~40dB) or could be compensated with an 
increased measurement time (more averaging) or wider test 
pulses. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
TYPICAL INSERTION LOSSES IN COARSE WDM (C-BAND) 
WITHOUT CONNECTORS 
#channels 
Active switches 
Thin Film Filters 
(TFF) WDM 
2 
0.5-1.5 
1.4-1.8 
4 
0.6-1.7 
1,6-2.0 
8 
0.6-1.7 
1.8-2.5 
16 
0.6-1.7 
3.8-4.5 
32 
0.6-1.7 
4.8-5.5 
40 
0.6-2.3 
5.2-6.0 
III. 
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (CAPEX) AND POWER 
EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS OF A 4 WAVELENGTHS OTDR AND 
FOCS DESIGN 
In this section, a conventional FOCS implementation 
using a single wavelength OTDR and active switches is 
compared with the proposed alternative approach using a 4 
wavelength 
OTDR 
(N=4) 
and 
1x4 
ports 
multiplexers/demultiplexers (Nijk=4) design example, see 
Fig. 3. 
The comparative analysis has been performed for 
different number of fibers under test (16 to 1024). For each   
number of test fibers, the proposed FOCS uses an active 
switch with a 4 times lower number of outputs that in a 
conventional system, and adds ports in groups of 4 by 
cascading 1x4 WDMs. In the case of GPON and EPON 
deployments, the proposed approach can be deployed as any 
already available PON supervision solution with external 
OTDR, using commercial triplexers in the Central Office, 
which combine optical data and OTDR signals. 
TABLE II.  
COST AND POWER MODEL PARAMETERS 
Element 
Cost (a.u.) 
Power Cons. (W) 
1-wavelenth OTDR 
1.00 
40 
4-wavelengths OTDR 
2.09 
40 
Active switch 1x4 
0.82 
0.6 
Active switch 1x8 
1.12 
0.6 
Active switch 1x32 
3.21 
2.8 
Active switch 1x64 
5.22 
5.8 
4-channels Mux/Demux 
0.04 
0.0 
 
 
Figure 3.  Centralized OTDR supervision system (a) with active FOCS and (b) proposed system with hybrid FOCS (4 wavelengths) for 256 supervision 
fibers.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 4.  Savings (%) of proposed system versus number of test fibers 
with regards to a single wavelength supervision system. 
Table II shows the values of the parameters used in the 
cost and power model employed for the cost and energy 
efficiency analysis. Due to the high cost of active switches 
with regards to passive Mux/Demuxes, reducing by 4 
times the number of ports allows to significantly reduce 
the total cost, even adding a large number of Mux/Demux 
components. The use of passive components for fiber 
switching also achieves a relevant power consumption 
reduction. 
As shown in Fig. 4 (dashed line), the proposed 4 
wavelengths system can save up to 50% of power 
consumption of a conventional FOCS with a single-
wavelength OTDR. For a number of test fibers smaller or 
equal than 64, the CAPEX savings keep below 20% due to 
the impact of the high cost of the OTDR with regards to 
the total system CAPEX. For a number of test fibers 
higher that 64, the proposed WDM FOCS with Multiple-
Wavelength OTDR can save more than 20% and up to 
62% of the total system CAPEX. 
The penalty of the OTDR dynamic range is typically 
reduced around 1.0 dB, which is a very low value 
compared with the total dynamic range (~41dB) of the 
considered OTDR modules. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 
In order to experimentally validate the principle of 
concept of the proposed Multi-Wavelength OTDR 
supervision system, a laboratory setup has been prepared 
emulating a Central Office monitoring four Single Mode 
Fiber (SFM 10/125m) coils, whose lengths are 10027m 
(L1), 19850m (L2), 24330m (L3) and 40216m (L4). 
The Multi-Wavelength OTDR system has been 
implemented using a CWDM OTDR module with 
1=1551nm, 2=1571nm, 3=1591nm and 4=1611nm 
selectable nominal center wavelengths for measurements. 
A Coarse WDM TFF multiplexer-demultiplexer 
operating in the same four CWDM channels of the OTDR 
module was employed as a totally passive fiber switch 
(s11, M11=1, N111=4, see Fig. 2). All fiber connectors 
were SC/APC type. Maximum insertion loss of the 
CWDM TFF mux/demux is 2.0 dB according to its 
specifications datasheet. 
In the management system database, the supervision 
wavelengths 1, 2, 3, 4 are assigned to fibers L1, L2, 
L3 and L4, respectively, by connecting the corresponding 
ports of the CWDM TFF multiplexer-demultiplexer to 
each fiber. 
 
TABLE III.  
MEASURED TRANSMISSION LOSSES OF A 4 CHANNELS 
CWDM MUX/DEMUX TFF 
Wavelength 
(nm) 
Measured 
Transmission 
Loss (dB) 
1551 
0.67 
1571 
0.67 
1591 
1.45 
1611 
1.38 
 
 
Successful measurements using 100ns pulses and 30s 
of acquisition time were obtained using the novel Multi-
Wavelength OTDR supervision architecture. Clear traces 
with 0.18dB/km propagation loss were obtained, see Fig. 
6.  
For L1 and L2, the end of fibers was measured at 
around 10 km and 20 km, as expected.  
At L3 and L4, high connection losses of 7.7 dB and 3.8 
dB were detected at 20km from the Central Office. These 
losses generally appear when dirty connections appear at 
intermediate Central Offices along an optical path. End of 
fibers L3 and L4 were also clearly detected at around 24.3 
and 40.2 km from the Central Office, as expected. 
In order to evaluate the loss of dynamic range in the 
OTDR due to the transmission loss of the 4-channel 
CWDM multiplexer-demultiplexer, an alternative setup 
using a 20 km fiber coil connected to the OTDR module, 
followed by the CWDM multiplexer-demultiplexer and a 
cascaded 20km fiber coil at each output port was 
employed. 
 
The obtained traces are shown in Fig. 5, where the 
connection losses at 20km correspond to the transmission 
loss of the 4-channel WDM multiplexer-demultiplexer. 
The transmission losses are shown in Table III with 
values close to typical specifications and well below the 
maximum loss of 2 dB of the CWDM TFF mux/demux. 
The reduction of less than 1.5 dB of the OTDR dynamic 
range is negligible with regards to an obtained range of 
around 20 dB in the measurements, even with only 30 
seconds of acquisition time, and being 41 dB the 
maximum dynamic range of the CWDM OTDR module. 
 
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 5.  Measurement of transmission loss of the 4channels CWDM. 
V. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
A new reflectometric system and FOCS approach has 
been presented for physical layer supervision of fiber optic 
infrastructures from the Central Offices, with high 
potential for CAPEX savings and energy efficiency. 
It is based on the use of Tunable or Multi-Wavelength 
OTDR measurement equipment and WDM components 
used as passive fiber switches. By selecting the operating 
wavelength of the OTDR, the test signal can be delivered 
to a desired fiber under test of the network operator fiber 
infrastructure. 
Compared to external OTDR solutions with a single 
wavelength, already available in the market, the proposed 
approach keeps the same architecture and maintenance 
processes than the existing products, being the additional 
feature a selectable OTDR operating wavelength assigned 
to different test ports in an automatic way. 
The proposed approach enhances energy and cost 
efficiency of fiber infrastructure supervision systems, what 
can be especially interesting in the case of massive PON 
deployments with in-line reflectometry for physical layer 
supervision, which have a high number of fiber under test 
(>64). In the case of in-line OTDR PON supervision, the 
standard waveband is the U-band [10], so U-band passive 
components and U-band Multi-Wavelength or Tunable 
OTDRs should be used. The U-band is specified for 
monitoring purposes when communication wavelength 
band extends up to the L-band, thus the proposed approach 
is compatible not only with GPON and EPON, but even 
with emerging XG-PON deployments and, in the future, 
with NGPON2 systems and beyond. 
In the case of using reserved dark fibers attached to 
PON fiber infrastructure for supervision, there is no 
restriction in the waveband. 
For a number of channels of the WDM mux-demuxes 
higher than 16, the insertion losses of the OTDR test signal 
may be increased more than 3 dB with regards to a totally 
active fiber switching approach, so it is recommended a 
design of the hybrid FOCS employing filters with a lower 
number of output ports, unless the reduction of the 
dynamic range can be afforded by the monitoring system. 
 
The overall power consumption of the system is 
reduced because the FOCS is partially implemented in a 
passive way. Switching cost is also reduced because a 
lower number of active elements is required. 
The system advantages increase with the number of 
fibers under test. The most suitable use case is a massive 
PON deployment with in-line external OTDR supervision, 
but the proposed system is also applicable to any 
supervision system using dark fiber or metro-core systems 
with vacant channels. 
In a PON scenario with 10 million Homes Passed and 
256 ports FOCS (610 Central Offices), it is estimated that 
a 4 wavelength OTDR plus a hybrid FOCS system can 
save several tenths M€ of CAPEX. 
From the energy efficiency perspective, energy savings 
are in the range of 100 MWh/year in the same deployment 
scenario. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received 
funding from the European Union Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n. 
257740 (Network of Excellence “TREND”). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Teixeira, Giorgio M. T. Beletti, Optical Transmission: 
The FP7 BONE Project Experience, e-ISBN 978-94-007-
1767-1, Springer, 2011. 
[2] N. J. Frigo, et al., Centralized in-service OTDR testing in a 
CWDM business access net-work, IEEE J. Lightw. 
Technol., vol.22, no.11, pp. 2641-2652, 2004. 
[3] K. Yüksel, et al., Optical Layer Monitoring in Passive 
Optical 
Networks 
(PONs): 
a 
review. 
International 
Conference on Transparent Optical Networks, 2008. 
[4] G.984.2 Ammendmend 2. ITU-T. G-PON Physical Media 
Dependent (PMD) layer specification, 2008. 
[5] WT-287 
(draft): 
PON 
Optical-Layer 
Management, 
BroadBand Forum, 2011. 
[6] J. Hehmann and T. Pfeiffer., New monitoring concepts for 
optical access networks, Bell Labs Tech. Journal 13(1), pp. 
183-198, 2008. 
[7] F. Saliou et al, Energy efficiency scenarios for long reach 
PON Central Offices, paper OThB2, OFC/NFOEC, 2011. 
[8] N. Madamopoulos, et al., Applications of large-scale 
optical 3D-MEMs switches in fiber-based broadband-
access networks, Photonic Network Communications, Vol. 
19, 2010. 
[9] J.E. Ford, et al., 1xN fiber bundle scanning switch, Optical 
Fiber Communication Conference, pp. 143-144, 1998. 
[10] ITU-T L.66: Optical fiber cable maintenance criteria for in-
service fiber testing in access networks, 2007. 
 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Traces corresponding to the four supervision fibers obtained from the CO with the Multi-Wavelength OTDR and the CWDM passive mux/demux 
as FOCS. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

