Personalized Protocols for Data Hiding in Cloud-to-Things Applications 
 
 
Marek R. Ogiela 
AGH University of Krakow 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: mogiela@agh.edu.pl 
Urszula Ogiela 
AGH University of Krakow 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: ogiela@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract— In this article, we will introduce the idea of creating 
personalized security protocols for hiding and distributing 
secret information. In particular, a new paradigm combining 
Cloud Computing with IoT will be considered as an application 
area for the proposed hiding technologies. Such protocols will 
take advantage of selected user characteristics in protocols 
dedicated to secret data transmission. 
Keywords-Cloud-to-Things 
protocols; 
data 
hiding; 
personalized security protocols. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Information hiding algorithms play a huge role in modern 
computer systems and IT security. Such methods are 
categorized as steganography, which deals with a variety of 
techniques 
for 
hiding 
data 
or 
creating 
invisible 
communication channels. Among the most popular methods 
are techniques for transmitting secret data placed in image 
container [1]. The way the information is hidden in the 
container is the key, which must also be used to reconstruct 
the data from the media [2].  
This paper will describe the idea of using personal data to 
create a key that allows to distribute secret information in the 
selected visual container. Since cryptographic keys usually 
have a fixed length, the proposed method will also use hash 
functions to encode the personal characteristics of a particular 
user in the form of hash sequence with particular length. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we introduce the hash-based personalized hiding protocols. In 
Section III applications of hiding protocols will be described. 
Finally, we conclude the work in Section IV. 
II. 
HASH-BASED PERSONALIZED DATA HIDING 
PROTOCOLS  
Information hiding techniques, which exploit users' 
personal characteristics can use various unique personal 
biometric or behavioral traits. Popular biometric can be 
acquired using sensors, or motion capture devices that allow 
analysis of selected gestures or movements [3]. The resource 
of individual features acquired in this way makes it possible 
to select some of them and apply them to an appropriate 
algorithm for hiding the secret. Selected personal features 
regardless of their characteristics can be encoded using hash 
functions. Such an operation allows one to generate a hash of 
a certain length depending on the selected hash function. Since 
the resulting hash will be used as a key to place the secret data 
in the information carrier, it makes sense for it to be as long as 
possible, which can be achieved by choosing hash functions 
that generate hashes about 512 bits long.  
After generating a personal key for hiding the data in the 
information carrier, one can proceed to encode the secret so 
that it is invisible in the container. The key sequence can be 
used here in various ways. The first is that the key bits can be 
interpreted as offsets indicating the next pixels of the data 
where we place the secret information. These offsets can be 
determined taking into account individual bit values, i.e., 0, 1, 
or bit blocks containing a larger number of bits and 
determining larger offset values when determining the next 
points (pixels) of the carrier to place the secret information in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Secret hiding procedure based on offset values. 
The second way to use the key can be to use successive bit 
values to determine the color components of successive image 
points where part of the secret is to be placed [4]. Thus, in this 
method, all the points of the container are considered 
consecutively, and only the bits of the key decide in which 
color component we place the secret bit of information. The 
idea of this method is illustrated in Figure 2. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 2. Secret hiding procedure based on color components. 
This method can also be modified and place secret 
information in the color components of consecutive points 
determined in an irregular way, i.e., not a raster bitmap. Here, 
it is possible to use a column order of viewing the image and 
placing the secret instead of a row order, or to use special bit 
masks of specific sizes (e.g. 3x3, 5x5), which will indicate the 
neighboring points for the currently considered point, and just 
in them will allow placing the next bits of secret data. 
III. 
HIDING PROTOCOLS IN CLOUD-TO-THINGS 
APPLICATIONS 
Methods for hiding secret information in visual containers 
have a number of practical applications. Among them are 
guaranteeing copyrights in digital works, transferring strategic 
information or splitting secrets to create multiple keys.  
Such applications are of great importance in Cloud-to-
Things computing technologies, where there is a need to use 
particularly important information processed in the computer 
cloud in the task of guaranteeing confidentiality in the IoT 
area [5]. IoT-related protocols and services require the use of 
personalized cryptographic keys, which can be generated and 
transmitted using the described secrecy hiding protocols [6]. 
Personal keys, obtained using hash functions, can also be used 
for user authentication tasks when accessing remote services 
and data in distributed systems [7]. 
The presented protocol for generating personal keys in the 
form of a hashed string is very versatile and can be used 
wherever the collected information resources are processed 
using cloud computing resources, and then transmitted and 
used in Internet of Things devices. 
The main advantage of the described approach is the 
ability to create personalized cryptographic solutions that are 
oriented to a specific system user, and at the same time allow 
only authorized users for whom personalized keys have been 
generated to run procedures for data transmission, device 
control, resource access or data analysis. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper describes methods of using individual user 
characteristics and personal features in the creation of 
personalized cryptographic protocols. In particular, a method 
for creating personal keys using hash functions has been 
presented. Such keys are in the form of a hashed bit sequences 
of a certain length, which was created from encoding selected 
personal characteristics using a hash function. The resulting 
keys can then be used in authentication protocols or hiding 
data procedures. They can also be used in cloud-based 
services and applications that are dedicated to performing 
tasks and communicating with devices in IoT. 
The techniques presented develop methods categorized as 
cognitive and personalized cryptography. Future work will 
attempt to extend them toward creating multiple personalized 
keys that can be used interchangeably by a single user. Such a 
solution would provide opportunities for a selected user to 
simultaneously implement multiple protocols using his 
personal characteristics. Such protocols would be quite 
independent and would be implemented using different 
personal characteristics and the keys produced for them by 
means of hash functions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the funds of the 
Polish Ministry of Education and Science assigned to AGH 
University of Krakow. The research project was supported by 
the program „Excellence initiative – research university” for 
the AGH University of Krakow. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ogiela, “Transformative computing in advanced data 
analysis processes in the cloud,” Inf. Process. Manage. Vol. 
57(5), paper 102260, 2020. 
[2] S. Zapechnikov, “Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning as a 
Tool for Secure Personalized Information Services,” Procedia 
Computer Science, Vol. 169, 2020, pp. 393-399, doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2020.02.235. 
[3] M. R. Ogiela, L. Ogiela, and U. Ogiela, “Biometric methods 
for advanced strategic data sharing protocols,”. In: 2015 9th 
International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet 
Services in Ubiquitous Computing IMIS 2015, pp. 179–183, 
2015, doi: 10.1109/IMIS.2015.29. 
[4] M. R. Ogiela and U. Ogiela, “Secure information splitting 
using 
grammar 
schemes,” 
Studies 
in 
Computational 
Intelligence, Vol. 244, pp. 327–336. Springer, 2009, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-03958-4_28. 
[5] C. Guan, J. Mou, and Z. Jiang, “Artificial intelligence 
innovation in education: a twenty-year data-driven historical 
analysis,” Int. J. Innov. Stud. 4(4), pp. 134–147, 2020. 
[6] N. Ferguson and B. Schneier, “Practical Cryptography,” Wiley, 
2003. 
[7] S. J. H. Yang, H. Ogata, T. Matsui, and N.-S. Chen, “Human-
centered artificial intelligence in education: seeing the invisible 
through the visible,” Comput. Educ.: Artif. Intell. Vol. 2, paper 
100008, 2021. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

