Wireless Home Automation Network Stability Testing 
 
Radek Kuchta, Radovan Novotny, Jaroslav 
Kadlec, Radimir Vrba 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication, 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
kuchtar | novotnyr |kadlecja | vrbar@feec.vutbr.cz 
 
Vladimir Sulc 
MICRORISC, s.r.o. 
Jicin, Czech Republic 
sulc@microrisc.com
 
Abstract - This paper describes stability testing of the new 
wireless communication platform for home automation. In the 
paper 
is 
description 
of 
two 
test-cases 
for 
wireless 
communication parameters evaluation to determine the limits 
of stability and low error rate. The paper also describes used 
statistical method and discusses testing results together with 
the main advantages of tested wireless communication 
platform. This new wireless communication platform was 
designed and developed especially for home automation and 
telemetry projects and test case results prove suitability of this 
wireless communication technology for home and office 
buildings environment. 
Keywords - Home Automation; IQRF, Wireless communication; 
Stability testing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the advance of networking technology and wireless 
communications, the popularity and the applications of 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) are increasing. Current 
trends show that the Wireless Sensor Networks will be an 
integral part of our lives, more than the present-day personal 
computers [1][2][3]. 
Usage of Wireless Sensor Networks with low energy 
demands, low weight and intelligent networking features 
seems to be the most cost effective solution for many 
application areas. These devices incorporate wireless 
transceivers so that communication in short distances over a 
Radio Frequency (RF) channel is enabled. Wireless Sensor 
Networks can be used for many applications in various 
application fields such as automation of the buildings, 
machines, in the monitoring product quality or conditions at 
agriculture, medicine, and healthcare. 
A general overview of available wireless solution 
targeted to the small home automation applications and their 
main parameters and limitations is described in Section II. 
Following chapter defines test cases and issues of testing of 
the wireless communication platforms. Statistic tool and 
evaluation method is described in the Section IV followed by 
the measured results in Sections V and VII. Conclusion of 
final measured values and their short assessment is in the last 
Section VII. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
There are available different wireless communication 
solutions from different vendors on the market place. These 
solutions support different network topologies. Many of 
them are based on 802.15.4 [4] standard defining Physical 
Layer (PHY) and Media Access Layer (MAC) for Low Rate 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPAN). In most 
cases they work on non-licensed wireless communication 
bands.  
Probably, the most known standardized protocol that 
works on non-licensed bands is Zigbee [12]. It is a solution 
based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard prepared by the Zigbee 
Alliance [5]. This standard was developed by consortium of 
industrial companies especially for building automation 
[6][7]. There are also special applications for industrial 
control, e.g., [8] [10] on remote access to the system and 
using small, independent wireless devices, [9][13][14] on 
building automation and telemetry applications, or an alarm 
system suitable for pervasive healthcare in rural areas [11]. 
Among the proprietary solutions, reference can be made to 
the technology of MiWi launched by Microchip Technology 
Inc. [15]. MiWi is based on the aforementioned standard but 
simpler than Zigbee from the implementation point of view. 
This technology does not support direct cooperation with 
Zigbee devices. From other solutions available on the 
market, mention would be made, for example, of the solution 
promoted by Z-wave alliance [16][17]. 
These solutions have disadvantage in attempt on being a 
universal solution targeting every kind of applications. It 
brings heavier protocols, more difficult and more expensive 
implementations, lower reliability, and increased network 
complexity. 
Effectiveness of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) relies 
on the communication parameters of interconnected sensors’ 
nodes, which are typically transmitting power, baud-rate, 
error-rate and their detection range or sensitivity to received 
signal. 
These WSN technologies are determined especially for 
monitoring environmental and physical conditions, such as 
temperature, pressure, sound, vibration, humidity, and 
motion. WSNs applications are often used to perform many 
critical tasks and sensor networks applications have to meet 
strict rules and parameters to reliably and error-rate.  
A failure of a component or components of a network 
can result to malfunction in the area of sensing, data 
processing, and communication. From this point of view it is 
necessary to evaluate the availability and reliability of 
application 
services as 
two 
important dependability 
factors [3]. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

III. 
TEST CASE DESCRIPTION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Small battery operated wireless sensor nodes are in our 
network used for automatic inventory system. This 
application not only expects wireless signal coverage but 
also need undisrupted service and reliable connectivity. The 
key aspect of wireless channel is the monitoring and 
evaluation of the channel quality. Most of the models of 
radio wave propagation involve questions related to the "free 
space" radio wave propagation [18].  
Radio waves emit from a point source of radio energy, 
traveling in all directions. Obstacles such as physical and 
structural components of a building, furniture and fixed or 
movable structures, or the ground can impact signal 
propagation paths. Especially ferrous materials, such as steel 
and 
iron, 
can 
drastically 
alter 
signal 
propagation 
characteristics, communication distances, link quality, and 
many other factors [19]. 
Reflection, diffraction and scattering cause radio signal 
distortions and give rise to signal fades, as well as additional 
signal propagation losses. Indoor use of wireless systems 
creates the necessity for evaluation of indoor radio (RF) 
propagation. Any obstacles in the pathway would be harmful 
to RF transmission, radio signals penetrate of obstacles in 
ways that are very hard to predict. The final composite signal 
is made up of a number of components from the various 
sources of scattered and diffracted signal components or 
reflections from different directions. 
To better understand this effect in our test case we at first 
evaluated the communication characteristics when sensor 
nodes were placed in various locations and distances. 
Absorption of RF energy results in loss of signal strength and 
reduced transmission distances. RF signals from wireless 
sensor nodes are air radiating from a transmitter and 
propagating through a medium in all directions. We need to 
understand the communication distance of individual nodes 
as well as to evaluate how and where to install the nodes.  
The WSN in this application test case is based on the 
IQRF wireless communication platform for industrial and 
home automation. This is the technology that was 
specifically developed for wireless sensor mesh networks by 
Microrisc company [20]. Typical application scenario of 
home automation with IQRF communication technology for 
a smart house is shown in the Fig. 1. The main parts of the 
platform are covered by Czech and US patents [21][22][23]. 
For our experimental purposes, the standard IQRF 
components and development tools have been used. This 
wireless solution could be used for wireless connectivity 
necessary for telemetry, remote control, displaying of 
remotely acquired data, connection of more equipment and 
building automation. Implementation of IQRF transceiver 
modules works in non-licensed communication bands, 
license-free ISM bands 868 MHz in EU, 916 MHz in US, 
433 MHz in EU, US and other countries. 
Basic features of the IQRF communication platform are 
especially extra low power consumption (1 µA in the sleep 
mode and 35 µA in the on-line mode), available networking 
functions, programmable RF power up to 3.5 mW, SW 
selectable in steps, up to 170 m communication range, 15 
kb/s (optionally 100 kb/s) RF bit rate. A transceiver module 
is the basic communication component needed for realization 
of wireless RF connectivity and can work as a node or a 
network coordinator. The IRQF modules could be integrated 
into any electronic device via SIM card connector. The low 
power consumption predetermines these modules for battery 
powered applications. The transceiver module is equipped 
with the IQRF operating system supporting functionality for 
the user application. There are RF functions for transmitting, 
receiving, network bonding, routing, main parameters 
configuration, EEPROM access functions, and IIC and SPI 
communication functions. Data processing, for example, 
encoding, encryption, checksums, adding headers, is 
evaluated automatically by IQRF operating system during 
the communication. The other functions of operating system 
are three buffers and some other auxiliary functions. IQRF 
operating system is buffer-oriented and allows sending up to 
32 bytes in one packet. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of the telemetry and control for smart house 
This application test case demonstrates simple data 
collection from wirelessly connected sensors. The network 
used for our experiment consists of one coordinator and a set 
of communication units. This is the basic star network 
topology where a sensor network is created around a core 
coordinator. The packet is wirelessly sent by operating 
system to the coordinator and the quality of the 
communication is statistically evaluated. 
Internet 
Intranet 
Firewall 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

IV. 
TEST CASES AND USED DATA EVALUATION METHOD 
For wireless communication parameters measurement 
were used two basic tests-case scenarios. The first one 
examined 
communications’ 
parameters 
and 
wireless 
technology limits under typical building environment with 
the set of rooms separated by the plasterboard walls and the 
second set of measures was done in the long hall without any 
physical obstacles to test free space signal propagation. 
A. Statistical description of the wireless network stability 
The binomial distribution B(n,p) with parameters n and p 
gives the discrete probability distribution of independent 
observations by the number of observations in the group that 
represent one of two outcomes. This distribution describes 
the behavior of a count variable X if the number of samples n 
is fixed, each sample represents "success" or "failure", each 
sample is independent, and the probability of "success" p is 
the same for each outcome. 
The binomial distribution gives the approach to 
dependability evaluation for wireless communication. We 
expect that in the stable wireless network each type of 
outcome has a fixed probability and by evaluation of the 
proportion of individuals in a random sample we could 
evaluate the stability of the network. They are the sequences 
of independent transfers in the communication model with 
two possible outcomes ("success" or "failure"). 
B. Statistical description of the wireless network stability 
We extract samples of a certain size from the ongoing 
Wireless Sensor Network in our case study related to the 
stability testing of the channel quality. There are the 
sequences of independent transfers with two possible 
outcomes ("success" or "failure") in this experimental 
situation. The fraction or proportion of "failure" items can be 
expressed as a decimal or as a percent (when multiplication 
by 100 is used). 
From the statistical point of view, the number of failures 
is the random variable. Common-causes and special-causes 
are the two distinct origins of variation in a system. 
Common-cause variation is the noise within the system and 
is inherent to the process. It could be removed by making 
modifications to the process. Special-causes are unusual, not 
previously 
observed 
variation, 
which 
is 
inherently 
unpredictable. There are only common-causes in the stable 
system and the statistical monitoring and control could be 
used for stability evaluation.  
Each run that is accomplished is then a realization of a 
Bernoulli random variable with parameter p. The binomial 
distribution B(n,p) with parameters n and p gives us the 
discrete probability distribution of these independent 
observations. If a random sample of n units of transfer 
realization is selected and if k is the number of units that are 
nonconforming, the k follows a binomial distribution with 
parameters n and p according to following equation 

 ( )  ( 
 )  (   )                 

We expect that in the stable wireless network each type 
of outcome has a fixed probability and by evaluation of the 
proportion of individuals in a random sample we can 
evaluate the stability of the network in setting condition. For 
the stability evaluation can be used the np-chart as Shewhart 
control chart with underlying binomial distribution. The 
sample size is constant and the number nonconforming is 
plotted against the control limits. The control limits are 
defined as a 

  ̅   √  ̅(   ̅)

where n is the sample size and  ̅ is the estimation of the 
long-term mean. Rational subgroups for our testing are 
composed of the transfer of packets under essentially the 
same experimental conditions.  
V. 
STABILITY EVALUATION OF INDOOR RF 
PROPAGATION (THE TEST CASE OF MORE RF PROPAGATION 
OBSTACLES) 
In this application test case, there were five transmission 
units in five various rooms each separated by the 
plasterboard partitions. There are two changed factors in this 
experiment: eight various levels of transmitting power and 
the daytime. In each run, there was 80 data transfer 
execution, which each consists from 500 data frame. The 
number of failures in the communication was then evaluated. 
The results from this first experimental test case are 
summarized in the Fig. 2. There are two factors influencing 
the results. The mark (a) in the graph highlights the 
independence of the number of failures on the RF power. For 
the distance that is higher than 5 meters it is necessary to 
optimize the RF power value. The mark (b) in the graph 
highlights the special-causes variation. Experimental results 
were evaluated by using the np control charts (see Fig. 3 and 
Fig. 5). An np-chart is a plot of the number of defective 
items observed in a sample where n is the sample size and p 
is the probability of observing a defective item when the 
system is in control without affection of special cause 
variation. The observed number nonconforming (NP) is 
plotted against the control limits (UCL – Upper Control 
Limit, LCL – Lower Control Limit), which are statistically 
determined.  
For the purpose of statistical evaluation of this wireless 
communication, experiments were used np control charts. 
The results of this analysis are summarized at the control 
charts (Fig. 3 and Fig. 5). The fluctuation of the points 
between the control limits (UCL, LCL) is due to the common 
cause variation. Any points outside the control limits related 
to the six standard deviation rule could be attributed to a 
special-cause variation. There are some cases where special-
causes are affecting the results. Out of control points are 
marked as “1”. Overall interpretation of created np control 
charts for this part of experiment leads to these conclusions: 
 
The higher distance between the transmitter and receiver 
is in the relation to the special-cases variation existence 
and communication failure.  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

 
The higher RF power gives the higher probability for 
wireless communication without failures. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Wireless stability evaluation (the test case of more RF 
propagation obstacles) 
 
Figure 3.   NP chart of  wireless stability evaluation for the measurement 
at 6 p.m. (the test case of more RF obstacles) 
VI. 
STABILITY EVALUATION OF INDOOR RF 
PROPAGATION (THE CASE OF THE FREE SPACE RF 
PROPAGATION)  
In this part of the experiment, there were five 
transmission units in five various places in a region, which is 
free of all objects that might absorb or reflect radio energy. 
Eight various levels of the RF power and the various daytime 
are changed in this experiment. In each run there was 80 data 
transfer execution, which each consists from 500 data frame. 
The number of failures in the communication system in this 
configuration was then evaluated. The results from this part 
of experimental test case are summarized in the Fig. 4. 
We could see that there are some communications 
problems related to the setting of the RF power. The RF 
power needs the optimization according the distance between 
the transmitter and receiver. These situations are in the Fig. 4 
depicted by mark (a). 
Communication with the fifth transmitter unit located in 
the distance 25 meters for the receiver is affected by special 
cause variation in this case. This is the limiting distance that 
the signal is able to penetrate at the building environment in 
this experiment configuration.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Wireless stability evaluation (the test case of the free space 
propagation) 
 
Figure 5.  NP chart for wireless stability evaluation (the case of the free 
space propagation, 4 p.m.) 
The mark (b) in the Fig. 4 is related to the 
communication failure and the special cause variation case. 
The number of communication problems in comparison 
to the case of more RF propagation obstacles is smaller. The 
requirements for higher RF power are smaller and the overall 
stability is better. The higher RF power gives the higher 
probability of wireless communication without failures. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
IQRF is a new wireless communication platform 
especially designed and developed for specific requirements 
from home automation and telemetry. One of the main aims 
was to offer wireless platform to developers of the end user 
devices that allows rapid development without necessity of 
stack implementations. As a typical representative of the 
low-cost wireless communication technology IQRF presents 
ideal solution for home automation and office or light 
industry applications. As such, this platform was designed 
especially for home automation and telemetry applications.  
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1
4
7
10
13
16
19
22
25
28
31
34
37
40
 6 hod.
 8 hod.
10 hod.
13 hod.
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(b)
(b)
Daytime:
5 meters
10 meters
15 meters
20 meters
25 meters
The distance between transmitter and receiver
min
Output RF power
max min
max min
max min
max min
max
Quantity of defects [-]
No. of run [-]
 
  
a.m.
a.m.
a.m.
1  p.m.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39
1 p.m.
4 p.m.
6 p.m.
8 p.m.
11 p.m.
Daytime:
5 meters
10 meters
15 meters
20 meters
25 meters
The distance between transmitter and receiver
min
Output RF power
max min
max min
max min
max min
max
(b)
(a)
(a)
(a)
Quantity of defects [-]
No. of run [-]
 
  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

Proposed test cases have proved suitability of this 
technology to typical application scenarios, test their real 
communication parameters under buildings environment and 
determine limits. Based on the statistical result of measured 
data analysis can be set optimal node distance and output RF 
power to communication defects ratio. Output RF power 
influences power consumption and then operation time. 
Optimal combination of distance and output RF power in 
specific operation conditions under different environments is 
therefore highly needed and can significantly improve 
operation time and minimize communication failures.  
Real tests proved wireless communication abilities of 
IQRF, which fits to the requirements for usage in home 
automation and telemetry applications and also in the 
currently developed automatic stochastic system. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by ARTEMIS JU in 
Project No. 100205 POLLUX - Process Oriented Electronic 
Control Units for Electric Vehicles Developed on a multi-
system real-time embedded platform, by the Czech Ministry 
of Industry and Trade in projects FR-TI3/254 OPT - Open 
Platform for Telemetry and by the CZ.1.05/1.1.00/02.0068, 
OP RDI CEITEC 
- 
Central 
European 
Institute 
of 
Technology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Akyildiz, F., Weilian, S., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., and Cayirci, E.: A 
Survey on Sensor Networks, IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 
102-114, August 2002. 
[2] Akyildiz, F., Wang, X., and Wang, W.: Wireless mesh networks: a 
survey, Computer Networks, no. 47, pp. 445-487, January 2005, 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2004.12.001. 
[3] Taherkordi, A., Taleghan, A., and Sharifi, M.: Dependability 
Considerations in Wireless Sensor Networks Applications, Journal of 
Networks, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 28-35, November 2006. 
[4] Naris, L. and Benedetto, G.: Overview of the IEEE 802.15.4/4a 
standards for low data rate wireless personal data networks., in 4th 
Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and Communication 2007 
(WPNC 07), 2007, pp. 285-289. 
[5] ZigBee: (2009, May) ZigBee Aliance Web Pages. [Online].   
HYPERLINK "http://www.zigbee.org"  http://www.zigbee.org , Last 
accessed on 27 December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 2011>.  
[6] Evans-Pughe, C.: Bzzzz zzz [ZigBee wireless standard], IEE Review, 
pp. 28-31, March 2003, 0953-5683. 
[7] Gill, K., Yang, H., Yao, F., and Lu, X.: A ZigBee-Based Home 
Automation System, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER 
ELECTRONICS, pp. 422-430, May 2009. 
[8] Gill, K., Yang, H., Yao, F., and Lu, X.: A zigbee-based home 
automation system, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, pp. 
422-430, March 2009, 0098-3063. 
[9] Edgan, D.: The emergence of ZigBee in building automation and 
industrial control, Computing & Control Engineering Journal, pp. 14-
19, April-May 2005. 
[10] Zualkernan, A., Al-Ali, R., Jabbar, A., Zabalawi, I., and Wasfy, A.: 
InfoPods: Zigbee-based remote information monitoring devices for 
smart-homes, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, pp. 1221-
1226, August 2009. 
[11] Casas, R., Marco, A., Plaza, I., Garrido, Y., and Falco, J.: ZigBee-
based alarm system for pervasive healthcare in rural areas, 
Communications, IET , pp. 208-214, February 2008. 
[12] Poole, I.: What exactly is... ZigBee?, Communications Engineer , pp. 
44-45, August-September 2004. 
[13] Ciardiello, T.: Wireless communications for industrial control and 
monitoring, Computing & Control Engineering Journal , pp. 12-13, 
April-May 2005. 
[14] Gomez, C. and Paradells, J.: Wireless Home Automation Networks: 
A 
Survey 
of 
Architectures 
and 
Technologies, 
IEEE 
COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 92-101, June 
2010. 
[15] Flowers, D. and Yang, Y.: MiWi Wireless Networking Protocol 
Stack, 
2010. 
[Online]. 
HYPERLINK 
"http://www.newark.com/pdfs/techarticles/microchip/AN1066_MiWi
AppNote.pdf", Last accessed on 27 December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 
2011>. 
[16] Gomez, C. and Paradells, J.: Wireless home automation networks: A 
survey of architectures and technologies, Communications Magazine, 
IEEE , pp. 92-101, June 2010. 
[17] Walko, J.: Home Control, Computing & Control Engineering Journal, 
pp. 16-19, October-November 2009. 
[18] Rappaport, T.: Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: IEEE Press (The Institute of 
Electrical And Electronics Engineers, Inc.), 1996, ISBN: 0-7803-
1167-1. 
[19] Sun, Z. and Akyildiz, F.: Channel Modeling and Analysis for 
Wireless Networks in Underground Mines and Road Tunnels, IEEE 
Transactions on Communications, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1758-1768, June 
2010, ISSN: 0090-6778. 
[20] Microrisc: 
(2009, 
May) 
Microrisc 
Web 
Page. 
[Online].   
HYPERLINK 
"http://www.microrisc.cz/new/weben/index.php"  
http://www.microrisc.cz/new/weben/index.php, Last accessed on 27 
December 2011, <retrieved: 1, 2011>. 
[21] Šulc, V.: Czech Republic Patent - A method of accessing the 
peripherals of a communication device in a wireless network of those 
communication devices, a communication device to implement that 
method and a method of creating generic network communication, 
PUV 18679, 2008. 
[22] Šulc, V.: US Patent - Method of coding and/or decoding binary data 
for wireless transmission, particularly for radio transmitted data, and 
equipment for implementing this method., 7167111, 2007. 
[23] Šulc, V., Kuchta, R., Vrba, R.: IQMESH implementation in IQRF 
wireless communication platform, In 2009 Second International 
Conference on Advances in Mesh Networks, pp. Pages 62-65, 2009, 
ISBN 978-0-7695-3667-5. 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

