IVHM System Integration Network Performance Analysis using Different 
Middleware Technologies and Network Structure 
Rajkumar Choudhary  
Researcher, IVHM Centre 
Cranfield University 
 Cranfield, Bedford, UK 
e-mail: r.choudhary@cranfield.ac.uk 
 
Suresh Perinpanayagam  
Lecturer at Cranfield University 
Cranfield University 
Cranfield, Bedford, UK 
e-mail:s.perinpanayagam@cranfield.ac.uk
Eugene Butans 
Senior Research Fellow, SATM 
Cranfield University 
Cranfield, Bedford, UK 
e-mail: eugene.butans@cranfield.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—According to Aircraft Crashes Record Office 
(ACRO), total number of accidents occurred from 1999-2013 
were 2556 in worldwide, were primarily due to loss-of-control 
in flight, controlled flight into terrain, and system/component 
failure. These accidents caused big capital loss for aircraft 
industry and 18987 deaths. Aircraft manufacturers are 
investing a huge amount of money to minimize these accidents 
by implementing new technologies, e.g., IVHM (Integrated 
Vehicle Health Management) in legacy and new generation 
aircraft. In aircraft industry, maintenance costs represent the 
third largest expense item after labor and fuel costs for both 
regional and national carriers with maintenance costs 
commonly comprising 15-18% of the operational expenses. By 
implementing IVHM technologies not only the maintenance 
costs can be reduced, also the fatality rate can be minimized. 
IVHM can provide more specific scheduled maintenance, 
onboard diagnostics and prognostics services.  The aim of this 
paper is to investigate, about finding network architecture 
suitable for IVHM integration in vehicles (e.g., aircraft) that 
should be able to support interoperability between multiple 
vendors’ IVHM components and insertion of new IVHM 
capabilities using simulation and optimization technique. To 
develop IVHM network architecture, essential data such as 
bandwidth, data rate, throughput, latency and performance in 
communication network will be collected using various 
enabling technologies (i.e., middleware) and OSA-CBM (Open 
System Architecture for Condition Based Monitoring) data 
model. Using simulation tools, e.g., OPNET (Optimized 
Network Engineering Tools), these sample data will be tested 
at large scale environment (e.g., aircraft or train). After 
simulation, multi-objective optimization will be used in trade-
off analysis that aims to find cost effective and fully functional 
IVHM network architecture. 
       Keywords-Distributed systems; IVHM; systems integration; 
architecture; OSA-CBM; middleware 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
       According to Boeing, an airplane has an average 
economic life of about 27.2 years. [1] This life span can be 
further divided into three categories: airplane useful life, 
airplane economic life, and airplane service life. In 
maintenance and service, the aviation industry invest 
enormous amount of money, to keep the aircraft 
operationally available throughout in-service period of its 
life cycle. The IVHM emerges as an advanced diagnostics 
and prognostics techniques provider. IVHM technologies 
can impact in both acquisition cost and maintenance cost 
throughout the life cycle of aircraft by efficiently identifying 
and predicting failures to enable the effective planning of 
maintenance tasks [2].  
 
 
 
Figure 1. IVHM System Integration Architecture 
 
       This 
research 
is 
focused 
on 
Designing 
and 
Development of a Large-Scale IVHM Network Architecture 
using 
Multi-Objective 
Simulation 
Optimization. 
The 
architecture should be flexible and extensible that can 
directly 
support 
the 
implementation 
of 
upcoming 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

technologies of IVHM and various IVHM cooperate 
partners. Extensive research has been conducted by Boeing, 
Thales and other system integrators for system integration 
of IVHM. Most of the work has been done for development 
of individual subsystem and integration of IVHM on the 
aircraft. An adaptable architecture is required which can 
support interoperability between multiple vendors’ IVHM 
components and insertion of new IVHM capabilities [2]. In 
the past, there have been very limited studies done on 
different approaches in integration of IVHM components. 
Aircraft industry is looking for scalable, flexible, 
economical and reliable network architecture for IVHM 
technologies integration in aircraft. Planning the reliability 
issues is necessary such as reliability of communication 
networks and reliability of Network costs. The penalties 
issue needs to be considered which may exceed the profits 
from the providing IVHM integration services. How to 
integrate this IVHM architecture in an efficient and cost-
effective way to maximize the overall product rate is a 
challenge to the IVHM industry [3]. IVHM systems include 
sensors, processing units and software, which comes from 
multiple suppliers having different configurations. Several 
IVHM based projects are in progress for different 
technologies using various programming languages and 
contrary platforms by different organizations, for example: 
Integrated Intelligent Flight Deck (IIFD) Project and 
Aircraft Aging and Durability (AAD) Project. IVHM 
technologies can be developed following the OSA-CBM 
data model as a common standard. OSA-CBM (Open 
Source Architecture for Condition Based Monitoring) is 
developed by MIMOSA, which is based on ISO standards 
(i.e., ISO13374-1, ISO13374-2 and ISO13374-3).   
 
 
 
Figure 2. OSA-CBM Model developed by MIMOSA (Machinery 
Information Management Open Systems Alliance) [4] 
       As shown in Figure 2, OSA-CBM model consists of 
seven layers, which are Data Acquisition (DA), Data 
Manipulation 
(DM), 
State 
Detection 
(SD), 
Health 
Assessment (HA), Prognostics Assessment (PA), Advisory 
Generation (AG) and human interface layer.  
       All OSA-CBM based IVHM systems follow the same 
pattern. Various sensors are used to collect data in DA layer, 
which is later transformed into a suitable format in DM 
layer, and this data is then analyzed using knowledge 
discovery algorithms. The data from lower layers is used to 
know the current state of component in SD layer. In HA 
layer, the current health of the component is analyzed based 
on data collected from previous layers. The RUL 
(Remaining Useful Life) of subsystem and prognostics 
details are saved and can be assessed in PA layer. Later this 
data is required to be shared across maintenance 
departments to take appropriate actions such as arrangement 
of spare parts if problem in any component has been 
detected. The AG layer sends information to relevant 
department to take appropriate actions if any fault detected. 
Lastly, human interface layer provides information to access 
data in OSA-CBM model. The IVHM practitioners are 
facing difficulties with determining the best method for 
interconnecting 
the 
system’s 
components 
via 
communication networks. There is a need to tackle many 
issues for building large network architecture such as 
bandwidth saturation events (Point in which all available 
bandwidth is used up), broadcast impact on CPU 
processing, unpredictable reachability, address collision, 
unused duplicate circuits, non-optimal routing, limited 
network management, isolated configuration control and 
support a multi-protocol environment [5]. 
       The addition of IVHM capabilities shall be further 
explained in Section II. The network architecture 
requirements related to IVHM technology insertion and an 
open systems approach to systems integration are covered in 
Section III. Section IV covers the modeling to evaluate the 
network performance of different IVHM implementations. 
The result of experiments is discussed in Section V. Lastly, 
the conclusion is covered in Section VI.    
II. 
INSERSION OF IVHM CAPABILITIES 
       A typical IVHM system involves many different 
components that vary in bandwidth demand. IVHM system 
needs to be able to support multiple types of interconnection 
networks for hardware and software components that are 
dramatically different in their routing capabilities.  Study of 
information exchange between the different subsystems and 
the system level is highly recommended for insertion of 
IVHM capabilities, which is essential for communication 
issues, synchronization, and input/output functionality [6]. 
The 
IVHM 
network 
architecture 
must 
provide 
a 
methodology for adding future network technologies 
without 
affecting 
existing 
IVHM 
components 
and 
interoperability across existing interconnection networks. 
The IVHM is facing difficulty with determining the best 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

way for interconnecting its components via communication 
networks. There is a need to tackle many issues for building 
large network architecture such as bandwidth saturation 
events, broadcast impact on CPU processing, unpredictable 
reachability, address collision, unused duplicate circuits, 
non-optimal routing, limited network management, isolated 
configuration 
control 
and 
support 
a 
multi-protocol 
environment [5]. The physical constraints of IVHM 
architecture are Acquisition of high fidelity data, cost of 
certification, limited communication Bandwidth, limited 
local processing, post flight test maturation, size, weight and 
power [7]. In order to overcome these constraints the IVHM 
architecture should incorporate various features such as 
Health ready subsystems (e.g., generator (IDG (Integrated 
Drive Generators)), 
open 
system (e.g., OSACBM), 
hierarchical-and-Distributed, partitioning of flight and 
Enabling technologies (e.g., Chafing protection system) [8].  
An IVHM system is more than just a set of IVHM 
technologies. The technologies must work together in a 
realistic environment and must provide significant safety 
improvements to justify the development, integration, and 
costs associated with these technologies [6]. 
  
III. 
ARCHITECTURE REQUIREMENTS 
A. Available middleware technogies for   implementation of 
IVHM Systems 
 
       Middleware-enabling technologies are now used for 
distributed real-time and embedded (DRE) systems that 
control 
communication 
among 
devices 
in 
physical, 
chemical, biological, or defense industries [8]. Middleware 
that can satisfy stringent quality of service (QoS) 
requirements, such as predictability, latency, efficiency, 
scalability,	   dependability and security, can be used for 
development of IVHM network architecture.   
 
TABLE I 
 ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES –MIDDLEWARE [9] 
 
Distributed 
Data Model 
Middleware 
OSA-CBM	  
Mappi
ng 
Langua
ge	  
Protocol	  
Data 
Bus	  
Standard	  
Interface 
Data 
Model 
Client/Server 
CORBA 
(TAO/JacO
RB) 
Yes 
Valuetyp
e (from 
CORBA 
ver.2.3) 
IDL 
UDP 
(TAO), 
TCP 
Ethernet
, AFDX 
OMG’s 
CORBA 
ICE 
Yes	  
class 
Slice 
UDP, 
TCP 
Ethernet
, AFDX	  
Proprietary 
Publish/Subsc
ribe 
IceStrom	  
Yes	  
class	  
Slice	  
UDP, 
TCP	  
Ethernet
, AFDX	  
Proprietary	  
Data 
Distribution 
service	  
RTI DDS	  
No	  
valuetyp
e 
(Propriet
ary 
Extensio
n)	  
IDL, 
XML	  
UDP, 
TCP	  
Ethernet	  
OMG’s 
DDS- 
DCPS	  
OpenSplice	  
RMI 
Extensio
n	  
valuetyp
e 
(DLRL)	  
IDL	  
UDP, 
TCP	  
Ethernet	  
OMG’s 
DDS- 
DCPS 
/DLRL 
 
Acronyms: AFDX –Avionic Full-Duplex Switched Ethernet, DCPS –Data Centric Publish/Subscribe, DDS –Data 
Distribution Service, RMI –Remote Method Invocation, TAO –C++ Implementation of CORBA, TCP –Transmission 
Control Protocol, DLRL –Data Local Reconstruction Layer, IDL –Interface Definition Language, JacORB–Java 
Implementation of CORBA, OMG –Object Management Group, UDP –User Datagram Protocol, XML –extensible 
Markup Language                                   
                                 
       In Table 1, a detailed comparison of important 
distributed computing object middleware technologies, 
which include ICE, IceStrom, RTI DDS, OpenSplice and 
CORBA on the basis of mapping language, protocol, data 
bus, standard, and OSA-CBM framework support, has been 
done [9]. 
       IVHM subsystems can be implemented using any of 
these 
distributed 
data 
models: 
Client/Server, 
Publish/Subscribe and Data Distribution service. Different 
middleware supports different Distributed Data Model, e.g., 
ICE middleware supports Client/Server. All middleware use 
some 
kind 
of 
mapping 
language 
which 
provides 
interoperability. TCP and UDP are the most common 
protocols. CORBA, ICE and IceStorm can work on both 
Ethernet and AFDX data bus whereas RTI DDS and 
OpenSplice support only Ethernet. 
       Client/Server model utilize OSA-CBM interfaces and 
supports the required data flow characteristics (i.e., trigger 
by state changes or push all). It has an advantage of 
simplicity but the disadvantage is its direct connection 
between IVHM subsystems (i.e., tightly coupled). 
       Publish/Subscribe model uses Publish/Subscribe server 
as a global data space which manages data subscriptions and 
responsible for data delivery. It is loosely coupled as there is 
no direct connection between IVHM components. It has 
some disadvantages such as single point of failure and data 
latency (i.e., Data takes longer to deliver).  
       Data 
Distribution 
service 
combines 
various 
Publish/Subscribe 
server. 
Localized 
Publish/Subscribe 
server carries out data delivery. The service named dynamic 
discovery is used to find out IVHM components and what 
data are available for them. Removing or upgrading a 
subsystem will not affect other subsystems.  
 
B. OSA-CBM and its interfaces to implement IVHM 
systems 
  
       The OSA-CBM specification is a standard architecture 
for moving information in a condition-based maintenance 
system. A more in depth look reveals a way to reduce costs, 
improve interoperability, increase competition, incorporate 
design changes, and further cooperation in the realm of 
condition-based maintenance [10].  Open system IVHM 
architecture can be built using OSA-CBM standard. OSA-
CBM focuses on IVHM functionality and associated data 
models. Most OSA-CBM works are from Boeing, GE 
Aviation and ARL. Research need to be done on how OSA-
CBM can be implemented or how IVHM architecture can be 
designed to compliant with OSA-CBM. An example of 
communication between two IVHM components using 
RMI-Java middleware and OSA-CBM data model is shown 
in Figure 3.  
 
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

 
 
Figure 3. Communication between two IVHM Components using RMI-
Java middleware and OSA-CBM data model 
 
IV. 
MODELLING AND EXPERIMENTS 
 
A. RMI-Java Latency performance test: 
Hardware and software used for experiment: 
 
PC1 CONFIGURATION    : Intel Pentium CPU 2127U @    
                                               1.90GHz, RAM – 4 GB,   
                                               Windows 8.1 – 64bit  
                                               Operating system 
PC2 CONFIGURATION    : Intel Pentium CPU 2127U @  
                                               1.90GHz, RAM – 4 GB,  
                                               Windows 8.1 – 64bit  
                                               Operating system 
Software used                      : Netbeans IDE 8.0.1 
Java version                         : JDK 1.7 
Middleware                         : RMI-Java     
Data Model used                 : OSA-CBM 
Overhead included from     : OSA-CBM, RMI-Java   
                                              Middleware and etc. 
 
       For experimental setup, two PCs (Personal Computers) 
are used to create a Client/Server model. Server acts as a 
service provider, and a client that acts as a service receiver. 
OSA-CBM is implemented in both as a common data 
model.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II 
RMI-JAVA LATENCY TEST 
 
 
       In Table II, the intention is to find the performance of 
RMI-Java using OSA-CBM data model by increasing the 
size of data. 
 
 
Figure 4. RMI-JAVA Latency test  
 
       Figure 4 illustrates the performance test of RMI-Java, 
based on latency and data size.  
 
 
B. RMI-Java Throughput performance test: 
 
Throughput (Kbit/second) = (Latency per data transfer (ms)/1000) 
*(data transfer size (bytes)/1000) * 8  
 
 
0	  
2	  
4	  
6	  
8	  
10	  
12	  
14	  
16	  
18	  
20	  
0	  
5000	  
10000	  
Latency	  per	  	  
Data	  Transfer	  
(milliSeconds
)	  
Data	  Transfer	  Size	  (bytes)	  
RMI-­‐Java	  Latency	  Test	  
Latency	  
Data Transfer Size (bytes) 
Latency per Data Transfer 
(milliseconds) 
8 
0.01969 
16 
0.03328 
32 
0.06769 
64 
0.12925 
128 
0.25379 
256 
0.51476 
512 
1.06714 
1024 
2.0008 
2048 
4.1136 
4096 
8.8302 
8192 
17.458 
 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 5. RMI-JAVA Throughput test 
	  
       In this section, the throughput is calculated using values from 
Table II and the result is shown in Figure 5. 
	  
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
       As the work in progress, the result shows the 
performance of one middleware which is RMI-JAVA. RMI-
JAVA 
shows 
low 
and 
predictable 
latency 
that 
scales linearly with message size. The performance test on 
ICE, RTI-DDS will also need to be done. The result aims to 
find the best system integration network architecture for 
IVHM. IVHM brings more sophisticated condition based 
maintenance system and problems at the same time, to 
synchronize with existing components and adapt with 
upcoming 
upgrades 
of 
the 
components. 
And, 
the 
components belong from different vendors with different 
configurations. After comparing several different enabling 
technologies (e.g., RTI-DDS middleware, ICE, CORBA and 
IceStrom), different mode of networks (e.g., LAN, WAN 
and wireless), different distributed data mechanism (e.g., 
Client/Server, Publish/Subscribe and Data Distribution 
service), different protocols (e.g., UDP and TCP/IP) and 
different network topologies (e.g., Star. Mesh and Ad-Hoc), 
this project will focus on implementing IVHM technologies 
on aircraft (vehicle) using best open system distributed 
communication system.           
 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
       In summary, this project is about simulating IVHM 
Architecture and optimizing related parameters to find out a 
suitable way of system integration. The literature review can 
be generalized in six respects which are Aerospace 
operation and maintenance, IVHM, System integration, 
Network embedded, modeling and simulation at large scale 
platform (vehicle) network and simulation optimization. The 
research problem is to find out a suitable IVHM System 
integration strategy and how the strategy influence the QOS 
and cost to the IVHM systems which will be used in the 
IVHM implementation in vehicles(e.g., aircraft). Main data 
of the model, such as type of Data and network 
requirements of the related IVHM subsystems will be 
collected in the later months. Data characteristics (e.g., 
Bandwidth requirement, data speed and data security) will 
be collected using OSA-CBM model with different 
middleware technologies (e.g., ICE and RTI-DDS). An 
automated design environment will be created which can be 
used to find best possible network for IVHM integration. 
 
  REFERENCES 
[1] Helen Jiang. (2013, Mar.) aircraft_economic_life_whitepaper.pdf. [Online], 
Accessed: [2014,Dec] http://www.boeing.com/assets/pdf/commercial/ 
aircraft_economic_life_whitepaper.pdf 
[2] T. Sreenuch, "PnP IVHM Architecture IVHM Seminar," , Cranfield University, 
Cranfield, 2010. 
[3] Kirby Keller, T Dave Wiegand, Kevin Swearingen, Chris Reisig, Alan Gillis,  
MikeVandernoot,  
, "An architecture to implement Integrated Vehicle Health Management systems," 
IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 2-6, 2001. 
[4] MIMOSA. MIMOSA. [Online], Accessed: [2015,Jan] 
http://www.mimosa.org/?q=node/350 
[5] JeffryS.Yaplee and Robert 0.Denney "Building a Large Network at the Boeing 
Company," IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 20-22, 1988. 
[6] Principal Investigator: Ashok N. Srivastava, Ph.D. Project Scientist:  
Robert W. Mah, Ph.D. Project Manager: Claudia Meyer, (2009) National  
Aeronautics and Space Administration. [Online], Accessed: [2015,Jan] 
http://www.aeronautics.nasa.gov/nra_pdf/ivhm_tech_plan_c1.pdf; 
[7] Kirby Keller, Jim Peck, Kevin Swearingen, and Dan Gilbertson, "Architecture  
for Affordable Health Management," AIAA, vol. 1, pp. 1-3, 2010. 
[8] Nanbor Wang. Douglas C. Schmidt, and. Aniruddha Gokhale (2014, Aug.) 
QoS4DRE.pdf. [Online], Accessed: [2014,Dec] 
http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~schmidt/PDF/QoS4DRE.pdf 
[9] T. Sreenuch, "PnP IVHM Architecture," in IVHM Seminar, Cranfield University 
Cranfield, 2012, p. 10. 
[10] MIMOSA. [Online], Accessed: [2015.Jan] 
http://www.mimosa.org/?q=resources/specs/osa-cbm-330  
[11] OptTek Systems Inc.  [Online], Accessed: [2015,Jan]  
http://www.opttek.com/OptQuest 
[12] Jacob H. Christensen ,David B. Anderson, Bryan D. Hansen 
"Scalable Network Approach for the Space Plug-and-play Architecture,"  
IEEE, vol. 6, 2012. 
[13] Mostafa Fazeli, "Assessment of throughput under opnet modeler simulation  
tools in mobile ad hoc networks(MANETs)," IEEE, 2011. 
[14] T. Sreenuch, A. Tsourdos I.K Jennions, "Distributed embedded  
condition monitoring systems based on OSA-CBM standard," CSI,  
pp. 238-246, 2012. 
[15] Sumair Khan, "Performance Comparison of ICE, HORB, CORBA and 
 Dot," International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 3, 2010. 
[16] Kalyan Perumalla, Alfred Park, Hao Wu, Mostafa H. Ammar Richard M. 
Fujimoto. Large-Scale Network Simulation: How Big? How Fast? 
[Online], Accessed: [2014,Dec] 
0	  
500	  
1000	  
1500	  
2000	  
2500	  
3000	  
3500	  
4000	  
4500	  
0	  
5000	  
10000	  
Throughput	  
(Kbit/sec)	  
Data	  transfer	  size	  (bytes)	  
RMI-­‐Java	  Throughput	  Test	  
Throughput	  
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

http://www.cs.mcgill.ca/~carl/largescalenetsim.pdf 
[17] Shahrul Kamaruddin Rosmaini Ahmad, "An overview of time-based and 
condition-based maintenance in industrial application, Pages 135–149,"  
in Computers & Industrial Engineering.: Computers & Industrial  
Engineering, August 2012, vol. 63. [Online], Accessed: [2015,Jan]. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360835212000484 
[18] Richard E. Schantz and Douglas C. Schmidt, "Middleware for  
Distributed Systems," vol. 1, no. 1. [Online], Accessed: [2014,Dec] 
https://www.dre.vanderbilt.edu/~schmidt/PDF/middleware-encyclopedia.pdf 
[19] T Sreenuch, "IVHM CONOPS," in IVHM Seminar, Cranfield University 
 Cranfield, 2012. 
[20] Grant A. Gordon, Honeywell Laboratories Dimitry Gorinevsky, "Design  
of Integrated SHM System for," vol. 1, no. 1, 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
	  
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

