Optimization of Wireless Sensor Network Using Network Coding
Algorithm
J´essica Bartholdy Sanson
GPSCOM-Department of Electronics and Computer Science
Federal University of Santa Maria
Santa Maria, Brasil
jessikbs.37@hotmail.com
Natanael R. Gomes, Renato Machado
Andrei P. Legg and Osmar M. dos Santos
GPSCOM-Department of Electronics and Computer Science
Federal University of Santa Maria
Santa Maria, Brasil
natanael.rgomes@gmail.com, renatomachado@ufsm.br
andrei.legg@gmail.com and osmar@inf.ufsm.br
Abstract—A
wireless
sensor
network
is
a
kind
of
ad
hoc
network
that
can
be
used
to
monitor
a
variety
of
environmental characteristics aiming, for instance, military
purposes, environmental purposes, etc. A typical application
of these networks is to collect and send historical information
from all network sensor nodes to the base station. In this work
we propose a new network coding technique and evaluate its
performance in terms of time and energy saving. We show
that the proposed technique has considerably improvements on
sensor networks with small number of nodes.
Keywords- Computer Modeling, Mobile Communication Sys-
tems, Channel of Communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) consist of sensor nodes
responsible for sensing tasks in a distributed way, according to
the client applications. These networks act as data acquisition
systems environment, allowing monitor physical or environ-
mental phenomena, such as temperature, sound, pressure and
vibration. The sensor nodes collect data and forward them to
an exit point of the network, called the sink node, destination
node, or base station (depending on the application), to be
analyzed and processed.
In conventional sensor networks, the propagation of infor-
mation is traditionally performed by a method called routing,
where the information is stored by the intermediary nodes and
then forwarded until it reaches its destination. It was believed,
until a few years ago, that the information processing in the
intermediary nodes do not bring any beneﬁts in the replication
and dissemination of data. However, in [4], Ahlswede, Cai, Li
& Yeung demonstrated that applying such a processing it is
possible to achieve higher data throughput. The processing
of information in intermediary nodes is denominated network
coding.
The topology of wireless sensor networks consists of mul-
tiple source nodes and a sink node – base station. This origi-
nates problems such as data congestion and limited resources.
Consequently, it is important to apply techniques for data
reduction so that fewer bits are transmitted into the wireless
channel [1]. Network coding is a technique that can be used for
this. The technique combines algebraically by using “exclusive
or” operation (denoted by the symbol “ ⊕” or by the word
“XOR”), over the received packets [2]. This strategy reduces
the trafﬁc of packets in the network communication channels
and, consequently, the data congestion. Also, the capacity and
transmission speed of the network are increased without need
of complex routing algorithms.
The research which is considered the work demonstrates
that the problem of transmission of wireless sensor networks,
described above can be softed through network coding, re-
mains to know whether in practice this technique has the same
efﬁciency that achieved by simulation
This paper is organized as follows. The next section pro-
vides a brief discussion of the network coding technique.
Section III presents the methodology used, deﬁnes and eval-
uates the technique proposed in this paper. For comparison
purposes, Section IV describes a previous technique found in
the literature. The technique proposed in this paper is shown
in Section V. Results are presented in Section VI, which is
followed by the conclusions.
II. NETWORK CODING
Some of the advantages of network coding were introduced
in terms of ﬂow in a butterﬂy network [1]. This kind of
network represents a communication network as a directed
graph in which the vertices correspond to the network nodes
(terminals) and the edges represent the channels as shown in
Fig. 1. The network is composed of two source nodes (A and
B) and two destination nodes (R1 and R2). It is assumed
that the sources A and B can only send one bit at each time
interval. Hence, it would take more than one time interval
to transmit a bit from “A” and “B” to nodes R1 e R2. In
contrast, by using network coding, there is the possibility
of processing the bits at the intermediary node “X”. Such
processing enables the reception of bits from nodes “A” and
“B” in one time interval. The node R1, which receives the
bits from node A and A ⊕ B, obtains the bit from node B
by calculating A ⊕ (A ⊕ B) = B. Similarly, the node R2
is also able to decode the bit information from nodes A and
B [3]. Hence, there is a beneﬁt in terms of throughput when
the processing of information is allowed at the intermediary
network nodes, therefore, justifying the use of network coding.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Practical implementation of network coding is fully described
in [6], [7].
R1
R2
X
+
A B
+
A B
+
A B
A
A
B
B
A
B
Fig. 1.
Representation of the Butterﬂy Network
III. METHODOLOGY
The encoding process described in the previous section is
employed in this work to obtain a higher transmission data rate
in wireless sensor networks. The direction of transmission is
from sensors towards the base station (receiver). The nodes
of the network are deployed in a systematic way aiming
an efﬁcient coding of information by the intermediate nodes
called encoders. We have considered two different network
sizes: (A) the ﬁrst one, denominated network type A, has a
smaller number of nodes (around 20 nodes); (B) the second
one, denominated network type B, has a large number of nodes
(40 nodes). These two different sizes of network allow us to
evaluate, by means of time delay comparison, the throughput
of the network.
In this work, we assume that, in addition to sensor nodes,
the networks are formed by intermediary nodes called “relays”,
which relay the information from other nodes toward the
base station. Some “relays” perform the “XOR” operation on
received data and, therefore, are called encoders.
Simulations were implemented and performed on a Mathe-
matical Software by using normalized transmission rates and
data frames. A representation of the network is illustrated in
Fig. 2.
In this work we simulated two coding techniques. Technique
1 was previously proposed by [1]. It employs network coding
and is efﬁcient for sensor networks with a large number of
nodes. Nevertheless, its performance is similar to conventional
wireless sensor networks (no network coding) for a network
with a smaller number of nodes. This technique is described in
the next section. In order to improve the performance of this
technique, specially for smaller networks, this paper proposes
Technique 2, which is presented in Section V.
IV. TECHNIQUE 1
A. System Model
The sensor nodes collect data from the environment and
transmit them to relay nodes. At the relay nodes the data
is evaluated in order to verify the need to perform network
coding. The data is then forwarded to the receiving node.
The necessity to perform network coding is evaluated by
using function f, which is deﬁned as follow: Let p and q be
Sink
Sensor
Encoding
Relay
17
6
7
4
1
16
15
8
3
2
14
13
12
11
18
9
10
5
Fig. 2.
Representation of Sensor Network
the two data received by a encoder node and f a binomial
function that calculates the signiﬁcant difference between two
data packets and returns true or false. If p and q do not differ
more than a threshold γ, then the value of the function f is
false (0), otherwise it returns true (1). The absolute value of
difference is denoted by [5]:
d = p − q;
f :
 0,
d < γ;
1,
otherwise.
(1)
B. Description
Assume that sensor nodes 17 and 16 have some information
to send to the network, as shown in Fig. 2. Node 16 sends
information to node 7 and to the node 6 (relay encoder).
Sensor node 17 transmits its information only to node 6. Node
7 only transmits the information towards the receiving node.
However, encoder node 6 has two packets to transmit, then it
employs function f. If function f returns true, node 6 encodes
the packets using the XOR operation and forwards the result
towards node 4. Now node 4 has two packets: one is a data
packet transmitted by node 7 and the other one is a coded
packet transmitted by node 6. Node 4 transmits a packet at
each time interval, and the same procedure is adopted to the
others non-coding relay nodes when there is more than one
packet to retransmit. When these packets reach the receive
node, they decode a packet at a time using XOR operation. In
this study it was considered that the difference between two
data packets is always greater than the threshold γ. In other
words, a pair of packets is always encoded by an encoder
node.
C. Algorithm
When an encoder node has to encode two packets, for
instance, pkt1 and pkt2, the following procedure is adopted:
XOR operation is performed on these two packets and the
result is encapsulated in a new packet, which is routed forward
to the receiver. The receiver decodes the data by using XOR
operation on the appropriate packets. When an encoder node
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

receives data from sensor nodes, it calculates the difference
between the data using function f. If the difference is less than
γ, then there is no need for coding and a randomly selected
data is routed towards the receiving node. If the difference is
greater than γ then the encoder node encodes and forwards the
data to the receiver. A bit is used to conﬁrm if encoding will
be performed on the data. The algorithm that was implemented
in the coding nodes in [4] is described in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Technique 1(packet pkt1, packet pkt2)
//pkt1i and pkt2i is ith packet sent by leaf node 1 and
leaf node 2 respectively.
{
If f(data(pkt1i), data(pkt2i)) == 0
{
Select either packet and transmit
}
Else
{
Perform network coding on pkt1 and pkt2
Transmit data obtained by encoding in previous
step
}
}
//End of Algorithm
V. TECHNIQUE 2
A. System Model
In our proposed technique (Technique 2), each encoder
node receives and processes data from a pair of sensor nodes.
Moreover, only a single sensor node from that pair sends
information to a relay node, as shown in 3. The information
of this sensor (marked in Fig.3) is used to decode the data
across the network. This technique does not use function f,
and thus the nodes encoders always perform encoding.
Sink
Sensor
Encoding
Relay
16
15
14
13
12
11
6
7
8
9
10
5
1
2
3
4
Fig. 3.
Representation of Sensor Networks using Technique 2
B. Description
Observing Fig. 3, it is assumed that sensor nodes 16 and 15
have some information to send through the network. Node 16
transmits the information to the encoder node 6, while sensor
node 15 transmits its information to the encoders nodes 6 and
7. Encoder node 6 performs XOR operation on data received
from sensors 16 and 15. Node 7 will encode the data received
from sensors 15 and 14. The other subsequent encoder nodes
execute similar procedure until sensor 11 is reached, which
sends its data to the encoder node 10 and to relay node 5.
The information sent to relay node 5 will be used to decode
the entire network, by using exclusive OR operation among
successive pairs of data in the receiver.
C. Algorithm
An encoding node in Technique 2 (proposed in this paper),
as well as in Technique 1, has to encode a pair of packets,
namely, pkt1 and pkt2. This is done as following: XOR oper-
ation is executed on pkt1 and pkt2, the result is encapsulated in
a new packet that is routed forward. The decoding procedure
is accomplished by using XOR operation on the appropriate
packet.
It is relevant to notice that in this technique, every encoder
node always applies XOR operation on two received packets.
The encoder node does not evaluate the difference between a
pair of packets by employing function f. Due to this fact,
the algorithm becomes simpler, consisting only of a XOR
operation on a pair of data packets. Algorithm 2 presents the
proposed algorithm for the encoding procedure.
Algorithm 2: Technical 2(packet pkt1, packet pkt2)
//pkt1i and pkt2i is sent by leaf node 1 and leaf node
2 respectively.
{
Perform network coding on pkt1 and pkt2
Transmit data obtained by encoding in previous step
}
//End of Algorithm
VI. RESULTS
Table 1 shows the results for three types of wireless sensor
networks: (1) network with no encoding, (2) considering
the Technique 1 and (3) considering the proposed technique
(Technique 2). For data analysis, the following deﬁnitions are
used: cycle is the time interval in which the information from
all sensors arrives at the receiver node; transmission delay is
the time required for data being exchanged between two nodes;
NN is the number of network nodes; B is the amount of data
arriving at the receiver in a time interval necessary for the
network with no encoding to complete a cycle; TD represents
the transmission delay needed to complete one network cycle;
NT is the number of transmissions required to complete a
cycle; R is the transmission rate given in bits/nodes/time.
Technique 2, which is proposed in this work, is more
effective for a network size of type A. In other words, it
has a higher transmission rate, requires a smaller number
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

TABLE I
COMPARISON RESULTS
Network Type A
NN
B
TD
NT
R
Without coding
18
8
5
24
0.08889
Technique 1
18
8
5
24
0.08889
Technique 2
16
9
4
18
0.11250
Network Type B
NN
B
AT
NT
R
Without coding
38
16
8
64
0.05263
Technique 1
38
19
9
64
0.0625
Technique 2
34
15
7
48
0.05514
of transmissions, and presents a smaller number of nodes in
the network. Hence, Technique 2 leads to a saving of time
and energy in the transmission of information. Technique 1
does not provide advantages when a network of type A is
considered. Considering a network of type B, we see that the
Technique 2 has a loss of performance, but still performs better
than sensor networks with no coding. However, Technique 1
begins to have a better performance then the others techniques.
In this scenario, Technique 1 presents a higher transmission
rate and a decreasing in the number of network transmissions
related to the number of data information arriving at the
base station. Its performance increases as the network size
increases, being a good technique for large networks.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we compared and analyzed two robust imple-
mentation of network coding for transmission in sensor net-
works, denominated Technique 1 and Technique 2. Technique
1 was already discussed in [4]. Technique 2 is proposed in
this work, which allowed a better network performance and
a reduction in the number of messages transmitted on the
network. It was observed that the network coding applied to
wireless network, considering both methods, has advantages
over the conventional transmission techniques (no encoding
techniques).
Technique 2 presented a performance improvement on
small sensor networks. The proposed technique allows data
compression and concatenation of the data path to the base
station in some aggregation points. However, as the network
size increases, Technique 2 becomes less efﬁcient. In con-
trast, Technique 1, which in small sensor networks has no
advantages, has its performance improved as the network size
increases. This is due to the number of collisions on the
network, that is, in a network with no encoding there is a
higher number of collisions when compared to an encoded
network.
For the next steps of the research is necessary to create
a protocol that can be implemented in practice in wireless
sensor networks, in order to have a more precise calculation
of the gain technique, and variables to calculate performance
as due to processing delays obtained protocol, bits of overhead,
packet loss and others.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported, in part, by the Brazilian Re-
search Support Foundation of the State of Rio Grande do Sul
(FAPERGS)
REFERENCES
[1] N. Jain, S. Sharma, and S. Sahuv, “Efﬁcient ﬂooding for a large sensor
networks using network coding,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, v. 30, no. 9, pp. 1-4, September 2011.
[2] J. L. Rebelatto, B. F. Uchˆoa-Filho, Y. Li, and B. Vucetic, “Adaptive
distributed network-channel coding,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 2818-2822, September 2011.
[3] R. W. N´obrega, B. F. Uchˆoa-Filho, “Multishot Codes for Network Cod-
ing: Bounds and a Multilevel Construction,” in Proc. IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT’09), Seul, South Corea, June
28-July 3, 2009, pp. 428-432.
[4] R. Ahlswede, S. Y. R. Li, and R.W. Yeung, “Network information ﬂow,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1204-1216,
July, 2000.
[5] R. R. Rout, S.K. Ghosh, and S. Chakrabarti, “Network Coding-aware
data aggregation for a distributed wireless sensor network,”
in. Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Industrial and Information Systems
(ICIIS), Sri Lanka, Dec. 28-31, 2009, pp. 32-36.
[6] P. A. Chou, Y. Wu, and K. Jain, “Practical network coding,” in Proc.
Conf. Comm., Control and Comp., Oct. 2003.
[7] Qunfeng Dong, Jianming Wu, Wenjun Hu, and Jon Crowcroft, “Prac-
tical Network Coding in Wireless Networks,” in Proceedings of the
13th Annual ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking, Montr´eal, QC, Canada, Sept. 9-14, 2007, pp. 306-309.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

