 
  
Abstract— This paper provides a short description and visions 
about the convergence network architecture for an Open-IPTV 
model based Cloud. Also, it counts the benefits which derived 
from adoption of this architecture to mobility and security issues. 
With the new Open-IPTV model, the migration towards 
convergence networks between different Content Providers (CP) 
infrastructures becomes evident. This adaptation leads us to the 
Cloud Computing Revolution for CPs interconnections. The 
traditional mobility issues will be eliminated under the new 
umbrella conditions for the collaboration between the CPs. 
Moreover, the general management methodology will add value 
to the overall control between those providers. It's the first step 
from a technical perspective, and we consider it to help in 
resources optimization regardless of our exact choice of any 
content provider. This optimization will include the two cost 
relations that are very important to all providers: Capital 
expenditure (CAPEX) and Operational expenditure (OPEX). 
 
Keywords- Collaborative Computing; Domestic Cloud; Open-
IPTV 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Recently, the aspect of Cloud network has proliferated 
within the Internet Service Providers ISPs. It enhanced all the 
multimedia business efficiencies though its establishment was 
few years ago. Cloud infrastructure solutions have matured 
and provided reasonable interoperability under the current 
Internet regulations and standards. While the cost of deploying 
delivery networks solution for IPTV has increased over the 
last several years, the operational expense of maintaining and 
managing the network also continues to rise.  
As more and more IPTV application migrate to IP 
Multimedia (IMS) [2] services or Next Generation Network 
(NGN) [1] architecture, the cost of implementations and 
network troubleshooting for performance issues are increasing. 
Unlike traditional models, the collaborative Cloud model 
poses unique challenges given the transient and shared nature 
of the communication medium. The ability to effectively 
analyze and manage problems is indispensable for maximizing 
the Return-on-Investment (ROI) from the Cloud solution. We 
search for significant improvement in the IPTV network 
delivery performance for service and content providers. 
A. Open IPTV 
The current status of IPTV model can be summarized in 
Fig. 1. We have three models; IMS based standard model 
based on the IP Multimedia Subsystem core as a controller and 
 
 
NGN based standard model based on Next Generation 
Network architecture and finally the more famous business 
Internet model which is the Google TV model [9]. 
 
 
Figure 1: IPTV Models. 
 
We expect a collaborative model (Cloud-Based) for IPTV 
delivery. This model will have some advantages over the other 
models in terms of low cost, good performance delivery and 
converged system in the domestic region. 
B. Definitions 
The Internet Protocol TeleVision (IPTV) term has found 
many definitions. But, the ITU-T definition [6] is the more 
intuitive one which said: “IPTV is defined as multimedia 
services 
such as television/video/audio/text/graphics/data 
delivered over IP based networks managed to provide the 
required level of QoS/QoE, security, interactivity and 
reliability.” It is really a comprehensive definition. 
In the next days, we expect a merging in IPTV technologies. 
Now, we mainly have three models: 
• 
TV for normal access by traditional TVs (DVB-T). 
• 
IPTV online channels for normal access by PCs or 
IP-phones. 
• 
VoD which represents the offline case and access by 
same methodologies; PCs or IP-phones. The last two 
cases represent the web-based content. 
The above three scenarios will be integrated into one 
scenario which represents the Future IPTV. This scenario will 
require a special convergence in the operator networks and 
some integration between different content providers. 
For the General IPTV Models Management, there are two 
models: 
• 
The Managed Model: it concerns access to and 
delivery of content services over an end-to-end 
managed network. Orange in France represents one 
type of this model. 
• 
The Unmanaged Model: it concerns access to and 
delivery of content services delivered over an 
unmanaged network (e.g., The Internet) without any 
Moving to the Cloud: New Vision towards Collaborative Delivery for  
Open-IPTV  
Emad Abd-Elrahman and Hossam Afifi 
Wireless Networks and Multimedia Services Department, Telecom SudParis (ex. INT), France. 
9, rue Charles Fourier, 91011 Evry Cedex, France. 
 {Emad.Abd_Elrahman, Hossam.Afifi}@it-sudparis.eu 
353
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
quality of service guarantees. YouTube represents 
one type of this model because there is no guarantee 
for QoS while accessing its videos through Internet. 
This work provides a study for the current situation of IPTV 
delivery and how we can evolve Cloud starting from the 
current position in the access network. The main two aspects 
of Cloud computing that are interesting to our study are: 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), and Software as a Service 
(SaaS) [10]. With IaaS, a service provider delivers raw 
resources, like virtual machines, storage, and network 
bandwidth, as a service. With SaaS, a provider layers a 
specific software solution on top of those raw resources, and 
delivers it. 
The rest of this work is organized as: Section II highlights 
some related work. In Section III, we introduce all existing 
terminologies related to IPTV. Section IV differentiates 
between the current model and our proposed one for 
collaborative delivery based on Cloud network for domestic 
access. Our model analysis is discussed in Section V. Section 
VI concludes our case study. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Cloud computing is a recent concept and there is few 
contributions in the field of collaboration in the domestic 
network. This is mainly due to the continuous competitive 
between different providers in the same region.  
The concept of resources collaboration has been discussed 
in different places like [3]. They proposed the concept of 
Alliance as a general aspect of Virtual Organizations. Their 
Alliance concept is based on integration and collaboration 
between clients’ requests or demands and providers resources. 
Moreover, they study the motivations from reforming the 
distinction in the current situation of organizations that will 
lead to good business model. The work mainly discussed the 
collaboration problems and some security aspects towards 
virtual organizations. Also, the work in [8] proposed the idea 
of on-demand Cloud service within IPTV based servers’ 
virtualization. But, this work did not touch the area of 
domestic collaboration between different providers. 
III. IPTV AND THE NEW OPEN BUSINESS MODEL 
A. The Common IPTV Terminologies 
• 
Pay-TV: this service refers to the subscription-based 
TV delivered in either traditional analog forms, 
digital or satellite. We have in different countries 
similar term called Packs Channels like Showtime, 
ART and so on.  
• 
TV-OTT: TV Over-The-Top; it is one of the 
American  modern TV term that provides a seamless 
consumer experience for accessing linear content 
through the broadcast network on a TV set, as well as 
non-linear services such as Catch-up TV and Video 
on Demand through a broadband IP network. It is 
also designed to allow the provider to extend content 
and the consumer experience to additional platforms 
including PCs, mobile, gaming consoles and 
connected TVs. 
• 
IPTV ‘‘Follow-me’’: allows the user to continue 
access his IPTV service while moving and changing 
his screen. (Content Adaptation while Mobility). 
• 
Personal IPTV "My Personal Content Moves with 
Me"): it means, allowing the user to access to his 
personalized IPTV content in any place in his 
domestic region and be billed on his own bill 
(Nomadic Access). 
• 
TVE: TV Everywhere; it is the process of adding 
place shifting technology to (STB) set-top boxes and 
this required  software S/W STB and also adapted 
(content optimization) to match all types of screens: 
Traditional TV, PC or laptop and Smartphone. 
• 
Open IPTV: is the new model of TV service that will 
a borderless technology. It will be a hybrid model that 
merges the traditional Broadcasting TV with the 
Web-TV in one thing for nomadic services. 
B. Physical Set-Top-Box (P-STB) 
Definition: 
This system represents the actual implemented scenario in 
the most developed countries. It mainly depends on physical 
Hardware of STB and leased connection between the 
consumer and content provider. 
Advantages: 
The service security assurance and bandwidth satisfactions 
are the most pros of this model. Also, the good management 
provided by the content providers. 
Drawbacks: 
With the present model of IPTV, the delivery is based on 
physical STB restricted to specific location. But, the 
consumers increasingly become Anywhere Consumers and 
they demand bandwidth regardless of their locations for satisfy 
their entertainments. So, the lack in this model is the inability 
for consumer satisfactions while changing their locations 
(Mobility and Nomadic Access Aspects). By experience, the 
new open model of the TV and the entire video delivery could 
be enhanced rapidly. 
C. Software Set-Top-Box (S-STB) 
Definition:  
It is the new up to come system for IPTV business model. It 
will depend on Software instead of Hardware for controlling 
the received channels and videos. 
Advantages: 
It will satisfy the consumer desires for enjoying all their 
subscription videos Anywhere. 
Drawbacks: 
The operators have some fear from the management of user 
policies and authorizations while the clients are changing their 
locations.   
As the future recommends the new Software model of Set-
Top-Box (S-STB), we will not need to a strict physical 
location of IPTV services. 
354
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
D. Design Factors 
Two factors press on the providers decisions while they are 
taking a new infrastructure investment: 
• 
Capital expenditure (CAPEX): is representing the 
cost of network foundation and all non-consumable 
system devices and infrastructure.  
• 
Operational expenditure (OPEX): is representing 
the running cost for provider network including all 
cost of operation and maintenance. 
For the long term investments, the operators will reduce 
those costs in the domestic Cloud. Moreover, the new added 
services related to quality and interactivity will be costless.  
IV. COLLABORATIVE ARCHITECTURE  
The competitive space between different IPTV operators 
pushes them to implement high similarity in clients’ services. 
This means that, the majority of VoD and IPTV channels are 
the same which reverse the culture and social interests of each 
country. Thus, if we make some convergence between the 
different providers it will not affect the overall policy of this 
country. Moreover, it will enhance the service delivery and 
reduce incremental cost for future service investments. 
A. Current Architecture Status 
The current architecture of content providers (as shown in 
Fig.2 as France case study) has mainly three layers: 
Layer 1: Interconnection Layer (Infrastructure Providers) 
Layer 2: Control Layer (Content Providers Islands) 
Layer 3: Management Layer (The 3rd party hosting and 
cashing videos and channels servers) 
 
 
Figure 2:  The current model of different islands content providers. 
CP: Content Provider 
LCM: Local Content Management 
GCM: General Content Management  
              : is the interface between CP access network and the core network 
               : is the interface towards GCM and LCM 
 
The isolations and different islands are the main features of 
this model. Each operator has large investments and local 
management for the same services provided by the others in 
many cases. 
The open models require an open infrastructure design and 
also an open management policy. So, the providers must avoid 
their selfishness and think for two important things: 
• 
the great benefits from the collaboration that will 
adopt cloud computing design 
• 
the satisfaction of consumers towards new services 
Thus, the Open-IPTV model needs a lot of cooperation 
between different partners for achieving remarkable success. 
B. Proposed Architecture  
The collaborative model design is illustrated in Fig. 3. This 
model proposes more interactions and collaborations between 
different operators. As mentioned, the S-STB is the future 
aspect for IPTV delivery; we use it as the point interface to 
multi-screen access client.  
 
Figure 3: The proposed collaborative model for domestic cloud network to 
new IPTV system. 
UAR: User Authorization Request 
UAA: User Authorization Answer 
CAI: Content Adaptions Interactions 
 
The collaboration exists in the form of common access to 
CCI and DGCM layers by the client access layer. This case 
will lead us to new methodology of accessing which called 
Resource-On-Demand ROD. Moreover, this ROD will save 
the time and cost for service configuration. Another thing, 
UAR and UAA processes for clients’ services authentication 
and authorizations pass mutually and independently of user 
access network. More over, the content adaptation for different 
screen has two aspects; one based the capability of S-STB and 
the other on the access device specifications. The CA process 
for the domestic sphere for the client is mainly done by STB. 
C. Open-IPTV Model and Relation Aspects  
To support a correct model, we need to explain the relations 
between the four billers that lead to a successful Open-IPTV 
model (see Fig.4) as follows: 
• 
Content Providers: must study between them the 
content convergence so as to facilitate the consumer 
access methods and delivery and also the content 
adaptation to match different screens. 
• 
Operators: must convince the delivery of Open-
IPTV before missing the dominant and control of 
Web delivery because the service will come in the 
near future. 
• 
Infrastructure Providers: it is the time to 
convergence infrastructure and Cloud Computing 
design to appear so as to enhance the user access 
methods and ameliorate the mobility and security 
user issues.  
355
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
• 
Consumers: no way for the consumers from 
integrating him self with the new technology and 
new methodologies of future Internet services. If the 
consumer does not conceive with this developing 
then we will have a missing part in the ring or the 
cycle will not be completed. Client culture and 
motivations must be changed so as to help in the 
model successful. 
 
Figure 4: The Open-IPTV service billers 
A: is the first point of the cycle and responsible for contents 
B: is the service provider 
C: is the network access part and the point of attachment for the client 
D: is the last point of the cycle which represents the end user 
(In some cases A, B, C can be represented by one provider) 
V. THE MODEL ANALYSIS 
This part provides some aspect and study analysis relevant 
to the new Open-IPTV model and the impacts on all members 
of the new life cycle as the following: 
• 
The 
impacts 
of 
infrastructure 
integration 
on 
workflows and privacy policy. 
• 
The impacts of applying and integrating convergence 
model between different content providers on:  
o 
consumer privacy protection measures 
o 
business operational cycle  
o 
Financial management performance. 
• 
The 
optimization 
of 
resources 
under 
new 
collaborative conditions. 
• 
The new behaviour of consumers under new 
methodologies of services accessing with different 
screens as shown in Fig. 5. 
So, the content adaptation and the QoS assurance are the 
two factors which are affecting on studying multi-screen IPTV 
delivery and band width optimization. Moreover, these two 
factors are playing an important role Cloud migration. They 
are the turning point in the design and collaboration between 
different providers. 
 
Figure 5: Open-IPTV model and Multi-screens consumer issues 
A. Traditional Broadcast TV versus Web-TV 
The future prospection for the relation between traditional 
TV watching and Web-TV in terms of average number of 
hours/month is shown in Fig. 6. Some IPTV weekly monitor 
sites [5] and specialist in technical and industrial reports [4] 
estimate that, the normal human in advanced countries like US 
and Europe watches traditional TV for 120 hours per month 
and Web-TV for 18 hours per month in 2010. But, this 
scenario will be inversed after the year 2019. They expected 
that, the Web-TV watching will exceed the traditional TV in 
2020 and this excess will continue as shown in Fig. 6. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Year
Average No of Hours
Traditional TV
Web-TV
 
Figure 6: The expectation watching for Web-TV will exceed    the amount of 
watching traditional TV by the year 2020. 
 
New research shows that while TV broadcasts still dominate 
initial viewing, more users are turning to the new services like 
(TVE) to watch TV when they have time. 
For some segments of the industry TVE is being able to 
watch any television show, any movie, any online video 
content anywhere you’d like on any screen, television, PC, 
mobile phone and, of course, the Smartphone at any time. 
B. Cloud Design Motivations 
Content providers businesses rely on the network 
(infrastructure) and the data centre (hosting servers). They are 
the key factor in providing a successful IPTV service. Without 
them, achieving business goals like increasing market share, 
customer satisfaction or operating margins and profitability is 
nearly impossible. However, over time, both networks and the 
data centre have matured and, in the process, become more 
complex than ever before. The adoption of new trends, 
applications and services over the years has brought with it 
inflexible designs, point product solutions, and a plethora of 
operating systems and management applications. This 
complexity leads to increased operating expenses in both the 
delivery and data centre networks and limits their potential. 
So, the traditional ways for enhancing the current state by 
hierarchal way are not suitable. They lead to more 
sophisticated network and high cost especially the Capital 
Expenditure (CAPEX) one. Also, by default, as a result of 
complexity the Operational expenditure (OPEX) will be 
augmented. So, we expect that the curve of cost will reach a 
high peaks. 
From all causes mentioned above, we can conclude that the 
356
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
mean two reasons for adopting Cloud Design are the reducing 
of high costs of investments and consumer quality assurance 
for satisfying the service. But, the migration towards Cloud is 
not easy from the providers’ prospection. 
So, we suggest the first step of moving to the Cloud by 
adopting the convergence mechanism between the current 
providers. Then the future Cloud will be the international one. 
We categorize the Clouds into two aspects as: 
• 
Domestic Cloud: resulted from collaborative 
providers in the same country. 
• 
International Cloud: is the co-operation between 
different domestic clouds over Internet. 
C. Collaboration Culture and Benefits 
The collaboration model as a first step to cloud design is 
considering as a new value added culture between different 
providers. It will reduce the whole cost for new services 
deployments and increasing the total revenue from the network 
services. As, the future IPTV services goes to future 
generation 
based 
on 
multi-screen 
multi-services, 
the 
development of content and service providers must take 
parallel path for achieving customers satisfactions. 
• 
High availability  
• 
Good scalability 
• 
Minimum OPEX cost and moderate CAPEX cost 
• 
Good interoperability between different providers 
• 
More facilitations to clients access services like 
mobility issues 
On the other hand, the realization part of Fig. 4 is not 
practically simple. This is because the huge cost for content 
provider implementations to adopt multi-screen systems flow 
adaptations. But, we think that the collaborative model will 
achieve the most cost reduction for this scenario. 
D. Generating Domestic Cloud  
The main problem which faced all content providers toward 
migration to Cloud Computing networks is the lack in security. 
If the content is very sensitive, the cloud can not guarantee its 
security as much as required. So, we are claim to the 
collaboration and re-evaluation of the current infrastructure 
and reuse it in a Cloud manner through domestic area. 
The reliability and troubleshooting are also representing big 
difference between the Cloud providers and traditional ones. 
But, the new release of Domestic Cloud can adopt the 
convergence mode. 
So, the cooperation between the existing providers for 
obtaining a convergence network could lead them to the future 
Cloud computing network as a suitable solution in this time. 
The trusting in sharing contents and resources is a way toward 
full migration to the concept of Cloud. We suggest the 
collaborative solution as a domestic Cloud network for all 
types of videos and IPTV service.  
Actually, we noticed that in France the majority of IPTV 
providers provide the same group of VoD, channels, Pay-TV 
packs and other types of videos. They almost have 90% of the 
contents common. Parts of these videos are hosted by another 
party or cashing systems like AKAMAI system [7] and small 
parts of videos are hosted by the providers themselves. So, if 
they share their resources, they will provide good services and 
they can overcome on the bandwidth bottleneck problems. The 
benefits from this convergence are: 
• 
Interoperability: get unified management for different 
providers’ networks. 
• 
Portability: achieve some degree of mobility between 
operators.  
• 
Integration: obtain complete service  
• 
Quality of Services (QoS): service assurance. 
The successful model of the domestic cloud will lead to host 
international services which are the core stone of cloud 
networks and International Cloud. The third-party cloud 
service is the great objective but the route we follow must be 
taken step-by-step. 
E. CAPEX vs. OPEX Analysis 
All direct and indirect infrastructures and servers costs are 
representing the whole part of CAPEX cost. We estimate that, 
for the Cloud design, it can have more reduction of the 
essential costs till 80% of the total cost. Moreover, the 
reduction mainly depends on the degree of collaboration 
between the providers in the same domestic region. 
Let the following assumptions: 
N: is the number of providers mesh links in the domestic 
region. 
C: is the total cost for each provider. 
Then, the total CAPEX for all providers = N*C 
For collaboration Model cost ratio, it will equal: N*c/N*C 
Where c = L*C2 
So,  
CAPEXc = (L*C2)/C = L*C 
Where: 
CAPEXc: is collaboration CAPEX cost 
L: is the infrastructure Link foundation between providers after 
collaboration and interoperability/compatibility added costs. 
So, the profit from collaboration as a reduction in CAPEX: 
 
R = N*C – L*C = (N-L)*C 
  
If we have a third parity (Cloud provider), then the CAPEX 
for the current operators will be Zero and all costs will just be 
OPEX costs. 
Therefore, the typical cost optimization regarding to 
traditional data center design versus Cloud design is really 
remarkable. The long term costs will be reduced. Also, the 
benefits from adoption of Cloud are the utilization principles 
of servers based needs. This means that, the using of the 
infrastructure only when there is a real need and releases it for 
other free use times. Moreover, the Cloud is the mean of 
scalability for multimedia delivery. 
VI. CONCLUSION  
Our work contributions were to: present state-of-the-art for 
new IPTV terminologies like (TVE, OTT, Pay-TV and Open 
357
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
TV); illustrate the benefits in convergence networks design 
and their impacts on CAPEX and OPEX costs. Also, 
demonstrate the performance of future IPTV service against 
traditional TV and introduce the Multi-screen idea and the 
bandwidth optimization for multimedia delivery to different 
consumer’s screens and then analyze the impacts of using 
Cloud computing infrastructure in the converged network to 
different providers.   
Finally, we expect the demise of isolated content providers’ 
islands over the Internet at least in the domestic regions. So, 
the gates are now opened for clients Nomadic Access to 
Nomadic Services (NA to NS). 
In the next work, an investigation will be conducted for 
some new IPTV use cases in the domestic region using Cloud.  
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a part of feedbacks of future IPTV network 
delivery design in the contribution of the European project 
UP-TO-US (User-Centric Personalized IPTV UbiquitOus and 
SecUre Services) that lunched in September 2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Telecommunications and Internet converged Services and Protocols for 
Advanced Networking TISPAN); Service Layer Requirements to 
integrate NGN Services and IPTV, ETSI TS 181 016 V3.3.1, July 2009. 
[2]  Draft ETSI TS 182 027 V0.0.9 (2007-04), Telecommunications and 
Internet converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); IPTV Architecture; IPTV functions supported by the IMS 
subsystem, ETSI Technical Specification Draft, 2007 
[3] J.M. Brooke and M.S. Parkin; ‘‘Enabling scientific collaboration on the 
Grid’’;  Original Research Article Future Generation Computer Systems, 
Volume 26, Issue 3, March 2010, pp. 521-530. 
[4] ReportLinker: http://www.reportlinker.com/  
[5] FierceIPTV: http://www.fierceiptv.com/  
[6] ITU-T Newslog: http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/newslog/IPTV/ 
[7] AKAMAI: http://www.akamai.com/  
[8] P. Yee Lau, S. Park, J. Yoon and J. Lee; ‘‘Pay-As-You-Use On-Demand 
Cloud Service: An IPTV Case’’; International Conference on 
Electronics and Information Engineering (ICEIE 2010); pp. V1-272 - 
V1-276. 
[9] Google TV: http://www.google.com/tv/ 
[10] A.B. Bondi, 'Characteristics of scalability and their impact on 
performance', Proceedings of the 2nd international workshop on 
Software and performance, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 2000, ISBN 1-
58113-195-X, pp. 195 – 203. 
 
358
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

