Impact of Propagation Factors on Routing Efficiency in  
Wireless Mesh Networks: A Simulation-based Study 
 
Ewa Osekowska, Iwona Pozniak-Koszalka, Andrzej Kasprzak 
Department of Systems and Computer Networks 
Wroclaw University of Technology 
50-370 Wroclaw, Poland 
e-mail: ewa.osekowska@bth.se, iwona.pozniak-koszalka@pwr.wroc.pl, andrzej.kasprzak@pwr.wroc.pl  
 
 
Abstract—The low installation and maintenance costs, self-
healing abilities and the ease of development are some of the 
qualities that make the multi-hop wireless mesh network a 
promising alternative to conventional networking in both – 
rural and urban areas. This paper examines the performance 
of such a network depending on environmental propagation 
conditions and the quality of applied routing protocols. This 
aim is addressed in an empirical way, by performing repetitive 
multistage network simulations followed by a systematic 
analysis and a conclusive discussion. This research work 
resulted in the implementation of an experiment and analysis 
tools, and a comprehensive assessment of a group of simulated 
wireless ad-hoc routing protocols. 
Keywords-routing protocol; simulation; wireless mesh 
network; propagation shadowing 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The object of these investigations is the wireless mesh 
network (WMN). It is a multi-hop network that consists of 
stationary mesh routers, strategically positioned to provide 
a distributed wireless infrastructure for stationary or mobile 
mesh clients over a mesh topology [1]. WMN provides more 
robust, adaptive and flexible wireless Internet connectivity to 
mobile users compared to conventional local wireless 
networks (WLAN) or mobile ad hoc networks (MANET). It 
offers relatively low installation and maintenance costs, self-
configuration and self-healing ability, thus ensuring more 
reliable connection and enlarging the covered area [2].  
Routing is a crucial factor influencing connectivity and 
information exchange across the network. The flexibility, 
self-configuring and healing, as well as general performance 
of WMNs is highly dependent on the choice of a routing 
protocol and the quality of its implementation.  
The objective of these investigations is to evaluate the 
performance of WMNs influenced by propagation factors 
referred to as signal shadowing. The evaluation is based on 
network simulations applying a group of commonly used 
WMN routing protocols, containing the Highly Dynamic 
Destination-Sequenced Distance-Vector (DSDV), the Ad 
hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV), the Optimized 
Link State Routing (OLSR) and the Hybrid Wireless Mesh 
Protocol (HWMP). The analysis and discussion requires 
collating the protocols and conducting a comparison by 
experimentally simulating scenarios of environments with 
different propagation conditions. The result is an assessment 
of protocols suitability for the WMN and an evaluation of the 
overall network performance influenced by propagation 
conditions. 
There have been conducted numerous researches 
investigating wireless network's performance with respect to 
the issue of routing [2][3]. A similar comparative evaluation 
of routing protocols was conducted by Zakrzewska et al. 
[13]. This work extends previous research in WMN routing 
by investigating the influence of propagation factors. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II, the considered protocols are briefly described. Section III 
presents the experiment environment and simulation 
scenarios. Section IV shows the results and discusses the 
propagation impact. The final remarks appear in Section V. 
II. 
ROUTING IN WMN 
The investigated routing 
protocols are used in 
802.11b/g/n standard based WMNs. The selection of DSDV, 
AODV, OLSR and HWMP was dictated by the intention to 
investigate a wide spectrum of approaches towards 
topographical routing. These protocols can be divided into 
the classical groups of distance vector and link state routing 
protocols, 
as 
well 
as 
hybrid 
protocols 
that 
have 
characteristics of both. The common WMN routing protocols 
differ also in terms of the events triggering the routing 
information exchange. Some protocols use a proactive 
mechanism repeating broadcasts in regular intervals of time. 
Others exchange the information in reaction to current data 
transmission and other events. 
A. DSDV 
DSDV is historically the first of the investigated routing 
protocols. It operates on ad hoc networks induce inferring a 
cooperative engagement of mobile hosts without a required 
intervention of any centralized access point [3]. It specifies 
each mobile host as a router, which advertises its view of the 
topology to other mobile hosts within the network [4], by 
periodically and incrementally broadcasting own routing 
table entries. DSDV determines the shortest route to a 
destination, i.e., a route with least intermediate hops. 
DSDV construction is based on the basic Bellman Ford 
(BF) routing mechanisms, as specified by routing internet 
protocol (RIP), adjusting it to a dynamic and self-starting 
network mechanism required in ad hoc networks [4]. The 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

modifications concern, e.g., poor looping properties, such as 
the counting to infinity problem. Furthermore, in order to 
damp out fluctuations in route table updates DSDV also 
includes a sequence number and settling-time data. 
There are significant limitations in DSDV protocol, i.e., 
it provides only a single path between each given source and 
destination pair [5]. Furthermore, the protocol's performance 
is highly dependent on selected parameters of periodic 
update interval, maximum value of the settling time and the 
number of update intervals. These parameters likely 
represent a trade-off between the latency of valid routing 
information and excessive communication overhead [5].  
B. AODV 
The AODV routing protocol offers the  ability of quick 
adaptation to dynamic link conditions, low processing and 
memory overhead, low network utilization, and determines 
unicast routes to destinations within the ad hoc network. 
Similarly to DSDV, AODV uses destination sequence 
numbers to ensure the elimination of loops [6], but unlike 
DSDV, it does not require nodes to maintain routes to 
destinations that are not active in communication.  
The AODV operations require Route Request (RREQ) 
messages, to be disseminated among a range of network 
nodes [6]. Despite from RREQ the AODV protocol defines 
the Route Reply (RREP), and Route Error (RERR) routing 
messages improving the efficiency of finding routes. 
The on-demand character of the protocol implies that as 
long as the endpoints of a communication connection have 
valid routes to each other, no routing messages need to be 
sent. The information is kept in route tables, which (like in 
DSDV) store entries for all, even short-lived routes. Among 
the added fields of table entries are the valid destination 
sequence number flag and the list of precursors [6].  
AODV is designed for use in networks, where the nodes 
can all trust each other, either by use of preconfigured keys, 
or based on known fact of no malicious nodes. It has been 
designed to improve the wireless network scalability and 
performance and eliminate overhead on data traffic. 
C. OLSR 
OLSR protocol is an adaptation of the wired Link State 
Routing (LSR) algorithm, specifically designed to serve the 
needs of mobile ad hoc networks (MANET) [7]. The main 
adjustments tackle reduction of administrative data exchange 
and increase the overall protocol performance.  
Each router in an OLSR routed network owns a complete 
representation of the whole network topology and maintains 
this information periodically by exchanging topology 
information with other nodes. This makes OLSR a member 
of the proactive and link state routing algorithms family.  
OLSR exchanges information by the means of messages 
HELLO and Topology Control (TC) [7]. They are used to 
sense the links between nodes in direct neighborhood. Based 
on responses from the other nodes each node selects an 
individual subset of neighbors, which are from then on 
referred to as Multipoint Relays (MPR). MPR’s task is to 
execute the information exchange called flooding in its part 
of the topology. Therefore, each of the MPRs sends TC-
messages containing local topology information to their 
respective MPRs, while forwarding received topology 
information to their non-MPR neighbors [7]. Hence, OLSR 
ensures a complete distribution of routing information, and 
limits the flooding data overhead only to MPR nodes. This 
design aims to lower administrative data exchange and 
improve scalability to network size and density. 
Although OLSR is a young protocol, it is already used as 
a major WMN routing protocol e.g., by the Freie Funknetze 
in Berlin, Germany. It is criticized, though, for its large 
energy consumption due to constant data exchange and large 
topology databases. 
D. HWMP 
The HWMP is a mesh routing protocol that combines the 
flexibility of on-demand routing with proactive topology 
tree. The reactive and proactive elements of HWMP are 
combined in order to enable optimal and efficient path 
selection in mesh networks (with or without infrastructure). 
The HWMP protocol uses a set of protocol primitives, 
generation and processing rules taken from AODV, adapted 
for Layer-2 address-based routing and link metric awareness. 
The AODV mode is used for finding on-demand routes in 
a mesh network, while the optional proactive mode sets up 
a distance vector tree rooted at a single root mesh node [8].  
The control messages in HWMP are the RREQ, RREP, 
RERR – introduced in AODV, and an additional Root 
Announcement (RANN) message. The metric cost of the 
links determines which routes HWMP builds. The needed 
information is propagated between mesh nodes in the metric 
fields of RREQ, RREP and RANN messages [8]. The loop 
free routing is ensured by the use of the sequence numbers. 
In the experimental phase of this research, only the on-
demand mode of HWMP is enabled, thus it is qualified as a 
reactive routing protocol. 
III. 
SIMULATION MODELING 
The group of chosen routing protocols is compared based 
on an experiment using ns 2.34 network simulator (licensed 
for use under version 2 of the GNU General Public License). 
The choice of this simulator is motivated by its advantages, 
among which are: open source code, variety of implemented 
protocols and contributed code [10], as well as the reliability 
confirmed by the common usage for research purposes [13].  
The simulated scenarios represent a structure of a hybrid 
WMN [9]. This means that all nodes have the mesh routing 
capabilities. The backbone of the network is formed by more 
powerful and completely stationary routers covering the 
topology in shape of a regular square grid. They provide the 
wireless infrastructure to the mobile users placed in random 
locations, which also support meshing and improve the 
internal network coverage [9]. 
Apart from mobility, router and mobile node properties 
differ in the matter of transmission capabilities, namely the 
transmitting power and the receiving threshold. On the 
sending side of communication, the initial packet signal 
power is regulated by a transmitting power value [10]. The 
receiving is limited by a threshold, which is assigned to a 
wireless node and determines the minimum value of packet's 
signal power required to succeed with its delivery. If the 
packet's signal power at the destination node does not reach 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

the receiving threshold value, it is marked as error and 
dropped by the Media Access Control (MAC) layer [10]. 
A. Radio Signal Propagation 
The signal power fluctuates in a way determined by the 
phenomenon of radio wave propagation [11], which leads to 
the next issue of simulating wireless communication, namely 
radio propagation models. In general, these models predict 
the received signal power of each packet. There are three 
propagation models in  ns [10].  
The free space model assumes ideal conditions with 
a clear line-of-sight between the transmitter and the receiver 
[10]. This model represents the communication range as a 
circle around the transmitter. If a receiver is within the circle, 
it receives all packets. Otherwise, it loses all packets. 
The two ray ground reflection model gives a more 
accurate prediction at a long distance than the free space 
model, based on considering both – the direct- and ground 
reflection paths. Still, this model also predicts the received 
power as a deterministic function of distance representing the 
communication range as an ideal circle (Fig. 1). 
Those 
are 
the 
acceptable 
and 
commonly 
used 
simplifications of radio wave propagation for most of 
simulation based research. However, an attempt to 
investigate realistic conditions requires determining the 
received power at certain distance by a more complex 
computation. It is due to multipath propagation effects, 
which are also known as fading effects. These are taken in 
consideration in the shadowing propagation model [10]. This 
model redefines the calculation of the mean received power 
at a distance, making it dependent on the value called path 
loss exponent, which also enables a user to manipulate the 
propagation mechanism in simulations. 
The signal power is reduced gradually with raising 
distance 
from 
transmission source, 
representing 
the 
communication range as a fuzzy circle. The diagrams (Fig.. 
1, 2) were developed for the ns simulator and published by 
the Institute of Telematics at the Hamburg University of 
Technology, Germany to demonstrate the differences 
between propagation models. The upper graph shows the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Probability of receiving     Figure 2. Probability of receiving a 
packet – two ray ground model.         a packet – the shadowing model. 
probability of receiving a packet by the middle horizontal 
line of nodes. The other graph is a 2D area plot representing 
the probability of receiving packets as grayscale points, 
where the darker the shade is – the higher the probability. 
The shadowing model (Fig. 2) fulfills the description of 
IEEE 802.11 physical layer definition, which implies using a 
medium that has no readily observable boundaries, outside of 
which stations with conformant physical layers transceivers 
are known to be unable to receive network frames [11]. 
Furthermore the shadowing model introduces the 
shadowing deviation factor, which reflects the variation of 
the received power at a certain distance by time-varying and 
asymmetric propagation properties [10][11]. This prevents 
unrealistic representation of communication range as a circle, 
which was the case for other propagation models. It is also 
most probably the only way to simulate the presence of 
physical obstacles causing the signal power fluctuation in 
wireless network topologies. The intensity of this fluctuation 
is controlled by the shadowing deviation parameter [10].  
IV. 
RESULTS DISCUSSION 
In this section, the performance of four investigated 
routing protocols is compared based on the WMN 
simulations with User Datagram Protocol (UDP) traffic. The 
simulations were carried out for the hybrid WMN topologies 
with the following settings: 
Topology size  
width  
 
- 300m  
 
 
 
length   
- 1200m  
Amount of nodes 
total  
  
- 58  
 
 
 
mobile     
- 36  
 
 
 
backbone  
- 22 
Mobile node speed 
maximum 
- 5m/s  
The experiments were performed in order to observe the 
influence of two varying propagation parameters: 
Shadowing deviation min. 3  - free space 
 
 
 
max.12 - outdoor, very obstructed 
Path loss exponent 
min. 2.0 - free space 
 
 
 
max. 4.4 - urban shadowed area 
The performance is measured using metrics well 
describing performance of wireless networks [12][13]. The 
choice of metrics was dictated by the need of both – precise 
analysis as well as legible and intuitive representation. 
Delivery ratio (DR) – the percentage of successfully 
delivered packets calculated as the total amount of data 
packets received at the destinations, divided by the amount 
of all data packets generated by the sources [12].  
End to end delay of data packets (EED) – the average 
time passing from the moment of sending a data packet to its 
delivery, measured in milliseconds [13], including all delays 
such as route discovery latency, interface queuing and 
retransmissions, as well as propagation and transfer times 
[12]. The delay for individual hops is not measured. 
Normalized routing load (RL) represents the relative 
content of routing packets. Here it is expressed as the amount 
of all sent and forwarded routing packets divided by amount 
of delivered data packets, thus each hop-wise transmission of 
a routing packet is counted [12].  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

System throughput (ST) – the aggregate amount of data 
measured in bytes delivered at all nodes in a given period of 
time. The unit of the AT is kilobyte per second. In opposition 
to the received throughput (RT) metric [12], the ST reflects 
the summary amount of both – data and routing traffic. 
A. Experiment 1. Impact of the shadowing deviation 
The results are collated in diagrams (Fig. 3), where each 
plot represents the performance of one routing protocol. 
The packet DR reaches the maximum, i.e., most desired 
value of nearly 65% for minimum shadowing deviation, 
referring to environments with a clear line of sight (e.g., a 
factory). It holds true for all tested routing protocols. 
Increasing shadowing deviation lowers the DR. The decrease 
for the HWMP exceeds 40%; it is smaller for AODV – ca. 
35%, whereas for OLSR and DSDV protocols it does not 
reach 30%. Nevertheless, the DSDV protocol is visibly the 
least effective – offering more than twice smaller DR in 
comparison to any other protocol. The favorites are AODV – 
for the highest DR in this experiment and OLSR – for 
slightly lower but more stable DR.  
The same two routing protocols are leading, taken into 
account the EED. The HWMP and DSDV plots show similar 
results, mostly between 4 and 5s. These delays are over two 
times longer than for AODV protocol. The unquestionably 
best EED times are reached using OLSR protocol. 
The results for OLSR seem implausibly small in 
comparison to other protocols, however revising the analysis 
procedure as well as manual analysis of parts of trace files 
confirms correctness of these EED outcomes based on 
simulations performed using the ns simulator. 
AODV and OLSR produce comparable amount of 
routing packets sent per one successfully delivered data 
packet. For AODV it grows from circa 1.5 routing packets 
for shadowing deviation equal to 3, to almost 4 for maximal 
deviation. The range for OLSR is smaller but the values are 
higher – from 2.4 to 4.3. This amount for HWMP is twice 
smaller; also its increase trend is not as strong. The RL is 
smallest and nearly stable for DSDV routing protocol. That 
property corresponds with the proactive character of this 
routing protocol. Nevertheless, the benefit of a small amount 
of DSDV routing packets is overweighed by the 
disadvantage of their large size.  
ST reflects the network load and it is not predestined to 
represent the speed of data transmission. The complete 
observation requires collating ST versus the DR and RL 
metrics. The largest ST of almost 1.7Mbps, and thus the 
greatest network load is generated by the DSDV protocol. 
This result confronted with low DR puts DSDV in the last 
place. The correlation with stable and low RL leads to an 
interesting finding. The amount of successfully transmitted 
data is small; the number of generated routing packets – 
smallest of all; the ST on contrary is the biggest. Then the 
size of the broadcasted routing information must be very 
large. The second largest ST, circa 1.1Mbps is generated for 
the HWMP, followed by 600 to 700kbps for the AODV 
protocol. The smallest result is reached using the OLSR.  
This observation points to the conclusion that the optimal 
network performance for simulated scenarios is reached 
using OLSR, and the worst for DSDV protocol. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Delivery ratio, packet delay, routing load and system 
throughput in functions of the shadowing deviation. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

B. Experiment 2. Impact of the path loss exponent 
Unlike the deviation, the path loss exponent does not 
introduce randomness imitating the presence of encountered 
obstacles, but affects the transmission range. Higher values 
of path loss exponent mean faster fading of transmitted 
signal power with growing distance from the source, and 
thus shorter transmitting, sensing and receiving ranges. 
The plots in the first diagram (Fig. 4) representing the 
DR for individual routing protocols show very strong 
decreasing trend (lowering DR approximately to a third). 
DSDV is shown to be the least effective protocol in the 
whole experiment. The similarity in DR for AODV, OLSR 
and HWMP does not allow to select an unambiguous leader. 
All of them note a rather constant decrease of the DR 
summing up to the amounts from 53.7% to 56.8%. 
The EED diagram (similarly to Fig. 3) shows significant 
differences between the investigated protocols. The EED 
function of the path loss exponent has a clearly visible, 
strong growing trend for HWMP – from 336ms up to nearly 
7.4s – respectively for values 2 and 4.4 of the investigated 
parameter. The increase of EED for AODV routing protocol 
is also rather constant but considerably less intensive – from 
approximately 1s to over 3s. Whereas the DSDV plot shows 
a contradicting trend decreasing from 4.8s to 3.2s, which is a 
rather unexpected outcome. The other interesting finding 
concerns the OLSR plot. The EED is diminutive for values 
from 2 to 3.2 of path loss exponent. For higher values of this 
shadowing parameter OLSR protocol denotes a rapid EED 
growth of the order of several seconds.  
The relatively smaller EEDs for low path loss exponent 
and their growth for more intensive signal fading can be 
logically explained. In perfect circumstances, when the wave 
propagation is undistorted and the signal power fades slowly, 
a lot of data is sent directly from its source to the destination. 
The decreasing range of the source and destination nodes 
disables the direct transmission and forces the source to send 
the packet through intermediate nodes. In this case the 
propagation and transfer times are multiplied by the number 
of intermediate hops and the total EED grows.  
It is harder to explain the behavior of the DSDV protocol. 
The relatively low DR, especially for low values of path loss 
exponent, suggest that DSDV protocol, or at least its 
implementation for ns manages UDP traffic routing 
significantly less effectively than any other protocol. 
The proactive character of this protocol is not to blame in 
this case. The true reason is most likely the way of 
disseminating routing information in the network. In case of 
DSDV it is performed by exchanging full routing tables with 
all of the currently detected one-hop neighbors. The lower 
the path loss exponent is, the further the nodes' range, and 
thus the bigger the one-hop neighborhood.  
The big network load caused by large routing traffic, can 
influence the efficiency of data transmission. This effect is 
amplified by the fact that the routing messages are given 
higher priority than those carrying data. 
The 
two 
remaining 
diagrams 
substantiate 
the 
assumptions made in previous paragraphs in this subsection. 
The RL is smallest for DSDV, from 0.05 for low values of 
path  loss  exponent, up to 0.8  for  the  strongest  shadowing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Delivery ratio, packet delay, routing load and system 
throughput in functions of the path loss exponent. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

With more intensive shadowing less and less nodes belong to 
one-hop neighborhoods. For this reason a lot of broadcasted 
routing information needs to be forwarded, thus enlarging 
the RL. The HWMP protocol generates stable amount of 
approximately 0.9 to 1.4, in the extreme case 1.7, routing 
messages per one delivered UDP packet. The RL for AODV 
protocol grows most intensively with the path loss exponent. 
This happens because the decreasing nodes' range in mobile 
network causes more changes in topology, and consequently 
more frequent changes of the neighborhood, thus generating 
more on-demand routing information for this reactive routing 
protocol. The unexpected and fairly sudden decrease of RL 
for OLSR protocol seems somewhat anomalous and, 
confronted with other diagrams, gives an inkling of problems 
on implementation level, resulting in anomalies observed for 
more complex or particularly problematic scenarios.  
The ST is the highest for the DSDV protocol, however 
intensively and almost constantly growing ST for HWMP 
reaches the same level of approximately 1600kbps for the 
high path loss exponent values – 4 and 4.4. The level of ST 
for AODV mostly reaches the values between 700 and 
900kbps, which make it the most stable result.  
This set of simulations has shown AODV as the most 
suitable protocol for network topology environments 
affected with strong shadowing. The DR obtained using 
AODV is in most cases the highest; the EED is the shortest, 
and the generated ST – the lowest. For less shadowed 
environments, like e.g., rural or indoor WMN applications, 
the OLSR protocol seems to be the right choice. However, in 
the face of the dubious accuracy of simulation outcomes for 
OLSR protocol a clear and irrefutable selection of the overall 
best routing protocol or protocols cannot be made. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This paper presented an investigation of WMN 
performance based on simulations with varying propagation 
conditions. The simulation results gave some direct remarks 
on the WMN performance, which may be used as support for 
decisions on the choice of a routing protocol or aid in the 
process of its design and development. 
The experiment has shown that the performance, 
indicated by the predefined metrics, highly depends on the 
propagation conditions. The investigated protocols perform 
better in scenarios with low propagation parameter values.  
The oldest of the investigated protocols - the proactive, 
distance vector routing protocol DSDV, performs very well 
only in terms of the RL. Regarding to the relatively low DR, 
long EED and high ST, DSDV efficiency is insufficient for 
use in modern WMNs even in good propagation conditions.  
The main drawbacks of the hybrid protocol HWMP are 
the long EED and large ST. It is, however, still a well and 
reliably performing routing protocol. Its DR is considerably 
good. HWMP’s strong side is the low and stable RL. 
Moreover, HWMP protocol, currently developed in IEEE 
802.11s standard for WMN may prove to be more efficient, 
especially with parallel proactive and on-demand modes. 
AODV – a reactive distance vector protocol, offers 
similar DR and low stable network load. The EED is 
considerably long but still acceptable. The downside is the 
sensibility to the propagation factors in case of RL. In the 
experiment with shadowing deviation AODV shows an 
intensive growth, but the generated RL is still adequate. In 
case of the path loss exponent experiment the result is the 
highest of all. Nonetheless, it is stable and robust, when 
influenced by changeable propagation. 
The proactive, link state routing protocol OLSR has 
shown the best performance. Its EED is multiple times 
shorter than any other, the ST-indicated network load is low 
and the DR is among the highest. The drawback is the 
relatively high RL, which makes it prone to transmission 
collisions. These are, however, reduced by the MPR based 
topology information dissemination mechanism. These 
characteristics make the young OLSR a good routing 
protocol for areas with all propagation conditions. 
In course of investigations several problems, which may 
create a perspective for future work, were encountered. 
These are, for example, the lacking compatibility of the 
routing protocol implementations as well as imprecision of 
the simulator modules’ documentation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Elias, M. Novaes, G. Cavalcanti, and D. Porto, 
“Simulation-based performance evaluation of the SNDP 
protocol for infrastructure WMNs,” Proc. 24th IEEE Int. 
AINA Conf, 2010, pp. 90-97. 
[2]  N. H. Moleme, M. O. Odhiambo, and A. M. Kurien, 
”Enhancing video streaming in 802.11 wireless mesh 
networks using two-layer mechanism solution,” Proc. 
AFRICON ’09, 2009, pp. 1-6. 
[3] Y. Zhang, J. Luo, and H. Hu, “Wireless mesh networking, 
Architectures, 
Protocols 
and 
Standards,” 
Auerbach 
Publications, 2007. 
[4] C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat, “Highly dynamic destination 
sequenced distance vector routing (DSDV) for mobile 
computers,” 1994. 
[5] V. D. Park and M. S. Corson, “A highly adaptive distributed 
routing algorithm for mobile wireless networks,” Proc. IEEE, 
INFOCOM '97, vol. 3, 1997, pp. 1405-1413. 
[6] C. Perkins, E. Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-demand 
distance vector (AODV) routing,” RFC 3561, IETF, 2003. 
[7] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized link state routing 
protocol (OLSR),” RFC 3626, IETF, 2003. 
[8] The Working Group for WLAN Standards of the IEEE, 
“HWMP protocol specification,” 2006. 
[9] I. F. Akyildiz and X. Wang, “A survey on wireless mesh 
networks,” 2005 [Online: September 2011]. 
[10] K. Fall and K. Varadhan, Eds., “The ns Manual (formerly 
nsNotes and Documentation),” UC Berkeley, LBL, USC/ISI, 
and Xerox PARC.California, 2010 [Online: September 2011]. 
[11] IEEE 
Standard 
for 
information 
technology: 
telecommunications and information exchange between 
systems. Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, 2007. IEEE 
Std 802.11 - 2007 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.11 - 1999). 
[12] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, S. R. Das, and M. K. Marina, 
“Performance comparison of two on-demand routing 
protocols for ad hoc networks,” IEEE Personal Comm., vol. 8, 
2001, pp. 16-28. 
[13] A. Zakrzewska, L. Koszalka, and I. Pozniak-Koszalka, 
“Performance study of routing protocols for wireless mesh 
networks’, Proc. 19th Int. Conf. Systems Engineering 
ICSENG '08, 2008, pp. 331-336. 
          
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

