User utility function as Quality of Experience(QoE)
Manzoor Ahmed Khan
DAI-Labor Technical university Berlin, Germany
Email: manzoor-ahmed.khan@dai-labor.de
Umar Toseef
ComNets university of Bremen, Germany
Email: umr@comnets.uni.de
Abstract—The realization of a user-centric paradigm will revo-
lutionize future wireless networks. For this innovative concept to
materialize, a paradigm shift is required from a long-term contrac-
tual based service delivery to a short-term contractual and dynamic
service delivery concept. However this necessitates that translation of
user satisfaction into network technical indices, commonly termed
as Quality of Experience (QoE). In this paper we propose the user
utility function to capture her satisfaction for different services. We
validate the proposed utility function by extensively carrying out the
simulations for VoIP, video streaming and FTP applications using
OPNET simulator. We also suggest three different types of users on
the basis of user preference.
Keywords-utility function; user satisfaction; QoE;
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
The business models of telecommunication operators have
traditionally been based on the concept of the so-called closed
garden: they operate strictly in closed infrastructures and base
their revenue-generating models on their capacity to retain a set of
customers and effectively establish technological and economical
barriers to prevent or discourage users from being able to utilize
services and resources offered by other operators. After the initial
monopoly-like era, an increasing number of (real and virtual)
network operators have been observed on the market in most
countries. Users beneﬁt from the resulting competition by having
a much wider spectrum of choices for more competitive prices.
In its most generic sense, the user-centric view in telecommu-
nications considers that the users are free from subscription to
any one network operator and can instead dynamically choose the
most suitable transport infrastructure from the available network
providers for their terminal and application requirements [7]. One
envisions that in future telecommunication paradigm, the decision
of interface selection will totally be delegated to the mobile termi-
nal enabling end users to exploit the best available characteristics
of different network technologies and network providers, with the
objective of increased satisfaction. The generic term satisfaction
can be interpreted in different ways, where a natural interpretation
would be obtaining a high quality of service (QoS) for the lowest
price. In order to more accurately express the user experience in
telecommunications, the term QoS has been extended to include
more subjective and also application-speciﬁc measures beyond
traditional technical parameters, giving rise to the quality of
experience (QoE) concept. QoE reﬂects the collective effect of
service performances that determines the degree of satisfaction
of the end user, e.g., what the user really perceives in terms of
usability, accessibility, retainability, and integrity of the service.
Until now, seamless communications is mostly based on technical
network QoS parameters, but a true end-user view of QoS is
needed to link between QoS and QoE. While existing 3GPP
or IETF speciﬁcations describe procedures for QoS negotiation,
signaling, and resource reservation for multimedia applications,
such as audio/video communication and multimedia messaging,
support for more advanced services, involving interactive appli-
cations with diverse and interdependent media components, is
not speciﬁcally addressed. Such innovative applications, likely
to be offered by third-party application providers and not the
operators, include collaborative virtual environments, smart home
applications, and networked games. Perceived quality problems
in future internet might lead to acceptance problems, especially
if money is involved. For this reason, the subjective quality
perceived by the user has to be linked to the objective, measurable
quality, which is expressed in application and network perfor-
mance parameters resulting in QoE. Technical Report 126 of the
DSL Forum (Digital Subscriber Line Forum) is a good source of
information on QoE for three basic services composing the so-
called triple play services. One way to achieve QoE assessment is
to perform subjective tests with panel of humans, which is not an
attractive solution in online optimization, another approach may
be to use objective testing to predict the MOS value of a service.
However such approaches require original signals (for real-
time applications e.g., ITU-T objective measurement standards
like PESQ, E-model etc.) and are computationally complex. In
addition these approaches do not capture user-satisfaction (user-
preferences) based on the non-technical or economical parameters
speciﬁcally pricing, reputation of operators etc.
Several research contributions on meeting the user QoS and
bandwidth requirements are present in the literature, most of
them mainly focus on homogeneous service demands, fairness
etc. by suggesting radio resource management schemes and
scheduling algorithms [17].[6] compares several scheduling al-
gorithms for real-time and non-real time applications, similarly
[14] suggests the QoS aware packet scheduling for real time
multi-media trafﬁc, and a simple priority order queue mechanism
for non-real time applications. [9], [15] discuss the problem of
utility based throughput allocation and load balancing, where the
earlier reference restricts the utility to linear behavior, and the
later formulates the objective as network wide utility function
balancing network throughput and load distribution. User-centric
network selection approaches based on various approaches in-
cluding policy based, fuzzy logic based etc. are discussed in
[2], [3], [10], [4]. However most of the research literature either
formulate the network selection problem as a static optimization
problem or theoretically assume that user satisfaction function
for any application follows a function, and these assumptions are
not supported by the validation that represents the realistic user
satisfaction.
To address these issues we propose users utility function,
that captures user satisfaction for real-time and non-real-time
applications with respect to both technical and non-technical
99
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

attributes. The estimated MOS outcome from utility function can
then be used for network selection decision making. The user
network selection decision making can be based on maximizing
the utility function and user utility also drives the operator
strategies. We in this work validate the proposed utility function
by comparing MOS value curves attained from the proposed
utility function to the ones obtained from objective measurement
techniques and study the relationships between them.
II. PROPOSED UTILITY FUNCTION
We capture the user satisfaction using utility function, the
term utility comes from the ﬁeld of Economics. Utility is an
abstract concept and is derived largely from Von Neumann and
Morgenstern [11]. It is designed to measure the user satisfaction.
A utility function measures users relative preference for different
levels of decision metric attribute values. Thus preference relation
can be deﬁned by the function, say U : X −→ ℜ , that represents
the preference for all x and y ∈ X, if and only if U(x) ≥ U(y).
Basically a utility function should satisfy non-station and risk
aversion properties [11].
Let Ui(bk,c, Qk,c, πk,c) represents the utility function of user
i, then: Ui(bk,c, Sk,c, πk,c) :=
vi(bk,c)
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl.πc,k +
X
j∈J
wjuij(Qc,k)
(1)
User utility function is the function of offered bandwidth
bk,c, offered associated satisfaction attributes Sc
k (where Sc
k =
{Qc,k, tc,k}), and the service price πk,c. Here k ∈ Θ represents
the ﬁnite set of user types (We consider three types of users
namely Excellent, Good, and Fair). wj ∈ J, wl ∈ L represents
the weights of parameter j and l, these attributes are detailed in
later section.
We decompose the user utility function into four components,
namely i) bandwidth dependent utility component, ii) associated
dependent attributes utility component, iii) associated indepen-
dent attributes utility component, and iv) price dependent utility
component.
A. Bandwidth dependent utility -
Availability of bandwidth
/ transmission data rate plays a key role in evaluating the user
QoE, therefore most of the literature work focuses on throughput
optimization. However amount of bandwidth is strictly driven by
the application types and user preferences. Application speciﬁc
bandwidth requirements are well studied in the literature and
standards documentation, however user preferences over the
bandwidth requirements is a subjective quantity and depends on
the type and context of users. In this connection, we characterize
the proposed user types as; i) Excellent users - the users who
prefer quality more than the service price, ii) Good users - the
users who stand mid-way between the quality and price, and
iii) Fair User - the users who values the service cost more
than the service quality, indexed by k. The bandwidth dependent
utility component explicitly captures user satisfaction for offered
bandwidth values to different user and service types and is given
by:
ui(bc
k) =







0
if bc
k < bk
c
µk,c 1−e−βc(bc
k−bc
k)
1−e−βc(bc
k−bc
k)
if bk
c < bc
k < b
c
k
µk,c
if bc
k ≥ b
c
k
(2)
where µk,c is the maximum achievable MOS for the service
class c, and user k. βc represents the sensitivity of application c
towards the amount of bandwidth, i.e. βreal−time−application >
βnon−real−time−applications. The value of β is scaled between
the value range [0, 1], and for different k type users, bexcellent >
bgood > bfair and µexcellent > µgood > µfair.
B. Associated dependent attributes utility -
The term de-
pendent here refers to the dependency on the bandwidth. This
component of the user utility function is the function of delay
and packet loss QoS metric parameters. Since both the mentioned
parameters can be normalized into the the lower the better
expectancy, therefore we capture the user satisfaction for these
parameters as:
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl :=

1
if lk,c < lk,c
elk,cζk,c(l)
if lk,c ≥ lk,c
wl,c
(3)
where tk,c represents the ﬁnite set containing l ∈ L dependent
variables namely delay and packet loss. ζk,c(l) represents the
sensitivity of user satisfaction towards the increasing values of
l. wl,c (driven by the application type) represents the weighted
contribution of utility degradation introduced by attribute l. lk,c
is the ideal attribute values for which the user k for any class of
service c has the maximum achievable utility.
C. Associated Independent attributes utility - This component
of user utility is the function of various attributes like reputation
of operator, security, battery life etc. These attributes are of
diverse scope and can be normalized on expectencies of the lower
the better, the higher the better, or the nominal the better. User
satisfaction for this component is purely attribute dependent i.e.,
the decision of using linear, exponential, lograthmic functions and
control parameters depend on the attribute under consideration
e.g., for security parameter, a function like bandwidth dependent
utility may be used.
D. Price based utility -
In addition to technical, user
satisfaction is also inﬂuenced by the economical parameters.
One can not neglect the importance of this parameter in
decision making for network selection, when it comes to
cost-sensitive user types (e.g., fair users). We capture the
satisfaction of different user types with respect to service prices
as: uk(πk,c) = ˜µk,c −
˜µk,c
1−e˜πc,k e−πϵ, where ˜µk,c represents the
maximum satisfaction level of user type k, and ˜πc,k is the
private valuation of service by user, and ϵ represents the price
sensitivity of user.
III. EXPERIMENTATION AND UTILITY VALIDATION FOR
DIFFERENT SERVICES
A. Real-time VoIP applications
Streaming and conversational trafﬁc classes can be combined
in real-time applications, which are commonly termed as inelastic
or rigid applications. Generally real-time applications are con-
strained by minimum amount of bandwidth i.e., application is
admitted only when the demand for minimum required bandwidth
is met. Such stringent requirement on bandwidth are represented
by step like function, which results in a very narrow transition
region between the two states (fully satisﬁed, unsatisﬁed). Such
transition region is captured by the value of β of user utility
function given in equation-2. This transition region represents
100
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

very narrow required bandwidth range for different real-time
applications e.g., audio broadcasting demands 60−80Kbs, video
broadcasting demands 1.2Mbs − 1.5Mbs with MPEG1 coding
standard.
A.1. VoIP objective measurement -
In order to capture
user satisfaction using simulation measurement methodology,
we set up a simulation scenario with heterogeneous wireless
technologies, and run a lengthy rounds of simulations to analyze
the user satisfaction for different values of delay and packet
losses, when she is associated to different codecs using ITU-
T PESQ and modiﬁed E-models standard models. It should be
noted service affecting factors [1] in addition to delay and packet
loss are out of the scope of the objective measurements.
A.1.1. OPNET simulation setup - The components involved in
the simulation setup include; i) impairment entity - we develop an
impairment entity that introduces speciﬁed packet delay, packet
loss and is also able to limit bandwidth available to a voice
communication by performing bandwidth shaping using token
bucket algorithm. ii) LTE radio access network, iii) WLAN radio
access network, and iv) transport network. The simulation is setup
such that the impairment entity resides between the caller and the
callee, and introduces various delays and packet losses during the
life of a VoIP call.
Note - The packet delay values in the simulation include only
codec delay and transport network delay excluding ﬁxed delay
components e.g., equipment related delays, compression decom-
pression delays and other internetwork codec related delays etc.
A.1.2. Simulation Results -
We analyze the results for
three different codecs namely i) G.711, ii) GSM EFR, and
iii) G.729, which are characterized by their data rates. Each
codec in a lossless (lossless is an ideal scenaio, where pack-
etloss and delay values are idealy zero.) condition achieves
the maximum MOS, MOSc, such that MOSc
̸= MOS˜c.
2
3
4
5
28.4
1
40
96
4.44
4.48
4.20
MOS
Data rate(kbps)
     MOS loss due to 
    codec switchover
     MOS gain due to 
    codec switchover
(G.711)
(G.729A)
(GSM EFR)
Figure 1.
VoIP MOS for Loss-less Scenario with
different codecs
This characteristic
of codec dictates
that a user, when
associated
with
a codec c, will
have
lossless
MOS
equal
to
MOSc unless he
is
switchedover
to the codec
˜c.
Codec switchover
results
in
step-
function
like
MOS
value
of
user in a lossless
scenario. This is depicted in Figure-1, which clearly shows
that even in a lossless scenario, codec switchover introduces
a marginal gain or loss in the MOS value. We now discuss a
more realistic scenario, where user satisfaction is inﬂuenced
by the packet loss and delay values, i.e. user associated with a
speciﬁc codec c, with the MOS, MOSc, experiences delay and
packet loss in the communication system. The consequence of
system impairments is a degraded service, which in turn has
negative impact on user satisfaction. In simulations, we use
impairment entity to introduce customized delays and packet
losses in the system and study the impact of parameter values on
Table I
UTILITY CONTROL PARAMETER VALUES FOR VOIP AND FTP APPLICATIONS
Application
Codec/size
vi(bk,c)
ζ(pl)
ζ(d)
wpl
wd
Voice
G.711
4.48
0.03
0.0075
0.75
0.25
G.729
4.20
0.03
0.0075
0.75
0.25
GSM EFR
4.44
0.075
0.0033
0.4
0.6
FTP
20Mb
5.0
0.99
0.0429
0.5
0.5
Video
JM
3.98
0.031
0.011
0.7
0.3
user satisfaction. Figure-2 shows the impact of delay and packet
loss values on user satisfaction for G.711, G.729, and GSM
EFR codec, As can be seen that all the codecs lead to different
MOS values for different values of packet loss and delays.
A.2. Proposed utility function for VoIP applications - Although
the proposed utility function in equation-1 captures user satis-
faction for both technical and non-technical aspects, we limit
here the scope of utility function to the technical part only so
that we can validate it against the results obtained from the
objective measurements. Since the objective measurements are
carried out for different codecs and different packet loss, and
delay values, therefore ﬁrst two components of the proposed user
utility (equation-1) are adequate to capture user satisfaction.
Ui(bk,c, Sk,c) := vi(bk,c)
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl
(4)
where vi(bk,c) represent codec data rate, and this utility is given
by a step like function. vi(bk,c) is tuned by the
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl
utility component. The control parameters for this utility compo-
nent take different values for different codecs, which are given
in the Table-I.
0
5
10
Loss Packet
0
200
400
Delay
1
2
3
4
MOS
G.711
GSM EFR
G.729
Figure 2.
MOS values for different codecs
A.3. Validation
-
In this section
we
validate
the
proposed
utility
function for VoIP
application
by
comparing
the
plots
attained
from
the
utility
function
to
the
plots
we
get
from
objective
measurements
(simulation results), this is shown in Figure-3. As evident
from the ﬁgure that most of the points overlap well i.e., few
points map exactly, for few MOS values the proposed utility
function partially underestimates or overestimates the objective
MOS values. This is further elaborated in Figure-4, where the
correlation clearly strengthens the claim that proposed utility
function for VoIP applications estimates the user satisfaction
with appreciable conﬁdence level.
B. Non-real-time applications
Interactive and Background trafﬁc classes can be combined
in non-real-time applications, which are commonly termed as
elastic applications, these applications are further divided into
symmetric and asymmetric non-real-time applications. Generally
non-real-time applications do not have stringent requirements
101
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

0
5
10
Loss Packet
0
200
400
Delay
1
2
3
4
MOS
Simulation based
Utility function based
Figure 3.
Mapping of objective and utility function measurements for VoIP
application
Simulation based
0
1
2
3
4
5
Utility based
0
1
2
3
4
5
FTP
G.711 codec
GSM EFR codec
G.729 codec
Figure 4.
Correlation of objective and utility function for VoIP application
for bandwidth and delay. Such application can run even with
minimal amount of available bandwidth, therefore, call admission
control may not be needed in this case. TCP based non-real time
applications ensure the error free delivery on the cost of waiting
time introduced by TCP ARQ mechanism. This necessitates the
proper investigation of how much is the inﬂuence of packet loss
and packet delay on achievable TCP throughput? According to
literature, TCP throughput is inversely proportional to round trip
time of a network. In case of negligible packet loss rate following
relation holds i.e., throughput ≤ (TCP buffer size) / RTT, where
RTT is TCP segment round trip time. But if there are considerable
packet losses than following relation holds, i.e. throughput <
(MSS/RTT)*(1/sqrt(PLR)), where MSS is the maximum TCP
segment size, RTT is the round trip time and PLR is the packet
loss rate. However above relations only show the upper bound
of achievable TCP throughput. In order to investigate the more
concrete throughput values of TCP in the presence of certain
packet delay and packet loss rate, extensive simulations runs are
provisioned.
User satisfaction metric for Non-real-time application - The
performance metric to measure user satisfaction for non-real-
time applications include throughput, download response time
[13], and MOS. Although different, these performance measuring
parameters are correlated. In this paper, we choose the MOS value
as a performance metric for FTP applications. The motivation for
selecting MOS as the performance metric is to have a generalized
and common metric for different services.
B.1. FTP objective measurements -
On the similar lines
to the VoIP application objective measurmenets, we set up
simulation scenario with heterogeneous wireless technologies and
run lengthy rounds of simulations to analyze the user satisfaction
for different values of delay and packet loss.
B.1.1. Simulation Settings and Methodology - This simulation
environment also involves the impairment entity, and LTE in
the similar fashion as discussed in the VoIP simulation settings,
however in this case, the caller and the callee are replaced by the
FTP server and FTP client. FTP server and client are connected
through LTE access network. In our settings, an FTP client
downloads a heavy ﬁle (of 20MB) through LTE access network.
The choice of ﬁle size here is dictated by the facts; i) slow start
effect of TCP can be ignored, ii) correlation of TCP throughput
and distribution of packet losses within a TCP can be reduced.
We artiﬁcially inject the packet delays by using the impairment
entity, packet delays follow Normal distribution. A bandwidth
shaping of 8Mbps is performed at a router in LTE transport
network. We use the most widely used TCP ﬂavor New Reno
with receiver buffer size of 64KB. Moreover windows scaling
option of TCP is disabled, window scaling option allows TCP
maximum congestion window size to grow beyond 64KB. Due
to deployment of accumulated acknowledgements, TCP is not
very sensitive to the loss of few percent of acknowledgement
packets in uplink direction, therefore, effect of packet loss is
investigated only in downlink direction. It should also be noticed
that processing delay and packet losses in network components
(other than impairment entity) are negligibly small. Packet losses
are injected based on Bernoulli distribution, packet delays are
actually RTT values.
B.1.2 Simulation results - We analyze the impact of packet
loss and delay values on the user throughput as shown in
Figure-5. However user throughput does not directly show the
user satisfaction, in this connection, we need to translate the
user throughput values into user satisfaction. We carried such
translation using the throughput to MOS mapping approach
detailed below.
Throughput to MOS mapping - For such mapping we assume
that a user of type k is subscribed to an amount of bandwidth bk,
such that the user remains fully satisﬁed (has the MOS = MOS)
as long as he receives the bandwidth bk or bk + ϵ, and for any
bandwidth less than bk, the user satisfaction degrades and user
reaches the irritated state, when the received bandwidth is bk. We
term the bandwidth range [bk − bk] as feasible bandwidth range
for user k. This further necessitates a function of degradation and
scaling the user satisfaction. We scale the user satisfaction for
FTP applications on the same lines as in the case of VoIP MOS
values i.e., [1-5], whereas the bandwidth dependent component
of utility (equation-1) is used as the degradation function between
fully satisﬁed and fully irritated states of user. For mapping the
throughput results shown in Figure-5 into MOS scaled results, we
set the control parameters of equation-2 to the following values;
bk = 1.265×107kbps, bk = 20250.449kbps, β = 0.000006, and
α = 5. The consequence of such mapping is depicted in Figure-
6, which represents the user satisfaction in terms of MOS values
for different achieveable data-rate values.
B.2. Utility function representation of FTP user satis-
faction -
We capture the user satisfaction for FTP appli-
cation using the proposed utility function given in equation-
1. From the simulations, what we get is the user throughput
and impact of different packet loss and delay on the through-
put as shown in Figure-5. The vi(bk,c)
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl utility
components capture the user satisfaction that is comparable
to measurement results obtained from the objective testings.
102
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

0
2
4
Loss Packet
0
200
400
Delay
0
5
106
1
107
Datarate
Simulation based
Utility function based
Figure 5.
Overlapping of utility-based data rate values over the simulation-based
data rate for FTP application
200 000
400 000
600 000
800 000
1.0 × 106
1.2 × 106Datarate
1
2
3
4
5
MOS
Utility Based MOS
OPNET Based MOS
Figure 6.
Comparison of Utility Based and Ob-
jective Measurement Based MOS values for FTP
application
Let
us
ﬁrst
discuss the case,
when
we
are
not
mapping
the
throughput
over
the
MOS
values,
in
this
case
vi(bk,c)
component
of
the
utility
function
takes
constant
value
that represents the
throughput in lossless conditions i.e., bk = 1.265 × 107kbps,
which is shaped by the
Y
l∈L
uil(tc,k)wl
component of the
utility function. The results attained from the utility-based
measurements are overlapped over the objective measurement
results, and it is observed that these map very well, as can
be seen from the Figure-5. We also scaled the throughput by
mapping it over the MOS (remember that similar parameter
values for mapping in utility function based measurement i.e.,
bk = 1.265 × 107kbps,bk = 20250.449kbps, β = 0.000006,
and α = 5 are used), the scaled result is presented in Figure-6.
The results show that the utility function estimates the user
satisfaction similar to the objective measurement and hence
validate the proposed utility function.
C. Video streaming applications
In video streaming the most commonly used objective eval-
uations produce PSNR (peak signal to noise ratio) and Ssim
(Structural similarity) as output video quality metrics.
PSNR - PSNR deﬁnes the ratio between the maximum possible
power of a signal and the power of corrupting noise that affects
the ﬁdelity of its representation. When comparing two video ﬁles,
the signal is the original ﬁle and noise is the error which occurs
due to compression or during transmission over the network. In
the context of video quality evaluation, PSNR is taken as an
approximation to human eye perception of image quality. It is
measured in decibel units (dB).
Ssim - The Structural Similarity (Ssim) index is a novel method
for measuring the similarity between two images. It takes the
original undistorted image as a reference and provides the quality
measure of the compressed/distorted image. Ssim index value
ranges from -1 to 1. The higher the Ssim index value the higher
the similarity between the two comparing images. For videos Ssim
index is computed image by image [16].
C.1. Methodology and simulation setup -
In this work,
we use PSNR as video quality metric owing to its widespread
use in scientiﬁc literature. We calculate MOS value based on
PSNR value. There are several parameters which decide the
sensitivity of end user video quality to network impairments,
such as: i) Type encoding - It is due to the fact that encoding
schemes differentiate among frames based on their importance
in the decoding process. Hence a loss of more important key
frames deteriorates reconstructed video quality much more than
the loss of less important non-key frame. ii) Error concealment
method, iii) Frames per second, iv) MTU size of transport
network, and v) Pre-ﬁltration of codec etc. However a thorough
study of the impact of all other above parameters on video ﬁle
transmitted over a wireless network in the presence of additional
IP impairments is beyond the scope of this work. We consider
a reference video sequence called Highway for this work. The
motivation to use this video sequence its repeated reference in
a large number studies in video encoding and quality evaluation
e.g. Video Quality Experts Group[5]. This video sequence has
been encoded in H.264 format using the JM codec [14] with
CIF resolution (352 × 288) using a target bit rate of 256kbps.
H.264 codec has been selected because its widespread use can
be seen in future communication devices. The reference video
sequence has total 2000 frames and frame rate of 30fps. Key
frame is inserted after every 10th frame which provides good
error recovery capabilities. An excellent video quality is indicated
by 38.9dB as an average PSNR value of encoded video sequence.
The video ﬁle is transmitted over the IP network considering
MTU size of 1024 bytes. At the receiving end, video ﬁle is
reconstructed from received IP packets. The reconstructed video
ﬁle might have errors due to packet losses and delays in the
transport IP network. Results presented in this work have been
taken from OPNET simulation setup.
C.1.1 OPNET simulation setup - This simulation setup has
two parts, the ﬁrst part includes implementation of E-UTRAN,
EPC network entities of LTE access network, and the second part
of the simulation set-up is derived from EvalVid [8]. EvalVid is
a framework which can be used for video quality evaluation. It
provides both PSNR as well as MOS values of reconstructed
video ﬁle. The motivation to use Evalvid is its ﬂexibility to
be used in conjunction to simulation environments like ns-2
and OPNET. None of the other available video evaluation tools
provide such an interface. Target of this task is to get video
quality metric for video ﬁle which is transmitted over LTE
access network. The transport network part of LTE artiﬁcially
introduces IP impairments to the transmitted video ﬁle. Here the
IP impairment entity uses Normal distribution for packet delays
and packet delay variations. This choice is based on empirical
study of big IP networks. Moreover packet losses are injected
using Bernoulli distribution.
Following sequence of action leads to video quality metric
for a particular value of mean packet delay and packet loss
rate. EvalVid tools are used to generate a ﬁle which includes
information about packets (e.g. packet type, size, count etc).
These are the packet which would carry video frames if video
ﬁle is transmitted over an IP network in real world scenario.
103
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Packet size and type information is used to transmit the same
number, type and size of packets over LTE access network using
OPNET simulator. IP impairment entity injects speciﬁed packet
delays and packet loss rate in the above generated packet stream.
Associated information of received packets (e.g. packet end-to-
end delay, jitter, type and sequence number of lost packets)
is used to reconstruct video ﬁle. This task is performed using
EvalVid tools. Play-out buffer length of 250ms is used in this
step. The reconstructed video ﬁle is then compared against the
raw formatted reference video ﬁle to compute PSNR values frame
by frame. It tells about the noise produced by both encoding as
well as transmission errors. Video quality metric is computed
by evaluating the difference between quality of H.264 encoded
video ﬁle and reconstructed video ﬁle. In MOS of every single
frame of the reconstructed video ﬁle is compared to the MOS of
every single frame of the reference video ﬁle. In the end average
MOS value of whole video ﬁle is output. For PSNR to MOS
translation following table is used [12]. The simulation results
are shown in Figure-7, depicting the video user satisfaction for
different packet loss and delay values.
C.3. Utility function representation of video user satisfaction
- We capture the user satisfaction for video streaming application
using the proposed utility function given in equation-1 on very
similar lines to that of VoIP applications(for details, refer to
VoIP application section) The ﬁrst two components of user
utility function estimate the user satisfaction for different values
of packet loss and delays. For video application, the control
parameters of the proposed utility function are listed in Table-
I. In order to validate the proposed utility function, we overlap
the results obtained from the utility-based measurement over the
simulation-based measurements. It is observed that the proposed
utility function estimates the video user satisfaction very similar
to the satisfaction values from experimentation, this is evident
from the Figure-7.
0
5
10
15
20
Loss Packet
0
100
200
Delay
1
2
3
4
MOS
Simulation based
Utility function based
Figure 7.
Overlapping of utility-based MOS values over the simulation-based
MOS values for video application
Given the validation results in Figures-4,6,5,7, we conﬁdently
claim that the proposed utility function estimates the user satis-
faction similar to subjective and objective measurements.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we translated the user satisfaction in utility func-
tion. The proposed utility function captures user preferences over
both technical and non-technical decision attributes. We carried
out the extensive simulations to compute the user satisfaction for
different service types including voice, FTP, and video streaming.
Factors effecting the user perceived service quality have been
discussed in detail for different test scenarios. We proposed the
utility function that estimates the user satisfaction for different
applications, and also validated the proposed utility function by
comparing the utility-based results against the results attained
from the objective measurements. We plan to extend this work
to model operator utilities and ﬁnd the local and global optimum
solution for resource allocation at the operator level and network
selection strategies (using proposed utility function) in different
environments at user level.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Fajardo, F. Liberal, I. Mkwawa, L. Sun, and H. Koumaras.
Qoe-driven dynamic management proposals for 3g voip services.
Computer Communication, 33, September 2010.
[2] V. Gazis, N. Houssos, N. Alonistioti, and L. Merakos.
On the
complexity of always best connected in 4g mobile networks, 2003.
[3] X. Gelabert, J. P´erez-Romero, O. Sallent, R. Agusti, and F. Casade-
vall. Radio resource management in heterogeneous networks. In
Proceedings of the 3rd International Working erogeneous Net-
works, 2005.
[4] L. Giupponi, R. Agusti, J. Perez-Romero, and O. Sallent. A novel
joint radio resource management approach with reinforcement
learning mechanisms. In 24th IEEE Ineternation Conference on
Performance, Computing, and Communications, 2005.
[5] Video Quality Experts Group.
http://vqeg.org (last accessed
september 2, 2010).
[6] P. Jos and A. Gutirrez. Packet scheduling and quality of service
in hsdpa, October 2003.
[7] T. G. Kanter. Going wireless, enabling an adaptive and extensible
environment. In Mobile Network Applications, 2003.
[8] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz. Evalvid - a framework for
video transmission and quality evaluation. In In Proc. of the 13th
International Conference on Modelling Techniques and Tools for
Computer Performance Evaluation, pages 255–272, 2003.
[9] X. Liu, E.K.P. Chong, and N.B. Shroff. A framework for oppor-
tunistic scheduling in wireless networks. Computer. Networks, 41.
[10] K. Murray and D. Pesch. Policy based access management and
handover control in heterogeneous wireless networks.
In 60th
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2004.
[11] John Von Neumann. Theory of games and economics behavior.
[12] Jens rainer ohm. bildsignalverarbeitung fuer multimedia-systeme,
skript.
[13] ITU-T recommendations G.1030.
Estimating end-to-end per-
formance in ip networks for data applications.
In Series G:
Transmission system and media digital system and netowrks.
[14] S. Shin, S. Bahng, I. Koo, and K. Kim.
Qos-oriented packet
scheduling schemes for multimedia trafﬁcs in ofdma systems. 4th
International Conference on Networking, 2005.
[15] H. Wang, L. Ding, P. Wu, Z. Pan, N. Liu, and X. You. Dynamic
load balancing and throughput optimization in 3gpp lte networks.
In IWCMC, 2010.
[16] Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli. Image
quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. In
In proceedings on IEEE Transaction Image Processing,, 2004.
[17] D. Zhao, X. Shen, and J.W. Mark. Radio resource management
for cellular cdma systems supporting heterogeneous services. IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing.
104
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

