Network Clustering and Cluster Control in Energy Harvesting Wireless Video Sensor
Networks
Hwan-hee Lee, Keon-woo Park, Doo-sik Kang and Myeong-jin Lee
Dept. of Electronics and Information Engineering
Korea Aerospace University
Goyang-si, Gyeonggi-do, Rep. of KOREA
Email: hwanhee4777@gmail.com, ko92go@gmail.com, jskg72@nate.com, artistic@kau.ac.kr
Abstract—A novel network clustering and cluster control algo-
rithm is proposed for energy harvesting wireless video sensor
networks. For inter-cluster energy balance, video sensor nodes are
clustered based on their distance from a base station. For intra-
cluster energy balance, a cluster head selects a cluster member
with the largest residual battery level as the next cluster head. For
minimum energy consumption of a cluster, control parameters for
all cluster members in each cluster are decided by joint distortion-
energy control model of video sensor nodes. From simulation
results, the proposed algorithm is shown to keep both inter-
cluster and intra-cluster energy balance, and to enable perpetual
operation of energy-harvesting wireless video sensor networks.
Keywords–wireless video sensor network; energy harvesting;
energy balance; joint distortion-energy control model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless video sensor networks (WVSNs) for public secu-
rity and remote monitoring should monitor and record video
without interruption [1]. Because they are expected to be
installed in a wireless communication environment without
stable power supply, energy harvesting is required for perpetual
operation. Also, video sensor nodes should control video qual-
ity considering their residual energy while keeping network-
wide energy balance to prolong the network lifetime.
There have been studies on energy-efﬁcient clustering of
wireless sensor networks to improve the lifetime of sensor
networks [2][3]. Clusters were organized based on the energy
consumption model of data transmission by sensor nodes
and a cluster head (CH) was selected based on the selection
history and random model [2]. A reactive sensor network
routing protocol, TEEN, was proposed to reduce the number of
transmission more appropriately in event-driven applications
[3]. There have been efforts to extend the lifetime of video
sensor networks based on an energy model of a video sensor
node [4][5]. Gurses et al. established the energy model of a
video codec and radio frequency (RF) transceivers with the
energy control parameters of the bit-rate and compression
mode of a video codec [4]. Jang et al. also established the
energy models of a video codec and RF transceivers with
the energy control parameters of routing paths, bit-rate, and
aspect ratio of video codecs [5]. However, these studies did
not consider the energy consumption of an image sensor which
occupies a large portion of the total energy consumption of a
video sensor node. Also, energy harvesting function and the
corresponding energy consideration in video sensor nodes were
not considered to extend the lifetime of WVSNs.
In this paper, a network clustering and cluster control
method is proposed for perpetual operation of energy harvest-
ing WVSNs. Sensor nodes are clustered based on their dis-
tances to the base station (BS) for inter-cluster energy balance.
A video sensor node with the largest residual battery level is
selected as the next CH for intra-cluster energy balance. For
minimum energy consumption of a cluster, control parameters
for all the video sensor nodes in the cluster are calculated by
a CH based on joint distortion-energy (JDE) control method
of video sensor nodes [6].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we propose the energy balanced clustering method and WVSN
control protocol for the inter-/intra-cluster energy balance. In
Section III, we present simulator results verifying the inter-
/intra-cluster energy balance. Finally, we conclude the paper
in Section IV
II.
ENERGY-EFFICIENT NETWORK CLUSTERING AND
CLUSTER CONTROL
A. Energy Harvesting Wireless Video Sensor Networks
Energy harvesting WVSNs consist of several clusters
where each video sensor node is equipped with energy har-
vesting and video sensing and encoding functions. Each cluster
consists of one CH and several cluster members (CMs). CH
aggregates the video data received from CMs and transmits it
to the BS. The energy consumption model of a transceiver in
[2] is used for our energy modeling and is shown in Table I
where k, d, ϵelec, ϵamp represent the amount of information
generated by the cluster, the transmission distance, the energy
consumptions by the transceiver and the ampliﬁer, respectively.
TABLE I. ENERGY CONSUMPTION MODEL OF TRANSCEIVER MODULE. [2]
module
energy consumption model
transmitter
etx(k, d) = keelec + kd2ϵamp
receiver
erx(k) = keelec
B. Energy Balanced Clustering
For intra-cluster energy balance, the BS estimates the total
energy consumption of each cluster by considering its average
distance to the cluster and the cluster size.
For the cluster size n, the energy consumption by the
cluster head for n rounds is deﬁned as follows:
ech(n, ¯dbs) = k(2eelec + ¯dbs
2ϵamp) + eproc,
(1)
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

where ¯dbs and eproc represent the average distance between the
nodes in the cluster and the BS and the energy consumption
required for video sensing and encoding in a CH or a CM,
respectively.
The energy consumption by a cluster member is deﬁned as
follows:
ecm(n, ¯dch) = (n − 1)
nk
n(eelec + ¯dch
2ϵamp) + eproc
o
,
(2)
where ¯dch represents the average distance between the CH and
the CMs in the cluster.
Then, the total energy consumption by a cluster is deﬁned
as follows:
etot(n, ¯dbs)
=
k(2eelec + ¯dbs
2ϵamp) + neproc
(3)
+k(n − 1)
n
{eelec + (ω1n + ω2)2ϵamp},
where ω1 and ω2 represent the model coefﬁcients. These
coefﬁcients model the property of ¯dch growing linearly as the
cluster size n.
In conventional studies for sensor networks, the processing
energy of a scalar sensor node is negligible compared to the
transceiver energy. However, in wireless video sensor nodes,
because the bandwidth of sampled data is quite larger than
conventional scalar sensors, the processing energy should also
be considered for clustering or cluster control. The processing
energy in a video sensor node depends greatly on the rate
control method of a video codec, and there may exist lots of
possible combinations of video sensor node control parame-
ters. Therefore, the processing energy is not considered for
clustering, but considered only for cluster control.
In an initialization step, all nodes transmit their ID values,
locations, and remaining battery levels to the base station. The
number of clusters constructed for the 100 × 100m2 area is
chosen to be 5% of the total number of video sensor nodes
as in the LEACH [2]. Each cluster is constructed based on
the distance between the reference point and the BS with its
cluster size proportional to ¯dbs2. The BS selects the size of
each cluster to minimize the total energy consumption of the
WVSN based on the total energy consumption of (3). The CH
is selected right after the clustering. The clustering results are
broadcast to all the nodes. An example of clustering is shown
in Figure 1.
Figure 2 shows total cluster energy consumption by cluster
size n and ¯dbs over n rounds. The time duration, n rounds,
is same with the cluster size and is the average time for each
node to act once CH when cluster size is n. If ¯dbs increases,
etot(n, ¯dbs) increases as the cluster size n decreases. For
smaller cluster size n, because nodes in the cluster are more
frequently selected as the CH, ech(n, ¯dbs) increases while both
¯dch and ecm(n, ¯dch) decrease. However, because the effect by
¯dbs is more dominant than that of the cluster size n, the overall
cluster energy consumption increases.
C. Video Sensor Network Control Protocol
After clustering by the BS, the CM with the highest
remaining battery level in each cluster are selected as the
CH of each cluster, and the BS broadcasts the clustering
result and the CHs to all the nodes in the WVSN. Based on
the received information, the CH selects the distortion-energy
control parameters of the cluster for each predetermined time
interval T. The control parameters are selected by the JDE
control method [6] for the CM with the lowest remaining
battery level.
Then, each round of the cluster starts with the selected
control parameters and the CH performs time scheduling for
time division multiple access (TDMA)-based data transmission
and broadcasts the results to CMs. This allows each CM to turn
off its transmitter if it is not in its assigned time interval, which
results in efﬁcient energy dissipation. The CMs transmit the
sensed compressed video data, the identiﬁer, and the remaining
battery level after each round to the CH at the allocated time
interval. The CH ﬁnally transmits the video data received from
CMs to the BS. The CH selects the next CH, calculates the
distortion-energy control parameters based on the remaining
battery levels of CMs, and sends the results to all CMs in the
cluster.
Figure 1. Energy balanced clustering results.
Figure 2. Total energy consumption etot during n rounds
III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A simulator is designed to evaluate the sustainability of
WVSNs and the inter-/intra-cluster energy balance. Ranges of
control parmeters for the JDE control of CMs, such as the
operating frequency f of a video sensor node, the quantization
parameter qp and the frame rate rM of a video codec, are
summarized in Table II. Figure 1 shows the clustering results
of video sensor nodes randomly distributed in 100 × 100m2
area.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

(a) equal sized clustering
(b) energy balanced clustering
Figure 3. Battery level of CM 0 of each cluster, Eh: harvesting energy.
Figure 4. Evaluation of intra-cluster energy balance.
TABLE II. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENTS.
distortion-energy
control parameters
f(MHz)
qp
rM(fps)
200-1,400
30-45
1-30
time unit for encoding control
900 sec
energy harvesting
parameters
battery capacity
solar panel size
106,560J
600 cm2
video sequence
hall monitor
CIF (352 x 288)
Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) show the battery levels of CM
0 of each cluster after equal sized clustering and the proposed
energy balanced clustering methods, respectively. Although
inter-cluster energy imbalance exists in equal sized clustering
and operation halt of node 0 in cluster 3 due to the failure of the
JDE control, operation halt and energy imbalance is decreased
in proposed energy balanced clustering. Figure 4 shows the
battery level for cluster members in cluster 0. Although there
is difference in the battery levels between CMs in the initial
phase, the difference decreases as the proposed cluster control
goes on. This is because the proposed cluster head selection
selects the next CH considering the remaining battery levels of
CMs. The resulting inter-/intra-cluster energy balance enables
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 5. The number of operating CMs.
the perpetual operation of the cluster and the WVSNs.
Figure 5 shows the number of operating CMs for the
proposed and the conventional clustering methods. Direct and
LEACH represent the direct transmission without clustering
and the clustering method by Heinzelman [2]. Sufﬁxes lossy
and EH represent additive functions, data compression and
energy harvesting, respectively. Without EH, CMs die faster
due to battery underﬂow and will not survive because they
only use the initially charged energy. With EH, because the
conventional clustering method does not consider the amount
of harvested energy and the remaining battery level, CMs die
during nighttime. However, since the proposed method controls
the CMs with the JDE method which predicts the amount
of harvesting energy and controls the energy consumption
periodically, the CMs can operate perpetually day and night.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
A network clustering and cluster control algorithm is
proposed for inter-/intra-cluster energy balance in energy har-
vesting WVSNs. Based on a ten-day simulation, the proposed
distance based clustering, energy level based CH selection,
and the cluster control by JDE control of video sensor nodes
are shown to enable perpetual operation of energy harvesting
WVSNs. The optimum number of clusters and the dynamic
clustering should be investigated further for general energy
harvesting WVSN applications.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea gov-
ernment (MSIP) (NRF-2014R1A2A2A01006294).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Y. Chien and et al, “Power consumption analysis for distributed video
sensors in machine-to-machine networks,” IEEE Journal on Emerging
and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, March 2013,
pp. 55–64.
[2]
W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-
efﬁcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks,”
in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, Jan 2000, pp. 1–10.
[3]
A. Manjeshwar and D. P. Agrawal, “Teen: a routing protocol for
enhanced efﬁciency in wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings 15th
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium. IPDPS
2001, April 2001, pp. 2009–2015.
[4]
E. Gurses, Y. Lin, and R. Boutaba, “Distributed quality-lifetime maxi-
mization in wireless video sensor networks,” in 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Communications, June 2009, pp. 1–6.
[5]
J. Jang, G. Kim, and C. M. Kyung, “Lifetime elongation of event-driven
wireless video sensor networks,” in 2013 IEEE International Symposium
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS2013), May 2013, pp. 437–440.
[6]
H. H. Lee, C. H. Lee, and M. J. Lee, “Joint distortion-energy control
for energy harvesting video sensor nodes,” in Proceedings of the 31st
International Conference on Information Networking, Jan 2017.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

