A Spectrum Sharing Method based on Adaptive Threshold Management between
Non-cooperative WiMAX/WiFi Providers
Yukika Maruyama, Kazuhiko Kinoshita,
and Koso Murakami
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
Osaka University
Suita, Osaka 565–0871, Japan
Email: {maruyama.yukika, kazuhiko,
murakami}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Keita Kawano
Center for Information
Technology and Management,
Okayama University
Okayama, Okayama 700–8530, Japan
Email: keita@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, the number of portable mobile ter-
minal users is increasing with improvement of the wireless
communication environment. In addition, mobile multimedia
services also bring the increase of wireless trafﬁc and lack of
spectrum resources. As a technique for efﬁcient spectrum use,
spectrum sharing receives much attention. It dynamically assigns
a spectrum channel from a larger area network such as WiMAX
to smaller area networks such as WiFi-based wireless LANs and
achieves to increase the total wireless communication capacity
of this area. In a case where all providers are cooperative,
the spectrum sharing can be realized easily and improve user
throughput in average. In another case where providers are not
cooperative, some spectrum trading methods based on auction
theory had been proposed. Although such an existing method
assumes that providers can estimate their gain and loss caused
by spectrum sharing, however, it is very difﬁcult in fact since
they need to model the users’ behavior exactly. In this paper, we
propose a spectrum sharing method that works properly between
non-cooperative WiMAX/WiFi providers. It is achieved by simple
and adaptive parameter management. Finally, we conﬁrm the
effectiveness of the proposed method by simulation experiments.
Keywords- WiMAX/WiFi Integrated Network; Spectrum Shar-
ing; Spectrum Assignment; Cognitive Radio
I.
INTRODUCTION
With advances of wireless transmission technology (e.g.,
WiMAX [1], [2], WiFi [3] and Cellular), mobile commu-
nication environment is greatly improved. People can get
multimedia services via these networks and the demand will
grow as much as in wired networks.
On the other hand, the available radio spectrum resources
for a particular wireless systems are getting scarcer. Since radio
spectrum is statically allocated to licensed wireless providers,
some frequency bands are unused in any time and location.
In order to improve the wireless spectrum utilization, effective
integration of multiple wireless networks is required.
Utilizing the cognitive radio technology[4], wireless sys-
tems can share wireless spectrum in heterogeneous networks.
With spectrum sharing, it was conﬁrmed that the frequency
usage is improved in WiMAX/WiFi integrated network [5].
However, the existing method assumed that the WiMAX and
WiFi providers cooperated to improve mean user throughput.
Therefore, in the case where the providers do not cooperate
and pursue only their own interests, this method might not
work properly.
In such a case, spectrum trading methods had been pro-
posed [6], in which spectrum bands are bought and sold among
providers. While most of these works assumes that providers
can estimate their gain and loss caused by spectrum trading, it
is very difﬁcult in fact since users’ behavior has to be modeled
exactly.
In this paper, we propose a spectrum sharing method that
works properly even between non-cooperative WiMAX/WiFi
providers by introducing a threshold to assign an additional
channel from a WiMAX base station (BS) to WiFi access
points (APs). It is necessary to adapt the threshold of spectrum
sharing to the environment. Therefore, we also propose an
adaptive threshold management, which is a learning algorithm
for the threshold to match the spectrum demand.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we introduce spectrum sharing technology and some existing
methods. In Section 3, we elaborate our proposed method. Its
performance is evaluated by simulation experiments in Section
4. Finally, Section 5 presents some conclusions and indicates
future work.
II.
SPECTRUM SHARING
A. Integrated Network
Currently, most of wireless systems are independently de-
signed. The integration of those independent wireless systems,
however, is able to provide wireless users a seamless access.
Therefore, in recent years, integrated network such as the
Cellular/WiFi integrated network [7], [8] have been researched
actively. As a typical heterogeneous wireless integrated net-
work, we focus on integration of WiMAX and WiFi. The
former system whose coverage area is several kilometers wide
can achieve Quality of Service (QoS). The latter system can
cover only several hundred meters, although, spread widely.
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

As shown in Fig. 1, in the integrated network, mobile users
are connected to the best wireless systems, which are chosen
in terms of user (e.g., application and mobility) and system
(e.g., trafﬁc congestion). Therefore, users can have better
communications and systems also achieve load balancing [9].


 	
 	


Figure 1: AP selection strategy
B. Spectrum Sharing Model
Spectrum sharing technology has emerged to improve the
spectrum utilization in wireless networks. With the aid of
cognitive radio, a spectrum owner (or primary system) shares
their licensed spectrum for secondary systems, which has no
priority to the band [10]. Since two or more secondary systems
can use the same spectrum when they are not adjacent, the
total wireless communication capacity increases. In the case
of WiMAX/WiFi integrated network, spectrum channels of the
WiMAX system are temporarily assigned to WiFi APs and it
improves the whole network capacity[11].
As shown in Fig. 2, a centralized control server named
spectrum manager controls the spectrum assignment and col-
lects necessary information for the assignment from a WiMAX
BS and WiFi APs inside the WiMAX BS service area [12].
Also, the server searches for the optimal assignment pattern
of WiFi AP.




	
	
Figure 2: spectrum manager
C. Existing Spectrum Sharing Method
The protocol design for spectrum sharing depends on the
relation between WiMAX and WiFi providers (i.e., cooperative
or non-cooperative). In a cooperative environment, providers
cooperate with each other to improve the average user through-
put. On the other hand, non-cooperative providers pursue their
own proﬁt.
According to [5], spectrum sharing in cooperative network
improves the overall average throughput. In this method, the
number of users who connect to the system is used as the
evaluation value of Genetic Algorithm (GA). By using GA
under the constraint to disallow to assign the same spectrum
to adjacent WiFi APs, it is possible to assign channel without
interference among selected APs. However, this spectrum
assignment method works properly only for a cooperative
situation, for example, the same provider owns both WiMAX
BS and WiFi APs.
In a non-cooperative environment, spectrum sharing may
degrade the WiMAX system throughput due to the decrease of
the available WiMAX spectrum. Therefore, spectrum trading
method has been proposed. It adopts money trading as a
motivation for spectrum sharing [6].
Spectrum trading method based on auction theory is one of
the major methods to share frequency band in non-cooperative
providers [13], [14]. In this method, each WiFi provider bids
for an additional channel. By considering these offers, the
WiMAX provider selects an assignment pattern that maximizes
the WiMAX provider’s revenue. This enables the WiMAX
provider to obtain additional proﬁt by lending channels and
the WiFi providers to increase their effective bandwidth and
user throughput. According to the proﬁt which systems will
get, providers decide to sell or buy channels. However, it is
difﬁcult to guess the right proﬁt due to the difﬁculty to model
exact user behavior, e.g., users may dynamically change to
connect to a more comfortable system[14].
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
A. Concept
We propose a spectrum sharing method based on the auc-
tion system with adaptive threshold management between non-
cooperative WiMAX/WiFi providers. The proposed method
relies on a simple management scheme by utilizing a threshold
parameter which WiMAX provider sets as a minimum price
per channel. On the other hand, the threshold control is im-
portant for an effective spectrum sharing. Therefore, WiMAX
provider needs to learn and adapt the threshold parameter to
the environment. For this purpose, we also propose a learning
algorithm to decide an appropriate threshold. Note that this
algorithm does NOT depend on the users’ behavior modeling.
B. Network Model
We consider a heterogeneous network, that consists of one
WiMAX BS and multiple WiFi APs contained in the BS
covered area. Suppose the WiFi APi provides throughput Ti
per a contacted user , for i ∈ Wall (a set of all WiFi AP).
On a condition to leave at least one channel for BS, at most
N-1 channels of WiMAX are provided to APs, where N is the
number of channels primarily allocated to BS.
C. Threshold of Sharing Channel
Each WiFi AP submits a price for an additional channel
based on the demand of the spectrum which can be described
by provided throughput to each user. When an AP has larger
number of connected users, each user receives less throughput.
Therefore, price per channel Ui offered by WiFi APi is
formulated as
Ui = x
Ti
.
(1)
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Since we suppose all APs have basically the same strategy to
get an additional channel, x is a constant value.
Meanwhile, WiMAX provider sets the minimum price per
channel y. The condition that WiMAX gives its spectrum
resource to WiFi is described as
∑
i∈WGA
Ui > y,
(2)
where WGA is a set of WiFi APs receiving an additional
channel. Though the number of available spectrum channels of
the WiMAX BS decreases, this enables the WiMAX provider
to obtain additional proﬁt more than y by lending channels.
Since x is constant, x and y can put into one parameter
Mth (WiMAX threshold) as
∑
i∈WGA
1
Ti
> y
x = Mth.
(3)
D. Channel Assignment
As shown in Fig. 3, a spectrum channel can be assigned to
two or more APs which are not adjacent to each other. When
a channel is assigned to an AP, the AP can use twice as much
bandwidth. Thus, the spectrum demand of an AP which is
assigned one or more channels will decrease and the AP will
submit lower price for another additional channel. Therefore,
WiFi AP changes the price of one channel by the number of
the channels it receives.
The target APs for assignment and the number of assigned
channels are decided according to the following steps.
1)
WiFi APi decides the payment Ui.
2)
WiMAX provider selects the assignment pattern that
maximizes the sum of payments offered by WiFi APs.
3)
If the revenue of lending the channels exceeds y,
WiMAX provider performs the channel assignment.
4)
Repeat Steps 1 to 3 until N-1 channels are lent or y
exceeds the revenue from the target WiFi APs.
Note that, the condition of providing spectrum in Step 3 can
be described by (2).



	




Figure 3: Channel assignment
E. Adaptive Threshold Management
When the threshold of sharing spectrum Mth is too small, a
large part of the bandwidth is sold at a low price. On the other
hand, frequency is not shared when Mth is too big. Therefore,
it is necessary to set Mth to an adequate value in order to






	

 

    
 
	

 	


     	

	
   

Figure 4: Flowchart of management α
start
end
initialize
 and 
change 
change 
spectrum
assignment
end
judgment
Yes
No
Figure 5: Flowchart of management Mth
share spectrum effectively. Therefore, we propose a learning
algorithm to ﬁnd the appropriate Mth value dynamically.
According to the collected data of Mth and average users’
throughput Tall, α is added or subtracted to Mth, where α is
a variable. User throughput is given as
Tusr = Tch × C
U
,
(4)
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

where Tch is the maximum system throughput per one channel,
C is the number of available channels for the connected system
and U is the number of users connected to the system. Mth is
varied by α to improve Tall. Also, α represents the sensitivity
of Mth. We deﬁne Nch as the number of assigned channels.
Larger α leads to a drastic change of Nch, so that Mth can be
an adequate value quickly. In other words, however, Mth may
be unstable. In the contrary, smaller α leads to a ﬁne changes
and more stable Mth, but results in slower adaptation time to
reach an adequate Mth value. Therefore, we need to adjust α
value as well. We propose an algorithm to adjust α value as
shown in Fig. 4.
Speciﬁcally, when the number of users who connect to
WiMAX keeps growing, α is set larger. In the case where
the number of assigned channels changes greatly, such as zero
to N-1, α is set smaller.
Fig. 5 shows the ﬂowchart of the threshold management.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed method to show its effectiveness by simulation experi-
ments.
A. Simulation Model
As a network model, which is shown in Fig. 6, we set one
WiMAX BS including 10 × 10 = 100 cells where randomly
selected 50 cells had WiFi AP. APs in adjacent cells interfere
with each other.
The spectrum bandwidth of the WiMAX was set to
100[MHz] and each WiFi AP was allocated in units of
20[MHz]. Each WiFi AP could use the one channel of
20[MHz] except any channels assigned from WiMAX. In
addition, WiMAX BS was assumed to provide 20[Mbps] per
10[MHz] according to the evaluation in WiMAX Forum [15],
and WiFi AP supported 17.5[Mbps] per channel according to
our preliminary experiments using ns-2 [16]. We assumed that
an AP could use any additional channels with no delay [17].
・・・
・
・
・
WiMAX
WiFi AP
10
10
Figure 6: Network model
When a new user arrives at a cell with a WiFi AP, he/she
connects to the WiFi and downloads a ﬁle. Otherwise, the
user connects to the WiMAX. In addition, users were staying
in the arrival cell until the end of downloading. Calls occurred
following a Poisson arrival process.
We choose two methods for comparison. One is the existing
spectrum assignment method [5]: described in section 2.3,
this method allocates a spectrum to improve the overall mean
throughput in a cooperative network. The existing method is a
kind of ideal method in non-cooperative network. The other is
the method that does not share any spectrum. As a performance
measure, we observed the average throughput.
Moreover, to evaluate the performance of the adaptive Mth
management, we adopt another compared method called fixed
method that uses a ﬁxed Mth. The ﬁxed Mth can be found
by several trials and maximizes the average throughput.
The parameters we set are summarized in Table 1. Gener-
ally, because WiFi APs are set up in places where people gather
(e.g., cafe and ofﬁce), in order to emulate those environment,
we differentiate the arrival rate in a cell with and without WiFi
AP.
For Mth management, we set Mth and α to 0.1 as the
initial value. Note that, we found that they are not so sensitive
by preliminary experiments.
TABLE I: PARAMETERS SETUPS
interval time of spectrum assignment
300 [sec]
arrival rate in a cell with WiFi AP
λ [1/sec]
arrival rate in a cell without AP
0.1λ [1/sec]
ﬁle size
10 [MB]
trafﬁc
best effort
initial Mth
0.1
initial α
0.1
B. Simulation Results
The number of assigned channels from WiMAX BS to
WiFi APs with ﬁxed Mth is shown in Fig. 7. For a smaller
value of Mth, more and more spectrum channels are shared
since WiFi AP can obtain the spectrum with lower cost. In
contrast, for a larger Mth, it is difﬁcult for APs to get channels.
Therefore, Mth can control the number of the shared channels
WiMAX and WiFi APs.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
The number of channels
Mth
Figure 7: Mean number of assigned channel with variable Mth：
λ = 0.2
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

In Fig. 8 under the condition where λ is ﬁxed, Mth
converges due to the adaptive Mth management. When λ
is low, Mth is also low since the demand of the spectrum
channels from the WiFi APs are low. As the price that the
WiFi AP submits increase, Mth converge to a higher point to
lent a channel at a high price.
Fig. 9 indicates that the existing method and the proposed
method improve the average throughput against non-sharing
method, since the capacity of the system increased by assign-
ing channels from WiMAX BS to several WiFi APs. For a
smaller λ, the average throughput of the proposed method is
higher than that of the existing method since we introduce
a learning algorithm and obtain feedback of the spectrum
assignment interval time. On the other hand, for a larger
λ, the average throughput of the proposal method is lower
because the bigger λ, results in the higher Mth, due to this,
the algorithm tries to converges to a smaller value resulting in
a longer transient state.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
Mth
Arrival rate [1/s]
Figure 8: Converged Mth with variable λ
 0
 5
 10
 15
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
Average throughput [Mbps]
Arrival rate [1/s]
Proposed method
Existing method
Without spectrum sharing
Figure 9: Average throughput with variable λ
The example of transient state of adaptive Mth manage-
ment is shown in Fig. 10. In the transient state, which is soon
after the start of spectrum sharing, users’ throughput of the
proposed method is lower since Mth is so small that many
frequency bands of WiMAX BS are lent out. After the transient
state passes, the overall throughput of the proposed method is
as high as that of the ﬁxed method.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 0
 50
 100
 150
Throughput [Mbps]
The number of Mth changes 
Proposed method
Fixed method
Figure 10: Overall throughput under Mth changes : λ = 0.2,
ﬁxed Mth = 3.8
The result shows that Mth can adapt to the environment
where λ is ﬁxed. Consequently, it is conﬁrmed that the
proposed method can assign spectrum well even if the WiMAX
provider and WiFi providers are non-cooperative.
Moreover, according to [18], the mobile communication
trafﬁc in a day varies. It states that the trafﬁc reach its peak at
23.00 and then decreases over the early morning. In addition,
there is a three times difference in the maximum and the
minimum trafﬁc. To conform with this fact, we model the
variation of λ as shown in Fig. 11 and observe the average
of users’ throughput over 30 days.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0
 6
 12
 18
 24
Average rate [1/s]
Time [h]
Figure 11: Time-varying λ
Figs. 12 and 13 show the change of Mth and the average
throughput under time-varying λ. In the morning with a low
trafﬁc, Mth is low to share spectrum easily. In contrast, the
heavier the mobile trafﬁc, the higher Mth to refrain from
loaning channels out cheaply.
Fig. 13 indicates that although proposed method includes
a delay in comparison with the existing method, the users’
throughput of the proposed method is much higher than that
of the non-sharing method. Therefore, the results conﬁrm that
the proposal method can improve throughput in a practical
situation.
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 0
 6
 12
 18
 24
Mth
Time [h]
Figure 12: Mth with time-varying λ
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 0
 6
 12
 18
 24
Throughput [Mbps]
Time [h]
Proposed method
Existing method
Without spectrum sharing
Figure 13: Overall throughput with time-varying λ
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we described the advances in wireless com-
munication technologies and the lack of frequency resources.
Next, we introduced integrated wireless network and spec-
trum sharing technology in heterogeneous integrated network.
Different spectrum sharing methods and their problems were
outlined. We proposed a spectrum sharing method using a
minimum channel price threshold, which enabled WiMAX
to control the spectrum sharing between non-cooperative
WiMAX/WiFi providers. In addition, adaptive parameter man-
agement was proposed. Finally, we showed that the proposed
method could assign spectrum efﬁciently and improve the user
throughput by simulation experiments.
As a future work, we consider to improve the adaptation
speed of the threshold and enhance the proposed method that
supports multiple WiMAX BSs consideration.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is partly supported by Strategic Information
and Communications R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE),
the Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and
Telecommunications (MPHPT), Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems,”
IEEE STD 802.16–2004, Oct. 2004.
[2]
“Air Interface for Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE
STD 802.16m, Mar. 2011.
[3]
IEEE
802.11,
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11/
[Dec,
2012].
[4]
I. F. Akyildiz, W. Lee, M. C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, “A Survey
on Spectrum Management in Cognitive Radio Networks,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol.46, Apr. 2008, pp.40–48.
[5]
M. Nakagawa, K. Kawano, K. Kinoshita, and K. Murakami, “A
Spectrum Assignment Method based on Genetic Algorithm in
WiMAX/WiFi Integrated Network,” ACM CoNEXT, Dec. 2009,
pp.11–12.
[6]
D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Spectrum Trading in Cognitive Ra-
dio Networks: A Market-Equilibrium-Based Approach,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol.15, Dec. 2008, pp.71–80.
[7]
W. Song, W. Zhuang, and Y. Cheng, “Load Balancing for
Cellular/WLAN Integrated Networks,” IEEE Network, vol.21,
no.1, Jan.-Feb. 2007, pp.27–33.
[8]
M. Bennis, M. Simsek, A. Czylwik, W. Saad, S. Valentin, and
M. Debbah, “When Cellular Meets WiFi in Wireless Small Cell
Networks,” IEEE Comunications Magazine, vol.51, June 2013,
pp.44–50.
[9]
S. Hanaoka, J. Yamamoto, and M. Yano, “Platform for Load
Balancing and Throughput Enhancement with Cognitive Radio,”
IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol.E91-B, no.8, Aug.
2008, pp.2501–2508.
[10]
J. M. Peha, “Approaches to Spectrum Sharing,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol.43, Feb. 2005, pp.10–12.
[11]
D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Wireless Broadband Access: Inte-
gration of WiMAX and WiFi: Optimal Pricing for Bandwidth
Sharing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.45, no.5, May
2007, pp.140–146.
[12]
K. Kinoshita, Y. Kanamori, K. Kawano, and K. Murakami,
“A Dynamic Spectrum Assignment Method for Call Blocking
Probability Reduction in WiFi/WiMAX Integrated Networks,”
IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E94-B, no.12,
Dec. 2011, pp.3498-3504.
[13]
J. Huang, R. A. Berry, and M. L. Honig, “Spectrum Sharing
in Cognitive Radio Networks – An Auction based Approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B:
Cybernetics, vol.40, June 2010, pp.587–596.
[14]
H. Takemoto, K. Kawano, K. Kinoshita, and K. Murakami,
“A Spectrum Sharing Method Considering Users’ Behavior
for Uncooperative WiFi/WiMAX Providers,” ICN, Jan. 2013,
pp.15–20.
[15]
WiMAX Forum, http://www.wimaxforum.org/ [Dec, 2012].
[16]
ns-2, The Network Simulator
http://nsnam.isi.edu/nsnam/index.php/ [Dec, 2012].
[17]
J. Xiao, R.Q. Hu, Y. Qian, L. Gong, and B. Wang, “Expanding
LTE network spectrum with cognitive radios: From concept to
implementation,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol.20, Apr.
2013, pp.12–19.
[18]
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications (Japan),
“Waga Kunino Ido Tsusin Trafﬁc No Genzyo (Heisei 25Nendo
3Gatsu Bun)” (in Japanese)
http://www.soumu.go.jp/johotsusintokei/ﬁeld/ [Dec, 2012].
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

