Use Cases and 6G Architecture: New Needs and Challenges 
 
Francine Cássia de Oliveira 
Integration and Testing Department 
Eldorado Research Institute 
Campinas, Brazil 
Email: francine.oliveira@eldorado.org.br 
Gustavo Iervolino de Morais 
Electronic Devices Department 
Eldorado Research Institute 
Campinas, Brazil 
Email: gustavo.morais@eldorado.org.br 
João Victor Menino e Silva 
Integration and Testing Department 
Eldorado Research Institute 
Campinas, Brazil 
Email: joao.menino@eldorado.org.br 
Ramon Magalhães Nogueira 
Integration and Testing Department 
Eldorado Research Institute 
Campinas, Brazil 
Email: ramon.nogueira@eldorado.org.br
 
 
Abstract— The cellular network standard is stepping to the 
sixth generation, 6G. This new standard has been considered a 
key enabler for the smart information society of 2030. The 6G 
networks are expected to deliver superior performance over 
5G and satisfy new emerging services and applications that 
integrate space, air, ground, and underwater networks to 
provide ubiquitous and unlimited wireless connectivity. There 
is a huge number of uses cases that poses varying requirements 
which include extreme mobility, extreme low latency, ultra 
high data rates, high energy efficiency, enhanced security, as 
well as high reliability. From this perspective, it is necessary to 
consider some of the key features that can be fundamental for 
the construction of the 6G network architecture. In this article, 
we will list some main use cases that will need the main 6G 
functionalities to work correctly and meet the expected 
expectations with the main 6G requirements so that it is 
possible to identify relevant points in the construction of a 
robust and flexible network architecture. 
Keywords - 6G; use cases; architecture; applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. 
Background 
The growing demand for greater data traffic capacity, the 
staggered growth in the number of users, technological 
advances and new services drive the mobile communication 
systems and thus the development of the 5G system of 
International Mobile Telecommunications-2020 (IMT-2020) 
[1] was initiated. In International Telecommunication Union-
Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R), the Working Party 5D 
(WP5D), is responsible for the radio system aspects of the 
International that includes the IMT-2000, IMT-Advanced, 
IMT-2020 and IMT-2030. For IMT-2020, the WP5D created 
a process to be followed from the beginning of the study of 
trends until the end of the work on standards. The 
capabilities of IMT-2020 are identified such that IMT-2020 
is more flexible, reliable and secure than previous IMT and 
provides diverse services. IMT-2020 can be considered from 
multiple perspectives, including the users, manufacturers, 
application developers, network operators, and service and 
content providers. 
The WP5D commenced its work on the recommendation 
“IMT Vision for 2030 and beyond” in March 2021. The IMT 
Vision for 2030 and beyond is being developed with the aim 
to drive the industries and administrations to encourage 
further development of IMT by defining the objectives of the 
future of IMT, including the role IMT could play to meet the 
needs of future societies. Some of the objectives of the vision 
towards IMT for 2030 and beyond are: focus on continued 
need for increased coverage, capacity and extremely high 
user data rates, focus on continued need for lower latency 
and both high and low speed of the mobile terminals, full 
support to the development of an Ubiquitous Intelligent 
Mobile Society, focus on delivering on digital inclusion and 
connection with the rural and remote communities, among 
others [1]. To meet the diverse requirements of the upcoming 
decade, a robust, scalable and efficient network is thus 
necessary to be the key enabler for achieving this objective; 
it will connect everything, provide full dimensional wireless 
coverage, and integrate all functions, including sensing, 
communication, computing, caching, control, positioning, 
radar, navigation, and imaging, to support full-vertical 
applications. 
 
B. 
Motivation 
In fifth-generation networks, one of the main pillars in 
their development was the interconnection of everything, but 
applications involved with the Internet of Vehicles and 
Industrial Internet, for example, may be far from being met 
with such technology. Some questions are still unanswered, 
such as: What will be the problems of 5G for application in 
the industrial area? What will a green industry look like? 
Perhaps, these and other questions challenge the capacity of 
5G and, probably, only 6G can solve. 
Many white papers have addressed some aspects about 
the 6G network. For example, new 6G applications and 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

requirements are discussed in [2], 6G enabling technologies 
are mentioned in [3] and 6G enablers to drive Industry 5.0 
are discussed in [4]. However, it is still too early to say 
exactly what the 6G network architecture will look like as 
the network and corresponding technologies are still under 
development.  
Therefore, the main objective of this study is to analyze 
the main use cases that will require a network such as the 
sixth generation and the indicators related to them that may 
directly influence the construction of the 6G network 
architecture. 
C. 
Paper Organization 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II summarizes the related work. Section III brings 
some use cases that can be explored in 6G. In Section IV, 
some target indicators related to these use cases that will 
bring possible changes in the 6G network architecture. 
Section V concludes the paper and suggests future works. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several studies involving 6G architecture have been 
carried out to meet the demands of a fully connected, 
intelligent and digital world. In [5], Huda Mahmood et al., 
propose an architecture composed of seven functions that 
have functionalities for essential enabling technologies. The 
objective of this architecture is to allow the optimization of 
such functionalities through dedicated network components. 
According to Purbita Mitra et al. [6], 6G networks aim 
for 
ubiquitous 
intelligence 
and 
high-speed 
wireless 
connectivity in air, space and sea. This will require a super 
fast service with data speeds close to around 1000 Mbps. 
Marco Giordani et al. [7] have an analysis that suggests that 
meeting 
these 
high 
demands 
will 
require 
new 
communication technologies, network architecture and 
deployment models. Finally, Bariah et al. gave a 
comprehensive overview of 6G in [8], identifying seven 
disruptive technologies, associated requirements, challenges 
and open research questions. 
So far, a considerable number of papers have explored 
possible applications and solutions for the architecture of 6G 
networks, therefore, the present related work analyzes factors 
that may influence the evolution of the 5G network to 6G or 
the construction of a new network architecture with the 
purpose to fulfill the requirements specified by the IMT-
2030 for the next decade of technological evolution. 
 
III. 
USE CASES 
The 
5G, 
through 
the 
Massive 
Machine-Type 
Communications (mMTC) and Ultra Reliable Low Latency 
Communications (URLLC) use cases, has resulted in a 
significant increase in the number of connected devices. New 
applications in vertical industries emerge every day, bringing 
a significant impact on people's daily lives. Internet of 
Things (IoT) solutions will continue to emerge and there are 
several use cases whose stringent requirements 5G can not 
meet, its stringent requirements, such as Augmented Reality 
(AR), Virtual Reality (VR), haptic internet, telemedicine, 
among others. The sixth generation mobile network, 6G, 
should support and improve the connectivity and operation 
of such applications. 
Therefore, many use cases will require requirements that 
can only be met with sixth-generation technology. Three of 
these cases are listed below. 
A. 
Digital Twins 
With the increasing number of connected “things”, in 6G, 
a self-sustainable system should be proposed, which can be 
intelligent and operate with minimal human intervention. 
One technology, which presents itself as a strong candidate 
for such a requirement, and has received great attention, is 
the Digital Twins. It is a virtual representation of the 
elements and dynamics of a physical system [9]. In an ideal 
scenario, a Digital Twin will be indistinguishable from the 
physical asset, both in terms of appearance and behavior, 
with the added benefit of making predictions [10]. Figure [1] 
illustrates this representation of the virtual elements in 
relation to a physical system. Advances in other 
technologies make Digital Twins a powerful solution and 
contribute to its advancement. For example, recent advances 
in Machine Learning enable Digital Twins to analyze data 
and make decisions to be applied to the physical entity. This 
data can come from a network of sensors, from historical 
data or even from other Digital Twins (through a twin-to-
twin interface). In other words, automation and intelligence 
will be created in the cyber world and delivered to the 
physical world through 6G wireless networks [11]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Representation of the virtual elements in relation to a physical 
system [11]. 
 
Another enabler for the Digital Twins has been the 
significant advances in cloud solutions. The transformation 
of a physical system into a Digital Twin is mainly based on 
the concept of decoupling. To enable Digital Twin for 6G 
with decoupling, Software Defined Networking (SDN) and 
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) could be promising 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

candidates [8], which are heavily dependent on cloud 
solutions. 
Digital Twins consist of three parts - the physical part, 
the digital part and the connection between the two for two-
way communication. For this two-way communication, 
there is a unanimous opinion in the research community that 
the sixth generation (6G) mobile network will play a 
significant role [12], given that the Digital Twins 
technology requires a fast and reliable communication 
network.  
In addition to the contribution of 6G, many benefits can 
be achieved through the technology of Digital Twins. Since 
the Digital Twin “mimics” the real physical environment 
and can learn and make decisions through artificial 
intelligence algorithms, there are several aspects in the 
research and development of 6G communication systems 
that could benefit from the application of this technology.  
There are several network domains, such as Radio 
Access Network (RAN), Network Edge, Radio Resource 
Management (RRM), Edge Computing, Network Slicing, 
etc., that can significantly improve their performance using 
Digital Twins technology [13]. 
 
B. 
Human-centric immersive communications 
Through the ages, human beings have evolved their 
cognitive capacity through the use of all the senses in 
relationships with other individuals and with nature, 
therefore, the search for a better communication experience 
has been constant since the invention of the first 
communication systems. In our smartphones, every year we 
see the screen resolution being improved to the limit of 
human perception, which is quite interesting, but it has the 
limiting factor of having to enter data through only touches 
on the screen. Therefore, in order to provide an immersive 
experience, in which the human being can use senses in a 
more accurate way, new technologies such as AR and VR, 
as well as holographic communications have been emerging 
in recent times. Through them, it will be possible to offer 
new forms of interaction between human beings and their 
devices and, consequently, new forms of human-to-human 
interaction. Communication that until then was carried out 
strictly through a smartphone, mostly with touches on the 
screen, can evolve so that it is possible to enter data through 
gestures and even through nerve impulses generated by the 
brain. Obtaining data will also be improved and synesthesia 
becomes even more present through, for example, the 
combination of sounds and three-dimensional elements that 
can be inserted and merged with the user's perception of the 
real world through glasses, ocular lenses and devices in-ear 
audio. 
For such technologies to be offered as good user 
experiences through the 6G network, ultra-high data rates 
are required, in the order of Tbits/s, which is currently 
impossible to achieve with the 5G network. In addition to 
the very high rate, another fundamental requirement for 
such teleoperations involving the senses and human 
perception is very low latency. This parameter is necessary 
in order to avoid dizziness and fatigue when obtaining 
tactile and visual feedbacks in real time [11]. 
 
C. 
Industry 5.0 
Industry 5.0 is the enhancement of Industry 4.0 and 
brings new goals with resilient, sustainable and human-
centric approaches in a variety of emerging applications, for 
example, factories of the future and digital society. It is a 
quest to leverage human intelligence and creativity in 
connection with intelligent, efficient systems, use of 
cognitive collaborative robots to achieve zero waste, zero 
defects and mass customization based manufacturing 
solutions. 
The enabling technologies of Industry 5.0 are multiple 
systems resulting from the continuous convergence of 
technologies and paradigms that unite physical spaces and 
cyberspaces. 
Successfully 
working 
the 
symbiotic 
relationship between multiple complex systems and 
supporting technological frameworks together can only 
enable the true multidimensional potential of Industry 5.0 
functions [4]. These Industry 5.0 technology enablers are: 
Human-Machine Interaction, Real-time Virtual Simulation 
and Digital Twin, Artificial Intelligence-native Smart 
Systems, Data Infrastructure, Sharing and Analytics, Bio-
inspired Technologies, among others. 
The relationship between the 6G and Industry 5.0 is 
expected to meet with the intelligent information standard 
that provides high energy efciency, very low latency, high 
reliability, plus capacity of trafic.  
 
IV. 
TARGET INDICATORS FOR 6G 
Each new use case presents extremely specific advanced 
requirements and that, in the current scenario, the 5G 
network does not have the capacity to meet and work with 
all these requirements. Figure 2 illustrates the comparison 
between 5G and 6G requirements. Therefore, in order to 
understand how the new 6G network should be designed, 
some target indicators will be presented that exemplify the 
needs of this new generation of network. 
 
A. 
Latency 
As shown, several new end-user and vertical industry 
applications tend to emerge with the advancement of 
technology, for example, autonomous vehicles, Virtual 
Reality, Augmented Reality, holographic communication 
should be common applications in the future. These new use 
cases tend to require the same Key Performance Indication 
(KPI) as seen in 5G, but with new target values, for 
example, higher throughput, lower latency and better 
reliability. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 2.  Comparison between 5G and 6G requirements [14]. 
 
Latency was a critical KPI in 5G and is expected to 
continue to be a concern in 6G networks, given that many 
applications are dependent on this KPI. On 5G, the 
minimum user plan latency requirement is 4ms for enhanced 
Mobile Broadband (eMBB) and 1ms for Ultra-Reliable Low 
Latency Communications (URLLC). This value is expected 
to be further reduced in 6G, to 100 µs or even 10 µs. In 
addition to air interface latency, 6G must also consider End 
to End (E2E) latency [14]. E2E latency is trickier to manage 
due to the myriad network elements involved, but 6G should 
overcome this challenge. 
 
B. 
Reliability 
As with 5G, ultra-reliable, low-latency communications 
requirements will continue to guide the future 6G network. 
Although the 5G system has created an environment for a 
more secure system, its reliability mechanisms are strictly 
connectivity oriented, therefore, the handling of failures in 
the application layer is left to the application itself. From the 
point of view of mobile networks, any instance outside its 
domain is considered outside the scope of treatment, but 
with 6G this should change. 
In addition to enhancements to existing 5G security 
mechanisms, one of the most promising mechanisms for the 
sixth-generation system is Make-Before-Break-Reliability 
(MBBR). With it, it is possible to promote an interaction 
between the application servers and the mobile network, in 
order to detect failures. In short, MBBR gives the mobile 
network the possibility of previously detecting problems 
and security flaws in the application servers and transferring 
a problem-free copy to a redundant application server. In 
this way, the communication sections between the end 
device and the application will receive treatment from the 
6G network, which will surely promote another layer of 
reliability for the system, making it a truly ultra-reliable 
network [11]. 
 
C. 
Terahertz Communications 
Communications in Terahertz work between 100GHz 
and 10THz and, compared to millimeter waves, they brings 
a great potential for high frequency connectivity, enabling 
high data rates, in the order of hundreds of Gbps, which is 
what is expected from 6G. 
On the other hand, the main problems in adopting this 
type of communication are directly linked to problems of 
propagation, molecular absorption, high penetration loss and 
major challenges related to antennas and Radio Frequency 
(RF) circuits [15]. 
In the case of millimeter waves, the propagation loss can 
be 
compensated 
using 
antenna 
arrays 
and 
spatial 
multiplexing with interference limitation. 
Terahertz communications can be maximized by 
operating in frequency bands that are not severely affected 
by molecular absorption. And, finally, because these are 
very high frequencies, for indoor scenarios, it will be 
necessary to enable new types of RF solutions and ultra-
small scale antennas. 
Based on the characteristics of this type of transmission, 
the 6G network architecture will be directly impacted. For 
example, density and high data rates will increase demands 
on the capacities of the transport network, which must 
provide more fiber access points and greater capacity than 
current network backhauls. Furthermore, the wide range of 
different communication media available will increase the 
heterogeneity of the network, which will have to be 
managed [6]. 
 
TABLE I. THz WAVE PROPAGATION CHARACTERISTICS AND 
IMPACT ON THZ SYSTEMS 
 
To overcome these challenges, most of the conventional 
resource allocation algorithms are designed using high-
speed fiber backhaul links, which are not applicable due to 
geographic limitations in historic buildings.  
Fortunately, the very short wavelength in the THz band 
allows the use of an ultramassive array of antennas, i.e. 
containing 256, 512 or even 1024 antennas in the 
transmitter, which can provide a high beamforming gain to 
compensate for the loss of propagation. Meanwhile, 
precoding with multiple data streams can be used to provide 
multiplexing gain to further improve the spectral efficiency 
of THz systems. In the THz band, hybrid precoding that 
combines digital and analog domain signal processing is 
promising, as the number of RF chains is substantially less 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

than that of full digital precoding, while achieving superior 
performance. comparable [16]. 
A good comparison of the key THz propagation 
characteristics and their impact on THz systems, is depicted 
in Table 1 [17]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this article, an overview of 6G was presented, the 
expectations of society as a whole for the coming years in 
relation to this new technology, the preparation of the ITU 
in the construction of IMT-2030 and also a comparison of 
requirements with 5G. The study was directed towards 
researching some of the new use cases that will be 
introduced with the arrival of 6G, in order to present its 
objectives, characteristics and necessary requirements for its 
operation. 
The Digital Twins use case makes it clear that machine 
learning, 
cloud 
solutions, 
and 
fast 
and 
reliable 
communication will be some of your key requirements. The 
Human-centric 
immersive 
communications 
use 
case 
presents needs such as bit rates in the order of Tbits/s and 
very low latency. Finally, the Industry 5.0 use case presents 
the requirements already mentioned by the previous use 
cases as a necessity. After studying these use cases, the 
requirements, also known as target indicators, were 
discussed bringing confirmation of the need for a new 
network architecture. 
With ultra-low latencies, in the order of 10 micros, ultra-
reliable networks and transmissions in the order of 
Terahertz, it is expected that new network elements will be 
introduced, as well as the communication structure between 
them will be modified. 6G is expected to have intelligent 
and distributed network management in such a way that it 
can handle all demands privately and securely. All this must 
occur so that the success of the 6G deployment is possible 
and that all the desired objectives are achieved.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] ITU-R, “IMT traffic estimates for the years 2020 to 2030,” 
Report ITU-R M.2370-0, July 2015. 
[2] L. Zhang, Y. Liang and D. Niyato, “6G Visions: Mobile ultra-
broadband, 
super 
internet-of-things, 
and 
artificial 
intelligence”, China Communications, vol. 16, no. 8, 2019, 
pp. 1-14. 
[3] J. Zhu, M. Zhao, S. Zhang and W. Zhou,” Exploring the Road 
to 6G: ABC - Foundation for Intelligent Mobile Networks”, 
China Communications, vol. 17, no. 6, 2020, pp. 51-67. 
[4] S. Zeb et al., “Industry 5.0 is Coming: A Survey on Intelligent 
NextG Wireless Networks as Technological Enablers”, 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 200, 
2022. 
[5]  N. H Mahmood et al., “A Functional Architecture for 6G 
Special-Purpose Industrial IoT Networks”, IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Informatics, vol. 19, no. 3, 2023, pp. 2530-2540. 
[6] P. Mitra et al., “Towards 6G Communications: Architecture, 
Challenges, and Future Directions”, 2021 12th International 
Conference on Computing Communication and Networking 
Technologies (ICCCNT), 2021. 
[7] M Giordani et al., “Towards 6G Networks: Use Cases and 
Technologies”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 
3, 2020. 
[8] L. Bariah et al., “A prospective look: Key enabling 
technologies, applications and open research topics in 6G 
networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 174792–174820, 2020. 
[9] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han and C. S. Hong, 
“Digital Twin Enabled 6G: Vision, Architecture Trends, and 
Future Directions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 60, 
no. 1, 2022. 
[10] A. Rasheed, O. San and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital Twin Values, 
Challenges And Enablers From A Modeling Perspective,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 8, 2020. 
[11] W. Tong and P. Zhu, “6G The Next Horizon,” Cambridge 
University Press, 2021. 
[12] N. P. Kuruvatti, M. A. Habibi, S. Partani, B. Han, A. Fellan 
and H. D. Schotten., “Empowering 6G Communication 
Systems With Digital Twin Technology: A Comprehensive 
Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 112158–112186, 2022. 
[13] Z. 
Zhang 
et 
al., 
“6G 
Wireless 
Networks: 
Vision, 
Requirements, Architecture, and Key Technologies,” IEEE 
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 14, pp. 28-41, 2019. 
[14] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. a. Habibi and H. D. Schotten., “The 
Road Towards 6G: A Comprehensive Survey,” IEEE Open 
Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334-366, 
2021. 
[15] Q. Zhang, W. Ma, Z. Feng and Z. Han., “Backhaul-Capacity-
Aware Interference Mitigation Framework in 6G Cellular 
Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 8, 
pp. 10071-10084, 2021. 
[16] L. Yan, C. Han and J. Yuan., “Hybrid Precoding for 6G 
Terahertz Communications_Performance Evaluation and 
Open Problems,” 2020 2nd 6G Wireless Summit, 2020. 
[17] H. Tataria, M. Shafi, A. F. Molisch, M. Dohler, H. Sjoland 
and 
F. 
Tufvesson., 
“6G 
Wireless 
Systems: 
Vision, 
Requirements, Challenges, Insights, and Opportunities”, 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 109.7, 2021, pp. 1166-1199. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

