A Channel Utilization Method for Flow Admission Control
with Maximum Network Capacity
toward Loss-free Software Deﬁned WMNs
Masaki Tagawa
Graduate School of Information Science
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Nara, Japan
e-mail: tagawa.masaki.td4@is.naist.jp
Yuzo Taenaka
Information Technology Center
The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: taenaka@nc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Kazuya Tsukamoto
Department of Computer Science and Electronics
Kyushu Institute of Technology
Fukuoka, Japan
e-mail: tsukamoto@cse.kyutech.ac.jp
Suguru Yamaguchi
Graduate School of Information Science
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
Nara, Japan
e-mail: suguru@is.naist.jp
Abstract—This paper proposes an efﬁcient multi-channel uti-
lization method that reduces packet loss on software deﬁned
multi-channel wireless mesh network (SD-WMN). In SD-WMN,
multiple channels can be used in parallel along with a route.
To utilize multiple channels efﬁciently, we proposed a channel
utilization method that balances the channel load by exploiting
the ﬂow-based control of OpenFlow. However, packet loss often
occurs under this proposed method. Speciﬁcally, this method
balances the network load, thereby decreasing the available
capacity of each channel. Along to this, an acceptable ﬂow also
becomes smaller. A channel may run out of capacity when a
large ﬂow arrives, even if the total available capacity provided
by SD-WMN is sufﬁcient for that ﬂow. Thus, in this paper, we
propose a new method that is optimized to increase the available
capacity on some of all channels by intentionally making the
channel utilization imbalanced. When a new ﬂow arrives, the ﬂow
is transmitted on the channel, thereby minimizing the possibility
of packet loss. We then conduct some experiments in various
scenarios and show that the method can extremely decrease the
packet loss at the time when a ﬂow arrives.
Keywords—capacity management; trafﬁc engineering; multiple
channels; OpenFlow; wireless mesh network.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the popularization of smart devices, the amount of
mobile data trafﬁc from such devices is expected to increase
nearly tenfold between 2014 and 2019 [1]. To ofﬂoad this
heavy trafﬁc from cellular networks, access points (APs) which
are base stations on a wireless local area network (WLAN)
are spreading. However, APs tend to be densely placed near
each other and often suffer from severe radio interference.
Furthermore, the coverage area of each AP overlaps with
each other, thereby resulting in small service coverage. From
these reasons, the amount of ofﬂoading trafﬁc is still limited
under current WLAN environments. Therefore, it is essential
to extend WLAN coverage.
Wireless mesh network (WMN) is a good solution to
extend WLAN coverage. In WMN, all APs construct a multi-
hop wireless backbone network (WBN) by using the same
channel and only some speciﬁc APs provide the Internet
connectivity to other APs through the WBN. The multi-hop
network contributes to large coverage but limits the network
capacity because the capacity of a single channel is theoret-
ically limited. In order to exploit WMN for the purpose of
coverage extension, we need to increase the network capacity
by effectively aggregating multiple channels.
In the previous work, we proposed a novel WMN architec-
ture that utilizes multiple channels in parallel [2]. However,
the network capacity provided by a WBN strongly depends
on how to utilize multiple channels. We thus proposed a
channel utilization method to maximize the network capacity.
The method balances the network load by switching trans-
mission channels for each ﬂow while considering the impact
of radio interference inside the WMN. This method is called
Trafﬁc Volume Balancing Method between Interference APs
(TBI) [3]. However, TBI often causes packet loss when a
new ﬂow arrives. Since TBI utilizes all channels equally, the
available capacity of each channel is decreased in accordance
with the increase of ﬂows. More speciﬁcally, the acceptable
ﬂow size of every channel becomes smaller. As a result, when
a ﬂow arrives, no channel can transfer the ﬂow without packet
loss even if the available capacity provided by all channels is
enough for transmitting the ﬂow. To avoid such situation, the
available capacity of some channels should be maximized as
much as possible even when there are multiple ﬂows.
In this paper, we further develop the channel utilization
method to avoid packet loss at the time of ﬂow arrival. The
method tries to maximize the available capacity on some of the
channels on a WBN. That is, the method ﬁlls channels with
ﬂows, thereby making the channel utilization imbalanced. The
channel is selected in order from least available capacity for
keeping channels with large available capacity to carry a new
ﬂow with minimum possibility in packet losses.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
is an overview of related work. In Section III, we outline
an overview of our previous studies and point out potential
packet loss on channel utilization methods which balance the
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

Handle multiple APs as an AP, virtually
VAP1
VAP2
VAP3
AP1-1
AP1-2
AP2-1
AP2-2
AP3-1
AP3-2
Ch.A
Ch.B
OFC
Client 1
 Directly 
connected
by
Ethernet
cable
Figure 1. WBN architecture with virtual AP.
network load on multiple channels. Section IV develops the
channel utilization method to avoid packet loss by making the
channel utilization imbalanced. In Section IV, we implement
and examine the proposed method in a real testbed and demon-
strate the effectiveness of our method. Finally, we conclude
this paper with conclusions and future work in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
To date, many studies focusing on routing protocols, channel
assignment, and a MAC protocol, have been conducted for
increasing network capacity [4–9]. Furthermore, many multi-
channel routing protocols are conducted in conjunction with
channel assignment [5–9]. In essence, these studies dynami-
cally switch paths by updating the routing table in response to
the change in the network condition. However, these protocols
cannot simultaneously use multiple paths between two neigh-
boring APs because the routing table generally contains only a
single path (i.e., one channel) to reach a neighboring AP. Thus,
it is necessary to propose a channel utilization method that uses
all available channels between neighboring APs effectively and
simultaneously.
III. PREVIOUS WORK
This section outlines an overview of our previous stud-
ies [2][3]. We ﬁrst introduce the architecture of our WBN in
Section III-A and then brieﬂy describe TBI in Section III-C.
Finally, we point out potential packet loss on TBI in Sec-
tion III-C.
A. Multi-channel WBN based on OpenFlow control
Single channel WMN can suffer from serious network
capacity degradation due to the nature of the wireless medium.
Therefore, in order to increase the network capacity, effectively
aggregating multiple channels is needed. To increase the
number of channels used for the WBN, we employ a virtual
AP (VAP) as shown in Figure 1. The VAP consists of multiple
APs, each of which uses a single but different channel for the
WBN and are directly connected by Ethernet cable. From this
structure, we can ﬂexibly increase the number of channels
used for the WBN in accordance with the number of APs
belonging to the VAP. Note that, to easily indicate each VAP,
a VAP have its own identiﬁcation number (VAPID) denoted
as “VAPX”. In addition, each AP is uniquely identiﬁed as
“APX-Y ”, which combines a VAPID (= X) and a sequential
number (APID) (= Y ).
To ﬂexibly use channels on the WBN, we employ Open-
Flow, which enables us to use programs to control ﬂow
transfer. In this study, a ﬂow is identiﬁed by 4-tuples
(source/destination IP address and port number). An Open-
Flow network consists of an OpenFlow Controller (OFC) and
an OpenFlow Switch (OFS). The OFC connects with all OFSs
(=APs) and determines ﬂow control rules (ﬂow entries) when
necessary. All OFSs actually handle ﬂows by following ﬂow
entries which are cached in a local database (ﬂow table). By
exploiting ﬂow based control mechanism of OpenFlow, we can
ﬂexibly select a path (channel) for each ﬂow at each hop. That
is, we dynamically control channel utilization on the WBN.
B. Proposed channel utilization methods
We introduce a channel utilization method, TBI, which
was proposed in the previous work[3]. The method balances
the network load by controlling transmission channels of
each ﬂow. TBI treats the byte count transmitted for certain
duration as the network load. Since there is radio interference
between hops in a multi-hop network, TBI also considers
radio interference inside the WBN. More speciﬁcally, the OFC
makes all OFSs (APs) send probe packets to each other and
then identiﬁes interference APs for each AP. Then, based
on this recognized interference (i.e., radio range), the OFC
calculates the total amount of bytes transmitted within radio
range and uses this as the network load.
TBI tries to balance the network load, however, the network
load caused by new ﬂows is unknown at ﬁrst. Therefore, the
OFC cannot ﬁnd an appropriate channel for a ﬂow so as to
balance the network load at a ﬂow arrival. Thus, in TBI, the
OFC tentatively selects a channel to carry the ﬂow. Once the
OFC identiﬁes the trafﬁc volume of the ﬂow, the OFC tries to
change the channel to carry the ﬂow to balance the network
load among all channels in the WBN. TBI achieves these two
allocations by two types of processing: the initial allocation
and the late binding, respectively.
In the initial allocation, the OFC tentatively selects a
channel with lesser network load to avoid packet loss as
much as possible. The initial allocation is conducted upon
the arrival of each new ﬂow. On the other hand, the late
binding process tries to make the trafﬁc volume of each
channel on a VAP balanced in case of imbalance utilization of
channels. For the late binding, the OFC periodically checks the
transmitted byte count of each ﬂow. Then, in order to obtain
the network load of each channel, the OFC calculates the sum
of transmitted byte counts of each ﬂow on each channel. If
the OFC identiﬁes an imbalanced channel utilization, the OFC
switches the transmitting channel of some ﬂows in the WBN.
C. Potential packet loss due to balancing mechanism
TBI balances the network load by equally transmitting ﬂows
in terms of transmitted bytes as shown in Figure 2. Along
with the increase of ﬂows, the available capacity decreases
on all channels. Although TBI transmits a new ﬂow on a
channel with the lowest network load, the available capacity of
a single channel may not be enough for the ﬂow and packets
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

VAP1
VAP2
VAP3
AP1-1
AP1-2
AP2-1
AP2-2
AP3-1
AP3-2
Ch.A
Ch.B
OFC
Client 1
Client 2
Ch.A Ch.B
Traffic vol.
Initial Allocation
#1
#1
Ch.A Ch.B
Traffic vol.
Late Binding
#1
#1
Balanced
Figure 2. Example of ﬂow allocation with TBI.
are inevitably dropped. However, even in this case, the WBN
may still have sufﬁcient available capacity for the ﬂow with
regards to the sum of available capacity in all channels. From
these considerations, we conclude that the balancing channel
utilization method increases the possibility of packet loss.
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
We propose a new channel utilization method to minimize
the number of packet losses. Since the reason for packet loss
is the balancing mechanism as described in Section III-C, we
intentionally create an imbalanced channel utilization. That is,
the available capacity is maximized on some of the channels
and other channels are ﬁlled by ﬂows. If at least one channel
can have a large available capacity, the possibility of packet
loss could be minimized by transmitting a new ﬂow on such a
channel. In order to ﬁll the channel with ﬂows without packet
loss, it is necessary to calculate the available network capacity
of each channel. The calculation method of these capacity
is described in Section IV-A. To achieve ﬂow allocation
according to the concept, an arriving ﬂow is (1) initially
transmitted on a tentative channel and then (2) moved onto
a channel to ﬁll the channel. Also, some ﬂows are switched to
a channel whenever a ﬂow transmitted on the channel is ended.
These processes are described in Section IV-B, Section IV-C
and Section IV-D, respectively.
A. Calculation of available capacity
To maximize the available capacity in some channels, ﬂows
should be packed into the smallest number of channels. To
design a method according to the concept, it is necessary
to precisely know the available capacity on every channel
because without this information, a channel may be saturated
due to running out of capacity.
In the wireless network, it is easy to measure the amount
of transmitted trafﬁc but the available capacity is not so.
In this study, we estimate the available capacity based on
the information about transmitted trafﬁc. We ﬁrst obtain the
statistical information on transmitted trafﬁc (i.e., the number
of transmitted packets and the amount of transmitted trafﬁc)
for every channel on every VAP. In this measurement, we
collect it twice for the predetermined interval (0.5 seconds
in this study) and calculate its difference. This means that the
calculated packets are transmitted during the interval. We also
measure the physical link rate of every channel on every hop.
We next estimate the time that was necessary to transmit the
packets (i.e., channel occupancy time). It can be calculated
by dividing the amount of trafﬁc (including frame/packet
headers) by the physical link rate and then adding overhead
(e.g., DIFS and SIFS) of every packet transmission. Since the
statistical information was measured for the predetermined
interval, we can easily ﬁnd the duration that was not occu-
pied, i.e., the differences between the predetermined and the
calculated channel occupancy time. Finally, we can calculate
the available capacity by multiplying the unoccupied duration
by the physical link rate.
B. Tentative channel allocation for arrival ﬂow
In order to minimize the possibility of packet loss in
TBI, new ﬂows are transferred with a channel which has
largest available network capacity. However, it is important to
note that the available network capacity should be shared by
some ﬂows. For example, when multiple ﬂows arrive almost
simultaneously, TBI uses the same information about available
network capacity to select a tentative channel to transmit
each of them. As a result, they are transmitted on the same
channel and share the available network capacity of a single
channel. If other channels are free, these channels should be
selected for some of the ﬂows to avoid packet loss as much as
possible. From this consideration, we additionally consider the
expected occupation capacity on a channel for each arriving
ﬂow. That is, we take into account the number of ﬂows, which
is transmitted on a channel but its occupation capacity is not
identiﬁed yet. The detailed process is described below.
The tentative allocation is conducted at each arrival of ﬂow.
The OFC ﬁrst obtains the available network capacity of each
channel (referred to as Ac) as described in Section IV-A. Then,
the OFC collects the number of ﬂows which are supposed to be
sharing the available network capacity (this number is referred
to as n). To obtain this, the OFC checks the number of ﬂows
whose statistical information (i.e., the number of transmitted
packets and the amount of transmitted trafﬁc) has not yet
been identiﬁed. Note that, to calculate the expected occupation
capacity, we increase the number by one as if the focusing ﬂow
is transmitted on the channel.
The OFC next estimates the expected occupation capacity
of the ﬂow on each channel by Ac/(n + 1). Then, the OFC
identiﬁes the channel with the largest expected value. Note
that this process is performed on all hops upon which the ﬂow
will pass. Finally, the OFC allocates the ﬂow to the identiﬁed
channel by registering ﬂow entries to OFSs.
C. Packing ﬂows into the smallest number of channels
Since the OFC cannot obtain the statistical information of
a ﬂow at its arrival, the OFC tentatively allocates the ﬂow
to the channel. To minimize the possibility of packet loss in
the tentative channel allocation, the WBN should keep some
channels free. To achieve this, we pack as much ﬂows into the
smallest number of channels. Note that in accordance with the
increase of ﬂows, the number of channels which are ﬁlled by
ﬂows inevitably increases. In order to obtain largest available
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

capacity among these channels, we select a channel to be ﬁlled
next in order from the least available capacity to the largest.
After the tentative channel allocation at arrival of a ﬂow,
the OFC tries to move the ﬂow to a speciﬁc channel. For this
migration, the OFC periodically collects statistical information
for every ﬂow and calculates the available capacity on each
channel as described in Section IV-A. Then, once the statistical
information on ﬂows which are transmitted on a tentative
channel is acquired, the ﬂow should be migrated to a speciﬁc
channel.
The OFC then tries to ﬁnd a channel to migrate the ﬂow.
The channel is selected in order of the least available capacity
at that time. Then, the OFC compare the available capacity
of the selected channel with the amount of the ﬂow. If the
amount of the ﬂow is smaller than the available capacity, the
ﬂow is switched onto the channel. Otherwise, the OFC selects
a next candidate channel and conducts the same process until
ﬁnding a channel to be used. If the ﬂow cannot be allocated to
any channel other than the current channel, the ﬂow remains
on the channel.
D. Handling ﬂow completion
When a ﬂow is ended, the available network capacity
increases at the channel that transferred the ﬂow (this channel
is referred to as B). In this case, some other ﬂows can
be packed into channel B, thereby increasing the available
capacity on other channels. Therefore, we try to move ﬂows
to channel B and ﬁll the gap caused by the completion of
the ﬂow so that other channel could be used for a tentative
channel at ﬂow arrival. To achieve this, the ﬂow is selected
on a channel that carries ﬂows but have the largest available
capacity. If no ﬂow is found on the channel, the OFC focus
on the next channel that has the next larger available capacity.
Note that, if any ﬂow cannot ﬁt the gap, the OFC left the
gap to pack a new ﬂow that should arrived later. The detailed
procedure is described step by step below.
OpenFlow has a function in which the OFS (AP) automat-
ically notiﬁes the OFC about the inactiveness of ﬂow entries
which handle the packet transmission of each ﬂow on the
OFS. Therefore, we regard the ﬂow as completed when this
notiﬁcation is generated. When the OFC ﬁnds the channel
whose ﬂow is completed (this channel is referred to as B), the
OFC tries to change transmitting channel of ﬂows from other
channels to channel B as shown in Figure 3. Speciﬁcally, once
the OFC ﬁnds the channel B, the OFC checks the available
network capacity of each channel in descending order. If the
available capacity of the channel is greater than that of channel
B, the OFC checks ﬂows on the selected channel.
The OFC tries to identify ﬂows on the channel to ﬁll
channel B. To achieve this, the OFC calculate the occupancy
network capacity of each ﬂow in the same way described in
Section IV-A. The OFC then compares this and the available
capacity of the channel, then decides whether the ﬂow can
be sent on the channel without packet loss. At this time, in
order to migrate ﬂows as much as possible, the OFC selects
target ﬂows in descending order of the occupancy network
Yes
Start
Find the channel whose flow is completed (= Ch.B)
Each VAP
Calculate the available network capacity of each channel
Each Channel
in ascending order of the available network capacity
Switch the channel of this flow to the channel
Calculate the channel occupancy time of this flow with Ch.B
and check whether this flow can be sent on this channel
Each Channel
Each VAP
End
Yes
No
Measure the channel occupancy time of all flows in all VAPs
Check whether the available network capacity is bigger than Ch.B
Each Flow
in descending order of the channel occupancy time
Add/subtract the channel occupancy time of this flow to/from 
channels of all interference APs without measurement
No
Each Flow
Figure 3. Flowchart of handling ﬂow completion.
capacity. Finally, the OFC changes the transmission channel
of the identiﬁed ﬂow to channel B. In this way, the OFC keeps
a speciﬁc channel to be ﬁlled by ﬂows whenever a ﬂow ends.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed methods
in two types of trafﬁc. In Section V-A, we describe the
experimental environment. In Section V-B, we evaluate the
effectiveness with simple trafﬁc and use the ﬂow allocation
to show how our method works. Finally, in Section V-C, we
evaluate the practical effectiveness of our proposed method by
complex trafﬁc.
A. Experimental environment
The experimental topology is a 3-hop 4-channel WBN.
Each AP is placed 70 cm apart as shown in Figure 4. A
Buffalo WZR-HP-AG300H with OpenWrt [10] ﬁrmware was
used as the AP hardware. We additionally installed the Open
vSwitch [11] to the OpenWrt ﬁrmware, which allows us to
operate an AP as an OFS. In the WBN, we use IEEE802.11a
operating on channels 100, 112, 124 and 136. In addition,
physical link rate on each channel is ﬁxed as 54 Mbps. With
this WBN, we also prepare two PCs (Client 1 and Client 2) to
send/receive experimental trafﬁc and connect them to AP1-1
and AP4-1, respectively.
We employ Trema [12] as an OFC framework on which
the proposed method is implemented. Since we focus on the
performance of the channel utilization method, the following
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

VAP1
VAP2
VAP3
VAP4
AP1-1
AP1-2
AP1-3
AP1-4
AP2-1
AP2-2
AP2-3
AP2-4
AP3-1
AP3-2
AP3-3
AP3-4
AP4-1
AP4-2
AP4-3
AP4-4
Ch.A
100ch
Ch.B
112ch
Ch.C
124ch
Ch.D
136ch
OFC
Client 1
Client 2
0.7m
0.7m
0.7m
0.7m 0.7m
0.7m
Link rate: 54Mbps
Figure 4. Network topology as in performance evaluation.
pairs of <OFS, OFC>, <Client 1, AP1-1>, and <Client 2, AP4-
1> are directly connected by Ethernet cable to avoid the
degradation of the communication performance inside the pair.
B. Basic performance evaluation: Simple trafﬁc scenario
In this section, we examine the effectiveness of the proposed
methods with a simple scenario. We prepare two types of
WBNs, TBI-based WBN and proposed method based WBN.
Note that in this experiment, we use only two channels in a
testbed. In this experiment, two UDP ﬂows of 5 Mbps and
one UDP ﬂow of 10 Mbps with 1500 byte packets ware
transmitted from Client 1 to Client 2 in turns at 5 second
intervals. Figure 5 demonstrates the time series variation of the
packet loss. The TBI-based WBN has many packet losses after
starting the third ﬂow. In TBI, each 5 Mbps ﬂow is transmitted
on each channel at that time as shown in Figure 6(a). The
network loads are actually balanced among these channels.
However, this balanced utilization causes saturation on one of
the channels after the third ﬂow arrives. Moreover, the number
of packet losses ﬂuctuates drasticallly. Once packet loss occurs
as a result of channel saturation, the statistical information
(i.e., the number of transmitted packets and the amount of
transmitted trafﬁc) of each ﬂow is changed to randomly
smaller value than actual one. Therefore, the late binding
processing attempts to balance the network load among all
channels based on incorrect statistical information. The late
binding is periodically conducted and thus ﬂow transmission
is frequently changed. This causes ﬂuctuation on the number
of packets which are lost.
By contrast, the proposed method based WBN does not
experience any packet loss during this experiment. Two 5
Mbps ﬂows are packed into a single channel and thus there is
enough network capacity for the third ﬂow on either channel
as shown in Figure 6(b). Thus, we can say that the proposed
channel utilization method can avoid packet loss at ﬂow
arrival.
C. Practical performance evaluation: Complex trafﬁc sce-
nario
The reason for packet loss in TBI is unpredictability of new
ﬂow arrival and its speciﬁcation. In this section, we compare
1st flow
(5Mbps)
3rd flow
(10Mbps)
2nd flow
(5Mbps)
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
Packet Loss (packets/s)
Time (seconds)
TBI
Proposed method
Figure 5. The time series behavior on packet loss.
VAP1
VAP2
VAP3
VAP4
AP1-1
AP1-2
AP2-1
AP2-2
AP3-1
AP3-2
AP4-1
AP4-2
Ch.A
100ch
Ch.B
112ch
OFC
Client 1
Client 2
Ch.A 　Ch.B
traffic vol.
#1
#2
Balanced
not enough
for the 3rd flow
#1
#2
(a) with TBI
VAP1
VAP2
VAP3
VAP4
AP1-1
AP1-2
AP2-1
AP2-2
AP3-1
AP3-2
AP4-1
AP4-2
Ch.A
100ch
Ch.B
112ch
Client 1
Client 2
OFC
Ch.A 　Ch.B
traffic vol.
#1
#2
maximized for 
the 3rd flow
#1
#2
(b) with proposed method
Figure 6. Flow allocation after the 2nd ﬂow arrival.
our method with TBI by random trafﬁc scenario. We ﬁrst
measure the maximum network capacity by a single channel
in our testbed. We transmit a ﬂow from Client 1 to Client 2
by only one channel. The maximum data rate without packet
loss on every channel was 9 Mbps. Thus, we generate random
trafﬁc for this experiment. Speciﬁcally, the trafﬁc is generated
by the following rules and the experiment is concluded after
100 ﬂows are generated.
1) The ﬂow arrival interval should be less than 1 second.
2) Each ﬂow is kept for more than 1 second but not more
than 10 seconds.
3) A data rate of each ﬂow is ﬁxed but should be less than 9
Mbps (i.e., the maximum network capacity in the single
channel).
4) The total amount of trafﬁc generated in parallel is kept
less than 36 Mbps (i.e., the maximum network capacity
in the WBM).
In this experiment, the generated trafﬁc is transmitted from
Client 1 to Client 2 shown in Figure 4. This experiment
was conducted 9 times on the same trafﬁc pattern. The
number of packet losses was calculated by comparing the
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

TABLE I. THE NUMBER OF PACKET LOSSES WITH COMPLICATED TRAFFIC
(PACKETS).
Applied Method
Maximum
Median
Minimum
TBI
6826
4229
1196
Proposed
8
7
4
transmitted/received bits captured by tcpdump on Client 1 and
Client 2 during this period. Note that the number of transmitted
packets was 197,906 packets.
The maximum, median, and minimum number of packet
loss are listed in Table I. The trafﬁc should be carried on this
WBN without any packet loss because the maximum amount
of trafﬁc generated in parallel is less than the maximum
network capacity in the WBM. Furthermore, the data rate of
each ﬂow is under the network capacity of a single channel.
Therefore, the WBN have enough available capacity at any
time in this experiment. However, in the case of TBI, there
is a signiﬁcant amount of packet loss. With late binding
processing in TBI, ﬂows are allocated in order to balance the
network load between each of the channels. As we pointed
out in Section V-B, the statistical information of each ﬂow
is calculated to be smaller than actual information in TBI.
As a result, even if we conduct experiments with the same
trafﬁc, the ﬂow allocation on each experiment will differ. This
is why there is a big difference between the maximum number
of packet loss and the minimum one on TBI. In contrast
to TBI, the proposed channel utilization method successfully
reduces the number of packet losses signiﬁcantly in a stable
manner. Even if a new ﬂow arrives and its speciﬁcations
are unpredictable, the proposed method allocates these ﬂows
to channels providing enough capacity and packed the ﬂow
into speciﬁc channels soon, thereby avoiding saturation of all
channels in a WBN. Therefore, the proposed method has a
potential to avoid packet loss by utilizing multiple channels
efﬁciently.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a channel utilization method that
enables the consideration of the available network capacity on
each channel in a WBN. With channel utilization methods
which equally utilize all channels, the available capacity of
each channel is also decreased and accordingly the acceptable
ﬂow size of each channel becomes smaller. As a result, even
if enough available capacity provided by all channels still
remains for new ﬂow, one channel may be saturated due to
running out of the capacity once a ﬂow arrives.
In this study, we propose a new ﬂow allocation method that
makes the channel utilization imbalanced. That is, the method
maximizes the available capacity on some of the channels and
ﬁlls other channels with ﬂows. In case of ﬂow arrival, this
method allocates new ﬂows to the channel that brings the
largest expected occupation capacity for the ﬂow. As a result,
the possibility of packet loss is minimized by utilizing multiple
channels efﬁciently. We then implemented the method based
on the OpenFlow framework and conducted performance eval-
uations in a real testbed. In the experiment, we used complex
trafﬁc that should be carried on the WBN without any packet
loss. From the results, we conclude that the proposed method
can reduce the number of lost packets signiﬁcantly. In the
future, we plan to continue with the examination of methods
for effectively utilizing multiple channels in environments
having more clients (i.e., more complex topology).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study is partly supported by The Telecommunications
Advancement Foundation, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
Cisco Visual Networking Index, Global Mobile Data
Trafﬁc Forecast Update, 2014-2019, http://www.cisco.
com / c / en / us / solutions / collateral / service - provider /
visual-networking-index-vni/white paper c11-520862.
pdf [retrieved: Jan. 2016].
[2]
Yuzo Taenaka and Kazuya Tsukamoto, “An efﬁcient
trafﬁc management framework for multi-channel wire-
less backbone networks”, IEICE Communications Ex-
press, vol. 3, no. 3, 2014, pp. 98–103.
[3]
Yuzo Taenaka and Kazuya Tsukamoto, “A radio inter-
ference aware dynamic channel utilization method on
software deﬁned WMN”, In Proceeding of the 10th
International Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud
and Internet Computing (3PGCIC 2015), Nov. 2015.
[4]
A. Antony Franklin, Athula Balachandran, and C.
Siva Ram Murthy, “Online reconﬁguration of chan-
nel assignment in Multi-Channel Multi-Radio wireless
mesh networks”, Elsevier Computer Communications,
vol. 35, no. 16, Sept. 2012, pp. 2004–2013.
[5]
Weisheng Si, Selvadurai Selvakennedy, and Albert Y.
Zomaya, “An Overview of Channel Assignment Meth-
ods for Multi-radio Multi-channel Wireless Mesh Net-
works”, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing,
vol. 70, no. 5, May 2010, pp. 505–524.
[6]
Saad Mustafa et al., “Stable-path multi-channel routing
with extended level channel assignment”, International
Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 25, no. 7,
2012, pp. 887–902.
[7]
Eiman Alotaibi and Biswanath Mukherjee, “Survey Pa-
per: A Survey on Routing Algorithms for Wireless Ad-
Hoc and Mesh Networks”, Computer Network, vol. 56,
no. 2, Feb. 2012, pp. 940–965.
[8]
Parth H. Pathak and Rudra Dutta, “A Survey of Network
Design Problems and Joint Design Approaches in Wire-
less Mesh Networks”, IEEE Communications Surveys
and Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 3, Sept. 2011, pp. 396–428.
[9]
Djohara Benyamina, Abdelhakim Haﬁd, and Michel
Gendreau, “Wireless Mesh Networks Design - A Sur-
vey”, IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
vol. 14, no. 2, 2012, pp. 299–310.
[10]
OpenWrt, https://openwrt.org/ [retrieved: Jan. 2016].
[11]
Open vSwitch, http://openvswitch.org/ [retrieved: Jan.
2016].
[12]
Trema, http://trema.github.io/ [retrieved: Jan. 2016].
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

