Extending Contemporary Network Modeling Towards the Photonic Layer
Jan Kundr´at and Stanislav ˇS´ıma
CESNET, z.s.p.o.,
Praha, Czech Republic
E-Mail: jan.kundrat@cesnet.cz
Abstract—A signiﬁcant interest recently sprouted towards de-
scribing a production computer network in a machine-readable
way. Most of the effort has, however, so far focused on providing
an accurate description starting at the L2/L3 of the ISO/OSI
model. Such an approach cannot accommodate advanced appli-
cations, such as accurate transfer of ultra-stable frequency signal.
In this work, we aim at outlining possible ways of extending
the existing network models towards describing the photonic
properties of the contemporary networks. When a network model
allows for an accurate description of the photonic substrate, it
becomes suitable for automated veriﬁcation of critical properties
which are required by emerging network users.
Keywords–photonics; optical networking; network modeling;
CAD.
I.
INTRODUCTION
When dealing with contemporary networks, a list of inter-
esting properties includes much more than just the available
bandwidth and an administrative cost of a given interconnect.
Optical networking, or photonic networking, is a novel way
of designing networks where the light which travels through a
ﬁbre link is not converted to electricity at various points [1].
A photonic network is capable of carrying concurrent optical
signals between the connected nodes. Properties which are
sufﬁcient for a reasonably accurate description of a generic
packet-switched network no longer make sense for a photonic
service. It is irrelevant whether the provisioned transceivers
at exchange points support 100 Gbps Ethernet. What matters
is how the light is affected by the ﬁbre paths, or by the
active devices which amplify, switch and otherwise modify
the carried signal.
Having a well-established model of how a photonic net-
work (or, indeed, any computer network in general) is con-
structed allows for many advanced applications. If the model
includes physical properties like location of the actual hard-
ware devices, it can be used for optimizing dispatching the
technicians in case of an outage. A well-designed abstraction
scheme along with a well-maintained inventory can be used for
checking the bill-of-materials needed when building networks.
Model checking and veriﬁcation can be used to verify upfront
that a network which is about to be built, with ﬁbre buried
a few meters deep, is capable of achieving the properties its
owners expect, and are willing to pay for.
This paper starts by explaining the state of art in the area
of network modeling in Section II. In Section III, we explain
what properties of the photonic substrate have to be tracked
in the model, and outline how to cover them as an extension
of an existing modeling language. The article wraps up with
a plan for future work and conclusion in Section IV.
II.
RELATED WORK ON NETWORK MODELING
Different use cases require varying level of detail to be
present in a model of the network. As an example, a typical
network router usually needs to know where to forward packets
destined for a particular IP address. On the other hand, a
Network Operating Center (an NOC) usually has more strin-
gent requirements. In our use case we are going to focus on
modeling the complete topology of a network, i.e., a situation
where at least one node is aware of every property of the
network being modelled. This is in contrast to a distributed
system where each node typically maintains just a subset of
the required information.
In this work, we are investigating universal models, which
are capable of conveying a wide range of information. We
are looking for a single model which is usable for (or at least
extensible to) describing the actual computer network on many
levels.
A. Network Description Language
The Network Description Language (NDL) is a format
which was introduced by Jeroen van der Ham [2]. Based on
the RDF (Resource Description Framework) standard [3], the
NDL builds a distributed set of documents, each referenced
by a special URL (Uniform Resource Locator), along with
relations among the described entities. The basic NDL contains
three classes of modeled entities:
Location which describes a physical location where Devices
are to be found in real-world.
Device which represents a physical piece of equipment which
is a part of the network.
Interface which is used to model an interface or port of the
physical Device which is used for connecting to other
devices.
These objects or classes are connected by various prede-
ﬁned relations. The NDL format predeﬁnes these six proper-
ties:
locatedAt for tying together Locations and Devices.
hasInterface for assigning Interfaces to Devices.
connectedTo which represents an external connection of two
Interfaces.
switchedTo which, compared to the connectedTo, repre-
sents an internal connection, presumably within a single
Device.
name for conveying the name of a resource in a RDF way.
description which includes a free-format, human-readable
description to any class.
The original, baseline NDL did not offer much function-
ality. While its features were sufﬁcient for describing the
topology of the network, no provisions were included for
adding machine-readable properties such as the type of actual
link, or available capacity. Due to the nature of the RDF
format, though, the NDL itself was very extensible. As a
logical next step, its main authors built on top of the existing
standard and attempted to introduce the NDL concept to
contemporary optical networks in their follow-up work [4]. It
should be noted that while the article in which this extension
was ﬁrst presented was titled Using the Network Description
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Language in Optical Networks the word “optical” does not
refer to the optical properties of photonic networks.
This reﬁnement of the NDL language added (among other
changes) a single new class, a Link, which represents a
previously implied connection between two entities, and the
following new properties:
capacity which provides the provisioned throughput over a
Link.
encodingType which deﬁnes the encoding used on a given
Link.
encodingLabel which extends the information provided by
encodingType.
These properties addressed one of the major shortcomings
of the original NDL speciﬁcation, as useful properties were
now assignable to individual links. A perfect example is the
encodingType, which enabled specifying the type of a link,
such as whether it represents an L2 Ethernet segment, or a
lower level lambda path. There was still little to no support for
machine-readable analysis of the attached information, though,
and the model did not consider multiple layers which constitute
modern computer networks.
As shown by Dijkstra [5], it is rarely sufﬁcient to describe
just a single layer of the network at a time. Similarly, it is
often not feasible to always operate on the full node graph of
a moderately-sized network. The NDL format was therefore
extended by provisions for multi-layer network modeling, as
demonstrated by van der Ham [6].
The authors show how the NDL can be extended with
a concept of adaptation and multiplexing. Together, these
features allow modeling common concepts such as aggregating
multiple VLANs into one Ethernet port. The concept is further
extended with support for the so-called Switch Matrix, a
construct suitable for describing features which the network
provides on each of the represented layers.
It should be noted that, as Dijkstra shows, opening up
the model for multilayer description brings along unintuitive
situations. As an example, he presents a use case [7] where
the only feasible path within a laboratory in Universiteit von
Amsterdam and the Universit´e du Quebec actually crosses the
same ﬁbre twice.
An attempt at extending the NDL for photonic services
was conducted at CESNET. In a deliverable of the Phosphorus
project, CESNET contributed an add-on schema [8] suitable
for conveying a wide range of properties concerning the
optical path. The proposed extension was capable of accu-
rately describing specialized equipment, such as the DCM
(Dispersion Compensation Module, a device which corrects
for phenomena resulting from different propagation speeds of
different wavelengths in the ﬁbre medium, including its effect
on a single-color modulated light) as well as actual, real-world
ﬁbre spans and optical light paths deployed in the CESNET2
network at that time. However, the proposal did not make use
of the usual NDL features such as the concept of adaptations,
and it was not formally merged into the upcoming revisions
of the NDL standard.
B. Network Markup Language and the Network Service Inter-
face
The NDL language described in the previous section was
not the only contender for delivering a format capable of accu-
rately describing multilayer computer networks. The G´EANT
collaboration worked on the cNIS [9], while the US-based
ESnet was independently working on a similar solution needed
by perfSONAR. The Network Markup Language (NML) work-
ing group [10] was eventually formed within the Open Grid
Forum [11] to create a uniﬁed, multi-layer network model.
Roughly in parallel, an effort was ongoing on delivering
a uniﬁed speciﬁcation for communicating between networks
of different administrative contexts. There was a huge range
of envisioned applications, from bandwidth-hungry users of
the Bandwidth-on-Demand (BoD) service, to testbed users and
network students to experiment on a real network, yet in a
controlled and harmless manner. These applications, however,
required understanding of the underlying network topology.
The Network Service Interface (NSI) framework [12]
and its associate suite of protocols is designed to facilitate
establishing of multi-domain network connections using a
RESTful (Representational State Transfer) web service API
(Application Programming Interface). As of 2014, the NSI
and the associated speciﬁcations are subject of active research
and development work. There are plans to use the result-
ing software throughout the newly developed Testbed as a
Service (TaaS) offering by G´EANT. The network topologies
represented by NML are being studied for further uses, such
as multi-constrained path selection [13], a process where the
choices of a link path are affected by several parameters. It
seems that the academy has ﬁnally settled on a single modeling
framework after a phase where concurrent projects were each
pushing for their own solution.
C. Nodes, Links and Adaptations
A common feature found in each sufﬁciently mature multi-
layer or multi-domain schema is the appearance of the follow-
ing building blocks:
Nodes for entities which represent active network devices, or
abstraction points which serve a certain purpose which is
visible to the other layers.
Links or Connections whose purpose is to represent intercon-
nections between the Nodes. Each link typically carries a
set of Properties.
Adaptations which are capable of interconnecting Nodes be-
longing to conceptually different layers of the abstraction.
Within the NDL, these concepts were accurately repre-
sented by the Device/Interface and Link entities. Under the
NML abstraction, these are realized through the Node/Port,
Link and Adaptation/SwitchingMatrix classes. On a basic level,
these building blocks are enough for representing the contem-
porary network hardware as long as a mechanism for tagging
the entries with appropriate machine-readable properties is
supported.
At CESNET, the author is developing a graphical CAD
(Computer-Aided Design) application which should be capable
of handling the future development of the NML scheme as long
as the additions and changes remain within the bounds of these
three broad categories of functions. Internally, the application
uses these classes for manipulating a hierarchy of objects
which correspond to actual real-word entities, such as optical
ampliﬁers, Ethernet switches or a leased line between two
points of presence (PoP) on a network. The clean architecture
of the NML speciﬁcation enables its users to be written in
a generic way. A compliant application will require no code
changes to support an updated or new NML schema. The
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

ultimate goal is to have all the required information present in
the newly developed schema; that is, the computer program,
which is the user of the extended NML, shall be able to infer
any required details from the schema itself.
III.
ACCOMMODATING THE PHOTONIC LAYER
While the NSI suite and the associated NML protocol are
generic, support for describing the physical layer is explicitly
said to be out of scope for the core speciﬁcation [14]. However,
based on personal contact with the GLIF (Global Lambda
Integrated Facility, an international consortium that promotes
lambda networking) members who are working on the NML
adoption, the project is open to external contributions adding
support for additional schemes.
A. Importance of the Photonic/Optical Properties
The contemporary Internet, and computer networks in
general, are very good at delivering high bandwidth with
reasonable latency and mid-to-high jitter. (Jitter describes how
much a latency between the end points, which are communi-
cating together ﬂuctuates over time. A low jitter means that the
latencies are stable, while high jitter indicates that the latencies
might be very low at one point in time, but can grow signiﬁ-
cantly at any instant.) These properties are usually sufﬁcient for
a wide range of applications, from modest HTTP (Hypertext
Transfer Protocol) requests and interactive SSH (Secure Shell)
or RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol) trafﬁc on one hand to VoIP
(Voice over Internet Protocol) or media streaming applications
at the other end of spectrum. It is usually acceptable that a
latency of each packet varies between, e.g., 15 ms and 45 ms,
and the applications which are more sensitive to increased jitter
can usually cope with this phenomenon through additional
buffering to smooth-over the variance.
However, there are other sorts of applications which are
much more demanding, to an extent where a classic network
equipment cannot keep up the pace [15]. A photonic service
guarantees that the optical signal is transmitted throughout
the network without any conversion between the light and
electricity, or even statistical processing by a DSP (Digital
Signal Processing) circuit common in contemporary systems.
The signal is ampliﬁed along the ﬁbre paths by dedicated,
all-optical ampliﬁers, and circuit switching is implemented by
all-optical equipment. The existing applications which require
a photonic service include for example extremely accurate
frequency transfers, which are used for comparison of national-
level atomic clocks, precise instruments which are involved
with the maintenance of the UTC (Coordinated Universal
Time) time standard, or other metrological applications [16].
Being able to understand the underlying network opens
up opportunities for more intelligent system procurement and
signiﬁcant cost savings [17, p. 20-22], both due to improved
network design and innovative concepts such as bidirectional
single ﬁbre transmission [1].
B. Extending NML towards the Photonic Layer
Within a computer network which is capable of providing a
photonic service, the emphasis on the tracked properties shifts
down to the lower layers of the transmission stack. The total
available bandwidth of a link is no longer the focus of the
model; instead, the data describe how each link can transfer
the light, and what modiﬁcations are inﬂicted on the signal as
it travels through the ﬁbre.
The total attenuation is one of these properties. However,
as the total loss of signal is dependent on the frequency, the at-
tenuation is not a single number, but instead a function, which
computes the total loss based on the wavelength, or color of the
light beam which passes through the ﬁbre. Because the ﬁbre
usually conforms to one of predeﬁned quality/performance
classes, it makes sense to track the properties of each of
the ﬁbre type separately, and calculate the expected loss as a
function of the ﬁbre class and the total ﬁbre length. However,
in real world, the attenuation is not affected just by the ﬁbre
length. Mechanical stress or vibrations along the ﬁbre path
affect the transmission, too, and it is unfortunately common
for construction works to interfere with a buried cable in
a catastrophic mode, which typically involves an excavator’s
bucket. When the ﬁbre is spliced back into a working state,
the newly introduced joint deteriorates the overall transmission
properties, and as such, the measured attenuation increases.
Each splice also contributes to an increased in-ﬁbre scattering
of the source signal. The model therefore must distinguish
between the theoretical, computed values and actual behavior
of the ﬁbre established by measurements.
There are other phenomenons besides the total attenuation,
though. Different frequencies (or wavelengths) travel through
the ﬁbre at different speeds, therefore the light impulses
received at the end of an uncompensated ﬁbre are distorted,
and care has to be taken to reconstruct the original shape of
the signal before further processing [1]. There are different
means of compensation for this chromatic dispersion, includ-
ing Dispersion Compensating Fibre or Fiber Bragg Gratings.
Properties of both must be carefully described by the model
because they impact the transmission properties of the installed
ﬁbre path.
Another problem is an accurate representation of devices
which are capable of changing the wavelength of the trans-
mitted signal. Conceptually, this transformation does not con-
stitute an adaptation, in the NDL/NML sense, as the signal
transformation occurs on a single level of the model. However,
a naive scheme which simply compared wavelength of adjacent
ports of a wavelength converter would assume that a given
wavelength would not be able to pass through the device.
There are other interesting phenomena, such as PMD,
the polarization mode dispersion, or non-linear effects, which
contribute to signal deterioration over a ﬁbre span. An accurate
description of these phenomena is needed if the model is to
be used as a basis for planning and procurement of optical
networks which offer a photonic service to their users.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work has illustrated that while the NML model is
promising, it cannot presently accommodate the requirements
of a photonic service without further work. Hence, the NML
scheme should be extended to allow describing the photonic
layout of the network. The extended NML scheme should be
self-describing, that is, it must contain enough information to
allow its interpretation by a machine with no prior knowledge
of photonics, but with a thorough understanding of the NML
features. That way, a compliant application designed for sup-
porting all aspects of NML will be able to work even in face
of future additions to the conceptual model without a costly
retroﬁt.
In order to verify feasibility of the chosen approach, a
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

sizable chunk of a real-world, production network should be
described at the chosen level of detail. Adaptations between
the low-level photonic layer and the upper layers shall be
developed and tested to ensure that the NML’s concepts allow
an accurate representation of functionality of the modern
hardware. To further prove the viability of the general concept
and to study applications of semantic network modeling, a
demo application shall be built. The technical demo should
cover adaptations across multiple layers as well as veriﬁcation
of example properties of the modeled network.
The extended NML suite can be used not only for modeling
of existing networks, but also for a design of new transmission
paths. A user should be assisted with an extensive, semi-
automatic validation of the proposed network topology. For
example, while it is perfectly acceptable from the perspective
of the semantic model to connect two ﬁbres with a sequence
of two add-drop multiplexers which effectively ﬁlter out all
channels, the resulting topology would present little utility to
its operator. A powerful validation framework should therefore
be built to check whether the end product of the design
is usable, i.e., to verify signal propagation paths across the
network.
In order to prevent obsolescence and a dangerous situation
where the modeled situation no longer matches reality, work
should be undertaken to periodically reconcile the model with
actual network in an automated manner; a topic which involves
queries and call-outs to physical devices deployed in the ﬁeld.
It is our plan to explore these possibilities in our work
at the Optical networks department at CESNET, and in the
upcoming GN4 project at G´EANT. As a ﬁrst step, we will
deﬁne the required NML extensions on a formal level, and
verify their utility on a selected transmission path in the
CESNET2 network. We also plan to use the NML extensions
in formal description of the Photonic Testbed, a testbed-as-
a-service (TaaS) laboratory developed at CESNET, and to
benchmark its utility for describing the lowest layer of the
G´EANT Testbed Service (GTS), a Europe-wide distributed
testbed network.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Czech institutional fund-
ing of research by project Large Infrastructure CESNET
LM2010005 and by the GN3 project under the EU FP7
programme. The authors would like to thank Jan Radil and
Josef Vojtˇech for their valuable feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] J.
Kundr´at,
“Why
we
should
care
about
the
photonic
layer,”
in
2nd
TERENA
Network
Architects
Workshop,
November
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.terena.org/activities/netarch/ws2/
slides/131113-cesnet-photonics.pdf
[2] J.
van
der
Ham,
F.
Dijkstra,
F.
Travostino,
H.
Andree,
and
C.
de
Laat,
“Using
RDF
to
describe
networks,”
Future
Gener.
Comput.
Syst.,
vol. 22, no. 8, Oct. 2006, pp. 862–867. [Online].
Available:
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼vdham/research/
publications/0510-NetworkDescriptionLanguage.pdf
[3] “Resource
description
framework
(RDF).”
[Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/RDF/ [Accessed: 2015-03-
05]
[4] J. van der Ham, P. Grosso, R. van der Pol, A. Toonk,
and
C.
de
Laat,
“Using
the
network
description
language in optical networks,” in Integrated Network
Management, 2007. IM ’07. 10th IFIP/IEEE International
Symposium on, May 2007, pp. 199–205. [Online].
Available:
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼vdham/research/
publications/0606-UsingNDLInOpticalNetworks.pdf
[5] F.
Dijkstra,
“Framework
for
path
ﬁnding
in
multi-layer
transport
networks,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.macfreek.nl/work/
Dijkstra-multilayer-pathﬁnding.pdf
[6] J.
van
der
Ham,
“A
semantic
model
for
complex computer networks: The network description
language,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼vdham/research/
publications/vdham-phdthesis.pdf
[7] F. Dijkstra, “Lessons learned in multilayer network
modelling,” in Phosporous/Federica tutorial at TNC
2008 and NML-WG meeting at OGF 23, June 2008.
[Online]. Available: http://staff.science.uva.nl/∼fdijkstr/
presentations/20080518%20Network%20Modelling.pdf
[8] L.
Altmannov´a
et
al.,
“Recognizing,
description,
deployment and testing of new types L0/L1 resources,”
June 2009, pp. 17–39, deliverable Phosphorus-WP6-
D.6.9. [Online]. Available: http://www.ist-phosphorus.
eu/ﬁles/deliverables/Phosphorus-deliverable-D6.9.pdf
[9] “cNIS, Common Network Information Service.” [On-
line]. Available: http://geant3.archive.geant.net/service/
cnis/pages/home.aspx [Accessed: 2015-03-05]
[10] “The
NML
working
group
(NML-WG).”
[Online].
Available: https://forge.gridforum.org/sf/projects/nml-wg
[Accessed: 2015-03-05]
[11] “Open grid forum (OGF), an open global forum for
advanced distributed computing.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.ogf.org/ [Accessed: 2015-03-05]
[12] G.
Roberts,
I.
Monga,
and
T.
Kudoh,
“Network
service interface,” in GLIF Meeting, Atlanta, March
2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.glif.is/meetings/
2014/winter/roberts-nsi-tf.pdf
[13] M. ˇZivkovi´c, “Multi-constrained path selection,” in GLIF
Meeting, Atlanta, March 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://redmine.ogf.org/dmsf ﬁles/13221?download=
[14] C. de Laat and F. Dijkstra, “NML outreach session,” in
OGF 31, Taipei, March 2011, p. 5. [Online]. Available:
http://www.delaat.net/talks/cdl-2011-03-22a.pdf
[15] J. Vojtˇech, V. Smotlacha, S. ˇS´ıma, and P. ˇSkoda, “Pho-
tonic services and their applications,” in Inﬁnity Trident-
com Thessaloniki, Greece, June 2012. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://czechlight.cesnet.cz/documents/publications/
transmission-systems/2012/PS Tridentcom12 2.pdf
[16] J.
Vojtˇech,
V.
Smotlacha,
and
P.
ˇSkoda,
“Optical
infrastructure
for
precise
time
and
stable
frequency
transfer,”
Proc.
SPIE,
vol.
8866,
2013,
pp.
886 620–886 620–5.
[Online].
Avail-
able: http://czechlight.cesnet.cz/documents/publications/
network-architecture/2013/ITMSﬁn.pdf
[17] J.
Vojtˇech,
M.
H˚ula,
J.
Nejman,
J.
Radil,
and
P.
ˇSkoda,
“Equipment
for
open
photonic
networking,”
in
CEF
Networks
Workshop,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://czechlight.
cesnet.cz/documents/publications/ﬁber-optics/2010/
Vojtech-EquipmentForOpenPhotonicNetworking.ppt
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

