MH-LEACH: A Distributed Algorithm for Multi-Hop Communication
in Wireless Sensor Networks
Jos´e Henrique Brand˜ao Neto, Antoniel da Silva Rego,
Andr´e Ribeiro Cardoso, Joaquim Celestino Jr.
Computer Networks and Security Laboratory (LARCES)
State University of Cear´a (UECE)
Fortaleza, Brazil
{henrique.brandao, antoniel.rego, andrec, celestino}@larces.uece.br
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) consist in a set of
nodes that collect information from the environment and send it
to a Base Station that processes the ﬁnal data. Some challenges
in order to minimize the power consumption and maximize
the network lifetime in this kind of networks can be found.
This paper presents MH-LEACH, an algorithm that permits
to establish a multi-hop communication between sensor nodes,
which aims to save energy. Using MH-LEACH, a sensor will have
options to transmit their data to closer nodes, always sending the
collected data to the base station. This proposal was incorporated
into the LEACH protocol being evaluated through simulations.
The results show improvements in the approach when compared
to the original version of LEACH.
Keywords-Sensor networks; Multi-Hop communication; energy
consumption;
I. INTRODUTION
The result of advances in technology and wireless communi-
cation, and also sensor networks, has emerged as an important
and indispensable tool for the detection of contamination in
hazardous environments, habitat monitoring in reserves, ene-
mies inspections in war environments, and other applications
[1] [2].
The Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) are a special kind of
ad hoc networks that allow the monitoring of the physical
world through small sensors networks densely or sparsely
distributed. These networks are composed of hundreds or
thousands of sensor nodes with multifunctional low power
load, operating autonomously in an environment with limited
computational capabilities, and a base station, responsible for
receiving data from the sensor nodes.
Currently, WSN are targets of many challenges. One of
them is related to the shortage of available energy in sensors,
and a large part of the research done today seeks to highlight
effective ways to save energy in sensors, making the network
lifetime be extended.
The energy used for communication in wireless sensor
networks is very high compared to that used for computation,
thus it must be carefully used to improve the network lifetime
[3]. Routing algorithms based on clustering are widely used
to increase the sensor networks lifetime [4] [5] [6].
We present in this article a new algorithm based on clus-
tering that uses a new technique for multihop communication
between cluster-heads in order to conserve energy consumed
by the network and thereby increase the network lifetime.
This article is organized as follows: Section 2 presents as
related work LEACH protocols [7], the LEACH-C [8] and
ALEACH [9]. The MH-LEACH is described in Section 3.
Section 4 presents the simulations and results. And ﬁnally, in
Section 5, the conclusion of our work is drawn.
II. RELATED WORK
Saving energy is an extremely important factor in sensor
networks. Thus, many routing algorithms aimed in efﬁcient
energy consumption have been developed [10] [11] [12]. This
section presents some of these algorithms, which are: the
LEACH protocol, which is the basis for the development of
our work, the LEACH-C and ALEACH.
Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) pro-
tocol [7] is a hierarchical protocol for minimizing the power
consumption in order to increase the network lifetime. In
LEACH, the nodes are organized into clusters, with one node
acting as the leader (cluster-head). All non-leaders nodes
should transmit their data to the cluster-head, while the cluster-
head must receive data from all the cluster members, perform
functions of data processing (e.g., data aggregation), and
transmit data to the base station.
The LEACH works by rounds. In each round, leader nodes
are exchanged in order to distribute the network energy con-
sumption. Two phases compose the rounds: clusters grouping,
and communication phase. In the phase of clustering, the
choice of leaders is performed through a distributed algorithm,
and the source nodes choose to join the nearest cluster-head.
In the communication stage, the transfer of data to the base
station is made, including aggregation / data fusion by the
leaders.
Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy Centralized
(LEACH-C) protocol [8] is a variation of LEACH that uses
a centralized algorithm for grouping the clusters. During the
formation of groups of LEACH-C, each node sends informa-
tion about its location and energy level to the base station. In
order to ensure the distribution of energy to all the nodes in
the network, the base station calculates the average energy of
the nodes in each round. The cluster-head nodes must have
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

the energy level above the average to be chosen, and based
on them the base station performs the Simulated Annealing
algorithm to determine the best cluster-heads. After ﬁnding the
clusters and the respective leaders, the base station transmits
this information to the nodes of the network. The nodes then
transmit the data to the leader of their group, which sends data
to the base station.
The Advanced Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy
(ALEACH) protocol [9] is an efﬁcient energy routing protocol
that considers the level of energy in a sensor node in the
election of cluster-heads. As in LEACH, the ALEACH works
by rounds and does not need to know the geographic positions
of the nodes to elect the cluster-heads.
The Multi-hop LEACH protocol [13] represents an ex-
tension of the LEACH to save energy in wireless sensor
networks. The purpose of the protocol is send the data to the
base station through other intermediate nodes. Like LEACH
protocol, Multi-hop LEACH uses the same mechanism for
the election of clusters-head. At the stage of data collection,
two types of communication are allowed: the inter-cluster
communication and intra-cluster communication. In the ﬁrst
communication, the network is divided in clusters. The cluster-
head of each cluster receives the data of its member nodes.
It performs data aggregation and send the ﬁnal information
to the base station through other nodes. In the intra-cluster
communication, the members nodes of the cluster send their
data to another members nodes to reach the cluster-head. The
protocol works by rounds like LEACH and it selects the path
with minimum hops between the clusters-head and the base
station.
III. THE MH-LEACH ALGORITHM
The main objective of the algorithm is the establishment of
multi-hop communication between clusters-head in a network.
The main purpose is to send the packet to the nearest cluster-
head that is turned towards the Base Station. With this char-
acteristic, it is intended to decrease the power consumption of
the nodes and extend the network lifetime, since the smaller
the distance to transmit the lower the consumption is.
A. Energy Consumption Model
As described in [8], a sensor node spends energy according
to the model shown in (1) and (3).
The transmission of a message of k bits at a distance d has
the following energy consumption:
ET x(k, d) = ET x−elec(k) + ET x−amp(k, d)
(1)
ET x(k, d) =
(
Eelec ∗ k + ϵfs ∗ k ∗ d2,
d < d0
Eelec ∗ k + ϵmp ∗ k ∗ d4,
d ≥ d0
(2)
and receiving a message, the sensor has the following con-
sumption:
ERx(k) = ERx−elec(k) = Eelec ∗ k,
(3)
where:
ET x−elec = Energy spent in transmission;
ERx−elec = Energy spent in receiving data;
ET x−amp = Energy of transmission ampliﬁer;
d0 = threshold distance, calculated according to the
values of Eelec, ϵfs e ϵmp;
ϵfs = Parameter called free space model (fs), is used
if the distance from source to target is less than d0;
ϵmp = Parameter called multipath model (mp), used
if the distance from source to target is greater than
or equal to d0;
Eelec = Energy spent per bit transmitted or received
B. MH-LEACH Operation
In order to understand the proposition, it is important to
point out that during the construction of routes between the
transmitter (cluster-head) and base station, it is assumed that
the network is already clustered and the cluster-heads of each
group are already set.
One of the main goals of the algorithm is to ﬁnd possible
routes for a cluster-head (leader) to send a packet using other
cluster-heads in order to save its energy. The choice of the next
cluster head to get the message must take in account if it has
enough energy. Thus, if a cluster-head cannot send a message
for another one, this node will try to ﬁnd another cluster-head
based on information contained in its routing table, according
to described ahead.
This proposal takes into account the fact that the higher the
signal strength of the received packet, i.e., Received Signal
Strength Indicator (RSSI), the greater the proximity of the
node that sent the message. This information is used in order
to build the routing table for each cluster-head.
The MH-LEACH proposes the routes establishment using
two phases:
• Phase 1: The cluster-heads are deﬁned as a part of
LEACH algorithm. After that, they broadcast an an-
nouncement message and all the cluster-headers in the
transmission ratio will take the advantage in order con-
struct their routing table taking in account the level of
signal (RSSI) received. So, they organize their early
routes containing the closest cluster-heads to send a
packet. The base station performs the same procedure
as seen in Fig. 1.
• Phase 2: After that, each leader sends these initial routes
(from routing table) to the base station that will check
whether a cluster-head can be in the route of another
one. After this check, the base station sends their routes
back to the nodes.
This procedure is necessary because it needs to create a table
of possible routes to a cluster-head. From the intensity of the
signal announced, each node keeps a list sorted by proximity
of the possible destinations of the packet. As shown in Fig. 2,
node 1 has the ﬁrst choice route the node 2, node 2 to the node
3, and so on. The id (identiﬁer) zero in the table indicates the
Base Station. Negative values indicate the signal strength in
decibelmiliwatt (dBm).
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 1.
Cluster-head and base station are identiﬁed.
Figure. 2.
Creation of each node initial tables.
Despite this initial table indicates the nearest cluster-head
node to pass the packet, it contains wrong routes. For example,
node 2 has as ﬁrst route the node 3, but this node has node 2 as
well as the ﬁrst route, causing a loop in the network. Another
wrong fact is that, node 2 has node 1 as route option, but it
is not a good alternative because the packet is transferred in
an opposite direction to the Base Station.
To solve these problems, phase 2 of the algorithm is
performed. Each cluster-head sends their initial table to the
base station so that it can check and correct them.
When
the
base
station
obtains
all
tables
from
all
cluster-head,
it
performs
an
algorithm
to
determine
whether
a
cluster-head
can
be
in
another
cluster-
head′s route table. The algorithm can be seen below:
IF { I − noX − EB < I − noY − EB } THEN
“The Y node is a possible route to the X node“
where:
I − noX − EB = Intensity of a packet that the node
X received from base Station
I − noX − EB = Intensity of a packet that the node
Y received from base Station
If the node Y received a packet of the base station with an
higher RSSI than node X, it means node Y is closer to the base
station than node X. The ﬁgures below show the performance
of this algorithm to correct the tables assembled in Phase 1.
As seen in Fig. 3, the Base Station corrects the initial routing
table of the node 2. It checks whether the node 3 may be a
possible route to node 2. Since the test is satisﬁed, the node
3 remains in the table.
Figure. 3.
Checking if node 3 can be a route to node 2.
Figure. 4.
Checking if node 1 can be a route to node 2.
The test done in node 1 is not satisﬁed, then it will not be
part of the routing table of node 2. The procedure can be seen
in Fig. 4.
Node 4 is approved and remains as a route of node 2 as
shown in Fig. 5. The Base Station indicated by Id (identiﬁer)
zero in the table always remains; it is one last option route of
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 5.
Checking if node 4 can be a route to node 2.
the node. The reason is, if it is not possible to send data to
any node in the network, it sends it to the base station.
After reviewing the table of each cluster-head, the base
station sends back to the nodes the correct tables, free of loops
and wrong forwards that aren′t in its direction. Fig. 6 shows
the ﬁnal result table of each node after the checking performed
by the base station.
Figure. 6.
Final result of route tables.
Thus, the process of calculating routes ends, where each
leader node will not transmit directly to the base station, but
for some other closer cluster-head to it indicated in its routing
table. After that, the collection and transfer of data is started.
IV. RESULTS
We evaluated the performance and validity of the proposed
algorithm through simulations. The proposal was incorporated
into the LEACH protocol making it multi-hop. We compared
the obtained results of this approach to the results of the
original version of LEACH using Castalia simulator [14]. This
simulator is designed speciﬁcally for sensor networks being
an extended module of OMNET++ simulator. Castalia has
realistic wireless modeling channel and radio modules, where
nodes behave very close to reality in the use of the radio.
The metrics used in the simulation were:
• Average consumption per node. In this metric, it is
evaluated if the algorithm provided energy savings to the
sensor nodes.
• Sending cost per energy consumed. This metric rep-
resents the total number of packets transmitted by the
average consumption of each node. It indicates that the
network took it best energy capacity due to the multi-
hop calculation. It also indicates that the network has
consumed less energy and sent a greater amount of
packets.
• Time of death of the ﬁrst node. This metric checks the
network coverage time, i.e., the time that the network
works 100% in data collection. Since a node dies, that
coverage is no longer full.
• Time of Death 80% of nodes. With this metric, it is
possible to check how long the network survived. Thus,
we can notice whether the proposed idea has extended
the network life.
The scenarios used in the simulation and evaluation of
results are deﬁned in Table 1. The energy of each node was set
to 5 joules. The simulation time was 60 seconds. This period
of time was set because at the end of that value most of nodes
are almost inactive since the initial energy is low. The nodes
were randomly distributed in the created area. The time for
each round of the LEACH protocol was 20s. The number of
cluster-head in every round was 5. Each simulation was run
33 times deﬁning a conﬁdence interval of 95% for all results.
TABLE I
SCENARIOS USED IN SIMULATIONS
Scenario
Number of nodes
Area (m x m)
Base Station Position
1
50
50 X 50
(25, 100)
2
100
70 X 70
(35, 140)
Figures 7 and 8 show the results related to the average
energy consumption of the nodes in the two scenarios, re-
spectively.
It is possible to see in the ﬁrst scenario that in the MH-
LEACH protocol has better average power consumption when
compared to LEACH. The values of the average consumption
were 1.82097 and 1.63964 for LEACH and MH-LEACH
respectively. The gain of the proposed approach was approx-
imately 9%.
In the second scenario, the MH-LEACH protocol also
obtained better values compared to the original LEACH. The
results for the average consumption were 1.69509 and 1.59406
for LEACH and MH-LEACH respectively. The gain was
approximately 6%.
Figures 9 and 10 show the results for the total number
of packets transmitted by the average energy consumed. The
higher that value, the better the protocol performance, since it
was possible to send more packets with a low consumption.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 7.
Average energy consumption per node Scenario 1.
Figure. 8.
Average energy consumption per node Scenario 2
In scenario 1, the LEACH and MH-LEACH obtained the
following results, 99.765 and 129.723 respectively.
In scenario 2, the results were 236.798 and 266.671 for
LEACH and MH-LEACH respectively. As can be seen, the
LEACH protocol using the new algorithm achieved a better
rate in both scenarios, i.e., more packets are sent with an
energy efﬁcient consumption.
Figures 11 and 12 show the results for the metric related
for the ﬁrst time that the network node dies. In scenario 1,
the times of death were 22.4115 and 23.4351 for LEACH and
MH-LEACH respectively. The results show that the proposed
approach had a greater coverage time.
In scenario 2, the results showed the following values,
22.1991 and 23.2233 for LEACH and MH-LEACH respec-
tively. In this scenario, the LEACH protocol with the proposed
algorithm once again obtained better results than the original
version of the protocol.
Figure. 9.
Number of sent packets by consumed energy Scenario 1
Figure. 10.
Number of sent packets by consumed energy Scenario 2
Figure. 11.
Time of ﬁrst node death Scenario 1
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 12.
Time of ﬁrst node death Scenario 2
Figures 13 and 14 show the results for the metric that
shows the time of death of 80% of nodes. There is a small
detail concerning the calculation in this metric. The simulation
time was increased to 120s generating a new simulation. This
extension was done to ensure the collection of the times of
death of at least 80% of nodes.
The times results obtained in scenario 1 were 54.1589
and 64.1114 for LEACH and MH-LEACH respectively. The
new algorithm has obtained a longer time indicating that the
network survived longer, i.e., since the nodes saved more
energy transmitting to closer nodes, the network lifetime was
extended.
Figure. 13.
Time for 80 percent of dead nodes Scenario 1
In scenario 2, concerning this metric, the following values
were found: 68.4805 and for LEACH and 74.6026 for MH-
LEACH. It is observed that the proposed idea got better results
when compared to other protocol.
Figure. 14.
Time for 80 percent of dead nodes Scenario 2
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The purpose of the study was to develop an algorithm for
establishing multi-hop communication between sensor nodes
in a network, with the main goal of saving energy. To achieve
this purpose, we used the feature that greater signal intensities
indicate node proximity. The base station was also used in
order to perform a centered calculation to avoid errors on the
use of found routes.
From the experiments, it was observed that the new algo-
rithm achieved improvements when compared to the LEACH
protocol. The gains were observed in power consumption and
network lifetime, which was extended.
We conclude that the proposal is presented as an interesting
idea that saves energy in sensor networks, which can be
adapted to other single-hop protocols to achieve improvements
in their running.
For future works, the proposal will be to adapt this technique
in others protocols, like LEACH-C and ALEACH. Another
future activity, it will be the development of a mechanism for
the cluster-head node to use other possible routes of its table
within a round taking into account the battery remains in the
neighboring leaders.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. Jiang and D. Manivannan, “Routing protocols for sensor networks,”
Proc. Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, 2004.
CCNC 2004. First IEEE.
IEEE, 2004, pp. 93–98.
[2] S. D. Muruganathan, D. C. Ma, R. I. Bhasin, and A. O. Fapojuwo,
“A centralized energy-efﬁcient routing protocol for wireless sensor
networks,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 43, no. 3, 2005, pp.
S8–13.
[3] A. Thakkar and K. Kotecha, “Wcvaleach: Weight and coverage based
energy efﬁcient advanced leach,” vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 51–54, 2012.
[4] I. F. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, and K. R. Chowdhury, “A survey on wireless
multimedia sensor networks,” Computer networks, vol. 51, no. 4, 2007,
pp. 921–960.
[5] J. N. Al-Karaki and A. E. Kamal, “Routing techniques in wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 6,
2004, pp. 6–28.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

[6] K. Akkaya and M. Younis, “A survey on routing protocols for wireless
sensor networks,” Ad hoc networks, vol. 3, no. 3, 2005, pp. 325–349.
[7] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-
efﬁcient communication protocol for wireless microsensor networks,”
Proc. System Sciences, 2000. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2000, pp. 10–pp.
[8] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An
application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless microsensor net-
works,” Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 4,
October 2002, pp. 660–670.
[9] M. S. Ali, T. Dey, and R. Biswas, “Aleach: Advanced leach routing pro-
tocol for wireless microsensor networks,” Proc. Electrical and Computer
Engineering, 2008. ICECE 2008. International Conference on.
IEEE,
December 2008, pp. 909–914.
[10] D. Kandris, P. Tsioumas, A. Tzes, G. Nikolakopoulos, and D. D. Ver-
gados, “Power conservation through energy efﬁcient routing in wireless
sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 9, September 2009, pp. 7320–
7342.
[11] K. T. Kim and H. Y. Youn, “Energy-driven adaptive clustering hierarchy
(edach) for wireless sensor networks,” Proc. Embedded and Ubiquitous
Computing–EUC 2005 Workshops.
Springer, 2005, pp. 1098–1107.
[12] M. Liu, J. Cao, G. Chen, and X. Wang, “An energy-aware routing
protocol in wireless sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 1, January
2009, pp. 445–462.
[13] R. V. Biradar, D. Sawant, D. Mudholkar, and D. Patil, “Multi-hop routing
in self-organizing wireless sensor networks,” IJCSI International Journal
of Computer Science, vol. 8, no. 1, January 2011, pp. 154–164.
[14] Castalia simulator. [Online]. Available: http://castalia.npc.nicta.com.au,
Retrieved: December, 2013.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

