An Analytic and Experimental Study on the Impact of Jitter Playout Buffer on the
E-model in VoIP Quality Measurement
Olusegun Obafemi
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal IL 61790 USA
oeobafe@ilstu.edu
Tibor Gyires
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal IL 61790 USA
tbgyires@ilstu.edu
Yongning Tang
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal IL 61790 USA
ytang@ilstu.edu
Abstract—Over the years, the quality in Voice over IP (VoIP)
applications has been deﬁned from the perspective of VoIP
service providers but not necessarily from the perspective
of end-users. Conversational quality as perceived by end-
users is affected by a wide variety of factors that are not
exclusive to network performance. While service providers
focus their efforts on Quality of Service (QoS) in VoIP, end-
users expect improvement in Quality of Experience (QoE).
The measurement of QoE is signiﬁcantly challenging due
to the diverse nature of factors that collectively determine
QoE. It is highly desired to have a more comprehensive and
accurate quality measurement model that can provide objective
measurement of QoS in real-time while simultaneously offering
QoE measurement as well. Thus, unveiling the relevance of
various factors in a quality measurement model is crucial. In
this paper, we study a commonly used ITU-T recommended
quality measurement model: the E-model with a focus on
how an important but ignored parameter jitter playout buffer
affects the measurement accuracy by conducting an analytical
and experimental approach. Our study shows that adaptive
jitter playout buffering does affect the measurement of end
user perceived VoIP quality. Thus, the E-Model that excludes
the impact of the dynamic jitter playout buffer cannot provide
accurate measurement on how an user perceives conversational
quality in VoIP application.
Keywords- Quality of Service, Quality of Experience, Jitter
Buffer, Adaptive Playout Buffering, Conversational Quality, VoIP.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quality of Service (QoS) in VoIP prioritizes voice trafﬁc
at the expense of trafﬁc from other packet types. The factors
of QoS mainly include jitter, packet loss and latency. Jitter
reﬂects the delay variation that affects voice IP packets as
they travel through a network. Packet loss occurs when
voice packets are dropped due to various reasons (e.g.,
congestions) in the network. Latency or delay is due to
several factors, including physical distance between a sender
and a receiver, the number of router hops the packets have to
pass through, and the packet processing time in the network.
The QoS provisioned by VoIP service providers is not
necessarily proportional to the Quality of Experience (QoE)
perceived by end users [4]. VoIP QoE describes the sat-
isfaction of end users with respect to conversations using
VoIP technology. The tremendous increase of VoIP users in
the recent years makes the satisfaction of users an equally
important metric, compared to the QoS related network
performance metrics.
The measurement of QoE is signiﬁcantly challenging due
to the diverse nature of factors that collectively determine
QoE. Several ITU recommended methods are commonly
used, namely Mean Opinion Score (MOS) [4], Perceptual
Evaluation of Speech Quality (PESQ) [5] and E-Model [9],
which we will discuss later. However, the MOS based user
satisfaction measurement has several inherent shortcom-
ings [1], including the unrepeatable nature of the tests and
the fact that the tests are not scalable. Similarly, the PESQ
and E-Model cannot provide accurate objective measurement
on user perceived quality as well as user satisfaction [8].
PESQ does not consider several factors such as end-to-
end delay in its computations. On the other hand, the E-
Model, although it includes conversational voice quality
measurements perceived by end-users, it still ignores the
dynamic nature of IP networks and subsequently excludes
the impairment caused by inappropriate playout buffering.
It is highly desired to have a more comprehensive and
accurate quality measurement model that can provide objec-
tive measurement of QoS in real-time while simultaneously
offering QoE measurement as well. Thus, unveiling the
relevance of various factors in a quality measurement model
is crucial.
In this paper, we study a commonly used ITU-T rec-
ommended quality measurement model: the E-model with
a focus on how an important but ignored parameter, the
jitter playout buffer, affects the measurement accuracy by
conducting an analytical and experimental approach. Our
study shows that adaptive playout buffering does affect the
measurement of end user perceived VoIP quality. Thus, the
E-Model that excludes the impact of the dynamic playout
buffer cannot provide accurate measurement on end user
perceived conversational quality in VoIP applications.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
ﬁrst presents a comprehensive literature review. Then, Sec-
tion III discusses the three ITU-T recommended models
that can provide subjective and objective measurements of
151
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

conversational quality. Section IV analyzes several objec-
tive measurement factors that determine quality of service.
Section V provides the experimental study via simulations.
Section VI concludes our study and brieﬂy discusses our
future work.
II. RELATED WORK
There are numerous approaches proposed to objectively
measure speech quality in VoIP. Robinson and Yedwab [10]
proposed a Voice Performance Management system to mon-
itor call quality in real-time by proactively monitoring,
alerting, troubleshooting and reporting network performance
problems. Robinson and Yedwab [10] concluded that only
packet loss, jitter and latency show the correlations between
QoS and QoE.
Gierlich and Kettler [11] provided insight into the impact
of different network conditions and the acoustical environ-
ment on speech quality. Testing techniques for evaluating
speech quality under different conversational aspects were
also described. Gierlich and Kettler [11] argued that there is
no single number that can objectively indicate speech qual-
ity; and pointed out that overall speech quality is a combina-
tion of different single values from different speech quality
parameters. Wang et. al., [12] designed and implemented a
QoS-provisioning system that can be seamlessly integrated
into current Cisco VoIP systems. Wang et. al., [12] also
described Call Admission Control (CAC) mechanisms (Site-
Utilization-based CAC and Link-Utilization-based CAC) to
prevent packet loss and over-queuing in VoIP systems.
Myakotnykh and Thompson [13] described an algorithm
for adaptive speech quality management in VoIP commu-
nications, which can show a real-time change in speech
encoding parameters by varying voice packet sizes or com-
pression (encoding) schemes. The algorithm involves the
receiver making control decisions based on computational
instantaneous quality level (which is calculated per talkspurt
using the E-Model) and perceptual metric (which estimates
the integral speech quality based on latency, packet loss
and the position of quality degradation period in the call).
Myakotnykh and Thompson [13] calculated the maximum
achievable quality level for a given codec under speciﬁc
network conditions, packet playout time, packet delay before
jitter buffer and degradation in quality caused by traf-
ﬁc burstiness and high network utilization. The algorithm
however results in an increase in average quality without
increasing individual call quality.
Raja, Azad and Flanagan [14] designed generalized mod-
els to predict degradation in speech quality with high
accuracy, in which genetic programming is used to per-
form symbolic regressions to determine Narrow-Band (NB)
and Wide-Band (WB) equipment impairment factors for a
mixed NB/WB context. Zha and Chan [15] described two
algorithms for objective measurement of speech quality:
single-ended (needing only to input the degraded speech
signal) and double-ended (needing both the original and
degraded speech signals). The algorithm developed by Zha
and Chan [15] can objectively measure in real-time speech
quality using statistical data mining methods.
Several algorithms have also been proposed to optimize
some of the existing ITU-T models. The goal of optimization
is to enhance existing models by correcting weaknesses that
are identiﬁed in the models. Gardner, Frost and Petr [16]
proposed an algorithm to optimize the E-Model by con-
sidering coder selection, packet loss, and link utilization.
The authors however stated that the algorithm would have
to be enhanced if used in a wide area network involving
multiple users. Mazurczyk and Kotulski [17] proposed an
audio watermarking method based on the E-Model and the
MOS, which provides speech quality control by adjusting
speech codec conﬁguration, playout buffer size and amount
of Forward Error Correction (FEC) mechanism in VoIP
under varying network conditions.
One of the limitations of the E-model is the fact that the
model does not consider the dynamic nature of underlying
networks that support VoIP. This limitation is addressed
by several authors designing adaptive playout buffering to
improve voice quality in VoIP. Most of these studies either
optimize the E-Model, the PESQ or combine the PESQ and
the E-Model to propose a more holistic solution. Mazurczyk
and Kotulski [17] highlighted two problems that are associ-
ated with adaptive playout buffering: how to estimate current
network status and how to transfer network status data to the
sending or receiving side. Wu et. al., [18] admitted that VoIP
playout buffer size has long been a challenging optimiza-
tion problem, as buffer size must balance the dynamics of
conversational interactivity and VoIP speech quality. Wu et.
al., [18] stated that the optimal playout buffer size yields
the highest satisfaction in a VoIP call. Wu et. al., [18]
investigated the playout buffering dimensions in Skype,
Google Talk and MSN Messenger. Wu et. al., [18] concluded
that MSN Messenger produces the best performance in terms
of adaptive playout buffering, while Skype does not adjust
its playout buffering at all. Narbutt and Davis [19] stated
that the management of playout buffering is not regulated
by any standard and is therefore vendor speciﬁc. Narbutt and
Davis [19] proposed a scheme that extends the E-Model and
provides a direct link to perceived speech quality. Narbutt
and Davis [19] evaluated various playout algorithms in order
to estimate user satisfaction from time varying transmission
impairments including delay, echo, packet loss and encoding
scheme.
III. THE ANALYSIS OF QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE
MEASUREMENT MODELS
In this section we brieﬂy review three commonly adopted
ITU-T recommended QoE measurement methods: Mean
Opinion Score (MOS), Perceptual Evaluation of Speech
Quality (PESQ) and E-Model.
152
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

A. Mean Opinion Score
Mean Opinion Score or MOS has been endorsed by ITU-T
as a subjective method to evaluate voice transmission quality.
The MOS test involves using a group of testers (listeners) to
assign a rating to a voice call. The quality is rated on a scale
of 1 to 5, with 1 = bad, 2 = poor, 3 = fair, 4 = good and 5 =
excellent [2]. The arithmetic mean of the scores provided
by all listeners becomes the ﬁnal MOS value of the voice
call. Assessment ratings can also be obtained by clustering
the test results as “Good or Better” or as “Poor or Worse”,
and further calculating the relative ratio or percentage of
each type of results. For a given voice call, these results
are expressed as “Percentage Good or Better” (%GoB) and
“Percentage Poor or Worse” (%PoW) [3]. Table I shows
the MOS rating, %GoB, %PoW and the correlation between
each rating [4].
Table I: Subjective Ratings for Measuring QoE
User Satisfaction
MOS (5)
%GoB (100)
%PoW (0)
Very Satisﬁed
4.3-4.4
97.0-98.4
0.2-0.1
Satisﬁed
4.0-4.29
89.5-96.9
1.4-0.19
Some Dissatisﬁed
3.6-3.9
73.6-89.5
5.9-1.39
Many Dissatisﬁed
3.1-3.59
50.1-73.59
17.4-5.89
Nearly All Dissatisﬁed
2.6-3.09
26.59-50.1
37.7-17.39
Not Recommended
1.0-2.59
0-26.59
99.8-37.69
The advantage of the MOS is that it can provide an
ofﬂine analysis of end-user opinions. However, MOS tests
cannot provide an absolute reference for the evaluations;
that is, MOS ratings are dependent on the expertise of
listeners [1]. Moreover, MOS tests cannot be used in large
scale experiments that involve a large number of users
because of the involved overhead (e.g., test setup). Moreover,
MOS tests are unrepeatable by nature.
B. Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality
ITU-T P.862 (PESQ) involves the comparison between the
original or reference speech samples and the ones traversed
through a test network channel. The more similar the output
signal is to the reference signal, the higher the score assigned
to the quality of the transmission channel. The comparison
result, referred to as the PESQ, is in the range of −0.5 to
4.5 which can be linearly projected to the corresponding
MOS score. The PESQ, however, cannot comprehensively
represent conversational voice quality due to its exclusion
of several network and system parameters including end-
to-end delay, echo, listening level, sidetone, loudness loss,
Enhanced Variable Rate Codec (EVRC) [5].
C. E-Model
The E-Model is designed to measure the instant user
perceived quality instead of the cumulative effect during an
entire conversation. The E-Model assumes that individual
impairment factors are additive on a psychological scale and
combines the cumulative effects of these factors into the
Transmission Rating Factor, R, which can be transformed
into other quality measures like the MOS, Percentage Good
or Better (%GoB) or the Percentage Poor or Worse (%PoW).
The R-rating is on a scale of 0 to 100, with high values of R
between 90 and 100 interpreted as excellent quality, while
lower values of R indicate a lower quality. Values of R below
50 are considered unacceptable and values above 94.15 are
assumed to be unobtainable in narrowband telephony. The
E-Model measures individual impairment factors at different
points in time to compute the R-rating. The value of the R-
rating is consequently associated with measurements taken at
a given time point and does not reﬂect the dynamic nature
of quality during the entire length of a conversation. The
following formula shows the computation of the R-rating:
𝑅 = 𝑅0 − 𝐼𝑠 − 𝐼𝑑 − 𝐼𝑒 + 𝐴
(1)
𝑅𝑂 represents the basic signal-to-noise ratio, including
noise sources such as circuit noise and room noise. The
factor 𝐼𝑠 is a combination of all impairments which occur si-
multaneously with the voice signal. The factor 𝐼𝑑 represents
the impairments caused by delay, and the effective equip-
ment impairment factor 𝐼𝑒 represents impairments caused by
low bit-rate codecs and packet-losses of random distribution.
The advantage factor 𝐴 corresponds to the user allowance
due to the convenience when using a given technology.
The E-Model not only takes in account the transmission
statistics (transport delay and network packet loss), but it
also considers the voice application characteristics, like the
codec quality, codec robustness against packet loss and the
late packets discard. However, the impairment due to playout
buffer size is simply excluded, which consequently results
to the ignorance on how the dynamic varying of the playout
buffer size affects QoE throughout an entire conversation. In
this paper, we conduct various simulations and experiments
to demonstrate that the exclusion of the affect of the playout
buffer in the E-model lessen the accuracy of measurements
of the conversational quality as perceived by end-users.
IV. THE ANALYSIS OF OBJECTIVE QUALITY
MEASUREMENT FACTORS
Quality of Service is determined primarily by latency,
packet loss and jitter presented in transmission networks
which eventually impose their impacts on user perceived
QoE. The ITU-T recommends that as long as the value of
latency in a network running VoIP is lower than 150ms, users
are expected to be highly satisﬁed if other factors that may
affect network performance are negligible. When latency
is between 150ms and 200ms, perceivable performance
degradation in quality is expected and becomes more severe
with the increase of latency.
VoIP is also sensitive to packet loss, which may result
in unintelligible conversation if the packet loss rate is high.
153
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

The ITU-T recommends that as long as the packet loss rate
is less than 1%, users are expected to be highly satisﬁed
if other factors that may affect network performance are
negligible. Our simulation via OPNET also shows the same
observation. We discuss and show the experimental setup
later in Section V. As shown in Figure 1, with increasing
packet loss rate, the end user perception of quality gradually
decreased.
While gradually increasing the value of packet loss in
the network beyond the recommended 1% level, the re-
searcher assigned a score based on the MOS scale. All
other impairments were kept at levels where there effects
will not be obvious so as not to interfere with the effect of
packet loss. Figure 1 shows that as packet loss increased
in the transmission network, the end user perception of
quality gradually decreased. It is expected that if packet
loss decrease in the transmission network and other factors
are kept constant, the end user perception of quality will
improve. Figure 1 also shows the packet loss in this OPNET
simulation was not evident for all three IP phones until after
25 sec.
IP Phone 1 Performance
IP Phone 2 Performance
IP Phone 3 Performance
Figure 1: The Effect of Packet Loss Rate on QoE.
V. EXPERIMENTAL STUDY
This section discusses some of the results that were
obtained during experiments that we conducted.
A. Experiment Setup
Figure 2 shows the experimental setup in OPNET that
was used to simulate 200 audio conference calls, each with
30s duration. The simulation model included three different
participants in the conference. Each of the IP phone nodes
had DHCP assigned IP addresses on the same network
segment with the two client computer nodes. The experiment
simulated a typical packet switched network scenario and
used a ﬁxed jitter buffer size that does not dynamically adjust
with varying jitter in the network. MOS scores from users
associated with the three different IP phone nodes were also
simulated and recorded in the experiment.
Profile 
Configuration
Application 
Configuration
IP Phone 2
IP Phone 1
IP Phone 3
SIP Gateway
Client PC 1
Ethernet Switch
Application 
Server
Client PC 2
Figure 2: Experiments Setup.
B. Experiment Results
Figure 3 shows the main observations that were recorded
during the simulations. The results include MOS values
associated with jitter delay, jitter loss and end-to-end delay
for the 200 voice calls measured at each IP Phone.
Figure 3(a) shows how static jitter buffer sizes affect the
MOS of users. The MOS is taken at every 0.2s during the
simulation. The result shows that users’ opinion ﬂuctuated
throughout the duration of the conversation as a result of the
inability of the jitter buffer size to adapt to varying values
of jitter in the network.
Since the similar performance results were observed for
all three IP phones in our experiments, we only show the
experiments result from IP phone 1. Figure 3(b) shows
the jitter measured at IP phone 1 during the simulation,
which demonstrates that after 10s jitter was continuously
increasing for about 15s. In the experiment, the jitter varying
greatly with the change of various conditions (e.g., available
bandwidth, packet loss rate). Figure 3(c) shows the end-to-
end delay presented in the network was negligible at the
beginning while the network condition was good; however,
started increasing signiﬁcantly after about 15s while the net-
work condition getting worse. Correspondingly, Figure 3(d)
shows the MOS varying and reﬂecting the change of the
network condition.
C. Playout Buffering
Mitigating the impact of jitter involves collecting packets
in a jitter buffer and playing the packets out relative to the
size of the jitter buffer. The size of the jitter buffer affects
the end-to-end delay on the network and also the packet loss
rate. The size of the jitter buffer may either be kept ﬁxed
(static playout buffering) or dynamically adjusted (adaptive
playout buffering) with respect to the variations in jitter
presented in the network.
Figure 4 shows two different Wireshark interfaces for
the same VoIP session. Wireshark allows the playback of
different segments of the entire conversation stream. Playing
back voice segments and matching the values of jitter present
154
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

second
0.2          0.4          0.6          0.8          1.0          1.2          1.4
IP Phone 1 Performance
IP Phone 2 Performance
IP Phone 3 Performance
(a) MOS jitter Delay
IP Phone 1 Performance
(b) Average Jitter (sec)
IP Phone 1 Performance
(c) Average Delay (sec)
IP Phone 1 Performance
(d) Average MOS
Figure 3: Voice Application Performance
Figure 4: The Wireshark Screenshot Showing the Presence
of Jitter.
in each segment conﬁrmed that jitter affects the end user
perception of quality.
Figure 5: The Wireshark Screenshot Showing the packets
dropped by jitter buffer.
Figure 5 shows the results of a typical conversation
analyzed using the experimental design shown in Figure 2.
Different speech segments of the VoIP session, the source
and destination address of the speech segment, together with
the number of packets that are out of sequence and those
dropped by jitter buffer are shown in Figure 5. Several VoIP
sessions were tested using different values of jitter buffer,
packet loss, available bandwidth, QoS mechanism, noise
reduction, echo cancellation, and different choice of codec.
Static playout buffer size is easier to implement when
compared to adaptive playout buffering. However, static
playout buffering might sometimes be either too small or too
large to handle the ﬂuctuating values of jitter in the network.
When the buffer size is too small, slower packets are not
played out and dropped. When the buffer size is too large,
packets are held longer than necessary and consequently
reduce conversational quality.
In contrast to using ﬁxed buffer size, adaptive playout
buffering continuously estimates the instant jitter in a net-
work, and further dynamically adjusts the playout buffer
to match the varying jitter during a whole conversation.
This ensures that packets associated with each conversation
segment are played out with the same playout delay. In
order to ensure the optimal QoE for end-users, adaptive
playout buffering will guarantee that conversational quality
is maintained at consistent levels, compared to ﬂuctuating
levels associated with static playout buffering.
The output of the E-Model is expected to be a reﬂec-
tion of the quality associated with the entire length of a
conversation. However, the computation uses snapshots of
impairment values taken at different points within an entire
conversation and does not include the affect of the playout
buffer. Figure 3(a) shows that the MOS measured at different
points during the conversation varied from the beginning
of the conversations to the end of the conversations. The
measured MOS shown in Figure 3(d) is corresponding to
the jitter variations shown in Figure 3(b). At the beginning
of the conversations when jitter was zero or almost zero, the
highest MOS value was recorded. As jitter increased in the
network, the MOS value recorded decreased. Towards the
end of the simulation, the MOS value recorded started to
increase again.
Adaptive playout buffering would ensure that the varia-
tions in jitter in the network are matched by a corresponding
value of playout buffer size. This would also ensure that the
end-to-end delay in the network is kept at optimal levels
and rate of packet loss in the network is kept below the
recommended 1%. We will report on the inclusion of the
playout buffer in the E-Model in a subsequent paper.
The results of our simulations show that the relevance
155
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

of adaptive playout buffering should not be ignored in the
evaluation of end user perception of conversational quality.
Including measurements of adaptive playout buffering into
the computations of the E-Model will either reduce the value
of the R-rating or keep the value the same, depending on
calculated effects of jitter buffer. A modiﬁcation to the value
of the R-rating will provide a more accurate mapping to the
MOS. This will in turn give a more accurate prediction of
the end user perception of conversational quality.
VI. CONCLUSION
Through the series of experiments conducted in this
study and data analyzed, it was obvious that the quality of
experience of end users is a subject that should never be
overlooked in the design and development of VoIP solutions.
Quality of experience ultimately determines the migration of
users from circuit-switched networks to VoIP and the next
generation of services. Quality of service related to network
conﬁguration and performance was shown in this study as
ineffective in ensuring the desired user experience, if other
factors that contribute to the quality of experience of end
users are not brought to cognizance.
In our future work, we will pursue a longitudinal study
tracking the effects of cost of VoIP service, security provi-
sion, usability, human behavior, call session and reliability
on quality of experience. The goal would be to determine
if there are long term effects of these factors on quality
of experience. Development of an approach to capture the
opinions of end-users about these factors in different parts of
the world might be informative. Developing a methodology
to conduct subjective tests to indentify how human behavior
varies with time during a conversation depending on the
quality impairments present would be a future goal.
REFERENCES
[1] Sat, B., and Wah, B. W. (2009). Analyzing Voice Quality in
Popular VoIP Applications. IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 16, no. 1,
pp. 46-59. doi:10.1109/MMUL.2009.2.
[2] Zwar, E. J., and Munch, B. (2006). Voice Quality and
Network
Capacity
Planning
for
VoIP.
Retrieved
from
http://my.gartner.com/portal/server.pt?open=512&objID=260&
mode=2&PageID=3460702&resId=493265&ref=QuickSearch
&sthkw=G00140936. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[3] Narbutt, M., and Davis, M. (2005). Assessing the Quality
of VoIP Transmission Affected by Playout Buffer Scheme.
4th International Conference on Measurement of Speech and
Audio Quality, Prague, Czech Republic.
[4] International Telecommunications Union (1996). ITU-T P.800.
Methods for Subjective Determination of Transmission Quality.
Retrieved
from
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-P.800-199608-
I/en. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[5] International Telecommunications Union (2007). ITU-T P.862
Corrigendum. Retrieved from http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-
P.862-200710-I!Cor1/en. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[6] Telecommunications
Industry
Association
(2005).
Telecommunications,
IP
Telephony
Equipment
and
Voice
Quality
Recommendations
for
IP
Telephony.
Retrieved
from
http://ftp.tiaonline.org/TR-
41/tr4112inactive/Public/Latest Revision of PN-
4689/PN4689LB.pdf. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[7] Morris,
M.
G.,
Venkatesh,
V.,
Davis,
G.
B.,
and
Davis,
F.D.
(2003).
User
Acceptance
of
Information
Technology:
Toward
a
Uniﬁed
View.
Retrieved
from
http://proquest.umi.com/pqdlink?vinst=PROD&fmt=6&startpa
ge=-1&ver=1&vname=PQD&RQT=309&did=420086661&ex
p=10-30-2014&scaling=FULL&vtype=PQD&rqt=309&TS=1
257038425&clientId=43838&cfc=1. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[8] Becvar, Z., Mach. P., and Bestak, R. (2009). Impact of
Handover on VoIP Speech Quality in WiMAX Networks.
Eighth International Conference on Networks, icn, pp.281-286,
Gosier, Guadeloupe, France.
[9] International
Telecommunications
Union.
(2008).
The
E-Model.
Retrieved
from
http://www.itu.int/ITU-
T/studygroups/com12/emodelv1/tut.htm.
Last
accessed:
5/6/2010.
[10] Robinson,
P.
and
Yedwab,
D.
(2009).
Voice
and
Video
Application
Performance
Manage-
ment
in
UC
Deployments.
Retrieved
from
http://www.ucstrategies.com/uploadedFiles/UC Information/
White Papers/Psytechnics/Psytechnics
UCS Final 042109%5B1%5D.pdf. Last accessed: 5/6/2010.
[11] Gierlich, H. W. and Kettler, F. (2006). Advanced speech
quality testing of modern telecommunication equipment: an
overview. Signal Processing, 86(6), 1327 - 1340.
[12] Wang, S., Mai, Z., Xuan, D., and Zhao, W. (2006). Design and
Implementation of QoS-Provisioning System for Voice over IP.
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol.
17, no. 3, pp. 276-288.
[13] Myakotnykh, E. S. and Thompson, R. A. (2009). Adaptive
Speech Quality Management in Voice-over-IP Communica-
tions. Fifth Advanced International Conference on Telecom-
munications, aict, pp.64-71, Venice/Mestre, Italy.
[14] Raja, A., Azad, R. M. A., and Flanagan, C. (2008). VoIP
Speech Quality Estimation in a Mixed Context with Genetic
Programming. 10th Annual Conference on Genetic and evolu-
tionary computation, Atlanta, Georgia, United States.
[15] Zha, W. and Chan, W. (2005). Objective Speech Quality
Measurement Using Statistical Data Mining. EURASIP Journal
on Applied Signal Processing, no. 9, 1410-1424.
[16] Gardner, M., Frost, V.S. and Petr, D.W. (2003). Using opti-
mization to achieve efﬁcient quality of service in Voice over
IP networks. IEEE International Performance, Computing, and
Communications Conference, Phoenix, Arizona, United States.
[17] Mazurczyk, W. and Kotulski, Z. (2007). Adaptive VoIP with
Audio Watermarking for Improved Call Quality and Security.
Journal of Information Assurance and Security 2, 226-234. Re-
trieved from http://www.mirlabs.org/jias/mazurczyk.pdf. Last
accessed: 5/6/2010.
[18] Wu, C., Chen, K., Huang, C., and Lei, C. (2009). An
Empirical Evaluation of VoIP Playout Buffer Dimensioning
in Skype, Google Talk and MSN Messenger. Proceedings of
the 18th International Workshop on Network and Operating
Systems Support for Digital and Video, Williamsburg, VA,
United States.
[19] Narbutt, M. and Davis, M. (2005). Assessing the Quality
of VoIP Transmission Affected by Playout Buffer Scheme.
4th International Conference on Measurement of Speech and
Audio Quality, Prague, Czech Republic.
156
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

