Mass Conﬁguration of Network Devices in
Industrial Environments
Gy¨orgy K´alm´an
ABB Corporate Research
Norway
gyorgy.kalman@no.abb.com
Abstract—Industrial Ethernet offers greater ﬂexibility and
potentially lower deployment costs than traditional ﬁeldbuses.
Although similar, the conﬁguration and engineering of these
networks need considerable effort. This paper presents the lessons
learned from an approach to bulk conﬁguration of an Ethernet
infrastructure for industrial applications. The paper presents
different approaches and decisions taken for the proof of concept
implementation. The paper gives an overview about the issues
related to representation and generation of conﬁguration data,
support of multiple vendors in the engineering phase and also
during operation. An outlook for possible improvements and
promising features is given.
Index Terms—industrial Ethernet; infrastructure; switch; con-
ﬁguration; life cycle; multi vendor
I. INTRODUCTION
A modern industrial communication system contains a con-
siderable amount of nodes interconnected with Ethernet and
current trends point towards moving the Ethernet connectivity
down to instrument level. Having an all-Ethernet infrastruc-
ture offers several advantages over traditional ﬁeldbus-based
or Ethernet-ﬁeldbus mixed networks. These include simpler
deployment by using the same connectors and wires over the
whole network, ample bandwidth, wide range of communica-
tion hardware and easy connectivity towards ofﬁce networks
or the internet.
One of the main drawbacks is a result of the inherently
different network topology compared to ofﬁce environments.
In industry, the bus-like structure has proven to reduce costs
with cutting cabling need. In these scenarios, the backbone is
usually composed as a ring and the devices, subnetworks or
other devices are connected to this with small switches (up to
approx. 10 ports).
As the networks are built with mainly these small switches,
the whole installation typically contains a magnitude more
devices than a comparable ofﬁce network (e.g.¨a bigger re-
ﬁnery can have several hundreds). During engineering and
Factory Acceptance Test (FAT), the effort of conﬁguring these
devices is high and severely inﬂuences the competetiveness. In
the majority of cases, the actual conﬁguration of the devices
can be described with setting port-VLAN allocations, RSTP
priorities, SNMP parameters and performance monitoring.
These steps currently require manual work, which is incresing
cost during engineering and also leads to increased resource
usage during FAT as conﬁguration errors may happen.
The use of small switches in addition results in issues as-
sociated with e.g. Quality of Service (QoS) and management.
A. Topology
A key area, where industrial networks do differ considerably
from their ofﬁce counterparts is the topology used. In an ofﬁce
environment the network is structured to resemble an equalized
tree as much as possible. Also, high port density switches are
used to lower the hierarchy levels in the network.
The industrial environment, as stated earlier, resembles
more a bus-like topology. Ring-based redundancy solutions
[4], traditional planning and cabling cost both force network
engineering towards the use of rings as backbone and small
switches to connect the few nodes which are located close.
Ring structures are beneﬁcial for redundancy, but are prob-
lematic for trafﬁc engineering. These rings aggregate trafﬁc
and force longer paths in the network than in a comparable
ofﬁce counterpart.
B. Network segmentation
The trafﬁc aggregation of rings do cause other issues too,
especially if multi- or broadcast trafﬁc is involved. In a typical
installation, several industrial protocols are in use. In order to
reach a more stable network and avoid that nodes are receiving
unnecessary trafﬁc, these networks are often segmented into
several Virtual LANs (VLANs).
C. Conﬁguration and Maintenance
Current industry practice builds on a detailed network
drawing and unit-to-unit conﬁguration of the network devices
as part of the deployment. Here in most cases the built-
in web conﬁguration solutions of the different vendors are
used, although some provide their tools for own product lines
e.g. Hirschmann HiVision or Cisco Network Assistant, which
support conﬁguration of multiple units.
From the engineering viewpoint, setting up these devices
one-by-one is a great risk, as the chance of human error is
high. This risk is mitigated with additional resources, meaning
more work hours to check the actual setup [5].
From maintenance viewpoint, this situation is even worse.
Most installations have a long life expectancy and therefore
future maintenance engineers will either face 10-15 year old
web interfaces if they have to modify something or the
the problems associated with replacing the old device and
migrating the conﬁguration to a new one.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

II. MOTIVATION
The motivation behind this work was to reduce engineer-
ing costs and to explore possible solutions for provider-
independent conﬁguration representation and setup of multiple
devices at the same time [6], [7]. The potential cost reduction
in the engineering phase is expected to reach 20-25% of the
total cost, not counting the life cycle support.
The review of a project portfolio revealed that in most
installations 2-3 vendors are involved in supplying network
infrastructure based on various preferences. Although the
planning of the network is done independently from the actual
manufacturers, the conﬁguration and acceptance checks do
depend on per vendor knowledge and tools.
The expected result of the research task was in addition to
explore possible solutions, to create a proof-of-concept tool,
which can compose, deploy and modify conﬁguration of one
or multiple Ethernet switches in the same work session.
In long-term, the vision of a common conﬁguration and
management tool was deﬁned, where planning, conﬁguration,
as-planned checking, monitoring and life cycle management
was provided. Such a tool could offer a common interface
to plan a network with deﬁning the segmentation and port
distribution (this covers the current network drawing step),
generate conﬁguration for the devices (which is done typically
by engineers), deploy and then through discovery, check that
the network has the same structure as planned (for example
the VLANs are set up correctly). During operation, the tool
could read out the current conﬁguration from a device and
upload it to a replacement unit, even if these are from different
manufacturers.
III. BACKGROUND
To explore conﬁguration possibilities, remote conﬁguration
features of selected product lines were reviewed:
• RuggedCom RS9xx [2]: This switch line supports con-
ﬁguration update using a builtin Trivial FTP (TFTP)
client or server, depending on requirements. In addition,
Secure Copy (SCP), terminal with Command Line In-
terface (CLI) and Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP) is supported for ﬁle and conﬁguration manip-
ulation. As all of the reviewed managed switches, this
unit offers a web interface. A vendor-speciﬁc tool for
monitoring is available1.
• Hirschmann RSRxx [1]: This switch line offers a TFTP
Client, CLI access through telnet or the web interface, a
java-based web interface, SCP ﬁle transfers and a propri-
etary Automatic Conﬁguration Adapter. This adapter, if
physically connected to the device, uploads or downloads
conﬁguration enabling easy replacement from the same
vendor.
• Moxa EDS-508 [3]: Has TFTP server and client, CLI,
SCP transfers and offers a web interface. A proprietary
Auto-Backup Conﬁgurator is offered for backup and
restore, allowing easy replacement from the same vendor.
1RuggedNMS
The research also showed that SNMP is supported on all
units, although the features were focused on monitoring and
not on conﬁguration.
The review showed considerable differences between web
interface structures and the available options. The differences
were big enough to limit reuse of conﬁguration knowledge and
proved to support the initial assumption about cost reduction
potential.
Conﬁguration data was accessible on all devices as struc-
tured text ﬁles, which were human readable and could be a
base for the conﬁguration tool design. In ﬁgure 1, the expected
coverage of a conﬁguration tool is shown. The objective was
to allow up- and downloading, manipulation and storage of
conﬁguration information.
A. Multiple unit conﬁguration
One of the most important features was to check the
feasibility of conﬁguring multiple units in the same time and
to explore the possible issues.
As part of the planning, a feature set was identiﬁed, which
were set the same on all devices or could be calculated auto-
matically. An example is the selection of the Rapid Spanning
Tree (RSTP) root bridge.
Other questions were risen in connection with the long
paths and rings used in these networks. It was assumed, that
depending on the behavior of the devices, the conﬁguration
might need to be topology aware.
The user interface was also a crucial point, as the objective
was to reduce engineering cost, which pointed towards a
simpler interface then most of the switches offered. This
request was supported by, that only a handful of features
needed to be set and most of the parameters were left at factory
defaults.
IV. PROOF-OF-CONCEPT
The implementation was focused on a subset of the possible
features. Based on feedback from engineering, conﬁguration of
multiple devices and support of multiple vendors were selected
as key features, which should be supported by a simple user
interface. In ﬁgures 2 and 3, the test user interface is shown
for single- and multi-unit mode.
The planned system was designed to cover tasks associated
with conﬁguration and deployment stages of the engineering
process. To ensure that options, which are not being used by
the system are preserved, the tool only replaces relevant parts
of the original conﬁguration ﬁles with new data (ﬁgure 4).
A. Requirements
• vendor independent, simple user interface
• remote conﬁguration of one or multiple devices
• life cycle support with conﬁguration versioning and
cloning
• conﬁgure selected features
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Fig. 1.
Proof of concept coverage
Fig. 2.
Single unit conﬁguration
B. Features
A subset of available features on the switches was selected
based on experiences from engineering. This set was planned
to cover most of the engineering needs without resulting in a
complex interface.
The feature set was deﬁned for both single and multi mode
as:
• Host IP: to be able to set the device’s IP
• Port-based VLAN: allow the setup of per-port VLANs
• SNMP setup: conﬁgure SNMP access rights and commu-
nity memberships
• Spanning Tree: select STP protocol and allow changes in
bridge priority
To support documentation, an automatic network documen-
tation generator function was also included.
A single unit conﬁguration section was included for prac-
tical purposes and served also as a testbed for checking the
conﬁguration generation capabilities.
The system was designed so that it would preserve changes
Fig. 3.
Multiple unit conﬁguration
made outside the conﬁguration tool (thus allowing device
speciﬁc conﬁguration for features not covered by the tool),
so the composition of the conﬁguration data was implemented
in a way, that it is only changing the relevant part and keeps
the rest of the data untouched.
C. Multiple vendor support
Enabling support for multiple vendors has risen several
issues, which were not foreseen. Even if all the switches
covered were complying the same IEEE standards, the actual
implementation and availability of features depends on the
vendor.
As a result, a vendor independent representation of the con-
ﬁguration data was needed and the conﬁguration generation
process had to be split into storage, representation and actual
conﬁguration data.
D. Multiple device support
Conﬁguring multiple devices in one session was considered
as the most important feature, as this would result in the
highest cost cut. Covering multiple devices also meant, that
the difference between the per unit web interfaces and the
conﬁguration tool might be the most emphasized.
Fig. 4.
Composition of the conﬁguration
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

For the IP conﬁguration and VLAN settings, a matrix of
switches and VLANs was generated. This offers a single-
screen overview of a typical network in the evaluated projects.
The drawback of this representation is, that if a large number
of ports and switches are used, the size of the matrix is getting
large. This limitation was found acceptable in this case, as in
a typical industrial environment low port count switches are
used, so adding more switches will result in a longer matrix,
but the width will stay limited.
The tool offers cloning of the port and SNMP settings to
all devices and setting the root RSTP bridge.
E. Connectivity
The review of connectivity methods has shown, that it is
problematic to choose one speciﬁc solution. Even in case of
just the three product lines reviewed, different protocols turned
out to be easier to use.
For the proof of concept, for one vendor (RuggedCom)
TFTP was chosen for up- and downloading conﬁguration data.
For the other vendor (Hirschmann), CLI-based conﬁguration
and telnet. While being aware, that none of these protocols
provide secure transfers, this requirement was relaxed for the
current version. This decision was supported by that the tool is
intended to be used during engineering, where these networks
operate as isolated islands.
V. LESSONS LEARNED
There are several important issues which were identiﬁed
during the evaluation and development of the conﬁguration
tool.
A. Vendor independent conﬁguration data
In order to support multiple vendors, the conﬁguration data
needs to be stored in an independent format. Generation of the
appropriate conﬁguration ﬁle or script depends on the vendor’s
implementation and there might be considerable differences.
Changes between vendors in most of the cases results
in information loss about the conﬁguration of the device.
An example is the support of vendor speciﬁc spanning tree
protocols. The use of these proprietary protocols is beneﬁcial
if the network is homogenous, but might cause problems if
multiple vendors are present. If the original conﬁguration was
set up e.g. to use RuggedCom’s eRSTP and the device is
replaced with an other manufacturer’s switch, the conﬁguration
tool has to fall back on e.g. RSTP, as that is the nearest
standard protocol which is supported by the new device.
If later the device is changed back (e.g. a device needed to
be taken out from the network and was temporarly replaced by
an other), if the conﬁguration storage depends on the vendor,
then only RSTP will be used even if eRSTP is available, as
the migration process will only create a representation of the
current conﬁguration in the new device.
B. Topology-awareness
An interesting issue with conﬁguration was raised while
the tests of the multiple unit conﬁguration were executed. In
single unit mode, were no problems, the conﬁguration was
updated, the device was reset and after some seconds, network
operation was restored. The same happened if multiple units
were conﬁgured in an ofﬁce-like topology (equalized tree),
where only a few levels of switches were involved and the
longest path was 3-4 hops. In case of industry-typical rings,
anomalies and connectivity errors happened.
The investigation showed, that while the update operation
itself is done in a fraction of a second and it takes approxi-
mately 2-3 seconds for a device to reset, this was too short
to update all members of the ring. In the tree topology, the
devices were updated before the ﬁrst unit decided to reset. In
the ring, however, these resets happened before all members
were updated. The result was that the network was falling
into fractions and in some cases one had to approach each
lost device separately.
As a result, it was identiﬁed, that it would be beneﬁcial
if in case of multiple unit conﬁguration, the update would be
done with respect to the topology, starting from the leaves and
progressing upwards in the tree. The same approach can be
used in rings, as these will be represented as a long unbalanced
tree (in normal operation RSTP is disabling the redundant link
to avoid a loop).
C. Identical conﬁgurations
Although the switches used in this work were not the most
complex units available, it turned out to be a complicated
task to reach exactly the same conﬁguration on devices from
different vendors.
A typical example is the conﬁguration of a trunk port. In
one case, this option was available directly on the webinterface
and in the conﬁguration ﬁle, but on a different switch at least
6 commands in the CLI were required.
An other example is the above mentioned case of RSTP. In
practice, all major vendors have their own enhancements to
RSTP to achieve better convergence times. This also means,
that these proprietary solutions can only used on homogenous
fractions of the network. If a device is replaced by a device
from a different vendor can result in weaker performance, as
all the units have to fall back on the ﬁrst standard solution,
which in most cases will be RSTP.
VI. FUTURE WORK
Future work will focus on topology awareness to miti-
gate the restart anomalies. By having a representation of
the network, also as planned checks could be executed and
discovery of previously unknown networks can be enabled.
This functionality extends the usage area of the tool towards
the network management systems.
Security is an important topic and for the current stage of
the work, no emphasis was put on this ﬁeld. While some
possible threats were identiﬁed, currently leaving a device
open for remote conﬁguration does in most cases result in
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

vulnerabilities. A possible area of research here is how to
provide an easy to use interface while having a detailed
logging system and secure connections to the devices with
respect to the limited possibilities.
VII. CONCLUSION
The background research of this paper has shown, that
there is a considerable potential to cut costs in network
engineering if appropriate tools are available. Although net-
work management software are available and widely used in
ofﬁce environments, their resource need and cost render them
unrealistic for industrial deployment.
The paper has shown a proof of concept implementation
of a conﬁguration tool, which can partially automate the
setup of Ethernet switches. The main difference compared to
proprietary solutions is, that this tool supports multiple vendors
and with a vendor independent representation of conﬁguration
data, also allows future extensions.
Testing of the tool revealed several issues associated with
device conﬁguration, especially related to problems caused
by the topology and the complexity of generating identical
conﬁgurations for switches from different vendors.
REFERENCES
[1] Hirschmann, Reference Manual, Command Line Interface Industrial
Ethernet Gigabit Switch Release 7.0, Hirschmann, 2011.
[2] RuggedCom, Rugged Operating System v3.10 User Guide, Ruggedcom,
2012. January 19.
[3] Moxa, Datasheet, EDS-508, Moxa, 2010. May 5.
[4] Kleineberg et.al., Automatic device conﬁguration for Ethernet ring redun-
dancy protocols, ETFA 2009.
[5] Rojas, C.; Morell, P., Guidelines for Industrial Ethernet infrastructure
implementation: A control engineer’s guide, IEEE IAS/PCA 2010.
[6] Imtiaz et.al., A novel method for auto conﬁguration of Realtime Ethernet
Networks, ETFA 2008.
[7] Reinhart et.al., Automatic Conﬁguration (Plug & Produce) of Industrial
Ethernet Networks, INDUSCON 2010.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

