Path Selection in WiMAX Networks with Mobile 
Relay Stations 
 
Pavel Mach, Zdenek Becvar 
Department of Telecommunication Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
Czech Technical University in Prague 
Technicka 2, 166 27 Prague, Czech Republic 
machp2@fel.cvut.cz, zdenek.becvar@fel.cvut.cz  
 
 
Abstract—Introduction of mobile relays into networks based 
on IEEE 802.16 standard brings new challenges. The paper 
proposes signaling mechanism for acquisition of channel state 
information for mobile relays and provides detail analysis of 
the amount of signaling overhead caused by their introduction. 
In addition, the investigation whether the connection of the 
mobile users through the mobile relays enhances the system 
performance is carried out. The obtained simulation results 
indicate that by means of mobile relays, the overall throughput 
can be increased and signaling overhead reduced. 
     Keywords-CSI, mobile relays stations, path selection, WiMAX. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the several last years, wireless systems and 
technologies established themselves as one of the fastest 
growing 
and 
developing 
area 
in 
the 
field 
of 
telecommunications. Especially IEEE 802.16 standards, also 
known as WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for 
Microwave Access), have a great potential. In 2004, IEEE 
802.16-2004 [1] version intended for fixed users was 
approved, which was followed by IEEE 802.16e [2] finished 
one year later. To cope with increasing users’ requirements 
for higher data rates, new WiMAX working groups were 
established in 2006, i.e., IEEE 802.16j [3] and IEEE 
802.16m [4]. The IEEE 802.16j version introduces Relay 
Stations (RS), which enhances system capacity and 
increases network coverage. The main aim of IEEE 
802.16m is to improve spectral efficiency and to minimize 
signaling overhead. According to [5], three types of RSs are 
defined; fixed, nomadic and mobile RSs. The fixed RS 
(FRS) is permanently installed at the same location. 
Although the nomadic RS (NRS) is also fixed when 
operating, its position can be changed as needed. The last 
type of the RS, i.e., the mobile RS (MRS) is moving in 
similar way as Mobile Stations (MS).  
When RSs are introduced into WiMAX based networks, 
several routes between the MS and Base Station (BS) can be 
found. The challenge is to select the route offering the best 
network’s performance. Data can be routed either through 
implementation of certain existing routing protocol or by 
modification of signaling at MAC layer. Nonetheless, the 
implementation of whole routing protocol into WiMAX 
seems to be too complicated. Thus, the preferable solution is 
to make simple modifications at MAC layer instead. In the 
scope of IEEE 802.16j standardization body, several 
proposals focus on routing issues in relay-based WiMAX 
networks (e.g., in [6][7]). In [6], the authors propose a 
signaling mechanism for efficient routing intended for IEEE 
802.16j standard. Nevertheless, the best point of attachment 
is decided immediately after the network entry procedure 
and no potential changes during MS’s operation are 
discussed. In [7], end to end routing and connection 
management is addressed. Besides the standardization 
activity, a lot of research papers dealt with routing issues in 
IEEE 802.16 networks with the FRSs. The common aim is 
to design effective path selection metrics and to propose 
suitable path selection algorithms for appropriate routing of 
data (see, e.g., [8]-[13]). 
To our best knowledge, all existing works dealing with 
routing issues assume only the FRSs, not the MRSs. Thus, 
the novelty of this paper is that takes into consideration also 
the MRSs and analyzes their impact on system performance. 
The first objective is to propose signaling mechanism 
allowing acquisition of channel state information (CSI). If 
the CSI of individual routes is known, the most appropriate 
path between the MS and BS can be selected. As a basis, the 
proposal uses the signaling mechanism introduced in [11], 
which takes into consideration only the FRSs, and extends it 
for the MRSs as well. The second objective is to investigate 
if it is profitable to use the MRS by MSs that are in close 
vicinity of the MRS but not located on the same vehicle as 
MRS.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next 
Section overviews MAC management messages used in the 
proposed 
signaling 
scheme 
and 
contemplates 
the 
assumptions considered in this paper. A brief description of 
principle explained in [11] is introduced in Section 3 
together with proposed signaling mechanism taken into 
consideration MRSs. In addition, the analysis of overhead 
introduced by signaling mechanism is addressed. Section 4 
and section 5 describe simulation scenario and simulation 
results respectively. The last Section gives our conclusion.  
303
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

II. 
PRELIMINARIES 
A. MAC management messages 
In IEEE 802.16e standard, several options to obtain CSI 
between the BS and MS are defined. In our proposal, the BS 
acquires the CSI by means of MOB_SCN-REP (mobility 
scanning report). The MOB_SCN-REP contains the results 
of scanning procedure. Time allocated for the scanning and 
reporting period is allocated to the MS through MOB_SCN-
RSP messages (mobility scanning response). Two types of 
reporting are specified: a) event triggered reporting and b) 
periodic reporting. In the event triggered reporting, the MS 
sends the reports after each measurement of channel 
parameters, i.e., CINR (Carrier to Interference and Noise 
Ratio), RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator), Relative 
delay and RTD (Round Trip Delay). In the periodic 
reporting, the reports are sent periodically.  
If the MS is attached to the BS through one or more RSs, 
the results of scanning have to be retransmitted to the BS. 
One option is to simply send the MOB_SCN-REP received 
by the individual MSs. Nevertheless, this option generates 
significant amount of signaling overhead. The second option 
is to combine obtained scanning results by all subordinate 
stations into one message labeled as MOB_RSSCN-REP. 
The definition and structure of the MOB_RSSCN-REP can 
be found in [14]. 
Similarly as in [11], the proposal distinguishes the 
activity/inactivity of the MS. To be more specific, the 
scanning and reporting periods depend on whether the MS 
has data to send or not. When the MS becomes active, the 
bandwidth request header (in IEEE 802.16 standard labeled 
as BW request) is send to the BS.      
B. Assumptions 
The IEEE 802.16 standard specifies several physical 
layers. In the paper, physical layer based on Orthogonal 
Frequency 
Division 
Multiple 
Access 
(OFDMA) 
is 
considered. 
In 
addition, 
the 
uplink 
and 
downlink 
transmissions utilize the same frequency band, i.e., the Time 
Division Duplex (TDD) is assumed. The maximal number 
of hops between the MS and BS is restricted to three hops. 
Consequently, the MRS can be attached either directly to 
BS or via one FRS. 
According to [5], the MRS is supposed to be placed on 
some kind of public traffic vehicle such as bus or tram. 
Hence, the MRSs can be considered as another MSs moving 
along the predefined trajectory (e.g., the path, along which 
the bus is traveling from departure to terminal station). The 
only difference with regard to the MS is that the MRS 
generates distinguishable more traffic as aggregates traffic 
of its subordinate MSs. In comparison with the MS, the 
MRS is assumed to be active all the time since its control 
information at the beginning of every frame must be 
transmitted. Consequently, no active/inactive state is 
distinguished as in case of MS. In addition, the MSs located 
at the same vehicle as the MRS are supposed to be fixed 
with respect to this particular MRS. 
III. 
PROPOSED SIGNALING METHOD 
This section firstly describes the signaling mechanism, 
which purpose is to obtain CSI. Secondly, the impact of 
MRSs in the network on the signaling overhead is analyzed. 
Thirdly, the path options for MSs are contemplated. 
A. CSI acquisition with Mobile Relay Stations 
When the MS is attached to the FRS or MRS while in 
inactive state, the acquisition of CSI is done exactly in the 
same way as described in [11]. Hence, the scanning period is 
set to t1 and reporting period is set to t2 (see Fig. 1). Both the 
scanning 
and 
reporting 
periods 
(scheduled 
in 
the 
MOB_SCN-RSP), are derived from the speed of the MS and 
can occur relatively infrequently in order to save valuable 
radio resources. In addition, to further minimize signaling 
overhead, the value of t2 can be set to n*t1 where n is the 
integer value. Nevertheless, the MOB_SCN-REP should be 
sent by the MS anytime if CINR between the MS and the 
access station (BS or RS) drops below a specific value for a 
certain amount of time. This principle guarantees that a 
handover can be made in advance. If the MSs are connected 
to the MRS, the MRS creates single MOB_RSSCN-REP 
message by combining of all MOB_SCN-REP messages and 
retransmits it in the direction of BS. Thus, the reduction of 
signaling overhead is achieved. Nevertheless, if the MS is 
attached to the FRS, the FRS itself simple relays the message 
toward the BS. This is due to the fact that the reporting 
intervals of individual users attached to the FRS are not 
necessarily scheduled at the same time intervals and to wait 
for all MOB_RSSCN-REP can result in outdating of 
reporting information.  
On the other hand, the MRS itself needs to send CSI to 
the BS in order to use the optimum route to the BS. As the 
MRS is considered to be active all the time, the value of 
scanning  period  t3  and  reporting  period  t4  should be set to 
 
 
Figure 1.  Scanning and reporting periods of MRS and MS (MS in  
inactive state). 
304
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Figure 2.  Scanning and reporting periods of MRS and MS (MS in  active 
state). 
much shorter values than t1 and t2. Thus, the up to date route 
between the MRS and BS can be maintained. The results 
acquired during the MRS’s scanning interval are appended to 
MOB_RSSCN-REP message.  
If MS becomes active, the scanning and reporting 
intervals should be changed accordingly in order to obtain up 
to date channel information (see Fig. 2). The BS learns about 
MS’s transition from the inactive to the active state either 
through BW request, which originates at the side of the MS, 
or when the BS has some data designated to this MS (see 
Fig. 2). Consequently, the BS transmits another MOB_SCN-
RSP message to schedule new scanning and reporting 
intervals. The MS performs scanning at t3 interval while the 
reporting interval is set to t4 similarly as in case of 
permanently active MRS. However, if the MS is located at 
the same vehicle as the MRS, the reporting and scanning 
intervals for the MS can remain the same as described in Fig. 
1. The reason is that the MS is fixed (or slowly moving) with 
regard to the MRS. Thus, the variation of channel conditions 
is supposed to be minimal and signaling overhead can be 
reduced.   
 
B. Analyzis of signaling overhead 
The amount of overhead introduced by the acquisition of 
CSI between the BS and MSs is proportional to several 
parameters. Note that by signaling overhead is meant the 
overhead introduced by proposed mechanism, not the whole 
overhead at MAC layer. The first parameter corresponds to 
the size of the reporting messages MOB_SCN-REP (ms1) 
and MOB_RSSCN-REP (ms2). In general, the number of 
MS’s neighbors has direct impact on the messages size. 
Since the MOB_SCN-RSP message is sent infrequently, its 
impact on the overhead is minimal and it is neglected in the 
paper. The second parameter is the amount of active MSs in 
the system (n). The third parameter is the number of hops 
between MSi and the BS (nohi), i.e., how many times the 
reporting messages have to be relayed to reach the BS. The 
last parameter influencing the overhead is the system 
configuration’s setting (e.g., reporting period rpi, nominal 
channel bandwidth, OFDMA parameters, etc.).  
The overhead is composed of several parts. The first part 
of the overhead is caused by MOB_SCN-REP message sent 
by the MSs to their access stations, which could be 
expressed as: 
 
( )
∑
=
×
=




1
1
2
1
1
n
i
i
i
MS
rp t
ms
s
b
OH
 
(1) 
 
where n1 is the number of inactive users and n2 represents 
the amount of active users (i.e., n1+ n2 = n). Note that 
message size ms1 is expressed in bits and reporting periods 
in seconds. The second part of the overhead is generated by 
the RSs. For the MSs connected only through the FRSs, the 
overhead can be formulated as follows: 
 
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
∑
∑
=
=
×
−
×
+
+
×
−
×
=




21
11
1
4
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
n
i
i
MS
i
i
n
i
i
MS
i
i
FRS
rp t
noh
ms
rp t
noh
ms
s
b
OH
 
(2) 
 
 
 
 
 
where n11 is the number of inactive users attached to the 
FRSs, n21 represents the amount of active users connected to 
the FRSs and 
nohiMS
is the number of hops between the MS 
i and BS. In other words, the MOB_SCN-REP message is 
simple relayed to the BS as described earlier. The overhead 
caused by the MSs connected to the MRS and MRSs itself 
can be expressed as: 
 
( )
∑
=
×
×
=




m
i
i
MRS
i
i
MRS
rp t
noh
ms
s
b
OH
1
4
2
1
 
(3) 
 
where m is the number of MRS and 
nohiMRS
 corresponds 
to the amount of number of hops between the MRS i and 
BS. The size of MOB_RSSCN-REP varies depending on 
the 
amount 
of 
received 
MOB_SCN-REP 
sent 
by 
subordinate MSs, which could be formulated as: 
 
1
1
22
2
)
(
)1
(
[ ]
K
K
ms
n
K
ms b
+
−
×
+
+
=
 
(4) 
 
where K is the size of message fields that are transmitter 
disregarding the amount of received MOB_SCN-REP 
messages (
n22
), K1 stands for the information added by the 
RS in order to recognize by the BS, which MSs are sending 
reporting information. In [14], it is demonstrated that if at 
least two messages are combined at the side of MRS, saving 
of overhead is achieved. 
305
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

C. Path selection options  
The MS can be connected either directly to the BS, to the 
FRS or to the MRS. The question is whether the MS 
situated near of the MRS (but not at the same vehicle as the 
MRS) can use the MRS to access the BS as indicated in  
Fig. 3. On one hand, the overall system throughput may be 
enhanced since the route via the MRS could offer better 
connection to the users. On the other hand, the connection 
through the MRS may have drawback since the route 
between the MS and BS can change rapidly, e.g., the 
advantage of attachment through the MRS is only of 
temporary duration. In this regard, higher number of MS’s 
handover initialization may occur. Nonetheless, the 
excessive number of handovers can be mitigated by 
utilization of HDT (Handover Delay Timer) technique 
proposed in [15] which purpose is to delay handover 
initialization.  
The purpose of following simulation is to investigate 
whether the connection through the MRSs can enhance 
overall system performance, which is measured in terms of 
system throughput and the amount of signaling overhead. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION SCENARIO 
The simulations are done in MATLAB environment. The 
parameters’ setting is given in Tab. 1. The simulation model 
is composed of one BS and eight FRSs. A deployment of 
individual stations is illustrated in Fig. 4. In the simulation, 
four MRS moving along predefined rectangular trajectories 
are considered (the initial position of MRSs is also shown in 
Fig. 4) 
 
BS
Acces
s FRS
MS
*
#
Primary route
Secoundary route
MRS
CINRMS-FRS
CINRMS-MRS
CINRMRS-FRS
CINRFRS-BS
MS
*
#
MS
*
#
CINRMS-FRS
CINRMS-BS
 
Figure 3.  Path selection option for the MS. 
 
Figure 4.  Deployment of RSs and MRS within BS cell. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Frequency band  [GHz] 
3.5 
Channel bandwidth [MHz] 
20 
Number of MS 
50 
MS and MRS velocity [m/s] 
10-50 
Frame duration [ms] 
10 
BS transmit power Pt [dBm]/height [m] 
43/30 
FRS transmit power Pt [dBm]/height [m] 
30/30 
MRS transmit power Pt [dBm]/height [m] 
30/4 
MS transmit power Pt [dBm]/height [m] 
23/2 
Noise [dBm] 
-100.97 
Simulation time [min] 
60 
 
The MRS can be connected either directly to the BS or 
via one intermediate FRS. Connection through more than 
one FRS is not allowed due to maximum number of hops 
restrictions (which is up to 3 hops between the MS and BS). 
Additionally, attachment of MRS through another MRS is 
not considered. 
The movement of the MSs is managed as follows. At the 
beginning of simulation, an initial position of each MS is 
randomly determined so that the MS has to be located 
within defined range, i.e., between 0 to 800 m from the BS. 
Additionally, random movement direction is determined for 
all individual MSs in the system. The mobile terminal is 
moving along straight line until the distance from the BS is 
equal or larger than defined BS’s cell area. In such 
circumstance, a new direction of the MS is established. This 
mechanism guarantees that no MS roams out of the BS 
range during the simulation process. 
Two path loss models taken from [16] are implemented. 
The first one is suitable for LOS communication and 
describes radio channel behavior between the BS-FRS and 
the FRS-FRS. The second one is assigned for NLOS 
communication between the BS-MS, FRS-MS, BS-MRS, 
FRS-MRS and the MRS-MS. 
The path between the MS and BS is selected according to 
the minimum Radio Resource Cost (RRC) metric (more 
detail may be found in [17]).  
The reporting period t4, assumed in the simulation, 
corresponds to the optimal reporting period for active 
MS/MRS derived from [11]. If the MS is inactive, the 
reporting period t2 is set to value of t4/10 in order to 
minimize signaling overhead. 
The system performance is analyzed in terms of system 
throughput and overhead generated by the MSs and MRSs. 
To that end, three scenarios are considered. The first 
scenario represents the situation when MRSs are not 
assumed (in the following figures labeled as “Scenario A”). 
Nonetheless, some of the MSs’ are positioned at public 
traffic vehicle moving along predefined trajectories. In the 
second scenario, the MRSs are installed at public traffic 
vehicle (in the following figures labeled as “Scenario B”). 
Thus, the MS situated at the bus are connected to the 
network right through newly deployed MRS. In the last 
scenario, it is assumed that also MSs currently not placed at 
306
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

TABLE II.  
HDT SETTING FOR SCENARIO C 
Scenario type 
HDT value [s] 
Scenario C1 
0.01 
Scenario C2 
0.1 
Scenario C3 
0.5 
Scenario C4 
1 
Scenario C5 
5 
TABLE III.  
TRAFFIC MODELS TYPE 
Model type 
VoIP 
FTP 
HTTP 
VoIP only 
100% 
0% 
0% 
Traffic Mix I 
30% 
30% 
40% 
Traffic Mix II 
10% 
80% 
10% 
 
the MRS can use this MRS as an access station (in the 
following figures labeled as “Scenario C”). Scenario C 
considers different values of HDT as shown in Tab. 2. 
To evaluate the maximal throughput, a full queue traffic 
model is implemented [18]. The throughput evaluated in the 
paper represents a system WiMAX capacity obtained at the 
MAC level. Hence, the overhead introduced by higher layer 
protocols (e.g., network, transport, etc.) is not considered. 
To estimate the amount of the signaling overhead due to 
reporting, the size of MOB_SCN-REP and MOB_RSSCN-
REP messages are derived from [2] and [14] respectively. 
The activity and inactivity of MSs depend on implemented 
traffic models. In the simulation, VoIP only and two traffic 
mixes are considered as indicated in Tab. 3 (detail traffic 
models description can be found in [18]).  
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Fig. 5 shows the normalized signaling overhead caused 
by 
the 
reporting 
messages 
MOB_SCN-REP 
and 
MOB_RSSCN-REP depending on the MSs/MRSs velocity.  
The worst performance is obtained by Scenario A as the 
highest amount of overhead is generated for all traffic 
models. The difference in the amount of generated signaling 
overhead for individual traffic models is caused by diverse 
ratio of MSs’ activity/inactivity. Thus, in case of VoIP 
model, the MSs are in inactive state much more often than in 
case of Traffic Mix I/II (i.e., reporting period is more often 
set to t2 instead of t4). The Fig. 5 further demonstrates that by 
introduction of MRSs into the system, the size of reporting 
overhead can be reduced (see Scenario B in the Fig. 5). The 
maximal achieved reduction is obtained for Traffic Mix II, 
which is approximately 30% when compared to Scenario A. 
As already explained, the minimization of the overhead is 
possible due to two facts: i) the MS located at the same 
moving vehicle as MRS can set its reporting period to t2 
independently on the activity/inactivity and ii) the MRS is 
able to combine received MOB_SCN-REP messages into 
one message. Although, the amount of signaling overhead is 
increased by utilization of Scenario C, the results are still 
better than in case of Scenario A (especially if Traffic model 
II is used). The reason for the increase of signaling overhead 
(when compared to Scenario B) is that the MSs connected 
through MRS are usually connected to the BS via more hops. 
 
Figure 5.  Signaling overhead due to reporting. 
Fig. 6 illustrates how many handovers are performed per 
simulation run depending on MSs/MRSs velocity. The best 
results are achieved by Scenario B as the overall number of 
handovers is reduced by utilization of MRS (approximately 
by 50% for MSs/MRSs’ velocity of 10 m/s and by 34% for 
MSs/MRSs’ velocity of 50 m/s). The less number of 
handovers in comparison to Scenario A is acquired due to 
the fact that the MSs currently positioned at the MRS do not 
perform handovers. If the Scenario C is implemented, 
distinguishable increase of initiated handovers is observed. 
The reason is that in some cases the attachment via the MRS 
is only temporaly. Nevertheless, this drawback can be 
mitigated by implementation of HDT. When HDT value is 
set to 5 s, the overhead generated by executed handovers is 
comparable to scenario A. 
Fig. 7 presents the throughput achieved for all 
investigated scenarios depending on offered traffic load. In 
case of Scenario A, already at middle traffic load, not all 
data could be transmitted to the destination station. The 
better results are achieved for Scenario B (improvement by 
9.2 %) and for Scenario C1 (improvement by 14 %). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Number of MSs’ handover per simulation run. 
307
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Figure 7.  Normalized system throughput in dependence on offered traffic. 
 Decrease of system throughput by application of HDT is 
only marginal. From Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 can be also derived 
the optimal HDT value, which is 5 s as the number of 
performed handovers are noticeably mitigated while the 
system throughput is still nearly the same as case of 
Scenario C1.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The paper proposed a mechanism for acquisition of CSI 
if MRSs are implemented into the network. In addition, 
detail analysis is done to estimate the amount of overhead 
generated by reporting messages. 
The obtained simulation results indicate that system 
throughput can be improved since MRSs provide to its MSs 
better signal quality. In some cases, also the MSs not 
currently positioned at MRS may utilize connection offered 
by near MRS. In this way, the system throughput can be 
further enhanced. Nevertheless, this option has some 
drawbacks, i.e., number of performed handovers can be 
significantly increased as the connection through the MRS 
is only temporally. In order to overcome this issue, HDT is 
implemented. By utilization of HDT, the excessive number 
of HO is decreased while the system throughput is still 
nearly unaffected. The results also demonstrated that the 
signaling overhead generated by reporting of scanning 
information can be reduced by means of the MRS.  
The disadvantage of MRSs’ introduction can be seen in 
potential increase of interference and longer packet delays if 
the MSs, not currently located at the same moving vehicle 
as the MRS, connect to it as described in the paper. Thus, in 
future work we would like to addresses these issues.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed in the framework of the 
FP7 project ROCKET IST-215282 STP, which is funded by 
the EC. The Authors would like to acknowledge the 
contributions 
of 
their 
colleagues 
from 
ROCKET 
Consortium (http://www.ict-rocket.eu). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE Std 802.16-2004, IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan 
area networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless 
Access Systems, 2004. 
[2] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan 
area networks, Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband 
Wireless Access Systems, 2006. 
[3] IEEE 802.16j, Baseline Document for Draft Standard for Local and 
Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and 
Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems, 2007. 
[4] IEEE802.16m Task Group: IEEE 802.16m proposals. Resources 
documents. http://www.ieee802.org/16/tgm/, 2009. 
[5] J. Sydir, IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access Working Group – 
Harmonized Contribution on 802.16j (Mobile Multihop Relay) Usage 
Models, July 2006. 
[6] K. Baum, M. Cudak, S. Ramachadran, P. Satori, and E. Visotsky, 
“Signaling for Efficient Routing,” paper no. C802.16j-06_159r1, 
available online at <http://ieee802.org/16>, 2007. 
[7] G. Q. Wang at al., “MMR Network end-to-end routing and 
connection  management,” paper. no. C802.16j-07/092, available 
online at <http://ieee802.org/16>, 2007. 
[8] D. M. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, S.-Ch. Kim, and Y.-B. Ko, “New 
Approaches for Relay Selection in IEEE 802.16 Mobile Multi-hop 
Relay Networks,” Lecture Notes in Computer Scienece, pp. 950-959, 
2007. 
[9] S.-S. Wang, Y.-H. Tsai, H.-Ch. Yin, and S.-T. Sheu, “An Effective 
Path Selection Metric for IEEE 802.16-based Multi-hop Relay 
Networks,” 
12th 
IEEE 
Symposium 
on 
Computers 
and 
Communications (ISCC), pp. 1051-1-56, 2007. 
[10] S. Ann, K. G. Lee, and H. S. Kim, “A Path Selection Method  in 
IEEE 802.16j Mobile Multi-hop Relay Networks”, International 
Conference 
on 
Sensor 
Technologies 
and 
Applications 
(SENSOECOMM), pp. 808-812, 2008. 
[11] P. Mach, Z. Becvar, and R. Bestak, “Acquistion of Channel State 
Information for Routing Purposes in Relay-based WiMAX 
Networks,” 8th International Conference on Networks (ICN), p. 170-
175, 2009. 
[12] D. Li and H. Jin, “Relay selection in two-hop IEEE 802.16 mobile 
multi-hop relya networks,“ 1st Internation Workshop on Education 
Technology and Computer Science (ETCS), pp. 1007-1011, 2009. 
[13] S. Ann and H. S. Kim, “Relay association method for optimal path in 
IEEE 802.16j mobile multi-hop relay networks,” European 
Transactions on Telecommunications, 2010. 
[14] Z. Becvar and P. Mach, “Reduction of Scanning Reporting Overhead 
in IEEE 802.16 Networks with Relays,” In 9th International 
Conference on Networking (ICN), pp. 109-114, 2010. 
[15] Z. Becvar and J. Zelenka, “Implementation of Handover Delay Timer 
into 
WiMAX,” 
6th 
Conference 
on 
Telecommunications 
(CONFTELE),  pp. 401-404, 2007. 
[16] IEEE 802.16j, Multi-hop Relay System Evaluation Methodology 
(Channel Model and Performance Metric) paper No. 06/013r3, 2007. 
[17] Z. Becvar, P. Mach, and R. Bestak., “Initialization of Handover 
Procedure in WiMAX Networks,” ICT-MobileSummit, 2009. 
[18] IEEE 802.16m, Evaluation Methodology Document, IEEE 802.16m 
paper No. 08/004r2, 2008. 
308
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

