SEED, A Server Platform for the Edge of the Network
Carlo Vitucci,
Technology management
Ericsson AB
Stockholm, Sweden
carlo.vitucci@ericsson.com
Alf Larsson
Senior Specialist
Ericsson AB
Stockholm, Sweden
alf.larsson@ericsson.com
Abstract—Software defined Network – Network Function
Virtualization (SDN-NFV) has been the catalyst of most of the
researches in the networking and telecommunication domain
during the latest years and it is supposed to have important
deployment in the early next ones. However, there is no common
understanding why it is so important and why it is the winning
solution for the next generation networks. This paper describes,
from
an
infrastructure
point
of
view,
the
challenges
to
understand what SDN-NFV deployment into the Radio Access
Network (RAN) really means. Our approach identifies how the
Server at the Edge (SEED) of the network should look like. The
paper describes the meaning of moving SDN-NFV into the RAN
(conceptually different than moving the RAN into the cloud) and
identifies the key function enablers for meeting the operation
agility request from
Radio Access. Resources
and meters
handling
as
critical characterization to empower
the
Self
Organizing
Network
(SON)
concept
without
unacceptable
performance
cost are
also described.
The
paper
aims to
emphasize the enablers of the new business model needed in the
SEED more than being an exhaustive description of single
components.
Keywords-SDN-NFV; C-Mobile OS; operational agility, new
business case.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, the Telecom realm is facing an epic moment, a
technology step that will drive the evolution of the networked
system in the future and, at the end of the day, the End User
services and life style. Although it has become common
knowledge, it is important to recall what is behind the SDN-
NFV fortune in order to clearly identify some design rules that
should drive the design in the area.
Figure 1. Smartphone penetration behind the growth of DATA ARPU (source:
Ericsson)
Figure 2. The revenue from new subscription trend (source Chetan Sharma
Consulting [2])
In the last
years, Telecom operators have seen an
exponential growth of data traffic and, at the same time, a
significant income reduction from the “golden eggs goose”
voice and Short Message Service (SMS). Concurrently,
thesmartphone penetration is continuously increasing (see
Figure 1), changing the user’s usage style of connectivity [1]
[3]. Today, it is a common condition for all operators to have
most of their Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) coming from
data traffic and indeed voice and SMS is often offered at a very
cheap price in order to attract new customers and increase
revenue from data traffic. The trend is not supposed to change
in the next years: Ericsson prediction shows that, by 2021,
there will be 28 billion connected devices around the world [1].
5G technology is just the answer to such a tremendous demand
of connectivity for data traffic [3].
Saying so, one could start thinking that the operators might
have better income from increased network capability, but the
picture is not complete: the majority of mobile users are not
prepared to spend too much for using their smartphones and it
is not a case that the revenue from new subscriber dropped
down dramatically in the last years, as reported in Figure 2.
Such a condition results in a significant reduction of operator
margin in a way that some pessimistic vision [4] is predicting a
possible “end of profitability” condition for their business.
Even in a more optimistic prediction, it is however a fact that
the current business model is not really sustainable and
operators need a direction where their margins can start to
increase again [5].
A common understanding is that SDN-NFV is a key to
reduce Operating expenses (Opex) and Capital expenditures
(Capex) and then increase operator’s margin. But, it looks like
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

that statement is without a strong background vision, or at
least, not able to give the right clue of the operators’ strategy.
Just to avoid any misunderstanding, SDN-NFV architecture
will reduce Opex and Capex, but it is not actually that huge of
an incentive for the operators’ business. In fact, Opex and
Capex have been reduced during the latest years, mostly thanks
to the cost reduction of technology, and the real truth is that
today total cost and revenue are so close that one can hardly
imagine a new golden era thanks only to Opex and Capex
reduction. It seems enough for surviving in the Telecom market
battlefield, but surely not enough to justify a new infrastructure
investment by the operators. Eventually, let us consider the life
cycle of a new Telecom technology: the delivery rate between
a technology step (from 2G to 3G, from 3G to 4G and so on)
has an aggressive pace, in most of the case “forcing” operators
to make a new infrastructure investment. But reduced revenue
and delivery interval is concurrently reducing the business case
window, so operators are not actually too keen to join a new
technology in such conditions and for sure they are looking at
any new investment very carefully. So, what are the actual
operators’ needs then?
So far, their effort has been focused on a market where
improvement of capacity and quality of the connectivity has
been enough. But the richest market today is fully in the hands
of the over-the-top content (OTT) media delivery companies
(Google, Facebook, Netflix, etc.). A real shift of operators’
business is the key to enter into such a rich market. Eventually,
that will be a win-win condition, since OTT is perfectly aware
that reducing the end-to-end (E2E) data contents latency will
improve their business. They are also aware that accessing
User Metadata (very well known by Telecom operators) will
increase even more such a market thanks to new business
cases. Those considerations are behind the successful story of
the SDN-NFV. The architecture has been designed in order to
feed that win- win condition. At the same time, reducing Opex
and Capex creates a more green-power environment and
allowing an easy deployment of a new technology in a shorter,
safer and comfortable new way. The “core” promise of SDN-
NFV is to guarantee a new “business environment” where
Telecom operators are a stakeholder in the creation of new
flexible services.
This paper explores how RAN is integrated into the SDN-
NFV architecture in Section 2. Section 3 introduces the SEED
as architecture element, which is further described in detail in
Section 4. We end with conclusions in Section 5 and future
works in Section 6.
II. SDN-NFV AND THE C-RAN
The European Telecommunications Standards Institute
(ETSI) has set regulations and indications in order to design
and define SDN-NFV architecture [7][8], but some parts are
left for others to design. One of those parts is the so called
Network Function Virtualization Infrastructure (NFVI), where
the Radio Network vendors could play their significant role, in
this way, both contributing to the SDN-NFV best deployment
and improving their own business. The first discriminating
condition to succeed in this challenge is their ability to
integrate the traditional IT world with the Telecom one (as
explicitly required by the new business case), that is, their
ability to provide full SDN-NFV architecture up to the edge of
the
network:
into
the
RAN.
ETSI
group
defined
the
deployment of the SDN-NFV for the mobile network in their
Use Cases study report [6]. According to that scenario, the
current base station is actually split into two main objects: the
Remote Radio Header (RRH), that is antenna and eventually
the basic Layer 1, and the virtualized Baseband Unit (vBBU)
as a service housed in a specific server implementing Layer 2
and Layer 3 of mobile protocols. Then, from an infrastructure
point of view, the challenge is to understand what SDN-NFV
deployment into the RAN really means, identifying how the
server at the edge of the network should look like. The
questions that initially need to be answered are: what are the
characterizations and technologies that must be considered as
key
components
of
the
server
itself,
which
hardware
characteristics are matching the requirements, which functions
are clearly new components (services) of the platform housed
into the server@edge (SEED) and which ones need more
attention
and
effort
to
remove
possible
obstacles
and
limitations?
It is a long journey where the infrastructure designers must
remember the real needs behind the SDN-NFV. Moreover, the
operators’ expectations have to be fulfilled and also a more
complete understanding of other opportunities like footprint
and energy consumption. For these reasons, it is worth to start
considering the SDN-NFV deployment scenario from a system
level view and then refer to it while defining services and
functions. This paper wants to focus on the SEED concept,
identifying its characterization to cope with the radio function
requirements. In fact, the starting point of this paper is that it
could be very difficult to move the RAN into the cloud and
more suitable to port SDN-NFV into the RAN. This will give
all the benefits of SDN-NFV described in the introduction and,
concurrently, will answer the specific requirements needed at
the edge of the network. The reference deployment model has
Figure 3. SDN-NFV layered architecture
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

been described [9][10] and ETSI made some progress in the
same
area
[7]
introducing
the
so
called
Mobile-Edge
Computing (MEC) server. It offers application developers and
content providers cloud-computing capabilities and an IT
service environment at the edge of the mobile network.
In this paper, the MEC server is considered the starting
point of any investigation of the SEED definition and
characterization. Another aspect is to consider SDN-NFV as an
overall system solution, an end-to-end solution from that
perspective
to
avoid
not
fulfilling
the
fundamental
requirements.
SDN-NFV architecture is built over three layers [11], as
logically shown in Figure 3:
•
Business Application Layer – where the enterprise
business value model is defined
•
Business Enablement Layer – where the enabling
and capabilities value are defined
•
Infrastructure
Resources
Layer
–
where
the
resources needed by the value are defined
In the next decades, enterprises will increasingly make their
specific applications available on mobile devices. The next
wave of mobile communication is to mobilize and automate
industries and industry processes. This is widely referred to as
machine-type communication (MTC) and the Internet of
Things (IoT). OTT players will move to deliver more and more
applications that require higher quality, lower latency, and
other service enhancing capabilities). The SDN-NFV layered
vision is the most useful to understand the service oriented
approach supported by the architecture itself. Deployment over
the network, functions blocks and their reference points have
been the main focus of the ETSI group. There are also some
concepts on the splitting of the current Base Station in RRH
and vBBU and what it actually means for the current
implementation of the Base Station Controller (BSC). As an
example, one can refer to the LTE protocol deployment in
order to figure out pros and cons while moving LTE function
from RRH to the vBBU. The deployment of Radio Technology
between RRH and BBU could be done in several ways, mostly
deciding the point in the protocol chain where the split is done
and so defining the interface typology between RRH and BBU.
Depending on the decision taken, one can face different types
of issues or constraints. An ETSI-based vBBU implementation,
for example, is able to guarantee the highest service flexibility
possible, so the highest level of operational agility (indeed very
useful for Telecom Infrastructure providers as well, since
deployment of a new technology could be handled in the same
product handling shape of a new service deployment), but it is
challenged by very aggressive latency time requirement. On
the other hand, a “smooth” porting of the existing BSC
solutions into the cloud could be attractive in term of legacy
software or reduced latency time that would simply the first
deployment, but it fails to answer the strong request of
operation agility, because, in this case, the protocol splitting is
done on the highest protocol layer only. In a similar way,
splitting BSC between RRH and BBU could have important
impacts by means of Fronthaul and Backhaul capacity demand
[12]. The successful story of SDN-NFV deployment is passing
by an infrastructure that matches all demands: there is nothing
more important than the operational agility in the business
behind the SDN-NFV and this simple consideration is driving
the decision to where one should focus their effort: define and
design an infrastructure for the SEED that cope with the
latency time requirement. As already mentioned before, that is
not a new concept indeed. It is in the ETSI studies while
talking about the so called MEC Server [7]. What remains to be
done is identifying the technical characterization of the C-
mobile platform, the SEED, in order to handle the MEC server
as needed. It is worth to mention that all network function
should
be
handled
as
service,
according
to
the
layer
architecture described in Figure 3. In SDN-NFV network, the
deployment is based on Service Availability Concept: shortly,
Radio Access must be a function deployed on the Business
Enablement Layer and published in order to be used as
component in a service chain at the Business Application
Layer. The service chains capability [13] is considered a key
accelerator of the SDN-NFV usage, since it is introducing a
high level
of
operational agility,
already mentioned
as
mandatory requirement. Note how the service chain is also a
mindset in ETSI use case description of the BS [6] and it is at
the very fundamental of SDN-NFV architecture description
[14][15].
III. SEED, A SDN-NFV SYSTEM ELEMENT
SEED is the C-mobile platform for the MEC server, by
definition the server at the edge of the network. It is designed
to allow a unique and logical centralized network controller
spread from end user to the data center. The characterization of
the SEED could only be done with that picture in mind and the
aim to never violate the operational agility. This concept is
fully aligned with the ETSI group SDN-NFV use case about
mobile network implementation [6]. From a high level
functions point of view, the MEC server should be able to host:
computing capability (for mobiles, as well as for generic
services), connectivity (with external network, as well as with
the radio interface), and storage, one of the value enabler
resource for new business case. The above set of different
capabilities is defining the SEED as described in Figure 4,
duplicated by redundancy in order to have high reliability
condition.
Figure 4. The SEED structured for function capabilities
The number of those capabilities for the SEED will define
its size, which is a pure dimensioning calculation. The solution
is fully aligned to the most common cloud platform (ref. User’s
Guide indication [16][17]). A bit more could be added about
connectivity. In order to avoid unwanted disturbances in traffic
bandwidth availability, Virtual Machine’s (VMs) data, storage,
network and radio buses should be kept independent from each
other. To comply with the idea of SEED we need to look on a
lower level than macro functions, try to figure out how the C-
mobile platform looks like. Next, we will clarify some
misunderstandings around some concepts that are normally
pointed out while talking about SDN-NFV. The virtualization
layer is not an option. Virtualization is the core of the SDN-
NFV architecture and there is no alternative to conform to such
architecture. All resources must be virtualized, with no
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

exception. Functions are virtualized, and every single physical
resource is virtualized as well. A downsize of the virtualization
range is against the operational agility characterization that has
been already mentioned previously as the key incitement for
the business model behind the SDN-NFV [18]. Downsizing the
virtualization means to downsize the operational agility, which
affects the business capacity of the operators and eventually
misses the expectation they have for the new business
opportunity. Applications are services and handled as services
into the new architecture. That means there is no software
deployment as traditionally intended, but instances of service
as VMs (or containers) deployed over the architecture and
connected in a service chain to deploy a network value. One of
the most common buzz words around SDN-NFV is Common
Off The Shelf hardware (COTS), most of the time, used as an
enabler to reduce Opex and Capex. Hardware evolution is
always ongoing. Vendors are fighting their own war and they
are fully aware of the needs/requirements coming from the next
mobile generation world. So, why should we get stuck on
COTS that most likely will be obsolete in a (short) while?
Thinking about our main ideas of the implementation for the
best SEED, we should identify the requirements of the
hardware platform in order to achieve our optimal architecture.
This means that the available COTS could not match our
requirements. What hardware characteristics and performance
will match our requirements is defining the next generation of
COTS. What we actually need (and that is not only a design
decision for software) is a suitable hardware in order to:
•
Remove the latency obstacles to strengthen the
operational
agility,
even
thanks
to
ad
hoc
hardware assisted functions and accelerations;
•
Improve connectivity;
•
Design secure Quality of Service (QoS) resource
usage
for
Service
Level
Agreement
(SLA)
handling;
IV. STRUCTURING THE SEED
Figure 5. Main objects housed in SEED boards
Looking at the state of the art, Intel architecture seems to
have better performance and virtualization features than other
architectures: the management of virtualized objects requests
less capability and introduce less latency in the system using
Intel
solution.
Moreover,
SDN-NFV
implementation
is
strongly supported by the Open Software Community and by
de facto a lot of functions and features in SDN-NFV are
designed on Intel architecture first and then eventually ported
on other targets. Though, power consumption needs to be
considered, especially while referring to the edge of the
network where power consumption is really a big issue and
where other hardware architectures seem to be more efficient in
the power consumption domain. Figure 5 is summarizing the
main objects housed in SEED board, where differences are
described in the next paragraphs.
A. Compute Platform for the Edge
The compute platform for the edge shall be based on 64-
bits Linux Operating system (OS). Both hardware and software
support the virtualization layer and this is pointing to a very
specific set of needed features: reduce the cache pollution (e.g.,
Huge Page or Rapid Virtualization Indexing (RVI), depending
on
hardware
architecture),
support
multi-core
system,
guarantee low power consumption, full set of hardware and
software feature in order to speed up VM context switch,
Virtual Interrupt Handling, hardware assisted trace & debug
capability in a virtualized environment and virtual path. Both
Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM) and Linux Containers
(LXC) should be supported: for the reasons mentioned above,
it seems a good choice to have a C-mobile platform able to
handle both, but having VM’s and container’s concurrently in a
service chain is introducing a level of complexity. The
OpenSoftware Cloud components and agents are obviously
there (OpenStack, OpenDayLight, ONOS, M-CORD and
whatever is requested by the Management And Orchestration –
MANO - of the system). Accelerated Data Plane in User Space
(vSwitch, fastpath, direct interrupt delivery, etc.) is needed in
order to design efficient connectivity solution. A Resource
Manager Agent is needed and must be able to handle the
resources reference point as described in the SDN-NFV
architecture. Distributed SLA and STAT agents are needed and
they shall interwork, not only to each other but to higher
hierarchical SLA and STAT objects in the architecture. That is
done in order to handle the available resources in a dynamic
way and providing the support for Self Organizing Network
(SON) capability. The hierarchical approach for meters and
resources handling, as described in Figure 6, is crucial to avoid
massive signaling. Moreover, the local resource-meters agents
can
apply the
right
taxonomy to
create
the
resources
relationship between different logical layers, from physical
resources usage up to QoS. Important characteristic is the User
Equipment (UE) metadata Server, as the service available in
the SEED to publish the UE metadata and control the
access/usage of them and the Third Party Product (3PP)-bridge
controller. It will provide “close-to-UE” service capability to
enterprises and other ‘vertical’ services. External connectivity
to Radio bus, Cloud control internal bus (Management plane),
data bus (data plane) and Storage bus (caching service) are
available for the compute board.
Figure 6. The hierarchical structure and co-relation of SLA and STAT
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

B. 3PP Hosting Platform for the edge
The hardware board is just the same as the compute one
and likewise we can say about OS and virtualization layer.
Platform components are the same or agents of the same
functions in the compute board. For example, UE metadata
client interworks with its server in order to provide the
complete list of metadata info and 3PP bridge is the active
component of its controller, devoted to provide connectivity
channel between 3PP application and external internet/radio
channels and, for that reason, responsible for security check,
registration,
authorization
and
encryption/decryption.
The
available connectivity channels are not the same: 3PP hosting -
for security reason - shall not have a possibility to use the radio
bus directly. This will allow resource control according to the
SLA in the compute board, avoiding any possible malicious or
faulty behavior of the 3PP applications themselves.
C. Radio-Interface Platform for the Edge
The board could be armed with dedicated hardware
accelerators, needed to speed up the radio access protocols
handling. It is not a limitation, as long as they are designed to
be controlled as virtualized resource by the resource manager.
With
such
differentiation,
the
board
and
the
platform
components/functions
are
not
different
from
the
components/functions mentioned so far for the SEED platform.
D. SEED Characterization
Connectivity and the efficient implementation of it is the
critical key of the SEED. It is mandatory to avoid any
bottleneck and additional overhead that will cost a lot for
latency time. At the same time, the connectivity handling shall
never be an obstacle for the service chain deployment concept
(the operational agility is a mandatory requirement for the
server at the edge of the network). Once one decides to share
resources between different actors, it is fundamental that they
can access them without creating disturbances to each other
and according to the resource sharing agreement they have. It is
like job scheduling where one wants threads continuously
working and not starve them out. In case that happens, the
thread may steal a job from someone else. Thereby maybe
using another set of resources. The virtual path concept is
trying to do the same with the connectivity access. Different
VMs running should be able to access connectivity as they are
running alone, based on the maximum available bandwidth
defined in its SLA (the virtualized slice of connectivity
assigned to it) and avoiding performance drawback due to
system overhead (minimum or zero cost of virtualization layer,
VM walkthrough data handling). The nature itself of SEED
sets a specific requirement for the platform: provide a wide
range of computing characterization and guarantee the agreed
slice of computing resources won’t be affected by other VMs
running on board. This is quite clear once one starts thinking
on
a
platform
where
there
are
strong
time
constrains
application types, like radio services, relaxed time-constrains
application types, like video or audio services, and no time-
constrains application types, like general services. But that is
not enough. If someone pays for a specific bandwidth and
computing, platform shall protect those resources for it. Again,
the macro effect should be that, no matter if the VM is working
alone or not, it can always count on the resources slices
assigned by SLA. For that reason, the platform shall schedule
VM jobs according to the following rules: a) Provide strong
isolation for VMs with strong time-constrains; b) Provide
maximum
CPU
utilization
for
VMs
with
relaxed
time
constrains
using
SCHED_DEADLINE
policy.
SLA
and
Statistics are strictly correlated to each other and actually
hierarchically spread all over the system (this concept is also
emphasized in Figure 6). Indeed, STATs are far from being a
passive snapshots recording, they are actively interworking
with SLA and resource manager in order to deploy the best
resource
utilization
of
the
network.
The
hierarchical
implementation of resources and metrics handling is fully
devoted to simplify the SON. SON brings a set of self-
configuration and self-optimization use cases that allow a
better control of the operational cost for the complex radio
access technologies. Here, the role of the real-time data
analysis, by all means, makes the difference. It involves all
resources of the system, removing the over-allocation, which
today is dominating the dimensioning of RAN and causes a
huge wasting of money in most of the operational time [19]
[20].
V. CONCLUSION
The opportunity to move SDN-NFV into the Radio Access
Network is a crucial objective for the communication system in
the next years. Fulfilling the customers’ needs means to answer
on the demand for the next generation mobile, create new
business models for the operators and open new service market
share for the infrastructure vendors. However, mobile cannot
be handled as data center or networking nodes. Location,
latency time, UE metadata are unique and added value for the
radio access, which means an ad-hoc solution is the enabler for
a successful and high performing product. A complete C-RAN
solution is not considered suitable due to the fronthaul capacity
explosion it meant and the more flexible approach of the Radio
Access Network as a Service (RANaaS) looks more promising.
The ad-hoc solution is based on the right implementation of the
ETSI concept called MEC. This paper emphasizes the role of it
as server@edge of the network, calling it SEED. SEED is a
suitable set of heterogeneous hardware solution, designed to
dramatically reduce the cost of virtualization. The engine of the
SEED is the so called C-mobile platform, a horizontal, per
sever distributed, platform able to support the main functions
characterizing the SEED: SDN-NFV controller, UE Metadata
access service, Radio Access as Service solution, 3PP hosting
and granted SLA. To be fully dynamic, SDN applications need
to be responsive to their environment, therefore, triggers for
network changes need to be state-driven. This automated
management will be based on real-time network data analysis.
Hierarchical Resource Manager and big data handling in the
meaning of SON support is a key enabler together with the
needed support.
VI. FUTURE WORKS
All the concepts in the paper need investigation and future
study. For example, the usage of sched_deadline in a
virtualized environment
needs
c-groups
extension
for
a
complete control of container’s thread. Moreover, a Greedy
Reclamation of Unused Bandwidth (GRUB)-like mechanism
implementation would decrease the Constant Bandwidth Server
(CBS) effect of sched_deadline, providing a more performing
latency time [21][22]. Usage of resources meters and statistics
is a very interesting topic. One of the natural next steps is the
evaluation of the taxonomy framework introduced in [23] for
the characteristic resources of the Radio Access Network:
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

network slices, load balancing, resource abstraction and
resource control as defined in [24].
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/mobility-
report/ericsson-mobility-report-nov-2015.pdf
[retrieved:
03,
2017].
[2]
Chetan Sharma Consulting, “US Mobile Market Update – Q1
2014, 2014.
[3]
Ericsson Mobility Report, On the pulse of the networked
society, June 2015.
[4]
T. Kridel, “The End of Profitability”, Tellabas Insight Q2, 2011,
pp.14-15.
[5]
K.
Shatzkamer,
“Applying
Systems
Thinking
to
Mobile
Networking”,
Brocade
Communications
Webinar,
2015.
Available from http://docplayer.net/8990528-Applying-systems-
thinking-to-mobile-networking.html [retrieved: 03, 2017].
[6]
ETSI paper, “Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV); Use
Cases”, ETSI GS NFV 001, v1.1.1, 2013, available from
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/001/01.01.01_
60/gs_NFV001v010101p.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017].
[7]
Y. C. Hu, M. Patel, D. Sabella, N. Sprecher and V. Young,
"Mobile Edge Computing - A Key Technology Towards 5G",
Sept.
2015,
availble
from
http://www.etsi.org/images/files/ETSIWhitePapers/etsi_wp11_
mec_a_key_technology_towards_5g.pdf [retrieved: 03, 2017].
[8]
ETSI paper, “Network Function Virtualisation (NFV); Network
Operator Perspectives on Industry Progress”, SDN & OpenFlow
World
Congress,
Dusseldorf,
2014,
available
from
https://portal.etsi.org/Portals/0/TBpages/NFV/Docs/NFV_White
_Paper3.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017].
[9]
G. Karagiannis et al, “Mobile Cloud Networking: Virtualisation
of
Cellular
Network”,
21st
International
Conference
on
Telecommunications (ICT), 2014, pp. 410-415.
[10] C.Vitucci, J.Lelli, A.Pirri, and M.Marinoni, “A Linux-based
Virtualized Solution Providing Computing Quality of Service to
SDN-NFV Telecommunication Applications”, In Proceeding of
the 16th real time Linux workshop (RTLWS 2014), Dusseldorf,
Germany, 2014, pp. 12-13.
[11] NGMN Alliance, “5G White Paper”, NGMN, 2015 J.S.
Harrison, M.M. Do, “Mobile Network Architecture for 5G Era –
New C-RAN Architecture and distributed 5G Core”, Netmanias,
2015,
available
from
https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/NGMN_5G_White_Paper
_V1_0.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017].
[12] J.S. Harrison and M.M. Do, “Mobile Network Architecture for
5G Era – New C-RAN Architecture and distributed 5G Core”,
Netmanias,
2015,
available
from
http://www.netmanias.com/en/post/blog/8153/5g-c-ran-
fronthaul-kt-korea-sdn-nfv-sk-telecom/mobile-network-
architecture-for-5g-era-new-c-ran-architecture-and-distributed-
5g-core [retrivied: 03, 2017] .
[13] G. Brown, “Service Chaining in Carrier Networks”, Heavy
Reading, 2015, available from http://www.qosmos.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/02/Service-Chaining-in-Carrier-
Networks_WP_Heavy-Reading_Qosmos_Feb2015.pdf
[retrivied: 03, 2017].
[14] T.A. Satria, M. Karimzadeh, and G. Karagiannis, “Performance
evaluation of ICN/CCN based service migration approach in
virtualized LTE systems”, IEEE 3rd International Conference on
Cloud Networking (CloudNet), 2014, pp. 461-467.
[15] M.J.
McGrath,
“Network
Functions
as-a-Service
over
virtualized infrastructures”, Ref. Ares(2015)3376865, 2015,
available
from
http://cordis.europa.eu/docs/projects/cnect/0/619520/080/deliver
ables/001-
TNOVAD32InfrastructureResourceRepositoryv10Ares2015337
6865.pdf [retrivied: 03, 2017].
[16] OpenStack,
“OpenStack
Operations
Guide”,
OpenStack
Foundation, 2014, avaiable from https://docs.openstack.org/ops-
guide/ [retrivied: 03, 2017].
[17] C. Dixon, “OpenDayLight: Introduction, Lithium and Beyond”,
available
from
http://colindixon.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/brighttalk-odl-webinar.pdf
[retrivied:
03, 2017].
[18] N. Nikaein et al, “Network Store: Exploring Slicing in Future
5G Network”, in Proceeding of the 10th International Workshop
on Mobility in the Evolving Internet Architecture, 2015, pp. 8-
13.
[19] K.Trichias, R.Litjens, A. Tall, Z. Altman, and P. Ramachandra,
“Self-Optimisation of Vertical Sectorisation in a Realistic LTE
Network”,
Europen
Conference
on
Networks
and
Communications, 2015, pp.149-153.
[20] S.
Fortes,
A.
Aguilar-Garcia,
R.
Barco,
F.
Barba,
J.A.
Fernandez-Luque,
and
A.
Fernandez-Duran,
“Management
Architecture for Location-Aware Self-Organizing LTE/LTE-A
Small Cell Networks”, IEEE 53(1) Communications Magazine,
2015, pp. 294-302.
[21] L. Abeni, J. Lelli, C. Scordino, and L. Palopoli, “Greedy CPU
reclaiming for SCHED DEADLINE”. In Proceedings of the
Real-Time Linux Workshop (RTLWS), Dusseldorf, Germany,
2014.
[22] G.Lipari and S. Baruah, “Greedy reclaimation of unused
bandwidth in constant bandwidth servers”. In IEEE Proceedings
of the 12th Euromicro Conference on Real-Time Systems,
Stockholm, Sweden, 2000, pp.193-200.
[23] S. Cai, B. Gallina, D. Nyström, and C. Seceleanu, “A Taxonomy
of Data Aggregation Processes”, IEEE DAGGERS project
paper,
2016,
available
from
http://www.es.mdh.se/pdf_publications/4628.pdf [retrivied: 03,
2017].
[24] VG. Nguyen, TX. Do, and Y. Kim, “SDN and Virtualization-
Based LTE Mobile Network architectures: A comprehensive
Survey”, Wireless Personal Communications, 2016, Volume 86,
Number 3, pp. 1401-1438.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

