A Technique to Mitigate the Broadcast Storm Problem in VANETs
Manoel Rui P. Paula, Daniel Sucupira Lima, Filipe Maciel Roberto,
Andr´e Ribeiro Cardoso, Joaquim Celestino Jr.
Computer Networks and Security Laboratory (LARCES)
State University of Cear´a (UECE)
Fortaleza, Brazil
{manoel.rui, daniel.lima, ﬁlipe, andrec, celestino}@larces.uece.br
Abstract—Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) are networks
formed by vehicles using the wireless medium as communication
link for data transmission and reception. In this network, vehicles
can transit on the roads with high speed and thus provide a
high dynamism in its topology. This may cause the connectivity
between vehicle lasts a short time. So, many applications in
VANETs, which need to disseminate data trafﬁc seek a fast
and efﬁcient diffusion mechanism. The forwarding broadcast
mechanism is generally used to accomplish this task. However,
a poorly elaborated mechanism for disseminating messages can
ﬂood the network with redundant data and increase the number
of collisions due to disputes between vehicles for accessing the
medium. These problems are usually known as broadcast storm
problem. Thus, this paper proposes a probabilistic technique for
mitigating the broadcast storm problem through a game from the
Games Theory: The Volunteers Dilemma. In order to explore the
equilibrium in the game and also evaluate the network technique
performance some simulations using the Network Simulator 3
(NS3) were performed. The results showed that the technique
presented a good delivery rate of packets and little loss of
data with high vehicular densities. However, it was found that
even without an overwhelming number of transmissions, a large
amount of redundant information was noticed.
Keywords-VANET; volunteers dilemma; routing protocol; broad-
cast storm;
I. INTRODUCTION
Vehicular networks known as VANETs are networks that
show different characteristics from other wireless networks,
such as, the Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANET) [1]. Both
networks are wireless and self organized, in which their own
nodes order and provide services. Although VANET is a
special case of MANET, one of the main differences between
them is their mobility patterns [2]. Since the key elements in a
VANET are basically cars that communicate with each other
through a wireless network, the direction and movement of
the vehicles are usually limited by the dimensions of the way.
Unlike VANETs, in MANETs the nodes can describe random
trajectories. The main characteristics that distinguish VANETs
from MANETs are found in [3].
In the environment of wireless vehicular networks, pro-
tocols that are designed to broadcast, transport, deliver or
route messages from an application should be concerned with
the special features that are in VANETs [3] [4]. Protocols
originally designed for other types of networks generally
have lower performance when applied in VANETs, since their
characteristics and problems are different. Many applications
in VANETs are designed to beneﬁt all network elements, such
as security applications in trafﬁc to prevent collisions among
vehicles [5]. Other applications in the same category which are
supposed to send messages to all other nodes in the network
use broadcast protocols. The use of a broadcast protocol in this
case is a good strategy to disseminate data because the vehicles
do not need to know an address and a route to a speciﬁc
target [6]. However, the forwarding of messages following a
broadcast protocol poorly prepared, with an excessive number
of broadcasts, ﬂood the network with duplicate messages and
causes inﬁnite loops of retransmissions. Since the network is
wireless, vehicles share the same link and can compete for
accessing the medium in a broadcast protocol for VANETs.
This fact is especially true when a vehicle receives a speciﬁc
packet and decides to relay it to other close vehicles. Recipient
vehicles, which decide to relay the packet received in regular
equal times cause huge amounts of collisions, consequently
this makes the information transmitted by the packet maker
vehicle is not passed on to further vehicles away from it.
These problems are generally referred to as the broadcast
storm problem [7] [8].
Thus, a smart mechanism that uses a technique to dis-
seminate messages which are sent from the trafﬁc generator
vehicle and can be achieved by all neighbouring nodes is
needed. In order to have the messages achieving vehicles out
of the range of the transmitter vehicle, it is necessary that
the intermediate vehicles forward these incoming messages.
Since some protocols send messages only for management
purposes, retransmitting these messages may cause a waste
of processing, bandwidth, and a longer delay to access the
medium controlled by the link layer protocols. Applications
that require urgency, so that their messages reach the other
nodes in the network would suffer a greater impact concerning
a service break in the broadcast storm [7]. So, it is clear that
the implementation of a broadcast mechanism poorly designed
worsens the broadcast storm problem, overloading the network
unnecessarily.
The other parts of this paper are organized as follows:
Section 2 will show how routing protocols can be classiﬁed in
VANETs. Section 3 focuses on main broadcast protocols that
worked as a stimulus for formulating probabilistic broadcast
protocol in this work. Section 4 shows the modeling of
the Volunteer’s Dilemma [21] game in order to produce a
broadcast protocol for VANETs. In Section 5, the results
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

of experiments between two probabilistic protocols will be
shown: the ﬁrst comes from Quantal Response Equilibrium
(QRE) [22] (proposed in this work) and the second comes
from the Nash equilibrium [18]. Finally, Section 6 will discuss
the conclusions and future work.
II. CLASSIFICATION OF ROUTING PROTOCOLS IN
VANETS
Most routing protocols in the literature proposed for
VANETs [6] [9] focus on more speciﬁc characteristics, making
these protocols become quite limited. Thus, for a routing
protocol it has a higher efﬁciency, some main features must
be considered.
In [10], the essential features that one routing protocol must
have are shown, some of them are the most important: the pro-
tocol must be dynamic, and acting reactively creating routes on
demand. Another important feature is that the routing protocol
must be scalable in such a way that the routing protocol
must show good performance in scenarios with low and high
quantity of vehicles. In order to achieve a better performance,
a protocol should have mechanisms to know the network
topology, even after the vehicles change their positions. Many
times, it facilitates developing solutions to situations of broken
connections. And lastly, a good feature for routing protocols
is to provide a larger time of connectivity between vehicles.
This latter feature is important for routing because it provides
the required time to complete the calculation of routes taken
by the protocol.
Through several researches on routing on wireless vehicular
wireless networks, many protocols have been reported in
scientiﬁc communities. However, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd protocols
that suit the different situations and scenarios. Many routing
protocols in VANETs are designed in order to troubleshoot
speciﬁc networks, thus these protocols may have similar prop-
erties and features. Not only by the protocols features, there are
several ways to classify the routing protocols in VANETs. One
can classify them by the techniques used, routing information,
service quality, routing algorithms and others [9].
Some authors tend to classify routing protocols following a
common genre. Works, such as [11], [12], and [13], classify
protocols based on the use of techniques and particular char-
acteristics in ﬁve classes: position, grouping, geocast routing,
topology, and broadcast. However, other authors prefer to
classify them in relation to their routing strategies, it means
proactive or reactive [14]. In other scientiﬁc papers, the authors
classify protocols regarding the information contained in the
packet based on topology or geographic information [15].
Deepening the classiﬁcation of protocols based on the
strategies of transmissions, Lin [16] presents some of the main
mechanisms for disseminating data in VANETs as well as
main protocols in their category in the literature. In his work,
he classiﬁes routing protocols for disseminating information
into three major groups: Unicast, Multicast, Geocast, and
lastly, Broadcast.
Similar to Lin [16], Panichpapiboon and Pattara-Atikom [6]
also classify the protocols regarding the main techniques for
disseminating information on VANETs. However, the atten-
tion is directed to the broadcast protocols. In his work, the
classiﬁcation of broadcast protocols are done basically in two
main categories: Multi-hop and Single-hop Broadcast.
Fig. 1 shows clearly the protocols broadcasts classiﬁcation
made by [6]. The ﬁgure also shows the main techniques used
by the protocols. Some of these protocols are presented in the
next section.
Figure. 1.
Classiﬁcation of broadcasts protocols in VANETs. Adapted from
[6].
III. BROADCAST PROTOCOLS
Here, after some protocols presented in [6] will be shown,
their main features will be discussed. The focus remains
in some protocols which use techniques based on timers
and probability, since parts of their approaches worked as
inspiration for the development of this work.
The ﬁrst protocol presented is the Weighted p-Persistence
[7]. It is a probabilistic protocol. Protocols based on this cat-
egory are characterized for deciding forwarding the received
information by a probability p. In the weighted p-Persistence
protocol, when a vehicle receives a packet via broadcast for the
ﬁrst time, it bases the need of rebroadcasting on the distance
between the packet source node and it. The distance between
them can be obtained through the receivers position and the
transmitters position that is inserted into the sent packet. When
a vehicle receives a broadcast packet it takes the decision to
rebroadcast information with the probability (1).
p = Dij
R
(1)
in which Dij is the distance between the receiver i and the
transmitter j, and R is the transmission range. The great
advantage of using this approach is that it gives a certain
priority to the vehicles near the radius edge R, what may
provide greater achievement of packets transmitted on the
network. However, this obtained probability does not consider
the number of vehicles in the network. When the network
shows a high density of vehicles, there may be a large number
of vehicles with a high probability of forwarding and thus rise
to a large number of retransmissions. The second protocol
is called Irresponsible Forwarding (IF) [17], and it is also
a probabilistic protocol. Similarly to the protocol Weighted
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

p-Persistence [7], the forwarding probability is built on the
distance between the transmitter and the receiver. Although it
also considers the density of vehicles. Thus, when a vehicle
receives a broadcast packet, it decides to relay the information
with the probability (2).
p = e− ρs
(z−d)
c
(2)
in which ρs is the vehicular density, z is the transmission
range and d is the distance between the transmitter and the
receiver vehicle. The parameter c is a coefﬁcient with value
greater or equal to one which is set to regulate the curve
of the probability function. The main idea inserted in the
formula is the fact that vehicles further from the transmitter
have a higher probability of relaying information compared to
vehicles which are closer to the transmitter.
The third protocol is the Slotted 1-Persistence Broadcast [7].
This protocol is based on timing. These protocols are charac-
terized by retransmitting the information to other vehicles in
the network after waiting a given time. It is expected that the
waiting time set in the vehicles is different so that the vehicles
far from transmitter are prioritized, it is, the closest vehicles
to the edge in the transmission range will have a much shorter
waiting time than other vehicles that are located closer to the
transmitter.
So, the protocol Slotted 1-Persistence Broadcast uses a
strategy using sectors to prioritize the vehicles waiting time
concerning the distance. The transmission range of a vehicle
is divided into sectors of times in which sectors more distant
from the transmitter have a shorter waiting time than the ones
closer to the transmitter. Thus, when a vehicle receives a
broadcast packet, it computes its waiting time deﬁned by the
sector time following (3).
TSij = Sij ∗ τ
(3)
where τ is the propagation time of a jump between vehicles
and the average waiting time for accessing the medium. And
Sij is the number of the sector deﬁned by the distance between
the transmitter and receiver. The sector number is calculated
following (4).
Sij = Ns

1 −
min(Dij, R)
R

(4)
where Dij is the distance between the transmitter i and the
receiver j, R is the transmission range, and Ns is the total
number of sectors previously deﬁned. The number of sectors
must be wisely chosen since as the network becomes denser,
there is the possibility that many nodes in the same sector
have the same waiting time. This makes they transmit at the
same time resulting in several collisions between packets.
Finally, a probabilistic protocol derived from Game Theory
[18] [19] stands out over. This work worked as the main
inspiration for the design of the protocol proposed in this
work. In [20], a model using the symmetric game based
on Volunteer’s Dilemma is made [21] in order to mitigate
the broadcast storm problem. In this work, we calculated
the probability of a player volunteer derived from the Nash
equilibrium [18] [19] with aiming to make the decision of
transmitting a broadcast message by a vehicle in the net-
work. The probabilistic protocol also incorporates some other
strategies, such as the use of sectors and timers adopted by
the Slotted 1-Persistence Broadcast protocol to prioritize the
waiting time for transmission of a packet by a receiving vehicle
over the distance from the source vehicle.
IV. VOLUNTEERS DILEMMA AS A BROADCAST
PROTOCOL
Taking as a model the Volunteer’s Dilemma [21] game
using its symmetric version, it is possible to adapt it to the
VANETs scenario in which a given vehicle in the network to
which the network receives a broadcast message and decides
to retransmit it to the others based on the probability of
volunteering modeled by the game. Creating an algorithm for
such purpose can be explored using the parameters involved
in the game.
Let N be the number of vehicles participating in the game
and all of them have a set of pure strategies, it means,
each vehicle chooses to transmit or not transmit the received
message. The decision of not broadcasting a message taking
into account the fact that at least one vehicle has already
made that decision, provides the greatest payoff B. The vehicle
which decides to broadcast the message will pay a cost C and
thus result in a payoff B − C. And in the case any vehicle
does not decide to relay the message a minimum payoff of M
will be shown. The representation of game in the regular way
is shown in Table 1.
TABLE I
NORMAL FORM OF THE GAME.
AT LEAST ONE FORWARD
ALL QUIET
FORWARD
B − C
B − C
QUIET
B
M
With the model presented by Goeree et al. [22], to insert
noisy behavior and aversion to unequal gains for QRE equi-
librium, it is possible to deﬁne a probability p of a vehicle to
forward the incoming message to its neighbors following (5).
p =
exp(λπv)
exp(λπv) + exp(λπn)
(5)
where πv = B − C − α(1 − p)C and πn = B(1 − (1 −
p)N−1)
+
M(1 − p)N−1 with the precision parameter λ
and aversion parameter α estimated through experiments. It is
assumed that the cost C and the beneﬁts B, M are properly
deﬁned.
As the game is the symmetric Volunteer’s Dilemma, then
the relationship C/B for vehicles belonging to the game
should be similar. However, it is necessary to give a priority
to the vehicles further away from the transmitter so that the
message has a longer range with the vehicles in the network.
Thus, a strategy using sectors similar to the one addressed by
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Wisitpongphan et al. [7] and Roberto et al. [20] was adopted
to prioritize the vehicle through space.
The transmission range R of the transmitter vehicle is
divided in an amount Nsect denominated number of sectors.
The numbering of the sector S happens in descending order
tank into consideration the message transmitter, ie the sector
most distant from the transmitter has value S = 1 and is
labeled S1, the second sector from the transmitter is labeled
S2 and so on until the nearest transmitter sector SN. Each
sector also limits some area to which vehicles may be passing.
Thus, the length of the sector is deﬁned as Slen and can be
easily found using the transmission range R divided by the
number of sectors Nsect. It can be formally deﬁned as shown
in (6).
Slen = R/Nsect
(6)
Since every vehicle in the network is transmitting and
receiving ad messages (beacon messages) stating their mobility
pattern, any vehicle that receives a broadcast message has
the necessary information obtained to calculate the distance
between it and the transmitter. That distance will be called
the Dtr, which can be interpreted as the distance from a
transmitter t from a receiver r. So, a vehicle can discover in
which sector Si it is compared to the transmitter performing
the following computing (7).
Si = ⌊(Nsect + 1) − (Dtr/r)⌋
(7)
The modeling of costs and beneﬁts is highly related to the
transmission range of the vehicle and in which sector they
are located. Thus, for a vehicle having a transmission range
R equal to 1000 meters and the number of sectors Nsect
equal to 5, vehicles located in the most distant sector from the
transmitter will have beneﬁts equal to 1000. Vehicles located
in the second most distant sector from the transmitter will
have their beneﬁts equal to 800 because it is the result of a
proportional reduction in the size of the length of the sector.
The same idea is applied to the second most distant sector
from the transmitter and so on until the closest section to the
transmitter. So, a vehicle will know its beneﬁt Bi through the
sector it is in relation to the transmitter. That is, it will know
its beneﬁt calculating (8).
Bi = ((Nsect − Si) + 1) Slen
(8)
To avoid the likelihood that at least one vehicle transmits the
received message be reduced to zero due to cost and beneﬁt
have very similar values, resulting in a cost beneﬁt close to
1, this cost is modeled as a function of the least beneﬁt. That
beneﬁt is provided by the closest sector from the transmitter.
The cost obtained is considered the same for all sectors. Then,
the cost C can be set following (9).
C = Bmin q
(9)
where Bmin is the lowest beneﬁt provided by the nearest
sector from the transmitter and 0 < q < 1 is a reduction
factor of the lowest beneﬁt. For example, if the lowest beneﬁt
achieved Bmin is equals 200 and the factor q is equal to
0.5, then the modeled cost for all sectors will be equal to
C = 200 ∗ 0.5 = 100. In this work, the value of M is
modeled with zero. Fig. 2 illustrates a scenario in VANETs in
which nodes in the network use the sector approach to model
the costs and beneﬁts of the Volunteers Dilemma game. The
algorithm resulting from the proposed modeling Volunteer’s
Dilemma game is deﬁned in Algorithm 1.
Figure. 2.
Modeling of costs and beneﬁts.
1 In: Packet received by broadcast
2 if (The packet was received earlier) then
3
Discard packet;
4 else
5
Slen = R/Nsect;
6
Si = ⌊(Nsect + 1) − (Dtr/r)⌋;
7
Bi = ((Nsect − Si) + 1) Slen;
8
C = Bmin q;
9
πv = B − C − α(1 − p)C;
10
πn = B(1 − (1 − p)N−1) + M(1 − p)N−1;
11
p =
exp(λπv)
exp(λπv)+exp(λπn);
12
nrand = RAND(0, 1) ;
13
if (nrand ≤ p) then
14
Forward packet;
15 Out: Transmission, or not, of packet received..
Algorithm 1: Proposed algorithm for broadcast forward.
In order to perform the calculations required for the proba-
bilistic decision of retransmitting a packet received via broad-
cast, one vehicle must know some information of its neigh-
bors. However, this decision is not made cooperatively but
individually. Thus, a message exchange mechanism between
neighbors becomes essential as a tool for the capture and
dissemination of information in the neighborhood. For this
reason, a management mobility mechanism was created as a
separate module inspired by [23] and is also used by [20] in
their work.
So, the game starts in each sector whenever a vehicle
performs the spread of a packet via broadcast and vehicles
located within sectors limited by the transmission range must
make the decision to retransmit information for the other
vehicles in the network or not. The game ends when all
vehicles have taken their decisions.
Thus, the algorithm is applied when a vehicle in a sector
receives a packet as input. If a packet is identiﬁed as received
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

then it is discarded. Otherwise, if it was received for the ﬁrst
time, then the receiver vehicle uses the information as the
basis of its neighborhood table to calculate the values of the
expected payoff of volunteer πv and of not volunteering πn
to be applied in the formula of probability p. The number of
players in a sector is obtained using the mobility management
module. Considering the parameters λ and α estimated [22],
involving the game parameters, the vehicle transmits the
packet with probability p.
V. RESULTS
The experiment of this work is a freeway scenario with
two lanes where vehicles move with constant speeds in the
same direction. (topology similar to Fig. 3). The transmitter
vehicle is sending packets every second in the simulation time.
When the receiver receives a message from the source message
vehicle or coming from a relay, the implemented algorithm
runs and decision to forward the message is taken.
Each vehicle has a transmission range of approximately
one kilometer following the Nakagami propagation model, the
radius is divided into ﬁve sectors and therefore the size of each
sector is 200 meters. Thus, in order to evaluate the perfor-
mance of probabilistic techniques in more realistic scenarios in
which network connectivity depends on the distance between
the vehicles, a modeling was performed where the inter vehicle
spacing was exponentially distributed. All experiments were
done using the NS3 [24] to evaluate the game performance in
the network. The simulations were performed with the follow-
ing vehicular densities: 10 (vehicles/km), 15 (vehicles/km), 30
(vehicles/km), 45 (vehicles/km) and 60 (vehicles/km).
The simulation parameter values were chosen according to
levels of vehicular trafﬁc (light, moderate and heavy) [7] and
also induces behavior as the probability of a vehicle forward
data, since the amount of vehicles in a sector and the cost-
beneﬁt determine these probabilities [21] [22]. The parameters
were heavily inﬂuenced by the works of [7] and [20]. All
simulation results were obtained with conﬁdence level equal
to 0.95 for the conﬁdence interval of each of the averages of
data obtained through measurements presented below.
For the result analysis, the probabilistic technique based
on Nash equilibrium of the symmetric game based on the
volunteers dilemma simply Nash Equilibrium [21], was call.
This technique is similar to [20], as shown in Section 3.
In addition, the technique based on the probabilistic balance
QRE, also from the same game, called the QRE equilibrium
[22].
Another observation to be made concerns the forwarding
probability for each routing technique. Fig. 3 shows the
behavior of the probability of retransmission in each sector to
the Nash equilibrium and each density discussed previously.
Eg vehicular density equals to 10 vehicles/km corresponds
to the same vehicular density of 2 vehicles/sector since the
radius is partitioned into 5 sectors and each sector has 200
meters. Similarly, Fig. 4 shows the behavior of the probability
of retransmission in each sector for QRE equilibrium.
Figure. 3.
Probability of retransmission of packets in each sector to Nash
equilibrium.
Figure. 4.
Probability of retransmission of packets in each sector to QRE
equilibrium.
Standard packet delivery rate: The expected analysis of
this metric concerning both techniques is that the delivery
rate increases as the vehicular density also increases. That is
exactly what happens in the graphs shown in Fig. 5. In high
vehicles densities, the ones which are located closer to the
transmitter have a great chance to receive the data transmitted.
The graphs also show that the Nash equilibrium has a
packet delivery rate greater than QRE equilibrium for lighter
and moderate vehicular trafﬁc. This is explained by the fact
that the probability of routing in the Nash equilibrium is
relatively high for small groups, thus more retransmissions are
performed. However, when the number of players increases,
the probability of volunteer decreases considerably. In the
QRE equilibrium, the probability behavior of volunteering
does not decrease a lot compared to the Nash equilibrium.
Thus, for large groups, the probability of forward in the QRE
equilibrium becomes higher than in the Nash equilibrium and
therefore a larger amount of packets will be sent and received
successfully.
Standard packet loss rate: In Fig. 6, the graphs show
that the QRE equilibrium performance was worse than the
Nash equilibrium in the ﬁrst three densities. This happens
because the probability of forwarding in the Nash Equilibrium
is greater than the equilibrium QRE. It can also be noted that
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 5.
Standard rate packet delivery.
the further away from the transmitter, the signal information
becomes weaker, getting to a point in which the network
device will no longer be able to receive the message. In larger
networks, there is a greater tendency for this to happen and
thus resulting in a higher packet loss. Another factor that
inﬂuences the rate of packet loss is the amount of collisions
during the broadcast storm.
With vehicular density equal to 45 vehicles/km, both tech-
niques presented performances quite similar. But in a heavy
vehicles trafﬁc it can be noticed a reversal in performance
techniques. As previously explained and reassured in the
results from the rate of delivered packets, the probability of
routing in QRE equilibrium remains higher than the Nash
Equilibrium groups with lots of players. Thus, the packet
transmitted by the source message vehicle has a great chance
to reach the destination and few packets are lost in the network.
Figure. 6.
Standard packet loss rate.
Number of duplicate packets: The greater the number of
message retransmissions in the network it is expected a greater
number of duplicate messages. The graphs in Fig. 7 shows the
results obtained from both techniques to prove this fact. As
we can see, the Nash equilibrium got better results than the
QRE equilibrium in the following densities: 10 vehicles/km,
15 vehicles/km and 30 vehicles/km.
With a density of 45 vehicles/km there was a slight differ-
ence in the techniques performance where it was from there
that the QRE equilibrium proved to be the worst. It may be
noted that for the higher density, the number of duplicated
packets in QRE equilibrium was slightly more than twice
than at the Nash Equilibrium. A greater difference in the
values shown from that point is justiﬁed because the vehicles
are closer to each other. As the transmission range vehicle
can cover a large number of neighboring vehicles any relay
performed by any of these vehicles in high density networks
will result in large amount of duplicate information.
Figure. 7.
Number of duplicate packets.
Link load: Finally, we have the average results from the
load link shown in Fig. 8. These results strengthen what
other metrics showed. The greater the amount of information
transmitted by a given vehicle, the greater the amount of infor-
mation received by receiver vehicles. The routing probability
in both techniques also shows the same pattern.
In the lower densities of 10 vehicles/km, 15 vehicles/km
and 30 vehicles/km the values were very small because losses
may have happened. But this can be explained because the re-
ceiving vehicles are usually away from the transmitter vehicle
and thus, for vehicles outside the range of the transmitter,
the arrival of packets generated by the source depends on
retransmissions carried out by vehicles within the transmission
range.
Similarly to what happened with the other previous metrics,
with density equal to 45 vehicles/km the performance of
both techniques were very similar, mainly motivated by the
behavior of their quite similar probabilities. And for the
density of 60 vehicles/km QRE equilibrium keeps the routing
probability greater than the Nash equilibrium and thus it gave
a higher amount of transmissions and thus receptions. The
analysis of the number of duplicated packets proves what was
said and evaluated the load link results.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this work, a modeling of the game Volunteer’s Dilemma
was carried out, particularly the symmetric version, and this
idea was based on Game Theory in a totally different environ-
ment, such as the vehicular networks. With the main objective
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure. 8.
Link load.
to mitigate the effect of broadcast storm in VANETs, a pro-
posed probabilistic technique based on the QRE equilibrium
was made.
From the results we can see the behavior and the charac-
teristics involved in the game of volunteers dilemma. Partic-
ularly, we observed the effect of probability to volunteer in
a Nash equilibrium stemmed from mixed strategies and the
probability of volunteering in QRE equilibrium with additional
parameter of aversion. As expected, the results strengthened
the concepts in both equilibrium involved, since the parameters
to setting the routing probability QRE equilibrium contribute
to this probability decrease more slightly than in the Nash
equilibrium.
The probability impact of a player volunteer using the
probability stemmed from the QRE equilibrium provides some
positive contributions. For example, when vehicular density is
high, a delivery and loss rate becomes more satisfactory than
in low densities. But a side effect in the same situation in a
network with high vehicular density is that it can generate a
higher rate of redundant information in the network.
Thus, the proposal in this work proved to be a very
interesting and satisfying technique to spread information via
broadcast in VANETs in order to mitigate the broadcast storm
problem. In order to be a technique to be applied in a more
robust dissemination protocol, some improvements can be
made. A further study to reduce the packet loss rate caused
by collisions can be made. In this sense, the use of timers
can be inserted to prevent simultaneous transmissions. Another
improvement that can be exploited is through modeling costs
and beneﬁts, verifying the ideal values in their modeling for
each scenario. It is also possible to run some simulations with
costs and beneﬁts asymmetrically in order to prioritize vehicles
further from the transmitter. Another way to prioritize vehicles
can be made by exploiting the quality and strength of the
signal coverage area of the transmitter vehicle. Thus, with
this change, a greater amount of scenarios could be tested
and compared with some protocols in literature in order to
assess its efﬁciency and viability.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Kaur and M. K. Rai, “A novel review on routing protocols in manets,”
Undergraduate Academic Research Journal (UARJ), 2012, pp. 2278–
1129.
[2] R. Sharma, M. Halder, and K. Gupta, “Mobile ad hoc networks-a holistic
overview,” International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 52,
no. 21, August 2012, pp. 31–36.
[3] B. Paul, M. Ibrahim, and M. A. N. Bikas, “Vanet routing protocols: Pros
and cons,” International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 20, no.
3, April 2011, pp.28–34.
[4] S. Kumari, “Survey on routing protocols in vanet,” International Journal
of Wired and Wireless Communications, vol. 2, no. 1, 2013.
[5] V. R. Krishnan and T. Rajesh, “Vanet based proﬁcient collision detec-
tion and avoidance strategy for cars using double-c curve movement
algorithm,” IJCAIT, vol. 1, no. 2, 2012, pp. 81–84.
[6] S. Panichpapiboon and W. Pattara-Atikom, “A review of information dis-
semination protocols for vehicular ad hoc networks,” Communications
Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 3, 2012, pp. 784–798.
[7] N. Wisitpongphan, O. Tonguz, J. Parikh, P. Mudalige, F. Bai, and
V. Sadekar, “Broadcast storm mitigation techniques in vehicular ad hoc
networks,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 6, 2007, pp.
84–94.
[8] Y.-C. Tseng, S.-Y. Ni, Y.-S. Chen, and J.-P. Sheu, “The broadcast storm
problem in a mobile ad hoc network,” Wireless networks, vol. 8, no.
2-3, 2002, pp. 153–167.
[9] M. Altayeb and I. Mahgoub, “A survey of vehicular ad hoc networks
routing protocols,” International Journal of Innovation and Applied
Studies, vol. 3, no. 3, July 2013, pp. 829–846.
[10] M. Barros, R. C. M. Gomes, and A. da Costa, “Routing architecture for
vehicular ad-hoc networks,” Latin America Transactions, IEEE (Revista
IEEE America Latina), vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 1411–1419, 2012.
[11] P. Bijan and M. J. Islam., “Survey over vanet routing protocols for vehi-
cle to vehicle communication,” IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering
(IOSRJCE), vol. 7, no. 5, 2012, pp. 1–9.
[12] S. Allal and S. Boudjit, “Geocast routing protocols for vanets: Survey
and geometry-driven scheme proposal,” Journal of Internet Services and
Information Security (JISIS), vol. 3, no. 1/2, 2013, pp. 20–36.
[13] R. Kumar and M. Dave, “A comparative study of various routing
protocols in vanet,” IJCSI, vol. 8, no 1, July 2011, pp. 643–648.
[14] M. Vijayalaskhmi, A. Patel, and L. Kulkarni, “Qos parameter analysis
on aodv and dsdv protocols in a wireless network,” International Journal
of Communication Network & Security, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011.
[15] U. L. Kevin C. Lee and M. Gerla, “Survey of routing protocols in
vehicular ad hoc networks,” IGI Global, no. 22, pp. 149–170, 2010.
[16] Y.-W. Lin, Y.-S. Chen, and S.-L. Lee, “Routing protocols in vehicular
ad hoc networks: A survey and future perspectives,” J. Inf. Sci. Eng.,
2010, pp. 913–932.
[17] S. Panichpapiboon and G. Ferrari, “Irresponsible forwarding,” ITS
Telecommunications, pp. 311–316, 2008.
[18] J. Watson, Strategy: An Introduction to Game Theory.
W. W. Norton
& Company; 2 edition, 2007.
[19] R. B. Myerson, Game theory: analysis of conﬂict.
Harvard university
press, 2013.
[20] F. Roberto, J. Celestino, and H. Schulzrinne, “Using a symmetric game
based in volunteer’s dilemma to improve vanets multihop broadcast
communication,” Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications
(PIMRC), 2011 IEEE 22nd International Symposium on, 2011, pp. 777–
782.
[21] J. Weesie, “Asymmetry and timing in the volunteer´s dilemma,” Journal
of Conﬂict Resolution, vol. 37, no. 3, 1993, pp. 569–590.
[22] J. K. Goeree, C. A. Holt, and A. K. Moore, “An experimental exam-
ination of the volunteers dilemma,” ESA Meeings, pp. 1–18, October
2005.
[23] J. H¨arri, C. Bonnet, and F. Filali, “Kinetic mobility management applied
to vehicular ad hoc network protocols,” Comput. Commun., vol. 31,
no. 12, 2008, pp. 2907–2924.
[24] (January, 2014) The network simulator. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.nsnam.org/
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

