Controller Placement Problem to Enhance Performance
in Multi-domain SDN Networks
Hidenobu Aoki, Norihiko Shinomiya
Graduate School of Engineering, Soka University, Tokyo, Japan
Emails: aoki39h@gmail.com, shinomi@soka.ac.jp
Abstract—As the use of Software-Deﬁned Networking is ex-
tended, the deployment of multiple controllers has been required
to deal with scalability and reliability issues. In such an SDN
network, a network can be partitioned into sub-networks as
controller’s domains. In this case, there are mainly two issues
to consider: 1) how to partition a network and 2) where to
place controllers. Our previous work has concentrated on the
network partitioning to satisfy several aspects in Software-
Deﬁned Networking. As an idea of our future work, this paper
discusses and formulates the controller placement problem in
multi-domain networks on the basis of network partitioning in
our previous work.
Keywords—Software-Deﬁned Networking; multiple controllers;
network partitioning; controller placement; graph theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) has been emerging
as a new networking paradigm. The fundamental concept of
SDN is to achieve programmable networking by separating
the control and the data planes in individual network devices,
such as switches and routers. As the use of SDN is extended,
SDN networks with multiple controllers have been proposed
to deal with scalability and reliability issues [1].
In such an SDN network with multiple controllers, a net-
work can be divided into sub-networks, and controllers are in
charge of one of them as their administrative domains. This
could reduce the overall complexity of the whole network
management and the computational load of each controller as
well as handling ﬂow setup requests faster and more efﬁciently.
Furthermore, when a controller failure occurs, it could alleviate
spreading its negative effects to the rest of the network [2].
Here, there would be two major aspects to consider for such
a network:
1) How to partition a network to decide controller domains
2) Where to locate controllers in each domain.
Because network partitioning determines network resources
and topology distribution, it could affect the various aspects
of network performance, such as controller load balance and
reliability [3]. This issue is referred to as the network parti-
tioning problem in our previous work. On the other hand, the
selection of controller locations has been discussed in many
research papers as it has various inﬂuences on communications
between switches and a controller in terms of latency, stability,
or efﬁciency. Generally, this issue is called the controller
placement problem.
Our previous work has mainly focused on network parti-
tioning methods based on graph clustering [4]. Thus, aiming
at more effective management of multi-domain SDN networks,
this paper addresses the controller placement problem based
on the network partitioning as an extension of our previous
work.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes the related work of the network partitioning
and controller placement. Section III presents the model and
problem formulation. Section IV addresses the conclusion and
our future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Network Partitioning
As mentioned earlier, network partitioning could be related
to the various aspects of network operations and performances
of SDN.
For instance, the load balance among controllers would be
one of the major issues. The controller load is mainly network
provisioning and status collection overhead within a domain
[5]. Hence, simply, the more switches a controller needs to
manage, the heavier load the controller has to bear.
Moreover, in case of a link failure, it would be preferable
that a network topology in a domain ensures redundancy so
that the failure can be recovered within the domain; otherwise,
additional inter-controller communication would be required.
In addition, from the perspective of trafﬁc load balancing,
switches in each domain might need to have multiple paths to
controllers and other switches to distribute data trafﬁc.
Considering those issues above, our previous work has
proposed network partitioning methods based on the concept
of conductance and cycle structures in networks [4][6].
B. Controller Placement
After the ﬁrst proposal by Heller et al in [7], the controller
placement problem has been studied in many researches.
The most common objective for the problem is to mini-
mize controller-switch latency [8][9]. Particularly, it has been
widely studied to locate a controller based on the closeness to
switches.
In addition to controller-switch distance, survivability is also
the other metric for the controller deployment [10][11]. In this
type of metric, the number of disjoint paths, which do not
share links among them, between switches and a controller
is maximized to ensure logical connections between them in
case of link failures in SDN in-band model.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

As stated above, the controller placement problem and
its metrics have been well studied. However, the controller
placement in partitioned networks has not been discussed in
detail. By using those existing metrics, this paper formulates
the controller placement problem based on the network parti-
tioning in our previous work.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
This section describes the graph deﬁnitions and the metrics
for the control placement.
A. Graph Deﬁnitions
For a network graph G = (V, E), a set of nodes V =
{vi} denotes network devices, such as routers and switches,
and a set of edges E = {ek} represents links between those
devices. Considering the network partitioning, local domains
of controllers and its set are deﬁned as follows:
Gl
1 = (V l
1, El
1), Gl
2 = (V l
2, El
2), . . . , Gl
k = (V l
k, El
k),
(1)
Gl = {Gl
1, Gl
2, ..., Gl
j..., Gl
k}.
(2)
B. Evaluation Metrics for Controller Placement
The controller placement problem in multi-domain networks
can be formulated as an optimization problem to ﬁnd an
appropriate node cj for a controller location in each domain
where a given evaluation function is optimized. Here, assume
that domains are given by network partitioning, and a set of
controller locations in domains is denoted as
C = {c1, c2, . . . , cj, . . . , ck}.
(3)
1) Controller-switch latency: The most commonly used
metric is the longest distance between a switch vi ∈ V l
j and a
controller cj ∈ C, which represents the worst controller-switch
latency. Supposing that the distance is the shortest path length
between them denoted as dist(vi, cj), the longest distance
between a switch and controller in a domain is deﬁned as
L(Gl
j) =
max
vi∈V l
i \{cj} dist(vi, cj).
(4)
Thus, for a network as a whole, the task is to ﬁnd a set of
controller locations C to satisfy the following function:
Minimize
∑
Gl
j∈Gl
L(Gl
j).
(5)
2) Survivability: In the controller placement problem, sur-
vivability is denoted as the number of edge disjoint paths
between switches and a controller. By representing the number
of edge disjoint paths between a switch vi and a controller cj
of a domain Gl
j as δij, the survivability of a domain is denoted
as
S(Gl
j) =
∑
vi∈Gl
j\{cj} δij
|V | − 1
.
(6)
Then, the evaluation function is described as
Maximize
∑
Gl
j∈Gl
S(Gl
j).
(7)
Therefore, the whole algorithm will include two phases:
1) partitioning a network and 2) ﬁnding the locations of
controllers in individual partitioned networks so as to satisfy
the metrics.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In multi-domain SDN networks, two issues have been dis-
cussed: 1) Network partitioning and 2) Controller placement.
This paper has formulated the controller placement problem
for multi-domain networks, which considers the network par-
titioning in our previous work.
As the ﬁrst step in future tasks, the generally deﬁned metrics
of the controller placement, such as controller-switch latency
and survivability will be examined on the partitioned networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 26330120.
REFERENCES
[1] S.
Yeganeh,
A.
Tootoonchian,
and
Y.
Ganjali,
“On
scalability
of software-deﬁned networking,” Communications Magazine, IEEE,
vol. 51, no. 2, February 2013, pp. 136–141.
[2] H. Xie, T. Tsou, D. Lopez, H. Yin, and V. Gurbani, “Use cases for
alto with software deﬁned networks,” Working Draft, IETF Secretariat,
Internet-Draft draft-xie-alto-sdn-extension-use-cases-01. txt, 2012.
[3] X. Li, P. Djukic, and H. Zhang, “Zoning for hierarchical network
optimization in software deﬁned networks,” in Network Operations and
Management Symposium (NOMS), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[4] H. Aoki and N. Shinomiya, “Network partitioning problem for effective
management of multi-domain sdn networks,” vol. 3&8, no. 8.
IARIA,
2015, pp. 171–181.
[5] D. Hock, M. Hartmann, S. Gebert, M. Jarschel, T. Zinner, and P. Tran-
Gia, “Pareto-optimal resilient controller placement in sdn-based core
networks,” in Teletrafﬁc Congress (ITC), 2013 25th International. IEEE,
2013, pp. 1–9.
[6] J. Nagano and N. Shinomiya, “Efﬁcient information sharing among
distributed controllers of openﬂow network with bi-connectivity,” in
Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), 2015 Interna-
tional Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 320–324.
[7] B. Heller, R. Sherwood, and N. McKeown, “The controller placement
problem,” in Proceedings of the ﬁrst workshop on Hot topics in software
deﬁned networks.
ACM, 2012, pp. 7–12.
[8] G. Yao, J. Bi, Y. Li, and L. Guo, “On the capacitated controller
placement problem in software deﬁned networks,” Communications
Letters, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 8, 2014, pp. 1339–1342.
[9] E. Borcoci, R. Badea, S. G. Obreja, and M. Vochin, “On multi-controller
placement optimization in software deﬁned networking-based wans,”
ICN 2015, 2015, p. 273.
[10] Y. Hu, W. Wang, X. Gong, X. Que, and S. Cheng, “On reliability-
optimized controller placement for software-deﬁned networks,” Com-
munications, China, vol. 11, no. 2, 2014, pp. 38–54.
[11] L. F. Muller, R. R. Oliveira, M. C. Luizelli, L. P. Gaspary, and M. P.
Barcellos, “Survivor: an enhanced controller placement strategy for
improving sdn survivability,” in Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1909–1915.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

