ACROSS-FI: Attribute-Based Access Control with Distributed Policies for Future
Internet Testbeds
Edelberto Franco Silva
Institute of Computing
Fluminense Federal University (UFF)
M´ıdiaCom Laboratory
Niter´oi, RJ, Brazil
Email: edelberto@midiacom.uff.br
Natalia Fernandes Castro
Dept. of Telecommunications Engineering
Fluminense Federal University (UFF)
M´ıdiaCom Laboratory
Niter´oi, RJ, Brazil
Email: natalia@midiacom.uff.br
D´ebora C. Muchaluat Saade
Institute of Computing
Fluminense Federal University (UFF)
M´ıdiaCom Laboratory
Niter´oi, RJ, Brazil
Email: debora@midiacom.uff.br
Abstract—Interests in access control authorization methods
for distributed resources have been growing as more shared
resources environments and resource federations have been made
available, both in academy and in industry. Different propos-
als aiming at creating a granular and scalable access control
in those distributed environments have been presented in the
literature. The standardization of access control models based
on roles and attributes are examples of that effort. However,
none of the existing proposals or standards present a complete
authentication and authorization framework that can be adapted
for different distributed environments. This work presents an
authentication and authorization framework based on policies
and attribute aggregation for controlling access into Future
Internet (FI) distributed testbeds. A generic solution for attribute-
based access control in Future Internet testbeds federation is
implemented and evaluated, providing a generic interface to allow
communication between the FI resource federation and our access
control proposal. Based on user and resource’s attributes, policies
are dynamically applied to control which resources a user may
require. This work has been validated in an experimental identity
management laboratory (GIdLab) enabling the use of identity
management services offered in an academic identity federation
and in an experimental environment for the Future Internet.
Keywords—future
internet;
authorization;
authentication;
attribute-based access control.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Identity Management (IdM) is the set of processes and
technologies used for guaranteeing the identity of an entity.
IdM ensures the quality of identity information such as identi-
ﬁers, credentials, and attributes and uses it for authentication,
authorization, and accounting processes [1].
Authentication procedures focus on conﬁrming the identity
of an entity, that is, checking that an entity is who it claims
to be. Authorization mechanisms deﬁne the access rights to
resources associated to an identity. Authorization procedures
describe these access rights to ensure that they are obeyed. Fi-
nally, accounting refers to track network resource consumption
by users for capacity planning and billing.
In recent years, the use of academic authentication and
authorization (A&A) federations to control access to resources
became popular [2][3]. In Brazil, for instance, academic re-
searchers access scientiﬁc publication repositories using iden-
tities of the CAFe academic federation [4]. Hence, there is no
need to duplicate user information in local databases.
The Federated Identity Management (FIM) is the basis
of this work, when users from many institutions can access
services provided by other partner institutions. A federated and
distributed identity service depends on the ability of any ser-
vice provider to trust the credentials provided to them by other
entities. In this scenario, IdM appears as a strong requirement
for establishing the trust environment among participants, as
to share tools or resources among each other.
Important examples of such environments are the initia-
tives for experimental facilities for the Future Internet (FI)
research [5][6]. New network architectural proposals depend
on exhaustive tests before they are implemented in the real
world. Thus, various experimental facilities, or testbeds, were
developed [7][8]. Researchers, however, realized that intercon-
necting those testbeds is a requirement in order to carry out real
experiments in geographically dispersed scenarios. This brings
up many management challenges, because communication and
access control agreements are necessary. The need to specify
an IdM architecture in this context draws attention.
There are some proposals for federating FI testbeds.
Among them, we highlight the Slice-Based Federation Archi-
tecture (SFA) [9], which is currently in use in testbeds such
as OneLab, FIBRE Project (Future Internet testbeds experi-
mentation between BRazil and Europe) [10], and PlanetLab.
In SFA-based FI testbeds, users supply their credentials to get
access authorization to a set of resources located in different
institutions, such as a set of computers and a minimal speciﬁed
bandwidth. Although SFA is the most important initiative to
create a federation of FI testbeds, it presents open issues related
to A&A. Brieﬂy, this occurs because its proposal is focused
on interconnecting resources through a resource federation.
The A&A ends up in background, composed only of a simple
authentication mechanism based on X.509 certiﬁcates and
static proﬁles.
To illustrate our proposal a component architecture is
shown in Figure 1. On top the identity federation is responsible
for authenticating users. In the middle all components of a
federated resource environment are depicted, with an attribute
provider, an access control component, a credential translation
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

component (necessary to translate the credential from the
identity federation to the testbed federation, which is presented
in [11]), a service provider and the resource federation (i.e.,
FI testbeds or islands).
Figure 1. Proposed component architecture for authentication and
authorization.
In this work, we propose a new authorization method
for SFA-based testbeds. Our proposal integrates A&A feder-
ations based on Shibboleth [12] and a authorization frame-
work based on Extensible Access Control Markup Language
(XACML) [13]. Shibboleth implements the Security Assertion
Markup Language (SAML) standard [14] and also supports
Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC), which has become a
standard in 2014 [15]. Using ABAC, it is possible to implement
more granular and dynamic access policies. Moreover, Shib-
boleth is used by the Brazilian academic federation, named
CAFe, and also by eduGAIN. Our proposal allows the user to
allocate resources in testbed federations based on attributes
arising from an identity federation. We propose a generic
framework for ABAC using an aggregate attribute mechanism
that associates points for user attributes and resource attributes.
Our goal is to use the access control proposal in the FIBRE
testbed, which is an initiative of federated testbeds between
Brazil and Europe, using CAFe and eduGAIN for authentica-
tion.
We implemented the proposed A&A architecture using a
real experimentation laboratory called GIdLab. GIdLab pro-
vides a mirror of the CAFe federation, which serves as an
experimental environment for new applications that use the
federation. GIdLab also offers virtual machines, in which we
conﬁgure some virtual testbeds and all ABAC infrastructure.
This implementation allowed us to validate the proposal and
to evaluate security features, comparing it to other proposals.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section II
discusses related work. Section III shows an essential back-
ground of technologies and concepts necessary to understand
the proposal. Section IV details our proposal and Section V
presents current results. In Section VI, conclusions and future
works are described.
II.
RELATED WORK
There are many initiatives to federate testbeds, such as
GENI (Global Environment for Network Innovations), OneLab
and FED4FIRE [5]–[8][16].
A recent initiative for creation of testbeds in Brazil and
Europe is the FIBRE Project [10]. FIBRE proposes the con-
struction of a network for large-scale experimentation, which
includes wired and wireless environments, through the inter-
connection of small testbeds, called islands, in various parts
of Brazil and Europe. Thus, FIBRE is strongly grounded in
building a federated environment. Although these proposals
are strongly based on the resource federation, using tools
such as SFA, they present open issues related to identity
management. These projects integrate testbeds using different
control and management frameworks, each of them using
a different user database and different authentication and
access control methods. Tools such as SFA do not provide a
proper A&A federation architecture to integrate such different
environments.
Related work, in general, proposes the introduction of a
standardized model (such as RBAC [17], ABAC [15]) for
resource distributed environments such as grid computing, and
more recently, cloud computing. The area where there is more
related work is undoubtedly grid computating. We can cite
works as [18][19], on which role-based access control models
(RBAC) are applied. More recent works in cloud computing
use ABAC for access control, such as [20]. However, we
must emphasize the need to know how access control in these
environments has been employed, but each distributed resource
environment has its particularities.
In this paper, we present the ﬁrst proposal for policy
and Attribute-Based Access Control in FI testbeds, different
of GENI ABAC proposal (the other – and only – similar
proposal), when attributes are used to restrict and delegate
access [21], introducing a new way to represent the resources,
attributes and policies in this enviroment.
III.
BACKGROUND
This section presents an introduction of technologies and
concepts needed to understand the solution proposed by this
work.
A. SAML and Shibboleth
The Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) stan-
dard [14] presents a set of speciﬁcations to deﬁne an infras-
tructure for dynamic exchange of security information between
partners (e.g., institutions). SAML deﬁnes the roles of entities,
“assertions” and transport protocols supported. Assertions use
an XML format [22] for describing data, which represents the
authorization of a user at a given time for instance. There
are two main types of entities that compose an Authentication
and Authorization (A&A) federation environment: Identity
Provider (IdP is responsible for storing and providing infor-
mation about users and their authentication and the Service
Provider (SP) is responsible for offering one or more services
(or resources). Shibboleth [12] implements SAML and allows
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

web applications to enjoy the facilities provided by the model
of federated identity, such as the concept of Single Sign-On
(SSO).
B. CAFe
Federated Academic Community (CAFe) is the Brazilian
academic federation, encompassing education and research
organizations. Through CAFe, a user keeps all his information
at his home organization and can access services offered
by institutions participating in the federation through SSO.
CAFe uses standards and software solutions already avail-
able and adopted by other federations, such as Shibboleth.
Besides maintaining the usual set of privacy policies, CAFe
also comprises a set of tools for populating an Lightweight
Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) repository with data from
different corporate databases. Integrated to eduGAIN, the
CAFe federation participates in the network of trust of G´EANT
academic federation. In the FIBRE project context, CAFe is
being proposed as the main means of authentication [11] for
Brazilian users.
C. FIBRE project
The FIBRE project [10] is a partnership between Brazilian
and European institutions in order to create a large-scale net-
work virtualization testbed. Topologically, FIBRE can be seen
as the union of a large European island and a large Brazilian
island, which consists of several small islands, located in
different universities and research centers.
In FIBRE, there are several control frameworks. To control
OpenFlow equipment
[23][6], the experimenter uses the
OFELIA Control Framework (OCF) [24]. To control wireless
equipment, FIBRE provides the Control and Management
Framework (OMF) [25]. Moreover, FIBRE also has islands
based on ProtoGENI, which is a control framework developed
for the GENI project [26]. The idea is that FIBRE can provide
different control interfaces and can aggregate an increasing
number of islands.
D. XACML
XACML
(eXtensible
Access
Control
Markup
Lan-
guage) [13] is an XML-based standard language for declaring
security policies by OASIS (Organization for the Advancement
of Structured Information Standards), aiming at ensuring in-
teroperability between authorization systems. Moreover, it is a
language to declare access control policies, deﬁning a format
for request and response messages [13].
ABAC uses the XACML architecture, working with the
same entities. For example, PEP (Policy Enforcement Point),
PDP (Policy Decision Point) and PAP (Policy Administration
Point), where PEP is responsible for translating requests and
responses and PDP for deciding if any policy (deﬁned in PAP)
is applied.
E. Access Control Mechanisms
Access control (in this work, access control and autho-
rization have the same meaning) is a fundamental mechanism
for protecting a resource from unauthorized access or re-
specting security requirements. Speciﬁcally, an access control
policy deﬁnes the conditions to which access to resources
can be granted and to whom. With the increasing complexity
of computing systems, access control methods have evolved
from Mandatory Access Control (MAC) [27], Discretionary
Access Control MAC (DAC) [28], Role-Based Access Control
(RBAC) [17], to Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) [15].
In this work, ABAC is the focus of access control applied to
resource federation for FI testbeds.
In [15], ABAC is an access control method where subject
requests to perform operations on objects are granted or denied
based on assigned attributes of the subject, assigned attributes
of the object, environmental conditions, and a set of policies
that are speciﬁed in terms of those attributes and conditions.
IV.
ACROSS-FI PROPOSAL
This section presents the ACROSS-FI proposal. At ﬁrst,
an attribute aggregator is proposed and validated, using an
attribute provider to store application-speciﬁc user attributes.
Then, a mechanism to generalize attribute values of both users
and resources is introduced. Finally, the proposal of access
control in the FI testbed environment is presented.
A. Attribute Aggregation
An attribute provider is necessary to store application-
speciﬁc complementary attributes for a given user. Additional
attributes are those employed only in a speciﬁc context, such
as a trial project in networks. In the FI testbed scenario,
many additional attributes can be necessary to access network
resources, on the other hand, they are not necessary in other
federation services. So, storing those additional attributes is a
responsibility of the service provider (i.e., FI’s testbeds), not
the Identity Federation (e.g., CAFe).
Attribute aggregation models were studied [29][30], and in
a nutshell, these papers introduce two models, when the user
is responsible (behalf) to aggregate all distributed attributes (at
different IdPs) or, alternatively, the SP is responsible to proceed
with this aggregation. In this work we decided to develop
a particular solution where the aggregation of attributes is
implemented with the help of an attribute aggregator and one
extra attribute provider, once our enviroment has particular
characteristics as speciﬁcs attributes for speciﬁcs testbeds. We
will see a similar approach on attribute aggregation performed
by linking service presented by [29], when the SP is responsi-
ble to link all attribute’s source. However, additional attributes
stored in the attribute provider should not identify the user
to which they are associated. Thus, a single and opaque ID
was created in order to link the academic federation user
with his extra attributes without identifying him, protecting
him from malicious attacks. In this case, malicious attack can
be a user modifying its attributes (or of other user) to obtain
more privileges than he really should. With an opaque ID, this
weakness is solved.
The attribute aggregation proposal is shown in Figure 2,
where steps 1 and 2 are the process of user authentication at his
home identity provider (IdP) in CAFe federation. Then, CAFe
returns the user attributes in step 3 to the service provider (SP),
which in turn forwards them to the attribute aggregator. An
opaque attribute is sent to the attribute provider that returns
only the user additional attributes without the knowledge of
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

which user that opaque attribute refers to, as shown in step 5.
Additional attributes are kept in a local LDAP (IdP of Attribute
Provider). In the end, the Attribute Aggregator gathers all
attributes.
Figure 2. Attribute Aggregation Proposal.
The following equations show how the unique and opaque
attribute to identify each user is generated:
δ ← Attru(uid) ∪ Attru(uidNumber)
(1)
AttrU(opaque) ← hash(δ)
(2)
Figure 3. Results of attribute aggregation process.
As an example for uid → esilva@uff with uidNumber →
1223, concatenating these two attributes in an MD5 hash, we
have the result af2ec12ce73cc910358ddb400f4abb74, which
corresponds to the user ID at the Atribute Provider. It is
noteworthy that only to validate the model a simple MD5 hash
was used. Other modern cryptographic hashes, such as SHA-2,
SHA-3, etc., should be used in a real environment.
Results of Attribute Aggregation. Brieﬂy, the user pro-
ceeds with all steps involved in Shibboleth authentication.
After this, Figure 3 shows all user attributes, the ones that came
from his home IdP and additional attributes that came from the
Attribute Provider (highlighted in red). They refer to speciﬁc
attributes of the FI environment, i.e., Shib-ﬁbre-userEnable (if
user is active in FI testbeds), Shib-ﬁbre-omfAdmin (if user is
an administrator of OMF testbeds) and the opaque attribute,
Attr opaque (the user ID at the Attribute Provider).
B. A Generic Access Control Based on Attribute Scores
This work proposes a new method to generalize attribute
values of both users and resources. This generic approach
is applied on ABAC scenarios. At ﬁrst, attributes are asso-
ciated to points and those points are summed to determine
a user level. Attribute points are predetermined by a global
administrator (the global administrator of the FI environment).
Algorithm
4 explains the procedure of computing a user
attribute score. All possible attributes are contained in a list
called All Attributes, where each attribute has a weight
Weight(Atribute). A simple normalization of attribute scores
is applied (forcing the score to range from 0 to 1).
Data: User attributes.
Result: Score (Total of points).
1 for Attribute in All Attributes do
2
if Attribute.content ⊂ User List[Attribute] then
3
Total ←
Total + Attribute.Point ∗ Weight(Atribute);
4
end
5 end
Figure 4. Attribute Score.
When a user is associated to a level, a generalization can
be used, because the policy access control does not need to
know exactly which attributes a user has. User levels are
used to deﬁne global and local access control policies. Global
access control policies are deﬁned by a FI testbed federation
administrator. Local policies are deﬁned by a FI testbed island
administrator.
To illustrate the proposal of generalization based on at-
tribute scores, one example is given in Table I. In this example,
the maximum value is equal to 80 and the minimum is 0, when
normalized ranges between [0-1], as follows:

will determine a number of levels L and score thresholds
for each level. Thus, for a score li < X ≤ li+1, the user
will be on Ni level, where 1 ≤ i ≤ L. So, in Table II the
global administrator sets 3 levels, where the example user is
associated to level 2.
TABLE II. AN EXAMPLE OF LEVEL DEFINITION BASED ON
SCORES.
Level Deﬁnition
Score
Level
0 ≤ X ≤ 0.5
01
0.5 < X ≤ 0.75
02
0.75 < X ≤ 1
03
TABLE III. ACCESS CONTROL POLICIES BASED ON SCORES
FOR VIRTUAL MACHINES.
Access Control policies based on scores for virtual machines
VMs
Level
0 ≤ X ≤ 5
1
0 ≤ X ≤ 15
2
0 ≤ X ≤ 20
3
The island (local testbed resources in one institution)
administrator sets how many resources a user under a certain
level can request. For example, Table III shows that the
example user can request up to 15 virtual machines.
V.
ACROSS-FI VALIDATION
A. Scenario
In this section, we explain how ACROSS-FI modules are
interconnected. Figure 5 shows all components involved, from
the authentication to authorization. It is possible to see a blue
box on the top, where the authentication process occurs. Red
boxes represent the authorization, with attribute aggregation
and ABAC solution. It is also possible to see an XML
document conﬁgured by a global administrator, concerning the
creation of user levels used in authorization (Tables I and II).
Our case study is the FIBRE project. Based on Figure 5, the
main steps, taken beginning from the federated authentication
up to authorization to use resources protected by distributed
access policies, can be seen, considering both local and global
policies.
Thus, in step 1, the user accesses the service provider (SP)
that will forward (step 2) to authentication, either through
CAFe or FIBRE federated LDAP. The FIBRE federated LDAP
is a tree that interconnects both Brazilian and European
institutions that do not integrate CAFe, enabling a federated
access to other users participating in the project. Such steps
are traditionally used to create an SAML session [14] from
the user to the SP access, redirecting through WAYF (Where
Are You From) to its home IdP to proceed the authentication
and exchange the user attributes.
In step 3, the authenticated user requests the list of
resources available to the SFA federation. In this step, SFA
is responsible to communicate with the SM (Slice Manager)
having a global view of all AMs (Aggregate Managers) (step
4), which have direct contact with the island testbed resources.
Thus, available resources are listed by a type of XML ﬁles,
called RSpecs (Resource Speciﬁcation) and returned to the user
in step 5. Thereafter, the user may request the resources.
Step 6 is responsible to send through the SP the attributes
to attribute aggregator, and the attribute aggregator is respon-
sible to generate an opaque attribute, which identiﬁes the user
in the attribute provider, so that additional attributes of IF can
be recovered without identifying the user directly to the IdP
CAFe federation (steps 7 and 8).
Then, the SP receives all attributes from the attribute
aggregator, in step 9, and forwards these attributes and the
RSpec (identifying the requested testbed resources) in step 10
to the PEP. The PEP then computes the user attribute score
indicating a user level (see Section IV-B). In step 11, the PEP
performs the conversion of RSpec ﬁles and score generated to
an XACML request.
In step 12, the XACML request generated is sent to
each FIBRE island, (the island’s PIP, step 13, will check for
additional attributes – optional). Then, in step 14, XACML
policies that the island administrator previously registered
through the PAP are returned to the PDP (step 15). At that
time, a global policy is also checked through step 16 and
policy-combining algorithms presented by XACML are used,
returning to the PDP (step 17) the decision. In step 18, the
response is returned to the PEP that converts to RSpec and
forwards it to the SP (step 19), stating if the user can or cannot
allocate the requested resources.
B. Results
To validate the proposal, the GIdLab experimental labo-
ratory was used, where a mirror of CAFe is available and
all other proposed components. All modules, including the
attribute aggregator and credential translation were developed.
Other necessary features, such as how the SP communicates
with SFA federation and the ABAC control access were also
implemented.
As we saw in Section IV-A, the attribute aggregator was
proposed and validated. Similarly, credential translation was
also discussed and implemented in [11]. The proposal of
attribute scores presented in Section IV-B was validated at
GIdLab using the Sun’s XACML implementation and three
different virtual machines, one for PEP and PDP and two
others to simulate the testbeds. Thus, after checking the user
level and the RSpec, a number of resources (e.g., VMs) were
requested, and the island’s PAP checks if the user is allowed
to allocate that number of requested resources. When the
XACML response was received by the PDP, a global policy
was veriﬁed too, and only after these steps the user received
an RSpec with available resources.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work is motivated by the need of access control
mechanisms in environments for evaluation of Future Internet
proposals. In this context, federations for authentication and
authorization can be used to facilitate the shared use of testbed
resources for researchers belonging from different institutions.
Our main contributions are: 1) attribute aggregation model
proposed and validated; 2) an ABAC model based on user
scores and levels to associate dynamically users and resources
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 5. ACROSS-FI Scenario.
proposed and validated; 3) implementation of an integrated
authentication and authorization solution for FI testbed envi-
ronments validated in GIdLab.
As future work, we intend to generalize the proposed A&A
solution to the concept of virtual organizations, where a subset
of users from different home institutions may use services
and share resources from other institutions. We also intend
to develop conﬁguration tools to facilitate the deﬁnition of
attribute points and user levels and policies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank RNP (GIdLab), CAPES, CNPq and FIBRE
project for supporting this research.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Jensen, “Federated identity management challenges,” in Availability,
Reliability and Security (ARES), 2012 Seventh International Confer-
ence on, 2012, pp. 230–235.
[2]
R. Dhungana, A. Mohammad, A. Sharma, and I. Schoen, “Identity man-
agement framework for cloud networking infrastructure,” in Innovations
in Information Technology (IIT), 2013 9th International Conference on,
2013, pp. 13–17.
[3]
J. Leskinen, “Evaluation criteria for future identity management,” in
Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications (Trust-
Com), 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on, 2012, pp. 801–806.
[4]
RNP,
“CAFe
-
Federated
Academic
Community,”
http://portal.rnp.br/web/servicos/cafe-en, Feb. 2015.
[5]
P. Stuckmann and R. Zimmermann, “European research on future
internet design,” Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 5, 2009,
pp. 14–22.
[6]
R. Riggio, F. De Pellegrini, E. Salvadori, M. Gerola, and R. Corin,
“Progressive virtual topology embedding in openﬂow networks,” in Inte-
grated Network Management (IM 2013), 2013 IFIP/IEEE International
Symposium on, 2013, pp. 1122–1128.
[7]
S. Jeong and A. Bavier, “Geni federation scenarios and requirements,”
Tech. Rep., Jul. 2010.
[8]
A. Falk, “Federation in geni - draft proposal - comments invited,” in
GENI Engineering Conferences - GEC11, Jul. 2011.
[9]
L. Peterson, R. Ricci, A. Falk, and J. Chase, “Slice-based facility
architecture,” Tech. Rep., Jul. 2010.
[10]
S. S. et. al, “FIBRE project: Brazil and Europe unite forces and testbeds
for the Internet of the future,” in Proceedings of TridentCom 2012, Jun.
2012.
[11]
E. Silva, N. Fernandes, N. Rodriguez, and D. Muchaluat-Saade,
“Credential translations in future internet testbeds federation,” in 6th
IEEE/IFIP Workshop on Management of the Future Internet (ManFI
2014)/NOMS, May 2014, pp. 1–6.
[12]
T. Scavo and S. Cantor, “Shibboleth architecture,” Tech. Rep.,
Jan. 2005. [Online]. Available: http://shibboleth.internet2.edu/docs/
draft-mace-shibboleth-tech-overview-latest.pdf
[13]
T. Moses. eXtensible Access Control Markup Language TC v2.0
(XACML). OASIS. [Online]. Available: http://docs.oasis-open.org/
xacml/2.0/access\ control-xacml-2.0-core-spec-os.pdf [retrieved: Feb.,
2005]
[14]
OASIS, Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) v2.0, Std., 2005.
[15]
V. C. Hu, D. Ferraiolo, R. Kuhn, A. Schnitzer, K. Sandlin, R. Miller, and
K. Scarfone, “Guide to attribute based access control (abac) deﬁnition
and considerations,” NIST Special Publication, vol. 800, 2014, p. 162.
[16]
Future
Internet
Research
&
Experimentation,
http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ﬁre/, March, 2015.
[17]
D.
F.
Ferraiolo,
R.
Sandhu,
S.
Gavrila,
D.
R.
Kuhn,
and
R. Chandramouli, “Proposed nist standard for role-based access
control,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., vol. 4, no. 3, Aug. 2001, pp.
224–274. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org.ez24.periodicos.capes.
gov.br/10.1145/501978.501980
[18]
B. et. al, “Identity Federation and Attribute-based Authorization through
the Globus Toolkit, Shibboleth, Gridshib, and MyProxy,” in 5th Annual
PKI R&D Workshop, Apr. 2006.
[19]
I. Foster, C. Kesselman, and S. Tuecke, “The anatomy of the grid:
Enabling scalable virtual organizations,” Int. J. High Perform. Comput.
Appl., vol. 15, no. 3, Aug. 2001, pp. 200–222.
[20]
Y. Zhu, D. Huang, C. Hu, and X. Wang, “From rbac to abac: Construct-
ing ﬂexible data access control for cloud storage services,” Services
Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, 2014, pp. 1–1.
[21]
M. Berman and M. Brinn, “Progress and challenges in worldwide
federation of future internet and distributed cloud testbeds,” in Sci-
ence and Technology Conference (Modern Networking Technologies)
(MoNeTeC), 2014 First International, Oct 2014, pp. 1–6.
[22]
W3C, “Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition),” Feb.
2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-xml/
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

[23]
M. et. al, “Openﬂow: enabling innovation in campus networks,” SIG-
COMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 38, no. 2, Mar. 2008,
pp. 69–74.
[24]
A. K¨opsel and H. Woesner, “Ofelia: pan-european test facility for open-
ﬂow experimentation,” in Proceedings of the 4th European conference
on Towards a service-based internet, ser. ServiceWave’11.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 311–312.
[25]
T. Rakotoarivelo, M. Ott, G. Jourjon, and I. Seskar, “OMF: a control
and management framework for networking testbeds,” SIGOPS Oper.
Syst. Rev., vol. 43, no. 4, Jan. 2010, pp. 54–59.
[26]
ProtoGeni ClearingHouse, http://www.protogeni.net/wiki/ClearingHouse
Desc, March, 2015.
[27]
R. S. Sandhu, “Lattice-based access control models,” Computer, vol. 26,
no. 11, Nov. 1993, pp. 9–19.
[28]
R. Sandhu and P. Samarati, “Access control: principle and practice,”
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 32, no. 9, Sept 1994, pp. 40–
48.
[29]
D. Chadwick and G. Inman, “Attribute aggregation in federated identity
management,” Computer, vol. 42, no. 5, May 2009, pp. 33–40.
[30]
——, “The trusted attribute aggregation service (TAAS) - providing
an attribute aggregation layer for federated identity management,” in
Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), 2013 Eighth International
Conference on, Sept 2013, pp. 285–290.
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

