Future NetworkArchitectures of Networking of Everything
Hyun-Kook Kahng
Electrical & Information Engineering
Korea University
Sejong, Republic of Korea
e-mail: eekahng@korea.ac.kr
Suyeon Kim
Department of Industry Cooperation
Keimyung University
Daegu, Republic of Korea
e-mail: sykim388@gmail.com
Seong-Soon Joo
ETRI
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
e-mail: ssjoo@etri.re.kr
Sweung-Won Cheung
Hanwha Techwin
Pankyo, Republic of Korea
e-mail: csw1988@gmail.com
Abstract—Currently,
even
though
various
and
advanced
networks, such as 4G/5G and IP based networks are available,
there
is
very
limited
choice
of
networking
in
real
communication depending on which Internet Service Provider
(ISP) is selected by a user. On the Internet, there is no place to
inquire about the physical address without DNS (Domain
Name Service), which is a centralized service. Nowadays, there
are social networks where users share their profiles including
name, phone number, email address, even their information
about private life. In this paper, we propose an architecture to
integrate conventional networks and social networks, so that
any user can find a destination without any centralized service
by referring to the social network in which every device
participates
and
shares
their
private
information.
Furthermore, we believe this concept can be extended beyond
communications. In the context of Internet of Things (IoT), if
those things are members of social networks, they can perform
more advanced tasks, such as collaborative works. We focus on
networking issues to integrate various networks, such as
transparent networks, things social networks, and things
centric networks, in which smart devices participate to provide
advanced network services to smart things or thing-users,
especially from the IoT perspective, through the conceptual
model of Networking of Everything.
Keywords-NoE; Transparent Network; PDN; Semantic Web;
RDF; OWL.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There are many different types of networks on the
market, such as mobile telecommunication networks, IP-
based data networks, etc. However, the networking principle
has not changed. Even though multiple networks are
available to the same device, the device of a user has no
choice but to access the predetermined (pre-contractual)
network, since each network is usually operated by different
providers. Secondly, even though a device can access two or
more different networks, this is done manually (even though
now this is possible, network access is still limited). Thirdly,
users have to know the address and its format of the device
providing the target service. And lastly, at this time,
especially in the current Internet, only IP address-routing is
the service provided by ISPs, regardless of the service type.
In other words, the user has to know everything: what kind
of services is available, what is the name of service in each
network, who from which network can provide it, how can
he access the network, etc. It is already known that current
networking cannot support meaningful and rich Internet of
Things (IoT) service.
In the IoT, things are supposed to be intelligent, and the
thing will be a user of the network which is called a thing-
user
in Networking of Everything
(NoE). While the
conventional device is allocated only an Internet address,
which is connected to a specific access network on the
Internet via Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP),
thing-users in NoE join thing-user social networks (defined
in [4]) to share not only their names or addresses, but their
capabilities,
context,
communicative
motivation,
experiences, and intentions of collaborative work with
others, and then socializes to interact with other thing-users
autonomously.
The
thing-users
produce
not
only
the
digitalized information but also the varieties of reactions
based on the socialized decision. The thing-user may
describe its communicative motivation and convey intended
meanings to other thing-users or thing-user groups using a
mutually
understood language
such
as
semantic
Web
languages with Resource Description Framework (RDF),
Ontology
Language
(OWL)
and
Extensible
Markup
Language (XML). The thing-user will discover a thing (or
groups) which will provide a service from the thing-user
community.
The
Future
Network
(FN)-NoE
also
focuses
on
networking issues to integrate diverse networking techniques
to provide the users’ service requirements mentioned above:
transparent networking, dynamic virtual networking, as well
as social networking. Social networking is to find a target
thing or things. Transparent networking is to interconnect
various networks. Lastly, dynamic virtual networking, called
Proximity Defined Network (PDN), is to define a temporary
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

working space where thing-users can collaborate for the
requested service.
In this paper, we show that the FN-NoE eventually
provides the thing-user centric communication service that
discovers and coordinates things to perform a collaborative
work among the socialized things located autonomously
within a space. The architecture and functional procedure of
FN-NoE are presented in Sections II and III, respectively.
We show a brief application in Section IV and conclude in
Section V.
II.
STATE OF ART
In recent years, the influence of the Internet has been
increasing rapidly and powerfully. This seems to be due to
the following factors. First, the performance of networks is
becoming very powerful. Giga Internet or 5G network is no
longer a dream, but a reality. Second, it is the evolution of
the Web which is the most familiar to the users. The World
Wide Web Consortium (W3C) extended the Web so that
information is given well-defined meaning, better enabling
computers and people to work in cooperation. Third, the
spread
of
social
networks
has
created
new
human
relationships. Online social networking technologies enable
individuals to simultaneously share information with others.
However,
these
attempts
have
faced
unexpected
problems, as follows. As the Internet with good performance
became more widespread, IoT, which was built on the
Internet, was introduced, and this resulted in a variety of
devices that would become the rapid evolution of IPv4
addresses. Secondly, the semantic Web makes Web content
machine understandable. However, it was found that there
are too many jobs to describe everything in RDF format.
Thirdly,
the
online-social
networks
also
show
some
problems like private information disclosure.
At this stage, we have to consider how to integrate these
three elements to maximize the advantage and minimize the
disadvantages. In IoT, we consider a social network with
only
machines,
or
things
with
semantic
Web
which
understand each other. The things will share information and
can verify each other by exchanging WebIDs [6]. The
content of semantic Web will be very limited information
about predetermined network services; no privacy disclosure.
Thus, this new Networking of Everything means the
integration of the semantic Web network to communicate
with
network
devices,
social
networks
to
share
the
information of network devices, and conventional networks
for data transfer.
III.
ARCHITECTURE
The infrastructure for the FN-NoE is constructed with the
core networks, the access networks, and the regional
networks. The core network and the access networks are
evolved
from
the
current
networks
and
provide
the
connections to the users and the transparent connections
between the regional networks, which is a virtual network to
provide logical access to an intelligent socialized thing-user.
The FN-NoE can be operated over either existing legacy
networks or future networks [1]. A NoE terminal located in a
certain space connects to an access network and is connected
Figure 1.
FN-NoE operated over existing legacy networks.
to another NoE terminal through the core networks.
The core networks between NoE terminals may be
operated by different network operators and the switching
and routing scheme applied to the core networks may be
different. The access network is managed by the core
network operator and differentiated with the type of access
links and access procedures. The access network may have a
local network managed by the local private owner as a
subnetwork. The local network may have a local network
underneath.
Figure 1 shows, excluding thing-user social network, a
reference network model where multiple NoE terminals
located in a certain space are connected to each other. There
is an NoE terminal connected to the A type access network
of the core network managed by operator X.
The FN-NoE provides (1) a transparent end-to-end
connection
between
NoE
terminals
connected
to
heterogeneous
access
networks,
and
according
to
the
preferred connection, (2) a thing-to-thing connection for
coordinating NoE terminals autonomously. The required
information for coordinating the access network in a certain
space to establish a transparent connection is maintained at
each NoE terminal. The NoE terminal may share the
coordination information with the NoE terminals located
within the same space directly or exchange in the regional
virtual
switch,
as
shown
in
Figure
2.
The
detailed
information about the coordinated networking layer will be
explained in the next section.
The regional networks are overlaid to the core network
and the access networks. The regional networks are formed
by the NoE terminals and the NoE virtual switches.
To provide transparent end-to-end connections between
the NoE terminals and autonomous coordinated thing-to-
thing connections among the NoE terminals, the FN-NoE
Figure 2. An example of connections in the FN-NoE
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

specifies following: How to manage a NoE terminal,
regional virtual switch, and the overlay virtual switch? How
to form a thing-user social community? How to share
experience with thing-users? How to discover a thing or
thing-user for collaborating? How to establish a transparent
connection between the NoE terminals? And how to
establish coordinated connections among the NoE terminals?
The coordinated networking layer of the FN-NoE is
composed of capability blocks, as shown in Figure 3.
 The NoE terminal resource and capability profile
management block maintains the profile and the status of
the NoE terminal’s resources and skill set. This block
manages the status of the NoE terminal, regional virtual
switch, and overlay virtual switch.
 The NoE terminal social networking block performs the
process of forming or disbanding a social group. This block
controls a NoE terminal to join or leave a social group.
This block controls a NoE terminal to publish or subscribe
an experience sharing with a social group. The control
protocols between the NoE terminal social networking
blocks are defined at the reference point R1.
 The
coordinated
experience
management
block
maintains the coordinated networking experienced by the
NoE terminal and by the NoE terminals of joined social
groups. This block searches the experience base to match a
request from a NoE terminal or a social group.
 The coordinated peer discovery block performs the
process of discovering the NoE terminal to be a peer NoE
terminal or the NoE terminals to form a collaborative work
group. This block searches a proximal NoE terminal from a
social group or hands over the discovery to the regional
virtual switches or overlay virtual switches. The control
protocols between the coordinated peer discovery blocks
are defined at the reference point R2.
 The transparency networking control block manages the
process
of
selecting
preferred
access
networks
and
establishing a transparent end-to-end connection. The
control protocols between the transparency networking
control blocks are defined at the reference point R3.
 The
thing-user
centric
networking
control
block
manages the process of socializing a thing-user and
Figure 3. Reference model of the FN-NoE
establishing
a
thing-to-thing
connection.
The
control
protocols between the thing-user centric networking control
blocks are defined at the reference point R4.
IV.
FUNCTIONAL PROCEDURE
The
FN-NoE
is
composed
of
two
main
blocks:
Networking of Heterogeneous Networks (NHN), which can
be implemented with legacy networks, and Proximity
Defined Networks (PDN) which is formed during the thing-
user centric communication period
In Figure 4, nodes (or thing-users) are in the scope of
three different types of access networks, i.e., heterogeneous.
They may or may not communicate with each other.
However, if those networks are transparent, then each device
with different skills can communicate and collaborate to
provide a service to a specific human-user or thing-user.
Any node like a switch, a virtual switch, a regional
(virtual) switch or a network agent can be a thing-user if it
can use the FN-NoE service.
A. Thing-user social network
In Figure 4, usually when a node (which is just legacy
node) accesses the local network 1, it can communicate with
a node in network 3 if a node knows its destination network
address (or name) and networks should be interconnected via
intermediate nodes. When the networks are physically
located too far away, it is a very time-consuming job.
However, when thing-user 1 (very smart node) in Figure
4 joins an appropriate social network 1 depending on its
profile and objectives, it can locate the exact thing-user in
network 3, not by network- dependent routing algorithm, but
by context-aware social networking, as shown in Figure 5.
By this thing-user social networking, a transparent
networking service is provided to the thing-user, which is
only identified by a profile or name (not network address).
Of course, if it can not find its social group, it itself must
create and post it to the regional post and/or the global post,
if needed, to announce it to others.
Figure 4. FN-NoE conceptual model
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Note that even though the matter to create, find, and
maintain the social networking is out of scope of this work,
they are key procedures to be defined in other documents.
B. Transparent end-to-end connection
The FN-NoE allows a NoE terminal to select appropriate
access networks according to the preferred connection and to
establish a transparent end-to-end connection between the
NoE
terminals.
The
FN-NoE
defines
the
coordinated
networking layer located at the OSI application to provide
transparent end-to-end connections between NoE terminals
and autonomous coordinated thing-to-thing connections. The
coordinated networking layer supports the NoE terminal to
be socialized for sharing the coordination experience and for
performing context-based discovery and establishing a
connection.
The regional virtual switch supports a NoE terminal for
discovering an appropriate access network and provides
access network to establish a transparent connection. The
overlay virtual switch performs a hierarchical peer-to-peer
overlay switching for exchanging coordination information
between regional virtual switches to provide a transparent
end-to-end connectivity between the NoE terminals.
C. Proxmity defined network
Figure 6 shows that when a thing-user locates its
destination thing-user or thing-user group, using thing-user
social networking, it explains its profile or objectives, and
then requests collaboration from its counterpart thing-user(s)
in PDN, as shown in Figure 4. If it needs additional thing-
users, then it will request to find more thing-user(s) in the
near social group, recursively.
PDN is a sort of temporary virtual network in which a
group
of
thing-users
collaborate
with
each
other
autonomously during the thing-user central communications.
D. Thing-user centric communication
The
thing-user
centric
communication
service
is
accomplished over PDN, which is based on thing-user social
Figure 5. Functional procedure of thing-user social networking
Figure 6. Functional procedure of Proximity Defined Networking
networking. The thing-user communicates with another
thing-user or a thing-user group in PDN by conveying the
intended meaning, which describes the communication
motivation, and experience on a specific task by ontology-
based thing-user language. The thing-user discovers a
communication party, relying on the assistance of thing-users
of a thing-user social group, requests to introduce a thing-
user who may be the communicative correspondent or might
know the communicative correspondent until it meets the
right communication party. The social assistance is accepted
upon the trust and reputation of a thing-user acquired in a
social group. Currently, in our application, the trust and
reputation can be achieved with WebID and semantic
inference.
V.
APPLICATION
In this section, we briefly introduce an application which
was built over a very preliminary NoE architecture [5],
namely, an autonomous collaboration system of smart things
using
accumulated
experience
knowledge
achieved
by
semantic inference with RDF database.
In Figure 7, smart delivery service with a drone having
smart thing’s structure is shown as one of services over the
autonomous collaboration system.
Figure 7. Example of collaborative service over NoE
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

If all Smart Things have Basic Identity Information (BII)
and use semantic technology, the Internet can become the
world of Smart Things, which has built up many social
networks. Semantic technology provides a way to utilize the
new Web application of many Smart Things connected to the
Internet. In this paper, we show a mailing and delivery
collaboration system among drones as a specific task of
spatial
autonomous
collaboration
where
Smart
Things
collaborate using semantic technology, such as SPARQL (a
semantic query language for Database) [7]. If a Smart Thing
has BII composed of a Web server address, WebID, and
endpoint address, and can query SPARQL for a purpose, it
shows how spatial autonomous collaboration is possible in
intelligent Web without special environment or Artificial
Intelligence (AI). The delivery drones that come with the
mail look for collaborative in-house drones using BII,
Identification
Process
(IDP),
and
SPARQL
semantic
techniques based on the Default Response Rules (DRR).
Smart Thing updates the BII of collaborators in TDB-
Experience knowledge after collaboration. It accumulates a
collaborative experience and expands its social network. The
delivery drones which experienced collaborations with
company drones # 3 were able to deliver mail more quickly
and accurately by utilizing their experience knowledge when
the
same
task
occurred.
Thanks
to
the
accumulated
experience knowledge, it is possible to process the same
thing more quickly and accurately in the future.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Networking of Everything (NoE) refers to the process
capable to provide FN-NoE services, such as transparent
network service, thing-user social network service, and
thing-user centric communication service to the thing-users
who participate in the FN-NoE. In other words, the
distributed social networking of thing-user devices will
provide thing-user centric service which is supported by the
intelligence and semantic knowledge of the thing-user.
The given application is implemented and verified under
the assumption that a delivery social network has already
been established. Depending on the purpose, how to
establish and dismiss the social network over FN-NoE would
be one of our future works.
Problems related to the NoE were defined in ISO/IEC TR
29181-9 in 2017. Even though this paper is a very
preliminary stage for its solution, enhanced work on NoE is
to
be
proposed
as
International
Standards
on
NoE
architecture and its companion protocols.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the project “Standardization
of Networking of Everything Architecture and Protocols”
funded by KEIT (No. 20002532).
REFERENCES
[1]
J.
Day,
“Patterns
in
Network
Architecture.
A
return
to
Fundamentals”, Prentice Hall, 2008.
[2]
T. Berners-Lee, “Linked-Data-Design Issues” [Online]. Available
from: https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
[3]
S. Joo and H. Kahng, ISO/IEC TR 29181-9, Future Network-Problem
statement and requirements-Part 9: Networking of Everything.
[4]
S. Tramp, “Distributed Semantic Social networks: Architecture,
Protocols and Applications”, Doctoral thesis from Universitat Leipsig,
2014.
[5]
C.
Lee,
S.
Cheung,
S.
Joo,
and
H.
Kahng,
“Design
and
Implementation of Autonomous Collaboration System of Smart
Things
using
accumulated
Experience
knowledge”,
IEEE/ICACT2019, Phoenix Park, Pyeongchang, Korea. Feb 17-20,
2019.
[6]
A. Sambra, H. Story, and T. Berners-Lee, “WebID 1.0 – Web Identity
and
Discovery”,
[Online]
Available
from:
https://dvcs.w3.org/hg/WebID/raw-file/tip/spec/identity-respec.html
[7]
B. DuCharme, “Learning SPARQL”, Second Edition, June 2013,
ISBN 978-1-449-37143-2
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

