Development of Secure IoT System based on Secret Sharing
Hiroyuki Dekihara
The Faculty of Economic Sciences
Hiroshima Shudo University
Hiroshima, Japan 731–3195
Email: hdekihar@shudo-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In Cyber Physical Systems based on sensor networks,
one of the important requirements is that the data in the system
are protected from a variety of incidents. In this study, a secure
IoT system is proposed for Cyber Physical Systems using sensor
networks, and a prototype was developed on the input side. The
novel concept of the proposed method is to apply encryption at
the physical layer into the IoT system from input processing to
output processing. The system is based on Shamir Secret Sharing,
which is a type of encryption using distributed processing. The
encrypted data in the system would maintain conﬁdentiality
even when a part of the data is browsed by a third party by
unauthorized access of a malicious third person or by human
operator error. In addition, it is possible for a user to control
accessibility by holding key information of the encryption. The
prototype system on the input side was created by an Arduino,
a Sakura LTE module, and the Sakura IoT Platform.
Keywords–Internet of Things; Network security; Wireless sensor
networks; Encryption; Shamir Secret Sharing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the Fourth Industrial Revolution [1], it is expected that
Cyber Physical Systems (CPSs) connecting the real world and
virtual world will serve as one advanced system. Usually, the
CPS gathers information from the real world using wireless
sensor networks. Of course, the CPS must protect the gathered
data from a variety of incidents, such as an attack by a
malicious third person, a leak due to human error, etc [2],
[3]. The objective of this research is to develop a new secure
IoT system for the CPS, and the ﬁnal goal is to proposal the
encrypted processes from input to output in CPS, in other
words from user side to operator side. The system is based
on secret sharing [4], [5], which is a type of encryption using
distributed processing. The encryption has been applied at the
physical layer into the IoT system from input processing to
output processing. The encrypted data by secret sharing can
be decrypted when there are more data than the threshold
number. Therefore, the encrypted data in the system would
be kept conﬁdential even when a part of the data smaller
than the threshold number is browsed by a third party by
unauthorized access of a malicious third person or by human
operator error. In addition, it is possible for a user to control
accessibility by holding key information of the encryption. In
this paper, the prototype system on the input side was created
using an Arduino [6], a Sakura LTE module, and the Sakura
IoT Platform [7]. From the prototype, it was veriﬁed that the
algorithm of Secret Sharing was performed on Arduino, the
two paths were connected by Sakura LTE modules, and Sakura
LTE modules and a SD card module were performed on a
single Arduino together.
In Section 2, the schemes of the proposed system and the
prototype system of the input side are explained. Finally, a
brief conclusion is presented in Section 3.
II.
PROPOSED SYSTEM
In this study, a secure IoT system was developed and is
proposed for CPSs using wireless sensor networks. In this
section, the scheme and prototype of the proposed system are
described.
Figure 1. The scheme of the proposed system.
A. Scheme
The scheme of the proposed system is shown in Figure
1. The IoT devices in the CPS receive a signal or stimulus
(i.e., heat, light, pressure, motion, etc.). The received data are
encrypted and divided by the secret sharing algorithm. Figure 2
illustrates an example graph in Shamir (k, n) secret sharing. Let
k = 3 and n = 5 in this case. The secret is the original data, and
it is encrypted and divided into ﬁve shares. A share is a set of
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

coordinates (x, y). The secret data can be decrypted from three
shares out of ﬁve. The divided data are transmitted to cloud
computing via multiple routes. The key data for the decryption
may be held by the IoT device (or the user side). For example,
the original data received by a sensor are divided into four
data points (A, B, C, and D) in Figure 1. Then the four data
points are sent to cloud computing devices and stored there.
In authorized access, the original data are decrypted from the
four data points on each cloud computing device. The proposed
system would maintain data division, even in the computing
and output components, by parallel processing using multiple
processors and computer vision using mixed reality.
Figure 2. An example of (k, n) secret sharing.
B. Prototype System of the input side
The prototype system of the input side was created by
an Arduino, a Sakura LTE module, and the Sakura IoT
Platform. The Sakura IoT Platform which has been supplied
by SAKURA internet Inc. is a service that has integrated
the communications environment for IoT and data storage
and processing systems. Figure 3 illustrates the prototype
component corresponding to the dashed-line area of Figure
1. The Arduino was connected to a sensor on a breadboard
by jumper wires, and had several shields mounted, such as
the Sakura LTE modules and the SD card shield (shown in
Figure 4). The Arduino communicated with the Sakura IoT
Platform by LTE to upload data from connected sensors that
were encrypted by secret sharing. The Sakura IoT Platform
stored the uploaded data from the Arduino. In this step, it is
possible for a user to hold key information about the encryption
and to control accessibility. In the case of the prototype system,
(3, 3) secret sharing was used for encryption, and the original
data were divided into three shares. In other words, the original
data were decryptable when all three shares were present. One
share is stored on the IoT device on the user side. The Arduino
connects to the Sakura IoT Platform on the Internet with a
dual communication path using LTE and sends three other
shares to the Sakura IoT Platform to store. The original data
can be decrypted from one share on the user side and two
shares on the Sakura IoT Platform. The user side was able
to reject unauthorized accesses from a malicious third party.
The numbers of data communication media from sensor to
cloud are depend on hardware. In the case of the prototype
system, it was depended on Sakura LTE modules (max 2).
Moreover, SD card module could be added to the Arduino
that had attached to the two Sakura LTE modules by solving
duplication of used pin numbers among modules. Therefore, it
is necessary to notice the duplication of Arduino’s pins when
the number of physical media storing or sending data of Secret
Sharing will be increased.
Figure 3. The prototype system of the input component.
Figure 4. A result of storing data from sensor.
III.
CONCLUSION
In this study, a secure IoT system was proposed for the CPS
using wireless sensor networks, and the prototype system of
the input component was created using an Arduino, a Sakura
LTE module, and the Sakura IoT Platform. The system is
based on secret sharing for encryption, and has been applied
to encryption at the physical layer into the IoT system from
input processing to output processing. It was conﬁrmed that
the original data could be decrypted from the divided shares
on the IoT device and the Sakura IoT Platform. In addition,
it was conﬁrmed that the original data could not be decrypted
in the case of a lacking, necessary share.
In the future, the data computing and output components
will be developed. Moreover, the developed prototype system
will be extended for multi-IoT platforms, adapting to the
visualization and calculation of secret sharing, etc., and the
data structure will be developed for the proposed system.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

REFERENCES
[1]
R. Kenett, R. Swarz, and A. Zonnenshain, Systems Engineering in the
Fourth Industrial Revolution: Big Data, Novel Technologies, and Modern
Systems Engineering.
Wiley, 2019.
[2]
R. Gurunath, M. Agarwal, A. Nandi, and D. Samanta, “An overview:
Security issue in iot network,” in 2018 2nd International Conference
on I-SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC)I-
SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-SMAC), 2018
2nd International Conference on, Aug 2018, pp. 104–107.
[3]
A. Assiri and H. Almagwashi, “Iot security and privacy issues,” in
2018 1st International Conference on Computer Applications Information
Security (ICCAIS), April 2018, pp. 1–5.
[4]
G. Blakley, “Safeguarding cryptographic keys,” in Proceedings of the
1979 AFIPS National Computer Conference. Monval, NJ, USA: AFIPS
Press, 1979, pp. 313–317.
[5]
A.
Shamir,
“How
to
share
a
secret,”
Commun.
ACM,
vol.
22,
no.
11,
Nov.
1979,
pp.
612–613.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/359168.359176
[6]
“Arduino”, 2019, URL: https://www.arduino.cc/ [accessed: 2019-07-27].
[7]
“Sakura IoT Platform”, 2019, URL: https://sakura.io/ [accessed: 2019-
07-27].
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-770-2
ICN 2020 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networks

