Assessing the Performance of Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET) Routing Protocols
Bilal Al Momani 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology 
Mohawk College of Applied Arts and Technology 
Hamilton (ON), Canada 
e-mail: bilal.al-momani@mohawkcollege.ca 
 
Esteve Hassan 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology 
Mohawk College of Applied Arts and Technology 
Hamilton (ON), Canada 
e-mail: esteve.hassan@mohawkcollege.ca  
 
Abstract — This paper focuses on evaluating some of the routing 
protocols for the Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET) and 
discusses their abilities to provide advanced Quality of Service 
(QoS) support in spite of their dynamic nature. Two routing 
protocols have been extracted to be studied extensively and 
compared against each other in terms of their performance: the 
on-demand Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) along with the 
table-driven Destination-Sequenced Victor (DSDV) routing 
protocol. The performances are analyzed according to various 
factors such as network load, mobility, and network size using a 
set of parameters. The evaluation shows that an on-demand 
routing protocol is preferable in all routing conditions. 
Keywords: MANET; Routing Protocols; Packet Delivery Fraction 
Ratio; Normalized Routing Load. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The increased importance of wireless networks is 
increasingly evident since the demand to access information 
from any part of the globe has overwhelmed supply.  
Reduction in cost and time taken to build wired infrastructure 
has become the ultimate objective for networks designers. 
Wireless networks can be classified into two categories: 
“infrastructure” networks and “Infrastructureless” networks. 
Infrastructure networks usually have fixed and wired 
gateways and mobile nodes communicate with the network 
through a base station. The mobile nodes can continue 
communication with the network even if out of range by 
connecting with a new fixed base station or access point. The 
other classification of networks is Infrastructureless, also 
known as ad-hoc networks. This type of network has no fixed 
infrastructure or routers; all nodes within the network are 
mobile and able to move freely to different locations, they can 
connect dynamically in an arbitrary manner. Each node within 
ad-hoc network acts as a host and router at the same time. Fig. 
1 gives a simplified overview of an ad-hoc network. This 
figure shows how different heterogeneous hosts are 
communicating without any infrastructure (Soldiers, tanks, 
vehicles, satellites).   
The biggest problem facing the ad-hoc networks is that it 
consists of wireless hosts, which have the ability to move in 
an unpredictable fashion. The movement of these nodes 
creates many complex issues resulting in changes in routes 
and addresses, which requires some new mechanisms for 
planning suitable routing protocols and other configurations.  
So far, network simulations, using simulation software, 
have been done on both the DSR and DSDV protocols and the 
results have been taken. Results have shown that the on-
demand routing protocols are more efficient in solving the 
routing problem in a mobile environment than the table-driven 
protocols. Therefore, the comparison between the ad-hoc 
protocols is a continuous concern, due to the importance of 
these protocols in a wireless world.  
The objective of this work is to undertake the most 
important issues regarding ad-hoc networks, evaluate their 
performance based on their properties and their ability to 
provide QoS and follow with an overview comparison 
between some selected protocols. Simulation environments 
are used to compare the performance of DSR and DSDV to 
examine the impact of the mobility of nodes on the behavior 
of these protocols regarding packet delivery, delay and routing 
load. The simulation results show that DSR outperforms 
DSDV in select scenarios. 
 
 
Figure 1. A simplified overview of MANET 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
addresses some related study. Section III describes the 
MANET routing protocols in general, and then specifically 
describes the two main protocols under comparison; DSR and 
DSDV. Section IV introduces the simulation environment. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

Section V discusses the simulation results. Section VI outlines 
the conclusion of this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Due to the importance of ad-hoc wireless networks, many 
routing protocols have been proposed and developed. Each 
one of these protocols has been designed for special 
applications. Therefore, differences between them are a point 
of contention. 
Continued 
work 
on 
performance 
evaluation 
and 
comparisons between ad-hoc routing protocols has been 
conducted by different researchers, using different methods of 
evaluation, such as simulations, algorithms, and mathematical 
analyses. In one study, a comparison between different types 
of protocols in term of control traffic overhead and loop-free 
properties based on theoretical analysis and discussion is 
made [1]. Other comparisons between the main categories of 
ad-hoc protocols have taken place based on Quality of Service 
[2]. Another study used simulations to compare three ad-hoc 
protocols [3]. Multiple studies comparing the performance 
between three ad-hoc protocols have also been done, with the 
performance comparison as their main issue [4], [5].  
III. 
MANET ROUTING PROTOCOLS 
Routing is a process of forwarding packets from source to 
destination; the path from source to destination should meet 
the QoS requirements such as: packet delay, delay jitter, 
bandwidth and packet loss [6]. The dynamic nature of the 
nodes in an ad-hoc network makes it difficult to sustain the 
precise link information that meets the QoS routing. Some of 
the MANET protocols properties, such as dynamic topology, 
multiple wireless links, physical security, power constrained, 
and limited resources heighten the pressure on routing 
protocols that can adapt with these characteristics, which are 
not met by traditional routing protocols [7],[8]. Therefore, the 
need for special routing protocols with certain properties is 
highly essential to meet the ad-hoc nature. Some desired 
characteristics of these protocols are: distributed, on demand 
operations, secure, loop free, bi-directional/uni-directional, 
QoS, 
energy 
and 
bandwidth 
reservation, 
and 
entering/departing nodes [9]. To meet the desirable properties 
above, many protocols have been proposed by the IETF 
MANET group [10] for the ad-hoc networks. These protocols 
can be classified into the following categories: table-driven, 
on-demands and hybrid protocols [11]. Table 1 shows general 
differences between on-demand and table-driven based 
routing protocols as stated in [12]. 
Table-driven, also called proactive, protocols are based on 
updating the information in the routing table periodically. This 
will enable the ad-hoc node to operate in steady fashion and 
up-to-date routing table. These protocols identify the network 
topology before any forward packet happens. Examples of 
these protocols are Destination-Sequenced Distance Vector 
(DSDV), Wireless Routing Protocol (WRP) and Source Tree 
Adaptive Routing (STAR) [13].  
On-demand, also called reactive, protocols, a complete 
routing table is not required; Instead, hosts establish routes 
when they need that. Examples of these protocols are: AODV 
(Ad-hoc On-Demand Distance Vector protocol), DSR 
(Dynamic Source Routing Protocol), TORA (Temporally 
Order Routing Algorithm) and ABR (Associated Based 
Routing). For this study, the DSR and DSDV from each type 
were selected for further discussion, analysis and performance 
evaluation. These protocols have been used for different 
applications ranging from small networks with low mobility, 
to large networks with high mobility. None of these protocols 
is suitable for the whole ad-hoc application; each one has its 
own characteristics to suit a specific application.  
TABLE 1. GENERAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ON-DEMAND AND 
TABLE-DRIVEN   
Parameters 
On-demand 
Table-driven 
Availability of 
Routing Information 
Available when 
needed 
Always available 
regardless of need 
Routing Philosophy 
Flat 
Mostly flat 
Periodic Rout update 
Not required 
Required 
Coping with mobility 
Using localized route 
discovery 
Inform other nodes to 
achieve consistent 
routing table 
Signalling traffic 
generated 
Grown with increasing 
mobility of active 
routes as in ABR 
Greater than that of 
on-demand routing 
Quality of Service 
Some can support QoS 
Mainly Shortest Path 
as QoS metric 
A. DSR 
DSR [14] is an on-demand routing protocol. It uses the 
source routing mechanism to discover routes. The sender 
knows the complete route (hop-by-hop) to the destination. 
These routes are stored in a route cache and the data packet 
carry the source route are in the packet header.  
As seen in Fig. 2, Node A is discovering a route to node 
D. Each node forwards the ROUTE REQUEST from A, 
adding its own address to the list in the packet; the 
combination of the initiator address (A), the target address 
(D), and the request identifier (2) assigned by node A uniquely 
identifies this Route Discovery [15]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Route Discovery in DSR 
B. DSDV 
DSDV [16] is a table-driven routing protocol that has been 
designed to ad-hoc networks as a modification to Bellman-
Ford algorithm [17]. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

It is a hop-by-hop distance vector routing that requires every 
node to continually broadcast routing updates. Each node 
maintains a routing table. This routing table contains the next 
hop to be accessed from this node, and the distance to that hop. 
Each route in the routing table is marked with a sequence 
number that reflects the freshness of the route [16]. This 
sequence number is originated at the destination node. 
Whenever an update is required, each node broadcasts an 
increasing sequence number for itself to all of its neighbors. 
When a node adjusts a route, it broadcasts an update with a 
sequence number greater than its sequence number for that 
route [16]. When a node receives a limitlessness metric with a 
later sequence number, it will prompt a route update broadcast 
to disseminate the news. The DSDV then, updates routes 
when faces a route failure as shown in Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 3. DSDV updates routes when faces a route failure 
The above two protocols’ performance are then assessed 
using the Network Simulator tool with predefined 
performance metrics as explained below. 
IV. 
SIMULATION ENVIRONEMNT  
In this study, the Network Simulator (ns-2) from Berkley 
was used [18]. Fig. 4 shows a simplified user’s view of NS. 
This figure shows that for C++ objects that have an OTcl 
linkage forming a hierarchy, there is a matching OTcl object 
hierarchy very similar to that of C++ [18]. This simulation is 
used to study a performance comparison between the two ad-
hoc protocols (DSDV and DSR). The simulation models all 
the control message exchanges at the MAC layer and network 
layer.  
 
 
Figure 4. Simplified overview of NS 
C. Simulation Setup and Parameters 
The IEEE 802.11 at 2 Mbps was used in this simulation as 
physical, data link, and MAC layer protocols. The random 
way-point was used as the mobility model. The area used is 
600m X 600m with fixed 50 nodes. The maximum speed for 
the mobile node is 20 m/s (0-20m/s). 20 sources are used, 
each source sends four 512-byte data packets per networks. 
Complete setup is explained in the simulation parameters in 
in Table 2 below. These parameters are used for both 
protocols (DSR and DSDV). 
TABLE 2. SIMULATION PARAMETERS   
Total Number of Nodes 
50 
Size of simulation area 
600m X 600m 
Movement model used 
Random way-point 
Pause time used 
0, 10, 20, 40, 100, 200 seconds 
Total simulation time 
200 sec 
Traffic type 
CBR (Constant (Continuous) bit 
rate 
Packet size 
512 bytes 
Data rate 
4 packets/second 
Interface queue size 
50 packets 
Nodes movement 
speed 
0-20m\s 
Ratio model used 
Lucent’s wave LAN 
MAC protocol 
IEEE 802.11 distribute 
coordination function (DCF) 
Send buffer 
64 packets 
Type of link 
Bi-directional 
 
As shown in above table, the parameters used in this 
simulation are: 
 
Total number of nodes. 50 nodes. 
 
Size of simulation. 600m X 600m. 
 
Movement Model used. The mobility model used for 
the nodes is the “random way-point” model [19]. In 
this model, the movements of mobile nodes are 
broken into repeating pause and motion period. A 
mobile node first stays at a location for a certain time 
then it moves to a new random-chosen destination a 
speed uniformly distributed between [0, max speed]. 
Here, each packet starts its movement from a random 
location to a random destination with a random 
chosen speed (0-20m\s). Once the destination is 
reached, another random destination is targeted after 
a pause. 
 
Pause time: the time a node stays at a position before 
moving to the next random position. Different pause 
times were used in this simulation 0,10,20,40,100, and 
200 seconds. A 0-second pause time indicates that 
nodes are continuously moving while a 200-second 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

pause time means that nodes are at rest for the entire 
simulation. 
 
Total simulation time. In this simulation a 200 
seconds total simulation time is used. 
 
Traffic type. Constant (Continuous) bit rate (CBR) 
traffic sources are used in this simulation with packet 
size 512 bytes and packet sending rate in each pair is 
set to 4 packets / second. The CBR is used as traffic 
here and not the TCP because the main object is to 
evaluate the performance of the two protocols to see 
how they behave toward the selected metrics.  
 
Interface queue size. The interface queue has a 
maximum size of 50 packets. It is a drop-tail priority 
queue with two priorities each served in FIFO. 
 
Nodes movement speed. Nodes move at speeds 
between 0 and 20m\sec. 
 
Radio 
model 
used. The 
ratio 
model 
uses 
characteristics similar to the radio interface, Lucent’s 
WaveLAN card. WaveLAN is modelled as a shared-
media with nominal bit rate of 2Mb\s and a nominal 
ratio range of 250m. 
 
MAC protocol. The distribution coordination 
function (DCF) of IEEE 802.11 for WLAN is used 
as the MAC layer protocol; with unslotted carrier 
senses multiple access techniques with collision 
avoidance (CSMA\CA). 
 
Send buffer. The protocols maintain a send buffer of 
64 packets. That means network layer a 64 packets 
send buffer is used for storing packets waiting for 
routing, such as packets for which route discovery 
has started, but no reply has arrived yet. 
 
 Bi-Directional link. Each node sends data to other 
nodes and visa versa. 
D. Performance Metrics 
There are several metrics that can be used to assess the 
routing protocols. In this simulation the following metrics are 
used to assess the performance of the two routing protocols 
[15]. 
 
Packet Delivery Fraction (PDF). The fraction of 
originated data packets that are successfully 
delivered to their planned destination nodes. This 
metric is most important for best-efforts traffic. This 
can be calculated from the following formula: 
        PDF = (received packets \ sent packets) *100           (1)                 
 
Average end –to–end delay. This includes all possible 
delays caused by buffering during route discovery 
latency, 
queuing 
at 
the 
interface 
queue, 
retransmission delays at MAC, and propagation, and 
transfer times. It can be derived from the formula: 
Average End-to-end delay=(time pkts received 
destination)- (time the pkts generated)               (2)    
                                   
 
Normalized routing load (NRL). The number of 
routing packets transmitted per data packets 
delivered at the destination. Each hop-wise 
transmission of routing packet is counted as one 
transmission. It is the total number of overhead 
packets used by the routing protocol (DSDV / DSR). 
The formula used to evaluate this metric is: 
NRL = routing packet sent/ received                 (3)             
E. Methodology 
Fig. 5 is an overview of the implementation and simulation 
design used starting from writing the script, generating the 
required scenarios and then getting the simulation output. This 
figure shows that, main OTcl application script is used to 
connect all components together to complete the simulation.  
 
Figure 5. Simulation design overview  
The OTcl script is used to setup the network 
configuration and components, the nodes links, send data 
between the nodes, etc.  Fig. 6 shows the script used to define 
the network model components. This part o fthe script defines 
how the mobile nodes are configured. Communication 
between mobile nodes generates a necessity for a random 
traffic connection. Either TCP or CBR can be setup between 
mobile nodes using a traffic-scenario generator script. This 
script is used to generate CBR and TCP traffics connections 
between mobile nodes. So, we define the type of traffic (CBR 
or TCP), the number of nodes, the maximum number of 
connections to be setup between them, a random seed and in 
case of CBR connections, a rate whose inverse value is used 
to compute the interval time between the CBR packets. CBR 
connection file is created between 50 nodes having maximum 
connection of 20 connections, with a seed value 1.0 and a rate 
4.0. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

 
set val(prop) 
Propagation/TwoRayGround            ;# channel type                                         
set val(netif) 
Phy/WirelesTPhy            ;# radio propagation model 
set val(mac) 
Mac/802_11                                           ;# mac type 
set val(ifq) Queue/DropTail/PriQueue              ;#Interface queue type 
set val(ll)  
LL                                                ;#Link layer type 
set val(ant)        Antenna/OmniAntenna                      ;#Antenna type 
set val(x)  
600                           ;# X dimension of the topography 
set val(y)  
600                           ;# Y dimension of the topography 
 
set val(ifqlen)                 50 
                      ;# max packet in ifq 
set val(seed) 
               0.0 
 
 
           ;# the seed value 
set val(tr)  
 tracefile.tr                                   ;# trace fil  
 
set val(nm)                      tracenam.nam        ;# the nam for visualization 
 
set val(adhocRouting)         DSDV|DSR    ;#the ad-hoc protocol used 
set val(nn)                          50                                ;# simulated nodes 
set val(cp)  
"../scenarios/cbr-50-5-4"             ;# the traffic 
connection file generated 
 
set val(sc)  
"../scenarios/scen-50-20-0”        ; # the scenario file 
generated 
 
set val(stop) 
 
200.0 
 
                ;# simulation time 
Figure 6. Mobile Node Configuration in Otcl 
The Otcl script is also used to create Traffic connection 
either TCP or CBR and node movement. – Not shown here 
due to space limitations.  
F. Analyizng the simulation output 
The simulation results can be analyzed using the two 
methods, the NAM file, and the trace file. The NAM file is 
used to visualize the simulation output as shown in Fig. 7. 
The trace file needs to be parsed in order to extract the 
required information.  
 
 
Figure 7. The NAM window 
G. Packet Delivary Fracton Ratio 
Fig. 8 shows the PDF for the two protocols after plotting 
the data from the trace files generated. From this figure, it is 
clear that DSR performed better than DSDV. In DSR most of 
the originated data was delivered successfully even when the 
mobility is high, more than 95% of data was delivered 
effectively.  
Fig 8 shows that, DSDV has shown to lack productivity; 
almost 77% of packets were delivered, that means it has 
dropped around 23% of data generated. So, when mobility is 
high (pause time is 0 seconds), DSR outperformed DSDV 
with number of data delivered from the total that originated.  
 
Figure 8. Packet Delivery Ratio 
When the pause time is 200 second (the nodes are not 
moving), both protocols performed well almost all of the 
generated data has been delivered successfully for DSR and 
DSDV. 
 
H. Normalized Routing Load 
As shown in Fig. 9, there was a significant low routing 
load for the DSR regardless of mobility. It is fluctuating 
between 0.01 and 0.07; the highest routing load for DSR was 
when pause time is 20 seconds (medium mobility), and the 
lowest when pause time is 200 seconds (no mobility). 
Overall, DSR has a low routing load in all cases. 
DSDV recorded higher routing load routing from 0.93 to 
1.26. The highest routing load achieved when pause time is 
40 seconds (moderate mobility), and the lowest when 
mobility is high (pause time is 0). 
 
 
Figure 9. Normalized Routing Load 
Overall, DSR outperforms the DSDV, since it has lower 
routing load. The reasons for these readings will be discussed 
in the next section. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

 
I. End –to-End Delay 
The average end-to-end delay is higher in case of DSDV. 
The DSR protocol outperform the DSDV in all mobility cases 
as shown in Fig. 10, it however is not a big difference, when 
the mobility is the highest (0second pause time), the delay on 
DSR is, almost, 0.03 seconds, and for DSDV 0.05 seconds.  
 
  
Figure 10. End-to-End Delay 
This delay increases with decreasing the mobility to reach 
the highest for both protocols when the pause time 20 
seconds. Still, at this stage DSR performs better. This 
increasing of average delay goes down again with decreasing 
mobility when pause time equals 40 sec. Until the end of 
pause time 100, and 200 seconds, both protocols, almost 
behave the same. The minimum delay was recorded when the 
mobility reached the lowest level (pause time is 200 seconds). 
In this case, both protocols performed well.  
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSION 
The same simulation model was used for both protocols, 
in order to compare the two protocols under the same 
circumstances to evaluate their behavior. The main objective 
is to evaluate the performance of those two protocols when 
changing mobility. Therefore, the same movement model 
was used. The number of nodes is set to 50, the maximum 
speed was set to 20m/s, and the pause time was varied 
between 0, 10,20,40,100, and 200 seconds. Varying the pause 
time will put the two protocols in different mobility 
conditions. The 0 seconds pause time means the highest 
mobility, while the 200 seconds pause time is the lowest (no 
motion). 
After recording the results from the simulation, many 
observations may be identified.  
The different mechanisms that the two routing protocols 
use to discover the route, affect their performance. The higher 
the mobility the more link failure occurs within the network. 
Therefore, a different reaction from both protocols will be 
used to deal with this failure. When no mobility (pause time 
is 200 seconds), both protocols performed well regarding the 
successful data delivered from the original. Whereas, when 
mobility is high (pause time is 0), DSDV performed poorly, 
and almost a quarter of the generated packets were dropped. 
The reason for the high number of dropped packets in DSDV 
is due to the mechanism that DSDV uses to build the routes. 
As explained above, each node maintains a routing table 
for the whole network. Therefore, the dropped packets result 
from stalling the routing table’s entry that directed and 
forwarded them over a broken link. In addition, the idea of 
DSDV having only one route for a specific destination with 
no alternative caused the MAC layer to drop the packets that 
were not delivered. This is because the route is broken, and 
no alternative is available.  
The DSR performed well in all cases. Even with high 
mobility (pause time is 0), more than 95% of originated 
packets were delivered. In all mobility cases, between 96% 
and 100% of packets were delivered.  
There is a notable difference between the two routing 
protocols regarding the average end-to-end delay time. In all 
cases, DSR performed better than DSDV. As mentioned 
before, the DSDV uses the table-driven approach to maintain 
the routing information. Therefore, to be able to adapt with 
updating these routing tables after any route changes, extra 
time is needed, causing a time delay. In contrast, DSR uses 
an on-demand approach that builds the route whenever 
needed. This makes it more adaptive to any routing changes, 
causing less time delay. 
In case of normalized routing load, DSR performed very 
well and had lower routing load in all cases than DSDV. The 
reason is that DSR uses the cache routing strategy which 
means the route can be found in the route cache without the 
need for route discovery, so it is more likely to find the route 
within the cache than the routing table. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
  
A comparison has been made between two mobile ad-
hoc routing protocols, DSDV (table-driven), and DSR (on-
demand). The Network Simulator (ns2) was used in these 
simulations to evaluate the performance of these two 
protocols. Similar parameters were set for both protocols to 
evaluate their behaviors under the same conditions toward 
mobility. 
The on-demand routing protocol, DSR, outperformed 
the table-driven protocol, DSDV, in all chosen metrics. In 
addition, DSR protocol uses the route cache mechanism to 
discover routes and doesn’t depend on any timer-based 
activity. In addition, DSR uses two routes per destination. If 
the protocol faces any broken links in one of the routes, an 
alternative path for the route is already available. The only 
limitations that DSR has is that it employs an aggressive use 
of caching, and a lack of any mechanism to expire state routes 
or determine the freshness of routes when multiple choices 
are available. DSDV is a suitable protocol in cases of low 
mobility and no continuous changing of topology. In 
addition, it is the right solution when the network is small. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

The main conclusion that can be drawn from this 
evaluation is that on-demand routing protocols perform better 
than the table-driven protocols for the mobile ad-hoc 
networks. However, the main challenge in the ad-hoc 
network environment is designing a special mobile ad-hoc 
routing protocol that can deal with the heterogeneity of 
network resources, and be able to select routes based on the 
requirements of each node, to achieve a high scalability 
within the ad-hoc world. Therefore, comparison between 
these protocols is still a principal issue of researches. 
However, there are other research issues related to MANET   
still undergoing such as security, address auto-configuration 
and scalability that can be proposed as future work for this 
study.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Wahi and S. Sonbhadra, “ Mobile Ad-hoc Network Routing 
Protocols: A Comparative Study,” International Journal of Ad-
hoc, Sensor & Ubiquities Computing, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 21-32, 
April 2012. 
[2] X. Hong, K. Xu, and M. Gerla, "Scalable routing protocols for 
mobile ad-hoc networks," in IEEE Network, vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 
11-21, August. 2002 
[3] A. K. S. Ali and U. V. Kulkarni, "Comparing and Analyzing 
Reactive Routing Protocols (AODV, DSR and TORA) in QoS 
of MANET," IEEE 7th International Advance Computing 
Conference (IACC), pp. 345-34, January 2017. 
[4] S. -. Lee and M. Gerla, "Dynamic load-aware routing in ad hoc 
networks," ICC 2001. IEEE International Conference on 
Communications. Conference Record (Cat. No.01CH37240), 
Helsinki, Finland, 2001, pp. 3206-3210 vol.10, doi: 
10.1109/ICC.2001.937263.  
[5] H. 
Jiang 
and 
J. 
Garcia-Luna-Aceves, 
"Performance 
comparison of three routing protocols for ad-hoc networks," 
Proceedings Tenth International Conference on Computer 
Communications and Networks ,  pp. 547-554, 2001. 
[6] M. T. Sultan and S. M. Malik,” Evaluation of Energy 
Consumption of Reactive and Proactive Routing Protocols in 
MANET”,  International Journal of Computer Networks & 
Communications, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 29-38, March 2017. 
[7]  L. E. Miller and X. Pallot, “Implementing message priority 
policies overan 802.11 based mobile ad-hoc network,” IEEE 
MILCOM 2001, pp. 861–865, October 2001. 
[8] S. Corson and J. Macker, “Mobile Ad-hoc networking 
(MANET) 
Routing 
Protocol 
Issues 
and 
Evaluation 
Considerations,”  Internet draft RFC 2501, 1999. 
[9] A. Burjari, C. Calafate, J. Cano, P. Manzoni, C. Palazzi , and 
D. Ronazani, “Flaying ad-hoc network application scenarios 
and mobility models,” International of Distiributed Sensor 
Networks, Vol 13, No. 10, pp. 1- 17, Sepetember 2017. 
[10] The 
IETF 
manet 
Group. 
http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/manet-charter.html, 
retreived March, 2021. 
[11] J. Song and L. E. Miller, “ Empirical Analysis of the Mobility 
Factor for the Random Waypoint Model”, Wireless 
Communications technologies Groups, 2002. 
[12] E. M. Royer and CK Toh,” A Review of current Routing 
Protocol for Ad-hoc mobile wireless Networks, ” IEEE 
Personal Communicatioons, April 1999. 
[13] J. L. Sobrinho and A. S. Krishnakumar, “Quality-of-Service in 
Ad-hoc Carrier Sense Multiple Access Wireless Networks, “ 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 17, 
No. 8, pp. 1353-1368, August 1999. 
[14] T-W. Chen, J. T Sai, and M. Gerla, “QoS Routing Performance 
in Multihop, Multimedia, Wireless networks, “ Proceeeding of 
the I6th IEEE International Conference on Univerals Personal 
Communications, October 1997. 
[15] Y-C. HU and D. B. Johnson, “Ensuring cache freshness in on-
Demand Ad-hoc network routing protocols,” POMC '02: 
Proceedings of the second ACM international workshop on 
Principles of mobile computing, Oct. 2002, pp. 25-30. 
[16] J. Jacob and V. Seethalakshmi, "Performance Evaluation of 
Various Routing Protocols in MANET, " International Journal 
Of Engineering Science, vol. 5, pp. 208-220, 2011. 
[17] A. S. Tanenbaum, “ Computer Networks”, third edition, 
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996. 
[18] The Network Simulator- ns2, http://www.isi.edo/nsnam/ns/ , 
retrieved March, 2021. 
[19] A .P. Singh, A. K. Shukla and A. Mishar,” Movement 
Evaluation of Mobilty Models in Ad-hoc Networks,” 
International Journal of Engineering Trends and Techniology, 
Vol.11, No. 9, pp. 417-421, May 2014. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

