A Spectrum Sharing Method Considering Users’ Behavior for Uncooperative
WiFi/WiMAX Providers
Hiroaki Takemoto∗, Keita Kawano†, Kazuhiko Kinoshita‡, Koso Murakami‡
∗Graduate School of Information Science, Nara Institute of Science and Technology
8916–5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630–0192, Japan
†Center for Information Technology and Management, Okayama University
3–1–1 Tsushimanaka, Okayama, Okayama 700–8530, Japan
‡Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
1–5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565–0871, Japan
E-mail: ∗hiroaki-ta@is.naist.jp,† keita@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp, ‡{kazuhiko,murakami}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The number of wireless network users has re-
markably grown by recent advances in wireless communication
technologies such as WiFi and WiMAX. This has led to a lack of
spectrum resources, which has therefore become an important
issue. To overcome this problem, spectrum sharing technology,
whereby a WiFi system temporarily uses a spectrum band
of a WiMAX system, is receiving much attention. Although
existing work assumes that the WiMAX and WiFi providers
are cooperative, it may not be realistic. In addition, user
behavior model is too simple. In this paper, we propose a
spectrum sharing method that behaves properly even if the
WiMAX provider, WiFi providers, and users are mutually
uncooperative. Finally, we conﬁrm the effectiveness of the
proposed method by simulation experiments.
Keywords-spectrum sharing; uncooperative providers; satis-
faction; WiFi; WiMAX; user model
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, users have had access to various wireless
systems such as cellular, WiFi, and WiMAX. With in-
creased bandwidth becoming available, multimedia services
via wireless networks are now widely used and the trafﬁc
demand is increasing.
However, with available spectrum resources being ﬁnite,
techniques that use wireless resources more effectively
should be considered. As one approach to this problem,
cognitive radio [1], [2] is receiving attention. Cognitive radio
is a technology whereby wireless devices can select between
a number of independent wireless systems according to
the condition of each system. The frequency spectrum can
then be used more efﬁciently than by using these systems
independently.
For cognitive radio, a spectrum-sharing method has been
proposed [3], in which a WiFi system temporarily uses a
spectrum band of a WiMAX system. In this method, the
WiFi access points (APs) that are to use the additional
WiMAX channel are decided according to the “load”, where
the “load” is deﬁned as the total number of users connecting
to the WiFi AP. It was conﬁrmed that this method could
improve the overall average throughput for the network
compared to a method without spectrum sharing.
However, the proposed method assumed that the WiMAX
and WiFi providers cooperated to improve the overall av-
erage throughput. Therefore, if the WiMAX provider and
WiFi providers do not cooperate and pursue only their own
interests, this method might not work.
An alternative auction-based method has been proposed
[4], which adopts a pricing model for lending channels.
This method can behave appropriately even if the WiMAX
provider and WiFi providers do not cooperate. However,
because this method focuses on the WiMAX provider’s
proﬁt, the improvement in the average throughput may not
be optimal.
To address these problems, we propose a spectrum-sharing
method that behaves properly even if the WiMAX provider,
WiFi providers, and users are mutually uncooperative. This
is an extended version of[5].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we introduce some existing methods and point out their
problems. In Section III, we elaborate our proposed method.
Section IV shows the excellent performance of the proposed
method by simulation experiments. Finally, Section V makes
some conclusions and indicates future work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Integrated Wireless Networks
Although several wireless systems such as cellular, WiFi,
and WiMAX have been developed, each system is used
independently. However, if these were to be integrated, users
could access services seamlessly. Therefore, WiFi/WiMAX
integrated networks [6], [7] have been investigated recently,
aiming to improve quality of service (QoS) and load balanc-
ing between the WiFi and WiMAX systems by using each
system selectively according to the condition of the systems
and the demands of user applications. The coverage area for
a WiFi AP is about 100 meters, whereas that for a WiMAX
base station (BS) is a few kilometers. As shown in Fig. 1,
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1.
Network Model
this means that two or more WiFi APs may exist inside a
WiMAX service area.
As an alternative, a spectrum-sharing method that tem-
porarily assigns a spectrum band of a WiMAX system to
WiFi system APs has been proposed. Here, the same spec-
trum can be used repeatedly without causing interference
between adjacent WiFi APs. This enables more efﬁcient
utilization of the spectrum, thereby providing users with
higher-throughput services.
B. Spectrum-sharing Method to Improve Overall Through-
put
In [3], a spectrum-assignment method for improving the
overall average throughput in the network was proposed. In
this method, the assignment of a WiFi AP to an additional
channel in the WiMAX system is decided by using a genetic
algorithm (GA). The number of users who connect to the
assigned target WiFi AP is used as the evaluation value and
the channel assignment is carried out under the constraint
that adjacent WiFi APs cannot be assigned the same channel
simultaneously. It was conﬁrmed that this method improved
the overall average throughput for the network. Moreover, in
[8], a spectrum-assignment method that also minimized the
difference in throughput between WiFi and WiMAX users
was able to provide higher throughput. This method not only
improved the overall average throughput but also reduced the
coefﬁcient variance.
However, for these methods, the WiMAX system has to
lend channels to WiFi APs without itself receiving any direct
reward. This implies that either there is one provider of the
WiMAX and WiFi services or that the separate providers
are prepared to cooperate. In reality, providers do not always
cooperate, preferring to pursue their own proﬁt. Therefore,
an effective spectrum-sharing method that behaves properly
even if the WiFi and WiMAX providers do not cooperate is
needed.
Figure 2.
Auction Method
C. Spectrum-sharing Method Based on an Auction
There is a spectrum-sharing method that uses the model of
an auction [4]. In this method, if WiFi providers receive an
additional channel from the WiMAX provider, they pay for
that channel. As shown in Fig. 2, each WiFi provider can
make an offer for a channel. By considering these offers,
the WiMAX provider selects an assignment pattern that
maximizes the WiMAX provider’s revenue.
This enables the WiMAX provider to obtain additional
proﬁt by lending channels and the WiFi providers to increase
their effective bandwidth and user throughput. Furthermore,
this method can behave appropriately even if the WiMAX
provider and WiFi providers are uncooperative.
However, because this method focuses only on increasing
the WiMAX provider’s proﬁt, more effective assignment
patterns may be overlooked, which implies that the im-
provement in average throughput is not optimal. Moreover,
for some of these proposed methods, the offered prices
for an additional channel are decided randomly, which is
unrealistic.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Summary of the Proposed Method
To overcome the problems described above, we propose a
spectrum-sharing method that behaves properly even if the
WiMAX provider, WiFi providers, and users are mutually
uncooperative. To achieve this, we introduce satisfaction as
an indicator of users’ behavior. In this method, we assume
that the user arrival rate at WiFi APs and the WiMAX system
varies according to the user satisfaction. Furthermore, given
that the WiMAX provider and WiFi providers are not
expected to cooperate, the WiFi providers must pay for
receiving an additional channel from the WiMAX provider,
and must decide for themselves how much they are prepared
to pay. The WiMAX provider will select the assignment
pattern that maximizes its own proﬁt via a GA method,
using the WiFi APs’ offered prices and the constraint that
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
W
Satisfaction
WiMAX
WiFi
Figure 3.
Relation between Satisfaction and Magniﬁcation W
adjacent WiFi APs cannot be assigned the same channel
simultaneously.
In the following subsections, we ﬁrst introduce the con-
cept of satisfaction. We then describe how the WiFi APs
decide about payments and the algorithm for spectrum
assignment.
B. Satisfaction
Satisfaction is associated with each WiMAX and WiFi
AP according to the throughput, and may vary from 0 to
100. APs have increased satisfaction as the user throughput
increases.
In general, users hope to connect to an AP with as high
a throughput as possible. On the other hand, WiMAX and
WiFi providers hope to increase the number of connecting
users, which increases their proﬁt. Therefore, WiMAX and
WiFi providers aiming to increase their proﬁt will improve
satisfaction.
The details are as follows. We assume that the user-
arrival rate changes as a function of the satisfaction at
each AP. Fig. 3 shows the magniﬁcation W of the arrival
rate as a function of the satisfaction. The arrival rate of
APs increases according to the magniﬁcation W as the
satisfaction increases.
C. Calculation of the WiFi Providers’ Offer Price
This subsection explains how WiFi providers calculate the
payment for being assigned a channel from the WiMAX
provider. As explained in Section III-A, the WiFi providers
decide for themselves how much they are prepared to pay.
For the WiFi providers, increasing the number of connected
users leads to increased proﬁt. Therefore, WiFi providers
need to raise their user satisfaction. If WiFi providers
receive an additional channel from the WiMAX system, the
throughput and the satisfaction will both increase, and an
increase in revenue would therefore be expected.
However, WiFi providers must pay the WiMAX provider
for the assigned channels. Therefore, WiFi providers must
consider both revenue and payment in deciding whether to
borrow a channel. If a WiFi provider wants to borrow a
single channel, they can calculate the appropriate payment
using Eq. (1). For multiple channels, the same calculation
will be repeated.
PF ∗ Ei ∗ α,
(1)
where PF , Ei and α refer to the price that WiFi providers
impose on users, the estimated number of increased users,
and the expected proﬁt to the WiFi provider, respectively.
Ei is calculated by Eq. (2), assuming that the satisfaction
changes from s to s′.
Ei = λF ∗ T ∗ (WF (s′) − WF (s)),
(2)
where λF and T are the arrival rate at the WiFi AP,
and the interval times for spectrum assignment, respectively.
WF (s) is the magniﬁcation of the arrival rate, as shown
in Fig. 3. Therefore, WF (s′) − WF (s) indicates by how
much the number of users connecting to the WiFi AP will
increase by borrowing additional channels. Whenever a WiFi
provider judges, using this equation, that it can increase
its revenue, it offers the calculated payment for borrowing
additional channels. Otherwise, it does not seek to borrow
any additional channels.
D. Procedure for Channel Assignment
We now explain the procedure for channel assignment.
The WiMAX provider decides on the number of assignment
channels and the APs of the assignment targets according
to the WiFi APs’ offer prices described in Section III-C.
However, the assignment of channels to WiFi providers will
cause the throughput of the WiMAX provider to decrease.
Therefore, the WiMAX provider’s satisfaction will change
from s to s′, which causes a decrease in both arrival rate
and revenue. Because of this, the WiMAX provider should
perform channel assignment by considering the difference
between the revenue decline and the payment from the WiFi
APs in terms of Eq. (3).
Estimated Decreased Revenue = PM ∗ Ed,
(3)
where Ed and PM refer to the estimated number of
decreased users and the price that the WiMAX provider
imposes on users, respectively. Ed is calculated by Eq. (4).
Ed = λM ∗ T ∗ (WM(s) − WM(s′)),
(4)
where λM is the arrival rate for the WiMAX system.
WM(s) − WM(s′) indicates the decrease in the number
of users connecting to the WiMAX system because of the
decrease in available channels.
The APs of the assignment targets and the number of
assignment channels are decided according to the following
steps.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

1) WiFi APs calculate the payment required to borrow
channels.
2) WiMAX provider selects the assignment pattern that
maximizes the sum of payments offered by WiFi APs.
3) WiMAX provider calculates the estimated revenue
decrease from lending channels.
4) If the revenue from lending channels exceeds the
estimated revenue decrease, then perform the channel
assignment.
5) Repeat Steps 1 to 4 until all channels are lent or the
estimated revenue decrease exceeds the revenue from
the target WiFi APs.
Note that, in Step 2, we use the algorithm proposed in [8].
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Simulation Model
In this subsection, we evaluate the performance of the
proposed method by simulation experiments. The network
model assumed that WiFi and WiMAX were able to carry
out spectrum sharing. There was one WiMAX BS, whose
area was divided into 10 × 10 = 100 small areas. 50 small
areas were selected at random, each having a WiFi AP.
The spectrum bandwidth for the WiMAX system was set to
100[MHz] and divided into channels of 20[MHz] each. Each
WiFi AP can use one or more additional channels assigned
from the WiMAX system. The WiMAX system was assumed
to provide 40[Mbps] per channel in accordance with the
WiMAX Forum [9]. The WiFi systems were assumed to
provide 17.5[Mbps] per channel according to preliminary
experiments that used the ns2 discrete-event simulator [10].
In addition, the interval time T for spectrum assignment
was set to 300[sec]. The price that the WiMAX provider
imposes on its users was 100, and the price that WiFi
providers impose on their users was set to 80. The WiFi APs’
price was lower because the coverage for WiFi is narrower
than that for WiMAX. We considered the example of a user
downloading a 10 MByte ﬁle.
In this simulation, calls occured according to a Poisson
arrival process, with each area having its own arrival rate.
Because WiFi APs tend to be set up in places where people
gather, such as ofﬁces, rail stations, and cafes, the call arrival
rate for a WiFi AP was assumed to be x times that for
WiMAX. We deﬁned the arrival rate for the whole network
as λall. The initial arrival rate per WiFi AP area (λ′
F ) and
that for WiMAX (λ′
M) were then calculated by Eq. 5 and
Eq. 6.
λ′
F = λall ∗
x
50(x + 1)
(5)
λ′
M = λall ∗
1
100(x + 1)
(6)
In this simulation, we set x = 3.
Now, as described in Section III-B, the arrival rate would
change according to the magniﬁcation W of the initial arrival
rate. Therefore, the actual arrival rates for WiMAX (λM) and
per WiFi AP area (λF ) satisﬁed the following equations.
λM = λ′
M ∗ WM
(7)
λF = λ′
F ∗ WF
(8)
It followed that the arrival rates λ1 (without WiFi AP)
and λ2 (with WiFi AP) were calculated by the following
equations.
λ1 = λM
(9)
λ2 = λF + λM
(10)
If a new user arrived in an area with a WiFi AP, the
system with the higher throughput was used. Otherwise, the
WiMAX BS was used. In addition, users would stay in the
arrival area until the end of their download.
We chose two other methods for comparison. One method
was the spectrum-sharing method described in Section II-B,
which improved the overall average throughput. In this
paper, we call this method the “existing method”. The
other method did not share any spectrum. As performance
measures, we observed the average time to complete the
download (download time) and the revenue for the WiMAX
and WiFi providers.
Under the same conditions as described above, we ran
ﬁve simulations with various initial overall arrival rates λall.
The simulation ended after 250,000 calls were completed.
We set the parameter α to 0.1. WF (s) and WM(s) are
logarithmic functions of the satisfaction s. As explained
above, with channel assignment, the throughput changes and
the satisfaction of the WiMAX and WiFi providers changes
from s to s′, where s′ is calculated from the following
equations.
s′(WiFi) = s + 190/s
(11)
s′(WiMAX) = s − 25/s
(12)
Note that, we assume that the satisfaction s is also a
logarithmic function of throughput (Tp), as deﬁned in Eq.
13.
s = 70 ∗ log((Tp + 5)/5)
(13)
B. Simulation Results
Fig. 4 shows the average download times as a function of
the initial overall arrival rate.
This indicates that both of the existing method and the
proposed method improve the average overall throughput,
since the capacity of the system increased by assigning one
or more channels from the WiMAX BS to several WiFi APs.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

0
100
200
300
400
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
Download Time [s]
Arrival Rate [1/s]
Proposed Method
Existing Method
No Share
Figure 4.
Mean Download Time with Variable Arrival Rate
4.0x106
6.0x106
8.0x106
1.0x107
1.2x107
1.4x107
1.6x107
1.8x107
2.0x107
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
Revenue
Arrival Rate [1/s]
Proposed Method
Existing Method
No Share
Figure 5.
Overall Revenue with Variable Arrival Rate
The average throughput of the proposed method is almost
equal to that of the existing method. Therefore, this means
that our proposed method behaves properly even if the
WiMAX provider, WiFi providers and users are mutually
uncooperative.
Figs. 5-7 show the sum of the revenues of the WiMAX
provider and WiFi providers, the WiMAX provider’s rev-
enue, and the WiFi providers’ revenue as a function of
the initial overall arrival rate, respectively. There is not so
much difference between the overall revenue of the existing
method and that of the proposed method, when λall is
up to 13.75. However, the overall revenue in the proposed
method becomes much higher when λall is bigger than 15.0.
Moreover, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 indicate that the revenues of
the WiMAX provider and that of the WiFi providers are
increasing. This is because the proposed method considers
the change of the revenue adequately to assign an additional
channel assignment based on satisfaction.
However, from Fig. 6, we can see that the revenue of the
1.0x106
2.0x106
3.0x106
4.0x106
5.0x106
6.0x106
7.0x106
8.0x106
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
Revenue
Arrival Rate [1/s]
Proposed Method
Existing Method
No Share
Figure 6.
WiMAX Provider’s Revenue with Variable Arrival Rate
2.0x106
3.0x106
4.0x106
5.0x106
6.0x106
7.0x106
8.0x106
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
Revenue
Arrival Rate [1/s]
Proposed Method
Existing Method
No Share
Figure 7.
WiFi Providers’ Revenue with Variable Arrival Rate
WiMAX provider is smaller than that of the non-sharing
method when the arrival rate is small. In this simulation,
when a new user arrives at an area with WiFi AP, he/she
chooses a system with higher throughput. In the methods
with spectrum sharing, the throughput of the WiMAX users
decreases because of the decrease in its available channels.
This might cause the situation that more users connect to a
WiFi AP rather than WiMAX BS. The proposed method
avoids this situation by consideration of the satisfaction.
Consequently, when λall is large, the revenue for the
WiMAX provider in the proposed method is higher than
that in the existing method.
These results indicate that the proposed method achieves
well spectrum sharing even if the WiMAX provider, WiFi
providers, and users are mutually uncooperative.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

0
100
200
300
400
500
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2
Download Time [s]
X
Proposed Method
No Share
Figure 8.
WiMAX: Mean Download Time with Variable X (λ = 20)
0
100
200
300
400
500
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 1.2
 1.4
 1.6
 1.8
 2
Download Time [s]
Y
Proposed Method
No Share
Figure 9.
WiFi: Mean Download Time with Variable Y (λ = 20)
C. Robustness
In this simulation, we assumed that WiMAX and WiFi
providers exactly knew the relationship between satisfaction
and the arrival rate. Therefore they can expect the change
of the number of uses properly. However, this is difﬁcult in
fact.
To conﬁrm this robustness, we veriﬁed the case where
WiMAX (WiFi) provider misestimated the change of users
X (Y) times more than the actual value. In other words, if
X is 1.0, WiMAX provider can expect the change properly.
Figs. 8 and 9 show the average download times as a
function of the parameter X (or Y) compared with the no
spectrum assignment method. We set λall = 20. Fig. 8
indicates that even if WiMAX provider expects about 50%
more or less, the proposed method can improve the average
throughput. Similarly, when the differece between what WiFi
providers expect and the actual change is less than 60%, the
improvemnet of the average throughput is achieved.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we proposed a new spectrum sharing method
that works well even if WiMAX provider, WiFi providers,
and users are mutually uncooperative. It introduces the
satisfaction as an indicator of users’ behavior. Furthermore,
it was conﬁrmed that the proposed method could keep the
average throughput compared with the existing method and
improve the revenues.
In a future work, we evaluate the sensitivity of each
parameter.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 21760290.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Mitola III and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio for Flexi-
ble Mobile Multimedia Communications,” IEEE International
Workshop on Mobile Multimedia Communications, pp. 3–10,
Nov. 1999.
[2] I. Akyildiz, W. Lee, M. Vuran, and S. Mohanty “Next
generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive radio wireless
networks: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 50, pp. 2127–
2159, Sep. 2006.
[3] M. Nakagawa, K. Kawano, K. Kinoshita, and K. Murakami,
“A Spectrum Assignment Method Based on Genetic Algo-
rithm in WiFi/WiMAX Integrated Networks,” 5th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Emerging Networking EXperiments
and Technologies (CoNEXT2009), Dec. 2009.
[4] G. Losiﬁdis and L. Koutsopoulos, “Challenges in Auction
Theory Driven Spectrum Management,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, Vol. 49, No. 8, pp. 128–135, Aug. 2011.
[5] H. Takemoto, K. Kawano, K. Kinoshita, and K. Murakami,
“A Study on Spectrum Sharing between Unncoperative
WiFi/WiMAX Providers,” IEICE Tehnical Report, NS2012-
100, pp. 113–118, Oct. 2012. (in Japanese)
[6] Y. Chen, J. Hsia, and Y. Liao, “Advanced Seamless Vertical
Handoff Architecture for WiMAX and WiFi Heterogeneous
Networks with QoS Guarantees,” Computer Communications.
Vol. 32, Issue 2, pp. 281–293, Feb. 2009.
[7] L. Berlemann, C. Hoymann, G. R. Hiertz, S. Mangold,
“Coexistence and Interworking of IEEE 802.16 and IEEE
802.11(e),” Vehicular Technology Conference, vol. 1, pp. 27–
31, May. 2006.
[8] K. Kinoshita, M. Nakagawa, K. Kawano, and K. Murakami,
“A Fair and Efﬁcient Spectrum Assignment for WiFi/WIMAX
Integrated Networks,” 6th International Conference on Sys-
tems and Networks Communications (ICSNC2011), pp. 117–
121, Oct. 2011.
[9] WiMAX Forum, http://www.wimaxforum.org/. (retrieved:
Dec. 2012)
[10] ns-2, The Network Simulator, http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/.
(retrieved: Dec. 2012)
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

