Distributed Cross Layer Cooperative MAC Protocol for Multihop Wireless Networks
Shamna Hamsa Rahim, Lillykutty Jacob
National Institute of Technology
Calicut, Kozhikode - 673601
Email: shamnahr@gmail.com, lilly@nitc.ac.in
Abstract—Extending the battery lifetime of energy constrained
devices is a key issue in designing wireless adhoc networks. The
existing works focus on using cooperative communications for
improving network performance in terms of throughput, delay,
spectral efﬁciency, etc. In this paper, we propose a distributed
cross layer cooperative Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol
for a multihop network environment that can improve the
network lifetime and energy efﬁciency while not degrading the
network throughput and end to end delay. The results show
that the proposed protocol can improve the performance of the
network in terms of network lifetime, throughput, end-to-end
delay, and energy efﬁciency.
Keywords–Wireless Ad hoc Networks; Cooperative Communica-
tion; Cross Layer; Energy Efﬁciency; Network Lifetime.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless communications have developed tremendously
over the past few decades due to the large demand for mobile
and wireless access. Compared to wired communications, the
signals transmitted over the wireless channels may suffer
from severe attenuation. The overall reliability of wireless
communication can be signiﬁcantly improved by transmitting
multiple copies of the same signal over multiple independent
fading channels. Multiple-Input-Multiple-Output (MIMO) sys-
tems achieve spatial diversity by deploying multiple antennas
at the transmitter side and receiver side [1]. However, due to
size, cost, and hardware limitations, mobile devices may not
be able to support multiple antennas.
Recently, cooperative communication is widely used as
a transmission strategy for wireless networks. It is a cost
effective alternative to the MIMO systems. Here, wireless
nodes work together to form a virtual antenna array to achieve
diversity gains. It takes advantage of the broadcast nature of the
wireless channel to allow communicating nodes to help each
other [2]–[4]. Most cooperative transmission schemes involve
two phases of transmission - a coordination phase and a coop-
eration phase. In the coordination phase, the nodes exchange
their own source data and control messages with each other.
In the cooperation phase, the nodes cooperatively forward
their messages to the destination. Cooperative communication
improves the network capacity, data transfer delay and Bit
Error Rate (BER) performance, reduce battery consumption,
and extend the coverage area [5].
When cooperative communication is employed at the phys-
ical layer, the receiving node can use physical layer combining
to achieve diversity gain and this helps cooperative communi-
cation to achieve a higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) than the
traditional Single-Input-Single-Output (SISO) systems. This
SNR advantage can be used to reduce the power of transmitting
nodes, which in turn, will increase the lifetime of the network.
By using the concept of cooperative communications at the
MAC layer, the transmitter (Tx) of a communication link can
send the packet to the relay nodes instead of sending it to
the receiver (Rx) of that link. Such a communication link
is called a cooperative link. Usually, the nodes in between
the Tx and Rx are selected as relay nodes. The transmit
power or energy required to transmit a packet via cooperative
link is comparatively lower than that of transmitting it via
direct link. This will effectively improve the network lifetime.
So, cooperative MAC can improve the lifetime of energy
constrained devices and increase the network lifetime [6], [7].
A proper design of MAC protocols is necessary to exploit
the advantages of cooperative diversity in a multiple user coop-
erative network. The cooperative MAC protocols developed in
the past few years show how the MAC layer protocols can be
modiﬁed to incorporate cooperation in the physical layer and
the advantages of cooperative communication from a MAC
layer perspective [6]–[12]. Depending on the channel condi-
tion, these protocols can apply two hop data transmissions in
the MAC layer to achieve higher transmission rates. Most of
these protocols aim to improve the overall system throughput
and reduce the packet delay. Performance of the protocols in
terms of energy efﬁciency or overall lifetime of the network
are not discussed in these works.
The existing works on cooperative communications at
physical layer focus on improving spectral efﬁciency, coverage
area, BER, interference reduction, etc. The works on coopera-
tive MAC protocols developed during the past years focus on
improving network performance in terms of throughput, delay,
and packet delivery ratio. Finally, the works on cooperative
routing protocols use the relay nodes to ﬁnd the energy or
power efﬁcient route. In most of the existing cooperative MAC
protocols, the resources of the relay nodes (residual energy,
queue size, etc.) are not considered while selecting the relay.
For each destination, the best relay that can improve the
network performance is used for transmitting all the packets
generated by the source. This leads to over utilization of
resources of some speciﬁc relay nodes, while the resources of
the other relays are under utilized. In this paper, we propose
a distributed cross layer cooperative MAC protocol that can
efﬁciently utilize the resources of the nodes and improve the
energy efﬁciency and network lifetime while maintaining a
reasonable throughput and end to end delay.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief de-
scription of the related works is given in Section II. Description
about the distributed cooperative MAC is given in Section
III. A simple expression for the saturation throughput of the
proposed protocol is derived in Section IV. Simulation results
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

are discussed in Section V. Conclusion and future work are
presented in Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
In [7], the authors propose a cross layer distributed en-
ergy adaptive location based cooperative MAC protocol with
the objective to improve the network performance in terms
network lifetime and energy efﬁciency. In this protocol, the
relay selection process is distributed and the best relay is
selected based on location information and residual energy.
An optimal cross layer power allocation scheme is designed
that maintains a constant data rate to meet the desired outage
probability requirement. The multi rate capability of 802.11 is
not considered in this paper. The throughput of the proposed
protocol is even lower than that of legacy 802.11 Distibuted
Coordination Function (DCF).
In [13], the authors present a framework for extending
the lifetime of energy constrained devices by exploiting co-
operative diversity. The cooperation strategy used is based on
decode-and-forward (DF) relaying protocol. They formulate
an optimization problem with the goal of maximizing network
lifetime under a BER constraint, and the solution gives which
node to be selected as the relay and how much power to be
allocated. The impact of cooperative communications in the
higher layers of the protocol stack is not considered in this
paper.
In [14], the authors propose an energy efﬁcient cooperative
MAC protocol to reduce energy consumption and increase
network lifetime by power control. Also, they use a distributed
utility based optimal helper selection procedure based on the
residual energy and transmission power. They also propose
a space and time combination backoff scheme to adjust the
power level and contention window in the event of transmis-
sion failures. The data and control packets are transmitted
using a single data rate. Request-To-Send (RTS) and Clear-
To-Send (CTS) messages are transmitted at the highest power
level and DATA and Acknowledgement (ACK) are transmitted
at the minimum power level.
A low power receiver initiated cooperative MAC for
wireless sensor networks is proposed in [15]. The authors
compare the energy consumption between SISO, multi hop
SISO, and cooperative relay systems for ideal and real MAC
protocols to show the impact of MAC layer on the total energy
consumption. The performance of the protocol in terms of
network lifetime is not considered in this work.
Routing protocols which are based on cooperative com-
munications are known as cooperative routing protocols. In
[16], the authors propose cooperative routing protocols that can
improve the network lifetime by selecting the energy efﬁcient
route. The problem of ﬁnding the minimum energy route is
formulated as two seperate optimization problems. The ﬁrst
problem is to ﬁnd the optimal transmission of information
between two sets of nodes and the second problem is to decide
the neighboring nodes to be selected to route trafﬁc to the
destination with minimum overall energy consumption.
A route that requires the minimum transmitted power
while maintaining a certain end-to-end throughput is proposed
in [17]. The proposed routing protocol makes full use of
the cooperation communications to construct the minimum
power route. The authors derive a cooperation based link cost
TABLE I. RATE VS RANGE [for IEEE 802.11b]
Data Rate (Mbps)
11
5.5
2
1
Maximum Range (Meter)
60
120
180
250
formula, which represents the minimum transmitted power that
is required to maintain the required end-to-end throughput.
In most of the existing cooperative MAC protocols, the
resources of the relay nodes (residual energy, queue size,
etc.) are not considered while selecting the relay. For each
destination, the best relay that can improve the network per-
formance is used for transmitting all the packets generated by
the source. The protocols that take into account the resources
of the relay for the relay selection process explicitly use power
control while maintaining a constant data rate. While these
protocols improve the network lifetime, the throughput and
delay performance degrade to a large extent.
In this paper, we present the design and analysis of a
cooperative MAC protocol named DCMAC, which considers
the residual energy and the data rate (physical layer parame-
ters)and queue size (total number of packets to be transmitted),
of the nodes for the relay selection process. The results show
that the protocol improves the performance of the network in
terms of energy efﬁciency, throughput, end-to-end delay, and
network lifetime.
III.
DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE MAC (DCMAC)
PROTOCOL
A. System Model
We consider an IEEE 802.11b/g based mobile ad hoc
network where the node transcievers have multi-rate capabil-
ity. The relationship between the transmission link distance
and data rate is shown in Table I for the case of 802.11b
transcievers. Two ray ground propagation model is assumed
in getting this link length - data rate mapping. The wireless
medium is shared among multiple contending mobile nodes.
Depending on the distance between the Tx and Rx, a packet
could be transmitted at different transmission rates. We assume
no power adaptation, so each node transmits its packets using
a constant transmission power. The wireless channel between
the sender and the receiver is assumed to be almost symmetric.
By applying the concept of cooperative communication at the
MAC layer, slow one hop transmissions are replaced by fast
two hop transmissions if suitable relays are available. Here,
cooperative communication is employed only when the direct
transmission rate is less than or equal to 2 Mbps and there exist
relay nodes such that
1
CT H +
1
CHR <
1
CT R , where CT H, CHR,
and CT R denote the data rate from source to helper, helper
to destination, and source to destination, respectively. In the
case of a multi-hop network, Ad hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector (AODV) [18] is used as the routing protocol. When
a route is established, DCMAC protocol initiates cooperative
transmission in a hop-by-hop manner by selecting the relay
nodes.
B. DCMAC Protocol Description
DCMAC is based on the IEEE 802.11 DCF. We deﬁne one
more control frame named Relay Ready To Cooperate (RRTC)
to support MAC relaying in addition to the conventional
control frames RTS, CTS, and ACK. RRTC is sent by the best
relay node to indicate its willingness to act as a relay. The best
relay (helper) is the node that can support the highest data rate
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Frame
Control
Duration
Source
Address
Destination
Address
Distance
Figure 1. RTS Frame Format
between the Tx and Rx; and is one among the nodes which are
within a routing pipe around the direct link between Tx and
Rx, with residual energy above a given threshold, and with
queue size below a given threshold. All the control frames
are transmitted at the basic rate, i.e., 1 Mbps for 802.11b
network and 6 Mbps for 802.11g network. The time duration
for the transmission of RTS, RRTC, CTS, ACK, and DATA
are denoted by TRT S, TRRT C, TCT S,TACK, and TDAT A,
respectively.
1) Operations at the Sender:
a)
When a sender has a packet to transmit, it ﬁrst checks
whether a cooperative link is beneﬁcial or not. In the
case of an IEEE 802.11b network, the cooperative
link is beneﬁcial if the data rate of the direct link
is less than or equal to 2 Mbps. For an 802.11g
network, a cooperative link is employed when the
direct link data rate is less than or equal to 18 Mbps.
Distance is a new ﬁeld introduced in the RTS frame
to support cooperative relaying. The format of RTS
frame is given in Figure 1. If cooperative link is found
beneﬁcial, the node will copy the direct link length
(distance in meters) to the destination in the distance
ﬁeld of the RTS message. Otherwise, this ﬁeld is set
to -1. The duration ﬁeld denotes the time required to
transmit the data frame which includes time for CTS,
SIFS intervals, and ACK. Even if the sender decides
to use cooperative communication, it does not know
whether any helper exists to forward its packets. So
the duration ﬁeld in the RTS message is same for
direct transmission and cooperative transmission. The
duration ﬁeld is given by
Duration = TSIF S + TCT S + 8L
CT R
+ TACK
(1)
where L denotes the payload length in bytes.
b)
It then senses the channel to check if it is idle. If the
channel is idle for DIFS, the node selects a random
backoff timer between 0 and minimum contention
window (CWmin). When the backoff counter reaches
zero, the node sends an RTS to reserve the channel.
c)
If the sender does not receive a CTS within TRT S +
TSIF S + TCT S + 2δ, it will retransmit the RTS.
Here δ denotes the propagation delay. Otherwise, the
sender will wait for another Tmaxbackoff + TSIF S +
TRRT C + δ, where Tmaxbackoff is the maximum
backoff time for the relay nodes. If no RRTC is
received within this time, it indicates that no relays
are available to forward the data. The node will
transmit the packet over the direct link and the ACK
timeout is set as
8L
CT R
+ 2δ + TSIF S + TACK.
(2)
d)
If both CTS and RRTC are received, the sender will
forward the data to the relay. The format of the MAC
protocol data unit (MPDU) is shown in Figure 2.
The sender stores the address of the relay in the
Frame
Control
Duration
Source
Address
Destination
Address
Address 3
Sequence
Control
Address 4
Figure 2. MAC PDU Header Format
destination ﬁeld and the receiver address is stored
in Address 3 ﬁeld. In this case, the ACK timeout is
set as
8L
CT H
+ 8L
CHR
+ 3δ + 2TSIF S + TACK
(3)
The duration ﬁeld denotes the time required to trans-
mit the data including ACK and SIFS intervals. In
the case of cooperative transmission, the value of the
duration ﬁeld in MPDU is given by
Duration = 2TSIF S + 8L
CHR
+ TACK
(4)
In the case of direct transmission, the value of dura-
tion ﬁeld in MPDU is
Duration = TSIF S + TACK
(5)
e)
If no ACK is received within the ACK timeout
duration, the sender resumes the backoff procedure
and contends for the channel again. When no ACK
is received for cooperative transmission, the sender
retransmits the packet directly to the receiver.
2) Operations at the Relay Nodes:
a)
When an RTS message is received with the distance
ﬁeld set to -1, which is an indication that it is decided
to use the direct link, the intermediate nodes will set
their network allocation vector (NAV) to the duration
speciﬁed in the duration ﬁeld of the message.
b)
If the distance ﬁeld contains a non-negative value,
the intermediate nodes check whether they can act as
a relay. If they cannot act as a relay, they will set
their NAVs. Otherwise, the relay nodes will wait for
TCT S + TSIF S + δ duration. If no CTS message is
received within this duration, the node will go back
to idle state.
c)
When the CTS message is received, all the potential
relays contend to act as the best relay using the
relay selection procedure described in Subsection
III-C. The node whose cooperative backoff procedure
expires ﬁrst sends the RRTC message and when this
message is heard by other potential relays, they abort
the backoff procedure and will set their NAV duration
and defer until the channel is idle. The format of
RRTC message is given in Figure 3. The duration
ﬁeld denotes the time to transmit the data packet from
transmitter to relay and from relay to destination.
It also includes the time to send ACK and SIFS
intervals. The duration ﬁeld in the RRTC message
is given by
Duration = 3TSIF S + 8L
CT H
+ 8L
CHR
+ TACK (6)
d)
The best relay will wait for a duration equal to
TRRT C + TSIF S +
8L
CT H + 2δ and if no data packet
is received within this duration, it will go back to
idle state. Otherwise, it will forward the packet to the
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Frame
Control
Duration
Source
Address
Destination
Address
Sequence
Control
Figure 3. RRTC Frame Format
Frame
Control
Duration
Source
Address
Destination
Address
Sequence
Control
Figure 4. CTS Frame Format
destination. Before forwarding the packet, the value
of the duration ﬁeld in MPDU is changed to
Duration = TSIF S + TACK
(7)
e)
The relay waits for a duration of TSIF S +
8L
CHR +
TACK + 2δ to receive an ACK from the receiver. If
no ACK is received within this duration, it will go
back to idle state.
3) Operations at the Receiver:
a)
When the Rx receives an RTS message it will send a
CTS back to the source. The format of CTS message
is shown in Figure 4. If the distance ﬁeld is set to -1,
the duration ﬁeld of CTS is set to
Duration = 2TSIF S + 8L
CT R
+ TACK
(8)
Duration = 3TSIF S +Tmaxbackoff + 8L
CT R
+TACK
(9)
The destination will wait for 2TSIF S + TCT S +
Tmaxbackoff +
8L
CT R + 2δ duration to receive either a
data packet or an RRTC message. If no data packet
or RRTC is recieved within the timeout interval, it
will go back to idle state.
b)
When a data packet is received, the Rx sends an ACK
back to the Tx. If the packet is forwarded by a relay,
a copy of the ACK is sent to the relay too.
C. Relay Selection Procedure
The existing cooperative MAC protocols mainly aim at
improving network throughput or reducing the end-to-end
delay by using cooperative communication. If the channel
conditions remain the same, the same relay is selected by the
source node every time it has a packet to be transmitted. The
same relay may also be used by other source-destination pairs.
In addition to this, the relay may also have some packets to be
transmitted. These relay nodes run out of battery very quickly
and may lead to network disconnection. At the same time,
there may be other nodes in the network that are capable to
act as relays. The energy consumption can be minimized if a
portion of the trafﬁc is relayed through each of the eligible
relays. We propose a relay selection procedure to select the
best relay based on its residual energy, queue size, and the
data rate that it can support over the cooperative link.
When an RTS message is received with the distance ﬁeld
set to a non-negative value, all the neighboring nodes other
than the destination check whether they are eligible to act as
relays. A node is eligible only if its residual energy is more
than 25% of the initial battery level and the following condition
is satisﬁed:
1
CT H
+
1
CHR
<
1
CT R
.
All the nodes that satisfy the above condition will start a
backoff timer to contend for the optimal relay. The backoff
utility function is deﬁned as
Backoff =
Min
  
1
CT H +
1
CHR
1
CT R
!α 
1 − Er
Ei
β  qc
qbuf
γ
, τ
!
(10)
where Er and Ei denote, respectively, the residual energy
and initial energy at the relay node. The terms qc and qbuf
denote the number of packets in the queue and the buffer size,
respectively. The value τ is used so as to limit the backoff time
within an acceptable range. We ﬁx the value of τ in such a
way that the backoff time does not exceeds the time to transmit
any of the control messages. The variables α, β, andγ are the
weight factors associated with data rate, energy, and queueing
parameters. For the results reported in the next section, we
give equal weight to all the three parameters.
IV.
DCMAC ANALYSIS
In this section, we derive a simple expression for the
saturation throughput of DCMAC. A simpliﬁed form of the
system model presented in III-A is considered for analysis.
We consider a single hop network in which all the source-
destination pairs are separated by a distance between 120
to 180m. We assume that there exist two helpers between
every source-destination pair that can support data rates of
(11,5.5) and (5.5,5.5) between the source to helper, and helper
to destination, respectively. Only 25% of the total nodes
generate trafﬁc and the remaining nodes act as destination and
relays. The performance analysis of the IEEE 802.11 DCF
presented in [19] and the analysis of CoopMAC [6] are used
for analysing the performance of the proposed protocol.
Let Ts denote the transmission time for one packet and L
denotes the size of the packet in bytes. For DCMAC protocol,
Ts is deﬁned as
Ts = (P11,5.5 + P5.5,5.5) TDCMACOH + 8LP11,5.5
R11
+
8LP11,5.5
R5.5
+ 16LP5.5,5.5
R5.5
(11)
where TDCMACOH denotes the DCMAC overhead, P11,5.5
and P5.5,5.5 denote the probability to transmit the packets
through the relays that support data rates of (11,5.5) and
(5.5,5.5) between the source to helper, and helper to desti-
nation, respectively. These probabilities are obtained through
numerical approximation.
TDCMACOH =2TP LCP + 5TSIF S + TRRT C + TDIF S+
TRT S + TCT S + TACK + Tmaxbackoff
(12)
In the case of EECO MAC protocol [14], Ts is deﬁned as
Ts = TEECOOH + 16L
R2
(13)
where TEECOOH denotes the EECO MAC overhead and it is
deﬁned as
TEECOOH = 2TP LCP + 5TSIF S + THT S + TDIF S +
TRT S + TCT S + TACK + Teecomaxbackoff (14)
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Number of Nodes
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Throughput (bps)
×106
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Legacy 1 Mbps
DCMAC
Legacy 2 Mbps
EECOMAC
Figure 5. Throughput vs Number of Nodes
R11, R5.5, and R2 represent 11 Mbps, 5.5 Mbps, and 2 Mbps,
respectively. From [19], the saturation throughput is deﬁned
as,
S =
PsPtrL
(1 − Ptr)σ + PsPtrTs + Ptr(1 − Ps)Tc
(15)
where Ps is the probability for successful transmission, Ptr is
the probability that at least one station transmits in a given slot,
σ is the slot time, and Tc is the collision time. Ps and Ptr are
obtained through the Discrete Time Markov Chain (DTMC)
analysis of Bianchi [19]; and Tc = TRT S + TDIF S + δ.
Figure 5 compares the saturation throughput performance
of the proposed protocol with the legacy DCF that transmits
packets at 1 Mbps and 2 Mbps, and EECO-MAC [14]. The
throughput of the proposed protocol is higher than that of
legacy DCF and EECO-MAC. In the proposed protocol, the
packets are forwarded using the relays that support (11,5.5)
and (5.5,5.5) data rates in both directions. But in the case of
EECO-MAC, the packets are forwarded through the relays at
a rate of 2 Mbps.
V.
SIMULATION RESULTS
The proposed DCMAC protocol described in the previous
section is implemented in the NS2 network simulator [?]. A
network topology of 600 x 600m2 is considered. Nodes are
uniformly and independently distributed at random locations.
Two ray ground reﬂected model is considered for wireless
channel and IEEE 802.11b parameters are used for the exper-
iments. The data rates for different transmission ranges as per
IEEE 802.11b are shown in Table I. The simulation parameters
are listed in Table II. EECO-MAC [14] protocol was developed
to improve the network lifetime. So, the performance of the
proposed protocol is compared with that of EECO-MAC. We
also compare the performance of the proposed DCMAC with
the legacy 802.11 DCF that transmits packets at a rate of
1 Mbps. 10% of the total nodes are considered as source
nodes generating CBR trafﬁc and their destinations are selected
randomly.
Figure 6 shows the relationship between the number of
nodes and the overall throughput at a ﬁxed payload size
(512 bytes). For EECO-MAC and DCMAC protocols, as the
TABLE II. SIMULATION PARAMETERS
MAC Header
272 bits
PHY Header
192 bits
RTS
352 bits
CTS
304 bits
RRTC
304 bits
ACK
304 bits
Data Rate for MAC Header
1 Mbps
Slot Time
20 µs
SIFS
10 µs
DIFS
50 µs
CWMin
31 Slots
CWMax
1023 Slots
Retry Limit
6
Number of nodes
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Throughput (kbps)
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
DCMAC
EECO MAC
Legacy
Figure 6. Throughput vs Number of Nodes
number of nodes increases, the availability of helpers for
forwarding data packets increases and hence these protocols
have better throughput compared to 802.11 DCF. This increase
in throughput is due to the increase in availability of helper
nodes which results in faster two hop transmission instead of
single one hop transmission. The proposed DCMAC protocol
has signiﬁcantly higher throughput than the EECO-MAC. This
is because EECO-MAC transmits data at a ﬁxed rate of 2
Mbps.
Figure 7 shows the relationship between the number of
nodes and delay.The delay performance is also better in the
case of DCMAC protocol. This is because in EECO MAC, the
transmission time is doubled when cooperative communication
is employed. In addition to this, the sender node has to wait for
a certain amount of time to receive the HTS message. In the
case of DCMAC, the source node has to wait for a certain
amount of time to get the RRTC message. If cooperative
transmission is used, the data is transmitted at higher rates.
The network lifetime and the average energy consumption
for different network sizes are shown in Figures 8 and 9,
respectively. In EECO MAC, the transmit power is lowered
when cooperative communication is used. This leads to a
decrease in the total energy consumption and increases the
network lifetime. In DCMAC, the relay nodes are selected
based on the residual energy level; and as the residual energy of
a relay node decreases, other nodes are selected as relays and
this leads to an increase in the overall network lifetime. But,
in DCMAC, all messages are transmitted with ﬁxed transmit
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Number of Nodes
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Delay (ms)
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
DCMAC
EECO-MAC
Legacy
Figure 7. Delay vs Number of Nodes
Number of Nodes
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Network Lifetime (s)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
EECO MAC
Legacy DCF
DCMAC
Figure 8. Network Lifetime vs Number of Nodes
power and therefore the energy efﬁciency and network lifetime
is slightly reduced when compared to EECO MAC.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a distributed cross layer
MAC protocol for multihop networks by employing coopera-
tive communication. The relay selection process is distributed
and the optimal relay is selected by considering the residual
energy, queue size, and location of the potential relays. The
simulation results show that the network lifetime and energy
efﬁciency can be improved in multihop networks by using
cooperative communication in the MAC layer. The results
also show that the proposed protocol can improve the network
lifetime and energy efﬁciency without degrading the network
throughput and delay performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Goldsmith, S. A. Jafar, N. Jindal, and S. Vishwanath, “Capacity limits
of MIMO channels”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, 21(5), pp. 684-702, 2003.
Number of Nodes
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Average Energy Consumption (J)
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
EECO MAC
DCMAC
Legacy DCF
Figure 9. Average Energy Consumption vs Number of Nodes
[2]
J. N. Laneman, D. N. C. Tse, and G. W. Wornel, “Cooperative diversity
in wireless networks: Efﬁcient protocols and outage behavior”, IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, 50(12), pp. 3062-3080, 2004.
[3]
A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User cooperation diversity-
Part I: System description”, IEEE Transactions on Communications,
51(11), pp. 1927-1938, 2003.
[4]
A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User cooperation diversity-
Part II: Implementation aspects and performance analysis”, IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, 51(11), pp. 1939-1948, 2003.
[5]
A. Nosratinia, T. E Hunter, and A. Hedayat, “Cooperative communication
in wireless networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 42(10), pp. 74
- 80, 2004.
[6]
P. Liu, Z. Tao, S. Narayanan, T. Korakis, and S. Panwar, “CoopMAC: A
Cooperative MAC for wireless LANs”, IEEE journal on selected areas
in Communications, 25(2), pp.340-354,2007.
[7]
X. Wang and J. Li, “Improving the Network Lifetime of MANETs
through Cooperative MAC Protocol Design”, IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, 26(4), pp. 1010-1020, 2015.
[8]
H. Zhu and G. Cao, rDCF, “A relay enabled medium access control
protocol for wireless ad hoc networks”, IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, 5(9), pp 1201-1214, 2006.
[9]
J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and W. Jia, VC-MAC, “A Cooperative MAC protocol
in vehicular networks”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
58(3), pp. 1561-1571, 2009.
[10]
H. Shan, W. Zhuang, and Z. Wang, “Distributed Cooperative MAC for
Multihop Wireless Networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 47(2),
pp. 126-133, 2009.
[11]
H. R. Shamna, N. L. Appari, and L. Jacob, “Cooperative MAC
protocol: Performance modeling and analysis”, IEEE Recent Advances
in Intelligent Computational Systems (RAICS) , pp. 233-238, 2013.
[12]
H. R. Shamna and L. Jacob, “Efﬁcient Cooperative MAC and Routing
in Wireless Networks”, Transactions on Networks and Communications,
3(5), pp. 79-95, 2015.
[13]
T. Himsoon, W. P. Siriwongpairat, Z. Han and K. J. R. Liu, “Lifetime
maximization via cooperative nodes and relay deployment in wireless
networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 25(2),
pp. 306-317, 2007.
[14]
X. Zhang, A. Anpalagan, L. Guo, and A. S. Khwaja, “Energy-Efﬁcient
Cooperative MAC Protocol Based on Power Control in MANETs”, IEEE
29th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications, pp. 48-53, 2015.
[15]
L. Q. V. Tran, O. Berder, and O. Sentieys, “RIC-MAC: A MAC
protocol for low-power cooperative wireless sensor networks”, IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) Istanbul,
pp. 1944-1949, 2014.
[16]
A. E. Khandani, J. Abounadi, E. Modiano, and L. Zheng, “Cooperative
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Routing in Static Wireless Networks” IEEE Transactions on Communi-
cations, 55(11), pp. 2185-2192, 2007.
[17]
A. S. Ibrahim, Z. Han, and K. J. R. Liu, “Distributed energy-efﬁcient
cooperative routing in wireless networks”, IEEE Transactions on Wire-
less Communications, 7(10), pp. 3930-3941, 2008.
[18]
C. PERKINS, Ad hoc on demand distance vector (AODV) routing,
Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-manet-aodv-04.txt, October 1999.
[19]
G. Bianchi, “Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed
Cooordination Function”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cation, vol. 18, No.3, pp. 535-547, Mar 2000
[20]
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

