Vehicular to Grid Technologies– A Survey on Architectures and Solutions
Al-Alwash Husam Mahdi
University Politehnica of Bucharest - UPB
Bucharest, Romania
Email: al.aloosh.92@gmail.com
Mustafa Khaleel Hamadani
University Politehnica of Bucharest - UPB
Bucharest, Romania
mkhaleel190@gmail.com
Abstract—Nowadays, the novel Vehicle to Grid (V2G)
technology is becoming of high interest in the domain of
Electric Vehicles (EVs). In the context of many EVs connected
to the power grid, the V2G technology has as its primary
objective to control and assure a necessary balance between
the consumption of the energy by some EVs and possible
energy delivery into the power grid by other EVs. The V2G
applications potentially help to increase the supply grid
performance,
concerning
system stability,
efficiency,
and
reliability. Given the novelty of V2G networking, this paper
exposes a short survey on the V2G technology, focusing on
identifying the challenges and open research issues for our
future work. Also, some solutions and not yet solved problems
in V2G are discussed. The approach of using a Software
Defined Network (SDN) type of control is briefly introduced.
The advantages of SDN-Based Smart Grid (SG) are identified,
as well as some challenges, especially related to the centralised
concept of the SDN.
Keywords-V2G; Electric Vehicles; SDN-Based Smart Grid;
Software Defined-V2G.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Vehicle to Grid (V2G) technology has recently
received increased interest from researchers because of its
advantages for both the environment and for power systems.
From the environmental perspective, Electric Vehicles
(EVs) are nature-friendly because of their reduced pollution
when compared
with conventional vehicles (fuel and
gasoline). From the power system perspective, by exploiting
the battery of the EV, it can act as power storage that can be
used based on demand. The Smart Grid (SG) is a
comprehensive innovation proposed for managing and
monitoring the traditional power grid. The SG introduces a
bidirectional communication (two-way) between service
companies, and consumers and has sensors over the
transmission lines that why it is called “Smart Grid”.
Therefore, the main objective of the V2G technology is to
provide available distributed power to serve the EVs
connected to the SG.
Figure 1 illustrates the bidirectional connection between
EVs and the SG. The power can flow in two directions:
from the power generator, over the SG to reach EVs or
back, from the EVs to the SG. Usually, the EVs are
supposed to have appropriate resources in order to benefit
from the advantages the V2G technology has to offer [1].
Software, processing power, and power electronics devices
should be included in the design of EVs. The EVs can be
attached to Distributed Networks (DNs) [2], to deliver
power to a grid at peak hours of load and thus enhance the
overall system efficiency and reliability. Moreover, the EVs
must have three essential elements:

A connection to the SG for power flow.

Physical and logical communication connections to
the grid operator, used for control purposes.

Onboard metering capabilities and controls of the
EVs.
The power grid arranges the vehicles in a group called
an aggregator. Also, it coordinates the charging and
discharging
processing
in
order
to
provide
reliable
operation.
SDN offers flexible control by separating the control
plane
from
the
data
plane.
The
control
plane
has
programmable
controllers
and
logical
centralisation.
Controllers
can
have
access
to
the
entire
network
information, so it is easy to configure the network and
deploy new protocols. Switches in the data plane provide
only simple data forwarding function, thus matching packets
can be processed rapidly to adjust the growing traffic.
As a novel technology, the V2G is facing challenges,
and therefore, several open research issues exist. This work
identifies several open problems, some of which have
solutions and some are still unresolved.
The structure of this paper is the following: Section II
describes some relevant work in the field. Section III
presents the features of SDN control integration into the SG.
In Section IV, we address EVs charging issues in the SG
and we outline the usage of SDN as a control solution in the
V2G environment. In Section V, we describe a general
SDN-Based V2G framework. Section VI identifies some
open research challenges. The conclusion is summarised in
Section VII.
Figure 1. The connection between EVs and the power grid.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

II. SUMMARY OF RELATED WORK
Wang et al. [3] introduce a novel architecture of
distributed energy management for the integration of V2G
networks with EV aggregator, aiming to achieve energy
balancing between the grid side and the EVs side. The paper
analyses theoretically what are the constraints of charging,
incorporated in the form of Willingness To Pay (WTP) and
proposes a distributed framework to coordinate the system
behaviour during charging and discharging.
According to SDN features as mentioned above, SDN
can solve two problems of V2G. First, V2G have the
problem
of
complex
network
configuration
and
management
due
to
the
dynamic
of
V2G.
Second,
unbalanced
the
energy
distribution
in
V2G,
so
the
importance of communication data is different. The SDN
can accelerate forwarding time and achieve traffic control.
Zhang et al. [4] proposed for V2G communication
model, software-defined V2G (SD-V2G), aiming to apply
SDN in V2G. This proposal deals with the dynamic
communication and security for the V2G system. Also, a
security communication mechanism (SCM) is proposed to
ensure
non-repudiation,
confidentiality,
integrity,
and
authentication.
Sun et al. [5] proposed a software-defined charging
network
architecture
for
hybrid
EVs
having
three
architectural planes: physical, control and application plane.
Some more details are provided in Section IV.
Li et al. [6] exploit the multicast communication to
collect information on the battery status and State of Charge
(SOC) from EVs. They propose a battery status sensing by a
software-defined multicast (BSS-SDM) scheme, where the
battery status of each EV is identified during SOC
transitions and maintained by a centralised controller.
Additionally, a battery-status-based multicast scheduling
algorithm is proposed to implement the V2G regulation
optimisation. The work presented simulation results that
verified the effectiveness of the proposed schemes. The
BSS-SDM is shown to be more adaptive than to achieve
optimal costs of the V2G regulation delay time in IEC
61850 advanced for V2G.
Li et al. [6] also propose the
coordination of EVs during charging/discharging sessions.
Integration benefits of the SDN with the SG in terms of
improving the system operations are proposed by Chen et al.
[7].They introduce a ‘‘two-tier SDN based framework’’.
The results have shown that it is easier to upgrade and
configure the SG. However, there are other open issues
(e.g., request balance between tiers) required to be solved.
Rehmani et al. [8] presented a comprehensive survey on
the SDN-controlled SG, including a taxonomy of the
advantages and the architectures. Also, this work identifies
some challenges, open research issues, and future directions.
Considering the recent developments in Fog computing,
technology, Tao et al. [9] proposed a new hybrid computing
model for V2G networks, to integrate Fog and Cloud for
5G-Enabled V2G networks, (called Foud).
III. MAJOR ADVANTAGES OF SOFTWARE DEFINED
NETWORKING IN SMART GRIDS CONTEXT
The SDN technology can successfully be used to
manage in a centralised way the communication entities in
the
SG
system and
also
to
improve
the
efficiency,
scalability, and resiliency. By deploying the SDN in SG
technology,
one
can
reduce
the
system
cost
and
management
complexity,
making
easier
the
system
upgrades. In particular, this solution is appropriate to satisfy
the demands of charging operation.
The SDN controller can offer (Rehmani et al. [8]):

Programmability: this feature is an added value
that SDN brings to SG. For instance, appropriate
decisions (dynamically changeable) can be taken,
in situations when a specific link should be used,
based on differences in SG communication traffic.
However, an open research issue is related to the
fact that different SG components might use
different protocols and are based on different
standards. Therefore, the SDN controller should be
able
to
handle
diverse
communication
technologies. This issue can be solved by taking
benefit from the abstraction capability of the SDN
architecture (data plane is abstracted at the control
plane level). This separation can also be exploited
in SG, in terms of management and communication
support.

SDN independence on vendor specific data plane
solutions: SG can implement and run diverse
applications,
networking
technologies,
and
protocols.

Powerful traffic management: SDN controller can
naturally identify data flows, i.e., it can install
appropriate flow tables in the forwarding nodes.
The traffic flows are treated accordingly to their
particular requirements; this allows the SG to meet
some
specific
Quality
of
Service
(QoS)
requirements (in terms of reliability, delay, and
throughput).
The SG operates on different types of traffic. The SDN
controller can simultaneously identify the traffic types, and
set
priorities
to
the
traffic
flow
by
dynamically
programming the SDN switches. However, there is an open
issue on horizontal scalability, in terms of the number of
devices in the vehicular network that can be managed by a
single SDN controller.
IV. V2G CHARGING/DISCHARGING SOLUTIONS
A. Charging Coordination
A critical issue faced by V2G technology is how to
coordinate a large number of EVs via the aggregator to
perform charging or discharging actions, in order to offer an
efficient service. This problem is a challenging one because
it is hard for the aggregator to directly control the
charging/discharging activities of each EV individually.
Moreover, the privacy of the EVs owners should be met
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

(some of them would not want to disclose their personal
activities).
To solve this problem, Wang et al. [3] defined for an EV
a parameter named WTP (Fan et al. [10]). They formulated
the V2G adjuvant services and applied methods of the
contract theory (Laffont et al. [11]). A framework has been
developed for distributed coordination of the EVs activities
(charging/ discharging). The aggregator can coordinate the
EVs and also can increase EVs revenue. One main objective
is to reach a balance between power supplier and consumer.
Some numerical results of their framework show that this
solution can make a higher income to the aggregator.
From our point of view, the work in [3] can further
continue in our future work by simulating the model and
make a comparison between practical and theoretical
results. Also, the location awareness of the EVs by the SG is
required to apply in this model. Therefore, the SG will be
able to send a request to the EVs based on demand.
B. Multicast
In multicast communication, the information is sent to
multiple receivers (e.g. users) in the network. In term of SG,
multicasting
has
been
used
to
distribute
time-critical
information such as control instructions or measurement
data
from
the
Phasor
Measurement
Units
(PMUs).
Generally, one PMU is deployed on a substation. Where,
PMUs are responsible for monitoring the level of voltage
and phasor angle of the transmission lines. Then, this
information is collected by different PMUs and sent to a
Phasor Data Concentrator (PDC). Then, this collected
measurement data forwarded by the PDC to the control
centre of the service [8].
In wide area monitoring systems, the PMUs measure
information
of
current
and
voltage
current
and
this
measured information is multicasted to the control centre for
immediate actions. Also, multicast can be used to inform a
large number of consumers to turn-off their appliances at
peak time, in order to manage and control the power level in
the SG. In the substation, the multicast communication can
distribute an emergency alert across substation Local Area
Networks (LANs). In SDN-Based SG, multicast has been
applied
to
V2G
networks,
PMUs,
and
substation
communication.
The EVs can be considered as moving power storage
which may support to supply power to entities where is
energy is required. In a functional of V2G network, several
sensors are installed at Charging Stations (CSs) as well on
the EVs itself. These sensors help the EVs owners to
monitor
the
charging
situations
of
their
vehicles.
Consequently, by sharing this information of sensing to the
V2G network, the global power grid can be stabilised. For
example, the SG can schedule the charging/discharging at
EVs, based on the power grid demand. This makes
necessary that the V2G knows the battery status of EVs and
their SOC. Through multicasting, the V2G can instruct the
EVs and implement the regulations relating SOC.
Li et al. [6] proposed a battery status sensing by a
software-defined multicast (BSS-SDM) scheme, the EVs
access to the SG system for charging or discharging
operation, controlled by the SD-V2G controller. During the
power
transition,
the
SD-V2G
controller
directly
communicates via Southbound Interface (SBI) with data
plane. The data plane is distributed devices and contains
different devices: routers, Road Side Units (RSUs), smart
meters, EVs, smart sensors, etc.).
The central SD-V2G controller includes functions of
monitoring and controlling the EVs sensors. SD It supports
the V2G multicast in order to support EVs mobility, as well
to provide a capability for dynamic configuration. The
simulation results show that the BSS-SDM scheme could
reduce the average delay time of the V2G operation.
C. Type of Charging
Management of the regulation charging is required for
the SG (especially when the number of EVs is high), in
order to avoid unregulated charging that could lead to grid
overload and even provoke SG breakdown. A solution to
this problem is to design EVs to support the SG aiming to
achieve a balance for the SG (Wang et al. [12]). Another
problem is how to balance between the charging demand
and the capability of service while a large number of EVs
are onboard.
There are two types of charging; wired and wireless
charging
technologies.
These
two
technologies
have
advantages of increasing the efficiency of charging and
provide a bidirectional power transition. Wang et al. [13]
introduced a Demand-Side Management (DSM) scheme for
the wireless charging, showing that in this way the process
of
wireless
charging
can
be
easier
and
economical.
Integrating both of wired and wireless charging technology
into the SG required an extensive communication network
to implement the DSM scheme for the EVs keeping the
stability of the grid in the real time.
By investigating the advantages of SDN, Sun et al. [5]
proposed a framework of Software-defined Green (SD-G),
which provides both wired and wireless charging and
efficient charging management. The objective is to evaluate
the SD-Based EVs charging network. The architecture of
SD-G framework contains three planes: physical, control,
and application plane. The EVs and SG networks have both
elements in the physical plane while the control plane is
responsible for control, of the data and power flow. The
centre of intelligent decision is served by the application
plane. The EV owner will get specific information about the
SG to practice the charging decision.
The simulations performed by Sun et al. [5] attempted a
comparison between two cases: with SDN and without SDN
control. The result shows that the demand setting time and
the cost of SG operation for nodes can also be controlled.
V. A GENERAL SDN-BASED V2G FRAMEWORK
The increasing number of EVs or Plug-in Electric
Vehicles (PEVs) and Internet of Thing (IoT) devices, and
their interaction with the SG need further study to improve
the efficiency, reliability, and stability of the system
operation. The integration of EVs and SG has a feature of
increasing the power storage through V2G technology and
corporate
the
SG
with
Renewable
Energy
Source-
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Distributed Generations (RES-DGs). Moreover, with the
integration of EVs with RES-DG into the power system, SG
faces the challenges of increasing large numbers of EVs and
IoT, which will affect the system scalability. Also, the
connection of EV, RES-DG, IoT, sensors, etc. to the
network require a hard/effort to configure the devices and
maintain a convenient cost at the same time.
To address the challenges mentioned above, many
contributions proposed general solutions, to cover any gaps
and satisfy the consumers. The approach adopted in [7] (see
Figure 2) comprises a two-tier SDN based framework for
the integration of EV with SG, aiming to provide a scalable
and stable system. The distribution system power flow has
two tiers. First, the power flows from sub-stations to
primary feeders to provide power for large-size commercial
and industrial loads. Then, the power flows from primary
feeders to secondary feeders to supply the small-size
resident loads.
Consequently, the SDN framework also has two tiers.
The tier-1 controller is located in the substation to have a
global system view, while the tier-2 controller is managed
by every aggregator in primary feeders to perform the power
and data operations. SDN controllers on each tier collect the
information frequently. This information is analysed by the
application layer to achieve optimal operation then, the
application layer sends new instructions to the devices in the
physical layer to update their commands.
A case study [7] based on PEVs and RES-DGs can
contribute to identifying the requirement of applying SDN
into the SG. Three fast charging stations (A B and C) are
deployed along a highway and distance between each one is
50 miles, (figure 3). The stations A and C get power
generated from solar radiation, while B is a powered by the
It has been supposed that PEVs arrive at each station
following a Poisson process through hourly variant arrival
rates. The charging stations send requests to the passing
PEVs for power supplement.
The first case considers 15 per cent of PEVs entering the
station, following a uniform distribution. In this hypothesis,
most PEV resources are wasted. The arrival rate of PEV in
the stations (A and C) are increases, while the grid powered
station (B) does not require any PEV, because the grid
powered station is stable and consistent source for the V2G
services. Note that the cloudy station would require more
PEVs than the sunny station.
The second case applies the SDN lower-tier operation.
The passing PEVs can be fully used to help the stations to
complete
their
V2G
services.
The
SDN
coordinated
performance is improved, while the PEV arrival rate
increases. The cloudy station requires far more PEVs than
the other two stations. The SDN-based system can analyse
the service requests depending on weather conditions; it is
able to direct more PEVs to the most needed station to help
the V2G service.
VI. OPEN RESEARCH ISSUE AND CHALLENGES
Given that V2G is a new technology, many frameworks
have been proposed; however, some of them have not yet
been implemented, given many open issues. In this section,
we identify the challenges of the V2G technology from the
communication side in order to guide for our future work
investigations.
A. Wired and Wireless Charging
In practice, many different charging standards have been
adopted (in single wireless or wired charging technology). A
unified charging standard would be necessary to be studied
Figure 3. The layout of fast charging stations [7].
Figure 2.The SDN Framework for the distribution system in the PEV integrated SG [7].
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

and
defined.
Wireless
EVs
charging
may
have
two
significant behaviours; static and dynamic charging. By
applying the dynamic charging in the road, one can reduce
the traffic in the SG. If both of wireless/wired charging are
supported by EVs/SG, a selection decision is required to get
optimal charging operations.
B. Synchronising Between Tiers
The aggregators in primary-feeders [7] obtain and
implement the instructions from the upper-tier. On the other
hand, they obtain requests from the physical devices in the
lower-tier, and provide suitable responses. Unsynchronised
data transmission of instructions from upper-tier and the
lower-tier requests may cause a lack of consistency at the
controllers in lower-tier. In some situation, the analysis
process at controllers in the lower-tier possibly will meet
different operation circumstances so that the controller will
be confused. The problem of balancing and evaluating
process between the instructions in upper-tier and requests
in the lower-tier, will be study and simulate in our future
work. Additionally, we will apply a simulation for the
charging and discharging decision and control process using
the tools of OMNET++.
C. SDN-Based V2G and Energy Internet (EI)
A novel concept has been proposed recently called
Energy Internet (EI), aiming to connect numbers of SG
devices for the purpose of management of the power flows.
Similar to traditional internet, the EI has routers and the idea
is to find the optimal routs and/or paths. That approach will
achieve high efficiency in the power distribution. Also, EI
has Local Area Networks (LAN), called (e-LAN) in the
Energy Internet standard. The power routers are responsible
for power flows management between various SG devices
and, in this regard, Wang et al. [14] proposed different
algorithms of energy routing. Chelmis et al. [15], Zhang et
al. [16], and Hou et al. [17] presented some results about
the integrating EI and SDN; this novel concept still requires
hard efforts in order to achieve an efficient and reliable
system operation of SDN-Based Energy internet. For
instance, it is hard for a single power router to have the
information of the entire network status at a short time.
Therefore, the real global smart control is not achieved yet.
D. Integrating Fog and Cloud (Foud) For 5G-Enabled V2G
Networks
To deal with the high mobility of EV, the computing
resources provided by mobile computing devices are
integrated with the provisional Fog dynamically. So, the
performance of the V2G applications and services in Foud
computing is affected by the mobility of EVs. Efficient
resource management can be implemented by dynamically
integrating the mobile computing resources with provisional
fog, and integrating cloud computing with temporary fog
(Foud), which is constitute a significant open issue needs to
study further. Also, integrating between Foud and two-tiers
framework could be a useful solution to reduce the large
data in the SDN controller.
E. Failures Detection
A central SDN controller may face failure issues, such
as breakdown, resource limitation by a malicious switch,
and so on, that is could be causing a loss of SDN controller
service. Therefore, solution for this problem is required.
Also,
fast
failure
detection
and
recovery
using
the
OpenFlow
should
be
analysed;
in
the
situation
of
communication link failure, the packets should be routed to
additional rout with/without asking the SDN controller.
VII. CONCLUSION
The novel V2G technology is still facing many problems
and
challenges,
especially
from
the
communication
perspective. The SDN is a powerful solution to have a
global view on the network. It can also solve problems
management and control for V2G service. The EVs
represent an available power storage distribution to the grid
based on the demand, integrating the SDN in the SG; one
can control the EVs onboard and coordinate their charging
status. In this paper, we have discussed some open research
issues
concerning
the
integrations
of
SDN
in
SG.
Multicasting and scheme of SDN-Based V2G will be
considered in our future work. Finally, we have identified
and discussed some challenges, open research issues, and
future research directions related to SDN-based V2G.
REFERENCES
[1] 
W. Kempton and J. Tomić, “Vehicle-to-grid power fundamentals: 
Calculating capacity and net revenue,” J. Power Sources, vol. 144,
no. 1, pp. 268–279, 2005.
[2]
S. Habib, M. Kamran, and U. Rashid, “Impact analysis of vehicle-to-
grid technology and charging strategies of electric vehicles on
distribution networks - A review,” J. Power Sources, vol. 277, pp.
205–214, 2015.
[3]
K. Wang et al., “Distributed Energy Management for Vehicle-To-
Grid Networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 22–28, 2017.
[4]
S. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Wu, J. Li, and G. Li, “A security mechanism for
software-defined networking based communications in vehicle-to-
grid,” 2016 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Energy Grid Eng. SEGE 2016,
pp. 386–391, 2016.
[5]
Y. Sun, X. Hu, X. Liu, X. He, and K. Wang, “A Software-Defined
Green
Framework
for
Hybrid
EV-Charging
Networks,”
IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 62–69, 2017.
[6]
G. Li, J. Wu, J. Li, T. Ye, and R. Morello, “Battery status sensing
software-defined multicast for v2g regulation in smart grid,” IEEE
Sens. J., vol. 17, no. 23, pp. 7838–7848, 2017.
[7]
N. Chen, M. Wang, N. Zhang, X. S. Shen, and D. Zhao, “SDN-Based
Framework for the PEV Integrated Smart Grid,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 14–21, 2017.
[8]
M. H. Rehmani, A. Davy, B. Jennings, and C. Assi, “Software
Defined
Networks
based
Smart
Grid
Communication:
A
Comprehensive Survey,” pp. 1–26, 2018.
[9]
M. Tao, K. Ota, and M. Dong, “Foud: Integrating Fog and Cloud for
5G-Enabled V2G Networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 8–13,
2017.
[10] Z. Fan, “A Distributed Demand Response Algorithm and Its
Application to PHEV Charging in Smart Grids,” IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1280–1290, Sep. 2012.
[11] J. Laffont and D. Martimort, The theory of incentives: the principal-
agent model, Princeton University press, 2009.
[12] K. Wang et al., “A Survey on Energy Internet: Architecture,
Approach, and Emerging Technologies,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 12, no. 3,
pp. 2403–2416, Sep. 2018.
[13] T. V. Theodoropoulos, I. G. Damousis, and A. J. Amditis, “Demand-
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Side Management ICT for Dynamic Wireless EV Charging,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 6623–6630, Oct. 2016.
[14] R. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Qian, Z. Lin, and X. He, “A Graph Theory Based
Energy Routing Algorithm in Energy Local Area Network,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3275–3285, Dec. 2017.
[15] C. Chelmis, K. Rajgopal, and V. K. Prasanna, “Software defined
connected prosumer communities,” in 2016 IEEE 3rd World Forum
on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2016, pp. 684–685.
[16] Q. Zhang, H. Wang, and Y. Song, “Efficiency evaluation algorithm of
SDN for energy internet,” in 2017 7th IEEE International Conference
on
Electronics
Information
and
Emergency
Communication
(ICEIEC), 2017, pp. 292–295.
[17] W. Hou et al., “Cooperative Mechanism for Energy Transportation
and Storage in Internet of Energy.,” IEEE Access, 2017, vol. 5, pp.
1363-1375.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

