Performance Comparison of IPv6 Multihoming and Mobility Protocols
Charles Mugga, Dong Sun, Dragos Ilie
School of Computing
Blekinge Institute of Technology (BTH)
Karlskrona, Sweden
E-mail: {chmu11, sudo11}@student.bth.se, dragos.ilie@bth.se
Abstract—Multihoming and mobility protocols enable computing
devices to stay always best connected (ABC) to the Internet. The
focus of our study is on handover latency and rehoming time
required by such protocols. We used simulations in OMNeT++
to study the performance of the following protocols that support
multihoming, mobility or a combination thereof: Mobile IPv6
(MIPv6), Multiple Care-of Address Registration (MCoA), Stream
Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), and Host Identity Proto-
col (HIP). Our results indicate that HIP shows best performance
in all scenarios considered.
Keywords-IPv6; mobility; multihoming; performance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modern computing devices such as laptops, tablets, smart
phones, PCs and broadband routers are typically equipped
with multiple networks interfaces (e. g. , 3G, WiFi) that enable
users to stay always best connected (ABC) to the Internet [1].
What best connected means is intimately tied to the needs
of a particular user: for some, it means being connected over
the interface that offers the highest data rate, while for others
connectivity during movement may be more important. Such
scenarios are supported by cooperation between multihoming
and mobility management protocols at layer 3 (L3) and layer
2 (L2) handover mechanisms [2].
More speciﬁcally, horizontal handover allows a mobile
node (MN) to change its link-layer point of attachment among
networks using the same radio access technology (RAT).
Similarly, vertical handover enables nodes to switch between
networks based on different RATs. We will refer to these
handovers as L2 handovers when they are transparent to L3
and above.
In certain situations, a node can be forced to reconﬁgure
its IP address after a handover. For example, this happens
when the handover occurs between networks under different
administrative domains, where each domain manages its own
set of network preﬁxes. In this situation, the handover requires
assistance from L3 (i. e. , it is not longer transparent to the
network layer). This type of scenario is called a L3 handover
and is handled by mobility management protocols.
Multihoming is the ability to be simultaneously connected
to multiple (home) networks. In practice, this means that each
network interface is assigned an IP address from a different
network, or that one interface is assigned multiple IP addresses
corresponding to different networks. Beneﬁts of multihoming
include fault tolerance, load sharing, and bandwidth aggrega-
tion. The fault tolerance scenario, where communication over
an unreachable network is reconﬁgured to go over another
home network, is similar to a L3 handover. However, here
we will use the term rehoming to emphasize that multihoming
is handling this scenario.
Mobility and multihoming are generally considered as two
separate concepts and thus are handled by different protocols.
However, they both propose a mechanism for session surviv-
ability, which can be used to provide seamless connectivity. In
our study, we focus on the performance of host-based mobility
and multihoming protocols with emphasis on time to recover
from link failures. The type of failures addressed here are
due to node mobility or caused by stopped or failing router
interfaces. Host-based mobility means that the MN is fully
involved in mobility-related signaling. This is in contrast to
network-based mobility, where dedicated entities are in charge
of signaling and no mobility-speciﬁc features are required for
MNs.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides
an overview of several multihoming and mobility protocols
(i. e. , HIP, MIPv6, SCTP, and MCoA), in terms of their
modes of operation, beneﬁts and drawbacks. Related work
is described in Section III. Section IV discusses the basics
of our simulation testbed and the particular simulation sce-
narios used here. Section V deﬁnes the performance metrics
relevant to our study (i. e. , handover latency and rehoming
time). Section VI elaborates on the simulation results. Finally,
Section VII provides a summary and proposes future work
to improve the performance of the studied multihoming and
mobility protocols.
II.
MOBILITY AND MULTIHOMING PROTOCOLS
This section provides an overview of IPv6 mobility and
multihoming management protocols that were part of our
study. Our main selection criteria was the availability of
the protocol as OMNeT++ simulation model. A more com-
prehensive list of mobility and multihoming protocols can
be found in [3]. Based on the functionality supported, each
studied protocol was allocated to one of the following three
categories: mobility management, multihoming management
and combined multihoming-mobility management.
A. Mobility Management
The Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) protocol was designed and
incorporated in IPv6 during the base speciﬁcation of IPv6,
thus providing L3 integrated mobility management [4]. MIPv6
introduces a new element in the network architecture, the home
agent (HA), which is responsible for maintaing communication
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

while the MN is visiting a foreign network. MIPv6 enables
mobility by requiring a MN to use two addresses: the home
address (HoA) and the care-of address (CoA) [5]. The HoA
is a unique address from the home network address space. Its
purpose is to be used as node identiﬁer for the MN. When the
MN visits a foreign network, it is assigned a CoA from the
address space used by that network. The MN informs its HA
whenever the CoA changes. The CoA identiﬁes the topological
location of the MN in the network graph, allowing packets to
be routed to it.
Typically, a correspondent node (CN) always uses the HoA
as destination address when sending data to the MN. The
packets are received by the HA, which forwards them to
the MN’s CoA. The HA forwards also packets going in the
opposite direction — from the MN to the CN. However, when
both the MN and CN support route optimization, they can
communicate directly using the CoA [6][7].
The strongest asset of MIPv6 is that it rests on over two
decades of research and experimentation. As a result the proto-
col is mature and available for many platforms. Simultaneous
L3 handover of the MN and CN is also supported. Some of
MIPv6’s drawbacks are the reliance on a third entity, the HA,
high signaling overhead and some security issues related to
return routability [5][8].
B. Multihoming Management
The Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP) is a
reliable connection-oriented layer 4 (L4) protocol developed by
IETF [9]. SCTP is designed to transport Public Switched Tele-
phone Network (PSTN) signaling messages over IP networks.
However, the protocol supports a broader range of applications
and features. In particular, SCTP supports multihoming, which
allows the use of multiple IP addresses for a single association
between two SCTP endpoints.
The SCTP association is a broader concept than the TCP
connection. During association startup, SCTP provides the
means for each SCTP communicating entity to provide the
other entity a list of transport addresses (i. e. , multiple IP
addresses in combination with an SCTP port) through which
that entity can be reached and from which it will originate
SCTP packets. These addresses are used as endpoints for
different streams. SCTP regards each IP address of its peer as
one “transmission path” towards that endpoint. The association
spans transfers over all of the possible source-destination
combinations that may be generated from each endpoint’s list.
One of the combinations is selected as initial primary path. If
the primary path is considered unreliable, then the packets can
be retransmitted on a backup path. Also, the primary path can
be replaced with one of the backup paths [4].
Integrated multistreaming and multihoming are the main
advantages of SCTP. An important drawback is that applica-
tions must be developed with speciﬁc support for SCTP (i. e. ,
the applications must use SCTP sockets) [10] . Consequently,
old applications cannot use SCTP unless they are modiﬁed.
Simultaneous rehoming is possible only for the set of addresses
negotiated during association initialization.
C. Combined Multihoming-Mobility Management
Our study contains two protocols that support both mobility
and multihoming. The ﬁrst one, HIP, integrates both fea-
tures. The second one, Multiple Care-of Address Registration
(MCoA), is a multihoming extension for MIPv6.
The HIP speciﬁcation introduces a new name space, the
host identity name space or HIP layer, located between L3
and L4 in the TCP/IP stack [11][12]. The purpose of the HIP
layer is to provide a mapping between host identiﬁers and IP
addresses. A host identiﬁer is the public cryptographic key
from a public/private key pair that is used to uniquely identify
a node. From an operational point of view it is more convenient
to work with the hash of the host identiﬁer, which is called a
Host Identity Tag (HIT). Applications use HITs to open sockets
to and communicate with other hosts. The IP addresses, (i. e. ,
the locators) are used only for routing purposes. The set of
IP addresses associated with a HIT can change over time, for
example due to L3 handover or rehoming. These changes are
transparent to the applications above the HIP layer.
The advantages associated with HIP include integrated
mobility and multihoming, low signaling overhead and trans-
parency to legacy user-level applications [12][13][14]. Further-
more, HIP can handle simultaneous rehoming and simultane-
ous L3 handover.
HIP’s main drawback is the introduction of a new layer
to the well-established TCP/IP stack. This requires com-
plex modiﬁcations to the operating system running on HIP
nodes [8]. Also, in order to support highly mobile nodes,
the system requires a rendezvous server (RVS) for location
management [15].
Multihoming in MIPv6 can be supported by the MCoA
extension, which allows the MN to register multiple CoAs with
the HA [4][16]. As a result, the MN can maintain concurrent
paths with its CNs by assigning more than one CoA to its
network interfaces.
The main advantages of MCoA is that it requires relatively
small changes to MIPv6 in order to enable multihoming. One
drawback is that the protocol can switch to another CoA only
when it detects failures in the communication between the HA
and the MN, but is unable to do so for communication between
the HA and the CN [17]. Another drawback is that the current
speciﬁcation does not state if multiple addresses can be used
at the same time or if one must, for example, choose a single
address based on link characteristics [4].
III.
RELATED WORK
Magagula et al. [7] discussed handover approaches used
by various MIPv6-related mobility management protocols and
proposed a handover coordination mechanism based on Proxy
Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) [18]. The authors used ns-2 simulations
to show that their proposed mechanism was more successful
than plain PMIPv6 and Mobile IPv6 fast handovers (FMIPv6)
[19] in decreasing the handover delay and the packet losses.
Zekri et al. [2] highlighted some of the main technical
challenges in providing seamless vertical handover in hetero-
geneous wireless networks. The article provides a survey on
the vertical mobility management process and mainly focuses
on decision-making mechanisms. The authors also point out
the main research trends and challenges, such as enhancing
network availability and QoS, green networking, and solutions
for healthcare applications. The main challenges discussed deal
with the coexistence of heterogeneous wireless networks.
A comprehensive survey of protocols supporting end-host
as well as site multihoming can be found in [4]. The evaluation
of multihoming solutions provided there is based on the
degree of fulﬁllment of multihoming goals (i. e. , resilience,
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

ubiquity, load sharing, and ﬂow distribution). The authors did
not explicitly point out the best or worst protocols in terms
of performance, but instead they illustrated that each protocol
comes with its own advantages and drawbacks. Additionally,
they argued that an efﬁcient multihoming protocol cannot
be coupled with a single layer, but instead it must be the
result of cooperation between multiple layers that act in a
concerted manner to meet the same goals. From an end-
site perspective, multihoming proposals should not focus only
on routing scalability. Instead, they should incorporate native
support for the diverse multihoming goals rather than relying
on extensions.
In [6], Jokela et al. compared the handover performance
of MIPv6 and HIP in a heterogeneous IPv6 network environ-
ment. They conﬁgured a network environment consisting of a
wireless 802.11b network as well as a GPRS network. In their
experiment, the MN received a stream of TCP data from a
server while performing handover between the two networks.
Their measurement results show that the recovery time was
8.05 s for MIPv6 and 2.46 s for HIP.
Ratola et al. [8] compared MIPv6, HIP, and SCTP in terms
of architecture, security, and known problems. The purpose of
their comparison was to determine which layer (L3, L3.5, or
L5) would be best suited for mobility. Based on their compar-
ison, the authors suggest that mobility should be implemented
in a new layer between the network and transport layers. In
this respect, HIP seems to be a good L3.5 solution for mobility
that solves several security, mobility, and multihoming issues
at the same time.
Dhraief et al. [20] proposed a novel framework, called
MIPSHIM6, that combines SHIM6 [21] and MIPv6, in or-
der to enable both host mobility and host multihoming. In
MIPSHIM6, the mobility management is delegated to MIPv6
and the multihoming management to SHIM6. The authors
evaluated this framework on a real testbed. They setup an
experiment where a MN boots up in a foreign network, binds
with its HA and initiates a secure copy (scp) session with
a CN. During the next step, the MN establishes a SHIM6
context with the CN . The authors arranged for a HA failure
to occur 60 s after the scp session was started. At that point
the MN rehomes to the path deﬁned by the SHIM6 context.
Unfortunately, there is no data in the paper to indicate how
well this solution performs in terms of rehoming time. The
TCP throughput plot shown in the paper indicates that it takes
10–15 s for the TCP throughput to increase to the level before
the HA failure.
IV.
TESTBED AND SIMULATION SCENARIOS
Our performance study was conducted under the OM-
NeT++ simulation environment. OMNeT++ is a modular,
discrete-event simulation framework based on the C++ pro-
gramming language [22]. It can be used for modeling wired
and wireless communication networks, protocols, multiproces-
sors, distributed or parallel systems, queuing networks and for
validating hardware architectures. OMNeT++ is open-source,
and it can be used either under the GNU General Public
License or under its own license that also makes the software
free for non-proﬁt use [23].
We have chosen OMNeT++ because it has an extensive
array of modules required by our study, such as HIPSim++ [24]
for HIP, the SCTP module [25] from the INET framework,
TABLE I: Multihoming and mobility management protocols
Protocol
Mobility
Multihoming
SCTP
No
Yes
MIPv6
Yes
No
MCoA
Yes
Yes
HIP
Yes
Yes
MCoA++ [26] for MCoA and xMIPv6 [27] for MIPv6. The
mobility and multihoming features supported by each protocol
are summarized in Table I. Note that mobility support in
MCoA++ is provided through the xMIPv6 module.
To evaluate the performance of the protocols described in
Section II we designed ﬁve simulation scenarios: two for mo-
bility and the remaining three for multihoming. The mobility
scenarios investigate the handover latency experienced in the
case when the MN is using MIPv6 and HIP, respectively. The
multihoming scenarios investigate the rehoming time when the
host is using HIP, MCoA, and SCTP, respectively.
A. Mobility Scenario for MIPv6
The simulated network topology for this scenario is shown
in Figure 1. The rectangle in the background depicts a 850 m
by 850 m movement area available for mobile nodes.
The home access point AP_Home is connected to the
router Home_Agent that plays the role of the home agent.
Together, they deﬁne the home network. The foreign network
consists of the foreign access point AP_1 that is attached to
the router R_1 acting as foreign agent. The coverage areas for
AP_Home and AP_1 are overlapped at the boundaries to allow
for continuous wireless connectivity. There is approximately
300 m between AP_Home and AP_1. The bit rate for the
backbone links connecting R_2 to Home_Agent and AP_1
to R_1 is conﬁgured to 1 Gbps. The links between the access
points and respective routers are conﬁgured as 100 Mbps
Ethernet.
The MN is programmed to move from its home network
to the foreign network in a straight line at a speed of 1 m/s,
resembling a moving pedestrian scenario. The router adver-
tisement (RA) message interval is set to a random number in
the range 0.03–0.07 s.
During the simulation, the CN sends every 50 ms a ping
packet (i. e. , a ICMP echo message) to the MN. The MN
replies to each ping with a ICMP echo reply message. This
represents background trafﬁc.
We have conﬁgured all MIPv6 nodes to use route optimiza-
tion, thus avoiding to forward trafﬁc through Home_Agent.
B. Mobility Scenario for HIP
The simulated network topology for this scenario is shown
in Figure 2. The topology is identical to the one described in
Section IV-A with the exception of two additional nodes: the
RVS host and the DNS server denoted by rvs and dnssrv,
respectively. The RVS host is a HIP node that allows the MNs
to store their actual HIT-to-IP address associations and to make
them available to potential communication partners. The DNS
server resolves domain names to HITs and IP addresses and
also provides RVS information for mobile HIP hosts.
Similar to the MIPv6 scenario, the MN moves from the
home network to the foreign network at a constant speed of
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1: Simulation environment for MIPv6 and MCoA
scenarios
Figure 2: Simulation environment for HIP scenarios
1 m/s. At the start of the simulation, a HIP association is
established between the MN and CN. After the association
is successfully established, an IPSec Security Association pair
is created between MN and CN. At this point, the MN starts
to send to the stationary CN (hipsrv) one UDP ping request
every 50 ms. The reason for using UDP pings is that it was not
possible to get the ICMP ping module to work in HIPSim++.
We have conﬁgured the size of the UDP ping packets to be
equal to that of ICMP ping packets and have no reason to
suspect any noticeable impact on the simulation results.
MN’s movement towards the edge of the home network
eventually results in a handover that enables the MN to
associate with the foreign access point.
C. Multihoming Scenario for HIP
The topology used here is similar to the one shown in
Figure 2, which was used for the HIP mobility scenario. The
difference is that in this scenario the MN is equipped with
an additional wireless network interface. Our intention is that
this scenario should resemble a situation where the MN can
Figure 3: Simulation environment for SCTP
connect to a CN over the (preferred) WiFi interface denoted
here by IF_WiFi and fallback on the 3G interface, IF_3G,
when it loses the WiFi connection.
While the MN moves towards the edge of its home
network, the signal strength from the home access point
AP_Home becomes weaker, causing the node to scan for new
access points on both its interfaces. We have arranged so that
the MN is unable to ﬁnd another access point over IF_WiFi.
At some point, the MN will receive the beacon signal from
AP_1 over IF_3G and will rehome to the foreign network
reachable over the 3G interface.
As explained before, a UDP ping session is established
from the MN to the CN. The RA interval is set to a random
value between 0.03 s and 0.07 s. The MN is moving away from
the home access point at a constant speed of 1 m/s.
D. Multihoming Scenario for MCoA
The MCoA multihoming network topology is similar to the
one for MIPv6 shown in Figure 1. The MN is conﬁgured to
use two interfaces, IF_WiFi and IF_3G, as explained in the
previous section.
The MN is sending every 50 ms an ICMP Echo message
to the CN, while moving at speed of 1 m/s.
E. Multihoming Scenario for SCTP
The network topology used to investigate the multihoming
capability of SCTP protocol is shown in Figure 3. The SCTP
hosts are equipped with two interfaces.
Because SCTP does not have mobility support and also
because its mobile extension, mSCTP [28], is not yet available
for OMNeT++, we have conﬁgured all nodes to use wired
interfaces. Therefore, we only tested the multihoming ability
of SCTP for data transfer between two stationary hosts.
The links between the routers, router_1, router_2,
router_3, and router_4 form the core network. All
these links are conﬁgured for 1 Gbps data rate. The Ethernet
interfaces of the hosts are conﬁgured to use a data rate of
100 Mbps.
The simulation setup aims to study the fault tolerance
feature of SCTP when a link on the primary path fails at
a random time during data exchange between the hosts. We
conﬁgured Host_1 to transfer 10 MB of data to Host_2,
such that Host_1 acts as the client and Host_2 as the server.
The size of the transfered data is a tradeoff between keeping
the simulation time short and having a long time range where
the failure event can occur.
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

After the endpoints establish a SCTP association, the path
consisting of routers router_1 and router_2, is desig-
nated as the primary path and the path using the remaining
routers, router_3 and router_4, is designated as the
alternative path. We have arranged for a link failure to occur
on the primary path between router_1 and router_2. The
failure event occurs at a time drawn from a uniform distribution
between 5.3 s and 7.5 s. This range is well within the time
window required to transfer the 10 MB ﬁle. The link failure
is detected by SCTP, which then redirects the communication
through the alternative path.
V.
SIMULATION METRICS
In terms of performance metrics, we measured the rehom-
ing time for multihoming protocols and handover latency for
mobility protocols, respectively. For HIP, which supports both
multihoming and mobility [13], we collected statistics for both
metrics.
A. Handover latency
We deﬁne the MIPv6 handover latency as the elapsed time
between the moment when the MN disassociates from the
old access point and the instant when the MN receives the
binding acknowledgement (BA) message from the CN [3].
The BA message is sent from the CN to the MN when route
optimization is used. Its purpose is to conﬁrm registration
of the new CoA. This metric is composed of the following
delay components: L2 handover, router discovery, duplicate
address detection, home registration, return routability, and
correspondent node registration [5][27].
In the case of HIP, every time a HIP-enabled MN changes
address it notiﬁes the CN through a sequence of three UPDATE
messages. Thus, we deﬁne the HIP handover latency as the
time elapsed from the moment when the MN disassociates
from the old access point and until the MN sends out the third
UPDATE packet while connected to the new access point [3].
The latency consists of the following delay components: L2
handover, router discovery, duplicate address detection, and
peer notiﬁcation of IP address change (by exchanging three
UPDATE messages with the CN).
B. Rehoming time
For a multihomed mobile node with two interfaces, the
onset of rehoming is triggered when the MN comes out of
range of the old access point, which is connected through the
ﬁrst interface. We therefore deﬁne the HIP rehoming time as
the interval from the moment when the MN starts scanning
for the new access point on the second interface until it sends
the third UPDATE packet while connected to it. The HIP
rehoming time computed this way includes the delays due
to L2 handover, conﬁguration of new IPv6 address and HIP
update message procedures.
In MCoA++, multihomed MNs use both interfaces simul-
taneously. When the MN detects a signal from a new access
point, it immediately sets up a connection with the new access
point via the second interface, which is assigned a new IPv6
address. In our simulation scenario, the ICMP echo requests
are sent over the MN’s old interface and the replies are received
over the new interface. We deﬁne the MCoA rehoming time as
the time elapsed from the moment the MN starts scanning for
the new access point over the second interface to the time when
TABLE II: Performance results with 95% conﬁdence interval
Protocol
Handover latency (s)
Rehoming time (s)
SCTP
N/A
0.99 ± 0.0100
MIPv6
3.32 ± 0.0880
N/A
MCoA
3.32 ± 0.0880
1.66 ± 0.0909
HIP
2.27 ± 0.0922
0.41 ± 0.0004
the MN receives the BA. The MCoA rehoming time consists
of L2 handover, conﬁguration the new of IPv6 address and
MCoA signaling procedures.
The SCTP rehoming time is deﬁned as the time elapsed
between the instant when a failure occurs on the primary path
until the moment when data is exchanged on the alternative
path.
VI.
PERFORMANCE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the performance results from
our results and share some reﬂections related to them. Table II
shows the statistical mean values for handover latency and
rehoming observed in our simulations. We provide also the
corresponding 95% conﬁdence intervals. Note that MCoA
is a multihoming extension of MIPv6, where the mobility
performance of MCoA is similar to that of MIPv6.
Looking at simulation results from the mobility scenarios
we can observe that the HIP protocol has an average handover
latency of 2.27 s compared to 3.32 s for MIPv6. The higher
latency for MIPv6 can be explained by its long signaling
phase. In our experiments, MIPv6 required 1.038 s to complete
signaling, which is 1 s higher than the time required for HIP
signaling. HIP signaling consists of only 3 UPDATE messages
exchanged between the MN and CN. In contrast, MIPv6
signaling requires 8 messages, some exchanged between the
MN and HA and some between the MN and CN
For multihoming protocols, the results indicate that HIP
again has the best performance in terms of the lowest average
rehoming time of 413 ms. This is less than half of the SCTP
rehoming time (992 ms) and almost a quarter of the MCoA
rehoming time (1656 ms). The main reason behind the high
performance shown by HIP is proactive IPv6 address conﬁg-
uration. This means that the MN establishes and conﬁgures a
new IPv6 address on IF_3G before it breaks the connection to
the home network, hence, performing a soft handover (make-
before-brake). When rehoming takes place, it does only a L2
handover followed by HIP signaling, resulting in a very low
latency. On the other hand, the rehoming time for MCoA
includes L2 handover delay, IPv6 address conﬁguration delay
and MCoA signaling latency. The address conﬁguration delay
is in fact the largest contributor to the MCoA rehoming time.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our simulation results indicate that HIP has the best per-
formance in both the multihoming and the mobility scenarios.
The main reason is HIP’s low signaling overhead during
handovers and rehoming events. Moreover, HIP implements
soft handovers during rehoming events, which decreases the
rehoming time by a large factor.
We think that the results presented in this paper indicate
that HIP is a suitable component for providing seamless
connectivity to mobile and multihomed nodes.
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Our future work in the short term will focus on developing
missing simulation models for OMNeT++, for protocols such
as SHIM6 [4] and mSCTP. This will allow us to extend
our current work into a more complete performance analysis
of mobility and multihoming protocols. For the longer term,
we look forward towards improving the performance of the
existing multihoming and mobility protocols.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Special thanks go to Dr. Kostas Pentikousis and Mr. Bruno
Sousa for their assistance and technical help they provided
during our simulations with MCoA.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Gustafsson and A. Jonsson, “Always best connected,” IEEE Wireless
Communications Magazine, Feb. 2003, pp. 49–55.
[2]
M. Zekri, B. Jouaber, and D. Zeghlache, “A review on mobility man-
agement and vertical handover solutions over heterogeneous wireless
networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 35, no. 17, Oct. 2012, pp.
2055–2068.
[3]
C. Mugga and D. Sun, “A solution combining both multihoming and
mobility in IPv6 heterogeneous environment,” Master’s thesis, Blekinge
Institute of Technology (BTH), Karlskrona, Sweden, Sep. 2013, MEE:
10035.
[4]
B. Sousa, K. Pentikousis, and M. Curado, “Multihoming management
for future networks,” Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 16, no. 4,
Aug. 2011, pp. 505–517.
[5]
C.
E.
Perkins,
D.
B.
Johnson,
and
J.
Arkko,
RFC
6275:
Mobility Support in IPv6, IETF, Jul. 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6275 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[6]
P. Jokela, T. Rinta-aho, T. Jokikyyny, J. Wall, M. Kuparinen, H. Mahko-
nen, J. Meln, T. Kauppinen, and J. Kauppinen, “Handover performance
with HIP and MIPv6,” in Proceedings of Wireless Communication
Systems, Mauritius, Sep. 2004, pp. 324–328.
[7]
L. A. Magagula, H. A. Chan, and O. E. Falowo, “Handover approaches
for seamless mobility management in next generation wireless net-
works,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 12,
no. 16, Nov. 2012, pp. 1414–1428.
[8]
M. Ratola, “Which layer for mobility? - comparing mobile IPv6, HIP
and SCTP,” in HUT T-110-551 Seminar on Internetworking.
Sj¨okulla,
Finland: Helsinki University of Technology, Apr. 2004.
[9]
R. R. Stewart, RFC 4960: Stream Control Transmission Protocol,
IETF,
Sep.
2007.
[Online].
Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/
rfc4960
[retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[10]
A. Dhraief, T. Ropitault, and N. Montavont, “Mobility and multihoming
management and strategies,” in 14th Eunice Open European Summer
School, Brest, France, Sep. 2008.
[11]
R. Moskowitz, P. Nikander, P. Jokela, and T. R. Henderson, RFC
5201: Host Identity Protocol, IETF, Apr. 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5201 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[12]
P. Nikander, A. Gurtov, and T. R. Henderson, “Host identity protocol
(HIP): Connectivity, mobility, multi-homing, security, and privacy over
IPv4 and IPv6 networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
vol. 12, no. 2, Second Quarter 2010 2010, pp. 186–204.
[13]
P. Nikander, T. R. Henderson, C. Vogt, and J. Arkko, RFC 5206:
HIP Mobility and Multihoming, IETF, Apr. 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5206 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[14]
T. R. Henderson, P. Nikander, and M. Komu, RFC 5338: Using the Host
Identity Protocol with Legacy Applications, IETF, Sep. 2008. [Online].
Available: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5338 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[15]
J. Laganier and L. Eggert, RFC 5204: Host Identity Protocol
(HIP) Rendezvous Extension, IETF, Apr. 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5204 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[16]
R. Wakikawa, V. Devarapalli, G. Tsirtsis, T. Ernst, and K. Nagami, RFC
5648: Multiple Care-of Addresses Registration, IETF, Oct. 2009. [On-
line]. Available: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5648 [retrieved: Dec, 2013]
[17]
A. Dhraief and A. Belghith, “Suitability analysis of mobility and
multihoming uniﬁcation,” in Proceedings of ICWUS, Sousse, Tunisia,
Oct. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[18]
S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B. Patil,
RFC 5213: Proxy Mobile IPv6, IETF, Aug. 2008. [Online]. Available:
http:// tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5213 [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[19]
R.
Koodli,
RFC
5568:
Mobile
IPv6
Fast
Handovers,
IETF,
Jul.
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://tools.ietf.org/search/
rfc5568 [retrieved:
{Dec., 2013}]
[20]
A. Dhraief, I. Mabrouki, and A. Belghith, “A service-oriented frame-
work for mobility and multihoming support,” in Proceedings of MELE-
CON, Medina Yasmine Hammamet, Tunisa, Mar. 2012, pp. 489–493.
[21]
A. Garc´ıa-Martnez, M. Bagnulo, and l. van Beijnum, “The shim6
architecture for ipv6 multihoming,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 48, no. 9, Sep. 2010, pp. 152–157.
[22]
A. Varga and R. Hornig. OMNeT++ community site. [Online].
Available: http://www.omnetpp.org [retrieved: Dec., 2013]
[23]
——, “An overview of the OMNeT++ simulation environment,” in
Proceedings of Simutools, Marseille, France, Mar. 2008, pp. 1–10.
[24]
L. Bokor. HIPSim++: A host identity protocol (HIP) simulation
framework for INET/OMNeT++. [Online]. Available: http://www.
ict-optimix.eu/index.php/HIPSim [retrieved: Aug., 2013]
[25]
I. R¨ungeler, M. T¨uxen, and E. P. Rathgeb, “Integration of SCTP in
the OMNeT++ simulation environment,” in Proceedings of Simutools,
Marseille, France, Mar. 2008, pp. 1–8.
[26]
B. Sousa, M. Silva, K. Pentikousis, and M. Curado, “A multiple care
of address model,” in Proceedings of Computers and Communications,
Kerkyra, Greece, Jun. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[27]
F. Z. Yousaf, C. Bauer, and C. Wietfeld, “An accurate and extensible
mobile IPv6 (xMIPV6) simulation model for OMNeT++,” in Proceed-
ings of Simutools, Marseille, France, Mar. 2008, pp. 1–8.
[28]
S. J. Koh, Q. Xie, and S. D. Park, Mobile SCTP (mSCTP) for IP
Handover Support, IETF, Oct. 2005, draft-sjkoh-msctp-01.txt.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

