Regional City Council mGovernment Case Study:  
Success Factors for Acceptance and Trust
Shadi Al-Khamayseh 
Higher College of Technology 
Dubai Women's College - Dubai City, UAE 
shadi.alkhamayseh@gmail.com 
 
Elaine Lawrence 
School of Computing and Communications 
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia 
Elaine.Lawrence@uts.edu.au
 
 
Abstract— This paper is the second of a series of investigations 
into the key success factors for mobile government services 
(mGovernment) in Australia, Jordan and the United Arab 
Republic. The case study in this paper concerns a large regional 
city council in Queensland, Australia. It provides valuable 
insights into the adoption of mobile government services and 
applications over the council’s wired and wireless network. Here, 
we report on a major achievement of the study namely,  the 
identification of success factors for mobile government.  
Keywords-mobile; government, success factors; case study 
I   INTRODUCTION 
 
     This case study outlines the mobile government 
systems implemented at a regional city council in the State 
of Queensland, Australia. The rationale behind the 
selection of local government is the high number of 
community issues with which local governments must deal 
compared with other government levels (i.e., state and 
federal). These community issues form a pressure on the 
local governments to improve their services through 
adopting the latest mobile and wireless technologies. The 
analysis of the case study generated a number of success 
factors that should be considered when planning for, and 
while implementing, the mobile government systems and 
services. This paper is part of our study of mobile 
government services [1] [2]. Here we report on one major 
case study from an analysis of eight (8) other case studies 
from Australia, the United Arab Emirates and Jordan. 
Section 2 provides the background to the case study and 
Section 3 outlines the methodology. Section 4 reports on 
the case study and the conclusions are found in Section 5. 
A table of success factors is set out in Appendix A.  
 
II. BACKGROUND 
 
    For ethical reasons the information is de-identified. Thus, 
the paper refers to this regional local government city 
council as Queensland Regional City Council2 (QLDCC2) 
in Australia. The team manager of technical services was 
interviewed for this case study. The goals of this study 
include an exploration of the (a) success factors and (b) 
economic aspects of the acquisition of wireless and mobile 
technologies in the public sector. The objectives deriving 
from those goals are: 
 
TABLE 1.    OBJECTIVES & QUESTIONS  
 
OBJECTIVES 
QUESTIONS 
An assessment of the categories 
of 
mobile 
and 
wireless 
technologies 
use in 
public 
sector. 
What patterns of acquisition 
emerge 
from 
the 
current 
wireless 
and 
mobile 
technologies and the perceived 
needs for mobile government? 
The establishment of a basis for 
understanding the current and 
future 
success 
aspects 
of 
mobile government. 
 
What characteristics of the 
categories 
of 
mobile 
government services contribute 
to the patterns of acquisition? 
 
An evaluation of the mobile 
government adoption issues, 
including 
managerial 
issues 
and the centralization and/or 
decentralization 
of 
decision 
making. 
What issues arise from the 
rapid acquisition of mobile and 
wireless technologies and how 
important 
have 
those 
technologies become to the 
organization? 
 
The establishment of a basis for 
understanding the current and 
future economic aspects of 
mobile government. 
How 
will 
the 
organization 
balance 
the 
need 
for 
technological changes with the 
need 
to 
continue 
the 
accomplishment 
of 
routine 
tasks? 
 
These questions were used for all eight case studies and the 
answers were recorded and transcribed and later analyzed using 
nVivo, a qualitative data analysis software package.  
 
 
 
III.  METHODOLOGY 
 
   The above questions along with the main research 
question: “What are the factors that contribute to successful 
mobile 
government? 
How? 
Why?” 
reinforce 
the 
exploratory nature for this research [3]. The author [4] 
defines the methodology as “the strategy, plan of action, 
process or design lying behind the choice and use of 
particular methods and linking the choice and use of 
methods to the desired outcomes”. According to [5] “Case 
196
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

study can be seen to satisfy the three tenets of the 
qualitative 
method: 
describing, 
understanding, 
and 
explaining”. This forms the rationale behind selecting case 
studies as the research strategy. The research question type 
also led to choosing the case study methodology. The core 
research question includes three categories of the enquiry 
questions series: ‘What’, ‘How’, and ‘Why’ [3]. The ‘What’ 
part here aims to develop propositions for further inquiry. 
The ‘How’ and ‘Why’ parts “are more explanatory and 
likely to lead to the use of case studies” [3]. In [6], a case 
study is defined as: 
an in-depth investigation of a discrete entity (which 
may be a single setting, subject, collection or 
event) on the assumption that it is possible to 
derive knowledge of the wider phenomenon from 
intensive investigation of a specific instance or 
case. 
     Tellis [5] acknowledges that case study methodology 
has been used extensively in many fields such as: “law, 
medicine, government and in evaluative situations”. He 
points out that “The government studies were carried out to 
determine whether particular programs were efficient…” 
[5]. In this case study, QLDCC2 is a regional council that 
serves an area of 3,127 km2 and a population of 300,000. 
The council has approximately ‘1300 employees’ and ‘has 
hundreds of different types of services .., from libraries to 
cemeteries, to water operations, inspectors, building 
inspectors, so there’s a whole raft of different business 
groups out there, … and … different business needs’. The 
council utilizes ‘40 Blackberry handsets’ as it ‘needed to 
provide some secure service for managers so they could get 
access to emails and their calendar, while they were out in 
the field’. The council also uses the NextG wireless 
network so that the mobile workforce can communicate 
with the council’s systems from outside the council offices. 
Furthermore, the technical manager explained that ‘it’s 
actually not just our mobile users that use NextG; we have 
about 5 or 6 locations, where we use NextG. One of them is 
the cemetery up the road; they use NextG, because they are 
out of the range for ADSL - they can’t get the high speed 
ADSL, so we can provide high speed connectivity back into 
the network through the wireless NextG”. 
     QLDCC2 has also implemented Wi-Fi hotspots in their 
libraries. The manager noted that in their ‘main libraries we 
provide free Internet access’. Recognizing its diverse 
community, the council arrived at its ‘Mobile Libraries’ 
initiative - ‘basically it’s a bus, a mobile library bus that 
drives around various sites’. At first, the mobile library 
used to ‘go to fixed stops, where there was a phone line into 
which they could plug’. Then, the council realized the 
benefit of the available wireless technologies, so ‘now that 
we’ve extended it to be fully mobile, it uses the Telstra 
NextG service’. The manager explained that ‘it’s cheaper 
doing that than it was previously having a fixed line at those 
25 sites, for which we were paying rentals, and you know 
you go from providing a 64k service through to a 7.2 
megabit service, so a huge increase in actual performance’.  
     The mobile library ‘visits areas like, outside retirement 
villages, schools, sort of locations where there … isn’t easy 
access to the fixed library’. The mobile library houses items 
covering a wide range of formats, including books, 
magazines, DVDs, music CDs, toys, large print and audio 
books - something for all ages. The manager explained that 
the mobile library ‘provides Internet access for the public 
when the library turns up and also it provides some online 
services for the library staff that work in that library, so 
they can check out books, record books that get loaned out 
and come back in, and it also provides several Personal 
Computers in the bus, for the public to come and do online 
catalogue queries, and surf the Internet’.  In terms of the 
benefits achieved, the manager explained that ‘now in words 
of ability, it can now go to anywhere within our region and 
it’s got full network coverage through Telstra, and we can 
provide the service to the public for Internet, online 
catalogue searching and also to our staff that actually man 
that library’. Figure 1 depicts the mobile library. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Regional Mobile Library QLDCC2 2008, 
 (Source: Welcome to QLDCC2 libraries, viewed 23/10/ 2008 
http://library.QLDCC2.qld.gov.au/sitePage.cfm?code=mobileli
braries). 
IV THE CASE STUDY 
    The manager explained that the main driver behind 
implementing the mobile government system was the fact 
that ‘the technologies are out there’, but this did not mean 
that all business units within a regional city council should 
utilize the technology. Investing in technology should bring 
benefits and/or profits to the business unit to justify the need 
to invest -‘we don’t necessarily implement technology just 
for the sake of implementing it'. 
    The business case perspective was highlighted as an 
important factor by the manager from QLDCC2. Investing 
in technology should bring benefits and/or profits to the 
business unit and possibly to the organization as a whole. It 
is not necessary that the business unit is aware of, or 
understands, the new technologies, as it is the IT division’s 
responsibility to ‘liaise a lot with the business to find out 
what their requirements are and make them aware of these 
technology changes’. The manager stated ‘we [IT division] 
work with the business to ascertain what their requirements 
197
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

are and what benefits they’ll get if we implement the 
technology’. This highlights the importance of the liaison 
among the IT division and all business units. He also 
cautioned that ‘there are costs and overheads, as we 
implement the technology, you are going to need more staff 
to maintain your system, there’s a cost to implement it, so 
it’s done on a case by case basis’. Determining the costs of 
implementing mobile government systems is a joint effort 
where the IT division provides its experience too. For 
example, the manager acknowledged that ‘security costs 
were a big one’ and these costs are determined by the IT 
division. 
    To enhance cooperation, the manager emphasized the 
importance of having a ‘good relationship with the 
business’ 
through 
maintaining 
open 
communication 
channels between the IT division and all business groups, so 
if ‘they require new technology solutions, they might come 
to us… and we work with them to find a solution’. To sum 
up, the case study showed that implementing mobile 
government systems through investing in mobile and 
wireless technologies is based on business case proposals 
which require: 
• IT liaison with the business units to understand 
their requirements; 
• IT liaison with the business units to make them 
aware of the available technologies that meet their 
requirements; 
• A valid and justified business case that supports the 
decision to invest in the technology. 
    Forty (40) Blackberry handsets were introduced ‘about 3 
to 4 years ago’. To do so, the council ‘looked at a few 
different technologies, and found Blackberry was … the 
most advanced at that time. Blackberries provided a good 
comprehensive solution, that was secure and you could also 
manage the devices that you had from the central system’. 
The council has been utilizing different mobile devices 
distributed to many different users, such as the ‘standard 
normal size laptops used by the water operations’, 
‘Blackberries used by the councillors and managers’ and 
‘touch screen tablets for those who need more organizer 
devices’. The manager justified utilizing the different 
devices due to the fact that ‘the different business areas are 
defining requirements that they need’. This highlights that 
the requirements play a role in mobile device selection. For 
example, a business unit might need ‘access to either online 
data when they’re actually in the field doing GPS 
measurements or whatever … so they can sign off jobs, out 
in the field’ and ‘for others it might be to just record static 
information as they are moving around, now those guys … 
don’t have live connections to the network because they 
don’t need it’.  
    Although some business units do not have a business 
need that requires live connection in the field, they still use 
the mobile technologies (i.e. mobile devices) to collect static 
data such as ‘GPS locations’ of any asset ‘that needs fixing’, 
and ‘when they [the users] come back to the office they just 
download the information, it goes straight into the system’. 
The manager illustrated that utilizing the wireless 
technologies through adding the live connection depends on 
‘what the requirements were and how they actually work’. 
The council has to consider ‘weighing up the costs to 
provide that service to the benefits’ gained. The manager 
reported that the ‘live connectivity’ facility used by the 
‘plumbing inspectors’ and ‘operations’ staff costs the 
council about a hundred dollars per staff member per month, 
but resulted in many ‘tangible benefits’ such as saving ‘a lot 
more down the track’. The manager demonstrated this 
through the following example: 
A good example is the plumbers, ..., going out collecting 
data, but they’d spend several hours, and they’d come back 
to the office, updating all the systems typing it all in, so they 
benefited in a big deal by … simply having a laptop, NextG 
connected out in the car and record the information as they 
do their job, and saves them travelling, gets synchronized 
straight away, it’s instantaneous, so it’s live on the system, 
it saves them having to spend several hours in the morning 
or afternoon coming back in the office, to get Internet 
information etc. 
     Another factor that plays a role in achieving a successful 
solution is the access devices. In this case, the selection of 
Blackberries was partly based on their ability to house new 
applications for any future emerging business need. The 
manager illustrated that ‘the primary use, initially for the 
Blackberries was to provide email and calendar access for 
councillors and managers’, but ‘the Blackberry platform we 
chose because you can actually have applications written, 
so you can interface with the systems [corporate systems]’, 
so ‘if the business need was there, to actually provide some 
functionality [i.e. to access the corporate systems] that way, 
then we could deliver it that way’. 
The implementation of the mobile government systems in 
the council resulted in utilizing ‘over a hundred laptops, 
which are now configured for that service and they’ve taken 
that up in about the last year, so there’s been a real 
explosive growth and that goes through from directors,  to 
managers and to  field operation staff’. The manager also 
highlighted the speed of data transfer over the network as an 
important success factor for the mobile government system. 
He acknowledged ‘certainly the speed that we can get 
through that system just makes the whole thing much more 
usable’.  
     Finally, the manager outlined the features of the mobile 
government system the council aims to achieve. He 
explained that: ‘we’re trying to implement a system that 
doesn’t add a large overhead in the back office systems, and 
a system that doesn’t need specialized tailoring for every 
application to make it sort of, device dependent, in that 
we're trying to … implement a system that can operate 
generically on a range of devices, and that we can support 
cost effectively’. 
     Mobile 
government 
has 
four 
main 
constituents 
(Government (G), Employees (E), Citizens (C) and 
198
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Business (B). In this case study, the council provides a 
number of G2C m-Government services or applications.         
The manager explained that in order to develop such 
projects it is important to ‘have the figures’ as they 
demonstrate that ‘there’s another service that could be 
done’. For example, such figures could show ‘how 
pervasive … 3G web surfing technology is with the public’ 
which supports decision making on whether to provide it. 
The manager also highlighted that for a mobile project to 
succeed, it should mimic the real process as much as 
possible. For example, the mobile library solution: ‘it’s a 
free service to the public’ and the council has ‘extended it 
now so they can provide Internet access’ because in the 
‘main libraries we provide free Internet access, to the public 
and this mobile library is now doing the same service’. 
     Although a high mobile and wireless technology 
penetration amongst citizens results in more success for 
G2C m-Government services, the manager noted that it ‘is 
not the local council’s role’ to market the mobile and 
wireless technologies to them, because the ‘the council 
doesn’t control the wireless market. According to the 
manager, such G2C m-Government services ‘could 
probably be provided quite easily’, but deciding to develop 
them ‘comes down to the penetration of the market’. This 
highlights the importance of knowing the penetration figures 
and discovering citizens’ needs according to these figures.  
To sum up, the manager has recommended the following 
success factors for G2C m-Government services: 
• 
Broadband availability 
• 
Attain representative figures of mobile usage 
• 
Broadband coverage over the network 
• 
Easiness and readability of services on mobile 
devices 
• 
Mimic the real process which people know and 
understand 
     The manager focused on the G2E m-Government 
services, saying that the ‘operations guy, who are in vans, 
have laptops to get back into the council’s systems. ˜Now all 
those particular users are provided with a laptop with a 
NextG card, which is configured with a corporate service, 
so it comes corporately back into our network’. The 
manager illustrated that the implementation of mobile 
government systems, especially the G2E m-Government 
services, has not affected jobs in terms of loss or growth. It 
has only resulted in benefits, such as increased productivity 
of the workforce. In order to successfully implement the 
system, it is important to understand the users’ skills, 
especially as some users (e.g., plumbers) ‘never used the 
computer before’ and after implementing the mobile 
government system, they will suddenly be dealing with a 
mobile device that might well be connected to the corporate 
systems. Managing the transition from the old style of 
writing on paper to the most up-to-date technologies creates 
a challenge to the success of the system. The manager 
acknowledged the challenge and recommended that one 
should ‘go through a training issue with the staff, they have 
to be trained to get the benefit from it’.  
    The manager emphasized that ‘there is a great deal of 
learning in there’, and concluded that it is essential to make 
changes to how things work. The manager also highlighted 
‘getting that acceptance and trust’ as critical to achieving a 
successful mobile government system. He suggested that 
‘some of them [mobile workforce] are even thinking, 'oh 
well now they can track us with this gear and know what 
we’re doing’. To gain that trust is ‘mainly just working 
through that issue with the people’, to make them aware of 
the reason behind implementing the system, and its benefits. 
The manager recommended addressing their concerns and 
answering ‘no we’re not doing it so we can keep track of 
you; it’s been done so you can be more effective’, and make 
them aware that ‘it’s not because we want to watch exactly 
what you’re doing from a time management thing, it’s more 
from a resource management of where to deploy the 
resources’. Thus, gaining acceptance and trust is ‘something 
they have got to manage really carefully’. 
    To sum up, achieving a G2E service depends on the 
following success factors: 
• 
G2E m-Government solutions must be configured 
with a corporate service 
• 
Staff trust 
• 
Staff acceptance 
• 
Training 
• 
Change management. 
     An important issue that the manager raised was the 
selection of providers. The chosen network plays a role in 
ensuring the security of the systems. The council has chosen 
Telstra’s NextG network for their mobile services, such as 
the mobile library. Telstra was chosen for many reasons, but 
one reason was the ‘GWIP [Government Wideband Internet 
Protocol]” which is ‘part of the Telstra Next Generation IP 
platform’. The manager explained that equipping the 
‘operations guys’ with ‘laptops with NextG cards’ started 
‘in 2007 as Telstra rolled out their NextG service’. The 
manager explained that ‘prior to that we did tests with their 
[Telstra’s] old CDMA network and GPS - GSV network, but 
the speeds weren’t really there’. Here, the manager 
highlighted the speed factor as important ‘to effectively 
deliver a corporate application out in the field; now from 
NextG, we can get good speeds’. This highlights the 
importance of the available speeds offered by the provider’s 
network. 
    The 
manager 
emphasized 
that 
the 
provider’s 
infrastructure is a core selection criterion as it plays a role in 
the security of the systems. The manager justified his 
department’s decision to go on with NextG from Telstra 
rather than 3G from other providers as ‘going on with Next 
G … [from] Telstra, we can have that secure VPN that goes 
directly into our network, and it removes access through the 
Internet.' 
     In summary, it is essential to enter a long term 
partnership with a reliable provider to achieve a successful 
199
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

mobile government system. It is necessary to understand the 
following providers’ success factors to help in selecting the 
right provider: 
• 
Ability to secure an access path to council systems 
• 
Data transfer Speed 
• 
Provider’s infrastructure and its compatibility with 
council systems 
• 
Provider’s network speed 
• 
Provider’s future plans. 
     The manager highlighted that catering for mobility might 
require updating current systems to ensure security. The 
council has ‘spent the last, about two years in going through 
planning for a network upgrade that can cater for mobility 
… in a secure way’. 
     In addition to the careful planning required to update the 
department’s current network, the manager discussed the 
importance of identifying and understanding the risks, 
threats and vulnerabilities that mobile government systems 
are subject to, such as ‘viruses’, ‘spyware’, ‘Trojan Horses’ 
and ‘worms’ that could find their way to the system when 
users access the Internet using council’s mobile devices (i.e. 
PDAs and laptops). As operational countermeasures, the 
council does not ‘allow connection on Internet to those 
unless it goes through our firewalls, and our Internet 
servers, so I can’t take my laptop home, plug it into my 
Internet service provider at home, it doesn’t work, we block 
it off, it’s a security halt, because once that goes in, then 
you know, viruses and spyware and all that stuff can get on 
the machine’.  
     The manager stated that the major security issues arise 
when ‘going back into the council network’. For this, the 
mobile library solution incorporates ‘two servers’. To 
ensure security, ‘staff PCs and the router, that’s got a 
corporate card off, so that basically goes into the Telstra 
cloud and securely goes into a VPN [Virtual Private 
Network], that pumps it directly back into our corporate 
network and it’s coded so you can only do it with that 
particular SIM [Subscriber Identity Module]. You need a 
SIM code as well to put through and there is authentication 
all the way through [this means the user must already be 
logged into ‘Windows’ to actually get connected to the 
network], so it’s fairly secure’. The coding and 
authentication procedures ensure security of the data in case 
of device loss or theft. 
     In this case, the solution ensures security by providing 
separate paths for corporate data and Internet traffic. The 
public get direct access to the Internet, but staff can 
seamlessly interact and quickly transmit vital data through a 
dedicated path so that ‘it doesn’t go on the public Internet at 
all, it simply goes and hits the VPN gateway in the Telstra 
network and pumps directly back into our network. Now, for 
it to come in on this side we’ve got a Government Wideband 
Internet Protocol (GWIP) 20 meg service, and that takes in 
all those NextG cards and also some of our smaller remote 
sites that use GWIP”. 
     One of the main threats is the loss or theft of the access 
devices. The manager demonstrated using the following 
example: 
If the device gets stolen that might have a NextG 
card connected to it, simply turning it on wouldn’t 
get them connection into the network. Every time the 
user turns on the laptop, they’ve got to logon as a 
local user on the laptop to start with, after they get 
through that security level, there is then a 4 digit PIN 
code which they must enter every time that the NextG 
device connects up to the network, ,,, they then have 
to logon to the CITRIX desktop, and that’s the 
normal desktop or network logon, which they then 
have to enter, so there’s like three levels they go 
through. Also, the actual service is keyed to that SIM 
card, so if they didn’t have that SIM card they 
couldn’t connect into the network. 
To sum up, to achieve a successful mobile government 
system, it is crucial to consider the following success 
factors: 
• 
Update the current networking solutions for 
securely catering for mobility 
• 
Awareness 
of 
all 
the 
risks, 
threats, 
and 
vulnerabilities to mobile government systems 
• 
Use as many security levels as possible to ensure 
the ultimate security of the access devices and the 
systems 
• 
Follow password selection best practice to generate 
passwords 
• 
No sensitive information to be kept on an access 
device. 
     The manager commented that the state government so far 
has not pushed local councils to implement mobile 
government systems, but he highlighted that the government 
has a crucial role to play in helping them succeed in 
implementing the system. There are many ‘ways they could 
help’; one way is ‘to bring the cost down and to bring the 
saturation even further’. The manager argued that ‘as the 
market gets saturated more and more uptake comes, and 
then you get more competitors, such as Optus rolling out 
their wireless networks, as that gets rolled out, that raises 
competition’. This competition has already resulted in a 
drop in prices; for example, ‘we pay a certain amount with 
Telstra now, for provision of the service, a couple of years 
ago it was more expensive, but now it’s getting cheaper’.     
The government could also negotiate with service providers 
to get the best deals for its departments. The manager 
acknowledged the importance of such negotiation; one 
result was that ‘we use the state government contract for 
mobile phone contracts’. The government negotiations with 
providers resulted in the creation of the ‘Telstra Next IP 
Network, and it’s basically made up of a couple of products 
like NextG, GWIP, Ethernet Campus, and it’s all about 
providing … faster data services and remotely integrated 
data services on a big platform’. 
 
200
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

V CONCLUSION 
     This case study highlighted a number of the potential 
benefits of implementing mobile government. According to 
the manager, ‘there’s a number of benefits’ for the mobile 
work force such as ‘the exact recording of information’, and 
‘they can actually work quicker out there, it becomes a time 
saver for them’. The manager also identified a number of 
benefits in using the wireless network to connect some of 
the fixed locations into the council’s network. This is 
usually needed when high speed ADSL is not available in 
the location, and the benefit is in ‘providing high speed 
connectivity back into the network’. The council found 
earned benefits in ‘converting it [locations] from a fixed 
line, or a fixed ADSL or a fixed ISDN line that goes to the 
site, to a mobile NextG connection’, and the benefit was that 
‘we’ve actually saved a lot of money … you change your 
cost from maybe three to five hundred dollars a month, 
down to a hundred dollars a month, so you get a doubling in 
speed or tripling in speed’. Implementing G2E m-
Government services has benefited the council in many 
ways, such as ‘saving overtime costs’ as a result of no 
longer ‘entering in information manually, which now they 
can enter out in the field’. The manager affirmed that it 
‘increases productivity, they [mobile workforce] can 
actually get more work done or provide more services to the 
public, or respond quicker to the public, because they can 
get information online out there, like job dispatching.  The 
guys have laptops always on out there, so when the jobs 
come through, they can see the details straight away when 
they’re out there in the field’. This shows that the return on 
investment not only benefits the government council, but all 
its constituents, such as the employees and citizens. To sum 
up, to implement mobile government in any council it is 
important to understand the potential benefits to be gained 
from such a system in order to justify the costs and to assist 
in the decision making process. 
     The analysis of the QLDCC2 case study has revealed a 
number of mobile government success factors. Table 1 in 
Appendix A summarizes the different success categories 
and their success factors.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]. Al-khamayseh, S. and Lawrence, E. 2005, 'Mobile government – 
converging technologies and transition strategies', 4th International 
Conference on Electronic Government Trauner, Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. 
358-365. 
[2.] Al-khamayseh, S. and Lawrence, E. 2006, 'M-government success 
factors: a roadmap for developing interactive mobile government', 5th 
International Conference on Electronic Government within DEXA 2006, 
Krakow, Poland. 
[3] Yin, R.K. 1994, Case study research: Design and methods, 2nd edn, 
Sage Publishing, Beverly Hills, CA.  
[4 ]Crotty, M. 1998, The foundations of social research: meaning and 
perspective in the research process, Allen & Unwin, Sydney, Australia. 
[5] Tellis, W. 1997, 'Introduction to Case Study', The Qualitative Report, 
vol. 3, no. 2. http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR3-3/tellis2.html, Last 
viewed 26 May 2010 
[6] Gorman, G.E. and Clayton, P. 2005, Qualitative research for the 
information professional : a practical handbook, Facet Publishing, London, 
UK.7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
Success 
Factor(s) 
QLDCC2 Case Study 
Drivers 
• 
The availability of technology 
Solutions 
• 
Easy management 
• 
Up-to-date 
• 
Selecting of access device 
• 
Data transfer speed 
• 
One platform 
• 
Device independent solution 
• 
Low overhead on the back office systems 
Constituents 
(Citizens) 
• 
Broadband availability 
• 
Mobile penetration and usage 
• 
Easiness and readability of (G2C) services 
• 
(G2C) services to mimic the real life 
process 
Constituents 
(Employee) 
• 
Staff trust 
• 
Staff acceptance 
• 
Training 
• 
Change management 
Providers 
• 
Security 
• 
Data transfer speeds 
• 
Infrastructure 
• 
Compatibility with the department systems 
• 
Future plans 
Business Case 
• 
IT liaison with business groups 
• 
Understanding business requirements 
• 
Awareness of available technologies 
• 
Justifying the needs and costs 
• 
Reflect on benefits 
 
Security 
• 
Update department’s network 
• 
Awareness of all the risk, threats and 
vulnerabilities 
• 
Implement as many security levels as 
required 
• 
Best password selection procedures 
• 
No information to be kept on devices 
 
Government 
Help 
• 
Negotiation with providers 
 
Benefits 
• 
Understanding the benefits 
 
 
 
201
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

