Data  Security Model for Cloud Computing 
 
Eman M.Mohamed 
Department of Computer Science, Menofia University 
Faculty of computers and information 
 Egypt 
emanhabib_1987@yahoo.com 
Hatem S.Abdelkader 
Department of Information Systems, Menofia University 
Faculty of computers and information 
 Egypt 
hatem6803@yahoo.com
Sherif El-Etriby 
Department of Computer Science, Menofia University 
 Faculty of computers and information 
Egypt  
El_etriby100@yahoo.com 
 
Abstract— From the perspective of data security, which has 
always been an important aspect of quality of service, Cloud 
computing focuses a new challenging security threats. 
Therefore, a data security model must solve the most 
challenges of cloud computing security. The proposed data 
security model provides a single default gateway as a platform. 
It used to secure sensitive user data across multiple public and 
private cloud applications, including salesforce, Chatter, 
Gmail, and Amazon Web Services, without influencing 
functionality or performance. Default gateway platform 
encrypts sensitive data automatically in a real time before 
sending to the cloud storage without breaking cloud 
application. It did not effect on user functionality and visibility. 
If an unauthorized person gets data from cloud storage, he 
only sees encrypted data. If authorized person accesses 
successfully in his cloud, the data is decrypted in real time for 
your use. The default gateway platform must contain strong 
and fast encryption algorithm, file integrity, malware 
detection, firewall, tokenization and more. This paper 
interested about authentication, stronger and faster encryption 
algorithm, and file integrity.  
Keywords- 
Cloud 
computing; 
Data 
Security 
model in cloud computing; Randomness testing; Cryptography 
for cloud computing; One Time Password (OTP). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the traditional model of computing, both data and 
software are fully contained on the user's computer; in cloud 
computing, the user's computer may contain almost no 
software or data (perhaps a minimal operating system and 
web browser, display terminal for processes occurring on a 
network).  
Cloud computing is based on five attributes: multi-
tenancy (shared resources), massive scalability, elasticity, 
pay as you go, and self-provisioning of resources, it makes 
new advances in processors, Virtualization technology, disk 
storage, broadband Internet connection, and fast, inexpensive 
servers have combined to make the cloud a more compelling 
solution.  
The main attributes of cloud computing are illustrated as 
follows [1]:  
 
Multi-tenancy (shared resources): Cloud computing 
is based on a business model in which resources are 
shared (i.e., multiple users use the same resource) at 
the network level, host level, and application level.  
 
Massive scalability: Cloud computing provides the 
ability to scale to tens of thousands of systems, as 
well as the ability to massively scale bandwidth and 
storage space  
 
Elasticity: Users can rapidly increase and decrease 
their computing resources as needed.  
 
Pay as you used: Users to pay for only the resources 
they actually use and for only the time they require 
them.  
 
Self-provisioning of resources: Users self-provision 
resources, such as additional systems (processing 
capability, software, storage) and network resources.  
 
Cloud computing can be confused with distributed 
system, grid computing, utility computing, service oriented 
architecture, web application, web 2.0, broadband network, 
browser as a platform, Virtualization, and free/open software 
[2].  
Cloud computing is a natural evolution of the widespread 
adoption of virtualization, service-oriented architecture, 
autonomic, and utility computing [3]. Details are abstracted 
from end-users, who no longer have a need for expertise in, 
or control over, the technology infrastructure "in the cloud" 
that supports them as shown in figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Evolution of cloud computing 
Cloud services exhibit five essential characteristics that 
demonstrate their relation to, and differences from, 
traditional computing approaches such as On-demand self-
service, Broad network access, Resource pooling, Rapid 
elasticity, and Measured service [4].  
66
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Cloud computing often leverages Massive scale, 
Homogeneity, Virtualization, Resilient computing (no stop 
computing), 
Low 
cost/free 
software, 
Geographic 
distribution, Service orientation Software and Advanced 
security technologies [4]. 
The main objective of this paper is to enhance data 
security model for cloud computing. The proposed data 
security model solves cloud user security problems, help 
cloud provider to select the most suitable encryption 
algorithm to its cloud. We also help user cloud to select the 
highest security encryption algorithm. 
The proposed data security model is composed of three-
phase defense system structure, in which each floor performs 
its own duty to ensure that the data security of cloud. The 
first phase is responsible for strong authentication. It applies 
the OTP (one time password) as a two-factor authentication 
system. OTP provides high security because it used one 
password in a session and cannot be cracked. The second 
phase selects the stronger and a faster encryption algorithm 
by proposing algorithm called "Evaluation algorithm". This 
algorithm used for selected eight modern encryption 
techniques namely: RC4, RC6, MARS, AES, DES, 3DES, 
Two-Fish, and Blowfish. The evaluation has performed for 
those encryption algorithms according to randomness testing 
by using NIST statistical testing. This evaluation uses 
Pseudo Random Number Generator (PRNG) to determine 
the most suitable. This evaluation algorithm performed at 
Amazon EC2 Micro Instance cloud computing environment. 
In addition, this phase checks the integrity of user data. It 
encourages cloud users to encrypt his data by using 
"TrueCrypt" 
software 
or 
proposed 
software 
called 
"CloudCrypt V.10". The third phase, ensure fast recovery of 
user data.   
The paper is organized as follows, in section 2 cloud 
computing architecture is defined. Cloud computing security 
is discussed in section 3, in section 4 Methodology is 
described, finally in section 5 interruptions of the results are 
described. 
II. 
CLOUD COMPUTING ARCHITECTURE 
A. Cloud computing  service models 
 
Cloud Software as a Service (SaaS): Application and 
Information clouds, Use provider’s applications over 
a 
network, 
cloud 
provider 
examples 
Zoho, 
Salesforce.com, Google Apps. 
  
 
Cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS): Development 
clouds, Deploy customer-created applications to a 
cloud, cloud provider examples Windows Azure, 
Google App Engine, Aptana Cloud.    
 
Cloud 
Infrastructure 
as 
a 
Service 
(IaaS): 
Infrastructure clouds, Rent processing, storage, 
network capacity, and other fundamental computing 
resources, Dropbox, Amazon Web Services, Mozy, 
Akamai. 
B. Cloud computing deployment models 
 
Private cloud : Enterprise owned or leased 
 
Community cloud: Shared infrastructure for specific 
community 
 
Public cloud: Sold to the public, mega-scale 
infrastructure 
 
Hybrid cloud: Composition of two or more clouds 
C. Cloud computing sub-services models [12] 
 
IaaS: DataBase-as-a-Service (DBaaS):  DBaaS 
allows the access and use of a database management 
system as a service.  
 
PaaS: Storage-as-a-Service (STaaS): STaaS involves 
the delivery of data storage as a service, including 
database-like services, often billed on a utility 
computing basis, e.g., per gigabyte per month.  
 
SaaS: Communications-as-a-Service (CaaS) :  CaaS 
is the delivery of an enterprise communications 
solution, such as Voice over IP, instant messaging, 
and video conferencing applications as a service.  
 
SaaS: SECurity-as-a-Service (SECaaS):  SECaaS is 
the security of business networks and mobile 
networks through the Internet for events, database, 
application, transaction, and system incidents.  
 
SaaS: Monitoring-as-a-Service (MaaS):  MaaS refers 
to 
the 
delivery 
of 
second-tier 
infrastructure 
components, such as log management and asset 
tracking, as a service.  
 
PaaS: Desktop-as-a-Service (DTaaS): DTaaS is the 
decoupling of a user’s physical machine from the 
desktop and software he or she uses to work.  
 
IaaS: Compute Capacity-as-a-Service (CCaaS) :  
CCaaS is the provision of “raw” computing 
resource, typically used in the execution of 
mathematically complex models from either a single 
“supercomputer” resource or a large number of 
distributed computing resources where the task 
performs well. 
D. Cloud computing benefits 
Lower computer costs, improved performance, reduced 
software costs, instant software updates, improved document 
format compatibility, unlimited storage capacity, device 
independence, and increased data reliability 
E. Cloud computing drawbacks 
Requires a constant Internet connection, does not work 
well with low-speed connections, can be slow, features 
might be limited, stored data might not be secure, and stored 
data can be lost. 
F. Cloud computing providers 
Amazon Web Services (AWS) –include Amazon S3, 
Amazon EC2, Amazon Simple-DB, Amazon SQS, Amazon 
FPS, and others. Salesforce.com – Delivers businesses over 
the internet using the software as a service model. Google 
Apps - Software-as-a-service for business email, information 
sharing and security. And others providers such as Microsoft 
Azure Services Platform, Proof-point, Sun Open Cloud 
Platform, Workday and so on. 
 
67
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING SECURITY 
With cloud computing, all your data is stored on the 
cloud.  So cloud users ask some questions like:  How secure 
is the cloud? Can unauthorized users gain access to your 
confidential data? 
 
 
Figure 2.  Security is a major concern to cloud computing[28]  
Cloud computing companies say that data is secure, but it 
is too early to be completely sure of that. Only time will tell 
if your data is secure in the cloud. Cloud security concerns 
arising which both customer data and program are residing in 
provider premises. Security is always a major concern in 
Open System Architectures as shown in figure 2. 
While cost and ease of use are two great benefits of cloud 
computing, there are significant security concerns that need 
to be addressed when considering moving critical 
applications and sensitive data to public and shared cloud 
environments. To address these concerns, the cloud provider 
must develop sufficient controls to provide the same or a 
greater level of security than the organization would have if 
the cloud were not used. 
There are three types of data in cloud computing. The 
first type is a data in transit (transmission data), the second 
data at rest (storage data), and finally data in processing 
(processing data). 
Clouds are massively complex systems can be reduced to 
simple primitives that are replicated thousands of times and 
common functional units, These complexities create many 
issues related to security as well as all aspects of Cloud 
computing. So users always worry about its data and ask 
where the data is? And who has access?. Every cloud 
provider encrypts the data in three types according to table 1. 
TABLE I.  
 DATA SECURITY [ENCRYPTION] IN CLOUD COMPUTING 
Storage 
Processing  
Transmission  
Symmetric encryption 
Homomophric encryption 
Secret socket layer 
SSL encryption 
AES-DES-3DES-
Blowfish-MARS… 
Unpadded RSA- ElGamal 
…  
SSL 1.0- SSL 3.0- 
SSL 3.1-SSL 3.2... 
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
Security of data and trust problem has always been a 
primary and challenging issue in cloud computing.  This 
section describes a proposed data security model in cloud 
computing. In addition, focuses on enhancing security by 
using an OTP authentication system, check data integrity by 
using hashing algorithms, encrypt data automatically with 
the highest strong/ fast encryption algorithm and finally 
ensure the fast recovery of data. 
A. Proposed data at rest security model 
The proposed data security model used three-level 
defense system structure, in which each floor performs its 
own duty to ensure that the data security of cloud  as shown 
in figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proposed data security model in cloud computing  
The first phase: strong authentication is achieved by 
using OTP. 
The second phase: data are encrypted automatically by 
using strong/fast encryption algorithm. In addition to encrypt 
data, users can encrypt his sensitive data by using TrueCrypt 
software or proposed software CloudCrypt V.10. CloudCrypt 
software uses eight modern/strong encryption algorithms. 
Finally, data integrity is achieved by using hashing 
algorithms. 
The third phase: fast recovery of user data is achieved in 
this phase. 
The three phases are implemented in default gateway. As 
shown 
in 
figure 
4. 
The 
proposed 
data 
security 
model provides a single default gateway as a platform to 
secure sensitive customer data across multiple public and 
private cloud applications, including salesforce, Gmail, and 
Amazon Web Services, without affecting functionality or 
performance. 
 
 
Figure 4.  How data stored in the cloud by using the proposed data 
security model? 
Default gateway platform tasks: 
Phase  1   
               
  
 
Phase  2                    
 
 
 
 
Phase  3 
Automatically Data 
Encryption 
Automatically Data 
Integrity 
Data Fast Recovery 
OTP Authentication 
Private User Protection 
68
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Encrypt sensitive data automatically on a real time 
before sending to the    cloud without breaking cloud 
application.  
 
The default gateway platform did not effect on user 
functionality and visibility.  
 
 If an unauthorized person gets data from cloud 
storage, he can see the encrypted data.  
 
  If authorized person access success in his cloud, the 
data is decrypted in real time for your use.  
 
 The default gateway platform must contain 
Strong/Fast Encryption Algorithm. 
 
 The default gateway platform must contain File 
integrity. 
 
  The default gateway platform must contain 
Malware detection, Firewall, Tokenization and 
more. 
Proposed data security model implemented and applied 
to cloudsim 3.0 by using HDFS architecture and Amazon 
web services (S3 and EC2).  
In this paper, automatically encryption, integrity, fast 
recovery and private user encryption all are achieved in the 
proposed data security model.  
B. Implementation details 
1) In first phase, Authentication: 
a) The cloud user select company, then create an 
account 
b) Cloud provider upload user information in DB in 
cloud storage 
c) Cloud Provider confirms user with his username and 
password 
d) Cloud user request login page 
e) The cloud provider displays login screen 
f) Cloud user login with username and password 
g) A cloud provider check is valid username and 
password by searching in DB in cloud storage. If user 
information not valid display error message else display 
reserve a PC page. 
h) Cloud user reserves your PC 
2) OTP authentication steps: 
a) Cloud user enters passphrase, challenge and 
sequence number for OTP authentication 
b) Cloud user generates an OTP 
c) The cloud provider generates the OTP temporary DB 
based on user information 
d) Cloud user login with OTP 
e) A cloud provider check is valid OTP by searching in 
temporary DB for OTP in cloud storage. If OTP not valid 
display error message else display user PC page. 
3) In second phase, Private user protection 
a) Before adding data, cloud user can encrypt data by 
using TrueCrypt or CloudCrypt software's. 
b) In second phase, Automatic data encryption 
c) Cloud user adds data. 
d) Cloud server encrypt data automatically by using 
fast/strong encryption algorithm that selected based on an 
evaluation algorithm for the cloud company 
4) In second phase, Automatic check data integrity 
a) The cloud server generates file hash value 
b) Cloud server store data with its hash value 
c) When a cloud user requests his data, cloud server 
decrypt data automatically, check integrity by check the hash 
value. 
5) In third phase, fast recovery of data 
a) Finally, cloud server retrieves data with message of 
file integrity. 
C. Proposed Evaluation Algorithm 
We use NIST statistical tests to get the highest security 
encryption algorithm from eight algorithms namely RC4, 
RC6, MARS, AES, DES, 3DES, Two-Fish, and Blowfish as 
shown in figure 6. NIST Developed to test the randomness of 
binary sequences produced by either hardware or software 
based cryptographic random or pseudorandom number 
generators.  
 NIST statistical tests has 16 test namely  The Frequency 
(Mon-obit) Test, Frequency Test within a Block, The Runs 
Test, Tests for the Longest-Run-of-Ones in a Block, The 
Binary Matrix Rank Test, The Discrete Fourier Transform 
(Spectral) Test, The Non-overlapping Template Matching 
Test, The Overlapping Template Matching Test, Maurer's 
"Universal Statistical" Test, The Linear Complexity Test, 
The Serial Test, The Approximate Entropy Test, The 
Cumulative Sums (Cusums) Test, The Random Excursions 
Test, and The Random Excursions Variant Test. 
We also compare between eight encryption algorithms 
based on speed of encryption to achieve faster recovery. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Steps to select the highest encryption algorithm 
We use Amazon EC2 as a case study of our software. 
Amazon EC2 Load your image onto S3 and register it. Boot 
your image from the Web Service. Open up the required 
ports for your image. Connect to your image through SSH. 
And finally execute your application.  
For our experiment in a cloud computing environment, 
we use Micro Instances of this Amazon EC2 family, provide 
a small amount of consistent CPU resources, they are well 
69
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

suited for lower throughput applications, 613 MB memory, 
up to 2 EC2 Compute Units (for short periodic bursts), EBS 
(Elastic Block Store) storage only from 1GB to 1TB, 64-bit 
platform, low I/O Performance, t1.micro API name, We use 
Ubuntu Linux to run NIST Statistical test package [9-11].  
D. Selection the highest encryption algorithm steps 
Sign up for Amazon web service to create an account.  
Lunch Micro instance Windows (64 bit) Amazon EC2. 
Connect to Amazon EC2 windows Micro Instance. Generate 
128 plain stream sequences as PRNG, each sequence is 
7,929,856 bits in length (991232 bytes in length) and key 
stream (length of key 128 bits). Apply cryptography 
algorithms to get ciphers text. Lunch Micro instance Amazon 
EC2 Ubuntu Linux Connect to Amazon EC2 Ubuntu Linux 
Micro instance  Run NIST statistical tests for each sequence 
to eight encryption algorithms to get P-value Compare P-
value to 0.01, if p-value less than 0.01 then reject the 
sequence. 
We compare between eight encryption methods based on 
P-value, Rejection rate and finally based on time consuming 
for each method. 
We have 128 sequences (128-cipher text) for each eight-
encryption algorithm. 
Each sequence has 7,929,856 bits in length (991232 
bytes in length). Additionally, the P-values reported in the 
tables can find in the results.txt files for each of the 
individual test – not in the finalAnalysisReport.txt file in 
NIST package. 
The P - value represents the probability of observing the 
value of the test statistic which is more extreme in the 
direction of non-randomness. P-value measures the support 
for the randomness hypothesis on the basis of a particular 
test Rejection Rate number of rejected sequences (P-value 
less than significance level α may be equal 0.01 or 0.1 or 
0.05).  The higher P-Value the better and vice versa with 
rejection rate, the lower the better [19]. 
For each statistical test, a set of P-values (corresponding 
to the set of sequences) is produced.  For a fixed significance 
level α, a certain percentage of P-values are expected to 
indicate failure.  For example, if the significance level is 
chosen to be 0.01 (i.e., α ≥ 0.01), then about 1 % of the 
sequences are expected to fail.  A sequence passes a 
statistical test whenever the P-value ≥ α and fails otherwise.  
 We produce P-value, which small P-value(less than 
0.01) support non-randomness.  For example, if the sample 
consists of 128 sequences, the rejection rate should not 
exceed 4.657, or simply expressed 4 sequences with α = 
0.01. The maximum number of rejections was computed 
using the formula [20]:  
Rejection rate #=
)   
1(
3








s
s



               (1) 
Where s is the sample size and is α is the significance level is 
chosen to be 0.01. 
 
 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, we show and describe the simulation 
results of the proposed data security model. 
A. OTP Authentication 
 
 
Figure 6.      OTP authentication in PDSM 
OTP System steps as shown in figure 6. 
    The users connect to the cloud provider. Then the user 
gets the username (e-mail), password and finally account 
password.  
    Users login to the cloud provider website by getting 
username (e-mail), password and   account password. 
    Cloud node controller verifies user info.  If user info is 
true, controller-node send that login authentication success 
and require OTP. 
   OTP generation software used to generate OTP as 
shown in figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.    Proposed software for  OTP Generation 
    Users generate OTP by using MD5 hash function and 
sequence number based on user name, password and account 
password.   
  Then users login to cloud website with OTP as shown in 
figure 8. 
  
70
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 8.  proposed OTP login screen 
   The cloud controller node generates 1000 OTP based 
on user info by using the MD5 hash function. Then the cloud 
controller saves 1000 OTP in the temporary OTP database. 
   The cloud controller verifies user OTP from the 
temporary OTP database.  
  If OTP is true, send OTP login success. 
We have compared password space with different 
password schemas; we can identify the most secure 
approaches with respect to brute force attack as shown in 
table 2. This table shows the comparison of the password 
space and password length for popular user authentication 
schemas for cloud computing. The next table shows that the 
approach presented by us is both more secured and the 
easiest to remember. At the same time, it is relatively fast to 
produce during an authentication procedure as shown in 
figure 9 and figure 10. 
TABLE II.  
  PASSWORD SPACE COMPARISON  
Authentication 
System 
Alpha
bet 
Password 
Length 
Password 
space size 
Entropy 
bits 
Static 
password 
82 
12 
92.4 * 1021 
22.96 
PIN number 
10 
12 
1 * 1012 
12 
OTP 
40 
30 
1.15 * 1048 
48.06 
 
We must remember that, a one-time password (OTP) is a 
password that is valid for only one login session or 
transaction. OTPs avoid a number of shortcomings that are 
associated with traditional (static) passwords. The most 
important shortcoming that is addressed by OTPs is that, in 
contrast to static passwords, they are not vulnerable to replay 
attacks. This means that, if a potential intruder manages to 
record an OTP that was already used to log into a service or 
to conduct a transaction, he or she will not be able to abuse it 
since it will be no longer valid. On the downside, OTPs are 
difficult for human beings to memorize. Therefore they 
require additional technology in order to work. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Security strength comparison based on entropy bits  
 
Figure 10.  Security strength comparison based on password space size  
Benefits of OTP in cloud computing 
 
OTP  offers strong two-factor authentication, 
 
The OTP is unique to this session and cannot be 
used again 
 
OTP offers strong security because they cannot be 
guessed or hacked  
 
Provides protection from unauthorized access 
 
Easier to use for the employee than complex 
frequently changing passwords 
 
Easy to deploy for the administrator 
 
Good first step to strong authentication in an 
organization 
 
Low cost way to deploy strong authentication 
  
B.  Evaluation Algorithm Results 
In this paper, we select the strongest and a the fastest 
encryption algorithm by proposing algorithm called 
"Evaluation algorithm". This algorithm used for selecting 
eight modern encryption techniques namely: RC4, RC6, 
MARS, AES, DES, 3DES, Two-Fish, and Blowfish. The 
evaluation has performed for those encryption algorithms 
according to randomness testing by using NIST statistical 
testing. This evaluation uses Pseudo Random Number 
71
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Generator (PRNG) to determine the most suitable. This 
evaluation algorithm performed at Amazon EC2 Micro 
Instance cloud computing environment. 
 
 
Figure 11.     Amazon EC2 Average P-value for eight modern encryption 
algorithms based on 16 NIST test 
Experimental results for this comparison point are shown 
in figure 11 to indicate the highest security for modern 
encryption techniques. The results show the superiority of 
the AES algorithm over other algorithms in terms of the P-
value. Another point can be noticed here; that RC6  requires 
more P-value than all algorithms except AES. A third point 
can be noticed here; that 3DES has an advantage over other 
DES, RC4, MARS, 3DES and Twofish in terms of P-value. 
Finally, it is found that Twofish has low security when 
compared with other algorithms. 
 
Experimental results for this comparison point are shown 
Figure 12 to indicate the speed of encryption/decryption. The 
results show the superiority of the Blowfish algorithm over 
other algorithms in terms of the processing time. Another 
point can be noticed here; that AES  requires less time than 
all algorithms except Blowfish. A third point can be noticed 
here; that RC4 has an advantage over other DES, RC6, 
MARS, 3DES and Twofish in terms of time consumption . A 
fourth point can be noticed here; that 3DES has low 
performance in terms of power consumption when compared 
with DES. It always requires more time than DES because of 
its triple phase encryption characteristics. Finally, it is found 
that Twofish has low performance when compared with 
other algorithms.   
 
Figure 12.     Encryption/decryption comparison with different size in 
Amazon EC2 
C. Private User protection 
Amazon web services encourage user's to encrypt 
sensitive data by using TrueCrypt software.  A new 
computer software program is implemented to encrypt data 
before storing in cloud storage devices. This software 
enables users to choose from eight encryption techniques 
namely: AES, DES, 3DES, RC4, RC6, Twofish, Blowfish, 
and MARS as shown in figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13.   Proposed encryption software CloudCrypt at runtime in 
Amazon EC2 
D. Ensuring Integrity 
This is an extra concern for customers that now they have 
to worry about how to keep data hidden from auditors. The 
actual problem of "trust" remains the same. In order to avoid 
third party auditors in this chain, this paper propose that the 
integrity check of data stored in the cloud can be checked on 
customer's side. This integrity check can be done by using 
cryptographic hash functions. 
For integrity check, we have to think about a simple 
solution that is feasible and easy to implement for a common 
user. The trust problem between Cloud storage and customer 
can be solved, if users can check the integrity of data 
72
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

themselves instead of renting an auditing service to do the 
same. This can be achieved by hashing the data on user's side 
and storing the hash values in the cloud with the original 
data. As shown in figure 14. This figure presents the 
overview of the scheme 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.   Overview of integrity check with hash functions 
   Integrity Check using Hash Function steps 
 
 The program takes file path that as shown in figure 
15. 
 
 
The program computes a four-hash values in this file 
based on the four hash functions (MD4, MD5, SHA-
1, and SHA-2) as shown in figure 16. 
 
 
Figure 15.   Screen shot of Check integrity program  
 
Figure 16.     Check integrity program calculating hash values 
 
When users store data in cloud storage devices, 
server store filled with four hash values. 
 
When a user retrieve data file, server  generate four 
hash values  
 
Server check integrity by comparing new four hash 
values  with stored four hash values. 
The following are the advantages of using the utility: 
 
Not much implementation effort required. 
 
Cost effective and more secured. 
 
Does not require much time to compute the hash 
values. 
 
Flexible enough to change the security level as 
required. 
 
Not much space required to store the hash values. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
According to the simulation results, in the authentication 
phase in the proposed data security model, OTP is used as 
two-factor authentication software. OTP archived more 
password strength security than other authentication systems 
(BIN and static password). This appears by comparing 
between OTP, BIN, and static password authentication 
systems based on the space time size and entropy bits. 
From the simulation results of the second phase in the 
proposed data security model, test the proposed system in 
Ubunto Amazon Micro Instance EC2, and from randomness 
and performance evaluation to eight modern encryption 
algorithms AES is the best encryption algorithm in Ubunto 
Amazon Micro Instance EC2. In addition to the randomness 
and performance evaluation, data integrity must be ensured. 
Moreover, the proposed data security model encourages 
users to use true-crypt to encrypt his/her sensitive data. 
From the comparison and performance evaluation, fast 
recovery of data achieved to the user. These appear in the 
proposed data security model third phase. 
From the comparison and performance evaluation, cloud 
computing depend on some condition however it has 
advanced security technologies rather than traditional 
desktop. The summarized results of proposed data security 
model are shown in table 3.  
TABLE III.  
SUMMARIZED RESULTS OF THE PROPOSED DATA           
              SECURITY MODEL IN CLOUD COMPUTING 
Features 
Description  
Authentication  
OTP Authentication System (mathematical 
generation)  
Provider 
Encryption 
Software implemented to select the highest 
security and faster encryption algorithm based on 
NIST statistical tests. 
This software select AES algorithm to Micro 
Instance ubunto Amazon EC2 with Amazon S3. 
Private user 
Encryption 
TrueCrypt system or proposed software 
CloudCrypt v.10 
Data integrity 
Hashing- MD5- MD4-SHA-1-SHA-2 
Data fast recovery 
Based on decryption algorithm speed 
Key management 
User keys not stored in provider control domain 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Center Of The Protection Of National Infrastructure CPNI by 
Deloitte "Information Security Briefing 01/2010 Cloud 
Computing",  p.71 , Published March 2010. 
[2] lan  Foster, Yong Zhao, Ioan Raicu, Shiyong Lu, "  Cloud 
Computing  and  Grid Computing 360-Degree Compared  "   
Grid Computing Environments Workshop, 2008. GCE '08  
p.10, published 16 Nov 2008.  
Store file with hash 
value 
Cloud server 
Or  
Owner of data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
File 
 
Hash value 
Retrieve 
file and 
check 
integrity 
73
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

[3] Jeremy 
Geelan, 
"Twenty-One 
Experts 
Define 
Cloud 
Computing", cloud  computing journal, published january 24, 
2009. 
[4] National Institute of Science and Technology."The NIST 
Definition of  Cloud Computing".p.7. Retrieved July 24  
2011. 
[5] Ngongang Guy Mollet, "Cloud Computing Security" Thesis, 
p. 34 + 2 appendices Published April 11, 2011. 
[6] Rajkumar Buyya, Chee Shin Yeo, and Srikumar Venugopal, "  
Market-Oriented Cloud Computing: Vision, Hype, and 
Reality for Delivering IT  Services as Computing Utilities"  
Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, 
University of Melbourne, Australia. p. 9.  Retrieved July 31 
2008. 
[7]  Mladen A. Vouk  "Cloud Computing-  Issues, Research and 
mplementations"  Journal of Computing and  Information 
Technology  -CIT 16, 2008, 4, 235–246 
[8] Dai Yuefa, Wu Bo, Gu Yaqiang, Zhang Quan, Tang 
Chaojing"Data 
 
Security 
Model 
for 
Cloud 
Computing"Proceedings of the 2009  international Workshop 
on Information Security and Application  IWISA 2009) 
Qingdao, China, November 21-22, 2009. 
[9] Amazon EC2 API ,"  Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
Developer 
Guide 
" 
http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AWSEC2/2006-10-
01/DeveloperGuide/Amazon 
Elastic 
Compute 
Cloud 
Developer Guide, published 2006-10-01 
[10] Amazon Web Services,  "Amazon  Simple Storage Service 
Developer 
 
Guide 
, 
"     
http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AmazonS3/2006-03-01/ 
Amazon  Simple Storage Service Developer Guide  , 
published 2006-03-01 
[11] Amazon Web Services,"  Overview  of Security Processes"  
http://aws.typepad.com/aws/2009/08/introducing-amazon-
virtual-private-cloud-vpc.html, September 2009. 
[12] Cloud Security Alliance  Guidance,  "Security Guidance For 
Critical  Areas of Focus    In  Cloud Computing V1.0",  
www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/guidance/csaguide.v1.0.pdf, 
published April 2009  
[13] Cloud  Security Alliance  Guidance,"  Security Guidance For 
Critical  Areas of Focus    In Cloud Computing V2.1",  
www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/guidance/csaguide.v2.1.pdf, 
published  Dec 2009  
[14] Cloud Security Alliance  Guidance,  "Security Guidance For 
Critical  Areas  of Focus    In  Cloud Computing V3.0  ,  
www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/guidance/csaguide.v3.0.pdf 
published  11/14/2011 
[15] Luis M. Vaquero1, Luis Rodero-Merino1 , Juan Caceres1, 
Maik  Lindner2 "A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud 
Definition  ", ACM SIGCOMM Computer  Communication 
Review, Vol 39, Number 1,  published January 2009  
[16] John W. Rittinghouse James F. Ransome "Cloud Computing 
Implementation, 
Management, 
and 
Security" 
 
book,  
published 17 Aug  2009. 
[17] Mark Baker, "An Introduction and Overview of Cloud 
Computing",43 
slides, 
published 
19th 
May, 
09 
. 
http://acet.rdg.ac.uk/~mab/Talks/Clouds-La-
Coruna09/Talk.ppt  
[18] Cloud Security Alliance "Top Threats to Cloud Computing 
V1.0" , March 2010. 
[19] Andrew Rukhin, Juan Soto, James Nechvatal, Miles Smid,: 
"A Statistical Test Suite for Random and Pseudorandom 
Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications", April 
2010 .  
[20] Affiliation Juan Soto, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology  100 Bureau Drive, Stop 8930 Gaithersburg 
"Randomness Testing of the  Advanced Encryption Standard 
Candidate Algorithms".   
[21] Carolynn Burwick c , Don Coppersmith "The MARS 
Encryption  Algorithm " , published August 27, 1999 
[22] Dawson, Helen Gustafson, Matt Henricksen, Bill Millan. "  
Evaluation  of RC4 Stream Cipher  ,  Information Security 
Research Centre  Queensland University of Technology", July 
31, 2002  
[23] W.Stallings, ''Cryptography and Network Security 4th Ed,'' 
Prentice Hall , 2005,PP. 58-309 . 
[24] Coppersmith, D. "The Data Encryption Standard (DES) and 
Its Strength  Against Attacks."I BM Journal of Research and 
Development, May  1994,pp. 243 -250.  
[25] Daemen, J., and Rijmen, V. "Rijndael: The Advanced 
Encryption  Standard."D r. Dobb's Journal, March 2001,PP. 
137-139.  
[26] Bruce Schneier. "The Blowfish Encryption Algorithm 
Retrieved  ",October 25, 2008,  
[27] John Kelseyy Doug Whitingz David Wagnerx Chris Hall, 
"Two_sh: A 128-Bit Block Cipher" , Niels Ferguson k , 15 
June 1998  
[28] http://www.csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloud-computing/cloud-
computing-v26.ppt. 
 
 
 
 
74
Copyright (c) The Government of Egypt, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

