Optical Protection with Pre-conﬁgured Backup
Paths and Limited Backup Resource Sharing
Krishanthmohan Ratnam, Mohan Gurusamy, and Kee Chaing Chua
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore
Email: {eleratn,elegm,eleckc}@nus.edu.sg
Abstract—In this paper, we consider provisioning protection
in WDM optical networks with pre-conﬁgured backup paths. In
the traditional protection approach, backup resources are not
shared among pre-conﬁgured backup paths, and thus resources
are not utilized efﬁciently. We propose a protection approach
with the use of a switch architecture, which allows limited
sharing of backup resources among pre-conﬁgured backup paths
(referred to as pre-conﬁgured backup protection with limited
sharing (PBPLS)). The architecture uses switching components
with a ﬂexible feature of splitting optical power on need basis
in addition to directing the power towards one output port
only. Further, conﬁguration can be done which connects two
(or more) input ports to the same output port at the same time.
These features allow sharing backup resources while provisioning
pre-conﬁgured backup paths. This approach can be adopted in
networks in small geographical area such as metro networks
since the power splitting feature is used. While sharing backup
resources in this approach, we consider power loss particularly
due to potential repeated power splitting. Ampliﬁers can be used,
at additional cost, to compensate the power loss. Instead, we
adopt an approach of limiting the number of power splitting to
small values to reduce the power loss. Constraining the number
of power splitting limits the degree of backup sharing. Through
simulation experiments in a single class and multi-class trafﬁc
scenarios, we demonstrate that, even with the small number of
power splitting such as one or two, signiﬁcant improvement in
blocking performance can be achieved.
Keywords-optical networks; wavelength-division-multiplexing;
survivability;
I. INTRODUCTION
Survivability or fault tolerance is an important requirement
in wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) optical networks.
Among the several survivability approaches, provisioning op-
tical layer protection with pre-conﬁgured backup paths such
as optical dedicated protection (or 1:1 protection) is preferred
for trafﬁc which require short recovery time. In this approach,
a backup path is conﬁgured at the time when the connection is
established. In the event of a component failure on a primary
path, this approach requires no further switch conﬁguration
to set up the backup path. This protection approach has been
investigated in research works under several scenarios such
as path, segment, and link based protection, protection with
trafﬁc grooming, differentiated survivability services, and pro-
tection with multi-line-rate consideration. In [1], two 1:1 path
protection methods, static and dynamic have been investigated.
The static method provides ﬁxed primary and backup paths,
and the dynamic method allows rearrangement of backup
paths. The work in [2] investigates capacity utilization and
protection switching time for a dedicated path protection
scheme and protection approaches which share backup re-
sources. Dedicated protection for trafﬁc grooming of sub-
lambda trafﬁc using a generic grooming-node architecture has
been investigated in [3]. In [4], a comparison of schemes which
include path and segment based protection for differentiated
availability-guaranteed services is given. The recent work in
[5] investigates dedicated protection approaches considering
various transmission rates of wavelength channels.
A major drawback in provisioning pre-conﬁgured backup
paths using the traditional protection approach is its inefﬁcient
resource usage. Unlike the optical layer shared protection
approach, in this approach backup resources are not shared
among the pre-conﬁgured backup paths and thus resources
are not utilized efﬁciently. The traditional optical shared
protection has long recovery time, in which backup paths
are not pre-conﬁgured and backup wavelength links can be
shared by other backup paths. The work in [2] shows that,
with 10ms switch conﬁguration time, the recovery times of
dedicated and shared protection approaches are 3ms and 56ms
respectively under a distributed protocol (for a random demand
of 30 connections on a representative network topology). The
conﬁguration time of switches widely used could be several
10’s of ms and the difference in recovery time for the two
approaches would, therefore, be even more signiﬁcant. Several
mission critical applications require short recovery time. Pre-
conﬁgured backup protection is suitable for such applications.
The shared protection approach may not satisfy their stringent
recovery time needs.
We propose a protection approach which allows limited
sharing of backup resources among pre-conﬁgured backup
paths (referred to as pre-conﬁgured backup protection with
limited sharing (PBPLS)). The proposed approach can be
used under single component failure scenarios. To allow such
resource sharing, we use the switch architecture proposed in
[6]. The architecture has the following ﬂexible features. In
addition to directing the input power towards one output port
only (like the traditional switches), the power can be split on a
desired sub-set of output ports on need basis. When the switch
is pre-conﬁgured to split power on two output ports, the trafﬁc
can be switched on one of the ports with the split power which
requires no further conﬁguration. Further, the switch can be
conﬁgured to connect two (or more) input ports to the same
output port at the same time. With this pre-conﬁguration, the
trafﬁc can be switched from one of the input ports to the
121
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

same output port which requires no further conﬁguration. In
the proposed approach, when backup paths are set up, similar
pre-conﬁgurations can be done so that backup resources can
be shared. The recovery time in this case is equivalent to the
case of the traditional dedicated protection approach since no
further conﬁguration is needed at intermediate nodes. This
protection approach can be adopted in networks in small
geographical area such as metro networks since the power
splitting feature is used when sharing backup resources.
In the proposed approach, we consider limited sharing
of backup resources. This is because of power loss when
power splitting is used for backup sharing. Particularly, when
repeated or cascading of power splitting occurs, power will
be reduced signiﬁcantly. One solution is to compensate power
using ampliﬁers at additional cost. In this paper, we adopt
the approach of limiting the number of power splitting on a
backup path to reduce the power loss. Constraining the number
of power splitting limits the degree of backup sharing. We
investigate for small values for the maximum number of power
splitting (one to three).
As explained above, the proposed protection approach uti-
lizes the ﬂexible features of the switch architecture used in
this paper. The widely used traditional optical switches such
as MEMS switches [7] do not support these features because
of architectural limitations, and therefore similar protection
approach cannot be adopted. The proposed approach can be
employed in broadcast-and-select based architectures which
are widely considered in optical burst/packet switching net-
works [8] [9]. These architectures generally consist splitters
and semiconductor optical ampliﬁers (SOAs). Since SOAs are
used, power loss due to power splitting would be compensated
and the need for limiting the number of power splitting
may not arise (or reduced). However, we do not use these
architectures in this paper because of their high power loss
and high cost. Splitters used in these architectures always split
power towards all the output ports and thus signiﬁcantly a
large amount of power is wasted. Further, these architectures
are expensive since a large number of SOAs are required.
The switch architecture used in this paper uses components
with the ﬂexibility of controlled power directing and splitting
as explained above. Therefore, it reduces power wastage
signiﬁcantly. In addition to this, we do not use ampliﬁers in
the architecture in order to reduce the cost.
In [10], an approach has been proposed to improve re-
source usage in which a pre-conﬁgured backup path can share
resources of non pre-conﬁgured backup paths. Unlike this
approach, this paper investigates sharing backup resources
among pre-conﬁgured backup paths. Power splitting has been
considered in [11] [12] when provisioning protection. In [11],
a 1+1 dedicated protection approach (trafﬁc is simultaneously
sent via the two alternate paths) has been investigated in
which splitters are used in broadcast-and-select OADMs for a
ring topology network. This work does not consider backup
sharing. In [12], splitters are used in tree-based protection for
multicast trafﬁc. In this work, backup sharing is considered and
nodes may require reconﬁgurations in the event of a failure. In
    0% − 50% − 100%
w 0
1
w
1
w
w 0
w n
w n
N1
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
VOS
Rx Rx Tx Tx
a
c
b
d
VOSs
VOSs
Combiner
Control Processing Unit
Combiner
a
b
c
d
DEMUX
MUX
Port 1
Port 2
100% − 50% −  0%
Fig. 1.
Switch architecture with two input and two output links
our work, we consider unicast only and the proposed approach
avoids reconﬁgurations when failure occurs. In the following
sections, we illustrate the switch architecture ﬁrst, and then
illustrate our proposed protection approach.
II. OPTICAL SWITCH ARCHITECTURE
The proposed switch architecture [6] is shown in Fig. 1(i).
In [6], we have investigated the transmission of bursty trafﬁc.
The switch can be used for the transmission of circuit level
trafﬁc also (transmission through lightpaths). We consider the
switch for a node with two input and two output links as shown
in Fig. 1(ii). Each link carries a control wavelength w0 and
n data wavelengths (w1, w2, .., wn). The basic architectural
component is a 1x2 variable optical splitter (VOS). Other
components are combiners, multiplexers (MUX), demulti-
plexers (DEMUX), receivers (Rx), transmitters (Tx), and a
control processing unit. In Fig. 1(i), the components VOSs,
combiners, receivers, and transmitters are shown for the data
wavelength w1. VOSs are cascaded and linked to combiners
and receivers as shown in the ﬁgure. Additional VOSs and
combiners can be cascaded and linked in the similar manner
to accommodate more links. For F number of ﬁber links and
N data wavelengths, a total of NF 2 VOSs and NF combiners
(each is of type (F + 1)X1) are required.
We use the 1x2 VOS component presented in [14] [15] [13]
in our switch. The self-latching VOS is based on magneto-
optical technology. The VOS is designed using mainly a
variable faraday rotator and a walk-off crystal. In the VOS,
input optical power can be distributed (or split) on the two
output ports with various ratios (states) such as (0%−100%),
(50% − 50%), and (100% − 0%) as shown in Fig. 1(iii).
The component requires an electric pulse to switch states
(i.e. increase/decrease the power on a port). By applying the
electric pulse appropriately the various states can be achieved.
It takes 0.25ms time to switch between (0% − 100%) and
(50%−50%) states. We assume the same time period to switch
between (50% − 50%), and (100% − 0%) because of near
symmetrical power splitting pattern seen in [15]. We denote
the 0.5ms conﬁguration time required to change the split power
122
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Apply
N1
c
d
a
b
Lightpath
Rx(Local drop)
(t = 0)
(t = −Tvos)
Rx(Local drop)
100
0
100
a
c
d
a
c
d
0
100
0
100
0
p
  q
p
  q
(ii)
(iii)
(i)
electric pulse
Fig. 2.
Switch conﬁguration
on an output port from 0% to 100% (i.e., from (0% − 100%)
to (100% − 0%)) as Tvos. The states (0% − 100%) and
(100%−0%) can be used to direct the full power towards one
output port only (like the traditional optical switches). Further,
the state (50%−50%) can be used to split power. Particularly,
unlike the traditional switches, the power can be split on a
desired sub-set of output ports on need basis by appropriately
changing the state of VOSs in the switch. We use this feature
in our protection approach, which is illustrated in Section III.
The low-cost magneto-optic component available in [16] can
also be used in our architecture.
Average insertion loss (IL) of the VOS is 0.6dB (for
(0% − 100%) and (100% − 0%)) and 4dB (for (50% − 50%))
and polarization-dependent loss (PDL) is less than 0.1dB. The
VOS energy consumption is very low (∼ 120µJ) [14]. For
a typical nodal degree such as two and three, the insertion
loss at core components (VOSs and combiners) is in the
range of 6.6dB to 7.2dB and 6.6dB to 7.8dB respectively
(VOSs: 1.2dB and 1.8dB when traversing up to 2 and 3 VOSs
with (0% − 100%) and (100% − 0%) states, and combiners:
6dB when two cascaded combiners (each of 3dB type) are
traversed with these nodal degrees in a 4X1 type). When the
VOS is used with (50% − 50%) state (used when failure
recovery only), slightly more power loss occurs. Therefore,
the architecture is suitable for networks in small geographical
areas because of the power-loss. Otherwise, ampliﬁers are
required to compensate the power-loss.
A. Switch conﬁguration
An optical connection/lightpath can be set up by conﬁguring
intermediate nodes along the lightpath. Generally, control
messages are sent (on the control wavelength w0) using a two-
way reservation approach for establishing the lightpath (on a
data wavelength, say w1). The control message is processed
electronically at the control processing unit at intermediate
nodes. The control message carries the details about the
connection which are used to conﬁgure VOSs at intermediate
nodes. Below, we illustrate how VOSs are conﬁgured at a node
which connects an input port to an output port for establishing
the lightpath. We consider a node with two input and two
output links as shown in Fig. 1(ii) for illustration.
We consider that a lightpath is set up which traverse from
link a to link c on the wavelength w1 as shown in Fig. 2(i).
It is considered that, at t = −Tvos, the control message has
been processed and the switch conﬁguration is initiated. The
default status of VOSs in our switch (at t = −Tvos) is shown
in Fig. 2(ii). VOS-p and VOS-q shown are the two VOSs
connected with link a in our switch architecture shown in Fig.
1(i). We do not show the other VOSs connected with link b
as no conﬁguration is done in these VOSs. At t = −Tvos,
the default power splitting status of both VOS-p and VOS-q is
(0% − 100%) with 0% power directed towards links c and d.
That is, paths within the switch from a to c and a to d are shut
initially. Once the control message has been processed, the
node identiﬁes the output port of the connection and selects the
VOS which is connected to that port (i.e. VOS-p). An electrical
pulse is applied to the selected VOS, i.e. VOS-p, at t = −Tvos
as shown in Fig. 2(ii). It changes the power splitting state of
VOS-p to (100%−0%) at t = 0 (i.e. it requires Tvos time to
change the state) with 100% power directed towards links c.
This is shown in Fig. 2(iii). That is, power directed towards
link c increases from 0% (at t = −Tvos) to 100% (at t = 0).
Therefore, at t = 0, the path a−c is connected/opened. When
optical signals arrive on the lightpath they are switched with
full input power directed towards link c. Paths a − d remains
shut. Note that, at the receiver node (egress), the optical signals
can be received at the default state as full power is directed
towards the local receiver (Rx).
III. PRE-CONFIGURED BACKUP PROTECTION WITH
LIMITED SHARING (PBPLS)
The traditional optical layer dedicated protection has short
recovery time because of pre-conﬁgured backup paths. Achiev-
ing short recovery time by pre-conﬁgured backup paths and at
the same time employing backup sharing are not done. This
is because of the limitations in the traditional OXCs. Consider
that a switch conﬁguration is done to connect an input port to
an output port within a widely used OXC such as a MEMS
optical switch. While maintaining this connection, another
conﬁguration to connect (1) the same input port to a different
output port, or (2) a different input port to the same output port
is not done. This is because, this later conﬁguration disrupts
the existing connection. The conﬁguration is, therefore, done
only after the existing connection is over or released. This
constraint does not allow setting up two backup lightpaths
which are pre-conﬁgured and at the same time they share one
or more wavelength links.
As explained in Section II, the switch architecture consid-
ered in this paper has increased ﬂexibility of how optical power
received on an input port can be directed or split on need basis.
This ﬂexibility can be used to overcome the above constraint.
Power splitting allows connecting an input port to two (or
more) output ports within the switch. In addition to this, the
components are cascaded in the architecture such that they
allow conﬁgurations which connect two (or more) input ports
to the same output port. We illustrate how these features are
used in our protection approach below.
123
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

  i
 a
b
c
 g
 e
P1
B1
B2
P2
 d
 f
 h
Fig. 3.
Shared protection
s
VOSs
Combiners
(Rx)
(Rx)
(Tx)
(Tx)
100
0
0
100
100
0
100
(a−d)
(g−d)
(d−e)
0
p
q
r
Fig. 4.
Switch conﬁguration at node-d
(f−i)
VOSs
Combiners
(Rx)
(Rx)
(Tx)
(Tx)
50
50
100
0
0
100
0
100
p
s
r
q
(e−f)
(f−c)
Fig. 5.
Switch conﬁguration at node-f
The protection approach allows provisioning pre-conﬁgured
backup paths with limited backup resource sharing. Such
backup sharing is possible in single component failure scenar-
ios. We assume single link failures which are the predominant
type of component failures. The proposed approach is illus-
trated in Fig. 3. It shows two primary lightpaths (P1 and P2)
and their backup lightpaths (B1 and B2). Each of the backup
lightpaths is link-disjoint with its primary lightpath. Further,
primary lightpaths P1 and P2 are also link-disjoint as shown.
Links d−e and e−f are shared among the backup paths. When
using the proposed switch, conﬁgurations can be done at node
d such that the link d−e can be opened for both the links a−d
and g − d for transmission at the same time. This is shown
in Fig. 4 (The same switch shown in Fig. 1(i) is used for this
illustration. Only the VOSs and combiners for wavelength w1
are shown in Fig. 4. The additional output link which is not
labeled in the ﬁgure is not used). In this conﬁguration, VOS-p
and VOS-r are conﬁgured such that their power splitting state
becomes (100%−0%) with 100% power directed towards link
d − e. The conﬁgurations are done by applying electric pulses
as explained in Section II-A. Further, at node f, power from
e − f can be split on f − c and f − i. This conﬁguration is
shown in Fig. 5. In this conﬁguration, VOS-p is conﬁgured to
the splitting state (50% − 50%) and VOS-q is conﬁgured to
the splitting state (100% − 0%) (100% directed towards link
f − i). As a result of these conﬁgurations, the power from
e − f is split on f − c and f − i. While sharing backup links
d−e and e−f, these conﬁgurations allow transmission over a
backup path without needing further conﬁguration. No power
splitting occurs at VOSs at nodes d and e (at node e, similar
conﬁguration illustrated in Section II-A is done). Note that, the
above conﬁgurations are done at the time when the primary
connections are established.
In case of failure on P1, trafﬁc can be immediately rerouted
through B1 since it is pre-conﬁgured. The trafﬁc will be
switched from a−d to d−e because of the switch conﬁguration
illustrated above. Further, the trafﬁc will be switched from
e − f to f − c because of the power splitting conﬁguration.
Hence, it provides short recovery time which is equivalent to
the case of dedicated protection. When rerouting the trafﬁc, a
copy of trafﬁc is routed on the link f − i also due to power
splitting. Similar rerouting can be done when failure occurs on
P2. Note that, in Fig. 5, power from e − f is split towards the
desired output links f − c and f − i only, and power wastage
can be reduced by not splitting on unwanted ports (if any).
B3
 d
 e
 f
 g
 h
  i
 a
b
c
  j
  k
P1
B1
P2
P3
B2
Fig. 6.
A backup sharing scenario
A. Limited backup sharing
Backup sharing while provisioning pre-conﬁgured backup
paths is limited because of power loss due to power splitting.
We mainly consider splitting loss at VOSs. Repeated or
cascading of power splitting may occur when backup links
are shared by many backup lightpaths. This is illustrated in
Fig 6. Three primary lightpaths (P1, P2, and P3) are protected
by their pre-conﬁgured backup paths (B1, B2, and B3). Links
d − e and f − g are shared by backup lightpaths B1 & B2,
and B1 & B3 respectively. In case of failure on P1, trafﬁc is
rerouted via B1. In this case, power splitting occurs at nodes
e and g (at VOSs). To reduce the power loss due to such
repeated power splitting, we adopt the approach of limiting the
number of power splitting at intermediated nodes (at VOSs)
on a backup lightpath. Limiting the number of power splitting
limits the degree of backup sharing. We denote the maximum
number of power splitting at intermediate nodes on a backup
lightpath as K. For instance, the three backup lightpaths can
be provisioned in Fig 6 when K = 2. However, if K = 1,
only primary lightpaths P1 & P2 can be set up with backup
paths B1 & B2 respectively. Lightpath P3 has to be rejected
since B3 would, otherwise, cause additional power splitting at
node g. Similarly, once P1 and P2 have been admitted with
their backup lightpaths, consider admitting a future request
with its primary and its backup lightpaths (say, P4 and B4
(not shown)). Assume that B4 shares the same backup link
d−e and additional power splitting occurs at node e to a link
(say e − l) in addition to the links e − f and e − i (the link
e − l is not shown). In this scenario, with K = 1, this new
request is rejected since additional power splitting occurs.
B. Protection with ﬁxed splitters vs. VOS
Our proposed protection approach can also be implemented
with traditional (ﬁxed) splitters and shutters instead of using
VOSs. (Similar splitter-shutter type switches are broadcast and
124
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

select based switches [8] considered for optical burst/packet
switching networks) A major drawback with ﬁxed splitters
based switches is their high power loss. This is because power
is always split towards all the output ports. Therefore, only
a small portion of power is used to transmit data and the
remaining power is wasted. This small power may not be
enough for transmission over long distance. In addition to
this, additional shutters are required. With VOSs, even with a
large number of ports, optical signals are switched with 100%
power directed at VOSs towards the output link during normal
working conditions. In case of failure-recovery using shared
backup lightpaths, optical power is split towards necessary
output ports only. Therefore, power-wastage is signiﬁcantly
reduced. In addition to this, additional shutters are not required
when VOSs are used. Because of these reasons, we use VOSs
instead of traditional splitters.
IV. PERFORMANCE STUDY
We evaluate the performance of the proposed protection
approach (PBPLS) on the 14 node and 21 bi-directional link
NSFNET topology. We consider 16 wavelengths per ﬁber.
We consider sub-lambda connection requests (or LSPs) which
require optical layer protection. A sub-lambda connection can
traverse a number of lambda connections or lightpaths. In
the optical layer protection, each of the lightpaths traversed
is protected by a backup lightpath. Trafﬁc requests arrive
dynamically. Request arrivals follow Poisson distribution and
holding time of a request follows exponential distribution with
unit mean. We assume wavelength capacity to be 10 units.
Bandwidth requests for trafﬁc are uniformly distributed in the
range of (4-10). Each request’s source node and destination
node are selected based on uniform distribution. We use a
shortest path selection algorithm (Dijkstra’s algorithm) with
the objective of minimizing the total number of physical hops
to route the requests. Each experiment is carried out with a
large number of request arrivals on the order of 105.
We investigate whether signiﬁcant performance improve-
ment is seen when limiting the number of power splitting at
intermediate nodes (K) to small values (K = 1, K = 2, and
K = 3). First, we consider that all the trafﬁc requests require
short recovery time and they are protected with pre-conﬁgured
backup paths using our proposed protection approach, PBPLS.
We compare the performance with the traditional dedicated
protection since it also provides pre-conﬁgured backup paths
(recovery time in PBPLS is equivalent to the case of the
traditional dedicated protection). In addition to this, we also
study the performance with two classes of trafﬁc when only
a portion of requests require short recovery time (class-1)
while the rest can tolerate slightly longer recovery time (class-
2). For class-1, pre-conﬁgured backup paths are provided
using PBPLS (and compared with the traditional dedicated
protection). For class-2, non pre-conﬁgured backup paths are
given using the traditional optical layer shared protection
approach. In this study, two trafﬁc arrival distributions are
considered. The trafﬁc arrival follows the distribution, class-1 :
class-2 = (1) 50% : 50%, and (2) 25% : 75%. In this study, we
25
30
35
40
45
50
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Traffic Load (Erlang)
Blocking Probability
Traditional dedicated protection
PBPLS, K = 1
PBPLS, K = 2
PBPLS, K = 3
Fig. 7.
Performance for the traditional and proposed protection approaches
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Traffic Load (Erlang)
Blocking Probability
Class−1, Traditional dedicated protection
Class−1, PBPLS, K = 1
Class−1, PBPLS, K = 2
Class−2, Traditional shared protection
Class−2, Traditional shared protection, K = 1
Class−2, Traditional shared protection, K = 2
Fig. 8.
Performance of class-1 (50%) and class-2 (50%) requests
also observe whether the performance improvement for class-1
trafﬁc due to limited backup sharing penalizes class-2 trafﬁc.
When both the PBPLS and the traditional optical layer shared
protection are provided, we consider that backup resources
associated to these two protections are separated (i.e., pre-
conﬁgured backup paths and traditionally shared backup paths
(not pre-conﬁgured) do not share the same resources) in order
to reduce the complexity.
The blocking performance for the proposed PBPLS ap-
proach with different values of the number of power splitting
(K = 1, K = 2, and K = 3) and the traditional dedicated
protection approach are shown in Fig. 7. In this study, a
single class of trafﬁc is considered and all the requests are
admitted using the same protection method. It can be seen that,
signiﬁcant reduction in blocking is achieved in PBPLS with
K = 1 (more than 74% reduction in blocking when compared
to the traditional approach). This is because, signiﬁcantly
a large number of requests can ﬁnd backup resources as
resources can be shared though it is limited in our approach.
Further reduction in blocking is observed with increasing
number of power splitting (with K = 2 and K = 3, additional
18% and 23% blocking reduction is seen at high loads).
Figure 8 shows the blocking performance when 50% of
requests (class-1) are protected by pre-conﬁgured backup paths
(PBPLS is used. The traditional dedicated protection is used
125
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

25
30
35
40
45
50
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Traffic Load (Erlang)
Blocking Probability
Class−1, Traditional dedicated protection
Class−1, PBPLS, K = 1
Class−1, PBPLS, K = 2
Class−2, Traditional shared protection
Class−2, Traditional shared protection, K = 1
Class−2, Traditional shared protection, K = 2
Fig. 9.
Performance of class-1 (25%) and class-2 (75%) requests
for comparison), and 50% of requests (class-2) are protected
by non pre-conﬁgured backup paths (the traditional optical
layer shared protection approach is used). Two values for
the number of power splitting (K = 1, and K = 2) are
investigated. In the ﬁgure, we denote the performance of class-
2 trafﬁc when class-1 trafﬁc is admitted using PBPLS with
K = p as ‘Class-2, Traditional shared protection, K = p’.
We denote the performance of class-2 trafﬁc when class-1
trafﬁc is admitted using the traditional dedicated protection as
‘Class-2, Traditional shared protection’. For class-1 requests,
up to about 42% reduction in blocking is seen for PBPLS with
K = 1, when compared to the traditional dedicated protection
approach. With K = 2, additional blocking reduction of up
to 4% only is seen. The performance of class-2 requests is
shown in dotted lines. The impact on the performance of class-
2 requests as a result of using our proposed protection for
class-1 requests is seen at very high loads only (above 45
Erlang). For class-2 requests, about 7% additional blocking is
seen at 50 Erlang when K = 1 in our protection approach.
Figure 9 shows the blocking performance when 25% of
requests (class-1) are protected by pre-conﬁgured backup paths
and 75% of requests (class-2) are protected by non pre-
conﬁgured backup paths. Overall, more blocking is seen for
class-1 requests. This is because, more resources are occupied
by frequently arriving class-2 requests. Class-1 requests do
not arrive frequently with the given small percentage of
trafﬁc arrival. Therefore, they may not ﬁnd enough available
resources and they are blocked. Even with the small percentage
of trafﬁc arrival, considerable blocking reduction of up to 15%
is seen for class-1 requests with the proposed protection with
K = 1. The impact on the performance of class-2 requests
as a result of improved performance for class-1 requests is
not signiﬁcant (only about 2% additional blocking is seen for
class-2 requests)
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed an optical protection ap-
proach with pre-conﬁgured backup paths, which allows limited
backup resource sharing. We investigated the performance in
a single class (all the requests were provisioned with pre-
conﬁgured backup paths) and two-class (class-1 and class-
2 requests were provisioned using pre-conﬁgured and non
pre-conﬁgured backup paths respectively) trafﬁc scenarios.
We demonstrated that even with the small number of power
splitting (K), signiﬁcant performance improvement is seen.
In the single class scenario, our proposed approach with
K=1 showed more than 74% reduction in blocking when
compared to the traditional dedication protection approach.
In the two-class scenario, it showed up to 42% and 15%
reduction in blocking for class-1 trafﬁc with 50% and 25%
trafﬁc distributions respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work was supported by NUS ARF research
grant R-263-000-530-112.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Anand and C. Qiao, “Dynamic Establishment of Protection Paths in
WDM Networks. Part-I,” in Proceedings of IEEE ICCCN, pp. 198-204,
Oct. 2000.
[2] S. Ramamurthy, L. Sahasrabuddhe, and B. Mukherjee, “Survivable WDM
Mesh Networks,” IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 21, no. 4,
pp. 870-882, Apr. 2003.
[3] C. Ou et al., “Trafﬁc Grooming for Survivable WDM Networks -
Dedicated Protection,” OSA Journal of Optical Networking, vol. 3, pp.
50-74, Jan. 2004.
[4] A. Mykkeltveit, and B. E. Helvik, “Comparison of Schemes for Provision
of Differentiated Availability-Guaranteed Services Using Dedicated Pro-
tection,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Networking,
ICN, pp. 78 - 86, 2008.
[5] M. Liu, M. Tornatore, and B. Mukherjee, “New and improved strategies
for optical protection in mixed-line-rate WDM networks,” in proceedings
of OFC 2010, 2010.
[6] R. Krishanthmohan, G. Mohan, and K. C. Chua, “A Flexible Optical
Switch Architecture for Efﬁcient Transmission of Optical Bursts,” under
review, Computer Networks Journal.
[7] Ai-Qun Liu, Photonic MEMS devices: Design, Fabrication and Control,
CRC Press, 2009.
[8] C. Guillemot et al., “Transparent optical packet switching: the European
ACTS KEOPS project approach,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol.
16, no. 12, pp. 2117 - 2134, Dec. 1998.
[9] M. C. Yuang et al., “A QoS optical packet switching system: architectural
design and experimental demonstration,” vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 66 - 75, May
2010.
[10] R. Krishanthmohan, G. Mohan, and Z. Luying, “Differentiated Sur-
vivability with Improved Fairness in IP/MPLS-over-WDM Optical Net-
works,” Computer Networks Journal, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 634-649, Apr.
2009.
[11] J. K. Rhee, I. Tomkos, and M. J. Li, “A broadcast-and-select OADM
optical network with dedicated optical-channel protection,” IEEE Journal
of Lightwave Technology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 25 - 31. Jan. 2003.
[12] L. Long, and A. E. Kamal, “Tree-Based Protection of Multicast Services
in WDM Mesh Networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE GLOBECOM 2009,
2009.
[13] S. Wada, S. Abe, Y. Ota, B. Reichman, T. Amura, and C.A. Daza,
“Variable gain equalizer using magneto-optics,” in proceedings of OFC
2002, vol. 70, pp. 324 - 326, 2002.
[14] H. Ramanitra, P. Chanclou, J. Etrillard, Y. Anma, H. Nakada, and
H. Ono, “Optical access network using a self-latching variable splitter
remotely powered through an optical ﬁber link,” Optical Engineering,
vol. 46, Apr. 2007.
[15] H. Ramanitra, P. Chanclou, Z. Belfqih, M. Moignard, H. L. Bras,
and D. Schumacher, “Scalable and multi-service passive optical access
infrastructure using variable optical splitters,” in proceedings of OFC
2006.
[16] Agiltron Inc. [Online]. Available: http://www.agiltron.com/PDFs/CL1x2
multicasting switch.pdf
126
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

