Methodology of Dynamic Architectural Adaptation  
for Ad hoc Networks Operating in Disturbed Environment 
 
Farouk Aissanou                                                 
Université du Québec en Outaouais  
Gatineau,  Canada 
aisf01@uqo.ca 
Dept. RS2M, TELECOM Sud 
Paris, France 
Farouk.aissanou@it-sudparis.eu 
 
 
Ilham Benyahia  
Dept. Of Computing and Engineering 
 Université du Québec en Outaouais 
Gatineau, Canada 
benyahia@uqo.ca 
 
Abstract— Wireless networks and particularly ad hoc 
networks, are gaining in speed and capacity. These advances 
open the way to their use in emergent, increasingly complex 
applications. Such networks have to operate in disturbed 
environments where disturbances, mainly caused by fading 
and interferences, primarily originate by the physical layer. 
Congestions associated with environment-specific disturbances 
caused by complex applications, such as emergency and 
disaster applications, are the second source of disturbance. 
Such networks must guarantee a QoS (Quality of Service) 
management to their associated applications, a task that is 
possible only by minimizing the transmission delay and 
maximizing the packets delivery ratio. The conventional 
network 
architecture 
used 
for 
TCP/IP 
model 
shows 
degradations of performance, especially when the networks 
operate in environments with physical layer disturbances. This 
paper presents a study based on the routing performance of ad 
hoc networks operating in disturbed environment. Simulation 
results are presented and analyzed to illustrate limitations of 
the 
conventional 
ad 
hoc 
network 
architecture. 
The 
methodology of a network architectural design based on cross-
layer architecture using a multi-criteria decision making 
process for quality enhancement is also presented. This work 
enabled us to highlight a new direction for the communication 
architecture of cognitive vehicular networks operating under 
disturbed environment. This direction consists of considering a 
dynamic reconfiguration of the communication architecture 
according to the network environment behaviour. Thus, it will 
allow either the traditional architecture or the cross layer 
architecture based on autonomous components.   
 
 Keywords- ad hoc networks; ant colony optimization algorithm; 
adaptive network communication architecture; cross-layer 
architecture; multi-criteria decision making.  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Wireless networks, including ad hoc networks, are 
among emergent telecommunication technologies operating 
in environments that can cause link failures and degradation 
of QoS (Quality of Service) in their associated applications. 
Despite the advances of such technologies, such as large 
band for G3 and G4 (third and fourth generations of mobile 
standards and technology), there is still a risk of 
performance degradation. This risk is especially significant 
for constrained services such as those used for real-time or 
near real-time applications. The correlation between 
physical layer phenomena of ad hoc networks and 
constraints related to complex applications that involve 
close nodes and rapid changes in topology make the 
behaviour of ad hoc network very complex and hard to 
predict [1][2][3][4]. The effect of this correlation is the 
guarantee of only the minimum required QoS (Quality of 
Service). This paper presents an analysis of conventional 
network architectures operating in disturbed environment. It 
offers a model for the cross-layer concept that makes it 
possible to: 1) enhance the network performance by sharing 
information between non adjacent layers and, 2) take 
benefits of real-time notifications of channels events 
representing new states that may have an impact on the 
performance of network protocols, which also include 
routing protocols.  
 
Section 2 presents the application context of emergent 
telecommunication technologies defined by a challenged 
environment. Section 3 presents a state-of-the-art network 
communication architecture. A case study on the application 
of a routing protocol based on Ant Colony Optimisation 
(ACO) 
algorithm 
within 
conventional 
network 
communication architecture is presented in Section 4. 
Section 5 presents a design methodology for ad hoc 
networks with a cross-layer architecture based on a multi-
criteria decision making model designed to operate in 
disturbed 
environment 
and 
to 
guarantees 
temporal 
constraints.  A conclusion and future directions are 
presented in Section 6.  
 
II. 
CHALLENGED ENVIRONMENT OF 
AD HOC NETWORKS 
 
Numerous 
studies 
investigating 
the 
challenging 
environment of communication networks focus on the 
behavior of their physical layer [5]. For this reason, a good 
understanding of physical layer will define suitable 
189
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

processing in network management and offer the possibility 
to avoid problems that directly relate to the network QoS.  
Wireless networks have made remarkable advances and 
today, they seem to have unlimited capacities. Based on 
such advances in communication networks, a range of 
complex applications have been developed, many of which 
have significant QoS constraints.  A realistic observation of 
networks environments and their physical layer performance 
makes it possible to detect inadequacies that lead to packet 
losses and to an increase in the transmission delay for 
wireless networks. 
 
 
A. Interference in the wireless environment  
It is important for wireless networks, especially for ad 
hoc networks, to define suitable access layer protocols that 
will minimize, if not avoid, packet collisions due to 
simultaneous transmissions. Ad hoc networks also require 
error protocols that counter frequent interference to radio 
transmissions and deal with the variable network topology 
of their network nodes. The very complex space geometry 
of the ad hoc network environment and various obstacles 
that may be encountered by the radio signals (buildings, 
bridges and tunnels, etc.) contribute to raising the level of 
interference.  Various phenomena have a direct impact on 
wireless signal propagation. These include fading of the 
transmitted signal and multi-path propagation caused by 
physical phenomena such as refraction, diffraction and 
reflection. Research on these phenomena and their impact 
on network quality relies heavily on mathematical models 
used to represent signal propagation in a realistic manner 
[5][6][7].  
 
B. Review of propagation models for wireless networks   
Propagation models are used to simulate the attenuation 
of wireless signals in a particular environment. Generally, 
propagation models compute the power of the signal at the 
receiver as a function of the power of the signal at the 
transmitter. Depending on the features of a particular 
environment, one of three main propagation models may be 
used: free-space loss model, two-ray ground model and 
shadowing model. Most of the published results in the field 
of ad hoc wireless routing and broadcasting are based on 
free-space or two-ray ground propagation models, which are 
simplistic and idealistic. Indeed, these models are usually 
unable to capture the spatio-temporal variations of the signal 
power at the receiver. Therefore, a probabilistic model is 
more suitable for our study context designed to depict an 
environment that experiences dynamic events. The 
shadowing model defined in [8][9] can be used for more 
realistic propagation models.  
            
The average large scale path loss for an arbitrary 
Transmitter-Receiver (T-R) separation is expressed in [8] as 
a function of distance by using a path loss exponent, n. The 
following equation expresses the average path loss PL (d) 
for a transmitter and receiver with separation d with d0 as 
the reference distance.   
 
 
Xσ is a zero-mean Gaussian distributed random variable 
with standard deviation σ. An important feature of the 
shadowing model is its ability to simulate a wide range of 
environments in which fading and interferences are 
determined by simply adjusting the value of n. 
 
 
III. 
BACKGROUND 
In the context of wired networks, layered structures 
proved to be reliable for usage in numerous high speed 
communication technologies such as ATM (Asynchronous 
Transfer Mode) based on SONET (Synchronous Optical 
Network). Because of the behavior of their physical layer 
and the impact of the degradation of this behavior on the 
upper layers, wireless networks have entirely different 
requirements. Among studies carried out on performance 
problems in wireless and ad hoc networks, two categories of 
research activities can be identified.  Advances on 
communication services in the context of TCP/IP 
communication architecture, is still considered for services 
innovations in addition to the new architectural design based 
on the concept of cross-layer.  
 
A. Advances in communication protocols based on TCP/IP 
Recent research activities on ad hoc networks have made 
important contributions to accessing the link layer. The 
result is the ability to minimize the number of collisions of 
the access link and to optimize the network resources as a 
spreading spectrum [10]. Other advances in protocols are in 
the domain of routing protocols. Various approaches, such 
as metaheuristics [11][12], have been taken to study the 
adaptive protocols for QoS optimisation.  
 
The 
main 
difficulty 
of 
these 
communication 
architectures is the variation of delay between degradations 
in the physical layer and reactions in the upper layers.  
 
B.  Architectural design of cross-layer communication  
 
Research activities on cross-layer architecture have been 
mainly focused on cognitive networks, which originate in 
cognitive radio [13]. Adaptation to changes represents an 
important topic for these networks. This category of 
research activities focuses on increasing the network 
performance. Literature on this research topic states 
potential advantages and direct impacts of the physical layer 
190
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

on operations of the nonadjacent high layers such as link 
layer, network layer and transport layer. 
Researchers have attempted to face these important 
challenges. One of the proposed solutions is based on a 
cross-layer architecture, which identifies three interaction 
categories [14]: 
 
 
Direct communication between layers, based on 
variables of a layer visible to the others in runtime. 
Internal states of the layers have to be managed for 
this category. 
 
Sharing of a database between the layers: In 
addition to the shared database access, a research 
topic here is the design of interactions between the 
different layers. 
 
Elimination of stack structure:  The components of 
communication architecture are autonomous. This 
category offers a great flexibility but represents a 
great challenge compared to the well-known 
organisation of protocols. Numerous research 
activities have studies cross-layer designs. In 
[15][16]. 
In 
cross-layer 
communication 
architectures, it is easier to define a network that 
has the knowledge of its environment. This is a 
characteristic that constitutes an important factor 
for ad hoc networks. In the meantime, a suitable 
architecture cannot be defined without the 
knowledge of related applications and their QoS. In 
Section IV, we present a case study based on the 
TCP/IP architecture that provides more information 
about network activities and their impact on the 
network QoS.  
 
IV.  
CASE 
STUDY: 
ROUTING 
ALGORITHMS ON NETWORK BASED 
ON TCP/IP ARCHITECTURE 
In this section, we discuss our case study of the 
application of metaheuristics inspired by the ACO (Ant 
Colony Optimisation) algorithm extension adapted to 
mobile ad hoc networks (AntHocNet) [17].  The case study 
addresses routing problems in a VANET (Vehicular Ad hoc 
Network) [18], a network that is gaining importance 
especially in the context of Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITS). VANET is an ad hoc network composed of 
vehicles with communication capacities and characterized 
by their mobility model.  To address potential issues in the 
physical 
layer 
and 
the 
consequences 
for 
network 
performance, we employ the cross-layer concept. Before 
going into detail on our case study, we present an overview 
of VANET and the cross-layer concept. 
 
 
A. Introduction to vehicular internetworking 
Wireless networks comprise different categories of 
networks, such as the Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET). 
MANETs are self-configuring ad hoc networks based on 
mobile routers and VANET (Vehicular Ad hoc Network). In 
a VANET network, communications may take place 
between vehicles (vehicle to vehicle) or between vehicles 
and roadside nodes.   Important technological advances in 
VANET networks have led to the development of a variety 
of complex applications for ITS such as disaster 
management. Complex applications must meet QoS with a 
focus on temporal constraints to manage emergencies on the 
roads.   
 
B. The concept of cross-layer architecture 
The cross-layer concept is based on the principle of 
layered protocols which constitutes the foundation of the 
classical architecture of network communication. In the new 
generation of communication networks, namely cognitive 
and autonomous networks [14], communication is allowed 
between nonadjacent layers. This will give rise to a situation 
where changes on any particular layer can directly affect the 
quality and the operation of another layer of the hierarchy or 
affect various aspects of network management such as 
performance, faults and security.  Thus, during the design of 
a network with cross-layer architecture and according to 
chosen interaction category, it is necessary to identify new 
relations 
between 
layers 
and 
specific 
processing 
requirements such as notification of events .  
 
C. Routing protocol based on AntHocNet  
AntHocNet is a hybrid algorithm that uses reactive and 
proactive mechanisms in order to discover routes.  The 
AntHocNet algorithm defined in [17], was adopted in our 
case study. We also introduced a few modifications to 
address particular time constraint problems in complex 
applications. AntHocNet works in four phases: route setup, 
route maintenance, data routing and route repair. 
 
 
Route 
setup: 
At 
the 
beginning 
of 
each 
communication session between a source node and 
a destination node, the algorithm creates a special 
packet called reactive-forward ant packet which 
simulates an exploration ant. The reactive-forward 
ant packet is broadcasted at the source and along 
the network until it reaches the destination node. At 
the destination, the forward ant packet is discarded 
and a backward ant packet is created. The 
backward ant packet will follow the route taken by 
the reactive-forward ant in reverse and will set up 
a route to the destination at each intermediate route 
including the source node.  
 
191
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Route maintenance: The aim pursued in the phase 
of route maintenance is to either keep the existing 
routes or to find new routes to the destination. To 
do this, the source node periodically generates a 
special packet called proactive-forward ant packet 
which is transmitted to the destination through a 
random neighbour. The proactive-forward ant 
packet follows its route along the network until it 
reaches the destination. At the destination node, the 
proactive-forward ant is converted into a backward 
ant packet which, as in the phase of route setup 
will follow the reverse route and update the routing 
tables of the intermediate nodes. 
 
 
Data routing: The phases of route setup and route 
maintenance make it possible to find a set of routes 
to the destination. The phase of data routing 
consists of choosing one path from this set. 
 
 
Route repair: In AntHocNet, each node tries to 
maintain an updated view of its immediate 
neighbors at each moment, in order to detect link 
failures as quickly as possible and before they can 
lead to transmission errors and packet loss. The 
presence of a neighboring node can be confirmed 
when a hello message is received, or after any 
other successful interception or exchange of 
signals. The disappearance of a neighbor is 
assumed when such an event has not taken place 
for a certain amount of time or when a unicast 
transmission to this neighbor fails. When a failure 
is detected, the algorithm removes the responsible 
neighbor from the neighbor list that it maintains. 
Then, the algorithm checks the presence of a 
secondary route to the destinations. If no such route 
is detected, the algorithm informs its direct 
precursors by means of a special packet called a 
link 
error 
packet 
which 
contains 
all 
the 
unreachable. The same process is subsequently 
repeated until all the nodes in the networks are 
informed of the change.  
 
The main changes we made in the AntHocNet routing 
protocol related to specific functions and the overall 
architecture of the algorithm. Our architecture is sequential 
and for the sake of simplicity, no concurrency is considered 
in the present implementation, called AntHocNet-1. Figure 
1 illustrates the components of our routing algorithm.   
 
Regarding specific functions, instead of the stochastic 
mechanism used in AntHocNet, we use a greedy forwarding 
mechanism in the data routing phase. In addition, while the 
authors of AntHocNet utilize a combination of delay and 
hop count as a pheromone amount, we use the total end-to-
end delay from the current node to the destination in our 
implementation.   
AntHocNet
routing table
-source
-destination
Packet
-destination
-pheromone
-next_hop
routing table entry
1
1
1
1..*
-list_nodes
-pheromone
reactive-forward-ant
-list_nodes
-pheromone
proactive-forward-ant
-list_nodes
-pheromone
backward-ant
-list_destinations
link error
hello message
1
1..*
 
 
Figure 1:  Structure of routing Algorithm AntHocNet-1 
 
 
D. Experiments on VANET using a Routing Protocol 
 
Our objective is to study the performance of the 
AntHocNet-1 algorithm in the context of a complex 
technology such as VANET by considering the temporal 
constraints as important criteria for assessing network 
performance. We also propose to study the behavior of this 
algorithm according to the network architecture by 
considering traditional (standard) structure TCP/IP with 
architecture dimensions which would be based on the cross-
layer concept.  
 
V.   
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT  
Experiment environment is made up of two simulators, 
SUMO (Simulator Urban Mobility), a microscopic road 
traffic simulator. In order to model the mobility realistically; 
we selected a tool called MOVE (Mobility model generator 
for VEhicular networks) [18]. The second simulator is ns-2, 
used for a communication network simulation [19]. Our 
experiment environment is illustrated in Figure 2.  
 
MOVE
Vehicle flow
Mobility trace file
ns2
Map
SUMO
 
 
Figure 2:  Experiment environment 
 
 
In our experiment environment, we first identify a set of 
VANET network features including the topology, the Grid 
192
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

MAP, vehicles in motion, etc. MOVE uses the SUMO 
output in form of mobility traces that realistically represent 
vehicle mobility according to the rules of the road such as 
traffic light coordination, signs, maximum allowed speed 
and priorities. MOVE communicates these mobility traces 
to ns-2. These traces will be used for simulation of VANET 
network such as the nodes mobility model.  
 
 
A. Simulation Parameters   
In our experiments, the geographical space for VANET 
is composed of a grid map representing a set of roads. The 
number of vehicles in our VANET is set to 80. Of these, 50 
move according to a model generated by SUMO and the rest 
are generated randomly and are characterized by setting the 
periodic packet transmission to a rate of 2 CBR (Constant 
Bit Rate) packets per second.  
 
The transmission range of the nodes is set to 400 m.  We 
examine two communication protocols having an impact on 
the network performance: the MAC layer and the network 
layer. According to the ns-2 implementation based on the 
IEEE 802.11/b standard, the MAC layer is based on the 
protocol DCF (Distributed Coordination Function), while 
the physical and network layers will be instantiated.   The 
propagation model for the physical layer is therefore the 
shadowing model since changes in its parameters will model 
environment changes and disruptions such as link loss. We 
use the AntHocNet-1 algorithm as a network protocol in 
order to study and analyze its performance when faced with 
environment changes represented by changes in propagation 
model parameters.   We set the simulation duration to 200 s, 
then run each scenario 10 times. Table 1 shows our 
simulation parameters.  
 
 
V.    
EXPERIMENTS USING TCP-LAYER  
 
In these experiments, specific path losses are defined to 
represent a degree of environmental disruption. The path 
loss exponent parameter n varies from 2.0 (non-disturbed 
environment) to 2.1 (disturbed environment) according to 
the Shadowing model. We evaluate the behavior of 
AntHocNet-1 through two architectures: the classical 
architecture based on TCP/IP, in which communication is 
only between adjacent layers, and the cross-layer 
architecture, in which communications occur between non-
adjacent layers. To test the concept of cross-layer 
architecture in our simulation, we established the following 
process: The physical layer monitors, by measurements, the 
wireless environment in order to detect disruptions. If a 
disruption, evidenced by changes in the path loss exponent, 
is detected, the physical layer directly notifies the network 
layer. In this study, we simulated physical and routing 
layers 
interactions 
by 
temporal 
notifications. 
The 
AntHocNet-1 protocol reacts to the notifications by 
executing the phase of route repair. In this experiment we 
change the frequency of disturbances from every 10 s to 
every 100 s, while keeping the length of each disturbance 
constant set to a value equal to 5 s.  
 
Simulation results in terms of end-to-end delay are 
illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Simulated cross-layer vs. standard architecture 
behaviors 
 
A. Towards a cross-layer network architecture based on 
multi-criteria decision making   
The results show the impacts of disturbances in the 
physical layer on the performance of the routing protocol. 
The tested network uses the traditional communication 
architecture set up according to the TCP/IP model. It is 
worth noting that this architecture is based on requests 
between layers and the delays for reactions especially in a 
congested network, a situation that causes a loss of 
communication packets.    
In 
order 
to 
support 
complex 
communication 
requirements of applications, the network communication 
architecture proposed in this study is based on the concept 
of cross-layer. This section analyzes the consequences of 
potential side effects caused by significant changes in the 
frequencies of physical layer.  
 
 
 
 
Table 1. Simulation parameters  
193
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

B. Cross-layer operating scenarios 
The subject of our study has been QoS requirements of 
complex 
applications. 
These 
requirements 
can 
be 
multicriteria and one of the criteria can consist of real-time 
constraints. 
We 
hence 
stress 
the 
importance 
of 
communication between the layers through notifications 
followed by real-time reactions. Thus, for mobile ad hoc 
network, significant changes of channel radio must be 
transmitted immediately after their occurrence to the 
concerned layers .  
According to our previous works [1][20], an increase in 
the frequencies of environment disturbances events will lead 
to performance degradations defining networks congestion 
or 
systems 
saturation. 
These 
disturbances 
manifest 
themselves by a failure to process events within the 
temporal constraints. The same behaviour is then likely to 
occur in a mobile ad hoc network tested in this study and 
illustrated in Figure 3. The network based on cross-layer 
concept responds to this condition by continuous 
reconfigurations of its network protocol presented by route 
maintenance in AntHocNet-1 algorithm and which seems to 
lead to performance degradation according to disturbances 
frequency.  
 
 
C. Methodology 
of 
a 
dynamically 
reconfigurable 
architecture 
The unpredictable environment behaviour in mobile ad 
hoc network and the risks of congestions and saturation 
described previously, make it difficult, if not impossible, to 
validate the design of the cross-layer architecture in order to 
guarantee the required QoS. This is even more critical when 
applications have to deal with dynamic criteria that 
represent their QoS. Thus, cross-layer architectures 
presented in section III cannot be used systematically in the 
context of our study despite their performances observed for 
some physical layer states compared to the standard 
communication protocol. We define a methodology of an 
adaptive architecture design that is more suitable for 
environment changes. An adaptive architecture faces the 
problem of experimental identification of parameters for the 
communications between layers.  Thus, parameters such as 
waiting delays between the occurrence of the events and the 
reactions of higher layers will be adjusted to the QoS 
requirements of applications.  
We consider learning by reinforcement as a direction to 
readjust the parameters of communications. This will be 
possible by using the network management system feedback 
on the global quality of the network in a given state of the 
environment and by the usage of parameters for a given 
architecture configuration. A decision-making process will 
also be integrated within the reinforcement learning in order 
to evaluate the network QoS based on a multicriteria 
objective function to optimise. Finally, this study will 
consider numerous areas of applications to validate the 
communication architecture. It also 
will study its 
adaptations and the associated dynamic decisions based on 
different criteria defined by applications requirements.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
AND 
FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS  
 
This paper presented a realistic context of the application 
of ad hoc networks and the new requirements for real-time 
applications. It has presented experiments on a routing 
protocol based on the Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) 
algorithm alternative on a network traditional architecture 
used for TCP/IP model and a cross-layer concept.  The 
results show performance degradations according to the 
physical layer perturbations for each architecture model. 
Study of the cross-layer concept demonstrates potential 
advantages of these networks, especially in presence of 
temporal constraints but not in the case of extreme 
disturbances.  The required architectural adaptations may 
lead to a cognitive network that represents a promising 
solution for today's applications, which are mainly based on 
ad hoc networks.  Consequently, suitable network 
communication architecture is defined by its ability to adapt 
its parameters and configuration to the changes of the 
environment network, especially following the notifications 
of metrics related to the quality of the radio channel along 
the routes.  
This work enabled us to highlight a new direction for the 
communication architecture of cognitive vehicular networks 
operating under disturbed environment such as the quality 
degradation of the radio channel along the routes. This 
direction consists of considering a dynamic reconfiguration 
of the communication architecture. Consequently, suitable 
network communication architecture is defined by its ability 
to adapt its parameters and configuration either by the 
traditional architecture or the cross layer architecture based 
on autonomous components.  Reinforcement learning is a 
suitable approach to identifying on line the best architecture 
among the traditional TCP/IP architecture that feature 
waiting times in communication between layers and cross-
layer architecture based on non-adjacent layer events 
notifications.  
Validating cross-layer architecture in the context of this 
study requires realistic applications considering their QoS 
requirements. 
 
Applications 
for 
network 
resource 
management will be considered for the validation of future 
approaches.  We will also consider simulations based on 
autonomic components in our future study to examine the 
communication network architecture based on the cross-
layer concept.    
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
This research is supported by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)  
194
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Benyahia and D. Lapointe, ―A Complex Applications Framework  
Supporting Adaptive Routing Strategy for Ad hoc Networks‖, 
Advanced International Conference onTelecommunications AICT'06, 
pp. 74-80, 2006. 
[2] P. Golding, ―Next Generation Wireless Applications: Creating 
Mobile Applications in a  Web 2.0 and Mobile 2.0 World‖, by: Paul 
Golding, Wiley; 2 edition, 2008.  
[3] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti and J. J.N. Liu , ―Mobile ad hoc networking: 
imperatives and challenges‖, Ad Hoc Networks, Elsevier, pp 13-64, 
2003. 
[4] A. Willig, ―Recent and Emerging Topics in Wireless Industrial 
Communications: A Selection‖, IEEE Transactions On Industrial 
Informatics, Vol. 4, No 2, pp 102-124,  2008.   
[5] J. 
M. 
Dricot 
and 
P. 
De 
Doncker, 
―High- 
 accuracy 
physical 
layer 
model 
for 
wireless 
network  
 simulations in NS-2‖, International Workshop on Wireless  
 Ad hoc Networks (IWWAN), 5 pp, 2004. 
[6] J. M. Dricot, P. De Doncker, E. Zimanyi and Fr. Grenez, ―Impact of 
the 
Physical 
Layer 
on 
the 
Performance 
of 
Indoor  
Wireless 
Networks‖, 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
International  
 Conference 
on 
Software, 
Telecommunications 
and  
 Computer Networks, October, pp 872-876, 2003. 
[7] Y. Yu and S. L. Miller, “A Four-State Markov Frame 
Error 
Model 
for 
the 
Wireless 
Physical 
Layer”, 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications 
& 
Networking 
Conferences,  
(WCNC), pp 2053 – 2057, 2007.  
[8] R. Akl, D. Tummala, and X. Li, ―Indoor Propagation Modeling At 2.4 
Ghz For IEEE 802.11 Networks‖, Proceedings of WNET 2006: 
Wireless Networks and Emerging Technologies, paper no. 510-014, 6 
pgs. July 2006.  
[9] N. 
Patwari 
and 
P. 
Agrawal, 
“NESH: 
A 
Joint  
Shadowing Model For Links In a Multi-hop Network‖,  IEEE 
International Conference  on Acoustics, Speech and Signal 
Processing, pp 2873 - 2876, 2008.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[10] Q. Li, and  A.Q. Hu, “A high efficiency spread spectrum  modulation 
based on Non-Strictly Orthogonal Sequences‖, IEEE  International 
conference 
on 
Wireless 
Communications 
 & Signal Processing, WCSP, pp 1 - 3,  2009.  
[11] D. Montana and J. Redi, “Optimizing Parameters of a Mobile Ad 
Hoc 
Network 
Protocol 
with 
a 
Genetic 
Algorithm‖,  
GECCO’05, 
The 
Genetic 
and 
Evolutionary 
Computation  
Conference),  pp 1993-1998, 2005. 
[12] I. 
Bouazizi, 
―ARA 
- 
The 
Ant-Colony 
Based 
Routing  
Algorithm for MANETs‖, Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Parallel Processing Workshop, pp 79-85,  2002.  
[13] S. 
Haykin, 
―Cognitive 
radio:brain 
–empowered 
wireless  
communications‖, 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
 
Areas 
in  
Communications, vol, 23, pp 201 – 220, 2005.  
[14] H. M. Qusay, ―Cognitive Networks: : Towards Self-Aware 
Networks‖, John Wiley,  2007. 
[15] S. Sharkkottai, T.S. Rappaport and P.C. Karlsson, ―Cross  
 layer design  for wireless networks‖, IEEE Communication  
 Magazine, pp 74 – 80, 2003. 
[16] V. Srivasta and M. Motani,―Cross-Layer Design : a Survey  
and a Road Ahead‖, IEEE Communication Magazine, pp 112-119, 
2005. 
[17] G. 
Di 
Caro, 
F. 
Ducatelle 
and 
L. 
M.  
Gambardella, 
―An 
Adaptive 
Nature-inspired 
Algorithm 
for  
Routing 
in 
Mobile 
ad 
hoc 
Networks‖, 
European 
Transactions on Telecommunications, pp  443–455, 2005. 
[18] F. K. Karnadi, M.   Z. H. Mo and L. K. Lan, ―Rapid  Generation of 
Realistic 
Mobility 
Models 
for 
VANET‖, 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference, pp 2506 – 2511, 
2007.  
[19]  http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ - 17.11.2010. 
[20] I. Benyahia and V. Talbot, ―Optimizing the Architecture of Adaptive 
Complex Applications Using Genetic Programming‖. Proceedings of 
the Fourteenth International Conference on Distributed Multimedia 
Systems, pp. 27-31, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
195
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

