A Fundamental Analysis of an Erase Code-enabled Data Caching Scheme 
for Future UAV-IC-WSNs 
 
Shintaro Mori 
Department of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science 
Fukuoka University 
8-19-1, Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan 
e-mail: smori@fukuoka-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This paper addresses an effective scheme for sensing 
data collection and management in future smart city 
applications for rapid urbanization. The main contribution of 
this paper provides an application of Internet of things as a new 
Internet technology as case study. In particular, we focus on two 
key 
technologies, 
an 
information-centric 
network 
and 
unmanned aerial vehicles. We propose a novel joint sensing, 
forwarding, and storing scheme, for which we introduce an 
erase code technique and cross-layer optimization. We provide 
the overall blueprint of our study, and we present a preliminary 
evaluation. The numerical results illustrate that the scheme can 
improve data caching capability by 29.3% in the deployment of 
future wireless sensor networks. 
Keywords- Information-centric network (ICN); Wireless 
sensor network (WSN); Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV); Cross-
layer. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart cities bring intelligence to various aspects of our 
daily lives for rapid urbanization, and there are application 
services to realize them, such as smart homes, personal 
healthcare, and urban infrastructure management. In addition, 
smart cities alternatively include not only urban sophistication, 
but also resilience to serious disasters and the promotion of 
public healthcare during global pandemics. Those promises 
have been recognized as representative of the Internet of 
Things (IoT), and they feature a diverse array of cyber-
physical systems. In realistic cities, to facilitate decision 
making and task execution for us, a massive number of 
resources, such as sensors, actuators, and data storages, need 
to be deployed to retain the sustainability of extensive social 
applications. Therefore, the smart cities’ platform should be 
considered in practical data management through all protocol 
layers. In our study, we concentrate on an effective sensing 
data collection and management scheme for Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
(WSNs) 
while 
taking 
into 
account 
the 
aforementioned background. In particular, we introduce two 
key technologies into our proposed scheme: an Information-
Centric Network (ICN) design [1] and a technique for assisted 
data collection of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) [2], 
which we call the UAV-assisted Information-Centric WSNs 
(UAV-IC-WSNs). 
In conventional IoT frameworks, Sensor Nodes (SNs) are 
directly linked to cloud servers to gather and centralize 
sensing 
data 
via 
HTTP/TCP/IP-enabled 
application 
programming interfaces. Typical location-dependent common 
interfaces are reasonable for coordinating across multiple 
systems in distributed wireless networks; nevertheless, heavy 
address-based queries cause serious protocol overhead, 
making them similar to denial-of-service attacks. The ICNs 
name content data instead of the “address,” and the ICN nodes 
copy and store the named data as caching data for further 
responses. Another problem with the current systems is that 
practical SNs are non-uniformly scattered depending on the 
ground surface, cost-effectiveness, and need to supply. 
Therefore, the sensing data are periodically generated but 
must be collected at asynchronous intervals. For data 
collecting and forwarding in those occasions, UAVs, such as 
drones (including multi-copters), small planes, and balloons, 
can work more flexibly and robustly as mobile sink nodes, 
which play an essential role in air-ground integration networks. 
In our previous study [3], we have found that the proposed 
scheme cannot be used in the typical fourth-generation (4G) 
and fifth-generation (5G) WSN scenarios. Especially, the 
proposed scheme cannot accommodate into the traditional 
WSN system because of a huge sensing data traffic due to 
massive SNs. Therefore, sophisticated channel access 
mechanisms and efficient radio bandwidth utilization 
techniques must be considered as the remained works. In 
addition, studies on UAV-IC-WSN’s Medium Access Control 
(MAC) protocols and physical protocols have remaining 
research 
problems [4]. 
Among 
them, 
in 
particular, 
acceleration in the transmission requests of sensing data leads 
to serious conflicts, such as collisions and interferences. In our 
previous study [5], we investigated a kind of cooperative 
MAC protocol design to remove interference among SNs, 
which are categorized as a cooperative sensing data collecting 
framework [4]. For the above atmosphere, we believe that we 
can overcame those technical issues by cooperative 
transmission, 
collision 
avoidance, 
and 
interference 
cancellation. 
The cooperative MAC protocols can be basically 
classified as being either receiver-side or transmitter-side 
cooperation schemes. The receiver-side cooperation scheme 
is suitable for wireless networks to maximize their network 
lifetime because the rich receiver-side station nodes undertake 
complicated cooperative procedures. In fact, the fifth 
generation and beyond wireless network systems utilize 
UAVs as airborne base stations, and the UAV swarms provide 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

an 
integrated 
receiver-side 
cooperative 
reception 
mechanism [6]. However, we believe that cooperation at 
receivers is not sufficient to provide enormous sensing data 
transmissions. To tackle the aforementioned situation, we 
designed a novel joint sensing, forwarding, and storing 
scheme, which includes transmitter-side cooperation. To 
achieve the aforementioned mechanism, as the first steps, we 
introduce an erase code technique [7] and cross-layer 
optimization [8] into UAV-IC-WSNs. In this paper, we 
provide the overall blueprint of our study in progress, 
including a novel MAC and physical protocol design and a 
first fundamental evaluation of the scheme using a computer 
simulation. In particular, the key contribution of this paper is 
to solve the technical issues about channel capacity in UAV-
IC-WSNs under 4G/5G scenarios by using dual-band SNs 
with erasure correction codes. 
Related studies in UAV-IC-WSNs have investigated 
several elemental technologies. For example, Bithas et al. [9] 
investigated channel modeling to satisfy the requirements for 
massive connectivity and ultra-reliability. Li et al. [10] 
investigated the upper limitation of CSMA/CA-based MAC 
protocols and created an extended proposal. Bouhamed et 
al. [11] found the MAC protocols have flight path controls and 
trajectory optimization for UAV swarms, e.g., adaptation of 
machine learning techniques. As we could observe from the 
above literatures, there have been studied elementally wireless 
connectivity including antenna design and interference 
cancellation. Regarding an erase code technique, there have 
been typically studied in the field of distributed storage 
reliability [7]. For example, Kishani et al. [12] investigated 
the redundant array of independent disks. On the other hand, 
several studies have applied this technique in network 
research fields, e.g., Sharma et al. [13] utilized as an elemental 
technology to achieve the multipath diversity-based packet 
loss-tolerant network systems. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Sectione II describes the proposed scheme. Section III 
presents 
the 
numerical 
results. 
Finally, 
Section IV 
summarizes our findings and concludes the paper. 
II. 
PROPOSED SCHEME 
In the UAV-IC-WSN scheme, SNs are scattered on the 
ground in the smart city area, and the SNs observe and cache 
sensing data. Then, flying UAVs collect the data as necessary. 
In this section, we provide a network model, the MAC 
protocol, and the physical protocol. 
A. System Description 
As shown in Figure 1, the named packet for the 
packet/frame format is encoded based on the erase code, i.e., 
the full-frame is structured by appending the parity bits. We 
can select among Error Control Codes (ECCs) (that is utilized 
as forward error correction methods) with strong resistance to 
burst bit errors, such as the Low-Density Parity-Check 
(LDPC) code and the Reed-Solomon code. This is because the 
packets with any lost sub-frames have continuous bit errors in 
the sector of the lost sub-frames. Another motivation for 
introducing the erase code is that the original packet can be 
restored even if all the sub-frames are not complete. Therefore, 
retransmission procedures, such as automatic repeat request 
methods, are not necessary when the SNs intermittently 
execute so as to ensure low energy consumption. Furthermore, 
we can try to recover the packets by fetching the lost sub-
frames from the neighbor SNs. 
In the wireless air interface, our system utilizes and 
switches to two radio frequency bands: the microwave band 
and the sub-gigahertz band. Note that multiband wireless 
communication modules were adopted in several studies [14]. 
In general, higher frequency radio leads to larger data capacity 
and strong straightness (low diffraction). Therefore, our 
scheme assigns the microwave band radio and sub-gigahertz 
band radio for the wireless transmission areas between SNs 
and between a UAV and SN, respectively. We proposed the 
utilization of those spectrum bands because we suspect the 
familiar Low-Power Wide-Area (LPWA) networks, which 
typically use sub-gigahertz bands, will have difficulty 
wirelessly transmitting a large number of sensing data in 
future WSN scenarios, which are illustrated in the numerical 
results. 
B. Proposed MAC protocol 
The MAC protocol is designed based on the slotted-
ALOHA scheme because we assume that all nodes can be 
synchronized using the pilot signal that the UAVs broadcast. 
 
Figure 1. The relationship between the named packet and frame, the 
structure of the full-frame and sub-frame, and the relationship between 
the frame and time slot in two radio frequency bands 
 
Figure 2. Network model 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

In general, the wireless communication system has a 
significant feature in that it is able to overhear what neighbor 
nodes can receive whether they desire it or not. In our system, 
to accelerate the effect of the caching processing, the nodes 
should actively accumulate the overheard data, making it the 
so-called off-path caching mechanism. For example, in 
Figure 2, 𝔸1’s data should be cached in not only 𝔹1 but also 
in neighbor SNs. However, if 𝔸2’s data are sent at the same 
time as 𝔸2 ’s, the data will interfere with each other. 
Regardless of the circumstances, 𝔹2 should be caching a part 
of 𝔸2’s data as the imperfect full-frame. 
To select the dual-band SN to which the UAV gives a 
transmission request, first, the UAV broadcasts the interest 
packets to the area where the desired data might be located. If 
one node responds to the request, the UAV can decide on it, 
e.g., 𝕌1 selects 𝔹1. However, if there are several candidate 
SNs, the UAV can decide on the SN with the best wireless 
condition that is obtained using the signal strength of the 
responding packet among the dual-band SNs that have a 
perfect full-frame, e.g., 𝕌2 selects 𝔹3 among 𝔹3, 𝔹4, and 𝔹5. 
Moreover, if the candidate SNs have only imperfect data, the 
UAV tries to combine and restore the data, e.g., 𝕌3 selects and 
recovers both 𝔹6 and 𝔹7. Note that, we assume in this paper 
that the wireless connection between the UAV and the dual-
band SNs is one hop because the current sub-gigahertz 
wireless systems are typically single hop with the end devices 
connected to a central gateway through a direct link. However, 
we believe that further packet loss can be improved if multiple 
hops are acceptable, and this is part of our future work. 
C. Proposed physical protocol 
The signal processing of the proposed wireless 
communications system is illustrated in Figure 3. As shown in 
Figure 3 (a), the full-frame is constructed at the erase code 
encoder by appending the parity bits that are calculated based 
on the named packet; and then, the full-frame is divided into 
several sub-frames at the fragmentor. Each sub-frame is 
encoded using the Error Control Code (ECC), such as the 
convolutional code, for error detection and correction through 
wireless links. After that, the codewords are mapped into the 
analog signals using the modulator, such as the binary phase 
shift keying method. To utilize the slotted-ALOHA scheme as 
the multiple access mechanism, we obtain the synchronization 
signals from the UAVs using the pilot signal regenerator, as 
shown in Figure 3 (b). 
At the receiver side, as shown in Figure 3 (c), the received 
signal is demodulated and interpreted using a method such as 
Viterbi decoding. The correctly received sub-frames are 
stacked into a temporary buffer, and the erase code decoder 
tries to recover the original packet using sufficient sub-frames 
in the temporary buffer. As a result, if the restoring process is 
completed, the recovered packet is stacked in the cache 
memory for the perfectly named packet; otherwise, the failed 
packet is stacked in another cache memory for the imperfectly 
named packet. Therefore, the packets stored in those cache 
memories could be re-transmitted when the cooperative 
packet/frame transmissions are requested by other SNs and 
when the request is accepted. In addition, our proposed 
methodology requires collaboration beyond the boundaries 
among the lower three layers; thus, we believe that the caching 
manager must be created based on the cross-layer design. 
III. 
NUMERICAL RESULTS 
Our initial evaluation of the proposed scheme included the 
erase code technique’s capability, the frame reachability 
through wireless channels, and the improvement in data 
caching among SNs. The simulation parameters are shown in 
Table I. We utilized the LDPC code as the erase code, and its 
parity-check matrix was decided based on the DVB-S2 
specifications, which are widely utilized in digital video 
broadcasting via telecommunications [15]. The full-frame 
 
Figure 3. Procedure of wireless communication system 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Terms 
Values 
Erase code 
LDPC with sum-products decoding 
Trans. Interval 
600 s (= 10 min.) 
Multiple access 
Slotted-ALOHA 
Number of channels 
15 
Full-frame length 
64,800 bit 
Number of fragmentations 
60 
Modulation method 
BPSK 
Error control coding 
Convolutional coding 
Radio 
Frequency 
2.4 GHz (in microwave), 
920 MHz (in sub-GHz) 
Channel model 
Rayleigh fading 
Radio propagation 
model 
Erceg’s model (SN-BS), 
Amorim’s model (SN-UAV) 
Radio transmission power 
0 dBm 
Antenna gain 
0 dBi 
Circuit loss 
0 dB 
Thermal noise 
−172 dBm 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

length was decided based on the codeword length of the 
LDPC code, and the sub-frame length was decided based on 
typical LPWA systems. In this paper, to avoid system 
complexity, we assume that the buffer size is an ideal 
condition, i.e., we ignore the upper limitation of cache 
memory causing hardware devices, and we do not consider the 
selection of buffered sensing data. The radio propagation 
models utilized Erceg’s model [16], Amorim’s model [17], 
and the theoretical free-space model. Note that the first two 
models were done based on the practical measurement results, 
and the fading and shadowing were taken into account, unlike 
with the theoretical free-space model. 
Regarding the robustness of the LDPC-based erase code, 
Figure 4 (a) shows the probability of successful recovery of 
the original packet if several sub-frames were lost. When the 
code rate 𝑅 = 1/4, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3, and 3/4, the original packet 
could be reconstructed even if 4, 11, 7, 3, and 2 sub-frames 
were lost, respectively. Note that the code rate denotes the 
percentage of information data length in the total codeword 
length, including parity bits. In addition, the LDPC code has 
strong resilience to burst errors, but it requires a long 
codeword to guarantee sufficient error correction; therefore, 
we need to overcome this barrier for short sensing data 
message. In addition, in Figure 4 (a), when the percentage of 
lost subframes is small, the reason why the curve keeps a flat 
shape is enough subframes to recover a full-frame can arrive. 
On the other hand, the recovery rate suddenly degraded 
because the received data is digitally decoded; thus, there is 
no resistance to noise as same as an analog system. 
The LDPC code decoder fulfills an iterative operation 
based on the belief propagation, which is called the sum-
products algorithm. Figure 4 (b) shows the average number of 
iterations until a successful recovery, i.e., the computational 
burden increases depending on the increased number of 
iterations. As a result, the number of iterations was 10 times 
or less when the packet was successfully restored, and even if 
the number of iterative operations exceeded 50 times, no 
improvement occurred. In other words, in Figure 4 (b), the 
curve keeps flat shape when the number of iterations exceeds 
50 times because the iterative decoding process reaches the 
pre-defined upper limitation. Note that, in Figure 4 (a) and (b), 
the radio propagation models are not taken into account 
because those simulations are performed based on lost 
subframes as parameters; thus, there is no effect of difference 
among radio propagation models. Figure 4 (c) shows the 
frame reception probability versus the distance between nodes. 
As a result, Erceg’s model and Amorim’s model describe 
smooth curves, and Amorim’s model did not appear to be a 
difference between radio frequency bands. 
Figure 4 (a)–(c) demonstrate the effectiveness of our 
scheme for packet caching, and Figure 4 (d) shows the 
computer simulation results. In general, 10,000/km2 (in the 4G 
scenario), 1,000,000/km2 (in the 5G scenario), and 
10,000,000/km2 (in the Beyond 5G (B5G) scenario) were 
assumed as the number of SN deployments. In Figure 4 (d), 
the LPWA systems achieved high reachability in the 4G 
scenario due to sufficient capacity for generated traffics. 
Therefore, the first computer simulation indicates that the 
proposed UAV-IC-WSNs can work under the 5G scenario by 
using the proposed MAC and physical protocols, while the 
traditional IoT frame cannot work in our previous studies. In 
particular, the proposed scheme improved data caching 
capability by 29.3% in comparison with a comparable scheme 
without introducing an erase code mechanism. The 
preliminary evaluation led us to conclude that our scheme has 
significant limitations for the B5G scenarios and needs further 
analysis.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed a novel erase code-enabled data 
caching scheme for UAV-IC-WSNs to achieve joint sensing, 
forwarding, and storing. We provided the overall blueprint of 
our proposal and a fundamental evaluation. As future work, 
we will expand on the B5G scenarios and analyze them in 
practical environments. In addition, it is necessary to discuss 
the disadvantages of dual-band SNs compared to single-band 
SNs in terms of power consumption and implementation cost. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
A part of this work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number JP19K20261. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Arshad, M. A. Azam, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Loo, “Recent 
Advances in Information-Centric Networking-Based Internet 
 
Figure 4. Simulation results: a) probability of successful packet 
recovery versus percentage of lost subframes, b) number of iterations in 
the erase code decoder versus percentage of lost subframes, c) frame 
acceptance probability versus distance between nodes, and d) number of 
successfully cached SNs versus density of distributed SNs 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

of Things (ICN-IoT),” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 6, 
no. 2, pp. 2128–2158, Apr. 2019. 
[2] F. Qi, X. Zhu, G. Mang, M. Kadoch, and W. Li, “UAV 
Network and IoT in the Sky for Future Smart Cities,” IEEE 
Network, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 96–101, Mar. 2019. 
[3] S Mori, “A Fundamental Analysis of Caching Data Protection 
Scheme using Light-weight Blockchain and Hashchain for 
Information-centric WSNs,” Proc. 2nd Conf. Blockchain 
Research & Applications for Innovative Networks and Services 
(BRAINS 
2020), 
Sept. 
2020, 
pp. 
200–201, 
doi: 
10.1109/BRAINS49436.2020.9223279. 
[4] S. Poudel and S. Moh, “Medium Access Control Protocols for 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle-Aided Wireless Sensor Networks: 
A Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 65728–65744, 2019. 
[5] S. Mori, “Cooperative Sensing Data Collecting Framework by 
using Unmanned Aircraft Vehicle in Wireless Sensor Network,” 
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC2016), May 2016, pp. 1–
6, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2016.7511187. 
[6] S. Zhang, H. Zhang, and L. Song, “Beyond D2D: Full 
Dimension UAV-to-Everything Communications in 6G,” 
IEEE Trans. Vehicular Tech., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 6592–6602, 
June 2020. 
[7] K. V. Rashmi, N. B. Shah, K. Ramchandran, and P. V. Kumar, 
“Information-Theoretically 
Secure 
Erasure 
Codes 
for 
Distributed Storage,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 64, no. 3, 
pp. 1621–1646, Mar. 2018. 
[8] V. Srivastava and M. Motani, “Cross-layer Design: A Survey 
and the Road Ahead,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 43, no. 12, 
pp. 112–119, Dec. 2005. 
[9] P. S. Bithas, 
V. Nikolaidis, 
A. G. Kanatas, 
and 
G. K. Karagiannidis, 
“UAV-to-Ground 
Communications: 
Channel Modeling and UAV Selection,” IEEE Trans. 
Commun., vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 5135–5144, Aug. 2020. 
[10] B. Li, 
X. Guo, 
R. Zhang, 
X. Du, 
and 
M. Guizani, 
“Performance Analysis and Optimization for the MAC 
Protocol in UAV-Based IoT Network,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular 
Tech., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 8925–8937, Aug. 2020. 
[11] O. Bouhamed, H. Ghazzai, H. Besbes, and Y. Massoud, “A 
UAV-Assisted Data Collection for Wireless Sensor Networks: 
Autonomous Navigation and Scheduling,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 
pp. 110446–110460, 2020. 
[12] M. Kishani, S. Ahmadian, and H. Asadi, “A Modeling 
Framework for Reliability of Erasure Codes in SSD Arrays,” 
IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 649–665, May 
2020. 
[13] V. Sharma, S. Kalyanaraman, K. Kar, K. K. Ramakrishnan, 
and V. Subramanian, “MPLOT: A Transport Protocol 
Exploiting Multipath Diversity Using Erasure Codes,” Proc. 
Int. Conf. Computer Commun. (INFOCOM2008), Apr. 2008, 
pp. 121–125, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2008.33. 
[14] Z. M. Fadlullah et al., “Multi-Hop Wireless Transmission in 
Multi-Band WLAN Systems: Proposal and Future Perspective,” 
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 108–113, Feb. 
2019. 
[15] DVB project: https://dvb.org [retrieved: Jan. 2021]. 
[16] V. Erceg et al., “An Empirically Based Path Loss Model for 
Wireless Channels in Suburban Environment,” IEEE J. Sel. 
Areas in Commun., vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1205–1211, July 1999. 
[17] R. Amorim et al., “Radio Channel Modeling for UAV 
Communication Over Cellular Networks,” IEEE Wireless 
Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 514–517, Aug. 2017. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

