A Congestion Control Approach for M2M Networks
David Arag˜ao
Universidade Federal do Cear´a
Fortaleza, Cear´a
Email: davidbpa@great.ufc.br
Dario Vieira
Ecole d’Ing´enieur G´en´eraliste en Informatique
et Technologies du Num´erique (EFREI)
Paris, France
Email: dario.vieira@efrei.fr
Miguel Franklin de Castro
Universidade Federal do Cear´a
Fortaleza, Cear´a
Email: miguel@great.ufc.br
Abstract—Machine-to-Machine (M2M) is a communication model
used by devices where data can be exchanged with little or no
human intervention. The M2M communication, when applied in
the context of LTE networks, can lead to overload and congestion
problems due to its intrinsic particularities. Accordingly, in this
paper we propose a congestion control approach for Long-Term
Evolution (LTE) that reduces the impact over the Human-to-
Human (H2H) devices and establishes priority amongst M2M
devices through the use of classes. The results obtained through
extensive simulations in Network Simulator (NS-3) show that the
proposed approach can control the impact over H2H devices,
establishes intra and inter-class priority for the devices, reduces
the access delay and it is compatible with the LTE network
standard.
Keywords–LTE; M2M; Congestion Control
I.
INTRODUCTION
M2M communication is a technology that enables infor-
mation exchange between autonomous devices with few or no
human intervention [1]. Device types can be of common (e.g.,
home appliance, cars, cell phones, etc.) or speciﬁc purpose
(e.g., sensors, actuators, etc.). The M2M communication is
expected to play an important role to leverage the Internet
of Things (IoT). The goal of the IoT paradigm is to facilitate
daily tasks, generating a huge impact on society behavior [2].
The Long-Term Evolution (LTE) [3] is a networking stan-
dard that presents advantages like mobility, accessibility, good
coverage area, security, and other relevant key features for
M2M services and applications. Since LTE networking was
mainly designed for H2H communication, some adaptations
need to be done to cope with M2M communication require-
ments. The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) [4],
organization that is responsible for the LTE speciﬁcation,
works to identify and propose solutions for the problems and
requirements that may arise with the integration of M2M
devices into the LTE network.
The overload and congestion control in the LTE Radio
Access Network (RAN) is considered by 3GPP as a high
priority issue that needs to be treated to enable the M2M com-
munication over the LTE networks. Overload and congestion
on LTE network normally occur when a huge number of access
requests are sent by devices to a single base station during the
Random Access CHannel Procedure (RACH procedure). The
RACH procedure presents a very low efﬁciency as the number
of devices increases [5]. In Section II, we present an overview
of the LTE networks and the RACH procedure.
The 3GPP presents six alternatives to mitigate the overload
and congestion problems on the LTE network: (i) Access
Class Barring (ACB), (ii) Backoff, (iii) Separated RACH,
(iv) Dynamic Resource Allocation for RACH, (v) Slotted-
Aloha and (vi) Pull Schema. Some approaches in the literature
(e.g., [6], [7], [8]) combine two or more of these mechanisms
to achieve better results. However, the solutions to mitigate the
overload and congestion problems normally consider only the
M2M trafﬁc in their approaches [5]. Another drawback in these
proposals is the lack of compatibility with the LTE standard.
The related works are presented and discussed in Section III.
These problems have motivated the development of our pro-
posal. In this paper, we propose a mechanism, presented and
discussed in Section IV, to mitigate the congestion in the RAN
of LTE networks that presents low implementation complexity.
In addition, in our solution, we propose mechanisms to control
the impact of M2M over H2H devices and we create priorities
among M2M devices. To accomplish these objectives, we split
the M2M devices into high and low priority classes and we
deﬁne a third class for H2H devices.
The results obtained through exhaustive simulations using
NS-3, presented and discussed in Section V, show that our
approach presents good results for inter and intra-class priority
for M2M and H2H devices. Moreover, our approach is highly
compatible with the LTE networks, easily implemented and
mitigates the congestion problems during the RACH Proce-
dure. In Section VI, we present our conclusion and future
works.
II.
OVERVIEW
A. Machine-to-Machine Communication
The M2M communication, also called Machine-Type Com-
munication (MTC) by 3GPP, is a technology where devices can
exchange information with little or no human intervention. In
addition to the applications diversity and number of devices,
other common features of M2M communication are [9]: (i)
trafﬁc in the uplink is higher than in the downlink, (ii) sporadic
data transmission, (iii) usual transmission of small portion of
data. Thus, due to these intrinsic features new approaches are
needed to adapt the LTE network to the M2M environment.
B. RACH Procedure
In LTE networks, the random access can be contention-
based or contention-free. In the former, the random access
request is initialized by the device. In the latter, requests are
started by the base station (evolved Node B - eNodeB).
The contention-based RACH procedure is divided into
four signal messages (represented in Figure 1, mgs1, msg2,
msg3, msg4) managed by the Radio Network Controller
(RNC) [10]. Figure 1 illustrates the message exchange during
the contention-based procedure. Information related to the
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 1. Random access procedure based on contention.
RACH procedure, as preamble code available and random-
access slots (RA-Slots) opportunities, is periodically sent
through the System Information Block (SIB) to devices. The
following activities are done in each stage of the RACH
message exchange procedure:
1)
PRACH Preamble (Msg1): The device randomly se-
lects and transmits a preamble code to eNodeB on
Physical Random Access CHannel (PRACH).
2)
Random Access Response - RAR (Msg2): In this
stage, the following occur: (i) detection of access re-
quests sent by devices to eNodeB, (ii) assignment of a
Temporary Cell Radio Network Temporary Identiﬁer
(TC-RNTI) to devices and (iii) a resource is granted
on the uplink channel for subsequent messages ex-
changes between the devices and the base station.
3)
Contention Request (Msg3): Devices send the TC-
RNTI, the one assigned in the previous message.
This exchange is done over the uplink shared channel
(PUSCH), also conﬁgured in previous stage.
4)
Contention Resolution (Msg4): Devices wait for the
contention resolution message from the eNodeB,
which is sent by the eNodeB through the Downlink
Shared Channel (DL-SCH). If the device identiﬁer is
present in the contention message, an ACK message
is sent to the eNodeB, otherwise the device randomly
select a backoff time before retry transmission.
Collisions during the RACH procedure occur when two or
more devices send the same preamble code to the eNB. In this
case, devices do not receive the Random Access Response
(msg2) and the waiting time window is reached.
III.
RELATED WORK
In [11], devices are classiﬁed into classes. Class priorities
are based on the backoff time. When a collision occurs, the
device waits for the backoff time, which is randomly selected
from the interval (X ∼ Unif(0, T)), where X is a random
variable and Unif an uniform distribution. The interval (T)
is divided by the number of classes (C) with the interval size
based on the congestion level (p0) broadcasted by the base
station. The interval range for M2M devices is given by the
following equation: T MT C
bf
(i) = p0T + Unif(i (1−p0)T
C
, (i +
1) (1−p0)T
C
). To prevent that the M2M interval becomes equal
to zero when the networks is congested, the authors propose
the following equation for the backoff calculus: T MT C
bf
(i) =
T + Unif(i kT
C , (i + 1) kT
C ). Another strategy presented by the
authors is to change the backoff range based on the M2M
device class. Using this second approach the backoff calculus
is done by the following equation: T MT C
bf
(i) = Unif(0, kiT),
where ki represents the multiplier of the ith type of MTC
user. The second strategy can be seen as an enhancement of
the speciﬁc backoff schema with the adoption of more than
one type of M2M devices. The third approach combines the
ACB with the backoff class. Since our main priority is to
analyze the performance of backoff strategies with our ap-
proach, we choose to implement the ﬁrst approach. Classifying
devices into classes with different backoff interval represents
an upgrade when compared with the conventional backoff and
the Slotted Aloha approaches. However, this approach is not
optimized. The interval class does not consider the number of
devices in each class. Thus, classes with a few hundreds of
devices have the same interval size as classes with thousands
of devices. Moreover, there are no intra-class priorities among
the types of M2M devices.
In [7], the authors propose a static and a dynamic approach
to split the RACH resources between M2M and H2H devices.
Before the resource allocation, the devices pass through the
ACB selection. The implementation complexity and no prior-
itization between devices are some of the drawbacks of this
approach. In [12], an algorithm is proposed that helps devices
to select the base station (eNodeB) which they should be
connected to. The algorithm uses a Q-Learning technique and
considers the application Quality of Service (QoS) during the
selection. In this proposal, no priority is deﬁned among M2M
devices and it is applied only to scenarios where the devices
are covered by more than one eNodeB.
In [13], the idea is an overload control mechanism that
uses the dynamic resource allocation for RACH technique. To
identify the overload level at the RAN in the LTE networks,
the authors consider the average number of preambles sent by
devices to get access to the network. The algorithm considers
the number of retries made by the devices before successfully
accessing the network to infer the congestion level into the
network. The authors also combine other 3GPP proposal
techniques (Slotted-Access, Backoff and ACB) to mitigate the
M2M impact over the H2H devices and deﬁne priority between
M2M devices. This approach has a high complexity level of
implementation and was not evaluated by simulation or by
analytical approach.
In [14], the authors present a testbed framework to analyze
the congestion control strategies of LTE networks. The con-
gestion caused by M2M devices can impact other domains of
the network (e.g., core network). However, better results are
achieved by the strategies applied in the RAN [12].
IV.
CONTROL CONGESTION PROPOSAL
In this section, we present our proposal to control the
congestion in LTE networks. Our goal is: (i) to reduce the
impact on H2H devices, (ii) to deﬁne inter and intra-class
priorities among the devices and (iii) to increase the success
access rate. The inter-class behavior presented in our approach
is deﬁned between the H2H, M2M with high priority and M2M
with low priority. The intra-class priority is among the same
type of M2M devices, with higher priority given for those
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

devices that are more likely to reach the maximum number
of connection tries. Furthermore, in Section IV-A, we describe
the congestion problem during the RACH procedure in LTE
networks.
A. Problem
The RACH procedure in LTE networks follows the Slotted
Aloha principle [15]. Based on this relation, it is possible to
use the following equation to estimate the collision probability
(Pc) during the RACH procedure [16], [17]: Pc = 1 − e(−λ/L)
, where L is the total number of Random Access Slots (RA-
Slots) available per second and λ is the average number of re-
quests per second targeting a single eNodeB. For a bandwidth
(B) in MHz, such that B ∈ {1.4, 2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20} the number
of Physical Resource Blocks (PRBs) available per frame is
given by: PRBT otalF rame = B/Fsubframe ×Tframe×2, where
Tframe is the frame timing in milliseconds and Fsubframe
is the frame frequency in kHz. Since an RA-Slots can be
conﬁgured to occurs n times within a Tframe interval, where
n ∈ {0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10}, the number of PRB available per
second for the RACH procedure is given by: PRBT otal =
P RBT otalF rame/2 × 1000/Tframe × n. Thus, the base station can
support TRAR request per second, where TRAR is given by
the following equation: TRAR = P RBT otal/P RBRACH Where
PRBRACH is the number of Physical Resource Blocks per
RACH request. In LTE networks, the number of PRBRACH
is equal to six. For a given collision probability (Pc), the
number of RA-slots per second (L) to support the random
access intensity (λ) is given by [17]: λ = −L × ln(1 − Pc).
Thus, more collisions will occur as the number of devices
increases.
B. Proposal
Mechanisms to control the overload and congestion prob-
lems presented in Section I and III may be considered as good
approaches to mitigate the problem. However, except for [11],
these mechanisms present a high implementation complexity,
with changes on the physical layer of LTE network. In [11], the
implementation is based on how devices calculate the backoff
interval and how the base station infers the congestion level
in the RAN. However, this approach does not consider the
number of devices during the class division. Accordingly, the
algorithm deﬁnes the network resources for classes with the
same interval range regardless of the number of devices in
each class. In addition, this approach does not consider priority
among M2M devices.
1) Congestion Level Identiﬁcation: In our approach, the
base station classiﬁes and reports as low, medium, and high
the congestion level in the RAN of LTE network. This classi-
ﬁcation is based on the results obtained in [18] that show the
relation between the average number of access attempts, the
collision probability and the RACH procedure ratio utilization.
These results show that for a maximum resource utilization,
which is approximately 50%, the collision ratio is around 20%
and the proportion of successful requests is about 50%. Thus,
when more than 50 requests are done per RA-Slot we consider
the congestion level as high (Pcong
= 1). However, we
consider the congestion level as low (Pcong = 0) when there
are less than 25 request per RA-Slot. The relation between the
number of requests and the congestion level adopted in our
approach is presented in Table I.
TABLE I. CONGESTION LEVEL
Level
Request per RA-Slot
Pcong
Low
< 25
Pcong = 0.0
Medium
> 25 and ≤ 50
Pcong = 0.5
High
> 50
Pcong = 1.0
2) Devices Priority: We classify the devices into H2H,
M2M with high priority and M2M with low priority
[6].
To guaranty priority in accordance with the device type, we
use a class-based approach. The priorities between classes are
based on the preamble transmission probability and backoff
interval. The preamble transmission probability indicates when
the device can send an access request. Based on the ACB
approach, to get access to the network the device has to
calculate a random number X ∼ Unif(0, Ps) within the
interval (0,Ps), where Ps is giving by:
Ps(i, t, L) =



pac
Pcong = 0.0;
pac × ((( L
t ) × i) × α)
Pcong = 0.5;
pac × ((( L
t ) × i) × α)
Pcong = 1.0;
.
(1)
where i is the device type (H2H, M2M low priority, M2M
high priority), pac is the blocking parameter broadcasted by the
base station (eNodeB), L is the maximum number of preamble
retransmissions and t is the number of requests sent to access
the network. The α parameter is related to the congestion level
on RAN and deﬁnes the dispersion between the classes of
devices. The results show that an optimized value for α is 1.0
when Pcong = 0.5 and 1.5 when Pcong = 1.0. The calculus
of the expected transmission probability of a device k from a
class i is given by:
E[X] = 1
2 × (0 + Ps(ik, tk, L))
(2)
Following the ACB behavior, the device can transmit an
access preamble request during the RACH procedure when
X ≤ pac, i.e., with the probability given by Paccess(X ≤ pac).
To conclude, the cumulative density function (CDF) FX of a
device k from a class i after t access attempts is given by:
FX(x) = P(X ≤ pac) = pac
Ps
(3)
Based on (2) and (3) the preamble transmission probability
increases with the class index and the number of access
attempts made by the device, as illustrated in Figures 2
and 3. These ﬁgures also show that as the number of classes
increases the preamble transmission probability for classes
with low priority decreases. However, for the number of classes
considered in our algorithm, the probability of a preamble
transmission can be around 50% for the class with low priority.
When X is greater than pac (X > pac) the backoff Tbackoff
is individually calculated by each device through the equation:
Tbackoff(i) =

20 ms
for i = 0;
50 ms × i
for i ≥ 1;
(4)
The backoff technique avoids successive requests from devices
to the base station (eNodeB) after a collision.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 2. Cumulative Density Functions (cf. Eq. 3)
Figure 3. Cumulative Density Functions (cf. Eq. 3)
V.
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT AND NUMERICAL
RESULTS
In this section, we present and analyze our simulation
results. In Section V-A, we present the Performance Key Indi-
cators (PKIs) selected to evaluate the implemented approach.
In Section V-B, we describe the simulation environment and
the conﬁguration parameters.
A. Key Performance Indicators
In this paper, the performance indicators to analyze the
approaches are the access delay, the blocking probability, the
number of accesses, and the number of transmitted preambles.
We deﬁne the access delay as the time interval between the
instant when the device sends the ﬁrst access request to the
base station, and the time when the device successfully receives
the contention resolution message from the base station. The
blocking probability is the ratio between non-successful ac-
cesses and the total number of access requests received by the
base station. The number of transmitted preambles indicates
the access retries sent by the device to access the network. Such
indicators will be useful during the analysis of the following
aspect of each strategy: (i) impact control of M2M devices
over H2H devices, (ii) priority between M2M devices and (iii)
energy efﬁciency during the RACH procedure.
B. Simulation Environment
To evaluate our approach, we choose the simulator NS-
3 [19]. The ofﬁcial version of NS-3 has a LTE module,
but some key features of the RACH procedure were not
TABLE II. PARAMETERS OF THE SIMULATIONS
General Parameters
Bandwidth
5 MHz (25 RBs)
Runs
15
Number of base stations(eNodeB)
1
PRACH Conﬁguration Index
6
Preamble Retransmissions (L)
10
Preamble Codes
54
Random Access Response Timeout Window
5 ms
H2H Devices
{ 100,100,100,...,100 }
M2M Devices With High Priority
{ 10,500,1000,...,4000}
M2M Devices With Low Priority
{ 2,125,250,...,1000 }
Arrival Rate (H2H)
Poisson(λ), λ = 1/300
Arrival Rate (M2M)
Poisson(λ), λ = 1/900
Arrival Interval
[0,...,1] s
Simulation Time
5 s
Other Parameters
i = 0 for H2H devices, i = 1 for M2M devices w/ high priority, i = 2 for
M2M devices w/ low priority.
α = 1 for Low Congestion Level, α = 1.5 for High Congestion Level (cf. Table I).
implemented at the time this paper was written. Moreover, for
the number of M2M devices simulated in this paper the sim-
ulator performance can become extremely low. Thus, we have
extended the LTE module to implement other functionalities
for the RACH on NS-3 for this paper.
We have also implemented three algorithms found in the
literature that are compatibles with the LTE network. The ﬁrst
ones is the Slotted Aloha, which is the most naive solution
implemented and which gives a good understanding of the
congestion problem during RACH procedure. The Backoff
Speciﬁc, which deﬁnes different backoff interval for M2M
and H2H devices, is the second implemented approach [20].
The third approach is presented in [11] and differs from the
Slotted Aloha and Backoff Speciﬁc by setting priority among
M2M devices. In [11], the devices are classiﬁed into classes
with different levels of priority. The priority among classes
considers the backoff interval such that access requests can be
more or less spread over the time.
In our scenarios, we simulate H2H and M2M devices,
where the number of H2H devices is constant and equal to 100.
The M2M devices priorities are classiﬁed into high and low
as presented in Section IV-B2. The number of M2M devices
with low priority are: {10, 500, 1000, 1500, ... ,4000}, and
the number of M2M devices with high priority are: {2, 125,
250, ... , 1000}, i.e., 1
4 of the number of M2M devices with
low priority. The arrival rate considered for the H2H and M2M
devices follows the Poisson distribution with arrival parameters
λH2H =
1
300 and λM2M =
1
900. The number of preamble
codes available for RACH procedures is 64 - N, where N is
the number of codes dedicated for the contention-free random
access method and equal to 10. For the PRACH Conﬁguration
Index 6, we have two RA-Slots available per LTE frame (10
ms), and so we have 200 RACH/s (1000 ms / 10 ms × 2).
For a bandwidth of 5 MHz, there are 25 PRBs available for
each 0,5 ms, and knowing that each RA-Slots occupies six
PRBs in the frequency domain and one subframe on the time
domain, the base station (eNodeB) can handle four requests per
PRACH procedure. Thereby, in an ideal scenario, i.e., without
collision, 800 (200 RA-slots/s × 4) devices can get access
to the network within the interval of one second. The above
conﬁgurations are presented in Table II.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 4. Impact Control Over H2H Devices - Blocking Probability.
C. Simulated Congestion Control Mechanisms
The approaches [11], [17] have in common with our
approach the implementation viability in a practical context of
the LTE networks. In [11], three techniques to split the classes
are presented. However, for the reasons already presented (cf.
Section III), only the ﬁrst technique is implemented in this
paper. Since there is no information in [11] on how the authors
identify the congestion level in the RAN, we choose to apply
the approach presented in Section IV-B1. The default backoff
time conﬁgured to the network is set to 20 ms [17]. In [17]
an Speciﬁc backoff approach is presented, in this approach
H2H and M2M devices receives different backoff interval
value. The maximum backoff value for M2M devices of 920
ms is within the deﬁned arrival interval presented in [17].
To keep this behavior for scenario used in this paper, we
deﬁne the maximum backoff time for M2M devices limited to
100 ms (Arrival Interval / Number of possible retransmission
attempts).
D. Results
In the next sections, the approaches presented in [11],
[17] will be respectively referenced by ”Jian” and ”BE”.
The scenario where no congestion control is applied will be
referenced as ”SlotAloha”. As presented in Section V-A, the
performance indicator will be useful to analyze the following
features: (i) impact control of M2M devices over H2H devices,
(ii) priority between M2M devices and (iii) energy efﬁciency
during the RACH procedure. Besides, our approach is referred
by PClass.
1) Impact over H2H Devices: The relation between the
blocking probability and the number of devices illustrated in
Figure 4 shows that PClass has a performance improvement
of 19% when compared to Jian and 40% when compared to
SlotAloha. For around 1350 devices, the performance of Jian
is about 10% better than PClass. However, between 1900 and
2000 devices, occurs an inversion on the blocking probability,
i.e., PClass approach is able to handle congested scenarios
better than Jian algorithm.
The priority inversion around 1975 devices is related to
the congestion level (Pcong), explained in Section IV-B1.
Scenarios with moderate level of congestion (Pcong) are less
Figure 5. Impact Control Over H2H Devices - Average Access Delay.
Figure 6. Impact Control Over M2M Devices - Blocking Probability.
restrictive. In this case, more M2M devices try to access the
network. Thus, more collisions may occur and emphasize the
impact over H2H devices.
As illustrated in Figure 5, the access delay is almost con-
stant for all implemented techniques. However, it is important
to notice that the average access time considers only devices
that accessed the network with success. Thereby, even if the
average access time of the H2H devices is considered constant,
it can be observed in Figure 4 that the number of successful
accesses decreases. The algorithm Jian considers a big backoff
interval for the H2H devices. Accordingly, the access delay
of H2H devices increases, since the access requests are more
spread over the time.
2) Priority Between M2M Devices: As illustrated in Fig-
ure 6, the blocking probability increases with the number of
devices in all implemented approach. Once the algorithms
SlotAloha and BE do not deﬁne priority between devices, both
types of devices (H2H and M2M) are equally penalized.
In the SlotAloha and BE algorithms the requests sent
by M2M devices are spread into the interval of 20 ms and
100 ms, respectively. As the interval increases, the number
of collisions decreases and more devices has access to the
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 7. Impact Control Over M2M Devices - Average Access Delay.
network with success. The results presented by Jian are better
than SlotAloha and BE since they deﬁne priority between
M2M devices. In relation to PClass, the Jian algorithm presents
a performance around 12% better for the blocking probability
between M2M devices with high priority for scenarios with
around 725 to 3530 devices. However, the PClass presents a
better performance in scenarios with more than 3530 devices.
In relation to M2M devices with low priority, the technique
applied by the algorithm Jian behaves like SlotAloha and BE,
i.e., the access time increases with the number of devices. The
PClass algorithm presents the same performance as Jain, when
compared with SlotAloha and BE in relation to the priority
between M2M devices. Notice that PClass exceed the number
of retries within scenarios less congested, i.e., those with
fewer devices (around 1350), see Figure 6. However, for more
congested scenarios, the algorithm PClass shows better results
amongst the implemented approaches. The behavior presented
by the PClass algorithm for scenarios within the interval
of 1350 and 3850 devices is consequence of the parameter
Pcong, which affects the devices transmission probability (cf.,
Equations 1 and 3).
3) Successful Access: As illustrated in Figures 8 and 9,
the impact over the H2H devices increases with the number of
M2M devices. The algorithms Jian and PClass have a similar
behavior, however, the PClass algorithm converges to higher
values than Jian. For scenarios where the number of device is
above 1800, the PClass offers better access performance than
Jian (cf. Figure 5).
For the M2M devices with high priority, the PClass al-
gorithm presents advantage in relation to the number and
average access delay for scenarios with about 1350 devices
when compared with Jian (cf., Figure 9 and 7). However, for
scenarios with more than 1350 devices, the average access
delay of the PClass algorithm is higher than Jian algorithm, but
PClass presents a better access performance of H2H devices
than Jian algorithm.
4) Preamble Transmission: The average number of pream-
ble transmission retries shown in Figures 11 and 10 is directly
related with the power consuming. Once radio transition activ-
ity demands a signiﬁcant amount of power, when more pream-
bles are transmitted more energy is consumed. The decreases
shown in Figure 10 in the number of preambles at 2600 to 5100
Figure 8. Average Succesful Access - H2H Devices.
Figure 9. Average Succesful Access - M2M Devices of High and Low
Priority.
devices is related with the network congestion. Since more
devices are trying to access, less preambles will be transmitted
by the PClass. Depending on the application type, devices
can use batteries as their primary energy source. However,
as the number of devices and the type of application grow, it
becomes clearer that the management of energy resources is
an important aspect for feasibility of some applications (e.g.,
environment monitoring, smart cities, etc). Thereby, energy
awareness strategies play an important role in this process. Our
proposal considers the energy aspect to keep the number of
preamble transmission lower than other proposed approaches,
see Figure 10.
In our proposal, the preamble transmission is controlled
by blocking the access request of devices. As illustrated in
Figure 11, in our approach the H2H devices show a lower
performance when compared to Jian algorithm. However, since
the expected number of M2M devices is higher than H2H
devices, our proposal causes less impact over the network than
Jian algorithm. Furthermore, energy consumption is a more
important issue when related to autonomous devices (M2M)
than non-autonomous ones (H2H).
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

Figure 10. Average Preamble Transmission - M2M Devices.
Figure 11. Average Preamble Transmission - H2H Devices.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we have presented a new congestion control
approach for LTE that can reduce the impact over the H2H
devices and establishes priorities amongst M2M devices using
classes of priorities. Besides, the proposed mechanism can
mitigate the impact of M2M devices in the LTE networks and
presents a low implementation complexity. In this context, our
approach shows a good result when compared with the others
in the literature. From the analysis of the results obtained
by simulations, we observe that our approach to change the
probability of both access and backoff time (as a strategy to
differentiate the priorities between M2M and H2H classes and
amongst M2M classes) can mitigate the impact of congestion
caused by excessive M2M devices on LTE network. We have
observed also that our approach to identify the congestion level
(as low, medium, and high in the RAN of LTE network), in
the base station constraints the amount of devices that can
successfully access the base station.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. M. Maia, M. F. d. Castro, D. Vieira, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane,
“Toward a new lte uplink packet scheduler for machine-to-machine
communication,” in 2014 Brazilian Symposium on Computer Networks
and Distributed Systems, May 2014, pp. 122–129.
[2]
Y. Chang, C. Zhou, and O. Bulakci, “Coordinated random access
management for network overload avoidance in cellular machine-to-
machine communications,” in European Wireless 2014; 20th European
Wireless Conference; Proceedings of.
VDE, 2014, pp. 1–6.
[3]
E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G: LTE/LTE-advanced for
mobile broadband.
Academic press, 2013.
[4]
3GPP. http://www.3gpp.org/about-3gpp/about-3gpp. [Online; retrived
March 19, 2017].
[5]
K. Zheng, S. Ou, J. Alonso-Zarate, M. Dohler, F. Liu, and H. Zhu,
“Challenges of massive access in highly dense lte-advanced networks
with machine-to-machine communications,” Wireless Communications,
IEEE, vol. 21, no. 3, 2014, pp. 12–18.
[6]
T.-M. Lin, C.-H. Lee, J.-P. Cheng, and W.-T. Chen, “Prada: Prioritized
random access with dynamic access barring for mtc in 3gpp lte-a
networks,” Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 63, no. 5,
Jun 2014, pp. 2467–2472.
[7]
K.-D. Lee, S. Kim, and B. Yi, “Throughput comparison of random
access methods for m2m service over lte networks,” in GLOBECOM
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2011 IEEE.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 373–377.
[8]
S.-Y. Lien, T.-H. Liau, C.-Y. Kao, and K.-C. Chen, “Cooperative
access class barring for machine-to-machine communications,” Wireless
Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 1, January 2012,
pp. 27–32.
[9]
3GPP, “Service requirements for machine-type communications (mtc),”
3GPP, Tech. Rep., 2013.
[10]
B. Yang, G. Zhu, W. Wu, and Y. Gao, “M2m access performance in lte-a
system,” Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies,
vol. 25, no. 1, 2014, pp. 3–10.
[11]
X. Jian, Y. Jia, X. Zeng, and J. Yang, “A novel class-dependent back-off
scheme for machine type communication in lte systems,” in Wireless
and Optical Communication Conference (WOCC), 2013 22nd.
IEEE,
2013, pp. 135–140.
[12]
M. Hasan, E. Hossain, and D. Niyato, “Random access for machine-
to-machine communication in lte-advanced networks: issues and ap-
proaches,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 51, no. 6, 2013.
[13]
A. Lo, Y. W. Law, M. Jacobsson, and M. Kucharzak, “Enhanced lte-
advanced random-access mechanism for massive machine-to-machine
(m2m) communications,” in 27th World Wireless Research Forum
(WWRF) Meeting, 2011, pp. 1–5.
[14]
J.-L. Chen, H.-C. Hsieh, and Y. Larosa, “Congestion control optimiza-
tion of m2m in lte networks,” in Advanced Communication Technology
(ICACT), 2013 15th International Conference on, Jan 2013, pp. 823–
827.
[15]
A. Laya, L. Alonso, and J. Alonso-Zarate, “Is the random access
channel of lte and lte-a suitable for m2m communications? a survey of
alternatives,” Communications Surveys Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1,
First 2014, pp. 4–16.
[16]
U. Phuyal, A. T. Koc, M.-H. Fong, and R. Vannithamby, “Controlling
access overload and signaling congestion in m2m networks,” in Signals,
Systems and Computers (ASILOMAR), 2012 Conference Record of the
Forty Sixth Asilomar Conference on.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 591–595.
[17]
3GPP, “Study on ran improvements for machine-type communication,”
3GPP, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[18]
M.-Y. Cheng, G.-Y. Lin, H.-Y. Wei, and C.-C. Hsu, “Performance
evaluation of radio access network overloading from machine type
communications in lte-a networks,” in Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW), 2012 IEEE.
IEEE,
2012, pp. 248–252.
[19]
The network simulator - NS-3. http://www.nsnam.org. [Online; retrived
April 10, 2017].
[20]
ZTE, “Backoff enhancements for ran overload control,” 3GPP, Tech.
Rep., 2011.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

