The Space-Time Information in the Access Management 
Jaroslav Kadlec, Radimír Vrba, David Jaroš, Radek Kuchta 
Department of Microelectronics 
FEEC, Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic  
kadlecja | vrbar | jarosd | kuchtar@feec.vutbr.cz 
 
Abstract—This paper deals with the possibility to employ the 
user’s time and space position information in the access 
management. Using the time and space information as new 
factors for authentication process is discussed in this paper. 
We have also considered the issues of indoor localization and 
possible application scenarios where these two additional 
authentication factors can be applied. We have developed the 
Multi-Factor Authentication Device (MAD I) together with 
active infrastructure, which is required for indoor users’ 
localization, to demonstrate the new main functions and 
advantages of adding time and space position to the user’s 
authentication factors. The main advantage of the MAD I is 
that the device helps the AAA system verify the user’s location 
in both main usages, i.e., indoor and outdoor environment. 
Keywords-location-based 
authentication; 
active 
infrastructure; wireless communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Authentication and authorization are required almost 
everywhere in today’s world. People must be identified when 
they download emails, read newspapers over the Internet, fill 
out forms for the government, access company private 
information, etc.  When servers communicate with each 
other, they have to create trusted connection. Before a 
connection is created, it is necessary to identify the servers. 
There are different ways how to identify a user and a server.  
The techniques that are used for user´s identity 
verification can be divided into three main groups along the 
subject of verification as refers [1]. 
 
A user knows something – the user has to know 
private information, which is not known by anybody 
else. The password verification technique is one of 
the most common techniques in this group. 
 
A user is somebody – this group covers techniques 
that are related to human user authentication. The 
techniques verify biometric properties of a human´s 
body. The fingerprint reading technique can be 
mentioned here. 
 
A user has something – the user brings up a unique 
thing (token) as subject of credential. For example, 
the 
unique 
thing 
can be 
Radio 
Frequency 
Identification (RFID) transponder or a hardware key. 
When a user or a server needs to authenticate a server, 
the most common way is using certificates. In this scenario, a 
trusted authority issues a certificate that is used for 
asymmetric cryptography.  
Especially, the scenario with the user’s credentials is 
sometimes insufficient and some extra information is 
required for many situations and systems. The information 
should be the user’s certificate, biometric identification or 
current position. 
The main topic of the paper is focused on the possibility 
of employing the user’s space-time information in AAA 
(Authentication Authorization Accounting) systems [2]. We 
assume that the space-time information will be used 
especially for user’s identity verification. 
The sharp growth in information, technologies and 
especially information systems require monitored and 
effective access control. A user has to approve his identity at 
first. Based on this step, an access management will assign 
the rights for the user. An accounting system that will create 
and store records about the user’s activities should also be a 
part of the system. For example, the records can be used as 
input information for future system development or for an 
audit. The above mentioned functions are provided by the 
systems that are commonly called AAA (Authentication 
Authorization Accounting) systems. The blocks of the main 
AAA system features are shown in Figure 1. A user is 
authenticated at first. In the next step rights are assigned to 
the user. The records are created during a whole session and 
stored in a database. 
 
a user
authentication
authorization
user’s 
records
a protected 
content
accounting
the AAA system
 
Figure 1.  The main features of the AAA system 
As a new factor of the user´s identity verification, his/her 
space-time information is discussed in this paper. That 
means “a user is on a known place in known time”. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the space-
time information introduction, the main aspects, and possible 
use in the AAA systems are described in the second section. 
The third section presents a possible application scenario. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

The fourth section introduces an authentication technique 
with active infrastructure and with the Multi-Factor 
Authentication Device (MAD I). 
II. 
THE SPACE-TIME INFORMATION 
The AAA systems that could work with the space-time 
information can prove useful in the following fields. 
For example, a doctor shouldn’t manipulate a patient’s 
private information outside the hospital area, as referred to in 
[3].  
Another example can be found in the financial sector. 
The user’s position verification should be a part of user 
authentication process before s/he gets access to the bank 
account.  
The SSO principle (Single-Sign-On) [4] could also make 
use of the space-time information. The user does not need to 
perform authentication to various systems when they are 
accessed from approved places (from his/her home or 
office). 
The position information can be interpreted relatively or 
absolutely [5]. The relative position is determined as 
proximity to the object the position of which is exactly 
known. The objects with known position are called anchor 
points.   This interpretation is used in GSM (Global System 
for Mobile Communications: originally from Groupe Special 
Mobile). Second, the position information can be interpreted 
absolutely. The absolute position information utilizes the 
coordinates in two or three dimensions. This way is 
employed for example in GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite 
System) systems. 
The space-time information can be assigned into all three 
main processes of the AAA system, as described in Figure 2. 
For the authentication the user’s space-time information 
should be verified in conjunction with verification of other 
authentication 
factors. 
The 
process 
which 
performs 
verification of two or more factors is commonly called multi-
factor authentication or strong authentication. Depending on 
the user’s space-time information the user will get different 
access rights in the system. For example, when the user 
accesses from the office, s/he will get different rights than 
when doing so from a public internet café. The user’s space-
time information could also be used for choosing charging 
rate for services. 
The space-time information is very sensitive private 
information. Generally, similar information is to be handled 
very carefully. As shown in [6], the user’s space-time 
information could be abused in various ways. 
The space-time information needs in the AAA systems 
are related especially to mobile users. If a user meets the 
space-time condition in the verification time, s/he will get 
access based on submitted credentials.  The user has been 
verified and has access to the system, but he can change his 
position and move out from the approved area. This problem 
can be solved by periodically evaluating the space-time 
information.  
The more suitable solution is described in [7]. Direction 
and speed of the user’s movements is additional information 
used. 
location Xa,Ya,Za,t0 -> rights: office
location Xb,Yb,Zb,t1 -> rights: home
location Xn,Yn,Zn,tx -> rights: unknown
authorization
authentization
location Xa,Ya,Za,t0 -> local rate
location Xb,Yb,Zb,t1 -> regional rate
location Xn,Yn,Zn,tx -> roamng rate
accounting
password
fingerprint
space-time information
..
..
 
Figure 2.  The space-time information in AAA 
III. 
APPLICATION SCENARIO 
We have adopted the application scenario as shown in 
Figure 3. The user wants to get access to the protected 
domain content (resources, services, etc.). The MAD I is 
connected to the user’s terminal. The request for protected 
content from the user is redirected to domain controller, 
which performs access management. The user is requested to 
give in his/her credentials. If the user has connected MAD I, 
it provides the space-time information and fingerprint data. 
The methods for fingerprint processing in general provide 
the same hash for the same fingerprint, otherwise a 
fingerprint reader cannot be used in the identity verification. 
The position information and fingerprint are encrypted by 
AES (Advantage Encryption System) [8]. The user adds his 
login and the data are sent to a domain controller. The 
domain controller will settle the user’s authentication 
depending on received credentials. If the identity is verified, 
the user’s role in the domain is defined. The RBAC (Role 
Based Access Control) is used for the system [9].  
An area management represents a database, which stores 
the definition of the user’s areas. The areas are defined in 
two ways. A simpler way is to define one point and the 
distance from it (radius). Thus we get a circle from where the 
user will get the access. The definition of the net of triangles 
is more complex (leading to convex combination). This way 
brings along more difficulties in defining, storing and 
evaluating but gives us an advantage in the definition area of 
any shape. Defined areas are stored within IDs and can be 
used by any users. The defined area can mean different roles 
(rights) for different users. The user can cooperate with the 
administration desk to define a new area. The pairs of the 
area’s ID - roles are stored in a user’s profile in the Active 
Directory. Appropriate areas are requested by the domain 
controller from the management of areas. The domain 
controller contains API for evaluating the position 
information (if a user is or is not in an evaluated position). 
The order in which the area’s IDs are stored in a user‘s 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

profiles defines the priority of the areas. The last added ID in 
the list has the highest priority. This right solves the 
overlapping problem.  
domain controller
Active Directory
user’s terminal
MAD I
heterogeneous 
network 
management of areas
resources
services
clients
protected domain
 
Figure 3.  The application scenario with MAD I 
An API in the domain controller evaluates mutual 
relationship between the user’s position and the areas defined 
for its identity. 
IV. 
ACTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE AND MAD I 
The Active Infrastructure (AI) is a technology 
background that is used in the two authentication techniques 
that are described in two subsequent sections. The key parts 
of AI are represented by an anchor point, a user’s tag and an 
authenticator. The anchor point is located in position where 
the users want to be authenticated regarding their position. 
We assume that the position of the anchor point is exactly 
known to the authenticator. On the other hand, the user’s tag 
is assigned to the particular user and only with difficulties is 
it related to its identity. The user’s tag can be a part of the 
user’s terminal or autonomy pocket device. The position of 
the user’s tag is determined by proximity between the anchor 
point and the user’s tag. When the user’s tag can 
communicate with the anchor point, it means that it is 
nearby. 
Figure 4 represents the active infrastructure key parts. 
The anchor point is in known position xAP, yAP, zAP. If the 
user’s tag is in its proximity, it can communicate with the 
anchor point which means that the position of the anchor 
point is similar to the position of the user’s tag. The 
similarity between the positions is dependent on the range of 
transceivers. When the user claims that he is in a position 
nearby the anchor point, the authenticator asks the anchor 
point if an appropriate user’s tag is in the communication 
range. It should be noted here that, for example, IQRF [10], 
Bluetooth [11], or similar wireless communication solutions 
can be used as wireless technologies.  
anchor point
user’s terminal with a tag
xAP,yAP,zAP
wireless link
authenticator
unknown position
mutual trust
claim
 
Figure 4.  Principle of active infrastructure 
Before the first user is authenticated, a mutual binding 
has to be done. Initial binding has to be executed at the 
system administration desk over local bus (MAD I is USB 
enabled). Binding process performs AES key exchange 
between MAD I and the domain controller or the Active 
Directory where the key is stored during the binding. The 
hash of the user’s fingerprint is also stored on the server side. 
This process can also cause the assignment of MAD I to an 
exact user. The initial binding is described in the following 
steps. 
 
First, a secure channel should be established. This is 
done by Diffie-Hellmann key exchange [12]. Two 
unknown sides can derive the secret key. This 
technique is often used for the exchange of 
symmetrical encryption key. 
 
When the secured channel is established, the domain 
controller generates an encryption key for AES. The 
length of the key is 256 bytes.  
 
The key is sent via the secured channel created in the 
first step.  
 
The MAD I stores the key in secured memory after 
reception. 
 
The user is requested to swipe his finger on the 
fingerprint reader on the MAD I. 
 
The hash of the user’s fingerprint is sent to the 
domain controller. 
 
The user’s fingerprint hash is stored in the user’s 
profile in the Active Directory. 
The MAD I collects principally three authentication 
factors, i.e., the ownership of certain device, the fingerprint 
and the user’s space-time information, where the user’s 
position is used in the authentication process described. 
The MAD I is connected to user’s terminal via USB 
(Universal Serial Bus). The device is designed as a pocket 
device. The block diagram of the MAD I is shown in Figure 
5. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

MAD I
fingerprint 
reader
IQRF 
tranciever
alfanumeric display
USB
power 
management
secured 
repository
CPU
user’s terminal
GPS receiver
anchor point
 
Figure 5.  The MAD I block diagram 
The position information is provided by the IQRF 
transceiver. The MAD I has already been assembled with 
GPS receiver for another way of position determination in 
other authentication techniques. The fingerprint reader is 
used for the user‘s authentication employing MAD I. For the 
security reasons the symmetrical encryption key is stored in 
the secure data repository. The secure data repository has 
special features that protect the stored data against 
unauthorized reading or writing. Alphanumeric display is 
assembled for communication between the user and MAD I.  
The MAD I is a battery-powered pocket device. The 
power management contains circuits for adjusting power 
voltages for the other blocks and circuits for battery charging 
via USB. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper has introduced quite a new direction in the 
access management which works with the user’s space-time 
information. We have enumerated the main aspects of 
possible applications. Further, we have described possible 
application scenario and a suitable solution while using the 
active infrastructure and the MAD I.  
We have designed and developed a user’s Multi-Factor 
Authentication Device, prepared software for this device and 
started the testing phase of the project. The software for the 
MAD I device represents only one part of the required 
software. Another two software pieces had to be prepared. 
One is on the server side, which allows processing of the 
received user data and authentication factors and also 
integrates the position information to the Microsoft Active 
Directory.  
The second part of the software has to be implemented to 
the user terminal. We are testing the available solutions. One 
is an extension of the Windows Credential provider. This has 
required installation to the client computer, an update of 
local policies and other administrative tasks.  Second one can 
prove useful for public computers. In this case no installation 
is required. The software will only be executed and will 
communicate directly with the server and ensure user’s 
authentication. But this version has some limitations.  
All the described methods are in the testing phase. The 
test results will be followed by other improvements. Also the 
MAD device is designed for testing purposes only and will 
be optimized and minimalized in the future. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by the ARTEMIS JU in 
Project No. 120228 AS Nanoelectronics for Mobile Ambient 
Assisted Living (AAL) Systems and partly by the Czech 
Ministry of Industry and Trade in project FR-FR-TI3/275 
OPS An Open Platform for Smart Cities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Lenzini, M. S. Bargh, and B. Hulsebosch, "Trust-enhanced 
Security in Location-based Adaptive Authentication," Electronic 
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 197, pp. 105-119, 2008. 
[2] R. He, M. Yuan, J. Hu, H. Zhang, Z. Kan, and J. Ma, "A novel 
service-oriented AAA architecture," Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications, 2003. PIMRC 2003. 14th IEEE Proceedings 
on , vol.3, no., pp. 2833- 2837 vol.3, 7-10 Sept. 2003 
[3] E. Bertino and M. Kirkpatrick, "Location-Aware Authentication and 
Access Control - Concepts and Issues," in 2009 International 
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications, 
2009, pp. 10-15. 
[4] D. E. Denning and P. F. MacDoran, "Location-based authentication: 
Grounding cyberspace for better security," Computer Fraud & 
Security, vol. 1996, pp. 12-16, 1996. 
[5] I. Ray and M. Kumar, "Towards a location-based mandatory access 
control model," Computers & Security, vol. 25, pp. 36-44, Feb 2006. 
[6] B. Schilit, J. Hong, and M. Gruteser, "Wireless location privacy 
protection," Computer, vol. 36, pp. 135-137, Dec 2003. 
[7] P. S. Tikamdas and A. E. Nahas, "Direction-based proximity 
detection algorithm for location-based services," in Wireless and 
Optical Communications Networks, 2009. WOCN '09. IFIP 
International Conference on, 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[8] Ch. Lu, Y. Kao, H. Chiang, and Ch. Yang, "Fast implementation of 
AES cryptographic algorithms in smart cards," in Security 
Technology, 
2003. 
Proceedings. 
IEEE 
37th 
Annual 
2003 
International Carnahan Conference on, 2003, pp. 573-579. 
[9] E. Bertino, B. Catania, M. L. Damiani, and P. Perlasca, "GEO-
RBAC: A spatially aware RBAC," Acm Transactions on Information 
and System Security, vol. 10, Feb 2007, pp. 1-39. 
[10] MICRORISC. IQRF - wireless technology. <retrieved: 12, 2011> 
Available: www.iqrf.org 
[11] B. SIG, Bluetooth homepage. <retrieved: 12, 2011>  Available: 
www.bluetooth.com 
[12] Y. Eun-Jun and Y. Kee-Young, "An Efficient Diffie-Hellman-MAC 
Key Exchange Scheme," in Innovative Computing, Information and 
Control (ICICIC), 2009 Fourth International Conference on, 2009, pp. 
398-400. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

