Interference-Aware Routing Supporting CARMNET
System Operation in Large-Scale Wireless Networks
Maciej Urba´nski, Przemyslaw Walkowiak, Pawel Misiorek
Institute of Control and Information Engineering
Poznan University of Technology
M. Sklodowska-Curie Sq. 5, 60-965 Poznan, Poland
Email: {maciej.urbanski, przemyslaw.walkowiak, pawel.misiorek}@put.poznan.pl
Abstract—The paper provides the research results concerning
interference-aware routing metrics supporting the operation of
large-scale wireless mesh/multi-hop networks. In particular, the
description of state of the art in this domain of research has been
provided and used in order to deﬁne a new interference-aware
metric for multi-radio networks. The proposed solution is aimed
at supporting trafﬁc control mechanisms for multi-hop wireless
networks by improving performance of any system controlling
multi-hop wireless transmission, e.g., a system widening the
access to the Internet by means of wireless communication
such as a CARMNET system. Moreover, the paper presents the
implementation of a set of tools necessary to provide experimental
evaluation of the solution in a large-scale wireless environment as
well as a set of tests comparing the performance of the proposed
metric with state-of-the-art solutions. The experiments have been
performed in the DES-Testbed located at Freie Universit¨at Berlin,
which is one of the largest wireless testbeds in Europe. Each of the
nodes taking part in experimentation has a CARMNET Loadable
Linux Kernel Module (CARMNET LLKM) deployed.
Keywords–wireless
mesh/multi-hop
networks;
interference-
aware routing; large-scale wireless experimentation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless networks are more and more popular due to the
rise of mobile devices. While their capacity is much lower than
capacity of their wired counterparts, they are highly valued
by end users for ease of setup and unrestrained mobility.
Mesh networks technologies, however, while very promising in
theory are still underused by industry due to their complexity.
In order to operate correctly, robust mesh networks require
additional protocols for dynamic routing, resource allocation,
and self-conﬁguration.
The presented research has been motivated by the need for
routing optimization necessary to improve the performance of
a CARMNET resource management system operation [1] in
large wireless networks. With the development of Wireless
Mesh Network (WMN) the importance of routing protocol
becomes more and more apparent. The interference-aware
routing metrics which take advantage of wireless networks’
properties, are especially important for the WMN researchers.
One of the weaknesses of a multi-hop mesh network is self-
interference, because of which, even in a scenario with a single
transmitting node, the available bandwidth is much lower than
that achievable throughput on the single link. More complex
WMNs mitigate this problem by incorporating multi-radio
nodes, allowing multiple transmission to occur at the same time
without interference. For such networks, the development of
special routing path metrics which take advantage of the non-
interfering channels has to be provided. It has to be stressed
that for such solutions interference range is still vague and
certainly not limited to the 1-hop neighborhood. Moreover, the
metrics have to provide the trade off between their complexity
and achievable gains to make them practical enough for the
implementation in real-world scenarios.
The goal of this paper is to provide the routing solution
for large-scale multi-hop multi-radio wireless networks which
is suitable to support the operation of resource management
mechanisms based on utility maximization. In particular, the
paper presents the experimental research results concerning the
test on routing metrics performance conducted in large wire-
less testbed with nodes controlled by utility-aware resource
management subsystem referred to as CARMNET Loadable
Linux Kernel Module (CARMNET LLKM) [1] based on
DANUM subsystem [2]. The module is a part of CARMNET
system developed by the research team realizing the Polish-
Swiss Research Programme project CARMNET “CARrier-
grade delay-aware resource Management for wireless multi-
hop/mesh NETworks” [3] devoted to research on delay-aware
wireless networking, multi-criteria routing, and the IMS (IP
Multimedia Subsystem) reliable application in a wireless en-
vironment. Although the provided research on interference-
aware routing is motivated by the need of optimizing the
CARMNET system operation in mesh/multi-hop networks, it
may be also beneﬁcial for the research on other aspects of
multi-radio multi-hop wireless networking.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II provides a discussion on related work, which contains a
brief presentation of state-of-the-art interference-aware routing
metrics. The introduction of the CARMNET framework is
given in Section III and the proposal of a new interference-
aware routing metric is presented in Section IV. Then, Sec-
tion V is focused on the experimental research. It contains the
description of the testbed environment, the implementation of
tools necessary to conduct the tests, experimentation scenarios,
results and their analysis. Finally, the paper is concluded in
Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
The presented research on routing metrics has been moti-
vated by the need to optimize the wireless resource allocation
solutions aimed at maximizing network utility. Many resource
allocation systems based on the Network Utility Maximisa-
tion (NUM) model exist and determine the utility of ﬂows
according to their measured properties [1][2]. However, only
a few of them have been implemented and tested in a real-
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

world wireless mesh network [4][5]. Furthermore, the pro-
posed approaches are not sufﬁcient to effectively measure the
utility of both delay-sensitive and throughput-oriented ﬂows.
On the other hand, the CARMNET system [1] uses a CARM-
NET Loadable Linux Kernel Module as a resource manage-
ment subsystem based on DANUM System (DANUMS) [2],
which takes both parameters into consideration. Moreover,
the CARMNET system has a well-tested implementation [1],
which allows researchers to focus on speciﬁc parts of the
system operation.
The remaining part of this section is aimed at introducing
the state-of-the-art interference-aware routing metrics used for
the comparison presented in this paper. In general, the presence
of interference is one of the most characteristic features of
the wireless networks and a major factor constraining their
performance [6]. Depending on a source of the interference, it
can be categorized as controlled internal or external interfer-
ence. Controlled internal interference can be reduced by the
modiﬁcation of the network properties (channel assignment,
routing, scheduling) and can be further divided into inter-
ﬂow and intra-ﬂow interference. Inter-ﬂow interference may
be described as a harmful competition for medium between
routers when transmitting multiple ﬂows. Intra-ﬂow interfer-
ence occurs when transmitting the single ﬂow over a multi-hop
wireless path, for which ﬂow transmission rate is radically
reduced since the medium has to be shared between each
hop of a transmission. In the real-world scenario, external,
uncontrolled interference in wireless systems has to be ex-
pected and should be taken into account during the routing
performance analysis. Depending on a source, it can be more
or less predictable and dynamic. The 802.11 networks use the
Industrial, Scientiﬁc and Medical (ISM) radio bands, which are
also applied in other technologies, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee
or proprietary wireless audio systems.
A. Expected Transmission Count
With hop count metric proven to be ineffective in irregu-
lar WMNs topologies [7], the Expected Transmission Count
(ETX) became the most popular metric for the WMN. The
value of the ETX metric for a bidirectional link is calculated
as it shown in the following formula:
ETX =
1
(1 − Pf) (1 − Pr),
(1)
where Pf and Pr are probabilities of the packet loss when
transmitting in the forward (i.e., nodeA → nodeB) and reverse
(i.e., nodeA ← nodeB) direction, respectively.
During the implementation of the ETX metric (and each
metric based on it), it is crucial to consider how a packet loss
is handled by lower and upper layers (e.g., it is crucial to take
into account if there is a retransmission mechanism applied).
B. Expected Transmission Time
Expected Transmission Time (ETT) is an extension of the
ETX metric based on introducing a link speed factor. For
each link, a value of the metric is computed according to the
following formula:
ETTl = ETXl
S
Bl
,
(2)
where S represents size of the packet and Bl represents the
link l data rate (as indicated by Link layer).
The ETT value can be seen as inversely proportional to
so called ’goodput’ of the link, representing successful packet
delivery rate. The most of the implementation use only probes
of the arbitrary size, which is not tied to S parameter. If all
link costs are multiplied by the same constant value of S, the
S parameter becomes entirely insigniﬁcant for the task of the
path ordering.
C. Weighted Cumulative ETT path metric
Weighted Cumulative ETT (WCETT) [8] is built directly
on the ETT metric, with the aim to achieve better performance
over multi-radio links. The following formula describes the
WCETT path metric for path p using K non-interfering
channels [8]:
WCETTp = (1 − β)
X
l∈p
ETTl + β max
1≤j≤K Xj,
(3)
where Xj = P
l∈pj ETTl is the attainable throughput in the
single channel. The subset pj of links on path p is deﬁned as
pj := {l : l ∈ p∧channel(l) = j}, where function channel(l)
returns a channel which link l is associated with.
As it can be concluded from (3), the Xj value of the
channel, which represents the bottleneck of the path (with the
maximum value), is taken into account in the measure. The
β value, such that β ∈ ⟨0, 1) controls channel diversity. For
β = 0, WCETT becomes identical to the ETT metric. Setting
β = 1 is not recommended as in such a case, the metric treats
longer path (in terms of the hop count) as identical as far as
they use non-interfering channels.
D. Additional metrics
The performance evaluation results presented in this pa-
per are reduced to above-mentioned metrics. However, this
set may be extended by several other metrics. In particular,
the Metric of Interference and Channel-switching (MIC) [9]
is a metric which is based on heuristic weighting of two
parts addressing the inter-ﬂow interference impact and intra-
ﬂow interference impact, respectively. The Exclusive Expected
Transmission Time (EETT) metric [10] is another interference-
aware routing metric which tries to solve the problem of
performance degradation in the large-scale WMNs. Finally,
Interference Aware (iAWARE) metric [11] is the metric which,
in the contrary to above mentioned interference-aware metrics,
takes into account the physical interference model and uses
signal strength of heard or sensed packets to determine Signal
to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR).
Table I summarizes the comparison of state-of-the-art rout-
ing metrics by presenting, which metrics consider particular
aspects of routing in the WMN including link loss, link speed,
intra-ﬂow interference and inter-ﬂow interference, isotonicity,
and awareness to the multi-radio transmission.
Depending how the link metrics calculate the overall path
cost, they could be further divided into the (i) additive metrics
– the path cost is the sum of the metric value of all links,
(ii) multiplicative metrics – the path cost is the product of
the metric value of all links, and (iii) statistical metrics –
the path cost it the minimum/maximum/average of the cost
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

TABLE I. FEATURES OF POPULAR WMN METRICS.
link
loss
link
speed
intra-
ﬂow
interf.
inter-
ﬂow
interf.
isotoni-
city
multi-
radio
hop count
no
no
no
no
isotonic
no
ETX
yes
no
no
no
isotonic
no
ETT
yes
yes
no
no
isotonic
no
WCETT
yes
yes
yes
no
monotonic yes
MIC
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
EETT
yes
yes
yes
yes
isotonic
yes
iAWARE
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
of the individual links. The metrics discussed in this paper are
mostly additive (hop count, ETX, ETT), what basically is an
assumption used by the majority of the routing protocols.
III.
CARMNET FRAMEWORK
The assumptions and architecture of the CARMNET sys-
tem have been proposed with details in [1]. The main goal of
the system is to enable the WMN users to share their resources,
in particular to share the Internet access. Additionally, the
CARMNET vision assumes the work on integration of the
delay-aware resource allocation subsystem with the Internet
provider infrastructure [12]. CARMNET solutions are aimed
to be integrated with public wireless networks — their have
been already tested in municipal network WiFi Lugano [13]
or in the socially-operated network – Malta NET – located in
Poznan [14]. The Internet sharing functions (described with
details in [12]) are optimized as a result of the application
of the utility-aware resource allocation subsystem (i.e., the
CARMNET LLKM based on Delay-Aware Network Utility
Maximisation (DANUM) model [2]), which allows to compare
the utility of ﬂows with different requirements with regard to
end-to-end delay and throughput.
The implementation of the CARMNET framework requires
integrated studies in several research areas including wire-
less network resource management, multi-criteria routing, and
seamless handover [15]. In this paper, we have focused on
issues concerning the routing solutions supporting CARMNET
resource management subsystem, i.e., DANUMS, which is
responsible for resource allocation.
A. CARMNET LLKM
The CARMNET LLKM resource management subsystem
(which is based on DANUM system [2]) is aimed to maximise
the overall utility of a mesh network deﬁned as:
X
r∈S
Ur(xr, dr),
(4)
where S denotes a set of ﬂows within the network; xr – rate
of ﬂow r; dr – delay of ﬂow r; Ur – the utility function of
ﬂow r [2].
In order to optimise the allocation of network resources,
DANUMS prioritizes ﬂows, which gain the most utility from
being served. The solution is based on “virtual queue” levels
deﬁned as a product of a packet backlog and the value of
the ﬁrst derivative of a given ﬂow utility function calculated
for current ﬂow performance parameters [2]. The parameters
which inﬂuence the utility value include ﬂow’s packets delivery
delay and throughput measured at destination node. Both the
mentioned parameters are attained by the active measurement
through the use of Delay Reporting Message (DRM) [2]. In
parallel, virtual queue levels are used to perform Max-Weight
Scheduling (MWS) [16] on each hop in distributed manner.
The details of DANUMS implementation may be found in [1]
[2].
IV.
DESIGNING THE WCETTX PATH METRIC
The goal of the proposed WCETT-eXtended (WCETTX)
metric is to improve the WCETT metric, which is based
on ETT optimized in a way enabling simple interference-
awareness for the multi-radio networks, and in consequence, to
deﬁne the metric suitable to be used in CARMNET-controlled
networks.
The WCETT metric assumes that by using several chan-
nels one can avoid a part of interference. Following this
assumption, WCETT focuses on the maximum additive sum
of ETT links’ values, grouped by the channel used. This sum
represents the ‘bottleneck of the path’ and is recognized as
a major contributor to its cost. Still, the authors of WCETT
acknowledge that additional hops on the channels, which are
not considered as a bottleneck, represent the additional cost.
It is modeled by an additional sum of overall links’ ETT
values, which is balanced with the major part of the metric
by arbitrarily assigned constant. The setting of this constant is
problematic, since one conﬁguration cannot accommodate all
of the scenarios [8]. The aim of WCETTX is to address this
problem and to propose a more natural representation of the
additional hops cost.
A. Formulation of WCETTX
The main improvement of WCETTX over WCETT is a
clear representation of the additional hop cost of links on non-
interfering channels. The assumptions made when formulating
the WCETTX metric are as follows:
1)
The metric of link throughput on interfering links is
used in the additive manner, as transmissions on links
‘divide’ available transmission time;
2)
The metric of network layer loss occurring on each
hop is used as multiplicative one;
3)
The channel with the maximum additive throughput
metric value represents a path bottleneck and is
regarded as the main factor limiting possible through-
put;
4)
The cost of the additional hops can be represented as
the loss risk;
5)
In the real-world scenario, the perfect links do not
exist and a loss rate is always higher than zero, (i.e.,
∀
link l ETX l > 1).
The throughput link metric, such as ETT, representing
‘goodput’ of link, is commonly used as additive. Multiplicative
use of the loss-based metric is not so often seen in wireless
networks, as they implement a retransmission mechanism on
the Link layer. However, even this mechanism fails sometimes,
and loss can be seen on the higher layer in end-to-end matter,
what justiﬁes its use as the multiplicative metric. Assumption
3 is shared with the WCETT metric – each used channel
is treated as not having any impact on other channels. As-
sumption 4 represents an optimization over WCETT aimed
at differentiating between shorter and longer paths without
the need for additional arbitrary assigned variables. Finally,
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

assumption 5 is used to prevent longer (in terms of hop
count) paths to be treated as equal due to the close to ideal
environment and measurement inaccuracies.
Equation (5) deﬁnes the WCETTX path metric:
WCETTXp = max
1≤j≤K Xj ×
Y
l∈p
1
1 − netw layer lossl
, (5)
where K is a number of channels, l ∈ p denotes links of path
p, and Xj is deﬁned as in the case of the WCETT metric. The
netw layer lossl equals to

1 −
1
ETX l
retry
and is used to
describe the cost of additional hops.
Probability of loss is different from Network- and Link-
layer perspective, as the lower layer can retransmit the packet
preventing the higher layer loss. Such a retransmission mecha-
nism is implemented in Wi-Fi networks if no acknowledgment
for the transmitted packet is received. If loss occurs, the
packet is regenerated, as long as it is under retry limit of
retransmission attempts. This mechanism makes Network layer
loss much less likely, but still possible. This end-to-end loss is
applied to estimate path throughput, here represented as Xj, in
the similar way like it is done in the case of the ETT metric.
B. The analysis of the WCETTX metric
The objective of this subsection is to discuss the require-
ments for the routing protocol necessary to apply the proposed
WCETTX metric.
First, the WCETTX metric assumes that measurements of
both link’s loss and throughput have to be used instead of
measurement of a single parameter. This approach may be
regarded as an improvement over the WCETT metric, since
it allows to separately model the inﬂuence of these parameters
on the path cost. Additionally, it enables to take into account
the association of the link to the interfering or non-interfering
channel. The third parameter that must be monitored for
each advertised link is a channel on which it operates. This
information can be inferred by the neighboring nodes, but has
to be explicitly announced during further forwarding of the
topology information.
Similarly as WCETT, the WCETTX metric is non-isotonic,
but monotonic. This feature has its consequences in both the
routing path calculation process and routing itself. In the most
common hop-by-hop routing scheme used in networks based
on TCP/IP, the path is determined according to the destina-
tion node only. For non-isotonic metrics, such as WCETTX,
the paths are also source dependent, thus, a more complex
process for their computation is required. Moreover, the well-
known algorithms used for routing path calculation, such as
Dijkstra’s algorithm or Bellman-Ford algorithm, process nodes
in breadth-ﬁrst manner and can only be applied with isotonic
metrics [17]. The authors of [8] have noted that the simple
adaptation of the k-shortest paths algorithm provides non-
optimal routes in terms of the non-isotonic WCETT metric.
The reason for that is the fact that the maximum function
is used for metric calculation, what is the case also for the
proposed WCETTX metric.
It has to be admitted that due to the requirement of data
gathering over time as well as computational difﬁculty of path
calculation (which slows down the time of reaction to change
in the network), the WCETTX metric seems to be suited for
static WMNs only. In order to use the metric in the Mobile Ad
hoc Network (MANET), the ability of fast path recalculation
based on a previous path should be further investigated.
It should be stressed that WCETT concentrates on intra-
ﬂow interference, while not counteracting inter-ﬂow inter-
ference. This feature makes this metric more suitable for
networks in which only several nodes exchange information
between each other. Following this assumption it is worth
considering to calculate WCETTX paths on-demand, only for
nodes exchanging high loads of trafﬁc, while using underlying
ETT metric for fast path calculation proactively for all the
nodes.
V.
EXPERIMENTS
The physical testbed environment has been chosen for the
purposes of the proposed solution testing. While simulations
offer better control over all experiment parameters as well as
better scalability, these advantages are always achieved at some
cost – in the simulation environment the link and physical
layers of the Open System Interconnection Reference Model
(OSI-RM) are often simpliﬁed, what in the case of testing
interference-aware solutions could severely affect the results.
A. Testbed
The
Distributed
Embedded
Systems
Testbed
(DES-
Testbed) [18] has been used in the experimentation described
in this paper. DES-Testbed is a non-commercial testbed de-
signed for the purposes of research in the area of wireless
mesh and sensor networks. The testbed is divided into two
networks, the ﬁrst one being WMN, called DES-Mesh, and
the second one called DES-WSN being sensor based. Both
parts are connected, as DES-Mesh consists of the core nodes,
and DES-WSN is based on daughter-boards integrated with
the core nodes. The whole DES-Testbed consists of over 100
core nodes, each integrated with a daughter sensor node, what
makes it one of the largest academic wireless testbed. The
core nodes are based on the x86 embedded PC boards, each
equipped with up to three wireless network adapters. At the
time of conducting the tests described in this paper only half of
nodes were available for testing, since the part of DES-Testbed
and the team responsible for it have moved to the University
of M¨unster.
The DES-Testbed nodes are placed around Freie Uni-
versit¨at Berlin (FUB) campus, thus the network topology
represents a real-world scenario in which placement of nodes
is irregular and external interference sources exists (e.g., gen-
erated by actively-used other networks). By default, each of the
DES-Testbed nodes connects (by means of its three interfaces)
to three network cells: des-mesh0, des-mesh1, and des-mesh2.
Each of these network cells is conﬁgured to work at a separate
channel, in order not to interfere with other cells. However,
during experimentation we have noticed that even when using
separate channels, the interference between radios may be
observed. This problem is similar to the one encountered by
authors of [8]. In order to mitigate the multi-radio interference
issue, only one channel from of 2.4GHz band and one channel
of 5Ghz band were used during experimentation. This setting
corresponds to interface ”wlan0” and ”wlan2” of DES-Testbed
nodes (des-mesh0 and des-mesh2, respectively).
Figure 1 shows the complexity of network cells des-mesh0
and des-mesh2.
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1.
Overview of the signal strength in DES-Testbed network cells (from the left: des-mesh0, des-mesh2).
B. Implementation
This section contains the description of tools implemented
by the authors, as well as provides the motivation for the choice
of speciﬁc solutions related to technical aspects of networking
in Linux, which is integral part of the testbed used.
1) Source-determined routing in Linux operating system:
Although source-determined routing is required for a number
of the interference-aware routing metrics, its implementation in
Linux is not available. There are two ways to force the packets
to travel between source and destination along a speciﬁc path
in a TCP/IP network. The ﬁrst one (later referred to as a Source
routing IP option) is to use IP packet options Strict Source
and Record Route (SSRR) or Loose Source and Record Route
(LSRR) as speciﬁed by [19]. The second one (referred to as
policy routing) is to make each node to choose a particular
path based on both source and destination IP addresses and the
set of predeﬁned rules. Source routing IP option and source
routing in the form of policy routing are easily mistaken
and hard to investigate due to similarity of terminology and
unpopularity of the former. The Linux kernel networking stack
supports both approaches, but to a different extent. Linux user
space policy routing utilities allow conﬁguration of the routing
policy rule based on a source address of the packet, which is
later executed during the routing process. While in the case
of the Source routing IP option, the Linux Kernel implements
its handling, respecting both LSRR and SSRR headers, there
are no utilities allowing insertion of such headers into the
packet. Such headers could potentially be implemented with
the use of the Netﬁlter framework or the network tunnel (TUN)
virtual device, but such a solution would require introduction
of additional protocol overhead and more computation as IP
packet had to be created anew. The shortcomings of the source
policy routing also exist, since for this approach, each possible
source node has to be ﬁltered to the separate routing table. The
hard limit of the routing tables number in Linux is less than
256, which can be a problem for very large networks.
After considering all of the pros and cons, the source policy
routing has been chosen in our implementation. Main factor for
the decision was maturity and stability of this solution, which
is important for the remote experimentation on a physical
testbed, for which a recover from the potential kernel-level
crash is hard to be done without a direct intervention.
2) Topology measurements and path calculation software:
For the topology mapping, the basic Linux networking tools
like iw and iperf have been used. The iw – the wireless
networking conﬁguration tool – was used to list each node
neighbors detected at the Link Layer (in this case 802.11). The
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) transmissions were generated
by iperf on the source node with the maximum possible rate
(as chosen by the Link layer rate adaptation mechanism) and
were measured on the destination node, thus providing both
packet throughput and loss rate for the interconnecting link.
To ensure the reliable measurement of Link layer packet loss
rate, the retry mechanism was disabled using iwconﬁg utility.
For the additional processing of the topology graph, the
Networkx python module was used. The process of topology
mapping and path calculation consisted of following steps (i)
measurement gathering and generation of the network graph
(ii) ﬁnding alternative paths between each pair of nodes, (iii)
computing metrics for alternative paths and choosing the best
path for each metric, and (iv) preparation of policy routing
rules.
C. Experimentation assumptions
The experimentation follows the methodology used by
authors of the WCETT metric described in [8]. The objective
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

of the experimentation scenario was to verify intra-ﬂow inter-
ference reduction properties of WMN routing metrics designed
for multi-radio wireless communication.
The following metrics were tested: WCETTX, WCETT
multi-radio metrics and the ETX metric used as a baseline
comparison. In addition, for WCETT, various β values have
been examined. The experiment has been run on 52 DES-
Testbed nodes. The routing paths were precalculated for all
of 2652 (N ∗ (N − 1), where N = 52) source-destination
pairs beforehand, as described in Subsection V-B2. From
these pairs, 200 have been selected at random in order to be
used as sender-receiver pairs during throughput measurement
tests. The experimental evaluation presented here is limited
to the tests on these randomly selected 200 pairs of source
and destination nodes. The Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP) connections generated by iperf have been used to
check achievable end-to-end throughput. The Linux default
“CUBIC” congestion algorithm was used, which has much
more aggressive slow-start phase [20]. This feature allowed to
lower the connection time down to 20 seconds when estimating
the path bandwidth. To ensure that the network is clear between
each test, an additional second was spent waiting after a single
test to guarantee that no more packets are queued.
D. Results and analysis
Due to the hard-to-locate bug in the implementation of
the 802.11 stack, in the network cell association routines,
the des-mesh network cells tended to partition. In order to
mitigate its effect, the presented analysis has been limited only
to the source-destination pairs for which all the provided test
executions have ﬁnished successfully without being inﬂuenced
by the above-mentioned bug. From 200 possible samples, no
less than 112 samples were gathered in each test according to
this criterion.
Figure 2.
Two-channel scenario results obtained using des-mesh0 and des-
mesh2 network cells.
Results of the experiment are based on 112 common
samples of throughput measurements. Figure 2 is a box plot
of achieved throughput. Table II repeats these results in a
numerical fashion. The outliers are not shown in Figure 2,
as they depict only single-hop bandwidth and are similar in
every tested metrics.
TABLE II. ACHIEVED THROUGHPUT FOR EACH OF THE METRICS USING
des-mesh0 AND des-mesh2 NETWORK CELLS.
metric
median
standard deviation
average
ET X
1.79Mbps
2.26Mbps
2.44Mbps
ET T
1.95Mbps
2.68Mbps
2.73Mbps
W CET T (β = 0.1)
2.02Mbps
2.45Mbps
2.81Mbps
W CET T (β = 0.5)
2.28Mbps
2.37Mbps
2.87Mbps
W CET T (β = 0.9)
2.39Mbps
2.40Mbps
2.93Mbps
W CET T X
2.38Mbps
2.60Mbps
2.88Mbps
The ETT (WCETT β = 0) metric has achieved signiﬁ-
cantly better results compared to ETX (the observed improve-
ment of median throughput is over 18%), which is expected
due to diversity of link quality. For β = 0.1 WCETT, the dif-
ference to the results of the standard ETT is not signiﬁcant. For
higher β values, WCETT delivers better throughput up to over
20% of improvement for median throughput when compared to
basic ETT. WCETTX provides results comparable to WCETT
having the β value optimized. In order to clarify the beneﬁt
from applying the proposed metric, it has to be stressed that,
for a given network conﬁguration and experiment scenario,
the optimal value of β is not known in advance, and needs to
be determined heuristically. The provided results conﬁrm that
in the case of WCETTX, the metric performance is equal to
the maximum performance of the optimized WCETT and is
obtained without the need of any parameter optimization.
It has been also noticed that even when using separate
frequency bands the multi-radio interference persists. It is
important to be aware that such a kind of interference may
occur what may lead to the results for which the simple
single-radio metrics outperform the interference-aware ones.
The problem was mitigated when power of the radios was lim-
ited. The results presented here were obtained using 18dBm
transmission strength setting.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The main contribution of this paper is the experimental
analysis of interference-aware routing metrics for multi-radio
multi-hop wireless networks, which is devoted to support
operation of resource management mechanisms in large-scale
wireless networks. The evaluation has been performed in the
DES-Testbed wireless environment using nodes operated by
experimental utility-aware resource management subsystem
based on CARMNET LLKM. The presented metric compar-
ison includes the new metric proposed by the paper authors.
The proposed WCETTX metric is based on the theoretical
assumption of non-interference between channels of different
bands and has been proven to provide the better or similar per-
formance than other compared solutions without the heuristic
optimization of parameters.
It has to be stressed that the tests in the real-world envi-
ronment, while more time consuming, provide better picture
of all the issues which could arise during the deployment
of the solution. In particular, the tests have shown that the
occurrence of multi-channel interference is possible. To the
authors knowledge, no WMNs simulator implements the model
which reﬂects performance degradation connected to the issue
of the multi-radio interference.
The future work plan includes more detailed analysis of
the multi-radio interference and its consideration during de-
signing path metric. Additionally, we are going to conduct the
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

extended experimentation using various topologies of different
characteristics aimed at additional comparison of WCETT and
WCETTX metric routing performance. The goal of these new
experiments is the analysis of limitations of both solutions and
providing the additional evidence of WCETT inaccuracy in
estimation of the additional hop cost, which has been observed
in results provided in [8].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partly supported by a grant CARMNET
ﬁnanced under the Polish-Swiss Research Programme by
Switzerland through the Swiss Contribution to the enlarged
European Union (PSPB-146/2010, CARMNET), and by Poz-
nan University of Technology under grant 04/45/DSPB/0122.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Glabowski, A. Szwabe, D. Gallucci, S. Vanini, and S. Giordano,
“Cooperative internet access sharing in wireless mesh networks: Vi-
sion, implementation and experimentation of the CARMNET project,”
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, vol. 7,
no. 1-2, 2014, pp. 25–36.
[2]
A. Szwabe, P. Misiorek, and P. Walkowiak, “Delay-Aware NUM
system for wireless multi-hop networks,” in European Wireless 2011
(EW2011), Vienna, Austria, Apr. 2011, pp. 530–537.
[3]
The CARMNET Project. [Online]. Available: http://www.carmnet.eu/
[retrieved: March, 2015]
[4]
U. Akyol, M. Andrews, P. Gupta, J. D. Hobby, I. Saniee, and A. Stolyar,
“Joint scheduling and congestion control in mobile ad-hoc networks,” in
The 27th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM 2008), Apr 2008, pp. 619–627.
[5]
B. Radunovi´c, C. Gkantsidis, D. Gunawardena, and P. Key, “Horizon:
Balancing TCP over multiple paths in wireless mesh network,” in
Proceedings of the 14th ACM international conference on Mobile
computing and networking, MobiCom 2008, 2008, pp. 247–258.
[6]
P. Gupta and P. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, 2000, pp. 388–404.
[7]
R. Ramanathan and R. Rosales-Hain, “Topology control of multihop
wireless networks using transmit power adjustment,” in Proceedings
IEEE INFOCOM 2000. Conference on Computer Communications.
Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Com-
munications Societies (Cat. No.00CH37064), vol. 2, no. c. IEEE, 2000,
pp. 404–413.
[8]
R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B. Zill, “Routing in multi-radio, multi-hop
wireless mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual international
conference on Mobile computing and networking - MobiCom ’04. New
York, New York, USA: ACM Press, 2004, pp. 114–128.
[9]
Y. Yang, J. Wang, and R. Kravets, “Interference-aware load balancing
for multihop wireless networks,” University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign, 2005, pp. 1–16.
[10]
W. Jiang, S. Liu, Y. Zhu, and Z. Zhang, “Optimizing Routing Metrics for
Large-Scale Multi-Radio Mesh Networks,” 2007 International Confer-
ence on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing,
Sep. 2007, pp. 1550–1553.
[11]
A. Subramanian, M. Buddhikot, and O. Miller, “Interference aware rout-
ing in multi-radio wireless mesh networks,” 2006 2nd IEEE Workshop
on Wireless Mesh Networks, 2006, pp. 55–63.
[12]
P. Misiorek, P. Walkowiak, S. Karlik, and S. Vanini, “Sip-based aaa in
delay-aware num-oriented wireless mesh networks,” Image Processing
and Communications, vol. 18, no. 4, 2013, pp. 45–58.
[13]
P. Walkowiak, R. Szalski, S. Vanini, and A. Walt, “Integrating CARM-
NET system with public wireless networks,” ICN 2014, The Thirteenth
International Conference on Networks, February 2014, pp. 172–177.
[14]
Malta NET. [Online]. Available: http://www.malta-net.pl [retrieved:
March, 2015]
[15]
M. Urbanski, M. Poszwa, P. Misiorek, and D. Gallucci, “Evaluation
of the delay-aware num-driven framework in an internetwork envi-
ronment,” Journal of Telecommunications and Information Technology,
no. 3, 2014, pp. 17–25.
[16]
L. Tassiulas and A. Ephremides, “Stability properties of constrained
queueing systems and scheduling for maximum throughput in multihop
radio networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 37,
no. 12, Dec. 1992, pp. 1936–1949.
[17]
Y. Yang and J. Wang, “Design Guidelines for Routing Metrics in
Multihop Wireless Networks,” 2008 IEEE INFOCOM - The 27th
Conference on Computer Communications, Apr. 2008, pp. 1615–1623.
[18]
M. G¨unes¸, F. Juraschek, and B. Blywis, “An experiment description
language for wireless network research,” Journal of Internet Technology
(JIT), Special Issue for Mobile Internet, vol. 11, no. 4, July 2010, pp.
465–471.
[19]
J. Postel. Internet protocol. RFC0791, September 1981. [Online].
Available: http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc0791.txt [retrieved: March, 2015]
[20]
S. Ha, I. Rhee, and L. Xu, “CUBIC: A New TCP-Friendly High-Speed
TCP Variant,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, vol. 42, no. 5,
Jul. 2008, pp. 64–74.
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

