Implementation Challenges in Rich Communication Suite-enhanced (RCS-e) 
 
Nishank Trivedi  
Lead Engineer  
HCL Technologies Ltd. 
Noida, India 
Nishank.trivedi@hcl.com 
Anurag Jain 
Deputy General Manager  
HCL Technologies Ltd. 
Noida, India 
anuragjn@hcl.com
 
 
Abstract - Everything is going mobile. This evolution is driven 
by video, cloud-based services, the Internet and machine-to-
machine connectivity. It changes how people behave and how 
they leverage mobility to communicate and to improve their 
daily lives, through new and existing services. Users now 
demand connectivity anywhere and anytime with innovative 
services at minimal cost. Mobile service providers are 
exploiting the speed of 3G radio networks to offer new SIP-
based interactive communications apart from basic Voice over 
IP (VoIP) services. One of these new emerging initiatives is 
Rich Communication Suite-enhanced (stated as RCS-e 
henceforth) 
which 
aims 
to 
seamlessly 
unify 
the 
communications experience by integrating traditional mobile 
telephony with new interactive services like presence, instant 
messaging and content sharing enabled by the enhanced 
address book of the mobile phone. This paper elaborates the 
challenges in implementation and roll-out of RCS-e technology, 
which includes combination of technical and business 
constraints. Finally, this paper not only compiles the unique 
challenges but it also touches upon the ways to deal with the 
implementation hurdles and using various studies and surveys 
it infers that RCS-e might well be the ideal combat technology 
against Over The Top applications (OTT apps) which are 
current leaders in the mobile telephony arena. 
 
      Keywords-RCS-e; Mobile Phone Apps; Rich Communication 
Suite; Implementation challenges in RCS-e; OTT apps; IMS 
I. INTRODUCTION 
       In today’s world of converged enterprise and consumer- 
oriented network services for triple play [1], there is a need 
as well as an opportunity before the operators to provide 
higher value add in terms of advanced collaboration services 
and monetize investments in high data intensive networks 
like IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) [2] and LTE (Long 
Term Evolution) [3]. RCS (Rich Communication Suite) is 
one of such initiatives led by network operators; network 
and device vendors that are expected to leverage SIP [4]-
based IMS core infrastructure to provide advanced 
communication and collaboration. RCS shall provide users 
with an experience beyond voice and Short Message Service 
(SMS) by providing them with instant messaging, live video 
sharing and file transfer across any device on any network 
and with anyone in their mobile address book which is 
capable of handling RCS enriched data [5]. Figure 1 gives 
an idea of the future broadband subscription trend. Fixed 
narrowband voice subscriptions are expected to drop down 
from near 1100 million subscription lines in year 2008 to 
800 million subscriptions in the year 2017 while in the same 
time period mobile broadband subscriptions are expected to 
rise steeply from mere 200 million subscriptions to 5 Billion 
subscription levels.  
 
 
Figure 1-Mobile broadband subscription by 2017 [6] 
  
Looking at the potential opportunity of 5 Billion mobile 
broadband subscriptions by 2017 [6] and growth in mobile 
data traffic by 20 times, the network infrastructure vendors 
are gearing up to this challenge and RCS is one of the 
technologies which provides a framework to monetize such 
investments. The RCS Initiative, catering to current growing 
interests in mobile applications and services, aims at 
providing 
an 
interoperable, 
convergent 
and 
rich 
communication environment. It uses an incremental and 
iterative methodology to continually add features, define 
interoperability conditions and reference guidelines. RCS 
reuses the capabilities of 3GPP specified IMS core system as 
the underlying service platform taking care of issues such as 
authentication, authorization, registration, charging and 
routing. The interests of the mobile network operator (MNO) 
or service provider and enterprise are aligning to tap this 
opportunity for VoLTE (Voice over LTE) as well as roll-out 
interoperable innovative communication services like rich 
call, video and social presence.  
GSM Association (GSMA) [7] and Open Mobile 
Alliance (OMA) [8] are the key standard bodies creating 
specifications for RCS. The RCS documents created by 
GSMA provide a common, unambiguous reference point for 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

operators 
and 
vendors 
alike 
to 
base 
their 
RCS 
implementations on. Up till now, five releases of RCS have 
been released which have incrementally added features in the 
RCS portfolio.  
    For example, RCS Release #1 laid the groundwork for 
further versions/releases by introducing the concept of voice 
and chat enrichment and a common evolved address book 
which facilitates chat and content share. RCS Release #2 
aimed at extending the same features as RCS Release #1 to 
broadband users. RCS Release #3 allowed broadband access 
devices to be used as the primary devices in absence of 
mobile devices. RCS Release #4 extended the feature set to 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) and RCS Release #5 aimed at 
global interoperability. The RCS releases keep on enriching 
the feature set and also and continue to refine on existing 
implementations. 
    Probably based on the initial feedbacks, GSMA 
realized that the bulky feature sets offered by RCS were not 
alone doing enough to lure more users as well as 
operators/vendors into the RCS arena. Keeping an eye on the 
market, RCS-e was introduced.  
    RCS-e is a pruned version of RCS Release #2 which 
not only reuses capabilities offered in RCS Release #2 but 
also optimizes & refines its specifications. Several technical 
prerequisites which were “mandatory” to meet so as to be 
conformant with RCS Release #2 were changed to 
“optional” status, some conditions kept intact and while 
others were dropped. This was done in order to simplify the 
entry level technical conditions & prerequisites as much as 
possible so as to encourage the operators to implement RCS-
e. Also, this was done so as to boost the market penetration 
curve twofold because simpler specs meant more operators 
were willing to invest in it as it offered more clarity and it 
reduced the go to market time as lightweight specs meant 
shorter  implementation cycle time.  
II. TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW 
RCS-e is based on a simple underlying basis of tying 
down the various available features and making them 
available from one single access point. It simplifies user 
experience and offers an easily available enriched 
communication experience. RCS-e feature availability and 
usage is driven from a central location known as Enhanced 
Address Book which as the name suggests, is an evolved 
version of the traditional contact book present in today’s 
mobile devices.  Enhanced Address Book is a repository of 
contacts, which can be either RCS-e or the traditional 
contacts. (Traditional contact is referred to as the contact 
having just name and number details associated with it, 
similar to the contacts stored in today’s mobile address 
books/contact lists.) It enables storage of RCS-e contact and 
Legacy contacts, all at one place so as to avoid an additional 
burden on user for maintaining a separate contact list for 
both types of contacts.  
 
 
 
 
The Enhanced address book allows legacy traditional 
operations such as ability to dial a contact (whether RCS-e or 
legacy) or sending a SMS. It also allows using advanced 
features such as starting a chat session with another RCS-e 
contact and ability to use multimedia content. Also, a service 
capability indication of each contact stored is provided which 
indicates the type of communication possible with each 
particular contact. In the Enhanced address book, as soon as 
user selects a contact it would be indicated whether that 
contact is capable of handling chat session, file transfer and 
video/image share capability or just simple call functions like 
SMS/call. For example, an RCS-e contact in the Enhanced 
Address Book might be shown as capable of handling of 
image sharing or/and chat capable, in the address book. 
Since, no such capability is present with non RCS-e contact, 
it would be depicted appropriately say by  graying out the 
image/video share option, so that user clearly knows which 
contacts on its contact list are RCS-e or non RCS-e  contacts 
and also what all services the user can avail to reach to a 
particular contact. 
IMS core system forms the base for RCS-e services and 
enables peer-to-peer communication between RCS-e clients. 
Further, intercommunication between two RCS-e service 
providers is made possible using Network-to-Network 
Interface (NNI) mechanisms as explained in PRD-IR.90 
(RCS Interworking Guidelines) [9][ 10]. 
Apart from the IMS core system many network entities 
form the RCS-e ecosystem. For instance, Presence server 
provides RCS-e clients with the current state information of 
the buddies in its buddy list. The IM server coupled with 
message store service provides the RCS-e client with a mix 
of traditional service such as chatting along with latest 
services like deferred messaging which ensures that no 
message sent by the RCS-e client is lost by delivering the 
message at a later time when the recipient party becomes 
available [11, 12]. In the same way, the Secure User Plane 
Location element could be used to exchange geo-location 
information, as part of Social Presence Information, which is 
an optional service for RCS-e [13].  
A typical protocol message sequence flow for image 
share as an example is depicted below in Figure 2. User A, 
wants to share an image file, with Contact B present in its 
contact list and hence selects it. As soon as the user performs 
this action, the capability checks followed by session 
establishment processes are initiated with the help of Session 
Initiation Protocol. Once the session setup is complete, 
Message Session Relay protocol is used to send the intended 
image file from user A to User B. Once, the entire content is 
transferred from User A to user B, the session is gracefully 
ended using BYE, a Session Initiation Protocol method. 
 
 
 
 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 2-Message sequence flow for image share scenario 
 
     RCS-e as a service, offers a wide mix of traditional and 
advanced features, which could not only cater to existing 
needs of mobile users but also offer additional edge in terms 
of feature availability and ease of use. Going by its 
portfolio, RCS-e offers a lot of things which are not 
correctly or fully implemented at present and there are 
several challenges to be dealt early for successful roll-out.  
Section III below elaborates some of these challenges. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES 
A. Binding to SIM Card 
Since, the RCS services are bound to the SIM card in use, 
the use cases such as roaming appear as serious challenges. 
Say if a user decides to continue using RCS-e services while 
in roaming area, he or she might be subjected to heavy 
roaming data charges on accounts of the RCS-e services he 
or she is using on the go. Why would then a normal user, 
who can use his Whatsapp account to connect to a local wifi 
and use it for messaging at no charge at all, use RCS-e to 
communicate? In contrast, the Over The Top (OTT) apps are 
on cloud so as to say and hence their access is not limited or 
bound by the SIM card which is a clear advantage and a vital 
one too. It remains interesting to see that how, the current 
roaming pricing model is tweaked to counter such obvious 
shortcomings when RCS-e is pitted against OTT apps. 
Similarly, in the case where the user makes use of 
multiple SIM cards based on network availability and tariff 
needs, multiple RCS-e account information will need to be 
managed; for example, to have the same buddy list appear on 
different SIMs and many more associated complexities like 
these.   
 
 
B. Inter-operability between operator networks 
Wider and large scale IMS deployment, interoperability 
between different terminal vendor RCS clients and RCS 
service interworking between operators are the key aims of 
the RCS Initiative. Looking from a competition perspective, 
interoperability hasn’t been much of an issue for OTT 
application market leaders since long. Whether it is 
Facebook, Whatsapp or Twitter, these apps are tested well 
and thoroughly by the app developers themselves and hence 
can boast of high level of interoperability. In fact, some of 
these apps come pre-embedded into the devices much like 
what RCS-e proposes to do in future. So, what additional 
RCS-e can offer to the users in terms of interoperability 
would be a thing to watch. 
Though a common set of GSMA specifications shall be 
followed by RCS-e enabling operators and application 
developers, a longer launch cycle time shall be needed due to 
multiple checks to be performed by the operator to validate 
inter-operability among different vendor solutions. Longer 
launch cycle time for RCS-e provides greater opportunity for 
OTT players to innovate and further impact RCS-e market 
penetration.  
 
C. Packaging of RCS-e services v/s existing Unified 
Communication applications 
In an enterprise world, equipment vendors and service 
providers are already investing in unified communication 
applications which provide mobility. These applications 
provide inherent capability to make use of advanced 
collaboration features when the user is in “office mode” or 
“work mode”. The Unified Communications framework 
provides a seamless access to IM, Presence, Voice, Video, 
Social networking, and others on a desktop or mobile device 
for a registered enterprise user in secured fashion, thereby 
enhancing productivity and mobility. 
RCS-e services for enterprises shall require different 
packaging and billing model to compete with the Unified 
communications reach and growth. In some cases there could 
be overlapping solutions to cater to both personal and official 
needs.  
  
D. Delay in availability of open APIs 
Availability of standard and well known development 
environment or the Application Programming Interface 
(APIs) is an essential element in success of any platform or 
application. A very good example is Android operating 
system which provides seamless open source access to 
global developer community to contribute, share and 
simplify application development and deployment process. 
This encouraged developers, vendors and operators to flaunt 
new apps and generate huge interest in Android.  
In the same way, RCS-e needs to provide Open APIs to 
capture the market quickly and offer similar developer 
experience/reach. Though the RCS-e APIs were made 
available for developer community just recently, it has to 
catch –up quickly with tested and scaleable APIs which can 
provide the required performance.  
 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

E. SIP Inter-Op Issues 
Figure 3 depicts a summary of SIP Inter-op issues in 
development and launch of new SIP devices across 5 leading 
original equipment vendors. Though SIP specifications are 
stable for more than 5 years now, this is actual 
implementation data for development between 2009 and 
2012. 
   This data gives a historical view of all kind of issues 
that may originate while introducing extensions to SIP which 
shall also impact RCS-e devices and associated services. 
 
F. Lack of standard test specifications or test tools for 
RCS-e clients 
     Original 
equipment 
vendors 
or 
chipset 
vendors 
themselves need to validate the protocol stack compliance 
with latest set of standards which are still evolving. 
Availability of standard test specifications and automated 
test tools remain a challenge for the vendors. One of the 
silver linings here is that SIP or IMS test frameworks can be 
extended for the RCS-e standard for control plane 
validation.  
IV. SUMMARY 
The key competition to RCS-e is the OTT service. RCS-e 
forum members, handset equipment vendors, chipset vendors 
and MNOs have to play a key role in success of RCS 
journey.  In today’s business context and increasing pressure 
to quickly monetize investments and enhance average 
revenue per user (ARPU) and user experience it is 
imperative for stakeholders to collaborate and come up with 
quick solutions to challenges described above.  
Figure 4 gives an idea of how big a threat do operator 
perceive OTT to be. Nearly three-fourth of the operators 
surveyed say that because of the usage of OTT IM clients, 
their revenue takes a hit whereas a mere 12% feel that 
presence 
 
 
Figure 3-SIP Inter-Op Issues Classification 
 
 
 
Figure 4-Operators expectation of revenue on usage of OTT IM clients on 
smart-phones [14] 
 
of OTT in the market hardly changes the revenue front 
for them. This for sure indicates that growing OTT presence 
is now clearly acknowledged by the operator community. 
Keeping mind that RCS-e enabled handsets would be 
available somewhere late in the year 2012, at present, 
various operators seem to be having different approaches to 
handle the OTT threat. Fig. 5 below shows using data 
collected in year 2011, how various operators across the 
world are planning to deploy the RCS-e services to combat 
the OTT threat. Here again, a clear pattern emerges with 
regards to the urgency with which RCS-e services are being 
promised. 39 percent of the operators is readying for 2012 
year release and another 16 percent of operators are in the 
process of deploying them. This further substantiates, that 
operators seems to be betting big on RCS-e to take on OTT 
applications.  
According to another survey [14], 22.6% of respondents 
also said that they are either offering their own IM client, or 
partnering with OTT providers. A minority, 6.5%, are trying 
to either block access to OTT clients or imposing surcharges 
for using OTT clients via deep packet inspection technology.  
 
 
Figure 5-Operators with RCS-e Deployment (as in year 2011) [14] 
 
But, these approaches are only addressing the outer layer 
of the problem, which is handling the OTT influx and hence 
is missing the crux of the issue. The solution lies in preparing 
well in advance and offering innovative services; one 
example is having the services on Cloud itself. 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

Based on the current information on GSMA website, 
most of the leading mobile handset manufacturers of the 
world seem to making heavy investments in getting their 
clients accredited for compliance to standards of new SIP 
devices across 5 leading original equipment vendors. Overall 
14 companies have accredited in the February 2012 – 
October 2012 time period which shows the current priority 
for manufacturers in this segment and hence the focus 
needed to address some of these problems.   
   This business situation also opens up opportunities for 
software engineering service providers and telecom test 
vendors to create propositions and solutions around the 
same. Since, RCS-e technology is still in its initial stages, the 
approaches RCS-e proponents shall adopt in near future to 
resolve the implementation challenges would be a thing to 
observe. 
V. REFERENCES 
[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_play_(telecommunications) 
[2] http://www.3gpp.org/Technologies/Keywords-Acronyms/article/ims 
[3] http://www.3gpp.org/LTE 
[4] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3261.txt 
[5] rcs-e_advanced_comms_specification_v1_2_2_approved.pdf 
(http://www.gsma.com/rcs/specifications/rcs-e-specifications/) 
[6] Traffic and Market Report from Ericsson (June 2012) 
[7] http://www.gsma.com/ 
[8] http://openmobilealliance.org/ 
[9] GSMA PRD IR.90 - “RCS Interworking Guidelines” 2.1 
October 2010 (http://www.gsma.com) 
[10] RCS5_0_Advanced_communications_specification_version10.pdf 
[11] SIP 
Extension 
for 
Instant 
Messaging 
IETF 
RFC 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3428 
[12] RCS_e_Advanced_Comms_specification_v1_1.pdf 
[13] Secure User Plane Location, Candidate Version 2.0 – 27 May 2011 
[14] Mobile Squared Report, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

