Model for Cloud Computing Risk Analysis 
 
 
 
Paulo F. Silva, Carlos B. Westphall, Carla M. 
Westphall 
Networks and Management Laboratory 
Post-Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil 
e-mail:paulofernando@furb.br; westphal@inf.ufsc.br, 
carlamw@inf.ufsc.br 
 
Abstract – Several risk analysis solutions have been proposed 
for cloud computing environments. But these solutions are 
usually centered on the Cloud Service Provider, have limited 
scope and do not consider the business requirements of the 
Cloud Consumer. These features reduce the reliability of the 
results of a cloud computing risk analysis. This paper proposes 
a model for cloud computing risk analysis in which 
responsibilities are not centered in the Cloud Service Provider. 
The proposed model makes the Cloud Consumer an active 
entity in risk analysis and includes the Information Security 
Laboratory entity. A prototype developed from the proposed 
model demonstrates performing a risk analysis in the cloud 
with shared responsibilities between the Cloud Service 
Provider, 
Cloud 
Consumer 
and 
Information 
Security 
Laboratory entities. 
Keywords – ISO 27005; cloud computing; risk analysis; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Some of the challenges posed by cloud computing in the 
information security area are: identity management, 
virtualization management, governance and regulatory 
compliance, Service Level Agreement (SLA) and trust 
management, data privacy of the users and protection against 
external and internal threats [1]-[4]. 
Risk analysis [5] has been a strategy used to address the 
information security challenges posed by cloud computing, 
often addressing specific technical vulnerabilities or threats 
identification. 
However, recent approaches on cloud risk analysis [6]-
[12] did not aim at providing a particular architecture model 
for cloud environments, considering the entities involved and 
their responsibilities. Thus, the current models have the 
following deficiencies in their way of analyzing the risk of 
cloud computing environments: 
• 
 The deficiency in the adherence Cloud Consumer 
(CC) occurs when the entity responsible for 
defining impacts unaware of the technological 
environment and the CC business environment. In 
this case, the impact of this specification can 
disregard relevant scenarios for the CC or  
Mauro M. Mattos 
 
Development and Transfer Technology Laboratory 
Regional University of Blumenau, Blumenau, Brazil 
e-mail: mattos@furb.br 
 
 
 
 
overestimate 
not 
relevant 
scenarios, 
thereby 
generating an incorrect risk assessment; 
• 
The deficiency in the scope occurs when the 
selection of security requirements are performed by 
the Cloud Service Provider (CSP) itself or one 
without sufficient knowledge entity. The CSP can 
specify addict’s security requirements in their own 
environment, thus defrauding the risk analysis 
results. Having an unprepared authority may specify 
requirements 
or 
insufficient 
disregard 
some 
important requirement, thus generating an incorrect 
risk analysis; 
• 
The deficiency in the independence of results arises 
when the quantification of probabilities and impacts 
are performed by an entity that has an interest in 
minimizing the risk analysis results. For example, if 
the analysis is performed solely by the CSP. It can 
soften the assessment of requirements and impacts, 
thus generating a satisfactory result for the CC, but 
incorrect. 
This paper proposes a model for performing risk analyzes 
in cloud environments that: 
• 
Consider the participation of the CC entity in the 
performance of risk analysis, that is, allows an 
adherent risk analysis to CC's information security; 
• 
Enabling the development of a risk analysis scope 
that is impartial to the interests of the CSP and to be 
developed by an entity with deep knowledge in 
information security; 
• 
Does not have the centralized performance of risk 
analysis for the CSP entity, or to generate more 
independent results risks analysis possible in 
relation to the CSP interest, thus acting on the 
independence of disability results. 
Therefore, the proposed model organizes the risk analysis 
in two phases: risk specification phase and risk evaluation 
phase. It also defines the entities involved in each phase and 
their responsibilities. Finally, the proposed model also 
provides a language for defining risk and a protocol for 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

communication between the entities involved in risk 
analysis. 
The rest of this paper is as follows organized. Section 2 
discusses related works on. The Proposed model is presented 
in Section 3. Section 4 describes the results and 
discussions. We conclude the paper and present future works 
in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Hale and Gamble [7] present a framework called 
SecAgreement that allows management of security metrics 
between CSPs and CCs. An SLA for cloud risk management 
is presented by Morin, Aubert and Gateau [8]. Ristov, Gusev 
and Kostoska [9] discuss risk analysis in cloud computing 
environments based on ISO 27001 and offers a model for 
security assessment in cloud computing. Chen, Wang and 
Wang  [10] present an architecture that defines security 
levels from the risk of each CC service in the CSP. 
Zech, Felderer and Breu [11] introduce a model for 
security testing in cloud computing environments based on 
risk analysis of these environments. Wang, Lin and Kuo [12] 
discuss risk analysis in cloud computing using intrusion 
techniques based on attack-defense trees and graphs. 
Rot and Sobinska [13] discuss new information security 
threats 
specifically 
applied 
in 
cloud 
computing 
environments. Ristov and Gusev [14] present a security 
assessment of the main cloud environments open source, 
while Mirkovic [15] presents some security controls from 
ISO 27001 applied to cloud computing. 
Ullah, Ahmed and Ylitalo [16] describe the Cloud 
Security Alliance (CSA) effort to inform security evaluation 
of automation in cloud services providers, the Cloud Audit, 
while Khosravani et al. [17] present a study of risk analysis 
in case of cloud computing, focusing on the importance of 
data security requirements that will be migrated to the cloud. 
Lenkala, Shetty and Siong [18] build upon the National 
Vulnerability Database (NVD) to identify vulnerabilities in 
cloud environments. Liu, Wu, Lu and Xiong [19] propose a 
model for information security risk analysis in virtual 
machines cloud computing environments, based on the ISO 
27001, 27002 and 27005. 
The related works presented above discuss the risk 
analysis on requirements or specific scenarios in cloud 
computing. The model proposed in this paper is different 
from the related works because it addresses an architecture 
for different risk scenarios in cloud computing, including 
discussion of the agents involved, communication protocol 
and language for description of the risks. 
III. 
THE RACLOUD MODEL 
This section presents the model for risk analysis proposed 
in the cloud, called RACloud – Risk Analysis for Clouds. 
A. Risk Definition Language 
The model provides a language for specifying risk, Risk 
Definition Language (RDL). The RDL is specified in XML 
and contains information about threats, vulnerabilities and 
information assets. This information is the basis for 
performing risk analysis in RACloud model. 
The RDL allows specification of three different types of 
records: threats, vulnerabilities and information assets. 
Figure 1 shows an example of specifying vulnerability 
records, which are two specified vulnerabilities from the 
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE). 
Each record contains information RDL header with Id, 
source and version of the XML file and registry information 
risk (threats, vulnerabilities or information asset) with Id, 
description, category and Web Service Risk Analysis 
(WSRA). 
The WSRA is a web service responsible for evaluating 
the record of risk (threat, vulnerability and asset 
information). It is also responsible by quantifying the risk as 
shown in Section III-C. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  An RDL especification of vulnerabilities. 
The RDL records are used by the components of the 
model RACloud (Section III-B) during phases of risk 
specification (Section III-D) and risk assessment (Section III-
E). 
B.  Architectural Components 
The RACloud model shares the responsibility of risk 
analysis between four distinct entities: RAH - Risk Analysis 
Host, ISL - Information Security Laboratory, CSP - Cloud 
Service Provider and CC - Cloud Consumer. These entities 
relate to different components at different times. 
The RAH entity has responsibility for the host 
connection and core layers, formed by components 
Conn ISL, Conn CC, Conn CSP, Agent Manager, RDL 
Manager and Analysis Manager (Figure 2). 
The components Conn ISL, Conn CC and Conn CSP are 
interfaces for communication with other components 
distributed respectively between the entities ISL, CC, CSP. 
The Agent Manager component is responsible for 
managing the registration of CC, CSP and ISL entities in 
RACloud 
model. The 
RDL 
Manager 
component 
is 
responsible for managing and storing the records of defining 
risks. And Analysis Manager component is responsible for 
performing the risk assessment. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

The ISL is a laboratory entity or group specializing in 
information security, its responsibility is to specify the RDLs 
vulnerabilities and threats, in addition to their WSRAs. This 
entity hosts the ISL Agent and WSRA Evaluator 
components. The component ISL Agent is responsible for 
registering the ISL in RACore and publish its RDLs. The 
WSRA Evaluator component is responsible for performing 
assessments of threats and vulnerabilities described in RDLs. 
The CSP represents the entity's own cloud service 
provider aim of risk analysis. This entity hosting the CSP 
Agent and WSRA Proxy components. The CSP Agent 
component is responsible for registering the CSP in RACore 
and subscribe to RDLs, which the CSP aims to be 
analyzed. The WSRA Proxy component is responsible for 
collecting information from the CSP and make the call of 
WSRAs. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Model Layers RACloud. 
The CC entity is the CSP's customer, hosting their 
information assets in the cloud and want to know which one 
is exposed to risk in relation to its CSP. This entity hosts the 
CC Agent component. This component is responsible for 
registering the CC in RACloud and initiate risk analysis. 
C. Risk Modeling  
Information assets, threats and vulnerabilities are the 
basic elements of a risk analysis of information security. 
RACloud in these model elements are defined by CC and 
ISL entities. Variables modeling of risk posed information 
assets, threats and vulnerabilities are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
BASIC ELEMENTS 
Symbol 
Description 
Tx 
Treat defined by ISL “x” 
Ay 
Information Asset defined by CC “y” 
Vz 
Vulnerability defined by ISL “z” 
 
In the risk analysis, functions are applied to the 
information assets, threats and vulnerabilities, with the aim 
of analyzing their impact, exposure and disability, 
respectively. The functions for allocating degree of impact, 
degree of exposure and degree of disability are represented 
according to Table II. 
TABLE II.  
FUNTIONS OF ANALYSIS 
Symbol 
Description 
eaf(Tx,w) 
Exposure analysis function of Tx on CSP “w” 
iaf(Ay) 
Impact analysis function of Ay 
daf(Vz,w) 
Deficiency analysis function of Vz on CSP “w” 
 
The analysis functions represented in Table II result in 
the calculation of the degree of impact, degree of exposure 
and degree of disability. The three variables are represented 
in RACloud as described in Table III. 
 
TABLE III.  
VIABLES OF ANALYSIS 
Symbol 
Description 
DET,x,w 
Degree of Exposure related with Tx and w. 
eaf(Tx,w)=DET,x,w 
DIA,y 
Degree of Impact related with Ay. 
iaf(Ay)=DIA,y 
DDV,z,w 
Degree of Deficiency related with Vz and w. 
daf(Vz,w)=DDV,z,w 
 
A risk event is the relationship of a threat with a 
vulnerability. This relationship is established in RACloud 
through a correlation function of the event. From the risk 
events are calculated the probabilities of occurrence of the 
event, based on the degree of exposure and the degree of 
disability. The modeling related events and probabilities is 
presented by Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
PROBABILITY CALCULATION 
Symbol 
Description 
ET,V 
Event relating T with V 
α(Tx,Vz) 
Function correlating T and V 
α(Tx,Vz)=ET,V 
fp(ET,V) 
Function of probability of ET,V 
fp(E)=(DET,x,w+DDV,z,w)/2 , or,  
fp(E)=matrix(DET,x,w,DDV,z,w) 
PE 
Probability of ET,V 
fp(ET,V)=PE 
 
From the probability of risk events and the degree of 
impact on information assets, it is possible to calculate the 
risk of a particular event on a particular information asset. 
The relationship between risk events and information assets 
are given by a function correlation risk. The modeling related 
to the correlation of risk and the final calculation of risk is 
presented by Table V. 
TABLE V.  
RISK CALCULATION 
Symbol 
Description 
RE,A 
Risk relating E and A 
β(E,Ay) 
Function correlating E and Ay 
β(E,Ay)=RE,A 
raf(RE,A) 
Risk analysis function of RE,A 
raf(RE,A)=(PE+ DIA,y)/2 
or 
raf(RE,A)=matrix(PE,DIA,y) 
DRE,A 
Degree of risk related with RE,A 
raf(RE,A)=GRE,A 
D.  Specification Phase 
In the risk specification phase, RACloud model of the 
threats (T x), vulnerabilities (V z) and information assets 
(A y) part of risk analysis is defined. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 3 illustrates the flow of interactions between 
components of the model RACloud specification phase 
risk. Initially each agent must register with the Agent 
Manager component (Figure 3 -a, b, c). After it registed ISL 
has the responsibility to specify threats and vulnerabilities of 
cloud computing environments and develop RDLs and 
WSRAs 
to 
these 
threats 
and 
vulnerabilities. 
The 
vulnerabilities and threats WSRAs to match functions 
eaf(Tx,w) e daf(Vz,w) of the risk modeling, respectively. 
After developing their RDLs and WSRAs ISL exports 
the records of RDLs for the RDL Manager (Figure 3 -d) 
component and publishes WSRAs (Figure 3 -e) so they can 
be called by the CSP in the evaluation phase. 
 
Figure 3.  Specification time. 
The performance of the CSP specification phase of risk is 
to import the RDLs recorded by ISL (Figure 3 -f.) and 
implement the Proxy WSRAs to call WSRAs of the 
evaluation phase (Figure 3 -g). 
The identification of threats and vulnerabilities, is the 
responsibility of the ISL and the call of WSRAs, is the 
responsibility of the CSP, but the definition of information 
assets and quantification of impact on these assets is the 
responsibility of the CC. Because CC entity is most adequate 
for the express the potential loss in the event of an incident. 
Thus, the responsibility of CC Agent on phase specification 
risk is to build a database of information assets RDLs (Figure 
3 -h). 
E. Evaluation Phase 
In the risk evaluation phase, it ocorrs the call of the 
functions eaf(Tx,w), daf(Vz,w) e iaf(Ay), and quantifying the 
variables ET,V, PE and RE,A defined in risk modeling. 
The evaluation begins with the CC Agent informing the 
CSP to be analyzed (Figure 4 -a). From this component 
Analysis Manager obtains information from the CSP (Figure 
4 -b) and queries the registered RDLs (Figure 4 -c). 
Based on information obtained from CSP and RDL, 
Analysis Manager component starts and will evaluation 
threats and vulnerabilities. To do so, makes the invocation of 
CSP Agent. Then there is the collection of information about 
threats and vulnerabilities through WSRAs Proxy and the 
assessment of that information through WSRAs ISL. Then 
WSRAs ISL make quantification of the variables DET,x,w and 
DDV,z,w (Table II) and return these values to Analysis 
Manager component (Figure 4 -d). 
After quantifying all the threats and vulnerabilities 
associated with RDLs defined in CSP, begins to quantify the 
impacts defined by the CC. Therefore, the Analysis Manager 
component invokes the CC Agent for the degree of impact of 
their information assets (Figure 4 -e). With the return of CC 
Agent Analysis Manager component defines the value of the 
variables DIA,y. 
 
Figure 4.  Evaluation time. 
Once obtained the values of DIA,y, DET,x,w e DDV,z,w for 
all information assets, threats and vulnerabilities defined in 
RDLs, Analysis Manager component starts the calculation of 
the variables ET,V and PE and through the functions α(Tx,Vz) 
and fp(ET,V). This process results in a list of possible events, 
or which may threats and vulnerabilities which exploits, and 
the respective probability of each event. 
Finally, the Analysis Manager component does the 
calculation of the variables RE,A and DRE,A, through the 
functions β(E,Ay) and raf(RE,A)  respectively. The result of 
this process is the ratio of risk items, ie valid relation 
between events and information. 
After the calculation of all risk items (RE,A) and their 
degrees of risk (DRE,A) the result is returned to the CC Agent 
for it to take decisions on the acceptance or not of risk found 
in their CSP (Figure 4 -f). 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
For testing purposes and discussion, we developed a 
prototype RACloud model as presented in Section III. From 
the prototype were performed phases of risk specification 
and risk evaluation in a controlled environment for testing. 
In the risk of specification phase (Section III-D), were 
specified 20 RDL records vulnerabilities and 20 RDL 
records threats and 10 RDL records of information 
assets. The RDL records of threats and vulnerabilities were 
specified as threats and vulnerabilities found in CVE -. 
Common Vulnerabilities, Exposures. Also WSRAs and 
WSRAs Proxy have been developed for the 40 records of 
threats and vulnerabilities specified. 
In the risk evaluation phase (Section III-E), the WSRAs 
Proxy and WSRAs were performed, generating the DD and 
DE values for each vulnerability and threat record, 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

respectively. The records of vulnerabilities and threats were 
correlated by Analysis Manager component generates 20 
events, which were correlated with the records of 
information assets, generating 20 risk scenarios. 
Figure 5 shows the result of calculation of variables DE, 
DD, P, DI and DR for the 20 risk scenarios (R1 to R20) 
specified in the prototype. 
 
Figure 5.  Evaluation of risk. 
The lower risk identified was the R3 risk scenario, with 
risk of 16.25%. This scenario specifies as information asset 
the file transfer service, as vulnerability the unencrypted 
password and as threat the unauthorized access. 
The greatest risk identified was the risk scenario R16, 
with risk of 66.25%. This risk scenario specifies as 
information asset the e-mail service, as vulnerability the 
weak encryption protocol and as threat the DDoS. 
Figure 6 presents the results of the risk assessment 
generated by RACloud model prototype for the risk 
scenarios R3 and R16. For each risk scenario is possible to 
observe the results of probability and risk variables. You can 
also see a brief description of the items threats, 
vulnerabilities and information assets and the value of their 
respective variable degree of exposure, degree of deficiency 
and degree of impact. 
With the risk analysis of the resulting information the CC 
may decide to allocate or not their information assets in a 
given CSP, or remove their systems of a CSP to present great 
risks. 
The proposed model aims to reduce the three major 
deficiencies presented by current models of cloud risk 
analysis: deficiency in scope, deficiency in the adherence and 
deficiency in independence of results. 
The reduction deficiency in the adherence occurs when 
the proposed model includes the CC as a key entity in the 
risk analysis process. In the model RACloud, the CC entity 
acts in active mode on risk analysis, defining information 
assets and quantifying impacts on these assets. 
The CC is the entity most apt to define the impacts, it is 
the entity that best knows the relevance of each information 
asset within its area of operation. Therefore, it is CC's 
responsibility to say what the impact will be whether a 
system file or database has its integrity, confidentiality or 
availability impaired. The CSP and ISL entities have no 
automy to identify or quantify impacts on information assets, 
because they are not experts in CC business area. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Result of risk. 
The RACloud model works to reduce the deficiency in 
scope in that it introduces the ISL entity. As the ISL an entity 
specialized to information security is the entity best placed to 
define security requirements, threats and vulnerabilities 
(specification of RDLs) and set as the threats and 
vulnerabilities should be quantified (specification of 
WSRAs). 
The reduction of deficiency in the independence of the 
results is the fact that the model RACloud the CSP has more 
restricted responsibilities than in the models traditionally 
presented by related work. 
Traditionally, the CSP is responsible for defining security 
requirements and the tests that are applied to risk assessment 
of their own environment. In this scenario the risk 
assessment may be biased to the CSP. Including the ISL 
entity removes responsibilities traditionally assigned to the 
CSP, as identification and quantification of threats and 
vulnerabilities, thus making it more reliable the result of risk 
analysis. 
The proposed model allows multiple ISLs act in the 
definition of RDLs and WSRAs together. Thus the risk 
definitions can come from different sources and can be 
constantly updated dynamic and collaborative way, forming 
a risk settings based on extensive and independent cloud. 
The way WSRAs are specified is also a feature that 
impacts the improvement scope. The use of Web Services to 
specify security requirements allows them to be platform 
independent and can be ordered by any CSP. It also allows 
the use of a wide variety of techniques for quantification of 
threats and vulnerabilities, because the limit is defined only 
by the programming language chosen for implementation of 
WSRA. 
The related works of cloud risk analysis did not consider 
the role of CC entity in the risk analysis. These works 
usually aim on the vulnerability assessment by the CSP 
itself, without considering the impact that the vulnerability 
will cause on the different CC information assets. By 
assigning the responsibility for identifying and quantifying 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

the impact of the CC are sharing the risk variables among 
different entities, so the responsibility for the quantification 
of risk analysis variables is not centralized in one specific 
entity. 
The CSP is the entity that will be the analyzed then it 
doesn’t have the autonomy to set any of the values of risk 
analysis, as this could make unreliable risk analysis. The role 
of CSP is only inform the data requested by ISL, so that ISL 
itself makes the quantification of security requirements. 
With RACloud model CC can perform analyzes in 
several CSPs before deciding to purchase a cloud computing 
service. The CC can also carry out regular reviews of your 
current provider and compare them with other providers, 
opting for changing its CSP. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a model for risk analysis in cloud 
computing environments. 
The proposed model changes the generally current 
paradigm in research on cloud risk analysis, in which the 
CSP entity is responsible for the specification of security 
requirements and analysis of these requirements in its own 
environment, so the only entity responsible for the results 
risk analysis. 
To reduce excess CSP responsibility for risk analysis, the 
proposed model includes two new entities with active 
participation in risk analysis, the CC entity and the ISL 
entity. 
The model presented in this paper is an initiative of the 
CC itself can perform risk analysis on its current or future 
CSP. And that this risk analysis is adherent, comprehensive 
and independent of the CSP interests. 
The characteristics presented in this paper are intended to 
generate a more reliable risk analysis for CC, so that it can 
choose its CSP based on more consistent information, 
specified and analyzed by an exempt entity interests, ISL. 
Several papers on cloud computing indicate lack 
confidence CC in relation to the CSP as a great motivator for 
not acquiring cloud computing services. An independent risk 
analysis can act to reduce this mistrust and promote the 
acquisition of cloud computing services. 
The prototype and the results show the specification and 
implementation of an adherent risk analysis, comprehensive 
and independent, because the analysis is not centered in the 
CSP. The identification and quantification of threats and 
vulnerabilities can be performed by many security 
laboratories and the impact on the information assets is 
defined by the CC itself. 
Several future works can be developed from the 
RACloud model. There is a need to extend this work to 
suggest the controls or countermeasures for CSPs can 
mitigate its risks. Searches can be developed on the 
reliability of the data reported by the CSP to the ISL for risk 
analysis and the specification of risk definition language can 
be further explored in specific researches. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. Srinivasan, K. Sarukesi, P. Rodrigues, M. S. Manoj, 
and P. Revathy, “State-of-the-art cloud computing security 
taxonomies: a classification of security challenges in the 
present cloud computing environment”. ICACCI '12: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in 
Computing, Communications and Informatics, August 2012, 
pp. 470-476. 
[2] H. Yu, N. Powell, D. Stembridge and, X. Yuan, “Cloud 
computing 
and 
security 
challenges”. 
ACM-SE 
'12: 
Proceedings of the 50th Annual Southeast Regional 
Conference, March 2012, pp. 298-302. 
[3] K. Ren, C. Wang and Q. Wang, "Security Challenges for the 
Public Cloud," Internet Computing, IEEE, vol.16, no.1, Jan.-
Feb. 2012, pp. 69-73, doi: 10.1109/MIC.2012.14, retrieved: 
March, 2015. 
[4] B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek and E. Stocker, "Understanding 
Cloud Computing Vulnerabilities," Security & Privacy, IEEE 
, vol.9, no.2, March-April 2011, pp. 50-57, doi: 10.1109/ 
MSP.2010.115. 
[5] ISO/IEC 
27005:2011, 
Information 
Security 
Risk 
Management. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.iso.org, 
retrieved: March, 2015. 
[6] J. Zhang, D. Sun and D. Zhai, "A research on the indicator 
system of Cloud Computing Security Risk Assessment," 
Quality, 
Reliability, 
Risk, 
Maintenance, 
and 
Safety 
Engineering (ICQR2MSE), 2012 International Conference on 
, vol., no., June 2012, pp.121,123, 15-18 doi: 10.1109/ 
ICQR2MSE. 2012.6246200. 
[7] M. L. Hale, and R. Gamble,  "SecAgreement: Advancing 
Security Risk Calculations in Cloud Services," Services 
(SERVICES), 2012 IEEE Eighth World Congress on , vol., 
no., 
June 
2012, 
pp.133-140, 
24-29, 
doi: 
10.1109/SERVICES.2012.31. 
[8] J. Morin, J. Aubert, and B. Gateau, "Towards Cloud 
Computing SLA Risk Management: Issues and Challenges," 
System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.5509-5514, 4-7 Jan. 2012 doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2012.602. 
[9] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, "A new methodology 
for security evaluation in cloud computing," MIPRO, 2012 
Proceedings of the 35th International Convention , vol., no., 
May 2012, pp.1484-1489, 21-25. 
[10] J. Chen, Y, Wang, and X. Wang, "On-Demand Security 
Architecture for Cloud Computing," Computer, IEEE, vol.45, 
no.7, July 2012, pp.73,78, doi: 10.1109/MC.2012.120. 
[11] P. Zech, M. Felderer, and R. Breu, "Towards a Model Based 
Security 
Testing 
Approach 
of 
Cloud 
Computing 
Environments," Software Security and Reliability Companion 
(SERE-C), 2012 IEEE Sixth International Conference on , 
vol., no., June 2012, pp.47,56, 20-22 doi: 10.1109/SERE-
C.2012.11. 
[12] P. Wang, W. Lin, P. Kuo, H. Lin and, T. Wang, "Threat risk 
analysis for cloud security based on Attack-Defense Trees," 
Computing 
Technology 
and 
Information 
Management 
(ICCM), 2012 8th International Conference on, vol.1, no., 
April 2012, pp.106-111, 24-26. 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

[13] A. Rot, and M. Sobinska, “IT security threats in cloud 
computing 
sourcing 
model”, 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Information Systems (FedCSIS), 2013, Federated Conference 
on, Publication Year: 2013, pp. 1153- 1156. 
[14] S. Ristov, and M. Gusev. “Security evaluation of open source 
clouds”, EUROCON, 2013 IEEE, Digital Object Identifier: 
10.1109/EUROCON. 2013.6624968, Publication Year: 2013, 
Page(s): 73- 80. 
[15] O. Mirkovic, “Security evaluation in cloud”, Information & 
Communication Technology Electronics & Microelectronics 
(MIPRO), 2013 36th International Convention on, Publication 
Year: 2013 , Page(s): 1088-1093.  
[16] K. Ullah, A. Ahmed, and J. Ylitalo. “Towards Building an 
Automated Security Compliance Tool for the Cloud”. Trust, 
Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications 
(TrustCom), 2013 12th IEEE International Conference on. 
Digital 
Object 
Identifier: 
0.1109/TrustCom. 
2013.195. 
Publication Year: 2013, Page(s): 1587- 1593. 
[17] A. Khosravani, Nicholson, B., and Wood-Harper, T., “A case 
study analysis of risk, trust and control in cloud computing”, 
Science and Information Conference (SAI), 2013, Publication 
Year: 2013, Page(s): 879- 887. 
[18] S. R. Lenkala, Shetty, S., and Kaiqi Xiong. “Security Risk 
Assessment of Cloud Carrier”. Cluster, Cloud and Grid 
Computing (CCGrid), 2013 13th IEEE/ACM International 
Symposium 
on, 
Digital 
Object 
Identifier: 
10.1109/CCGrid.2013.28, Publication Year: 2013, Page(s): 
442- 449. 
[19] S. Liu, J. Wu, Z. Lu, and H. Xiong, “VMRaS: A Novel 
Virtual Machine Risk Assessment Scheme in the Cloud 
Environment”, Services Computing (SCC), 2013 IEEE 
International Conference on, Digital Object Identifier: 
10.1109/SCC.2013.12, Publication Year: 2013, Page(s): 384- 
391. 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

