A Study on Zero-touch-design Information-centric Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Shintaro Mori 
Department of Electronics Engineering and Computer Science 
Fukuoka University 
8-19-1 Nanakuma, Jonan-ku, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan 
e-mail: smori@fukuoka-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a novel zero-touch-design 
information-centric wireless sensor network for smart-city 
applications. To promote self-growing in the autonomous-
distributed environment, the proposed scheme adopts a 
mechanism of zero-touch technology focusing on the lower 
layers in which sensor nodes join the network. The results of 
preliminary 
computer 
simulations 
demonstrate 
the 
effectiveness of the proposed scheme in terms of energy 
consumption. This study is a part of our ongoing research 
project to develop an ecosystem that enables a smart-city-as-a-
service platform, where we are currently focused on the 
development and experimental trials in on-site testing. 
Keywords-Information-centric wireless sensor networks; 
Zero-touch-design; Smart-city-as-a-service platform 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) has stimulated new trends and 
empowered innovative new developments in smart devices. 
The deployment of such devices at distributed locations is a 
typical scenario in smart-city applications. Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSNs) are an elemental technology in this regard, 
and they require rapid deployment, initial configuration, and 
sensing-data provisioning, which remain major challenges. 
Further, in next-generation wireless networks, such as beyond 
Fifth-Generation (5G), massive Sensor Nodes (SNs) might be 
deployed in a heterogeneous environment across multiple 
network domains and versatile service slices. Therefore, for 
scalability and sustainability, the IoT platform must be shifted 
from a centralized cloud-based framework to an autonomous-
decentralized-based one that provides access to various end-
users and applications ranging from individuals to enterprises 
or governments [1]. 
In light of this background, we focus on two key 
techniques: 
zero-touch 
and 
data-centric. 
Zero-touch 
technology aims at completely automating the network-
management process to minimize operating costs and set up 
individual execution environments. A zero-touch-design 
system was utilized in the first Linux operating system and has 
since led to the demand for service deployments that are 
versatile and flexible in cloud-native micro-services. As for 
the data-centric techniques, an Information-Centric Network 
(ICN) (e.g., a content-centric network or named-data network) 
can renovate current network protocols, such as the Internet. 
ICN natively supports functionalities, such as abstraction, 
naming, and in-network caching, which enables the data to be 
decoupled from its original location and the security of every 
data to be adopted in the network layer. Combining ICN with 
WSNs 
is 
suitable 
for 
an 
autonomous-decentralized 
environment, which yields Information-Centric Wireless 
Sensor Networks (ICWSNs). 
In our previous study [2], an ICWSN-based ecosystem 
with a blockchain for smart-city applications was investigated 
on the basis of a scheme that achieves efficient and reliable 
caching. In our ongoing research project, which we call the 
Decentralized Digital twins’ Ecosystem (D2EcoSys), we have 
developed a portable testbed device, and evaluated its 
applicability to mmWave-band Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), e.g., 
IEEE 8012.11 ad/ay, towards deployment for on-site testing. 
The current paper provides a blueprint of zero-touch-design 
ICWSNs to promote self-growing and ensure a reliable 
sensing-data distribution in which multiple players actively 
participate and exchange data. The computer simulation was 
conducted to investigate energy consumption, as the potential 
waste involved in the use of ICN and blockchain is significant. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes the proposed scheme and Section III 
presents the numerical results. In Section IV, we provide 
related works and. We conclude in Section V with a brief 
summary and findings. 
II. 
PROPOSED SCHEME 
In zero-touch-design ICWSNs, the first step is to enable 
automatic participation in the network, i.e., the network trusts 
an individual SN through the device owner when the SN joins 
 
Figure 1. Overview of proposed scheme 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

a 
member 
of 
ICWSNs. 
This 
procedure 
requires 
comprehensive involvement from device owners, micro-
(network) operators, and micro-service (roaming) providers, 
as shown in Figure 1. For the management of terminal 
information, the proposed scheme utilizes blockchain-based 
ledgers. Specifically, it obtains the SN identification 
information from the blockchain network, which plays an 
instrumental role in the execution of smart contracts. The 
scheme guarantees the trustworthiness of the SN during an 
initial process, i.e., it considers that the data generated by a 
reliable SN can be trusted without receiving any verification 
from the blockchain network [2]. For this reason, the 
blockchain-based storage for the data no longer requires 
traditional computation-intensive mining, and the blockchain 
can simply select alternative consensus schemes, such as 
proof-of-authority or proof-of-elapsed-time algorithms. 
When an SN device is turned on, it sends a registration 
request to the uOperator and establishes a secure Virtual 
Private Network (VPN) link if approved. An ICWSN with a 
VPN implements the orchestration of distant ICWSNs, 
terminal fixation at the datalink (L2) layer, and secure data 
exchanges. After joining the network, the SN downloads and 
installs a configuration setting and application software from 
the uService provider.  
III. 
NUMERICAL RESULTS 
The difficulty in deploying the proposed scheme is how to 
ensure any benefit in terms of energy consumption among the 
SN devices. This is because ICN has a pull-type network 
design and must always be on standby, and the blockchain 
also causes energy wastage. Figure 2 shows the computer 
simulation we ran to compare the cumulative energy 
consumption with the conventional scheme (current 
application-programming-interface-based IoT platform). The 
computer simulator was implemented using the C++ language. 
The simulation condition is that the generation and 
transmission of sensing data respectively correspond to the 
status of calculation and wireless communication. In addition, 
when the SN does not execute any process, we assume the 
conventional scheme supports a sleep state with deep sleep 
and wake-up functionalities, whereas the proposed scheme 
waits in the idle state to be ready for data retrieval from any 
other node (because of the pull-type data acquisition). The 
energy consumption for each status is based on the actual 
measured values from our previous study [3].  
As shown in Figure 2(a), the proposed scheme can reduce 
energy consumption by 1.91% if there are no additional 
requests for data retrieval in most cases of periodic data 
collection in ordinary situations. Moreover, even if 66 
additional data retrievals per day are requested, the proposed 
scheme can outperform. Next, Figure 2(b) shows the total 
energy consumption in the ICWSN for 1,000 SNs, with the 
results converted into the power consumption per node. For 
these results, the number of data retrieval attempts for each 
node was determined by a Poisson distribution, which is a 
more realistic calculation than the one in Figure 2(a). As we 
can see from the figures, the proposed scheme can reduce 
energy consumption by 3.85% and be advantageous until 138 
retrieval attempts. 
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
Togou et al. [4] developed a distributed blockchain-
enabled network slicing framework. Nour et al. [5] introduced 
a network slice and resource provider utilizing a blockchain in 
which the scheme could shift from a network-operator-
oriented architecture to a more open system with multiple 
actors. Rathi et al. [6] provided a blockchain-based 
management and orchestration technique for multi-domain 
networks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper described a zero-touch-design ICWSN for a 
smart-city-as-a-service platform along with a scheme that 
promotes self-growing in autonomous-distributed conditions. 
The results of a preliminary numerical investigation indicated 
that the proposed scheme could effectively reduce energy 
consumption. Testbed development, deployment, and on-site 
demonstration of the scheme in realistic smart cities are 
currently working in progress. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by NICT Japan, Grant 
Number 05601 and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP19K 
20261. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Chergui, A. Ksentini, L. Blanco, and C. Verikoukis, 
“Toward zero-touch management and orchestration of massive 
deployment of network slices in 6G,” IEEE Wireless Commun., 
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 86–93, Feb. 2022. 
[2] S. Mori, “Information-centric wireless sensor networks for 
smart-city-as-a 
service: 
Concept 
proposal, 
testbed 
development, and fundamental evaluation,” Proc. IEEE CCNC, 
Jan. 2023, pp. 945–946. 
[3] S. Mori, “A preliminary analysis of data collection and 
retrieval scheme for green information-centric wireless sensor 
networks,” Proc. ACM SigComm WS Net4us, Aug. 2022, 
pp. 1–6, doi: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3538393.3544932. 
 
Figure 2. Simulation results: (a) additional data retrieval requests per day 
vs. cumulative energy consumption, and (b) mean number of additional 
requests according to a Poisson distribution vs. cumulative energy 
consumption per unit for 1,000 SNs. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

[4] M. A. Togou et al., “DBNS: A distributed blockchain-enabled 
network slicing framework for 5G networks,” IEEE Commun. 
Mag., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 90–96, Nov. 2020. 
[5] B. Nour, A. Ksentini, N. Herbaut, P. A. Frangoudis, and H. 
Moungla, “A blockchain-based network slice broker for 5G 
services,” IEEE Networking Lett., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 99–102, 
Sept. 2019. 
[6] V. K. Rathi et al., “A blockchain-enabled multi domain edge 
computing orchestrator,” IEEE Internet of Things Mag., 
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 30–36, June 2020. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-036-0
ICN 2023 : The Twenty-Second International Conference on Networks

