Customer Security Concerns in Cloud Computing  
Shirlei A. de Chaves, Carlos B. Westphall, Carla M. Westphall, and Guilherme A. Gerônimo 
Network and Management Laboratory 
Federal University of Santa Catarina 
Florianópolis – SC - Brazil 
Emails: {shirlei, westphal, carla, arthur}@lrg.ufsc.br 
 
 
Abstract—There is no consensus about what exactly cloud 
computing is, but some characteristics are clearly repeated. 
It is a new distributed computing and business paradigm. It 
provides computing power, software and storage and even a 
distributed data center infrastructure on demand. In this 
paper, we investigated what are the main security concerns 
faced by the customers that are trying to better understand 
or profit from this new paradigm, especially considering a 
public cloud and we conclude that data confidentiality, 
integrity and availability are the biggest ones. 
Keywords - Cloud computing; security; distributed 
computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Despite of the fact that industry big players like 
Google, Amazon, SalesForce, Microsoft and others have 
products and services under the umbrella of ‘cloud 
computing’, ‘cloud ready’ or other similar denomination, 
there is no consensus about what exactly cloud computing 
is. Below we list some definitions made by researchers: 
“Cloud computing is the next natural step in the 
evolution of on-demand information technology services 
and products. To a large extent cloud computing will be 
based on virtualized resources.(…) Cloud computing 
embraces cyber infrastructure and builds upon decades of 
research in virtualization, distributed computing, grid 
computing, 
utility 
computing, 
and 
more 
recently 
networking, web and software services [1].”  
 “A large-scale distributed computing paradigm that is 
driven by economies of scale, in which a pool of 
abstracted virtualized, dynamically-scalable, managed 
computing power, storage, platforms, and services are 
delivered on demand to external customers over the 
Internet [2].” 
 “(…) cloud computing is a nascent business and 
technology concept with different meanings for different 
people.  For application and IT users, it’s IT as a service 
(ITaaS) - that is, delivery of computing, storage, and 
applications over the Internet from centralized data 
centers. For Internet application developers, it’s an 
Internet-scale software development platform and runtime 
environment. For infrastructure  providers  and 
administrators,  it’s  the massive, distributed  data  center  
infrastructure  connected  by  IP networks [3].” 
“"A Cloud  is a  type of parallel and distributed system  
consisting  of  a  collection  of  inter-connected  and  
virtualized  computers  that  are dynamically provisioned 
and presented as one or more unified computing 
resources based on service-level  agreements  established  
through negotiation  between  the  service  provider  and 
consumers [4].” 
“a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, 
and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released with minimal management effort or service 
provider interaction [5].” 
From these definitions, it is possible to notice that some 
characteristics are clearly repeated. It is a new paradigm, 
not just a distributed computing paradigm, but also a new 
business paradigm. It is intended to provide computing 
power, software and storage and even a distributed data 
center infrastructure on demand.  In order to make these 
characteristics viable, cloud computing makes use of 
existing technologies, such as virtualization, distributed 
computing, grid computing, utility computing and 
Internet.  However, even those industry big players have 
products and services available as also a definition of 
what are the basic cloud computing underlying 
technologies, a customer intending to better understand 
and profit from this new paradigm faces several concerns, 
especially the ones related to security.  
Considering the customer point of view, we have made 
an extensive research to obtain what are the main security 
problems pointed in the available literature for cloud 
computing security, aiming to list and discuss the more 
recurrent ones. The results and the discussion are 
presented in Section 3. It is also worth to mention that 
being the cloud computing security subject under active 
research, many changes, new events or studies relating to 
it are coming out in a rapid pace, so this paper does not 
aim to exhaust it, but to contribute to the discussion. 
. 
II. 
CLOUD COMPUTING CATEGORIES 
Attempts to cloud computing standardization are being 
done by some groups, including governments and 
industry. 
One 
effort 
that 
can 
help 
to 
avoid 
7
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

misunderstandings, by putting everyone to talk the same 
language, is the definition of cloud computing and its 
categories.  As of this writing, the US National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) is one of them, having 
defined the cloud as composed of four deployment 
models, three service models and five essential 
characteristics. The Cloud Security Alliance [6], which 
formal debut was made at RSA Conference 2009 
releasing a white paper entitled “Security Guidance for 
Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing”, has taken 
these definitions to work through its guidance, explaining 
that the motivation is “to bring coherence and consensus 
around a common language so we can focus on use cases 
rather than semantic nuance [6]”. 
A. 
Deployment models 
The definitions of the deployment models listed next 
are taken as it is from the NIST definition, although other 
researches mention this deployment models with similar 
definitions. 
 
1) 
Public Cloud 
The cloud infrastructure is made available to the 
general public or a large industry group and is owned by 
an organization selling cloud services. 
 
2) 
Private Cloud 
The cloud infrastructure is operated solely for an 
organization. It may be managed by the organization or a 
third party. 
 
3) 
Hybrid Cloud 
The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or 
more clouds (private, community, or public) that remain 
unique entities but are bound together by standardized or 
proprietary technology that enables data and application 
portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load-balancing 
between clouds).  
 
4) 
Community Cloud 
The cloud infrastructure is shared by several 
organizations and supports a specific community that has 
shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, 
policy, and compliance considerations). It may be 
managed by the organizations or a third party. 
 
B. 
Service Models 
The three service models listed below are not 
exclusively from NIST, being mentioned in several 
papers, including [2][5]. 
 
1) 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 
“The capability provided to the consumer is to 
provision processing, storage, networks, and other 
fundamental computing resources where the consumer is 
able to deploy and run arbitrary software, which can 
include operating systems and applications [5].” 
 
2) 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
“The capability provided to the consumer is to deploy 
onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or 
acquired 
applications 
created 
using 
programming 
languages and tools supported by the provider [5].” 
 
3) 
Software as a Service (SaaS) 
In this case, is provided “a complete, turnkey 
application—including complex programs such as those 
for CRM or enterprise-resource management via the 
Internet [5].”  Or, in the words of NIST, “the capability 
provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s 
applications running on a cloud infrastructure [5].” 
In each of these service models, what can be controlled 
by the customer varies, but in general, he does not have 
control over the underlying cloud infrastructure. This is 
especially true when is the case of a public cloud, the 
focus of the present paper. In a private cloud, for 
example, security responsibilities can be taken on by the 
customer, if he is managing the cloud, but in the case of a 
public cloud, such responsibilities are more on the cloud 
provider and the customer can just try to assess if the 
cloud provider is able to provide security. 
The five essential characteristics are related to 
characteristics already mentioned in the introduction of 
this paper: on-demand self-service, broad network access, 
resource pooling, rapid elasticity and measured services. 
 
III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING SECURITY OVERVIEW 
Many cloud computing security problems are still 
unclear. Being cloud computing such a recent computing 
paradigm, it is natural that many aspects remain 
uncovered whereas the paradigm itself is being more 
developed and understood.  
According to [5], there are three main customers’ 
concerns: 
Vulnerability to attack:  critical business information 
and IT resources are outside the customers firewall. 
Standard security practices: customers want to be 
confident that such practices are being followed. Most of 
those practices require disclosure and inspection, which 
leads to another concern as a customer: will my data be in 
the same virtual hardware and network resources with 
other customers, being susceptible to disclosure in 
someone else’s inspection? 
Being subject to state or national data-storage laws 
related to privacy or record keeping: European Union 
(EU), for example, has privacy regulations that do not 
8
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

permit some personal data to be transmitted outside the 
EU. In the cloud, data can be stored anywhere in the 
world; it is important to attend such regulations. 
In June 2008, the Gartner Group released a report 
entitled “Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud 
Computing” [7]. According to this report, widely 
commented and cited on the Internet, before jumping into 
the cloud, the customer should know its unique security 
risks, considering specially seven security conditions 
during the process of choosing a cloud provider. These 
unique security risks are: 
Privileged user access: outsourcing means allowing 
outsourced services to bypass internal controls, including 
personnel controls. With this in mind, the customer has to 
obtain as more information as possible about how the 
possible future provider hires people and what kind of 
controls their accesses have.  
Regulatory Compliance: if the cloud computing 
provider is not subject of external audits and security 
certifications, the customer probably should not use its 
services for non trivial tasks. Customers have to always 
remember that, unless stated or agreed otherwise, they are 
responsible for their own data. 
Data location: when using the cloud, the customer 
probably will not know where their data will be stored. 
Thus, it is recommended checking if the provider will 
commit to store and process data in specific jurisdictions 
and if a contractual commitment on behalf of the 
customer will be made by the provider. 
Data segregation: customers should check what is 
done to separate different customers’ provider data, due to 
the fact that, in a cloud, the environment is shared. Using 
cryptography, for example, is effective, but do not solve 
all the problems. It must be checked also if the 
cryptographic schemes are designed and tested by 
specialists, because cryptographic accidents are able to 
make data unusable.  
Recovery: the provider capacity of restoring the entire 
system and how long it would take should be checked by 
the customer.  Any provider that does not replicate its 
data or infrastructure is prone to total failures. 
Investigative support: In order to have confidence that 
inappropriate or illegal activities will be possible to be 
investigated, the customer needs a formal commitment 
from the provider. This commitment should state which 
kind of investigation will be possible and also gives 
evidence that similar support was already done by the 
provider. Otherwise, the customer almost can be sure that 
such investigations will be impossible. 
Long-term viability: if happens that the cloud 
computing provider be acquired or goes broke, the 
customer needs to know if the data will still be available 
and in a format that will allow being imported to a 
substitute application. 
Summarizing the Gartner’s report, customers should 
demand transparency and avoid providers that do not 
offer clear information about security programs. 
In a Tech News from forbes.com, published online in 
February 02, 2008 [8], by Andy Greenberg is cited that 
when customers store their data in someone else’s 
software and hardware, “they lose a degree of control 
over their often-sensitive information”. In that article, 
Greenberg gives the example of an employee of an 
investment bank that uses Google Spreadsheets to 
organize a list of bank employees and their social security 
number. In this example, the responsibility of protecting 
such information from hackers and internal data 
breaching is not from the bank, but Google’s.  Another 
situation in this same case is that, if government 
investigators subpoena Google to supply that list, 
sometimes even with no customer knowledge, Google 
may attend. Google’s privacy politics says that it will 
share data with the government if it has a “good faith 
belief” that this is necessary [9]. Greenberg also points 
that other problems to cloud computing is the cyber 
crimes.  He gives some examples occurred in 2007, like: 
- “retailer TJX lost 45 million credit card numbers to 
hackers”; 
- “the British government misplaced 25 million 
taxpayer records”; 
- “software company Salesforce.com sent a letter to a 
million subscribers describing how some customers’ e-
mail addresses and phone numbers had been snagged by 
cybercriminals - and warning how another wave of 
phishers were attempting to send malware more broadly 
to Salesforce.com customers”. 
Analyzing the articles cited before, it is possible to 
visualize that the main concerns, if not all, are related to 
the business level, i.e., customers are worried about how 
their business process will be affected.  This situation is 
expected because cloud computing can also be seen as a 
new business model, with many aspects to be fully 
understood before being adopted with no restrictions or, 
better, with fewer restrictions. As happen in any new 
business 
or 
technological 
area, 
customers 
and 
professionals need to be confident on what are they 
getting into. Foster [2] also considers this business model 
characteristic in cloud computing, saying that  “as for 
Utility Computing, it is not a new paradigm of computing 
infrastructure; rather, it is a business model in which 
computing resources, such as computation and storage, 
are packaged as metered services similar to a physical 
public utility, such as electricity and public switched 
telephone network.” Also, it is possible to visualize that 
major concerns are about data: how and where it will be 
kept, who will be able to access it and which regulations 
9
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

will have it as subject. Considering that, data 
confidentiality, integrity and availability will be discussed 
in more details in the next section. 
 
A. 
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability (CIA): 
the big concern 
According to [11],"storing data remotely into the cloud 
in a flexible on-demand manner brings appealing benefits: 
relief of the burden for storage management, universal 
data access with independent geographical locations, and 
avoidance of capital expenditure on hardware, software, 
and personnel  maintenances, etc." However, users face 
the situation of losing control of their data. For example, 
he no longer has physical possession of the outsourced 
data and may not get to know about data loss and leakage 
incidents, if the cloud provider for some reason acts 
unfaithfully and decide not to report the incident [11], just 
to cite a few.  Having that in mind, in the remainder of 
this section we discuss some of the traditional ways of 
delivering data confidentiality, integrity and availability. 
 
Cryptography 
One could ask if applying some cryptographic and 
backup schema would not solve at least part of the 
problem. This is a question certainly being target of 
studies, 
especially 
because 
as 
we 
cited 
before, 
cryptographic accidents are able to make data unusable. 
Trying to contribute to the subject, we bring some 
questions to this discussion.  
- 
If using cryptography, how the key management 
is done? 
o 
One key for each customer? 
o 
One key to all customers?  
o 
Multiple keys for the same customer? 
- 
What are the current cryptographic systems more 
applicable to the cloud computing characteristics, 
especially data storage? 
- 
Last 
but 
not 
least, 
in 
which 
situations 
cryptography should be used? 
We think that the cloud provider should have a detailed 
cryptographic plan, explaining what algorithms will be 
used, how the key management will be done, when 
encryption will be used and so on. The Cloud Security 
Alliance Guide [6] provides some guidance in these 
questions. As stated by them, cloud computing divorces 
components from location and this creates security issues 
that result from this lack of any perimeter. Hence there is 
only one way to secure the computing resources: strong 
encryption and scalable key management. Also according 
to [6], cloud customers and providers must encrypt all 
data in transit, at rest or on backup media, since all 
communications and all storage may be visible to 
arbitrary outsiders. Customers and providers want to 
encrypt their data to ensure integrity and confidentiality as 
also to avoid having to report incidents to their users 
(remembering that a provider’s customer may have their 
own customer to report and successively).  
According to [10], users are "universally required to 
accept the underlying premise of trust.", highlighting that 
although some take trust as synonymous  of security, it is 
not and in security the element of trust is more apparent. 
Relating to the classic key concepts of information 
security, the CIA, [10] lists the minimum capabilities that 
should be offered by the cloud storage provider: 
• “a tested encryption schema to ensure that the shared 
storage environment safeguards all data; 
• stringent access controls to prevent unauthorized 
access to the data; and 
• scheduled data backup and safe storage of the backup 
media [10].” 
Wang [11] proposes public auditability for cloud data 
storage security. Such audit would be done by a third 
party auditor, called TPA. Knowing that such data in 
general, due to privacy issues, cannot be subject of 
disclosure, [11] lists two fundamental requirements for 
the TPA: 1) efficient cloud data storage auditing without 
demanding the local copy of data and without additional 
on-line burden to the cloud user; 2) no new vulnerabilities 
should be brought to user data privacy by the auditing 
process. Such requirements are best practices as also are 
the reasons [11] mention for the TPA being a good choice 
instead of the own user auditing the correctness of their 
data: 1) possible large size of stored data; 2) possible 
user’ 
computer 
resource 
constraints; 
3) 
"simply 
downloading the data for its integrity verification is not a 
practical solution due to the expensiveness in I/O cost and 
transmitting the file across the network." 
 
Backup and recovery 
Backup is probably the more traditional way of keeping 
data for recovery purposes. However, being crucial to 
ensure that a point-in-time data is available to restore 
business operations and given the special nature of a 
cloud environment, some questions need to be clearly 
answered by the provider and understood by the 
customer: 
- 
Who performs the backup? 
- 
How frequent the backup is performed? 
- 
Who is responsible for storing the backup? 
- 
Which backup format is used? Is it dependent of 
a specific technology? 
- 
Logical segregation of data is maintained 
through the backup execution? 
Having these questions being done, another important 
issue is if the provider will be able to meet any specific 
customer backup requirement. Normally, to have an 
10
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

effective backup and recovery strategy, a careful study of 
organization’s need have to be done. Being the cloud a 
multi-tenant environment, it is possible that the cloud 
provider specific backup and recovery plan will not fit 
completely to the customer’s need. Also, as mentioned 
before, the data should be encrypted on the backup media. 
According to [6], as a customer and provider of data, it is 
customer’s responsibility to verify that such encryption 
takes place. 
 
B. 
Data format standards 
It seems vital to data availability to have a data 
format that allows customers to take their data from one 
provider and leverage it inside another provider’s 
application. This kind of concern, however, is neither new 
or exclusively of cloud computing, so what was already 
learnt or developed since the beginning of the Internet and 
the need of data exchange should be taken into account 
when addressing this situation. Some standardizations 
initiatives are in progress, like the Cloud Computing 
Effort announced on April 27, 2009 by DMTF 
(Distributed Management Task Force) [12].  
We do not know what would be the better in terms of 
data storage specifically and this is not the focus of this 
discussion. Maybe dictating a specific format is not a 
viable idea, at least not in a short time. But, the data 
interchange should be specified in some standard or well 
accepted 
format. 
The 
XML 
(Extensible 
Markup 
Language) format was designed to store and transport 
data. As cited in [13], XML is a technology that started a 
decade ago and since then great effort has been done by 
the research and industrial community to support XML 
and related technologies in RDBMS (Relational Database 
Management System). Also, being the format subject of 
standardization and widely adoption, lots of research 
aiming to secure the format has already been developed 
and it still is subject of ongoing improvements.  
Adopting XML or not, the groups cited here and 
many 
others 
working 
on 
cloud 
computing 
standardizations should have this in mind: data must be 
interchangeable.  
 
IV. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Maybe the cloud will evolve and become the largest 
information system we ever saw, having all sort of data 
and dealing with all kind of information, all kind of 
sensitive information. So, much research work is in 
progress to provide security for cloud computing, 
especially regarding do data confidentiality, integrity and 
availability.  The general believe, including ours, is that 
the larger adoption of cloud computing relies on how 
secure it is and that security should be addressed since the 
very beginning. Being cloud computing a still evolving 
paradigm, some new security concerns may appear during 
the definition process, but the concerns highlighted in the 
present survey probably will not change. There are, 
however, a lot of good research and work in progress 
aiming to mitigate or to solve the security issues and to 
turn the cloud computing horizon less cloudy. Among 
these researches are government initiatives, like the cloud 
security group from US National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) and industry initiatives, like the 
Cloud Computing Security Alliance. Having data 
confidentiality, integrity and availability a strong legal 
side, some legal organizations like Strafford Publications 
are organizing events to discuss the subject, like a 
Teleconference entitled “Cloud Computing: Managing the 
Legal Risks” [14], showing that other areas beyond 
information technology are watching cloud computing 
growing adoption more closely. Such initiatives bring 
advantages for the customer that can have more qualified 
background 
when 
analyzing 
the 
available 
cloud 
computing solutions to migrate his services to a cloud. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. Vouk, “Cloud Computing – Issues, research and 
implementations”, 
In: 
30th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information Technology Interfaces, pp. 31-40, 2008. 
[2] I. Foster, I. Yong Zhao Raicu, and S. Lu, “Cloud Computing and 
Grid Computing 360-Degree Compared”, In: 2008 Grid 
Computing Environments Workshop, pp. 1-10, 2008. 
[3] G. Lin, D. Fu, J. Zhu, and G. Dasmalchi, "Cloud Computing: IT as 
a Service," IT Professional, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 10-13, Mar./Apr. 
2009. 
[4] R. Buyya, Y. Chee Shin, S. Venugopal, “Market-Oriented Cloud 
Computing: Vision, Hype, and Reality for Delivering IT Services 
as Computing Utilities”, In: 10th IEEE Conference on High 
Performance Computing and Communications. IEEE Computer 
Society, 2008, pp. 5-13. 
[5] P. Mell, and T. Grance, “Cloud computing definition”. NIST, June 
2009, http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloud-computing/index.html 
[6] Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud 
Computing, www.cloudsecurityalliance.org (last access on Dec. 
2010). 
[7] J. Heiser, and M. Nicolett, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud 
Computing. http://www.gartner.com/DisplayDocument?id=685308 
[8] http://www.forbes.com/technology/ (last access on Dec. 2010). 
[9] http://www.google.com/privacy/privacy-policy.html (last access on 
Dec. 2010). 
[10] L. M. Kaufman, "Data security in the world of cloud computing," 
IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 61-64, July 
2009. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2009.87 
[11] C. Wang, Q. Wang, K.  Ren, and W. Lou, "Privacy-preserving 
public auditing for data storage security in cloud computing," in 
2010 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM. IEEE, March 2010, pp. 1-9.  
[12] http://www.dmtf.org/ (last access on Dec. 2010). 
[13] R. Zhen Hua Liu Murthy, “A Decade of XML Data Management: 
An Industrial Experience Report from Oracle”, In: IEEE 25th 
International Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 1351-1362. 
IEEE Computer Society, 2009. 
[14] http://www.straffordpub.com/products/cloud-computing-
managing-the-legal-risks-2009-12-09 (last access on Dec. 2010). 
11
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

