Adaptive Techniques for Elimination of Redundant 
Handovers in Femtocells 
 
Zdenek Becvar, Pavel Mach 
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Department of Telecommunications Engineering 
Prague 16627, Czech Republic 
zdenek.becvar@fel.cvut.cz, machp2@fel.cvut.cz 
 
 
Abstract—Dense deployment of femtocells in mobile wireless 
networks can significantly increase the amount of handover 
initiations. This paper analyzes new approach to elimination of 
redundant handovers. The innovative way dynamically 
updates current value of techniques commonly used for 
elimination of redundant handovers. The goal is to investigate 
the efficiency of two handover elimination techniques, i.e., 
windowing and handover delay timer. Both techniques are 
modified to enable adaptation of their parameter according to 
the channel quality related to the users' position in the cell. 
Furthermore, the impact of proposed modifications on the 
user’s throughput is examined. All simulations are performed 
in scenario of 4G networks with femtocells. The results show 
no benefit of adaptive windowing comparing to conventional 
one. However, the performance improvement is achieved by 
adaptation of the handover delay timer. 
Keywords-femtocell; handover; Handover Delay Timer, 
windowing; LTE-A 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The studies performed in recent year's show that more 
than 70% of users' traffic is generated from indoors and this 
ratio is still rising [1]. Deployment of so called femtocells 
can cope with limited indoor coverage and the cost of the 
connection in emerging 4G networks. The femtocell is 
represented by Femto Access Point (FAP) that provides 
connection of mobile wireless users to a network. The FAP 
is generally connected to the backbone through a cable 
connection, xDSL (Digital Subscriber Line) or optical fiber.  
The FAP can offer three types of access: close, open, and 
hybrid. In case of the close access, only a User Equipment 
(UE) of the FAP’s owner (or subscriber) or very small group 
of users is allowed to enter the FAP. The group of users with 
access to the FAP is defined by FAP’s owner and it is 
denoted as Close Subscriber Group (CSG). Other users can 
not access the network via the FAP. Contrariwise, the open 
access is designed to share full capacity of the FAP by all 
UEs in its area. The hybrid access combines both open and 
close accesses. In hybrid access mode, a part of capacity is 
permanently dedicated to the FAP's owner or to the CSG. 
The rest of transmission resources can be consumed by other 
UEs. The open access enables to increase the throughput in 
specific area by offloading the macro cell [2]. On the other 
hand, it increases interference in the close area of the FAP. 
The deployment of plenty of FAPs can significantly 
influence the handover decision procedure. The handover is 
initiated more often since UEs can receive the signal not only 
from Base Stations (BSs), but also from all FAPs in its 
neighborhood. In conventional networks without femtocells, 
the several techniques are defined to eliminate redundant 
handovers. The most widely used are: Hysteresis Margin 
(HM), windowing (also known as signal averaging) [3], and 
Handover Delay Timer (HDT) [4][5], which extends 
conventional Time-To-Trigger. These techniques can be 
implemented also in femtocell networks as presented, e.g., in 
[6][7]. Both papers demonstrate reduction of an amount of 
the redundant handovers by investigated techniques. 
However the authors do not investigate a negative impact of 
techniques on the throughput. In [8], the authors compare the 
probability of UE’s assignment to the FAP that do not 
provide the best signal quality. The paper shows some 
tradeoff between a minimum duration of signal averaging 
and probability of error assignment.  
Another approach of elimination of redundant handovers 
is to adapt the transmission power of FAPs. The proposals of 
a power control improvement to reduce the number of 
redundant handovers in femtocells is presented, e.g., in 
[9][10][11]. All proposals are able to eliminate the redundant 
handovers. Nevertheless, the advantage of throughput gain 
due to the open/hybrid access, as illustrated in [2], is also 
distinctively suppressed. 
A modification of HM, which purpose is to eliminate 
higher ratio of redundant handovers, is defined in [12]. The 
authors evaluate so called adaptive HM in scenario with 
macro BSs. The paper assumes precise knowledge of 
distance between a UE and its serving BS as well as 
invariant and accurately known radius of macrocells. The 
radius of all cells is assumed to be the same.  Nevertheless, 
the radius is varying in time and it is neither regular nor 
symmetric in practice. Moreover, the radius of individual 
cells is largely different if FAPs are deployed and the exact 
position of FAPs is not defined by operator as it is in charge 
of the user. Thus, the cell radius of FAPs cannot be precisely 
estimated. Therefore technique proposed in [12] cannot be 
applied into the networks with femtocells. The above 
mentioned weaknesses are eliminated by considering RSSI 
230
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

(Received Signal Strength Indicator) or CINR (Carrier to 
Interference plus Noise Ratio) for adaptation of HM value as 
presented in [13]. 
The goal of this paper is to investigate the possibility of 
application of the adaptation into other techniques for 
handover elimination. The paper investigates impact of the 
dynamic adaptation of an actual value for windowing and 
HDT. The simulations performed in this paper are in line 
with networks according to LTE-A (Long Term Evolution − 
Advanced) release 10. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows. The next 
section describes the principle of elimination of redundant 
handovers and its modifications to enable dynamic 
adaptation. The third section defines simulation scenario and 
parameters used for evaluation of throughput. The section 
four contains the results of simulations and their discussion. 
Last section presents our conclusions and future work plans. 
II. 
ELIMINATION OF REDUNDANT HANDOVERS 
A redundant handover (or unnecessary handover) 
represents a case when the handover is initiated; however it 
is not completed before a next handover decision is 
performed. Also the handover frequently repeated between 
two adjacent cells in short time intervals can be considered 
as the redundant handover. The redundant handovers are 
caused by short time channel variation (e.g., fast fading) or 
by movement of MSs along the edge of the two neighboring 
cells. As mentioned in previous section, several techniques 
can be utilized for minimization of the number of redundant 
handovers. All common methods are based on delaying of 
the handover execution for some time interval. During this 
interval, the MS is not connected to the station providing the 
best quality of communication channel. Therefore, it has 
negative impact on quality of service offered to the MS due 
to the utilization of channel with worse quality than a quality 
of channel available from other BS.  
In this paper, two techniques are considered, i.e., 
windowing and HDT. The third one, HM, was already 
investigated in [13]. 
A. Principle of common windowing and HDT 
In case of windowing, the handover decision is done if 
the average value of observed signal parameter (e.g., RSSI, 
CINR, etc.) from the target BS drops under the average level 
of the same parameter at the serving BS (see formula (1)). 
The average value is calculated over a number of samples 
denoted as Window Size (WS). 
 
WS
S
WS
S
WS
i
Ser
i
WS
i
iTar
∑
∑
=
=
>
1
1
 
(1) 
 
where 
iSTar
 and 
iS Ser
 represent the level of observed 
signal parameter at the target and serving BS respectively. 
The purpose of HDT is to cope especially with temporary 
drops of a signal level due to fast fading or when a user is 
located in shadowed places for a short time interval. 
Implementation of the HDT is based on the insertion of a 
short delay between the time when the handover conditions 
are met and the time when handover initiation is executed. 
This delay is labeled HDT. The handover conditions have to 
be fulfilled over the whole duration of HDT to initiate the 
handover. Generally, the handover is performed if: 
 
HDT )
t,
t(
t
S
S
HO
HO
Tar
t
tSer
+
∈
<
 
(2) 
 
where HDT represents the duration of the handover delay 
timer; and tHO is the time instant when the handover 
conditions are fulfilled.  
B. Adaptive techniques 
In the conventional techniques for elimination of 
redundant handovers, the threshold value (HM, WS, or 
HDT) is not related to the users’ position. Hence, it can be 
considered as invariant since it is modified by a network only 
rarely. The adaptive techniques are based on the 
modification of actual HM value according to the position of 
the user in the cell. The proposal on adaptive HM is defined 
in [12]. According to [12], the current HM value is 
decreasing with the UE’s moving closer to the cell boarder as 
presents the next formula: 
 











× −
=
0;
1
max
4
max
R
d
HM
HM
 
(3) 
 
where HMmax is the maximum value of HM that can be 
reached (this value can be set up only in the middle of the 
cell); d is the distance between the serving BS and the UE; 
and R is the radius of the serving BS. A modification of 
adaptive HM is proposed in [13] as the parameters d and R 
cannot be easily determined neither by the network nor by 
the UE. This modification considers the signal characteristics 
(RSSI or CINR) to derivation of current value of HM. The 
analogical modification should be done for adaptation of WS 
and HDT. The derivation of actual values for both adaptive 
techniques is defined by the following equations: 
 














−
×
=
−
−
0;
10
1
max WS
WS
4
CINR
CINR
CINR
CINR
max
max
min
min
act
 
(4) 














−
×
=
−
−
0;
10
1
max HDT
HDT
4
CINR
CINR
CINR
CINR
max
max
min
min
act
 
(5) 
 
where WSmax and HDTmax are maximum levels of WS and 
HDT respectively; CINRact is the actual CINR measured by a 
UE; CINRmin and CINRmax are minimum and maximum 
values in the investigated area respectively. 
The CINRact is measured periodically by UEs to monitor 
the channel state. It is usually performed with purpose of the 
handover decision. As well as in the case of adaptive HM, 
the minimum and maximum CINR values have to be 
determined for the utilization of the adaptive WS and HDT. 
231
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

The CINRmin is derived as lowest CINR level at which the 
UE is still able to receive data. Hence, it is set up to a fix 
value. Determination of the CINRmax is executed via 
monitoring and reporting of CINR by all UEs connected to 
the given FAP and than selecting the highest CINR from all 
known values as the CINRmax. The exact value of CINRmax is 
permanently updated since the channel conditions are time 
variant. Therefore, the CINRmax is acquired over several 
samples of CINR measured by UEs. The number of the latest 
samples utilized for the CINRmax derivation is represented by 
parameter CINRwin. The optimum value of CINRwin is 
analyzed further in this paper. 
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF SIMULATION PRINCIPLE 
A. Scenario and deployment 
The same scenario and deployment of FAPs and macro 
BSs as in [13] are considered for the evaluation of both 
adaptive techniques (see Fig. 1). The scenario contains fifty 
houses regularly and symmetrically placed along the direct 
street with length of 500 m. Also all FAPs and BSs are 
placed symmetrically along the street in the scenario.  
 
.
.
.
.
*
#
MS
Macro BS
Macro BS
.
.
.
.
 8 m 
 23 m 
 20 m 
 500 m 
FAP
FAP
 500 m 
 500 m 
 
Figure 1.  Deployment of FAPs and BSs for simulations.  
The users are moving directly along the street with the 
speed of 1 ms-1 until they reach the end of the street. The 
users are equally distributed over the street width with 
spacing of 0.2 m. The reporting of measured CINR is 
executed in periodic intervals of 0.5 s. The signal level 
received by a UE from a FAP is calculated according to ITU-
R P.1238 path loss model for single-storied house. The path 
loss model includes wall losses and channel variation due to 
the fast fading and shadowing with standard deviation of 
4 dB as defined in [14]. The propagation of BS’s signal is in 
line with Okumura-Hata path loss model for outdoor to 
outdoor communication [15]. As well, all other simulation 
parameters, presented in Tab. 1, are set up to be in line with 
simulations performed by Femto Forum [15].  
The amount of handovers is obtained as a number of 
initiated handovers. It means, if all conditions for the 
handover initiation are fulfilled, the handover is taken into 
account no matter if it is finished or not. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION  SCENARIO AND PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Frequency 
2 GHz 
Channel bandwidth 
20 MHz 
Transmiting power of BS / FAP 
43 / 15 dBm 
Height of macro BS / FAP / MS 
30 / 1 / 1.5  m 
External / Internal Wall Loss 
10 / 5 dB 
FAP path loss model ITU-R P.1238 
20log(f)+28log(d)-24 
BS path loss model Okumura-Hata 
69.55+26.16log(f)-
13.82log(hB)+(44.9-
6.55log(hB))log(d)-(1.1log(f)-
0.7)hM+(1.56log(f)-0.8) 
Channel bandwidth 
20 MHz 
Noise  
-100.97 dBm  
Number of simulation drops 
25 
CINRmin 
-3 dB 
CINRwin 
10 ÷ 500 
 
B. Throughput calculation 
The evaluation of throughput is performed for TDD 
frame structure of LTE release 10 with uplink–downlink 
(UL–DL) configuration “1” and Special Subframe (SS) 
configuration “0” (see [16] for more details).  
In simulations, we assume normal cyclic prefix (seven 
symbols per subcarrier) and 12 subcarriers per a resource 
block since those are typical values defined in LTE release 
10. The spacing of subcarriers is ∆f = 15 kHz. The amount of 
transferred bits depends on Modulation and Coding Scheme 
(MCS) used for the transmission. The assignment of the 
MCS is based on signal quality according to Tab. 2 (the 
values are taken from [17]). 
TABLE II.  
SELECTION OF MCS ACCORDING TO CINR 
CINR [dB] 
MCS 
Transmission 
efficiency Γ  
[bits/symbol] 
CINRmin <CINR <= 1.5 
1/3 QPSK 
0.66 
1.5 < CINR <= 3.8 
1/2 QPSK 
1 
3.8 < CINR <= 5.2 
2/3 QPSK 
1.33 
5.2 < CINR <= 5.9 
3/4 QPSK 
1.5 
5.9 < CINR <= 7.0 
4/5 QPSK 
1.6 
7.0 < CINR <= 10.0 
1/2 16QAM 
2 
10.0 < CINR <= 11.4 
2/3 16QAM 
2.66 
11.4 < CINR <= 12.3 
3/4 16QAM 
3 
12.3 < CINR <= 15.6 
4/5 16QAM 
3.2 
15.6 < CINR <= 17.0 
2/3 64QAM 
4 
17.0 < CINR <= 18.0 
3/4 64QAM  
4.5 
18.0 < CINR 
4/5 64QAM 
4.8 
 
The throughput of UEs via wireless interface is assumed 
to be with no limitation caused by the FAP’s backbone 
connection since the FAPs are supposed to be connected to 
the backbone through a high speed optical fiber. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The results, obtained by own developed MATLAB 
simulator, are divided into two subsections according to 
investigated technique. 
A. Adaptive Window Size 
As it is depicted in Fig. 2, the adaptive WS leads to the 
significant reduction of performed handovers for low number 
232
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

of averaged samples (roughly up to 7 samples). Then the 
efficiency of the adaptive technique drops down and the 
handovers are performed more often. The decreasing 
efficiency for higher WS is due to the fact that the radius of 
FAP is very small. Thus, the signal received from the FAP 
rises and drops rapidly if the user is moving. Therefore, the 
high WS leads to consideration of samples obtained long 
time ago with respect to the small FAP radius and users' 
speed. These samples misrepresent the actual WS and thus 
the handover is initiated in improper place. Note that the x 
axis in all following figures represents the actual value of 
WS and HDT for conventional windowing and HDT. In case 
of WS and HDT with adaptation, the x axis expresses WSmax 
and HDTmax (see equations (4) and (5)).  
The impact of CINRwin is only minor for short length of 
window. The optimum WSmax for the adaptive WS is roughly 
7 samples since the ratio of performed handovers is the 
lowest. The efficiency of handover elimination is rising with 
CINRwin. However, the results for CINRwin equal to 50 and 
500 samples are almost the same at WS = 7 samples. 
The ratio of eliminated handovers behaves different for 
conventional windowing with fixed amount of averaged 
samples. In this case, the amount of initiated handovers is 
continuously decreasing with growing WS. Nevertheless, the 
efficiency improvement only by approximately 6% is 
achieved if WS is increased from 7 to 25 samples. 
Consequently, Fig. 2 does not proof any benefit in 
elimination of handovers by implementation of adaptive WS. 
 
Figure 2.  Impact of adaptive WS on the amount of initiated handovers. 
Fig. 3 presents the impact of WS on the downlink 
throughput. This figure shows no considerable difference 
between adaptive and fixed WS size if WS value is up to 5 
samples. Than, the proposed adaptive WS with shorter 
CINRwin is preferable since it leads to the throughput gain.  
By combining the results presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 
can be observed that the optimum length of CINRwin is 
roughly 50 samples. Both figures further show some 
throughput gain of adaptive WS. However this gain is at the 
cost of lower efficiency of handover elimination. Thus the 
adaptation of WS is not profitable. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Average DL throughput over WS (for conventional windowing) 
or WSmax (for adaptive WS). 
B. Adaptive Handover Delay Timer 
The impact of HDT adaptation on the amount of 
handovers and downlink throughput is depicted in Fig. 4 and 
Fig. 5 respectively. The range of HDT values up to 30 s (x 
axis in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5) can be considered since only slowly 
moving users (pedestrians) are assumed to perform handover 
to a FAP. The vehicular users do not spend enough time in 
the femtocell to complete the handover. 
The Fig. 4 shows that the most of handovers is eliminated 
by HDT of 2 s. Additional prolongation of HDT up to 6 s 
leads to moderate decrease of the handover amount. The 
HDT over 6 s does not eliminate any further noticeable 
portion of handovers. The CINRwin influences the results 
only insignificantly if more than 10 samples is considered. 
The conventional as well as adaptive HDT eliminate 
handovers with the similar efficiency except the HDT = 2 s. 
For this value, the common HDT outperforms the adaptive 
one roughly by 5 %. Nevertheless, the efficiency of handover 
elimination of both adaptive and fixed HDT can be 
considered as nearly the same for all other values of HDT.  
 
Figure 4.  Impact of adaptive HDT on the amount of initiated handovers. 
233
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

As can be observed from Fig. 5, increasing length of 
CINRwin decreases users' throughput. Hence the shorter 
length of CINRwin is suggested to eliminate throughput drop.  
Comparing the fixed and adaptive HDT, significantly 
more negative impact on the throughput is caused by the 
technique with no adaptation of current HDT value. The 
adaptive HDT enables to reach significant gain in the 
throughput comparing to the conventional one. The gain 
noticeably rises with HDT duration. 
 
Figure 5.  Average DL throughput over HDT (for conventional 
windowing) or HDTmax (for adaptive HDT). 
Considering the results presented in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, the 
optimum CINRwin is roughly 25 samples. This value is same 
like optimal one for adaptive HM presented in [13]. The 
most efficient length of HDT is between 4 and 6 s. The 
adaptive as well as fixed HDT achieves the similar level of 
handover elimination. Nevertheless, the proposed adaptation 
of HDT enables throughput gain between 8 % and 13% for 
the optimal HDT and CINRwin.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The paper evaluates the efficiency of adaptive WS and 
HDT for elimination of redundant handovers in the networks 
with femtocells. 
The simulation results show that the adaptation of WS 
provides the similar results as the windowing technique with 
the fixed value of WS. On one hand, the adaptive WS leads 
to some throughput gain, but on the other hand, it also 
eliminates less handovers.  The adaptive duration of HDT 
can leads to the significant throughput gain while the same 
elimination of handovers as in case of fixed HDT is reached. 
The gain is between 8% and 13% for optimal duration of 
HDT. The optimal length of CINRwin is roughly 25 samples.  
The future work will be focused on the improvement of 
handover decision phase in femtocells by considering the 
handover prediction.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed in the framework of the 
FP7 project FREEDOM IST-248891 STP, which is funded 
by the European Community. The Authors would like to 
acknowledge the contributions of their colleagues from 
FREEDOM Consortium (http://www.ict-freedom.eu). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Informa Telecoms and Media, “Mobile Broadband Access at Home,”  
Aug. 2008. 
[2] D. Lopez-Perez, A. Valcarce, G. De La Roche, E. Liu, and J. 
Zhang, “Access methods to WiMAX femtocells: A downlink system-
level case study,” Proc. 11th IEEE Singapore International 
Conference on  Communication Systems (ICCS 2008), Nov. 2008, 
pp. 1657 – 1662, doi: 10.1109/ICCS.2008.4737463. 
[3] M. Zonoozi, P. Dassanayake, M. Faulkner, “Optimum Hysteresis 
Level, Signal Averaging Time and Handover Delay,” Proc. 47th 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 1997), May 1997, pp. 
310 - 313, doi: 10.1109/VETEC.1997.596370. 
[4] C. Hoyman, et. al., “Advanced Radio Resource Management 
Algorithms for Relay-based Networks,” Deliverable 2D2 of IST FP6-
027675 FIREWORKS project, Jul. 2007. 
[5] Z. Becvar, J. Zelenka, “Implementation of Handover Delay Timer 
into WiMAX,” Proc. of  6th Conference on Telecommunications 
(ConfTele 2007), Peniche, Portugal, May 2007. 
[6] M.Z. Chowdhury, W. Ryu, E. Rhee, and Y. M. Jang, “Handover 
between macrocell and femtocell for UMTS based networks,” Proc. 
11th International Conference on Advanced Communication 
Technology(ICACT 2009), Feb. 2009, pp. 237 – 241. 
[7] J.-S. Kim and T.-J. Lee, “Handover in UMTS networks with hybrid 
access femtocells,” Proc. 12th International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT 2010) , Feb. 2010. 
[8] G. Joshi, M. Yavuz, and C. Patel, “Performance analysis of active 
handoff in CDMA2000 femtocells,” Proc. National Conference on 
Communications (NCC 2010), Jan. 2010, pp. 1 – 5, doi: 
10.1109/NCC.2010.5430219.  
[9] S. Y. Choi, T.-J. Lee, M. Y. Chung, and H. Choo, “Adaptive 
Coverage Adjustment for Femtocell Management in a Residential 
Scenario,” Proc. 12th Asia Pacific Network Operation and 
Management Symposium (APNOMS 2009), Sep. 2009. 
[10] H. Claussen, F. Pivit, and L. T. W. Ho, “Self-Optimization of 
Femtocell Coverage to Minimize the Increase in Core Network 
Mobility Signalling,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, 
2009, pp. 155 – 184, doi: 10.1002/bltj.20378. 
[11] H.-S. Jo, C. Mun, J. Moon, and J.-G. Yook, “Self-optimized 
Coverage Coordination and Coverage Analysis in Femtocell 
Networks,” 
Oct. 
2009, 
available 
online 
at: 
http://cdsweb.cern.ch/record/1212431, accessed: Mar. 5, 2010. 
[12] S. Lal and D. K. Panwar, “Coverage Analysis of Handoff Algorithm 
with Adaptive Hysteresis Margin,” Proc. 10th International 
Conference on Information Technology (ICIT 2007), Dec. 2007, pp. 
133 – 138, doi: 10.1109/ICIT.2007.68. 
[13] Z. Becvar and P. Mach, “Adaptive Hysteresis Margin for Handover in 
Femtocell Networks,” Proc. International Conference on Wireless and 
Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2010), Sept. 2010. 
[14] ITU-R M.2135 Recommendation, “Guidelines for evaluation of radio 
interface technologies for IMT-Advanced,” 2008. 
[15] FemtoForum, “Interference Management in UMTS Femtocells,” Dec. 
2008, available online at: 
http://www.femtoforum.org/femto/publications.php, accessed: Feb. 
23, 2010. 
[16] 3GPP Technical Specification 36.300 v 10.0.0, “3rd Generation 
Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group Radio Access 
Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA)  
and 
Evolved 
Universal 
Terrestrial 
Radio 
Access 
Network  
(E-UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2,” Jun. 2010. 
[17] C. Yu, W. Xiangming, L. Xinqi, and Z. Wei, “Research on the 
modulation and coding scheme in LTE TDD wireless network,” 
International Conference on Industrial Mechatronics and Automation 
(ICIMA 2009), May 2009, pp. 468 – 471. 
234
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

