A Proposal of Dynamic RWA Using Ant Colony in Optical Burst Switched 
Networks
Erick A. Donato, Joaquim Celestino Júnior, Antônio 
S. S. Vieira
Computer Networks & Security Laboratory (LARCES)
State University of Ceará (UECE)
Fortaleza, Ceará , Brazil
{aguiardonato, celestino, sergiosvieira}@larces.uece.br
Ahmed Patel
Software Technology & Management Research Center
Faculty of Information Science & Technology,
University Kebangsaan Malaysia
UKM Bangi, Sengalor, Malaysia
whinchat2010@gmail.com
Abstract  -  One  of  the  main  problems  in  optical  networks 
concerns routing and wavelength assignment for establishing 
optical  circuits.  Burst  switching  is  a  viable  alternative  to 
overcome the problem of idle circuit waste, but it also prevents 
data  to  pass  to  the  electrical  domain  where  conversion  is 
necessary,  thus  making  this  switching  purely  optical.  A 
solution to the problem of dynamic RWA in Optical Burst 
Switching (OBS) networks, called AntOBS, is inspired by ant 
colony behavior. It is used to decrease the blocking probability 
during the routes establishment phase. The dynamicity and 
self-organization  are  the  main  features  of  AntOBS,  which 
through various experiments shows a reduction of the blocking 
probability of requests from the cross connect electro-optical 
network. 
Keywords-Optical Networks; Ant Colony; Burst Switching; 
RWA.
I.       INTRODUCTION
Many  technologies  and  techniques  have  emerged  to 
enhance the use of optical fibers, aiming to enjoy its unique 
qualities  such  as  very  low  transmission  error,  high 
transmission  speed  and  capacity,  overall  reliability,  and 
much longer distance ranges before the use of repeaters are 
required. 
Some multimedia applications require certain minimum 
requirements for good functioning and near real-time source 
to  destination  delivery.  For  example,  these  applications 
require that some network resources like buffer space, high 
payload  capacity  delivery,  throughput  and  minimum 
transmission delays  are  guaranteed  as  part  of a  Service 
Level  Agreement  (SLA)  with  stated  Quality  of  Service 
(QoS) parameters and their values at an offered price. There 
are some features like very low propagation distortion and 
transmission error rates in optical networks that can meet 
the  needs  of  these  applications  better  than  non-optical 
networks.
Optical networks provide high transmission rates with 
very low interference  between virtual channels and also 
immunity  from  electromagnetic  interference  [1].  Only 
where the merging of an optical network cross connects 
with non-optical  networks,  interference  and higher  error 
rates and lower capacities are still a problem [1, 2]. Other 
than  this,  the  optimization  of  Routing  and  Wavelength 
Assignment (RWA) can be made as close as possible to 
their maximum limits. Any failures of these functions can 
result in wastage and effectively reduce reaching the upper 
threshold value limits. Given this fact, it is asserted that 
optical network may provide the ability to handle failures 
through smart routing algorithms which take into account 
the current network state to find the best path between the 
source  and  destination  nodes  considering  various 
bottlenecks and restrictions. In doing so, such algorithms 
must assign the wavelength so that they maximize the use of 
network resources by minimizing the blocking probability.
The current  problems of RWA algorithms  in optical 
networking have the goal of choosing the path between two 
nodes in the network and set the wavelength to be used in 
communication.  The  performance  of  these  algorithms 
directly compromises the performance of these networks.
In solving the above mentioned RWA problems, it is 
further asserted that applying the technique of Ant Colony 
Optimization (ACO) [3] in proposing a new dynamic RWA 
algorithm for optical burst switching against a defined set of 
QoS  and  autonomic  self-organization learned  knowledge 
would result in a more satisfactorily solution compared to 
the performance of the current RWA algorithm.
ACO is a bio-inspired system  that is based on ants’ 
social organization and behavior patterns [3]. Ant societies 
have  division  of  labour,  communication  between 
individuals, and an ability to solve complex problems [4]. 
Ants communicate with each other using  pheromones  [4]. 
These chemical signals are more developed in ants than in 
other similar groups. Like other insects, ants perceive smells 
with  their  long,  thin  and  mobile  antenna.  The  paired 
antennae  provide  information  about  the  direction  and 
intensity of scents. Since most ants live on the ground, they 
use the soil surface to leave pheromone trails that can be 
followed by other ants. In species that forage in groups, a 
forager that finds food marks a trail on the way back to the 
colony; this trail is followed by other ants, these ants then 
reinforce the trail when they head back with food to the 
colony. When the food source is exhausted, no new trails 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

are marked by returning ants and the scent slowly dissipates. 
This  behavior  helps  ants  deal  with  changes  in  their 
environment. For instance, when an established path to a 
food source is blocked by an obstacle, the foragers leave the 
path to explore new routes. If an ant is successful, it leaves a 
new trail marking the shortest route on its return. Successful 
trails are followed by more ants, reinforcing better routes 
and  gradually  finding  the  best  path  [5].  The  colony 
organization  and  how  the  internal  ants’  communication 
structure through pheromones is made makes this meta-
heuristics  functional  and  appropriate  to  find  the  best 
solution for the problem [6]. The ants come down paths of 
the "nest" until the "food source" and place the pheromone 
there. This enables other ants to be induced to paths in 
which  there  is  the  largest  amount  of  pheromone.  This 
induction is probabilistic, what makes a possible variety in 
the path choice by the ant. This scenario allows the meta-
heuristics to converge for the best solutions within a set of 
viable alternatives.
Ant  colony  optimization algorithm  (ACO) is  a 
probabilistic technique for solving computational problems 
which can be reduced to finding good paths through graphs. 
This algorithm is a member of ant colony algorithms family, 
in  swarm  intelligence  methods,  and  it  constitutes  some 
meta-heuristic optimizations. Initially proposed by Marco 
Dorigo in 1992 in his PhD thesis [2], the first algorithm was 
aiming to search for an optimal path in a graph, based on the 
behavior of ants seeking a path between their colony and a 
source of food. The original idea has since diversified to 
solve a wider class of numerical problems, and as a result, 
several problems have emerged, drawing on various aspects 
of the behavior of ants as distributed optimization [7].
This article is organized as follows: the next section 
outlines relevant related work; Section 3 describes the main 
AntOBS features and QoS; Section 4 explains the setup of 
the simulation and gives the evaluation of the results of 
from  it  by  comparing  and  discussing  the  different 
approaches of the RWA problem. Section 5 concludes this 
research study and presents suggestions for future works. 
II.       ANTOBS
In  Optical  Burst  Switching  (OBS)  networks,  data  is 
stored in the network edge node, waiting for the burst to be 
mounted. With the ready burst, a wavelength (λ) and the 
path to be covered are assigned to the burst. This problem is 
called Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) [8, 9, 
10]. Then, a burst control packet (BCP) is sent to the target 
node. BCP uses a channel independent of the data channel 
(out-of-band), which goes through the path off the plan in a 
specific wavelength, using a signaling protocol. The main 
advantage  in  switching  is  the  data  and  control  plain 
separation, which enables a good network management and 
avoids the resources waste because it does not establish a 
connection. This fact reduces latency and improves network 
efficiency,  i.e.,  increases  the  use  of  network  resources, 
besides using a viable technology.
On the routing problem, routes are calculated according 
to some heuristics applied to data network. The goal is to 
find routes that can satisfy the requests that arrive on the 
network.  In  WDM  networks,  each  link  has  multiple 
wavelengths, and each one of them can carry different data. 
Therefore, besides setting the route, the wavelength to be 
used  must  be  set.  On  the  assignment  of  wavelength 
problem, one of the available wavelengths must be chosen 
for a given route.
The behavior of the ACO and the problems of RWA in 
OBS networks motivated this study to propose the AntOBS. 
This is an algorithm based on ACO that treats the routing 
problem  and  wavelength  assignment  in  OBS  networks 
dynamically. It is also important to mention that in this 
work, wavelength converters and buffers are not used.
The signaling protocols are responsible for determining 
how network resources will be allocated and deallocated. In 
this work the Just-Enough-Time (JET) signaling protocol 
[8] was chosen due its main feature: delayed reservation, 
one-way reservation and implicit release. In JET, after the 
BCP is sent, the burst is sent without confirmation that it has 
accomplished its task, i.e., reserve network resources along 
the route of the burst. The BCP contains the information of 
the burst size and setup time. This enables the reservation is 
made only during the time of the burst [8].
In the approach proposed in this paper, the ants are 
characterized by packets that feed the routing tables storing 
routes pheromone levels that represent  the burst success 
probability  in  a  route,  i.e.,  the  higher  the  level  of 
pheromone, the lower the burst blocking probability. Ants 
are generated in the nodes and are sent to targets randomly. 
As the ants follow the path to a particular target, they update 
the pheromone level in each node. 
Two types of ants are proposed: IAnt and MAnt. The 
first is responsible for creating the routing tables and the 
second for maintaining up-to-date pheromone levels. The 
details  of  each  type  of  behavior  are  explained  in  the 
following sections. The pathway of ants is covered out-of-
band. The ants sending frequency is a system parameter.
The wavelength assignment problem is treated by first-
fit algorithm and the nodes OBS are not equipped with 
wavelength  conversion  capabilities.  The  choice  of 
wavelength is independent of the choice of the route. In this 
algorithm, the wavelengths are put in a list of fixed order, 
determined  in  advance.  In  the  search  for  an  available 
wavelength, the first on the list is chosen. If this is already 
allocated to another request, the second is tested and it 
continues until you find one available. Global information is 
not required. The choice of this algorithm was made by the 
simplicity of it.
A. Main Features
The model used can be defined as a graph G = (V, E), in 
which  V  represents  the  set  of  network  nodes  and  E 
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

represents the set of edges or links in the network. Each link 
eij represents a connection between node i and node j. 
The IAnt ant is released during the optical networking 
startup to communicate to other network nodes the node 
source release. Initially, the node knows only its immediate 
neighbors, so it is necessary to meet all other nodes in the 
network so that the protocol can work correctly. This ant 
works based on the behavior of a broadcast packet. The 
IAnt has the following structure: identifier code, the source 
node  and  the  number  of  hops.  This  phase  is  called 
Initialization Phase.
The next phase is the Maintenance Phase. In this, the 
MAnt ants keep are released by the network nodes. MAnt 
must maintain and find out new routes to the source node, 
being launched with a destination chosen randomly. The 
launching frequency of is a system parameter. The MAnt 
carries data about the path and the target with the goal of 
selecting edges with pheromone along its way.  When it 
reaches to the node, this node interprets and renders the 
MAnt source address as the destination address, i.e., the 
node will update the routing table in the opposite ant path. 
Thus, the routing table of the current node is updated to the 
MAnt source node.
The data conveyed by an Ant MAnt is composed of the 
following fields: identifier code, source node, target node, 
stack, Time-To-Live (TTL) and bitmask. The TTL is used to 
prevent the ant to be on the network indefinitely. The stack 
is used to store the path covered by the ant. At each hop, the 
node processes data from the ant and checks if there is a 
cycle in the path. 
The bitmask, in its turn, has the task of bringing the 
available wavelengths for that route. In this route, each bit 
represents wavelength availability.
The probability of the ant MAnt, being at node i, choose 
the node j as next hop path is given by Equation 1. 
( 1 )
In this equation, r is a constant chosen randomly that 
aims to give diversity to the solution and k is a number of 
neighbors of node i. Ni
k represents the set of neighbors of 
node i, and τij and dij represent the pheromone levels and the 
cost  associated  to  the  link  eij.  In  this  study,  the  cost 
associated to each link represents the number of collisions 
that occurred when the node j was chosen. This metric is 
important  because  it  takes  into  account  the  history  of 
collisions in that link. The values of α and  β are constant 
responsible  for  deciding  the importance  of  the  equation 
terms.
To avoid stagnation in suboptimal solutions, we have 
proposed a second transition rule for Ant MAnt. So, the Ant 
MAnt will have two options for transitional rules, in which 
the Equation 1 is the first one. The second option is a 
randomly choice, in which the Ant decides the next hop 
without taking into account the link pheromone level, i.e., 
all  possibilities have  the  same  chance  of  being  chosen. 
Therefore, before applying the transitional rule, the Ant may 
decide which rule to use. This first choice is also done 
statistically, where each rule has the same chance of being 
chosen.
Equation  2  below  illustrates  the  reinforcement  of 
pheromone [l], i.e., illustrates how the level of pheromone is 
updated.  When  an  ant  reaches  the  node,  it  updates  the 
pheromone  level. Assume  that  ∆τk is  a  constant  and 
represents the pheromone update. This is one of the system 
parameters.
( 2 )
To update the table, the current node assumes the Ant 
MAnt  source  node  as  target  and  changes  the  registry 
corresponding to it. If the Ant arrives to the current node it 
implies that there is a route from the current node to the 
source node of the Ant Mant.
Based on the natural behavior of ants, periodically, the 
pheromone  levels  change  because  the  evaporation.  This 
allows the choices to be more diversified and that new 
solutions  are  found  as  shown  in  Equation  3  [l].  The 
pheromone level is reduced by ρ percent.
(3)
where  ρ is  a  constant  responsible  for  the  pheromone 
evaporation  level  in  the  links.  Along  with  α and  β,  1 
equation coefficients, ρ is also a parameter of the AntOBS 
algorithm presented below.
B. Initialization Phase
Table I below illustrates the structure of a routing table 
protocol.  The  nodes  have  their  probabilities  of  being 
selected,  represented  by  the  column  pheromone  and, 
according to the target  column, the next hop is chosen. 
Initially, only the neighbors are known. Ants add and update 
new rows in the table, thus new routes become available 
which will be used by control packets and by bursts of data.
TABLE I. PHEROMONE ROUTING TABLE PROTOCOL
Target
Next Hop
Hops Number
Pheromone
N1
N1
0
Pi
1
N2
N2
0
Pi
2
N3
N1
1
Pi
3
...
...
...
...
Nn
N2
2
Pi
n
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

After the simulation start, each node i send an ant IAnt 
through broadcast to its neighbors. This operation creates 
new registries and values of the nodes routing tables. A 
node  j, intermediate  between  the  source  and target  Ant 
nodes, creates a new registry in the routing table. The node j 
interprets the IAnt source address as the target address and 
the  previous  node's  address  as  the  next  hop,  and  then 
initializes the value of the pheromone in the link eji. Finally, 
the node updates the value of the field number of hops and 
the Ant IAnt is forwarded to its neighbors.
Fig. 1 below illustrates the IAnts behavior. In Fig. 1 (a), 
the node 0 launches two ants IAnt, one for each neighbor. 
Then they create a new entry in the routing table with the 
node 0 as a target and also save the link of the Ant arrival as 
outbound link to node 0. When nodes 3 and 4 receive Ant 
respectively from node 2 and 1, Fig. 1 (b), they will create a 
new entry in the routing table with the node 0 as a target 
with the respective node as an output.
Figure 1. IAnt search and routing behavior
After the end of this phase, all routes have the same 
probability;  therefore,  they  have  the  same  level  of 
pheromone.  Thus,  it  is  necessary  that  the  routes  are 
optimized. This is accomplished through  the ants MAnt 
behavior.
C. Maintenance phase
MAnt ants are responsible for maintaining the routes 
updated.  They  circulated  through  the  network  updating 
pheromone levels of links. Periodically, the nodes send the 
MAnt ants with random targets. The frequency of release of 
MAnt is a parameter and will be shown later.
When a given node i receives an ant MAnt it can be 
either the ant target or an intermediate path node to the 
target. The steps in each of the cases are described in the 
algorithm below.
Algorithm1 ReceiveMAnt (pkt)
1: if myaddress != pkt.dst address then
2: 
if pkt.T T L == 0 then
3:
    exclude (pkt)
4:           end if
5:           add entry route table (pkt)
6:           update pheromones ()
7:           next hop ← transition rule ()
8:           new pkt ← pkt
9:           new pkt.hops++
10:
new pkt.T T L −−
11:
new pkt.dst address ← next hop
12:
send (new pkt)
13: else
14:
update pheromones ()
15: 
exclude (pkt)
16: end if
The MAnt behavior differs from the real ant behavior, 
because the real ant traverses the path nest-food and goes 
back using the same path. In the case of ant MAnt, this only 
makes a one-trip path. This decreases the overhead caused 
by the use of ant on a network.
In AntOBS, the BCP is only a user of the data generated 
by the ants, it means, ants create and update the routing 
tables and the BCP uses the data in these tables.
The process of routes maintenance by the ants happens 
along the normal use of the network. The main benefit of 
this use is to ensure that the routes are always in accordance 
with the current state of the network.
D. Resources saving and Burst sent
The  ants  start  and  update  the  routing  tables  of  the 
network. However, the BCP uses these routes designed to 
reserve themselves for the burst sent. The behavior of the 
BCP is shown below.
On the edge router, the BCP is created. According to the 
level of pheromone, the next hop is chosen. In this case, the 
choice  is  probabilistic,  which  gives  a  possibility  of 
diversification  in  the  solution.  Soon  after,  an  available 
wavelength is chosen through First-Fit algorithm [1].
When the BCP leaves the edge node, it acts according to 
the steps below:
1. Choose the next hop in the routing table taking into 
account the level of pheromone. This choice is not 
probabilistic, is  based  on  the  highest  level  of 
pheromone. Due to the calculation of tuning time, 
the BCP should not change the number of hops in 
the path. This could cause a burst blocking;
2. According to the next hop, the possibility of saving 
the wavelength set in the edge node:
• If possible:
Set the saving;
Send the BCP;
• If not possible:
o Return to step 1 to select a second option 
to the next hop;
E. Example of burst blocking
Based on Figure 1 and Table 1 structure, suppose there 
is a burst to be sent from node N0 to node N4. There are two 
possible ways.  The first  possibility is N0-N1-N4 and the 
second path is N0-N2-N3-N4. 
As  described in  the  previous  section,  assume  that 
the BCP choose N1 as the next hop. After that, choose the 
wavelength λ1. Then the BCP is sent from the N0 to N1.
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

If N1 is checked that no wavelength is available for N4, 
then
 
the
 
reservation of
 
wavelength λ1 is
 
not 
performed and therefore burst blocking will occur.
III.       RELATED WORK
Many  research  proposals  apply  computational 
intelligence  techniques  to  solve  the  routing  problem  in 
networks.  Among  these  techniques  there  are:  genetic 
algorithms (GA) [11], ant colonies optimization (ACO) [3, 
4, 12], particle swarms optimization (PSO) [13]. 
Techniques  using ACO to solve problems  in optical 
networks, including OBS networks, have been proposed in 
the literature, but there are some deficiencies which in some 
cases may compromise the network operation. Some studies 
are discussed below.
In [12], ACO was used to solve the problems of RWA 
and recovery dynamically. In this work, the source node 
sends the BCP to the target  with the goal  of reserving 
resources for the next coming burst. Initially, as the levels of 
pheromone (routing tables) has not been started, each hop 
path is chosen randomly. When the target node receives the 
BCP, it means, when the reserves for the burst are effective, 
the target node responds to the source one with a message 
that travels the opposite way, updating the pheromone levels 
of intermediate. Thus, all other control packets take into 
account the level of pheromone for choosing a path to the 
recipient.
To achieve this stage, two types of control packets are 
used: BCP-REQ and BCP-ACK. The first packet type BCP-
REQ  reserves  resources  along  the  path  from  source  to 
destination. The second packet type BCP-ACK returns from 
target destination to the source updating pheromone levels 
of intermediate switches. BCP-ACK travels the same path 
as BCP-REQ, changing only its way. 
This  solution  results  in  unnecessary  overheads  and, 
according to the simulations made in the study, in some 
cases the problem is not solved satisfactorily. For example, 
when the network goes down or it does not send bursts 
successfully, even for a moment, this kind of problem leads 
to a situation in which the levels of pheromone does not 
represent  the current  network state. In  this solution, the 
routing tables are well set only if there is traffic in the 
network, since the control packet plays the role of setting. It 
is necessary, therefore to have, the existence of bursts in 
order  to  have  a  smooth  optical  network  operation  and 
configuration. If the routing tables are not close to the ideal 
setup, many bursts may be lost.
This problem does not happen in the purpose of this 
study. There is no connection with the ants, the burst and 
the control packet, that is, the routing tables do not depend 
on  the  existence  of  bursts  to  be  setup.  The  ants  are 
responsible for configuring routes and are independent of 
the data plan and control package.
In  [14],  a  solution  to  the  problems  of  routing  and 
wavelength assignment in WDM optical dynamic networks 
using ACO is presented. In this work, the ants act separately 
from the control packet and feed two types of routing tables: 
one  table  stores  the  complete  routes  in  the  border  and 
another table stores the routing data in core nodes that have 
the pheromone levels. 
The approach proposed in this article differs from the 
previous work in some aspects. The first one is that the 
AntOBS uses a single routing table. Another difference is 
that  the  AntOBS  stores  and  considers  the  number  of 
collisions on the node to update of pheromone, to ensure 
routing table is updated according to real data from the 
network operation.
IV.       SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
This section presents the results obtained in simulations 
to  test  the  performance  of  routing  AntOBS  algorithm, 
comparing to the algorithm  called Pure  OBS, a routing 
algorithm in OBS networks that is not based on Ant Colony 
and uses the shortest path strategy. This algorithm is based 
on Dijkstra’s algorithm [15]. The simulations were made 
using  the  Ubuntu  operating  system  and  the  Network 
Simulator 2 (NS-2). The NS-2 is a discrete event based 
simulator, widely used in research on computer networks. 
The process of generating traffic is stochastic and follows 
the Pareto distribution. The algorithm parameters were set 
according to Table II below and were chosen taking into 
account the simulations made during the work.
TABLE II. ALGORITHM PARAMETERS USED TO TEST ANTOBS' 
ROUTING PERFORMANCE
Parameter
Value
α (Importance of pheromone level)
0.5
β (Importance of number of collisions)
0.5
ρ (Evaporation level)
0.4
∆ (Increase pheromone update)
0.6
Mant Ant Creation frequency
0.6 s
During the simulations two topologies were used. Fig. 2 
shows the topology of a small test network with six nodes, 
called topology 1. Fig. 3 shows a topology similar to the 
network NSFNET with fourteen nodes.
    
Figure 2. Simulation network topology of test 1
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

    
Figure 3. Simulation network topology of test 2
A. Topology of test 1
In the first tests, the network represented by Fig. 2 is 
used, where two scenarios were used. The first scenario has 
6 available wavelengths on each link and the second has 10 
available  wavelengths  on  each  link.  The  amounts  of 
wavelength  in  each  scenario  were  determined  taking 
consideration the simulations done.
Fig. 4 shows the graph of the probability of blocking 
performance behavior of new AntOBS versus Pure OBS 
algorithms as a function of load on the network using six 
wavelengths, with. Not surprisingly,  with low loads, the 
blocking probability rate is substantially lower than in high 
loads. Due to the reduced number of wavelengths, with high 
loads  the  network  enables  a  high  burst  probability  of 
blocking.
It  is  also  possible  to  realize  in  the  graph  that  the 
probability of blocking of the algorithm AntOBS is smaller 
than to the Pure OBS algorithm, a routing algorithm in OBS 
networks  that  uses  the  shortest  path  strategy.  The 
probability of blocking is shorter, mainly from 18 Erlangs 
on. The congestion generated by the load increasing on the 
network is the main cause of this difference. Although with 
this increased  workload,  the dynamicity of the AntOBS 
ensures  that  the  best  routes  will  be  chosen  taking  into 
account the current  network status, preventing the block 
bursts.
Figure 4. Blocking burst probability performance behavior of new 
AntOBS versus pure OBS algorithms in topology 1 test with 6 
wavelengths.
Fig. 5 shows the graph of the blocking probability as a 
function of load of the optical Network using topology 1 
(see Fig. 2), in which 10 wavelengths are available. The 
increase in the number of wavelengths obviously decreases 
the blocking probability in both cases, but  the AntOBS 
continues with the fall of it in both scenarios.
Figure 5. Blocking burst probability performance behavior of new 
AntOBS versus pure OBS algorithms in topology 1 test with 10 
wavelengths.
B. Topology of test 2
Two  scenarios  have  been  defined  for  the  second 
topology again: with 8 and 12 wavelengths, respectively.
Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the AntOBS and 
Pure OBS algorithms, illustrating the blocking graph as a 
function of the network load with 8 wavelengths available.
Figure 6. Blocking burst probability performance behavior of new 
AntOBS versus pure OBS algorithms in topology 2 test with 8 
wavelengths.
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

The  graph  behavior  shows  again  a  performance 
improvement  of  AntOBS  over  Pure  OBS,  allowing  a 
decrease in the probability of blocking, in the same scenario 
of 18 Erlangs load.
Fig. 7 compares the algorithms AntOBS and Pure OBS, 
using a topology similar to the network NSFNET with 12 
wavelengths. In this scenario, once again the AntOBS had 
the blocking probability less than the Pure OBS.
It  is  possible  to  notice  that  in  simulations  in  this 
topology, when in high loads, the behavior of algorithms is 
very close. However, despite having similar performances it 
is possible to see that in almost all scenarios the AntOBS 
had better performance, and the efficiency of AntOBS in 
relation  to  the  Pure  OBS  could  be  proved,  since  any 
blocking  on  optical  networks  can  lead  to  loss  of  high 
amounts of data, mainly in OBS networks which work in 
bursts.
Figure 7. Blocking burst probability performance behavior of new 
AntOBS versus pure OBS algorithms in topology 2 with 12 
wavelengths.
Comparing  the  results  of  the  topology  simulations, 
topology 2 (see Fig. 3) results showed a minor difference 
between the performances of two algorithms. This is caused 
by  the  greater  number  of  nodes  of  topology  2,  which 
requires a greater number of updates of routing tables, i.e., it 
decreases the AntOBS performance.
V.       CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
This work proposed an algorithm, called AntOBS, aimed 
in decreasing the blocking probability in OBS networks, 
taking into account that traffic in this type of network is 
done in bursts and that blocking can lead to loss of an 
excessive amount of data. This solution is based on adaptive 
behavior of an Ant Colony. 
One  important  solution  presented  concerns  the 
possibility of AntOBS  to treat  the problem  of Adaptive 
RWA, through changes in the routing tables provided by 
ants, a route can be changed in case of a link failure.
In terms of signaling, the cost of AntObs Algorithm was 
small. During the simulations no ant or BCP were lost.
For a future work, another type of Ant can be inserted 
into the network to do new tasks in the optical network, for 
example,  to  check  the  link  status  periodically.  Other 
signaling  protocols  can  be  tested  such  as  JIT,  which 
explores the immediate saving; in order to compare to the 
results of this work which used the JET.
REFERENCES
[1]   R. Ramaswami and K. N. Sivarajan, Optical Networks: A Practical 
Perspective. 2 ed., San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers 
2002, ISBN 1558606556.
[2]   M. Dorigo, Optimization, Learning and Natural Algorithms, PhD 
thesis, Politecnico di Milano, Italy, 1992.
[3]   M. Dorigo and G. D. Caro, “AntNet: distributed stigmergetic control 
for  communications  networks,”  Journal  of  Artificial  Intelligence 
Research, 1998, pp. 317-365.
[4]   D. E. Jackson and F. L. Ratnieks, "Communication in ants," Current 
Biology,  August  2006,  vol.  16  (15),  pp.
 R570–R574, 
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2006.07.015. PMID 16890508.
[5]   S. Goss, S. Aron, J. L. Deneubourg, and J. M. Pasteels, "Self-
organized shortcuts in the Argentine ant," Naturwissenschaften, vol. 
76, pp. 579–581, 1989, doi:10.1007/BF00462870.
[6]    E.  Dicke,  A.  Byde,  D. Cliff, and  P. Layzell,  "An  ant-inspired 
technique  for  storage  area network  design,"  in A. J. Ispeert, M. 
Murata  &  N.  Wakamiya.  Proceedings  of  Biologically  Inspired 
Approaches to Advanced Information Technology: First International 
Workshop, BioADIT 2004 LNCS 3141, pp. 364–379.
[7]   A. Colorni, M. Dorigo, and V. Maniezzo, “Distributed Optimization 
by Ant Colonies,” Actes de la première conférence européenne sur la 
vie artificielle, Paris, France, Elsevier Publishing, 1991, pp. 134-142.
[8]   M. Yoo and C. Qiao, “Just-enough-time (JET): A high speed protocol 
for bursty traffic in optical networks,” in Proceeding of IEEE/LEOS 
Conf. on Technologies For a Global Information Infrastructure, 1997, 
pp. 26-27.
[9]   J. Y. Wei and R. I. McFarland, “Just-In-Time signaling for WDM 
optical burst switching networks,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, 
2000, pp. 2019-2037.
[10]   B. Mukherjee, Optical WDM Networks. Davis, CA: Springer, 2006, 
ISBN 0387290559.
[11]   D. Bisbal, “Dynamic Routing and Wavelength Assignment in Optical 
Networks by Means of Genetic Algorithms,” in Photonic Network 
Communications, vol. 7, nº 1, pp. 43–58, 2004.
[12]   Z. Shi, Y. TinJin, and Z. Bing, “Ant algorithm in OBS RWA,” Proc. 
of SPIE, Optical Transmission, Switching and Subsystems II, vol. 
5625, pp. 705-713, Feb. 2005.
[13]  A. W. Mohemmed, N. C. Sahoo, and K. G. Tan, “Solving Shortest 
Path Problem Using Particle Swarm Optimization,” in Applied Soft 
Computing, Jan. 2008, pp. 1643-1653.
[14]   S. H. Ngo, X. Jiang, and S. Horiguchi, “An ant-based approach for 
dynamic  RWA  in  optical  WDM  networks,”  Photonic  Network 
Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 39-48, Jan. 2006.
[15]   E. W. Dijkstra, "A note on two problems in connexion with graphs," 
Numerische
 
Mathematik
 
1,
 
1959,
 
pp.
 
269–271, 
doi:10.1007/BF01386390.
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

