openwincon: Open Source Wireless-Wired Network Controller
Software Defined Infrastructure (SDI) approach for Fixed-Mobile-Converged Enterprise Networks
Gijeong Kim
Department of Computer Engineering
Kyung Hee University
South Korea
Email: kimgijeong@khu.ac.kr
Sungwon Lee
Department of Computer Engineering
Kyung Hee University
South Korea
Email: drsungwon@khu.ac.kr
Abstract— Software Defined Networking/Network Function
Virtualization (SDN/NFV) is considered as a key technology
for
future
mobile
networks,
such
as
5G
mobile
communications
systems.
By
2020,
the
market
size
for
Centralized-Radio Access Networks (C-RAN) will reach $21B.
At the same time, enterprise Software Defined Data Center
(SDDC) and the mobility market will increase to $77B and
$360B, respectively. However, research on mobile enterprise
networking is not widely considered. Also, open source
software and hardware for an enterprise network is not well
developed. Thus, in this paper, we introduce the openwincon
project. openwincon is an open source wireless-wired network
controller, and it is based on Software Defined Infrastructure
(SDI) technology. openwincon is sponsored by the Korean
government and started in 2015. The source code will be
available in early 2016.
Keywords-component; SDI; SDN; NFV; Enterprise Network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Software
Defined
Networking/Network
Function
Virtualization (SDN/NFV) is considered as a key technology
for future mobile networks, such as 5G. Its world market size
is estimated at $19B. By the year 2018, telecom SDN/NFV
will be $11B and enterprise SDN/NFV will be $8B. This
number is larger than C-RAN’s estimated $10B. By 2020,
when the 5G mobile service will start, C-RAN’s market size
will reach $21B, but enterprise SDDC and mobility market
will increase to an estimated $77B and $360B, respectively
[1].
According to SDN/NFV for public networks, many open
source efforts are under way, such as Open Daylight (ODL)
[2], Open Networking Operating System (ONOS) [3], and
Open
Platform
for
Network
Function
Virtualization
(OPNFV) [4]. Conventional researches are focused on the
evolution of these platforms. However, research on mobile
enterprise networks is just at the beginning [5] and it is not
widely considered. Also, open source software and hardware
for an enterprise network is not well developed in general.
Thus, in this paper, we introduce the openwincon project.
openwincon is an open source wireless-wired network
controller, and it is based on Software Defined Infrastructure
(SDI) technology. In this project, we propose a new
networking architecture that converges wireless and wired
networks through SDN/NFV. It provides a control-bearer
separated enterprise network through a single centralized
controller.
openwincon
is
sponsored
by
the
Korean
government and started in 2015 and will last until 2020. The
open source software code opens in early 2016.
II.
PREVIOUS WORKS
The conventional heterogeneous network architecture is
depicted in Figure 1. In the figure, a wired network (Giga
Internet) and four different wireless networks are considered.
Among the wireless networks, WiFi, 2G, 3G and 4G are
considered. Each network has its wireless links, access
networks, and core networks.
For this reason, centralized and integrated control is not
possible. In addition, integrated QoS/QoE (Quality of
Service/Quality of Experience) for high-level services are
practically impossible. Moreover, the network complexity is
increased
in
terms
of
network
manageability
and
controllability.
However, SDN/NFV provides a solution for this type of
environment. For example, the bearer planes for most
networks are similar, and can be integrated into a single
device.
Also,
a
difference
between
networks
can
be
implemented as a single physical device with virtualized
applications.
III.
PROPOSED OPENWINCON ARCHITECTURE
The mobile network architecture based on openwincon is
depicted in Figure 2. We support conventional wired and
wireless networks and future networks such as 5G. For this,
not only Single Radio Cells (SRCs) but also Multiple Radio
Cells (MRCs) are considered. MRC supports multiple
Figure 1. Conventional Heterogeneous Network Architecture
Packet Gateway
Gateway GPRS Support Node
Mobility Management Entity
Serving Gateway
Mobile Switching Center
Serving GPRS Support node
Base Station Controller
Radio Network Controller
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

generation air interfaces simultaneously operating on the
same physical device.
Five major features are considered. First, the Access
Abstraction Manager (AAM) terminates air link dependent
functionalities to abstract the multiple networks. This
manager terminates protocols such as WiFi Control and
Provisioning of Wireless Access Points (CAPWAP), and
LTE S1. Second, the Radio Resource Manager (RRM)
manages wireless resources such as frequency, bandwidth,
and interference. Also, wireless scheduling is enabled to
guarantee the QoS/QoE of services. Third, the Network
Resource Manager (NRM) manages wireless resources.
NRM
includes
OpenFlow-based
network
control
and
traditional traffic engineering. Fourth, the Access Control
Manager (ACM) provides managements for subscribers,
devices,
and
services.
ACM
includes
control
and
management of authentication, authorization, accounting,
security, and service policy. Fifth, the Mobility Manager
(MM) provides mobility control for subscribers and devices.
MM provides seamless and consistent handover scheme over
heterogeneous wireless network environments.
We support carrier-grade reliability initially. As depicted
in Figure 3, each controller supports reliability via a
distributed multi-core architecture. Each manager operates
over multiple distributed cores. It avoids service destruction
when a single core fails. Also, inter-controller reliability is
guaranteed through multi-site redundancy. Thus, a controller
level failure is recovered via a peering controller.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
Our project is sponsored by the Korean government for
five
years.
Four
universities
participate:
Kyung
Hee
University
(KHU),
Seoul
National
University
(SNU),
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH),
and Sung Kyun Kwan University (SKKU). Also, SDN/NFV
related companies and government offices participate in the
project.
According to the development platform, we use ONOS
SDN controller as a control plane platform and OPNFV as a
bearer plane platform, as depicted in Figure 4. Figure 4
describes the goal of openwincon in the first year.
According to heterogeneous wireless technologies, we
are going to re-use conventional open source solutions such
as coova.org, openCapwap, OpenWISP, OpenWRT [6] for
WiFi AP (Access Points), OpenBTS [7] for 2G/3G base
stations, and Open-Air interface [8] for 4G.
The software source code will be released in early 2016.
Apache 2.0 license will be applied. Also, the performance
matrix will be announced with the source code.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Institute for Information &
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by the
Korea government (MSIP) (B0101-15-1366, Development of Core
Technology for Autonomous Network Control and Management),
(B0190-15-2013, Development of Access Technology Agnostic
Next- Generation Networking Technology for Wired-Wireless
Converged
Networks),
(B0101-15-0033,
Research
and
Development of 5G Mobile Communications Technologies using
CCN-based Multi-dimensional Scalability).
REFERENCES
[1]
Mind Commerce, "Software Defined Networks (SDN) and
Network Function Virtualization (NFV) Market, Forecasts,
and Impact on Network Operators 2015 - 2020", March 2015.
[2]
Open Daylight (ODL) official site,
https://www.opendaylight.org, [Retrived: Feb., 2016].
[3]
Open Network Operating System (ONOS) official site,
http://onosproject.org, [Retrived: Feb., 2016].
[4]
Open Platform for Network Function Virtualization (OPNFV)
official site, https://www.opnfv.org, [Retrived: Feb., 2016].
[5]
Lalith Suresh, Julius Schulz-Zander, Ruben Merz, Anja
Feldmann,
and
Teresa
Vazao,
"Towards
Programmable
Enterprise WLANs with Odin", HotSDN'12, August 13,
2012, pp.115-120.
[6]
OpenWrt official site, https://openwrt.org, [Retrived: Feb.,
2016].
[7]
OpenBTS official site, http://openbts.org, [Retrived: Feb.,
2016].
[8]
Open Air Interface official site, http://openairinterface.org,
[Retrived:
Feb.,
2016]
Figure 3. Redundancy and reliability support of openwincon
Figure 4. Proposed openwincon Internal Architecture for First Release
Figure 2. Proposed openwincon based Network Architecture
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

