Implementation Problems Facing Network Function Virtualization and Solutions
Krishna Gandhi
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal, IL, USA
e-mail: kgandh1@ilstu.edu
Jihad Qaddour
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal, IL, USA
e-mail: jqaddou@ilstu.edu
Abstract- Network administrators prefer the Network Function
Virtualization (NFV) concept as it is cost-efficient and easy to
maintain. However, the new technologies based on this concept
might lead to security threats, such as denial of service attacks,
availability attacks, exploitation, malware injection, or other
undiscovered
threats.
Network
Functions
Virtualization
represents a very large paradigm shift in the development and
the deployment of network services. Many research works on
NFV address the virtual concept. It can be a cloud or a virtual
private server. The security is the most important thing since
the virtual environment can also be compromised by cyber-
attacks. The paper focuses on the problems facing NFV
implementation and offers ways of navigating through the
main security related problems stated above.
Keywords-Network Function Virtualization (NFV); Virtual
Network Function (VNF); Cloud Security Alliance (CSA);
Software-Defined Networking (SDN).
I.
INTRODUCTION
The evolution of cloud computing has led to an increase
in cyberattacks targeted towards individuals, corporations or
any vulnerable entity within the cloud system. The increase
in the attacks forces bodies such as the Cloud Security
Alliance (CSA) to convene and deliberate on the best ways
to secure the systems, making them impervious to cyber
attacks. One area facing the blow of cyber attacks is the
network function virtualization. In computing, the term
virtualization can be applied to storage devices, operating
systems, hardware platforms, computer network resources
and much more. The evolution of technology allows the
virtualization of nearly all computer software and hardware.
Basically, nearly all network functions can be virtualized. In
this article, we explore virtualization in network functions.
Moreover, there will be mentions of Software-Defined
Networks (SDN), which alter the network function behaviors
and allow dynamic changes in the configurations of a
network [1]. Network function virtualization, commonly
referred to as NFV, is a concept recently introduced with
numerous
goals,
like
reducing
overall
cost,
ease
of
management, scalability, and also reducing the proprietary
hardware required during the launch or operation of network
services [2]. If the concept is implemented successfully, most
of the network services will launch and operate virtually
decoupling the functions of dedicated hardware devices in a
network, such as firewalls, routers, and load balancers.
The concept relies on a hypervisor that controls the
network functions making it easier to run them on the
standard X86 servers. The implementation of the NFV
makes the network administrators work easier by eliminating
the need for dedicated hardware devices when building a
service chain, thus reducing the operating expenses (OPEX)
and capital expenses (CAPEX) since the services will run on
a virtual machine. Moreover, NFV gives the network
administrators agility and flexibility when troubleshooting
errors in the system or when performing the routine
maintenance.
SDN
and
NFV
are
different,
yet
complementary
techniques
applicable
by
network
administrators: the NFV infrastructure allows SDN to run,
enabling it to forward data packets to and from network
devices, while the control functions run on a Virtual Machine
(VM) [3]. The implementation of NFV creates various
challenges and complexities in the security controls of
networks.
According to Amogh et al. [4], the CSA addresses some
problems that exist when implementing NFV, regardless of
the benefits it conveys such as cost reduction, agility, and
flexibility. There are six problems evident according to the
authors, and they include (1) scalability of available
resources, (2) stateful versus stateless inspection, (3) service
insertion,
(4)
hypervisor
dependencies,
(5)
dynamic
workloads, and (6) elastic network boundaries. The six
problems revolve around the security of network function
virtualization
and
if
each
of
them
is
not
addressed
individually, the incompleteness of configurations, lack of
integrity and lack of clearness defining security policies can
lead to attacks like denial-of-service. In NFV implemented
environments, stateful inspection of data-flow in the network
requires asymmetric flows which allow seeing every data
packet in transit, granting access controls to NFV, and
stateless inspection fails to see all the data packets in transit
making it difficult to grant access controls to NFV. The
problem brings about security issues since the NFV does not
know or have access to the data packets in transit. Service
insertion into the NFV relies on overlay models that fail to
coexist
across
the
vendor
boundaries,
allowing
the
implementation of NFV to be vulnerable to the security
breach. Insertion of services in NFV requires existing
layered services in the hypervisor, causing it to be difficult to
deal with asymmetries in the network, which arise from their
creation by redundant network devices and paths. To ensure
security is top-notch, vendors must all agree on standards
addressing security issues. The implementation of NFV
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

makes the understanding of the underlying architecture
difficult for the vendors, leading to the production of
different hypervisors for different systems. It is imperative
for the vendors to come in unison to ensure the security
vulnerabilities are non-existent such as, patching vulnerable
code that risks security breaches. Recent changes in network
topology make it difficult for traditional security methods to
evolve as per the current demand; additionally, traditional
methods are static compared to NFV, which is dynamic and
agile in its capabilities. Unlike the traditional methods, NFV
has no defined boundaries; its capabilities can expand as far
as the network administrators can fathom. Traditional
methods are bound by cable lengths, location and much
more, creating a definite boundary. The lack of clear
boundaries puts the network systems at risk in matters
pertaining to security.
In the paper, the focus is on the security issues that may
arise or exist during or after the implementation of NFV. The
paper is organized into four sections: Section II discusses
literature review, Section III presents a comparative study,
Section IV performs an analysis and discussion, Section V
describes the proposed solution, while Section VI concludes
the paper and suggests possible future developments.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
According to research, NFV is a major milestone in the
networking and telecommunications sector. Stringent laws
govern the administration of NFV enabling the availability,
security, and superb performance of the concept. NFV
revolutionizes
the
telecommunications
and
construction
networks by reducing the costs incurred purchasing new
gadgets or hardware and increasing the automation of
systems. Some challenges of NFV implementation include
the reliability of additional software, the effective key
escrow for the functions of the hosted network, reduced
isolation of the functions in a network, and fate-sharing
resulting from multi-tenancy [5].
According to the article by Yang and Fung [6], a survey
on security in network functions virtualization. The authors
acknowledge NFV as an emerging innovation that focusses
on the removal of hardware equipment responsible for
various network functions. The removal of the hardware
equipment gives room for the implementation of virtual
machines running on cloud computing infrastructure that
takes on the tasks tasked with the hardware equipment. As a
result, there is a reduction in the energy consumption and
equipment costs. Additionally, the authors acknowledge that
the rate of innovation poses risks for the NFV and they focus
their paper on the emerging security challenges and issues.
Yang and Fung present various techniques for overcoming
the challenges by offering security products and solutions to
tackle the rising insecurities. They explore future works
applicable
to
the
security
issues
accompanying
NFV
implementation after conducting a survey on NFV security
use cases. The paper is in line with what our research entails
and therefore is a chief resource in our work. The use of
various research methods gives insight on the directions we
should take while tackling the topic. The authors suggest that
the main contribution of NFV is the realization of software-
based NFs such as virtual gateways and firewalls, unlike the
traditional methods where hardware appliances were key to
the realization of networking.
The paper addresses most of our research and offers
research methodologies used in the conclusion of the
findings. Moreover, the paper focusses on the security issues
revolving around the implementation of NFV in the modern
systems and offers various ways of mitigating past the
security issues. The information is crucial to our research as
it gives us a guideline on how the paper should be and what
it should address unlike other related research papers
published by different authors. Yang and Fung conducted a
survey similar to what the paper will use to gain credible
data on the issue of security in the network function
virtualization implementation.
According to Raina et al. [7], the implementation of
NFV has resulted in the adoption of advanced security
measures to curb the rise in security vulnerabilities resulting
from the amalgamation of the traditional methods and NFV.
Virtualization addresses some of the deployed network
security functions focused on reducing the vulnerabilities
arising from the adoption of NFV [7]. The security measures
focus on malware protection, access control, denial-of-
service protection, access and identity management, intrusion
prevention and detection, and cryptography. Malicious
computer experts target systems with poor security measures
in the hope of accessing valuable information that they may
use to their gain or conduct fraudulent activities. For
example, a bank scenario where the bank has recently
adopted the use of NFV with little or no security measures
may compromise the personal information of its clients.
Malicious people may try to secure crucial data linked to the
customers’ accounts and transfer huge amounts of funds to
their accounts making the bank vulnerable to litigations,
customer distrust, or closure. The data presented is credible
to some extent since most the stated challenges are still a
challenge to date. The paper addresses the problems and
challenges related to the paper thus it is a vital reference
material.
According to Han, Gopalakrishnan, Ji, and Lee [8], the
introduction of NFV was to reduce the time taken to market
novel services and improve the flexibility of the provision of
the network system. NFV aids in the decoupling of software
implementations from underlying dedicated hardware. In the
article, the authors explain the architectural framework and
requirements of NFV and later discuss the challenges
experienced and the available opportunities for innovation.
In relation to the topic, we will look into the challenges of
NFV. The authors clearly state that network administrators
ought to be careful when implementing NFV in existing
systems to ensure security features are unaffected. Elements
such as hypervisors and orchestrators pose a security threat
to the network system when wrongly implemented and lead
to a rise in the intrusion. An increase in intrusion forces the
system to concentrate on intrusion prevention mechanisms,
which lead to an overload of the intrusion detection systems.
However, when correctly implemented, NFV makes work
easier for all concerned parties and allows the possibilities of
virtualized firewalls creation and domain protection thus
increasing the security of the network system. Virtualizing
network resources poses risks since applications and services
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

rely on the virtual machine to complete commands, for
instance, when a service is bugged and requires certain
resources from the virtual machine, it can easily infect the
core of operations thus increasing the spread of the bug or
virus within the network.
According to T. Qasim [9], research on NFV machine
learning the huge population communication services is
leading to the heavy loaded signaling system. It uses
Signaling System No 7 (SS7). SS7 was protected due control
owned by state-owned telecommunication operators. SS7
and network function virtualization have introduced many
new security challenges. There can be some vulnerability in
a virtualized environment. There should be many methods
that mitigate machine learning techniques from gathering
network traffic [9]. The research done by A. Kalliola and S.
Lal developed security orchestration in NFV environment
and is crucial. It represents Distributed Denial of Services
attacks and other cyber-attacks. The most important finding
is that it can mitigate future variation of attacks. These are all
done by machine learning orchestrating virtualized network
functions around the affected components to isolate those
components and redirect, capture and filter the traffic for
further analysis. This would allow maintaining a high quality
of service to given network functions [10].
Network Function Virtualization security is a vast area of
concern in many forms. Most of the NFV researches done
with an example are scenarios, especially research conducted
for Distributed DoS attack mitigation [9]. It implements an
SDN enable network in the OpenStack environment and
demonstrates and explains the effectiveness with various
kinds of attacks [Figure 1]. The mitigation architecture was
designed and implemented for the cloud environment. It used
underlying software-defined network elements for attack
mitigation and view of traffic.
Figure 1. DDoS attack mitigation scenario.
SS7 network vulnerability detection of NFV using machine
learning [10] also uses proper simulation to present the
many attacks. Machine learning techniques are proposed as
a
detection
mechanism.
The
experimental
setup
has
implemented to provide proof of concept [Figure 2]. SS7
traffic is generated in a properly setup virtual environment.
DoS and man in the middle attacks are launched on the
network.
There are many advantages if it presents in a virtual
environment because real devices do not get the actual
effect of the attacks. Using automation software such
OpenStack provides real benefits to visualize the real attack.
Figure 2. Simulation Setup.
According to F. Reynaud et al. [16], the network
functions come to resolve many network several issues
which come with the growth of the infrastructure, as power
consumption,
difficulties
to
manage
the
environment,
elevated
costs,
low
dynamism
and
scalability
and
misconfiguration proneness. To break those paradigms the
virtualization
and
softwarization
emerged.
European
Telecommunications Standard Institute (ETSI) created it to
simplify the management and reduce costs of networking
hardware as well since before it the companies have to buy
one or more equipment for each network function. The
clearest advantage of using it is the reduction of costs, but it
has also many advantages as a facility on the network
management using a centralized programmable controller. It
reduces the complexity of management and allows more
flexible
and
fewer
errors
on
network
configuration.
However, there are some problems related to attack
vulnerabilities when using the standard. One of them is
DDoS, which brings many problems as opened ports and
direct denial of services running since the resources are not
really unlimited. The traffic can be identified, but it needs a
3rd party resource to work. Another Man in the Middle
attack which is possible when a proper authentication
mechanism does not exist is a case of an attack that will
fatally put the NFV down.
The last attack we refer to here is the Network Visibility
Poisoning, an attack that may come from several security
breaches as Host Location Hijacking, Link Fabrication
Attacks or insufficient protection from the northbound
applications. There is another 3rd application which can
work side by side with NFV and helps it to check the
integrity of the packets.
According to T. Dimitrakos [17], NFV brings even more
advantages to the users such as the increase of time to
market and services fast deployment, the scalability of
services that can be up or down rapidly as required. Based
on the document [17], the standard makes the virtualized
infrastructure
go
along
with
the
market
challenges
delivering good features, fast, reliable and easier than
traditional solutions. One of the main quotations of T.
Dimitrakos [17] is if the NFV standard can maintain
traceability to threats, challenges and customers, standards
and compliance requirements. Since we are very near to the
big expansion of Internet of Things (IoT), the NFV must
come
as
an
interesting
solution
for
decentralized
environments and networks, since it can be deployed inside
or together with the virtual machine and its components.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

Some of the NFV challenges according to him are that it
would be very hard to put high-end security functions, the
intelligent management of the specific traffic designated to
Virtual Network Functions. Another challenge is that, since
the SDN (controller) must intercept, steer and mirror traffic
for security inspection since it is asynchronous, maybe the
NFV function cannot work properly.
T. Thanh et al. [18] built a specification called MANO,
which consists in automatization of known NFV that makes
it more reliable when in use. MANO seeks to automate the
learning of NFV model and resolve many security problems.
The
simple
security
framework
consists
of
Security
Planning, Security Enforcement, and Secure Monitoring,
and every part of this schema feeds the other, making a
stronger and faster security solution for NFV. The Security
Enforcement and Monitoring work together mitigating the
risks and feeding the Security Planning layer for better
updates and deployments. They had some success making a
two-sided management system, which could work with
Access
Control
and
Decision-making
lists,
using
OpenBaton, a toolkit that implements a current ETSI NFV
MANO. They provided virtual infrastructure and monitored
it using ZABBIX. They had great results using it with the
developed application and there were gains on Embed
Security Functions, a security protection that can be
embedded automatically and transparently to a virtual
infrastructure. Security Management Lifecycle Support,
which makes the security policy, adapts itself to application
lifecycle and Dynamic Security Incident Response that
adapts in case of DoS attack or other unforeseen events
(Zero-Day Threats).
The article does not address all the challenges we
identified
arising
from
the
implementation
of
NFV.
However, the paper gives a comparative study of the work
done so far and also gives the direction on the future works
possible from the implementation of network function
virtualization.
III. COMPARATIVE STUDY
A comparative study is presented in TABLE 1. The
table is showing different security problems in NFV and the
solution proposed as a summary.
TABLE I.
COMPARATIVE STUDY IN NFV SECURITY
Year
Security
Problems
in NFV
Solutions
Challenges
2017
Security
Adaptabili
ty of NFV
environm
ent [18]
A toolkit named
OpenBaton was used
which consists in
identifying network
threats, generating security
policies and makeing an
active monitoring of
network packets, adapting
the rules according to the
properties of packets on
the ports monitored.
Build a Hypervisor
using this feature
embedded and
transparent, it could
be expensive and
take some time to be
made.
2015
Network
Two 3rd solutions can be
The complexity of
visibility
poisoning
of NFV
standard
used within NFV standard
to solve this problem. One
of those is Rosemary [19]
that is an SDN controller
that resolves the lack of
access control and
authentication for the
applications responsible
for the Link Deletion
attack by employing a
sandbox approach (App
Zone). Another solution is
TopoGuard [20] that uses
Topology Update Checker
to verify the legitimacy of
a host
migration, the
integrity/origin of an
LLDP packet and switch
the port property once
detecting a topology
update
implementing the
two 3rd party
applications must be
a problem since no
Hypervisor is using
it.
2016
Side
Channel
Attacks to
the VM
frequency
[16]
To defend against this
attack it is required to
eliminate or reduce the
signal information
generated by the channel
or introduce some kind of
noise to the channel.
Some organizations
already have this
functionality
embedded into their
systems. The only
challenge is to find
the most efficient
system in the market.
2009
Denial of
Services
at
forwardin
g plane
level [16]
The feature FlowVisor
[21] reads the traffic in
slices, it learns and read
the packets over the
network and receive an
update from the network
controller and applies the
new rules to a specific
slice of the network. This
feature can prevent the
Denial of Services from
affecting the whole
environment since it can
block the traffic at a small
part of the packet or
sequence.
When receiving a
DoS attack it is hard
to differentiate
between the attack
packets and normal
packets.
2018
Signaling
System 7
attacks in
NFV [9]
SIGTRAN protocol and
MTPSec, IPSec and an
enhanced firewall
combined with the
intrusion detection feature
are the proposed solutions
to identify and mitigate the
SS7 attacks.
The solutions for
signaling system 7
attack are quite
expensive and not
easy to implement in
the VM environment
making it
impracticable.
2017
Access
Control
Managem
ent in
NFV[18]
ETSI NFV MANO
specifications can
automatically update the
system policies, making
the access control stronger
and self-managed into the
systems.
This is based on
theoretical logic and
did not process in
actual NFV
environment.
III.
ANALISYS AND DISCUSSION
Based on the comparative study performed, we found that
SS7 attack in NFV is the biggest security challenge because
it
is
the
newest
released
attack.
Due
to
solution
implementation cost and configuration complexity, the
solution for SS7 becomes impracticable. This also has four
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

big breaches divided into User Information, Eavesdropping,
Financial Thievery and Misuse of Service. Considering SS7
is a silent attack, it can leak multiple information and
protocols, for example, Logical Application Part (CAP).
When a Man-in-the-Middle attack is launched on the SS7
layer, the attacker intercepts the traffic and makes the router
busy in processing inconsistent packets while it sends the
attack packets to the full traffic. This action may steal data
in various levels of communication since it can capture
network packets and application layer packets as well.
IV.
PROPOSED SOLUTION
NFV can be improved in many ways. One of them, which
we consider most important, is putting encryption of the
traffic across the NFV environment will protect it against
many threats such as SS7. Our proposed solution is
embedded integration of Hypervisors with IPS and IDS
systems. Since they can monitor the network and auto create
policies to defend the environment, this can be the best
solutions for newer attacks as signaling systems 7. Another
point is that with the data created by IPS and IDS systems,
the researchers will have the capability to understand and
improve security quickly and efficiently.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The NFV findings reveal that the concept is widely
accepted by various individuals mainly due to its reduction
in cost and dedicated hardware. However, NFV faces or
gives rise to various security concerns as it is open to some
security breaches and it is not capable to avoid a DDoS
attack, for example. Organizations that use NFV systems can
have better performance than those using the traditional
computer networking systems. Since NFV is vulnerable to a
dangerous attack such as SS7, it is highly recommended that
the network specialist ensure to have a good firewall
combining IPS and IDS features, since we do not have an
embedded hypervisor OS yet. Also, there is a huge growth of
IoT devices globally. Solutions such as NFV will often need
to make new equipment connected to the Internet viable, so
the investment in upgrades is needed, especially thinking
about threats and concerns, for example, SS7 attack over
NFV, since SS7 is one of the biggest security challenges for
NFV environment since it exploits the vulnerability of the
communication infrastructure.
To implement the proposed solutions it is required a
dedicated research to improve the NFV capabilities and
integrate with the market security solutions as Deep Packets
Inspection and Intrusion Detection Systems so we can
implement a fully embedded virtual network solution. We
will also be customizing an OpenStack OS that uses its own
native IPS when the NFV feature is enabled, so it can grant
only genuine packets and users to access the systems behind
it, making it more reliable and robust.
The focus will also be on the protocols such as
SIGTRAN and MTPSec which can make it easier for the
NFV host to identify the threat and take some action to avoid
the breach. The IPSec protocol will also be used, so its
capacity to ensure the origin and destination details inside
the packet can be a good option to ensure the environment
security.
In the future, the above features and protocols can be
tested
inside
the
NFV
environment
to
validate
the
functionality and protect against the SS7 breach.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Odini, “NFV Testing. IEEE Software Defined Networks,”
pp. 24 November 2016.
[2]
R. Mijumbi, J. Serrat, J. Gorricho, N. Bouten, F. De Turck,
and R. Boutaba. “Network Function Virtualization: State-of-
the-Art and Research Challenges,” IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, pp. 236-262, 2016.
[3]
E. Duarte and M. Hiltunen. “Workshop on Dependability
Issues on SDN and NFV (DISN),” 2015 45Th Annual
IEEE/IFIP International Conference On Dependable Systems
And Networks, 2015.
[4]
N. Amogh, A. Gelman, and M. Ulema. “IEEE SDN/NFV
Standardization
-
IEEE
Software
Defined
Networks,” sdn.ieee.org, pp.1-5, 24 November 2016.
[5]
D. Bernardo and B. Chua. “Introduction and Analysis of SDN
and NFV Security Architecture (SN-SECA),” 2015 IEEE
29Th International Conference On Advanced Information
Networking And Applications, 2015.
[6]
W. Yang and C. Fung, "A survey on security in network
function
virtualization,”
IEEE
Netsoft
Conference
And
Workshops (Netsoft), pp.1-5, 2016.
[7]
K. Raina, S. Chaudhry, A. Milenkoski, B. Jaeger, M. Harris,
and S. Chasiri. et al.
“Security Position Paper Network
Function Virtualization,” Cloud Security Alliance, pp.5-26,
2016.
[8]
B. Han, V. Gopalakrishnan.,L. Ji, and S. Lee. “Network
Functions Virtualization: Challenges and Opportunities for
Innovation,” pp.93-96, 2016.
[9]
T. Qasim, M. H. Durand, A. Khan, F. Nazir and T.
Qasim.”Detection of signaling system 7 attacks in NFV using
machine
learning,”
IEEE
15th
international
bhurban
conference on applied sciences & technology, 2018.
[10] A. Kalliola, S. Lal, K. Ahola, I. Oliver, and Y. Miche.
“Testbed for security orchestration in an NFV environment,”
IEEE Conference on Network Function Virtualization and
Software Defined Networks, 2017.
[11] C. L Hwang and K. Yoon. “Multiple attribute decision
making: methods and applications a state-of-the-art case,”
Vol. 186, Springer Science & Business Media, pp.25-48,
2012.
[12] A. Tong. “An Inside Look at Winning SDN and NFV Case
Studies (1st ed.),” pp.2-18, 2016.
[13] J.
Buchmann.
“Introduction
to
cryptography,”
Springer
Science and Business Media, pp. 1-5, 2013
[14] J.
Katz
and
Y.
Lindell.
“Introduction
to
modern
cryptography,” CRC Press, pp.2-4, 2014
[15] C. Buyukkoc.
“SDN Initiative Creates Subcommittee to
Address SDN, NFV Fragmentation-IEEE Software Defined
Networks” Sdn.ieee.org, pp.1-4, 24 November 2016
[16] Reynaud, François, François-Xavier Aguessy, Olivier Bettan,
Mathieu Bouet, and Vania Conan. "Attacks against network
functions virtualization and software-defined networking:
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

state-of-the-art."
In NetSoft
Conference
and
Workshops
(NetSoft), 2016 IEEE, pp. 471-476. IEEE, 2016
[17] T. Dimitrakos, “Security Challenges and Guidance for
Protecting NFV on Cloud IaaS,” 2014.
[18] T. Thanh, S. Covaci, M. Corici, and T. Magedanz. Fraunhofer
Institute
FOKUS,
2
Technical
University
Berlin
Germany,”Access Control Management and Orchestration in
NFV Environment.”
[19] S. Hong, L. Xu, H. Wang, and G. Gu, “Poisoning Network
Visibility in Software-Defined Networks: New Attacks and
Countermeasures,” NDSS’15, Feb. 2015.
[20] S. Shin et al. , “Rosemary: A Robust, Secure, and High-
performance
Network Operating System,” CCS’14, Nov.
2014. Milenkoski, A., Jaeger, B., Raina, K., Harris, M.,
Chaudhry, S., Chair, S., ... & Liu, W. (2016). Security
position paper network function virtualization. Cloud Security
Alliance-Virtualization Working Group.
[21] R. Sherwood, G. Gibb, K.-K. Yap, G. Appenzeller, M.
Casado, N.
McKeown, and G. Parulkar, “FlowVisor: A
Network
Virtualization
Layer,”
OpenFlow
Switch
Consortium,
Tech.
Rep,
Oct.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

