Prediction Metrics for QoE/QoS in Wireless Video Networks for Indoor 
Environmental Planning: A Bayesian Approach 
 
André Augusto Pacheco de Carvalho 
Laboratory of Computation and Telecommunications 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: andrepcarvalho@gmail.com 
 
João Victor Costa Carmona 
Laboratory of Computation and Telecommunications 
Technology Institute, Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: victorjvcc@gmail.com 
 
Jasmine Priscyla Leite de Araujo 
Laboratory of Computation and Telecommunications, 
Technology Institute, Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Brasil, Bolsista CNPq-Brasil 
e-mail: jasmine.araujo@gmail.com 
 
Simone da Graça de Castro Fraiha 
Laboratory of Computation and Telecommunications, 
Institute of Exact and Natural Sciences, Federal University 
of Pará Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: fraiha@ufpa.br 
 
Hermínio Simões Gomes 
Laboratory of Computation and Telecommunications, 
Institute of Exact and Natural Sciences, Federal University 
of Pará Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: herminio@ufpa.br 
 
Gervásio Protásio dos Santos Cavalcante 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: gervasio@ufpa.br
Abstract—The evolution of applications on wireless networks 
has grown in recent years due to the growth in the number of 
users of mobile phones, tablets, and other. The availability of 
demanding services, such as video transmission affect the 
Quality of Experience (QoE) and Quality of service (QoS) 
provided domestic and commercial users, it has stimulated the 
study of new techniques of management of network resources, 
always having as objective to provide high quality services to 
an increasingly demanding customer. This paper presents a 
methodology of Artificial Intelligence, using the technique of 
Bayesian networks, as a hybrid evaluation strategy by 
analyzing the behavior of QoE and QoS metrics, in designing 
wireless LAN. So, by manipulating the basis of Bayesian 
networks, it was possible to find satisfactory results for the 
proposed solution helps the planning of wireless networks in 
indoor environments, which does not exclude the possibility of 
using this approach for other situations. 
Keywords-QoE/QoS; measurements; simulation; Bayesian 
networks; wireless networks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Currently, there is an increasing need for bandwidth 
services due to the demand for greater high-speed mobility 
and available services, any time, any place, anywhere. It 
should be noted that there is a widespread access to wireless 
networks and the use of multimedia applications such as 
Voice over IP (VoIP), and online video games (data and 
video).  
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
report [1] indicates that this increase includes network 
bandwidth usage. This has involved observation and 
improved planning in Wireless Local Area Networks 
(WLAN), so that bottlenecks and/or overloading can be 
avoided. 
Studies based on measurements can provide more precise 
results than studies based on simulations or modeling  [2]. 
In [3], there is a visualization tool for wireless network 
parameters; in this case, physical layers for the network, 
where the data are also collected through measurements in 
an indoor environment. In [4], a study was carried out on 
wireless and digital television transmissions in networks. 
Metric data of the physical layer and application were 
gathered with the aim of creating a cross-layer approach to 
model quality loss through empirical equations. 
In this study, a combination of measuring and simulation 
(through the use of Matlab® software [5]) is proposed. This 
is carried out by means of modeling with the aid of 
Bayesian networks to represent wireless network and predict 
the behavior of Quality of Experience or services offered to 
the user that differ from [3], where the QoS was only 
evaluated for a VoIP application. 
An evaluation will be conducted of several Quality of 
Experience (QoE) and Quality of Service (QoS) metrics [6], 
some taken from the measuring process and others 
originating from the data handling. 
The study is structured in the following way: Section II 
presents the related work. In Section III, the environment 
where the measurements were carried out is examined. 
Section IV describes the methodology employed and Section 
V shows the results obtained. Section VI discusses the 
conclusions of the study. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

II. 
RELATED WORK 
This work has as a differential of other article published, 
consideration of the parameters of QoS and QoE to assist in 
planning 
design 
of 
wireless 
networks 
for 
indoor 
environments. 
As we can see from Wu et al. [7], the beginning of the 
form study in this area of planning mainly uses techniques 
of neural networks and genetic algorithm to perform the 
forecast/prediction with some QoS/QoE metrics, never both. 
Dimitriou et al.  [8] makes use of physical layer 
parameters such as average power, signal error and signal, 
interference noise (SINR). 
Fraiha [9] proposed a methodology for projects in 
wireless local area networks optimized by using a model of 
loses of signal power and measures considered QoS 
parameters, always aiming to maximize coverage with the 
least number of Access Point (PA) to be installed in a given 
indoor environment by using a technique of optimization of 
multi-objective genetic algorithms, proposing a propagation 
model that allows simulating the likelihood of receiving the 
signal in the environment studied. 
This paper presents a new approach in designing indoor 
networks; prediction considering the QoE and QoS 
parameters to assist in the planning of wireless networks for 
indoor environment. 
III. 
THE MEASUREMENT SETTING 
The classroom building of the Federal University of Pará 
(UFPA) was used as the setting for carrying out the 
measurement campaign, as illustrated in Figure 1. It is built 
of bricks and concrete and has glass windows on the side and 
a corridor. The chairs and tables inside the rooms are made 
of plastic and metal. 
The measurements were conducted on the second floor. 
The size of the building is 40x11 meters. This floor has six 
rooms, each measuring 6x8 meters. 
Figure 2 shows a diagram of the classrooms where the 
measurements took place. The transmitter location is shows 
together with the points that were analyzed (in red). 
 
 
Figure 1.  The classroom building: classrooms and side corridor 
 
 
Figure 2.   Model of the setting and location of the points analyzed  (red) and 
transmitter location (PA). 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology employed for this study followed a 
number of stages: collection of the results of the experiment - 
these results are used to gain entry to the Bayesian networks 
[3], so that probability maps can be generated. After this, 
these maps are converted into information to allow an 
analysis of the behavior of the QoE/QoS metrics in wireless 
networks and to assist in the planning of the indoor 
networks. Figure 3 shows a flowchart of the methodology 
employed in this study.  
In planning wireless networks there is a mathematical 
formula that proves of installation exact PA, so in the 
methodology of this article was carried out measurements for 
the construction of measures to generate Bayesian network, 
to conduct training and validation. 
Several tools were used in order to control the traffic 
characterization, mapping the wireless network created, and 
can perform the analysis while the transmitter sent the video 
to the recipient. 
 
 
Figure 3.   Flowchart of the Methodology  
A. Materials Used 
The components of the interconnected network were as 
follows: four notebooks, two being used for the video 
transmission and reception respectively, and the remaining 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

two to generate competing traffic in the network by using the 
Windows 7 operating system. 
The configurations of the computers and PA that were 
employed, were as follows: 
• Two computers with a processor: core I5 2.4 GHz; 
4 GB RAM memory, HD of 500 GB; on-board video 
card with up to 512 MB of shared RAM memory and  
Windows 7 64 bit operating system; 
• Two computers with AMD A6 3410mx processor; 
video radeon HD graphics 1.6 GHz card; 4 GB RAM 
memory; HD of 500 GB; and Windows 7 64 bit 
operating system; 
• An Evo-W301AR (SIROCO) Router Model, 
Channel 3 (2422 MHz) - mode: 802.11g – channel 
width 20 MHz, maximum transmission rate 54 Mbps 
and Transmission power 20 dBm. 
 Figure 4 below shows the layout of the computers in 
class 1, where some of the devices used were installed. 
B. Measurements 
  A WLAN network was assembled to evaluate the 
communication and video transmission. Evalvid [10] 
software was employed for the video transmission and 
reception; this consists of a set of tools that allow the 
network to be evaluated by obtaining performance metrics 
such as jitter, end-to-end delay, Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio 
(PSNR) and Structural Similarity (SSIM). 
    These were obtained by making a comparison between 
the video frames received and the video reference frames. 
Figure 4 shows the two frames - the frames degraded by the 
effects of transmission  (left part) and the original frame 
without degradation, (right part). 
    In the case of the SSIM metrics, the index varies from 
0 to 1, where the closest to 1, means a greater quality and 
indices closest to 0, means a lowering of quality.  By 
analogy, the PSNR, is in a scale that ranges from 0 to 50, 
where the higher the value, the greater the inability of the 
user to detect failures in the video. 
    Some metrics like PSNR and SSIM are calculated 
through a set of frames. Other metrics like jitter and end-to-
end delay are calculated through the time needed for the 
consecutive frames to reach the receptor. As well as these 
metrics, at each reception point, the Receiver Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI) was measured by means of the 
WirelessMon tool [11]. 
    Traffic simulation (T-Iperf and R-Iperf) constant [12] 
was generated in the network with the aim of creating 
competition for bandwidth between the traffic caused by 
Iperf and the transmission of video traffic. This made it 
possible to characterize the network that was the nearest 
possible to a real network where competitive services are 
made available by the band.  
   The videos were transmitted in the MPEG-4 
Widescreen 16:9 format with a resolution of 1920x1080p so 
that they complied with the digital TV coding Standards. 
   During the measurement procedure, a methodology 
was employed to ensure there was no divergence in the way 
the data were collected. It can be described as follows: the 
PA was installed in the first room together with both the 
computers which carried out the video transmission and the 
computers that generated the network traffic constant with 
the T-Iperf e R-Iperf measurement tools. Only the video 
receptor that remained moved around between the points and 
this meant that the video could be received and reconstructed 
and it was thus possible to evaluate the quality of the 
transmission. 
     
 
Figure 4. Example of frame reception failures (above) and the original video 
frame (below). 
 
   The sending of the video and the measurement of the 
signal strength generated by the PA was carried out for each 
point shown in Figure 2. After the dispatch, a receptor file 
was made which enabled the video to be reconstructed by 
checking the quality of the data transmitted to determine if 
there had been any packet losses during the transmission. 
C. Computational Modeling and Simulation (Bayesian 
Networks) 
At the end of the measuring, several files were compiled 
and on the basis of this data, the modeling was carried out to 
enable us to create a Bayesian network. 
Bayesian networks are probabilistic graphical models for 
the representation of knowledge in areas where there is 
uncertainty. These models can be represented in two way: 
• 
Qualitative: 
representing 
the 
dependencies 
between the nodes; 
• 
Quantitative: 
represented 
by 
conditional 
probability tables. 
As a result, the evaluation can be carried out in terms of 
the probability of these dependencies [13][14]. These 
components form an efficient representation of the joint 
probability distribution of the X variables in a given domain 
[15]. 
Since a network is generated, it is possible to predict its 
future behavior through the choice of an interval for a given 
attribute. When this interval is selected, the values are 
propagated to the nodes, which is called the Bayesian 
inference [14]. 
After the measurements, numerous files were generated; 
these files contain data that generated the basis of measures. 
However, due to signal coverage, we could not 
obtain all the necessary measures for the entry of Bayesian 
network.  
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

However, with the use of Matlab®, it has been possible 
to perform the database extension measures. Dealing with a 
real existing base, we could create a Bayesian network. 
Despite having generated multiple files, scientifically 
measured points were to be based on an analysis of a 
methodology. However, due to coverage area of PA and the 
size of the building, we could not do more measurements; 
so, as a solution to extend the base, Matlab® has been used. 
A program was created that uses the feature of Matlab® 
of a micro type artificial neural network Radial Basis 
Function (RBF), the function newgrrnn, which implements 
the generalized recurrence, where a Gaussian function [2] 
with crests near the points measured is simulated. So, the 
points obtained from regression [9] has underestimated 
values and values well estimated to close points measured, 
making the gradual expansion of the points so that there was 
a sufficient database for Bayesian network was applied. 
Furthermore, in the program, there was the need of a 
softening in the generation of items, by using the parameter 
in the Matlab ® called spread, for which the creation of new 
point was approximately, so the regression cited would 
point creation by simulating the real scenario, where points 
close to the measured point stay good and far from the worst 
gets worse.   
Figure 5 shows the network generated with the QoS and 
QoE metrics and the metrics for physical layer, distance and 
RSSI. Figure 6 shows the inference of best distance. The 
probability values of the other nodes are altered, which 
confirms the propagation.  
This was exemplified by analyzing the RSSI metric 
when it was observed that there is a 81% probability of 
being between -60.0 and -49.0 dBm when the inference for 
the distance metric is at its best value, with points close to 
the access point of 5.36 to 6.06 meters. The PSNR value for 
the same inference has 65% of probability of being between 
24.55 and 36.24dB. The delay has almost 100% of 
probability of being between 151 and 591 ms.  Jitter has a 
99.0% probability of being between entre 0.08 and 1.83s. 
Finally, the SSIM has a probability of 65% of being 
between 0.75 and 0.868.  
Figure 7 gives an example of another inference that can 
be made with regard to the worst distance. When the RSSI 
metric is analyzed, it can be seen that it has an 86% 
probability of being between -64.0 and -79.8 when the 
inference of the metric distance is at its worst value, if the 
worst value is considered to be the points most distant from 
the access point of 12.55 to 24.13 meters. The PSNR value 
for the same inference has a 62.1% probability of being 
between 13.33 dB to 19.89 dB. 
 
 
Figure 5. Bayesian Network 
The Delay has more than 50% of probability of being 
greater than 194 ms.  Jitter has a 61.3% probability of being 
between 1.834 and 3.69 seconds. Finally, the SSIM has a 
probability of 62.1% of being below 0.65.  Figure 8 and 
Figure 9 can be analyzed for a visual inspection of the 
inferences carried out. 
 
 
Figure 6. Inference of best distance  
 
 
Figure 7. Inference of worst distance  
 
 
Figure 8. Inference of best PSNR 
Jitter 
SSIM 
RSSI 
PSNR 
Delay 
Distance 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 9. Inference of worst PSNR 
 
With the aid of the conditional probability tables 
obtained from the Bayesian network and variance tables, a 
simulation was conducted on the basis of this mathematical 
modeling and adapted to QoE metrics by means of Matlab. 
Finally, the values of the distance metrics can be visualized 
to analyze/predict the behavior of the video streaming 
network. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The heat maps presented follow the same reasoning of 
the measured building plan; for this reason, from Figure 10 
to Figure 14, the X axis represents the distance in meters and 
the simulation also represents the layout of the ¨pavilion¨ 
(inner part of the building) described in Section II. The Y 
axis represents the width of the classroom and the colors 
represent the degree of probability of the metric. The 
reference-point can be considered to be at the beginning of 
the X axis at a distance of 40 meters, that is it passes through 
the pavilion in an opposite direction to that shows in the 
diagrams. All the distance values shows in this section 
follow this reference-point.  
With regard to the SSIM metric, the greater it is, the 
better according to Figure 10, and a Bayesian simulation 
with measurement data shows a behavior above 0.7, even up 
to 10 meters from class 1.  
In the case of the delay metric, Figure 11 shows a 
reasonable value that corresponds to less than 250 ms at a 
distance of approximately 10 meters too. In Figure 12, jitter 
follows the previous metrics and shows reasonable values in 
up to 10 meters with values less than 0.8 second.  
PSNR is most often used to measure the quality of 
reconstruction of loss compression codec (example: for 
image compression). The sign, in this case, are the original 
data, and the noise is the error introduced by compression. 
When comparing compression codec, PSNR is an approach 
to the human perception of quality reconstruction. 
In Figure 13, PSNR also has satisfactory values up to 10 
meters with values that are approximately 28 or more. In 
Figure 14, the RSSI also has values higher than 10 meters, 
above 60 dB. 
 
 
Figure 10. Maps showing Probability of SSIM  
 
Figure 11. Maps showing probability of delay 
 
As in visual terms, the metrics had a suitable 
performance at a distance of up to 10 meters from the Access 
point; in this case, it is suggested that in the planning stage, 
other PAs are installed from this point, so that the other 
classrooms can be provided with a satisfactory number of 
applications that use video.  
 
 
Figure 12. Maps showing the probability of jitter 
 
This decision-making is based on the use of video to 
meet the needs of metrics that measure performance within a 
specified standard. Thus, the behavior of metrics can be 
predicted and access points installed, to make improvements 
when complying with the requirements of the QoS/QoE 
parameters. 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

 
Figure 13. Maps showing the probability of  PSNR 
 
Figure 14. Maps showing the probability of RSSI. 
 
Finally, these probabilistic maps show the use of the 
hybrid technique: measurements and the Bayesian approach. 
They can be used to analyze the behavior of wireless 
networks and assist in the analysis of the performance of 
these networks by taking account of both QoE/QoS 
bandwidth applications in the growth of indoor wireless 
networks. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This article has outlined an empirical approach and 
simulation for assisting the planning of wireless networks 
based on video measurements in the inside environment of 
the facilities of UFPA. 
The results suggest that the use of the proposed tool is 
feasible.  The measured data allow the Bayesian network to 
make estimates in a consistent and reliable way for 
environments similar to those measured in this study. 
In future studies, it is intended to perform more 
measurements campaigns, however these measurements 
shall be directed in other buildings, with totally different 
internal architecture of the architectures present in the 
building chosen for this dissertation. 
Perform simulations with other types of network traffic, 
such as audio. Expand the methodology of this study for the 
outdoor environment, and tests with other emerging 
technologies, such as the 4G and 5G. 
At the time of the confrontation of environments, would 
be inevitable, as a consequence the achievement also 
approach in the frequency range that used, as used in the 
frequencies of 2.4 GHz to 5 GHz, based on the IEEE 802.11 
wireless networks while the 4G is used in the 700MHz 
frequency in Brazil. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was done with the support of CNPq - National 
Council for Scientific and Technological Development – 
Brazil. The authors also would like to thank to UFPA, and 
the National Institute of Science and Technology – Wireless 
Communications (INCT-CSF) and their research staff for 
their support of this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T, “Measuring the Information Society Report 2014” in 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/publications/mis2014. 
aspx [retrieved: 03/2015]. 
[2] R. Jain. The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis: 
Techniques for Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation and 
Modeling, Publisher Wiley, 1991, pp. 418-425. 
[3] J. Araujo, J. Rodrigues, S. Fraiha, H. Gomes, N. L. Vijaykumar, G. 
Cavalcante, and C. Frances, “A Visualization Tool for Analyzing the 
Design of Physical and Network Layers Parameters of a Wireless 
Network”, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on 
Advances in Computing and Information Technology, vol. 3, July 
2012, pp. 291-305. 
[4] B. S. L. Castro, “CrossLayer Modeling of Quality of Experience for 
Video Transmission in OFDM Wireless Systems”, Doctoral Thesis, 
UFPA,Feb. 
2014, 
pp. 
20-24 
in 
http://repositorio.ufpa.br/jspui/handle/2011/5593 [retrieved: 03/2015]. 
[5] J. B. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, “EvalVid - A Framework for 
Video Transmission and Quality Evaluation”, 13th International 
Conference on Modeling Techniques and Tools for Computer 
Evaluation, Urbana, Illinois, USA, Sept. 2003, pp. 255-272. 
[6] H. Chaari, K. Mnif, and L. Kamoun, “An Overview of Quality 
Assessment Methods of Video Transmission over Wireless 
Networks”, Electrotechnical Conference (MELECON), 16th IEEE 
Mediterranean, vol. 1, March 2012, pp. 741-744. 
[7] R. Wu, Y. Lee, and S. Chen, “Planning System for Indoor Wireless 
Network”, Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, IEEE 
Consumer Electronics Society, vol. 47, Feb. 2002, pp. 73-79. 
[8] A. G. Dimitriou, S. Siachalou, A. Bletsas, and J. N. Sahalos, “An 
efficient propagation model for automatic planning of indoor wireless 
networks”. Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), 2010 Proceedings of 
the Fourth European Conference on. Barcelona, April 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[9] S. G. C. Fraiha, “Location of Access Points in Indoor Environments 
in Wireless System Projects”, Doctoral Thesis, UFPA, May 2009, pp. 
6-104.  
[10] Matlab, Matlab version 7.0. In Technical Documentation, 2012. 
[11] WirelessMon, PassMark Software, 2010. 
[12] Y. Byun, S. Narayanan, S. Mott, K. Biba, J. Schwenkler, R. Osborn, 
and M. Morris, “Wireless Broaband Measurement in California”. 10th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Technology: 
New 
Generations, vol. 1, April 2013, pp. 505-509. 
[13] Z. Chen, Data Mining and Uncerta in Reasoning: An Integrated 
Approach,Wiley-Interscience, Aug. 2001, pp. 285-289. 
[14] K. B. Korb and A. E. Nicholson, Bayesian Artificial Intelligence, Crc 
Press, 2004, pp. 74-89. 
[15] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent System, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers, Sep. 1988, pp. 223-232. 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

