 
Offline Routing and Spectrum Allocation Algorithms for Elastic Optical Networks 
with Survivability 
Rana Alaskar, Anwar Alyatama, Imtiaz Ahmad 
Computer Engineering Department, Kuwait University, Kuwait 
Email: rana.alaskar@hotmail.com, a.yatama@ku.edu.kw, imtiaz.ahmad@ku.edu.kw  
 
 
Abstract—Elastic optical networks (EONs) are a promising 
solution for future high-speed networks, because of their 
ability to efficiently manage network resources and provide 
better spectrum utilization. The intractable routing and 
spectrum allocation (RSA) problem and the eventually 
imposed survivability constraints play key roles in the effective 
design and control of EONs. In this work, we investigate 
priority allocation algorithms designed to solve the offline RSA 
problem in protection-based EONs. These algorithms are 
analyzed from the point of view of their main objective 
(minimizing the total amount of spectrum needed to serve the 
traffic 
demand), 
when 
the 
demand 
includes 
unicast 
unprotected and unicast protected requests. Unicast protected 
requests utilize a 1+1 dedicated path protection, with the same 
channel. The proposed priority allocation algorithms are based 
on the compact scheduling algorithm and the ordering 
obtained with two different metrics, both of which consider the 
bandwidth and required number of links of the requests 
presented to the network. We evaluate the performance and 
efficiency of the proposed algorithms across a range of demand 
frequency 
slots 
distributions 
in 
a 
mesh 
network. 
A 
comparative analysis of the obtained experimental results 
reveals that the proposed algorithms outperform existing 
reference algorithms in terms of spectrum utilization. 
Keywords-elastic optical networks; spectrum allocation; 
survivability; spectrum utilization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The increasing demand of multimedia streaming services, 
such as audio and video conferences, and cloud computing 
applications, requires increasingly higher data rates, flexible 
network resource management, and efficient spectral 
utilization. Traditional optical networks are unable to keep 
pace with the high data rate demands, because they are based 
on wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) technology, 
which wastes a large portion of the spectrum [1]. A different 
type of optical network—elastic optical network (EON)—
has been recently presented in [2][3]. It can efficiently 
manage network resources and provide better spectrum 
utilization, because it is based on orthogonal frequency-
division multiplexing (OFDM) technology [4]. OFDM is a 
multi-carrier modulation scheme that transmits a high-speed 
data stream by splitting it into several parallel data streams, 
each carrying a relatively low data rate. 
Many challenges have been faced by EON researchers 
concerning hardware development, network control and 
management, and spectrum management. Routing and 
spectrum allocation (RSA) [5][6] is one of the key 
challenges to be faced, and has received much attention from 
researchers in recent years, because it lies at the core of the 
design and control of EONs. RSA includes two main 
functions: assigning a suitable physical path between the 
source and destination(s), and allocating contiguous, 
continuous, and non-overlapping parts of the spectrum to 
meet traffic demand, while minimizing the total amount of 
spectrum needed to serve it. RSA is an NP-hard problem, 
because of the continuity constraint [5]. It can be divided 
into offline and online RSA. The former is used when traffic 
demand is known in advance, and traffic variations occur 
over a long period of time, whereas the latter is used when 
traffic arrives in a random manner. 
Many research has been conducted addressing the offline 
RSA problem. This problem was introduced by Jinno et al. 
[7]. Talebi et al. [8] mapped the offline RSA problem to a 
scheduling problem in multiprocessor systems. Genetic 
algorithms [9] and the tabu search algorithm [10] have also 
been proposed to solve the offline RSA problem and enhance 
spectrum utilization. We have recently proposed priority 
allocation algorithms [11] to handle offline RSA problem in 
unicast unprotected EONs. For more details about the 
spectrum management techniques in EONs, readers are 
referred to the recent excellent surveys in [1][12]. 
Data transmitted through the network can be of critical 
nature (e.g., military, medical, or financial information). 
Protecting the paths followed by those data is crucial, to 
ensure a continuous transfer of data. Survivability is an 
important design criterion for traditional networks in general 
and optical networks in particular, including EONs [13][14]; 
it describes the ability to continue providing services in the 
presence of a single failure, which could be caused by fiber 
cuts, active component failure inside the network equipment, 
or node failure [15]. Given that EONs have the capability of 
transmitting huge amounts of data, data transfer interruption 
due to node or link failures should be minimized or—if 
possible—completely avoided. Networks serve two types of 
request: protected and unprotected. Protected requests are 
designed to overcome a single network failure, most 
commonly by assigning a disjoint backup path (optical path, 
in the context) for each working path. The commonly used 
protection techniques can be divided into dedicated path 
protection (DPP) and shared path protection (SPP) 
techniques. Dedicated path protection means that each 
working path is assigned its own dedicated backup path, to 
which it can switch in case of a failure. On the other hand, 
shared path protection means that backup spectrum 
subcarriers can be shared on some links, as long as their 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
protected segments (links, subpaths, paths) are mutually 
disjoint. Dedicated path protection can be either 1+1 or 1:1. 
In 1+1 dedicated path protection, traffic is simultaneously 
transmitted on both the working and backup paths. On the 
contrary, in 1:1 dedicated path protection, the backup path is 
idle and can be used to transmit low-priority traffic during 
normal operation. Two different channel allocation policies 
can be applied with the aforementioned protection schemes. 
The first one is a same channel (SC) policy, where the 
working path and the backup path share the same central 
frequency. The second is the different channel (DC) policy, 
where both the working path and the backup path can utilize 
any available central frequency. The different channel policy 
is considered to be a resource-consuming solution, in 
contrast with the same channel policy, which is a much more 
cost-effective solution [16]. In this paper, we the address 
offline routing and spectrum allocation problem with 
dedicated path protection in EONs with same channel 
(RSA/DPP/SC). It is worth mentioning that DPP is 
considered an expensive scheme, but has a quick recovery 
time. On the other hand, SPP saves network resources, but it 
needs much more time than DPP to recover from failure. 
A significant amount of research has been carried out to 
study the issue of survivability of EONs. Some of these 
research efforts have been directed to the online (i.e., 
dynamic) RSA problem [17][18], whereas others considered 
the offline (i.e., static) RSA problem in survivable EONs, 
considering the different protection techniques mentioned 
above. (This later problem is the focus of this work.) In 
particular, the use of DPP in EONs has been addressed in 
[16][19]-[21]. Recently, Ruan et al. [15] studied the offline 
survivable multi-path RSA problem with DPP in EONs. 
They formulated the problem as an integer linear 
programming (ILP) problem. In the same context, 
Klinkowski [9] addressed RSA problem in EONs with DPP 
with static traffic demand, and he used genetic algorithms to 
develop an efficient algorithm, which performs better than 
other reference algorithms. Concurrently, the use of SPP in 
EONs has also been studied by many researchers [22]-[24]. 
Walkowiak et al. [23] addressed the offline RSA problem in 
EONs with SPP, formulating it also as an ILP problem. More 
details about the use of protection techniques in EONs can be 
found in [25], a recent survey of the topic. 
In a recent paper [11], we addressed the offline RSA 
problem in EONs by introducing priority allocation 
algorithms 
for 
unicast 
unprotected 
networks. 
These 
algorithms are based on both the compact scheduling 
algorithm [8] and a combination of the request bandwidth 
and the number of links used by that request. Simulation 
results show that our proposed priority allocation algorithms, 
when applied to different network topologies (e.g., a chain 
network and the National Science Foundation network 
(NSFNET)) with diverse bandwidth distributions outperform 
the existing algorithms, and produce close to optimal 
solutions in a unicast unprotected network. In this paper, we 
extend our priority allocation algorithms to handle 
survivability in EONs with the goal of minimizing the 
amount of spectrum needed to serve the traffic demand. In 
particular, we study the behavior of the proposed algorithms 
when the traffic demand includes unicast unprotected, and 
unicast protected requests. We consider spectrum usage as a 
performance metric, to show the effectiveness of the 
proposed algorithms. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
formulates the problem. Section III reviews priority 
allocation algorithms, with working examples. Section IV 
discusses the experimental results. We present our 
conclusion in the last section. 
II. 
PROBLEM FORMULATION 
In this section, we present and explain the offline RSA 
problem in protection-based EONs, with an example that 
will be used in the priority allocation algorithms section. 
A. Problem Statement 
The problem to be addressed can be formulated as 
follows: Given: a) A directed graph G(V, E), where G 
denotes the physical topology of an EON, V denotes the set 
of nodes, and E denotes the set of bidirectional optical links. 
b) A set of frequency slices (i.e., subcarriers) in each optical 
link, of cardinality sc. c) A set of requests between source-
destination pairs (s, d)i of request size sz (i.e., the number of 
frequency slices needed to serve a request), where i Î I  
represents the request type. Our aim is to minimize the 
amount of spectrum needed to serve the traffic demand—
which includes different types of request to the mesh 
network—under the following constraints: 
 
1) Spectrum contiguity constraint: Each request should 
be assigned to a contiguous portion of the spectrum. 
2)  Spectrum continuity constraint: Each request should 
be assigned to a similar portion of spectrum for all the 
corresponding links. 
3) Non-overlapping spectrum constraint: Requests that 
need to use similar links should be assigned to non-
overlapping portions of the spectrum. 
4) Same channel (applies only to RSA/DPP/SC): For 
each unicast protected request, the working and backup 
paths should be assigned to similar portions of the spectrum. 
 
In this paper, we consider two types of request, I = {1, 
2}. A request can be unicast unprotected (i = 1), or unicast 
protected (i = 2). When the demand includes a unicast 
unprotected request (s, d)1 from source s to destination d, the 
request will be served by contiguous subcarriers on all 
optical links belonging to the predetermined fixed working 
path from s to d. However, when the demand includes a 
unicast protected request (s, d)2, the request will be served by 
contiguous subcarriers on all optical links belonging to both 
the predetermined fixed working path and the predetermined 
fixed backup path from s to d. 
B. RSA/DPP/SC Example 
To exemplify the problem, consider the mesh network 
illustrated in Figure 1, with four nodes and five bidirectional 
links, and the corresponding spectrum demand matrix D 
shown below. The demand matrix includes the requests from 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
each source to each destination in the mesh network; the total 
number of requests in this example is therefore equals to 12. 
In the case of a unicast unprotected request, the routing 
algorithm chooses an arbitrary fixed path (the working path) 
selected from the set of shortest paths computed with 
Dijkstra's algorithm. Unicast protected requests with DPP 
utilize both a working path and a backup path. The working 
path is fixed and arbitrarily selected from the set of shortest 
paths computed with Dijkstra's algorithm; likewise, the 
backup path is fixed and arbitrarily selected from the set of 
shortest paths computed by Dijkstra's algorithm, after 
removing all edges belonging to the working path. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mesh network with four nodes. 
D = 
 0
1
10
100
 100
0
100
1
 1
10
0
4
 10
100
10
0
   
TABLE I.  
REQUESTS MADE TO THE MESH NETWORK 
Requests 
(s, d)i 
Type of request 
Size 
(sz) 
Working 
path 
Backup 
path 
t1 (1, 3)2 
Unicast protected 
10 
1-3 
1-4-3 
t2 (4, 3)2 
Unicast protected 
10 
4-3 
4-1-3 
t3 (2, 4)2 
Unicast protected 
1 
2-1-4 
2-3-4 
t4 (2, 1)1 
Unicast unprotected 
100 
2-1 
____ 
t5 (2, 3)2 
Unicast protected 
100 
2-3 
2-1-3 
t6 (1, 2)1 
Unicast unprotected 
1 
1-2 
____ 
t7 (3, 1)2 
Unicast protected 
1 
3-1 
3-2-1 
t8 (3, 2)1 
Unicast unprotected 
10 
3-2 
____ 
t9 (3, 4)2 
Unicast protected 
4 
3-4 
3-1-4 
t10 (4, 1)1 
Unicast unprotected 
10 
4-1 
____ 
t11 (1, 4)1 
Unicast unprotected 
100 
1-4 
____ 
t12 (4, 2)1 
Unicast unprotected 
100 
4-1-2 
____ 
 
Table I shows the requests made to the mesh network, 
type (unicast unprotected or protected), size (1, 4, 10, 40, or 
100), and the nodes traversed by the working and backup 
paths. Those requests will be sorted based on the selected 
sorting mechanism, and the sorted list of requests will be 
used as an input to the compact scheduling algorithm [8]. 
III. 
PRIORITY ALLOCATION ALGORITHMS 
In this section, we evaluate the extended version of the 
proposed algorithms [11] as a solution to the offline RSA 
problem in survivable OFDM optical networks; the objective 
is to minimize the amount of spectrum needed to serve traffic 
demand when it includes unicast unprotected, and unicast 
protected requests. The RSA problem has two different 
dimensions: the spectrum (or bandwidth) and the links. The 
combination of these two dimensions plays a key role in 
improving the process of spectrum allocation. Therefore, the 
proposed solution is based on combining them in multiple 
ways. First, we introduce the compact scheduling algorithm 
[8], which has been used to show the effectiveness of the 
proposed algorithms. We then review our priority allocation 
algorithms; specifically, the sorting mechanisms. Finally, we 
show a working example, to demonstrate the performance of 
the algorithms when compared with the existing algorithms. 
A. Compact Scheduling Algorithm 
The priority allocation algorithms proposed in [11] are 
based on an existing algorithm, the compact scheduling 
algorithm, proposed by Talebi et al. [8]. The compact 
scheduling algorithm is a typical list scheduling algorithm, 
where the quality of the solution is very sensitive to the order 
of requests in the list. It has a complexity of O(n2), where n is 
the number of requests in the list. The input to the compact 
scheduling algorithm is a sorted list of requests to the mesh 
network. The algorithm is constituted by the following steps: 
 
1) Select the first request in the list and assign it to a set 
of consecutive links. 
2) Delete the executed request from the list, and update 
the status (idle or busy) of the corresponding links. 
3) Scan the list at the same scheduling instant to select 
requests that can be executed simultaneously with the 
currently executed requests. 
4) Continue scanning the list until there are no other 
requests that can be executed at that scheduling 
instant or no available links. 
5) Advance the scheduling time based on the earliest 
finishing request, and add the available links to the set 
of free links. 
6) Repeat the aforementioned steps until all the requests 
have been satisfied. 
B. Sorting Mechanisms 
In [11], we proposed two priority allocation algorithms 
that consider both dimensions of the problem: the links and 
the spectrum (or bandwidth). It is worth mentioning that in 
the present paper the link dimension is represented by the 
number of links used by the working path in the case of 
unicast unprotected requests, and by the number of links 
used by both the working and backup paths in the case of 
unicast protected requests. On the other hand, in our previous 
work [11], the link dimension was represented by the 
number of links used by only the working path, because only 
unicast unprotected requests were being considered there. 
The sorting mechanisms, the longest then widest compact 
algorithm (LWC) and the area compact algorithm (AC), are 
described below. 
 
1) Longest then Widest Compact Algorithm (LWC): In 
the first proposed algorithm, we consider both dimensions 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
of the problem, the links and spectrum (or bandwidth), 
using two levels (a primary and a secondary sorting 
mechanisms) to sort the requests in the demand. In the 
primary sorting mechanism, requests are sorted based on the 
amount of needed spectrum or bandwidth (BWi), from 
higher to lower. Then, in the secondary sorting mechanism, 
requests with equal bandwidth are sorted based on the 
required number of links (LKi)—obtained in the terms 
described before—from higher to lower. 
2)  Area Compact Algorithm (AC): In the second 
proposed algorithm, we also consider both dimensions of 
the problem, but in a different way. The amount of spectrum 
needed for a request and the required number of links (in the 
working path, or the working and backup paths, depending 
on the type of request) are multiplied (LKi ´ BWi), thus 
providing a shape area. This area captures both dimensions 
of the problem and constitutes a better ordering metric. In 
this mechanism, the areas are used to sort the requests in the 
list, from higher to lower. 
C. Working Example 
In this subsection, we discuss the behavior of the above-
mentioned algorithms, and show how different sorting 
mechanisms can affect the amount of spectrum needed to 
satisfy the demand, when it includes both unicast 
unprotected and unicast protected requests. The requests lists 
presented below are based on the spectrum demand 
described in the problem formulation section. 
 
1) Existing Algorithms: 
The longest first compact algorithm (LFC), which was 
proposed in [8], sorts the requests based on the required 
amount of spectrum, from higher to lower. The sorted list of 
requests that will be used as input to the compact scheduling 
algorithm after applying the LFC algorithm is shown below: 
 
{t4, t5, t11, t12, t8, t10, t1, t2, t9, t6, t7, t3} 
 
Running the compact scheduling algorithm with LFC 
shows that 224 subcarriers are needed to serve the 
considered demand (which includes both unicast unprotected 
and unicast protected requests). 
The widest first compact algorithm (WFC), also 
proposed in [8], sorts the requests based on the required 
number of links used by the working and/or backup paths, 
from higher to lower. The sorted list of requests that will be 
used as input to the compact scheduling algorithm after 
applying the WFC algorithm is shown below: 
 
{t3, t2, t5, t7, t9, t1, t12, t4, t6, t8, t10, t11} 
 
Running the compact scheduling algorithm with WFC 
shows that 215 subcarriers are needed to serve the 
considered demand. 
2) LWC: 
The sorted list of requests that will be used as input to the 
compact scheduling algorithm after applying the LWC 
algorithm is shown below: 
 
{t5, t12, t11, t4, t1, t2, t8, t10, t9, t3, t7, t6} 
 
Running the compact scheduling algorithm with LWC 
shows that only 202 subcarriers are needed to serve the same 
demand. The number of subcarriers needed with LWC is 
therefore lower than if either LFC or WFC are used (224 and 
215, respectively). 
3) AC: 
The sorted list of requests that will be used as input to the 
compact scheduling algorithm after applying the AC 
algorithm is shown below: 
 
{t5, t12, t4, t11, t1, t2, t9, t10, t8, t3, t7, t6} 
 
In Figure 2 (a), request 5 is assigned at t = 0, and it 
occupies 100 subcarriers from the following links: 2-3, 2-1, 
and 1-3. Then, request 12 is assigned, and it occupies 100 
subcarriers from the following links: 4-1, and 1-2. After that, 
request 11 is assigned, and it occupies 100 subcarriers from 
link 1-4. Last request that will be assigned at t = 0 is request 
8, and it occupies 10 subcarriers from link 3-2. Figure 2 
shows the spectrum utilization as time proceeds, using the 
AC algorithm. Running the compact scheduling algorithm 
with AC shows that 202 subcarriers are required for the 
considered demand. The number of subcarriers needed for 
AC is equal to the number of subcarriers needed for LWC, 
and lower than the numbers needed for both LFC and WFC 
(224 and 215, respectively).  
 
  
 
            (a)   
      
            (b) 
 
  
 
            (c)   
      
            (d) 
 
  
 
            (e)   
      
            (f) 
Figure 2.  Area compact algorithm progression. (a) Step 1. (b) Step 2. (c) 
Step 3. (d) Step 4. (e) Step 5. (f) Step 6. 
Although in the example both LWC and AC require the 
same number of subcarriers (i.e., 202 subcarriers) to serve 
the demand, their behaviors are quite different. They have 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
different request ordering mechanisms and different request 
allocation orders. The performance difference between them 
will be discussed in the experimental results and analysis 
section. 
IV. 
EPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we present a comparative evaluation 
between our algorithms and the heuristics recently proposed 
in [8] (i.e., LFC and WFC). We start by presenting the 
comparison metric used for performance evaluation, along 
with the simulation environment. We use three traffic 
frequency slot distributions (discrete uniform, discrete high, 
and discrete low) to measure and compare the performances 
of our algorithms. Finally, we present the performance and 
analysis results. It is worth mentioning that both LFC and 
WFC were developed in the context of an RSA problem 
without additional survivability constraints in the mesh 
network. Therefore, we modified the aforementioned 
existing algorithms to address the new constraints resulting 
from the use of protection.  
A. Comparison Metric 
We consider spectrum usage as the goal metric to 
evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithms. 
Spectrum usage is defined here as the number of subcarriers 
needed to serve a traffic demand including the three different 
types of request (i.e., unicast unprotected and unicast 
protected requests). 
B. Simulation Setup 
To test the proposed algorithms in terms of survivability 
EONs, we use the NSFNET like topology as in [11]. The 
mesh network is composed of 14 nodes and 20 bidirectional 
links, as shown in Figure 3. In the case of unicast 
unprotected requests, the routing algorithm assumes an 
arbitrary fixed path, selected from the set of shortest paths 
computed with Dijkstra's algorithm. Unicast protected 
requests with dedicated path protection utilize both a 
working path and a backup path. As with the unicast 
unprotected requests, the working path is fixed and 
arbitrarily selected from the set of shortest paths computed 
with Dijkstra's algorithm; likewise, the backup path is fixed 
and arbitrarily selected from the set of shortest paths 
computed with Dijkstra's algorithm, after removing all edges 
belonging to the working path. 
 
 
Figure 3.  NSFNET-like topology. 
We use a distance-adaptive spectrum allocation strategy 
to allocate the spectrum for each traffic demand based on its 
needed frequency slots and the length of its path as reported 
in [7][8][26]. We assume an elastic optical network with five 
different types of request sizes. Each demand requests 1, 4, 
10, 40, and 100 frequency units. The size of the traffic 
demand is generated using three different types of frequency 
slot distributions (discrete uniform, discrete high, and 
discrete low). In the discrete uniform distribution case, all 
frequency slots have the same probability, whereas in the 
discrete high distribution higher frequency slots have higher 
probabilities, and in the discrete low distribution higher 
frequency slots have lower probabilities. The details of these 
three distributions and their frequency slot selection 
probabilities are listed in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
DETAILS OF THE USED TRAFFIC FREQUENCY SLOTS 
DISTRIBUTION 
Frequency 
slot 
Discrete 
uniform 
Discrete 
high 
Discrete 
low 
1 
0.2 
0.1 
0.3 
4 
0.2 
0.15 
0.25 
10 
0.2 
0.2 
0.2 
40 
0.2 
0.25 
0.15 
100 
0.2 
0.3 
0.1 
 
To evaluate our algorithms, we consider a scenario where 
the traffic demand includes both unicast unprotected and 
unicast protected requests; the ratio of unicast protected to 
unicast unprotected requests varies from 0 % to 50 %, in 
increments of 10 %, with different traffic demand generation 
patterns. Note that in the first data point in the graphs, all the 
requests are unicast unprotected, while in the last data point, 
half of the requests are unicast unprotected, and half are 
unicast protected. Table III presents the number of unicast 
unprotected and unicast protected requests in the scenario. 
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF REQUESTS IN THE SCENARIO 
 
Our proposed algorithms are implemented in C++ using 
Xcode (version 6.3.1) on a MacBook Pro with OS X El 
Capitan (version 10.11.4), a 2.2-GHz Intel Core i7 processor, 
and 16 GB of memory. 
C. Performance Analysis and Results 
In this subsection, we determine the average percentual 
improvement in the number of needed subcarriers to evaluate 
the performances of our proposed algorithms (LWC and AC) 
when compared with the two existing algorithms proposed in 
[8] (LFC and WFC). For each data point in our experiment, a 
large number of random problem instances (up to 8000) were 
executed, and only the resulting average values are being 
Percentage 
(%) 
Number of requests 
Unicast unprotected 
Unicast protected 
0 
182 
0 
10 
164 
18 
20 
146 
36 
30 
128 
54 
40 
110 
72 
50 
91 
91 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
reported. The averaged results were obtained with 99 % 
confidence, with a confidence interval smaller than 1 % of 
the average value. 
Figures 4, 5 and 6 show the average number of needed 
subcarriers versus the percentage of unicast protected 
requests, for both proposed algorithms and existing 
algorithms. 
Table 
IV 
presents 
the 
performance 
improvements of our proposed algorithms when compared to 
LFC and WFC, for different frequency slot distributions.  
TABLE IV.  
AVERAGE PERCENTUAL IMPROVEMENTS 
Distribution 
LWC 
AC 
LFC 
WFC 
LFC 
WFC 
Uniform 
8.5 % 
6.9 % 
8.5 % 
6.9 % 
Discrete high 
9.5 % 
7.1 % 
9.6 % 
7.2 % 
Discrete low 
6.3 % 
6.1 % 
6.3 % 
6.1 % 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average number of subcarriers as a function of the percentage 
of unicast protected requests; uniform frequency slot distribution. 
 
Figure 5.  Average number of subcarriers as a function of the percentage 
of unicast protected requests; discrete high frequency slot distribution. 
 
Figure 6.  Average number of subcarriers as a function of the percentage 
of unicast protected requests; discrete low frequency slot distribution. 
As shown in the figures, the proposed algorithms 
performed better than both the LFC and WFC algorithms. In 
other words, the number of needed subcarriers with our 
algorithms was less than the number of needed subcarriers 
with either LFC or WFC. In particular, in the case of a 
discrete high distribution of the requested frequency slots, 
LWC and AC improved the results obtained with LFC by 
9.5 %, and 9.6 %, respectively; when compared with WFC, 
improvements of 7.1 % and 7.2 % were respectively 
obtained. As mentioned previously, considering both 
dimensions; the amount of spectrum and the number of links; 
while sorting the requests, affects the number of subcarriers 
needed to serve the traffic demand. Therefore, our sorting 
mechanisms outperform the existing mechanisms, and 
require less number of subcarriers. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we addressed the intractable offline RSA 
problem in protection-based EONs. We investigated the 
efficiency of priority allocation algorithms based on the 
compact scheduling algorithm and the ordering obtained 
with two different metrics, both of which consider the 
bandwidth and required number of links of the requests 
presented to the network, albeit in slightly different ways. 
Our objective was to minimize the total amount of spectrum 
needed to serve traffic demand when this demand includes 
unicast unprotected and unicast protected requests. We 
evaluated the performance and efficiency of our algorithms 
across a range of frequency slot distributions. The obtained 
experimental results have shown that the proposed priority 
allocation 
algorithms 
outperformed 
other 
reference 
algorithms in term of spectrum utilization. The proposed 
priority allocation algorithms are robust, and can be used in 
EONs with different setups. 
This work can be extended in several interesting 
directions. For instance, it would be enlightening to 
investigate the online RSA problem in EONs, in which 
concerns the reduction of blocking and/or fragmentation 
obtainable by combining multiple bin packing algorithms 
(e.g., first fit, best fit, and random fit). Moreover, it would 
also be very interesting to focus on the problem of how to 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

 
efficiently handle the multicast protection problem in EONs, 
by finding the backup tree for a working (multicast) tree with 
the minimum amount of spectral resources. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Talebi, et al., “Spectrum management techniques for elastic 
optical networks: a survey,” Opt. Switch. Netw., vol. 13, pp. 
34-48, July 2014. 
[2] M. Jinno, et al., “Spectrum-efficient and scalable elastic 
optical path network: architecture, benefits, and enabling 
technologies,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 66-
73, Nov. 2009. 
[3] O. Gerstel, M. Jinno, A. Lord, and S. Yoo, “Elastic optical 
networking: a new dawn for the optical layers?” IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. s12-s20, Feb. 2012. 
[4] G. Zhang, M. De Leenheer, A. Morea, and B. Mukherjee, “A 
survey on OFDM-based elastic core optical networking,” 
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 65-87, Feb. 
2012. 
[5] Y. Wang, X. Cao, and Y. Pan, “A study of the routing and 
spectrum allocation in spectrum-sliced elastic optical path 
networks,” Proc. 2011 IEEE INFOCOM, Shanghai, 2011, pp. 
1503-1511. 
[6] M. Klinkowski and K. Walkowiak, “Routing and spectrum 
assignment in spectrum sliced elastic optical path network,” 
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 884-886, Aug. 2011. 
[7] M. Jinno, et al., “Distance-adaptive spectrum resource 
allocation in spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network,” 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 138-145, Aug. 2010. 
[8] S. Talebi, E. Bampis, G. Lucarelli, I. Katib, and G. Rouskas, 
“Spectrum assignment in optical networks: a multiprocessor 
scheduling perspective,” IEEE/OSA J. Opt. Commun. Netw., 
vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 754-763, Aug. 2014. 
[9] M. Klinkowski, “A genetic algorithm for solving RSA 
problem in elastic optical networks with dedicated path 
protection,” Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput, vol. 189, pp. 167-176, 
2013. 
[10] R. Goscien, K. Walkowiak, and M. Klinkowski, “Tabu search 
algorithm for routing, modulation, and spectrum allocation in 
elastic optical network with anycast and unicast traffic,” 
Comput. Netw., vol. 79, pp. 148-165, March 2015. 
[11] R.W. Alaskar, I. Ahmad, and A. Alyatama, “Offline routing 
and spectrum allocation algorithms for elastic optical 
networks,” Opt. Switch. Netw., vol. 21, pp. 76-92, July 2016. 
[12] B. Chatterjee, N. Sarma, and E. Oki, “Routing and spectrum 
allocation in elastic optical networks: a tutorial,” Commun. 
Surv. Tuts., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1776-1800, May 2015. 
[13] S. Ramamurthy and B. Mukherjee, “Survivable WDM mesh 
networks, Part I – Protection,” 18th Annu. Joint Conf. IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies, New York, 1999, 
pp. 744-751. 
[14] C. Politi, et al., “Dynamic operation of flexi-grid OFDM-
based networks,” Optical Fiber Communication Conf. and 
Expo. and the Nat. Fiber Optic Engineers Conf., Los Angeles, 
CA, 2012, pp. 1-3. 
[15] L. Ruan and Y. Zheng, “Dynamic survivable multipath 
routing and spectrum allocation in OFDM-based flexible 
optical networks,” J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 
77-85, Jan. 2014. 
[16] M. Klinkowski and K. Walkowiak, “Offline RSA algorithms 
for elastic optical networks with dedicated path protection 
consideration,” 
4th 
Int. 
Congress 
on 
Ultra-Modern 
Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops, St. 
Petersburg, 2012, pp. 670-676. 
[17] A. Alyatama, “Dynamic spectrum allocation for orthogonal 
frequency-division 
multiplexing 
optical 
networks 
with 
survivability and multicasting,” J. High Speed Netw., vol. 22, 
no. 1, pp. 1-13, Feb. 2016. 
[18] A. Tarhan and C. Cavdar, “Shared path protection for distance 
adaptive elastic optical networks under dynamic traffic,” 5th 
Int. Congr. on Ultra-Modern Telecommunications and 
Control Systems and Workshops, Almaty, 2013, pp. 62-67. 
[19] M. Klinkowski, “An evolutionary algorithm approach for 
dedicated path protection problem in elastic optical 
networks,” Cybern. Syst., vol. 44, no. 6-7, pp. 589-605, Aug. 
2013. 
[20] J. López, Y. Ye, V. López, and F. Jimenez, “Traffic and 
power-aware protection scheme in elastic optical networks,” 
XVth Int. Telecommunications Network Strategy and 
Planning Symposium, Rome, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
[21] K. Walkowiaka, M. Klinkowskib, B. Rabiegaa, and R. 
Gościeńa, “Routing and spectrum allocation algorithms for 
elastic optical networks with dedicated path protection,” Opt. 
Switch. Netw., vol. 13, pp. 63-75, July 2014. 
[22] M. Liu, M. Tornatore, and B. Tornatore, “Survivable Traffic 
Grooming in Elastic Optical Networks—Shared Protection,” 
J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 903-909, March 2013. 
[23] K. Walkowiak and M. Klinkowski, “Shared Backup Path 
Protection in Elastic Optical Networks: Modeling and 
Optimization,” 
9th 
Int. 
Conf. 
Design 
of 
Reliable 
Communication Networks, Budapest, 2013, pp. 187-194. 
[24] C. Yang, N. Hua, and X. Zheng, “Shared Path Protection 
based on Spectrum Reserved Matrix Model in Bandwidth-
Variable 
Optical 
Networks,” 
7th 
Int. 
ICST 
Conf. 
Communications and Networking in China, Kun Ming, 2012, 
pp. 256-261. 
[25] G. Shen, G. Guo, and S.K. Bose, “Survivable elastic optical 
networks: survey and perspective,” Photonic Netw. Commun., 
vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 71-87, Feb. 2016. 
[26] M. Fayez, I. Katib, G.N. Rouskas, and H.M. Faheem, 
“Spectrum assignment in mesh elastic optical networks,” 
Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Computer Communications and 
Networks, Las Vegas, NV, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

