Smart Factory or Smart Car?
The concept of IoT usability
Kazuyuki Shimizu
School of Business Administration
Meiji University
Tokyo, Japan
shimizuk@meiji.ac.jp
Abstract— The subject of this paper focuses mainly on the
world car industry and, especially, on how to implement
Internet
of
Things
(IoT)
technology
into
the
Japanese,
German, and U.S. car industries, as well as on differences
between the concepts of IoT usability in those target countries.
The car industry is now at a difficult phase with regard to how
to adjust secret information for car production using open-
access IoT technology. Intercorporate relationships provide
advantages for car production in general; however, this open-
access IoT technology is likely to completely re-arrange these
relationships. It will be very interesting to see how these
relationships will re-arrange. In this paper, we apply the
“smiling curve concept” to find a solution for differences in
IoT
usability
in
the
target
countries.
Then,
we
assess
producers’ ideas, such as the smart factory in Germany and
Japan, and the users’ need for a smart car in the U.S.A. As a
result,
we
explain
the
advantages
of
intercorporate
relationships and how integral parts of the product will be
replaced using IoT technology.
Keywords-component;
Internet
of
Things
(IoT);
INDUSTRIE 4.0;
Toyota; smiling curve; cyber and physical
systems (CPS).
I.
INTRODUCTION
German car and manufacturing industries are trying to
connect their production equipment through the IoT to
reduce their inventories, costs and time. These attempts
represent the early stages of smart factory, which requires an
advanced Supply Chain Management (SCM). Germany is
currently ranked third in sales of manufacturing equipment in
the world, according to data from Gardner Research in 2015
[1]. This trend is dependent upon the number of cars in
production, because car components are made by machines
from
the
manufacturing
industries.
The
existing
car
industries could shape the former “Lean Production” idea, to
reduce inventories [2].
In our work, we conducted a comparative study of
producer’s and user’s viewpoints for car industries. German
Volkswagen (VW) and Japanese Toyota are focusing on
their production systems. Their production systems are
different: VW has a module based production system
(Modularer Querbaukasten; MQB) and Toyota has a lean
based production system (Toyota New Global Architecture;
TNGA). We will not present the details of the difference
between the U.S. and the above mentioned European module
based production system. The two systems are hypothetically
treated as being the same for the purpose of this paper.
Both Toyota and VW have different ways of using the
IoT technology. We believe that the parts combination
influences the entire idea of IoT usability, which is causing
differences between producer’s and user’s viewpoints. U.S.
companies are run by user’s viewpoint, for example, through
wearable technology such as WiFi, Bluetooth or other
connective standards. German and Japanese companies are
not run by user’s viewpoints, but, rather, VW and Toyota
think about the producer’s viewpoints, which are much more
related to manufacturing special parts combination and the
smart factory.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we address the question of what a “smart factory” is in
Germany, with the INDUSTRIE 4.0 program. In Section 3,
we describe the car parts segmentation and smart, connected
products that use a similar architecture to that of computer
segmentation. Section 4 presents the differences between
Volkswagen
and
Toyota
and
Section
5
explains
INDUSTRIE 4.0 in the Japanese context. The “smiling
curve” and the interaction between the cyber and physical
space and addressed in Sections 6 and 7, respectively. We
conclude the paper in Section 8.
II.
INDUSTRIE 4.0 (SMART FACTORIES)
German car and manufacturing industries are trying to
use IoT technology to enhance their competitiveness. The
name “INDUSTRIE 4.0” means the upgrade of industrial
revolution from 1.0 to 4.0. The first industrial revolution
‘1.0’ followed the introduction of water- and steam-powered
mechanical manufacturing facilities in the 17th century. The
second industrial revolution ‘2.0’ followed the introduction
of electrically powered mass production based on the
division of labor between the 18th and the 19th century. The
assembly line was introduced on a large scale by the meat-
packing factory in Chicago. The third industrial revolution
‘3.0’ used electronics and Information Technology (IT) to
achieve further automation of manufacturing in the 20th
century. Now, companies are beginning to interactively
connect their machinery equipment through the IoT, to
improve the industrial processes involved in manufacturing,
engineering, material usage, and supply chain as well as life
cycle management. This is called the industrial revolution
‘4.0’, which is based on using Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS) by an establishing global networks and common
sensors [3].
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

CPS make the link between computational Cyber and
Physical elements supported by widely used cheap sensors.
Recently, the automotive industry is characterized by a static
production line. However, German ‘INDUSTRIE 4.0’ could
offer a dynamic production line. Each parts components
“Module” will be linked by the sensors mentioned above.
This will be a result of producer’s viewpoints.
On the other hand, Google made a self-driving vehicle
(Physical space). This product uses a CPS scheme. There are
different types of sensors such as GPS (Global Positioning
System) receiver, Laser range finder, Video camera and
Radar. These types of common sensors bring in big data into
Cyber space. There is also an interaction between big data in
Cyber space and the Physical system. This is why we think
U.S. car manufacturing is much more dependent on user’s
viewpoints.
There is high level IoT planning around the world, such
as “Advanced Manufacturing National Program (AMNP)”
[4] in U.S.A., “La nouvelle France industrielle” in France,
and “Future of Manufacturing” in the U.K. The German
“INDUSTRIE 4.0” is also one of these high-level national
IoT plans [5]. This high level planning creates a competition
between several countries in terms of their technological
innovative viewpoint.
III.
CAR PART SEGMENTATION AND SMART, CONNECTED
PRODUCTS
A car is made up of more than 30,000 parts that can be
divided
into
five
broad
categories,
namely:
Engine,
Drivetrain, Body, Chassis and Internal/Body Interior.
•
The engine is the heart of the car, and it converts
thermal energy into mechanical energy.
•
The drivetrain transmits the output of the engine to
the wheels, via the transmission, drive shaft and
differential.
•
In general, the body refers to the bonnet, doors, trunk
of the car and essentially consists of steel.
•
The chassis is currently defined as including the
suspension, steering, tires, and wheels.
•
The body interior is also an important component of
the car, and includes the seats, dashboard, air
conditioner, and audio
Cars may be equipped with additional items to enhance
their comfort.
Table I shows the different car parts segmentation. VW
and Toyota have developed highly innovative production
systems that give modularity considerable thought. The term
modularity is widely used in studies of technological and
organizational
systems.
Product
systems
are
deemed
“modular” when they can be deconstructed into a number of
components that can be mixed and matched in a variety of
configurations. For example, an internal body “Interior”
(each of dash board, air conditioner and audio) forms one
packaged “module”. This “module” will be linked with a
centralized main computer support by widely used cheap
sensors.
TABLE I. CAR PART SEGMENTATION
Car Part
Segmentation
I.
Engine
II.
Drivetrain
III.
Body
IV.
Chassis
V.
Interior
Hybrid
Electricity
Drive
Wheels
Bonnet Suspen
sion
Sheets
Hydrogen
Engine
Transmis
sion
Doors
Steering
Dash
boards
Down Sized
Engine
Drive
Shaft
Trunk
Tires
Air
Conditioner
Ecofuel
Engine
Differen
tial
Wheels
Audio
Toyota
Volkswagen
A computer is actually one of the best examples of
modular design. The typical modules for this design are
power supply units, processors, mainboards, graphics cards,
hard drives, optical drives, etc. All of these parts could be
easily changeable, so if the parts are used by standard
interface, they can be easily replaced.
M. Porter and J. Heppelmann [6] talk about the historical
transition of IT into the product value chain. During the
1960s and 1970s, with the first wave of IT, automated
individual activities in the value chain used a computer. For
example, order processing and bill paying was done through
a computer. In the 1980s and 1990s, the second wave of IT-
driven
transformation
included
an
inexpensive
and
ubiquitous connectivity to the Internet. The two waves gave
rise to huge productivity gains and growth over the
economy. However, the products themselves were largely
not affected. Then, in the third wave, IT is becoming an
integral part of the product itself, with embedded sensors,
processors, software, and connectivity in products, coupled
with a product cloud in which product data is stored and
analyzed. There are called “Smart, Connected Products”.
IV.
VOLKSWAGEN (MQB) AND TOYOTA (TNGA)
Regarding the concept of “modular design” used in the
production system at German VW and Japanese Toyota, we
compared, for example, their engine varieties. Table I shows
the variety of “I. Engine” module. Here, we notice that
Toyota has an advantage of Hybrid engine on one hand, but
VW has a competitive edge because of a down-sized engine,
on the other hand. This competitive advantage is a product of
their inter-corporate relationships. Japanese car producers are
characteristically vertically integrated, which is different
from an Anglo (U.S. and Europeans) horizontally integrated
model. Japanese car producers need, for example, monthly
and weekly meetings, which include a variety of other
networks such as banks, trading houses, suppliers and
customers, which is called “Keiretsu”. On the other hand, an
Anglo (U.S. and Europeans) model is horizontal integrated.
These inter-corporate relationships influence their parts
combination for MQB and TNGA.
VW has developed a very innovative parts combination
called the Modular Transversal Toolkit (MQB) with their
suppliers. They went through a tough period with their
production system in the 1980s. MQB was developed under
this tough environment. German workplaces are very strictly
protected by trade unions, and the existing employee
structure created a barrier to change their production system.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

We previously wrote a paper about “German Heavy-weight
Management:
A
Case
Study
of
Volkswagen”,
which
described the potential competitiveness of well-developed
German production systems [7].
The MQB system has the engine “quer,” or transverse.
The “Modularer Längsbaukcombinationasten” (MLB) and
“MMB” (Modularer Mittelbaukasten) systems are applied to
bigger cars. This development of each broadly formed
module such as from MQB, MLB to MMB aims for a more
standardization of parts, which is enhanced from the
economical and mass markets products to the a middle
luxury class to reduce the cost and assemblies.
Basically, Toyota has a long time value chain, which is a
tightly
coupled
production
system.
The
client’s
diversification led to environmental changes by Toyota New
Global Architecture (TNGA). This new platform realizes
optimal
design
freedom and
ergonomics. The TNGA
provides a foundation for grouping development, which
enables the standardization of parts and components across
different
models,
such
as
VW’s
parts
combination
developments, improving the efficiency of the development
process while reducing costs.
V.
INDUSTRIE 4.0 (IOT) IN THE JAPANESE CONTEXT
Another question is how to find the best matching point
between the standardized (MQB) and elaborated components
(TNGA) for each type of integration. U.S. and Germany
have created several types of consortium, such as internal
combustion, robotics and others etc. U.S. and Germany are
very well organized horizontally in terms of their knowledge
cooperation among government, industry and academia, not
like Japanese vertical intercorporate relationship. This is both
good and bad at the same time. Wiener says, “These
advantages would seem to be the ability of the brain to
handle vague ideas, as yet imperfectly defined.” And
“Render unto man the things which are man’s and unto the
computer the things which are the computer’s [8].”
VI.
SMILING CURVE
The founder of Aser.co, Stan Shih [9] argued the
concept of the “Smiling Curve” in 1992. This theory is
about appropriate value added of different sections in the
industry. Figure 1 below shows the “smiling curve”.
Figure 1.
Smiling Curve.
A smiling curve is an illustration of value-adding
potentials of different components of the value chain in an
IT-related manufacturing industry.
The concept of “Competitive Advantage” written by M.
Porter in 1985, gave the concept of the “value chain” [10].
The primary activities in the value chain are: 1. Inbound
Logistics 3. Operations 4. Outbound Logistics 5. Marketing
& Sales and 6. Service. Also, support activities include: A.
Firm Infrastructure B. Human Resource Management C.
Technology Development, and D. Procurement. Porter
suggests that a firm might develop a competitive advantage
in any one of these areas; 1 to 6 and A to D.
The value chain command higher values added to the
product (such as Patent & Technology, R&D and Brands &
Service) than the middle part (such as Production) of the
value chain. Also the Fabrication part could be divided
between many different shops, such as paint, assembly, body
and so on.
The basic structure of the “Smiling Curve” in Figure 1
from left to right on the horizontal axis, is the upper, middle
and downstream of an industry, that is, the component
production, product assembly and distribution. The vertical
axis represents the level of value-added. In terms of market
competition type, the left side of the curve is worldwide
competition
whose
success
depends
on
technology,
manufacturing and economy of scales. On the right side of
the curve is regional competition. Its success depends on the
brand name, marketing channel and logistics capability.
In Figure 1, the“Smiling Curve” explains, from left to
right on the horizontal axis, which is labeled A, C and E on
this diagram called Cyber space. In this area, we could add a
high value virtually, such a patent and idea of technology.
This sphere contains intellectual properties, such as Software.
The bottom part of the conceptual diagram, labeled B，
D and F, shows what is called the“Physical space”. This
area gives a limitation for the added value to physical
existence, which is a real product. A good example is
assembled car products, in this context.
VII.
INTERACTION BETWEEN CYBER AND PHISICAL SPACE
In this paper, we applied the concept of “smiling curve”
to car manufacturing industry. The way the automotive
industry
uses
modular
production
in
today's
global
competitive environment is similar to the way computers are
produced. IoT usability is different between Japanese and
Anglo (U.S. and Europeans) countries in terms of the car
industry.
We discussed
about
two
different
types
of
intercorporate
relationships,
which
are
the
Japanese
(“Keiretsu”= vertically integrated system) and Germans-U.S.
type (horizontally integrated system).
Figure 2 positions the targeted countries U.S., Germany
and Japan on the “Smiling Curve”. The figure shows the
Japanese “Keiretsu”= vertically integrated system and Anglo
(U.S. and Europeans) type horizontally integrated system, as
well as IoT usability in producer’s and user’s viewpoints.
Assembled car products are mainly made from German
and Japanese car producers. Therefore, we think that the
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

German and U.S. viewpoint for the car industry are different
in terms of using the IoT technology. Japanese and German
car producers are focusing more on the physical way for
assembly
production
line
out
of
their
module
(parts
combination) into the real world, using the IoT technology.
This plays a very important role for their supply chain
management
(SCM)
such
as
“Keiretsu”
and
Anglo
horizontally integrated system [11].
VIII.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, in this paper, we emphasize the different
concepts of IoT usability in targeted countries such as Japan,
Germany and U.S.A. German and Japanese car producers are
more focused on factory management using IoT technology.
Germans as well as U.S. place considerable emphasis on
user’s viewpoint, which means using a car more as an
equipment. The car is comparable to a computer, collecting
information through IoT (common sensor) technology. Then,
we see how the highly developed U.S. user’s viewpoint
could combine with Japanese and German producer’s
viewpoint to find out innovative products for smart factories,
which is now required.
Google is now trying to make a complete self-driving
vehicle without the necessary knowledge of car production.
They have much more IoT based knowledge for car
production. Japanese and Germans are adopting this self-
driving technology in a stepwise manner, introducing it into
their production line, which is needed for the interaction
between Cyber and Physical space.
We conducted a module based production system MQB
of VW and the other lean based TNGA. The three largest
U.S car manufacturers develop their advantage on the
production method by using the Smart Factory (big-data)
idea. “Smart” means to use “big data”, and use it in an
intelligent manner.
The meaning of a competitive advantage has been
changed with this newly developed relationship with regard
to the whole transport environment system.
Figure 2.
Positions of Japan, Germany and USA on the Smiling Curve
Japanese and German manufactures get their competitive
advantage from their intercorporate relationships, not from
drivers as user’s point of view. However, Japanese vertical
(“Keiretsu”)
model
and
Anglo
horizontal
model
are
substantially developed. As we’ve discussed by the “Smiling
Curve” and CPS, one could make the link between
computational Cyber and Physical elements supported by a
wide use of cheap sensors. A car becomes a sensor and could
re-arrange the total transportation environment.
“Keiretsu” vertically integrated system has produced
TNGA. Germans-U.S. horizontally integrated system has
developed MQB. Therefore, there is a lot of high level IoT
planning around the world. In the car industry, both user’s
and
producer’s
viewpoints
have
advantages
and
disadvantages. However, a horizontally integrated system is
far more advanced than TNGA in terms of cyber space
connectivity. Modules are developed following the computer
based architecture. Such integral parts of the product will be
replaced using IoT technology.
REFERENCES
[1]
Gardner
Research,
“World
Machine-Tool
Output
&
Consumption Survey 2015”, p4, 2015.
[2]
K.
Clark
and
T.
Fujimoto,
“Product
Development
Performance”, Japanease translation rights arrenged with
Harvard Business School Press in Boston. through The Asano
Agency, Inc. in Tokyo. pp321-338, 2001.
[3]
H.
Kagermann,
W.
Wahlster
and
J.
Helbig,
“Recommendations for implementing the strategic initiative
INDUSTRIE 4.0”, in resaerch paper from “Forschungsunion”
and “acatech”, pp17-21, 2013.
[4]
Executive Office of the President President’s Council of
Advisors
on
Science
and
Technology,
“Report
to
the
President Accelerating U.S. Advanced Manufacturing”, p4,
Oct 2014.
[5]
C. Siemieniuch, M. Sinclair and M. Henshaw, “Global drivers,
sustainable manufacturing and systems ergomics”, Applied
Ergonomics, No.51, pp104-119, Elsevier, 2015.
[6]
M. Porter, and J. Heppelmann, “How Smart, Connected
Products Are Transforming Competition”, Harvard Business
Review, pp64-88, Nov 2014.
[7]
K. Shimizu, “German Heavy-weight Management: A Case
Study of Volkswagen”, in Proceeding of the APCIM 2012,
August 2012.
[8]
N. Wiener, “God and Golem, Inc., A Comment on Certain
Point where Cybernetics Impinges on Religion”, The M.I.T.
Press, Cambridge, pp72-73, 1964.
[9]
S.
Stan,
“Growing
Global;
A
Corporation
Vision
Masterclass”, John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, pp10-11,
2002.
[10] R., Ankli, “Michael Porter's Competitive Advantage and
Business History”, Business and Economic History”, Second
Series, Vol.21, pp231-233, 1992.
[11] S. Turnbull, “The competitive advantages of stakeholder
mutuals”, 12th Annual Meeting on Socio-Economics Society
for the Advancement of Socio-Economics, LSE, p8, Last
revised September 20th, 2000.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

