Multifactor Biometric Authentication for Cloud Computing
Jihad Qaddour
School of Information Technology
Illinois State University
Normal, Illinois, USA
jqaddou@ilstu.edu
Abstract—Cloud Computing is a fast-growing technology,
which can do everything from running applications to storing
data off-site. It means a person can save his work around the
globe, retrieve, update, delete and use the data/information
stored in the cloud from anywhere in the world at any time.
The popularity of cloud in the business world has resulted in
its data centers growing at an unprecedented rate. While there
are so many benefits, there are always risks involved with
sharing
resources,
which
leads
to
privacy
and
security
concerns. Therefore, usage of Cloud Computing is still not at
par with businesses particularly; businesses who have critical
data that they cannot afford to lose or have stolen. This paper
investigates issues and challenges related to the authentication
security of cloud computing. Further, in this paper, a new
solution is proposed to enhance user authentication in Cloud
Computing using biometrics with multifactor authentication
techniques.
Keywords-Cloud
Computing;
Security;
Security
threats;
Biometric; Multi-factor authentication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the modern world, the Internet is growing at an
exponential pace. With this pace, many new technologies
came into existence and caught the attention of people from
different backgrounds, as well as industries. One of the
most popular tools is Cloud Computing (CC), which is
growing at an unprecedented rate. Cloud Computing is a
model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing
resources (i.e., networks, servers, storage, application, and
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with
minimal
management
efforts
or
services
provider
interaction [11][15]. Cloud Computing is a way to store any
data, such as images, videos, codes, and sensitive data on a
remote location other than the local device. Before Cloud
Computing came into existence, people used to save their
data on their local drives, where the data was not always
accessible. This was one of the main drawbacks, which
drove the development of a technology that gives access to
data at any place and that can be saved other than on local
drives. In addition, CC is a service that is provided by some
vendors to users offering options for storing, updating,
deletion of data, and developing different applications.
Moreover, the data will be stored at the remote location,
which gives users an option to retrieve and share data at
any time and any place. Every action has a reaction, and
similarly, when a new technology comes into existence, it
has some benefits as well as drawbacks. It is affected by
downtime, security and privacy issues, it is vulnerable to
attacks, and it has a limitation of control and security.
However, CC also helps in minimizing the infrastructure
cost, as it is cheaper than the cost incurred in the
infrastructure upgrades. It also eliminates the requirement
of upgrading infrastructure related to storage.
In the paper, the focus is on the authentication in
Cloud Computing and security issues that may arise or
exist during authentication. It is organized into four sections:
Section II talks about the Cloud Computing concept,
Section III addresses literature review, Section IV talks
about the research methodology, and Section IV concludes
our work.
II.
CLOUD COMPUTING CONCEPT
Cloud Computing has various features and the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) defined the
most essential five characteristics of Cloud Computing (CC)
[15].
A. Essential characteristics of Cloud Computing
1.
Broad network access and shared infrastructure
CC provides access to thin or thick client platforms (for
example,
mobile
phone,
laptops,
and
others)
through
standard mechanisms. As a part of doing business, cloud
providers invest in and build the infrastructure necessary to
offer software, platforms or infrastructure as a service to
multiple consumers. Capabilities are available through
shared networks with multitenant customers. Provider’s
resources are pooled to serve multiple consumers using a
multi-tenant model.
2.
On-demand self-service
With on-demand self-service, the cloud consumer will
be able to purchase and use cloud services as the need
arises. Moreover, a consumer can unilaterally provision
computing capabilities, such as server time and network
storage, as needed automatically without requiring human
interaction with each service provider. To make this
possible,
a
cloud
provider
must
obviously
have
the
infrastructure in place to handle consumers’ requests. Most
likely, this infrastructure will be virtualized, so different
consumers can use the same-pooled hardware.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

3.
Elastic and scalable
Capabilities can be elastically provisioned and released
to scale rapidly outward and inward commensurate with
demand. It allows providers to add or remove features,
without interruption and, at runtime, to handle the load
variation. From a consumer point of view is to have the
ability to expand and reduce resources according to their
specific
service
requirement.
This
service
capability
provides an elastic and scalable Information technology (IT)
resource. Consumers pay for only the IT services they use.
Although no IT service is infinitely scalable, the cloud
service provides the ability to meet the consumer's IT needs
creates the perception that the service is infinitely scalable
and increases its value. In the consumption-based pricing
model, providers charge the consumer per units consumed.
For example, cloud vendors may charge for the service by
the hour or gigabytes stored per month.
4.
Dynamic and virtualized
The need to leverage the infrastructure across as many
consumers as possible typically drives cloud vendors to
create a more agile and efficient infrastructure that can move
consumer workloads, lower overheads and increase service
quality. Many vendors choose server virtualization to create
this dynamic infrastructure.
5.
Measured Services
CC automatically controls and optimizes resources used
by leveraging a metering capability at some level of
abstraction appropriate to the type of service [11].
B. Cloud Computing Deployment Models
In addition, researchers have categorized four basic
cloud deployment models for delivery purpose and they are
as shown in Figure 1 [11]:
a.
Public Cloud
Public cloud infrastructure is made available to the
public and is owned by organizations selling the cloud
service that are responsible for infrastructure, maintenance,
controlling the data, and for the operation of CC. Examples
of the public cloud include Google App Engine, Microsoft
Azure, and Amazon EC2 [11]. All major components are
outside the enterprise firewall, located in a multi-tenant
infrastructure and access the cloud through a secure IP.
b.
Private Clouds
This cloud infrastructure is operated solely by the internal
IT of the organization; the organization may choose to
manage the CC in-house or contract it to a third party. The
computing infrastructure may exist on premises or off
premises. Examples of a private cloud include hospitals and
universities.
c.
Community Cloud
The community cloud shares the characteristics of both
the public and private cloud. It has restricted access to the
private
cloud
and
shares
its
resources
with
many
organizations like the public cloud. A good example is a
healthcare industry cloud. The infrastructure is a composition
of two or more clouds (private and public).
Community
cloud involves sharing of computing infrastructure between
organizations of the same community. For example, all
government organizations within the state of California may
share computing infrastructure in the cloud to manage data
related to citizens residing in California.
d.
Hybrid Cloud
The hybrid cloud infrastructure is a composition of two
or more clouds (public, private, or community). This is very
attractive to smaller businesses for which the security is an
important concern. Hybrid Cloud Organizations may host
critical applications on private clouds and applications with
relatively fewer security concerns on the public cloud. A
related term is cloud bursting. In the cloud, bursting,
organizations use their own computing infrastructure for
normal usage but access the cloud for high/peak load
requirements. This ensures that a sudden increase in
computing requirements is handled gracefully [4].
C. Cloud Service Models
NIST defined three types of services for the cloud model
a.
Software as a Service (SaaS)
b.
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
c.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Figure 1.
Cloud service model
a.
Software as a Service (SaaS)
SaaS is an ever-increasingly popular option for software
distribution. The Cloud Provider (CP) provides service to
customers in the form of software, specifically application
software running on and accessible in the cloud. The
applications are accessible from various client devices
through simple interfaces such as web browser. Some
examples of services are Google Gmail, Microsoft 365, and
Cisco WebEx [11].
b.
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
PaaS cloud provides service to the customer in the form
of a platform on which the customer’s application can run. A
PaaS cloud provides useful software building blocks and a
number of development tools that assist in deploying new
applications. In effect, PaaS is an operating system in the
cloud. For example. Google PaaS offers to build and host
web applications on the Google infrastructure.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

c.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
With IaaS, the customer has access to the resources of
underlying cloud infrastructure. IaaS cloud provides virtual
machines and other abstracted hardware and operating
systems.
IaaS
offers
customers
processing,
storage,
networks, and other fundamental computing resources so
that the customer can deploy and run arbitrary software.
Some examples of IaaS are Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
(Amazon
EC2),
Microsoft
Windows
Azure,
Google
Compute Engine (GCE) [9][11].
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Cloud Computing overgrows many computing paradigms
like grid computing, global computing, and Internet computing
in various aspects of on-demand self-service, broad network
access and shared infrastructure, elasticity and scalability,
guaranteed QoS (Quality of Service), and autonomous system
and virtualization [13][14], etc. A few states of the art
techniques that contribute to Cloud Computing are:
Wang et al. [1] proposed in their paper a new Cloud
Computing model named as a hybrid model with respect to
authentication and data security. In that article, a number of
methods were discussed in regards to assure data security to
protect user data. Authentication for the data based on public
key infrastructure, virtualization, and single encryption are
some methods discussed in their paper. Hemalatha et al. [2]
did a comparative analysis of security issues and encryption
techniques in cloud computing. The author of the article
discussed the two delivery models for addressing the issues
in Cloud Computing and they are cloud classification and
encryption mechanisms. In addition, to assure the privacy
and security of data over a cloud, authors did a comparative
study based on encryption techniques. Xin et al. [3]
discussed user authentication and unauthorized user access.
They did their research on data security model based on
multiple dimensions and proposed a three-layer defense
model.
In that model, each layer has their own role to
perform.
R. Massod et al. [6] did their research on implementing
Honey encryption to address brute force attack. A brute force
attack is done to get the user password or Personal
Identification Number (PIN) by the trial-and-error method.
For doing this, an automated software is used which can
generate many consecutive guesses. Brute force attack can
be of two type. The first is when a security analyst is testing
an organization’s network security. This type of attack helps
the analyst to point the gaps from where any attack for data
is possible. The second one is when a criminal uses brute
force attack to get encrypted data. The Honey Encryption
(HE) technique is used with Secure Repository Manager
(SRM) who creates a secure repository at server and client
systems. With every attack using the wrong cipher key, HE
will yield a fake plain-text or honey messages. This message
may seem legitimate but will be incorrect. This way the
attackers will have a bunch of fake plain-texts all looking
like actual text. So even if the attacker has the actual text
they will have to narrow it down from the haystack of false
texts.
After
implementing
honey
encryption,
it
is
almost
impossible to get any information or data of any user from
the server, because of honeypots. Use of honeypots is useful
as it generates new words named as honey words that looks
like the valid data but difficult to differentiate between the
original data and the data with honey words, which is
invalid. If the data is of large size, then a large number of
chunks are used to secure the data, and if the data is small,
then a small number of chunks are used. SRM first encrypts
the data before uploading the data to the cloud then performs
other functionalities to provide the security and privacy of
the encrypted data [4].
Hang et al. [5] proposed a public key encryption method
for integrity and authentication issues in cloud computing.
While data in transit over an internet, which is a type of
unsecured circuit, an unauthorized person, may access the
data, which is the main security issue in Cloud Computing
services. It is the cloud provider’s responsibility to provide
the security and integrity of the data to the end user.
Therefore, they use a public key to encrypt as well to
decryption the data. In a public key encryption method, the
only way to set back the data to its original form and make it
understandable is to encrypt or decrypt the data with two
secret keys (private key and public key). The private key
remains with its respective owner as confidential and a
public key is available to everyone through a directory or
public repository. Private and public keys are related
mathematically in a specific way; if the data is encrypted
using a public key, it decrypts only with its corresponding
private key. On the other hand, if data is encrypted using the
private key, then it should only be decrypted by the
corresponding public key to make the data intelligible.
Public key encryption is implemented in the cloud as:

The user uses its own private key to encrypt the data.

Cloud
Computing
infrastructure
units,
tools
for
virtualization, and all other elements in the system have
their own keys.

To perform the authentication, all elements of the
system uses private and public key at first place.

All events occurred in the cloud have their own unique
key. Therefore, public key encryption method assures
the safe and secure exchange of data over the cloud.

It is also advisable to the cloud provider that they can
design features of the public key infrastructure, which
is helpful to improve the security of data over the cloud.

Data moving in or out should be encrypted or decrypted
to assure the security.

A hardware security model should be used to store the
keys and performing decryption and encryption of data
to make it intelligible for the intended user and
unintelligible for the others.
Akashdeep
et
al.
[16]
reviewed
the
multifactor
authentication technique to address the security issues in the
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

Cloud Computing system that users are facing. They put
forward an idea using of at least two separate identifiers for
the validation of information instead of using one identifier
that is an ID and password, which helps in enhancing
security to get an access by introducing numerous barriers
for the user. Using this technique will reduce the chances for
any hacker to get access to the system by using stolen
passwords to have any critical data that he is not intended to
retrieve. To assure the safety and security of user data stored
in the cloud, use firewalls, multifactor validation, and load
balancers to withstand data center infrastructure and security
system technique from the hackers and other security
threats. Multi-factor authentication technique provides the
user with access passwords/keys to gain access to the cloud
system. If the user is unable to provide the password or keys
correctly, then IDS system will alert about the issue.
He et al. [8] likewise presents new security issues
because the information administration and proprietorship
are isolated, and the administration is worked on a
virtualized stage. In his paper, a novel Dynamic Secure
Interconnection (DSI) mechanism is proposed to disengage
the distributed computing framework into a few elements of
dynamic virtual trust zones with various security approaches
actualized for various clients in order to improve security.
There are three different types of components in DSI,
namely, DSI clients, DSI server and virtual bridges. The
DSI server is the focal controller for taking care of the
administration and security approaches. At the point when a
VM is introduced, it is associated with the DSI server to
enroll and begin to work within the framework. At the point
when the VM state changes, e.g. suspend, restart, float or
eliminate, it will educate DSI server to redesign the VM
state. Therefore, the DSI server keeps up all VM properties
what's more, states, for example, the virtual MAC (vMAC)
and virtual IP (VIP) locations of VMs, the VM proprietor,
the relating virtual scaffold, the ongoing VM state, and so
forth.
Likewise, DSI server keeps up the VM correspondence
conventions, strategies, and exercises. On the off chance
that VMs remain inside the same network, they can
converse with each other utilizing vMAC and VIP. On the
off chance, that VMs remain in the various nearby system,
particularly behind network gadgets, vIP based passages
will be set up to associate VMs. In the meantime, suitable
activity control approaches will be actualized amid the
association bootstrapping stage, for example, encryption
calculations, key administration convention, and movement
redirection. The DSI clients are a large number of VMs. The
properties of each DSI client includes vMAC and vIP
addresses, VM state, VM owner, corresponding virtual
bridge, host, and its own virtual trust zone ID. Virtual
bridges are in charge of performing and implementing the
communication protocols and policies. The communication
between two DSI clients is performed in a peer-to-peer
mode [8].
IV.
BIOMETRICS ENHANCED CLOUD SECURITY
Literature survey and reviews point out the researcher’s
addressed problems related to cloud security and privacy
issues. Researchers proposed some solutions regarding the
security issues in a Cloud Computing system, which
addresses some problems. However, there is still need to do
more research in the Cloud Computing area to guarantee
security and privacy of end-user data. Usage of Cloud
Computing is still not at par with businesses particularly;
businesses such as financial institutions which have critical
data that they cannot afford to lose or have stolen.
Implementation
of
biometric
features
(fingerprint
scanning, iris scan) will turn into a helpful tool for protecting
the data from threats like identity threat, shared technology
issues and many more. The proposed solution with a
multifactor biometric feature enhances the security one level
ahead than the previous solutions proposed by other
researchers. Multifactor authentication is responsible to
provide authentication to access with the public and private
key provided to the user by the cloud provider. If by chance
an unauthorized person gets the keys to access the cloud of
another user, without biometric access (unique to a user that
cannot be stolen by anyone), a person with bad intentions
would not be able to gain access.
The biometric feature is not new in the market. It is used
in
many
organizations
for
employee
registration
or
attendance, in visa formalities. This biometric feature also
serves
as
a
beneficial
and
unique
feature
to
attract
corporations and organizations to convince them to use the
cloud system to process and store their data on the cloud
system.
The implementation of the proposal of biometrics with
multifactor authentication in this paper is unique and
different from other researchers.
There have been many developments in the field of
biometrics, which means things are more reliable and costs
are
down.
Biometrics
offer
high-level
identification
management
security
operations
that
have
several
advantages over traditional means and
now they are
available
to
you
at
lower
costs.
Currently,
the
new
smartphones and laptops have the feature of scanning
fingerprint to unlock phones and applications and taking a
picture of the iris. For the systems that lack the feature of
biometric
scannings,
such
as
older
desktops,
cheap
instruments are available in the market to add. In addition,
some major banks have added the option of using fingerprint
technology as the login password for the user as it is hard to
remember the complex password, which is hard to hack.
Biometric log-ins mean a person can be directly connected to
a particular action or an event. In other words, biometrics
creates a clear, definable audit trail of transactions or
activities. This is especially handy in case of security
breaches because you know exactly who is responsible for it.
As a result, you get true and complete accountability, which
cannot be duplicated [17].
In general, there are four biometric types of physical
qualities that are utilized or can be utilized as a part of end
user verification:
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks


Unique mark examines (fingerprint scanning), which
have
been being
used
for a
long
time
by law
implementation and other government organizations and
is viewed as a solid, extraordinary identifier.

Retina or iris checks, which have been utilized to affirm
a user’s identity by examining the course of action of
veins in the retina or examples of shading in the iris.

Voice acknowledgment, which utilizes a voice print that
investigations how a user says a specific word or
arrangement of words extraordinary to that person.

Facial acknowledgment, which utilizes one of kind
facial elements to distinguish a person.
The biometrics feature is undoubtedly a more effective
method for verification than the more regular methods used
for authentication like passwords, smart cards, or a mix of
the two. Conceivably, the user would not need to recall
secret and complex passwords to get to data. Additionally,
passwords have lapse dates that require a new task of
passwords and more work for technical employees hired for
support. Organizations, enterprises, and medicinal suppliers
have found that too often clients forget their passwords, and
attempting to explore through a process consisting of
multiple steps to get the required data.
Biometric technology also ensures the data security and
assures that there will be no manipulation done by any other
employee under any circumstances. In addition, it binds the
person to be at the place when needed, no other person can
take his or her place as the unique physical attribute is used
for verification, which cannot be hacked, stolen or copied by
others.
V.
MULTIFACTOR BIOMETRIC
AUTHENTICATION IN CLOUD COMPUTING
The multifactor two-layer authentication is presented as
follows:
1.
Registration Phase: Client registers with the cloud
application by providing all biometric information
required for authenticating the users
2.
Login Phase: Client uses login form to access the
cloud application and its services. This accepts
username and password.
3.
True Random Number Generator (TRNG) phase:
Use TRNG to generate a random number from 1-4
4.
Biometric authentication Phase: Once the TRNG
number generated, the client will be requested to
provide the biometric identity identified by TRNG.
5.
Full access phase: once the client provides the
biometric identity, it will be compared with the
stored user’s biometric information. The client will
have full access if it is matched, otherwise will be
granted basic access, which is accessing not
sensitive and valuable data. Figure 3 shows the
algorithm steps for successful authentication.
The new proposed methodology is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Biometric with multifactor authentication technique
A. Advantages
Advantages of this method include that there are
two levels of access. The first level is a basic level to
access basic data using the regular user id and pw. In the
second level, the user has to provide one of his
biometric identities based on true random generators to
be able to access all sensitive data or to configure his
cloud. This method is better suited for customers with
more sensitive and valuable data. By using this case,
malicious intrusion and brute force attack will become
worthless at the very first step, such as the first layer of
authentication because biometric identity is unique for
everyone. By using biometrics, it would take care of
remembering
additional
passwords
or
carry
extra
badges, documents, or ID cards.
Moreover, using
biometric technology with public key encryption makes
the methodology more secure and better protected.
B. Disadvantages
The drawback of this method includes that users have to
use better equipment, which is capable of providing
biometric identities. These technologies are available and
affordable.
C. Algorithm
The following graph shows the process and algorithm
for implementing the multifactor biometric authentication
model.
Here is an algorithm that proposes for multifactor
biometric
authentication
implementation
with
a
True
Random Number Generator (TRNG) to access the cloud
computing.

Proposed Algorithm
Step 1: Start
Step 2: Register new user with biometric templates Saved
Templates = {template1, template2, template3, template4}
Step 3: Registration successful
Step 4: Initiate authentication to Sign In using ID & PW
Step 5: Use a TRNG to generate a random number m
Step 6: Pick the template from 1 to 4, based on m
Step 7: Request the user to input the template identified by
TRNG
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

Step 8: Verify if the user input matches the template in the
system
Step 9: If there is a match, the user will have full access to
the cloud
Step 10: End
Figure 3.
Multifactor biometric authentication
VI.
CONCLUSION
We
proposed
a
new
multilayer
authentication
methodology with biometric authentication.
The new
methodology is introduced using biometric technology with
multifactor authentication technique in addition to public key
encryption. The model comprises two level authentication.
The first level to access the basic data by using the classical
user id and pw, but for accessing sensitive data and
configuring the cloud, biometric identity is required. This
will add an additional layer of security for customer sensitive
data and configuration.
Therefore, based on the sensitivity
of the customer’s data, one or two layer’s authentications
will be required.
Cloud Computing is the technology in the modern era
which
is
widely used
by
users
irrespective of their
professions. Cloud is for everyone, which means there is no
need to have a specific level of education to be eligible for
using the cloud. It eliminates the dependability of data stored
at one location that cannot be accessible from anywhere,
anytime. With multifactor biometric authentication to the
cloud, users can access data from any place at any time,
location independent. In addition, it helps in reducing the
cost of infrastructure if any upgrade of hardware is required,
which has new device purchasing cost, installation cost,
maintenance cost.
This methodology helps in avoiding security issues like a
malicious intrusion and brute force attack, which are the
major
threats
that
need
to
be
addressed
first.
This
methodology works as a catalyst for convincing businesses/
to use the cloud in their organization for the critical data too.
By using multifactor biometric authentication, it would take
care of remembering more passwords, carry extra badges,
documents, or ID cards to access sensitive data.
For future research, with all the available solutions in the
cloud, more research is still required to make accessing data
automated and transparent to the user. This method is a
subject for my second paper and future research including
the conversance of cloud NFV and other technologies.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. K. Wang and X. Jia, “Data Security and Authentication in hybrid
Cloud Computing model,” IEEE Global High Tech Congress on
Electronics (GHTCE), November 2012, pp. 117-120.
[2]
N. Hemalatha, A. Jenis, A. C. Donald, and L. Arockiam, “A
Comparative Analysis of Encryption Techniques and Data Security
Issues in Cloud Computing,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, 96 (16), 2014.
[3]
Z. Xin, L. Song-qing, and L. Nai-wen, “Research on Cloud
Computing data security model based on multi-dimensional,” IEEE
International Symposium on information technology in medicine and
education (ITME), 2012, pp. 897-900.
[4]
M. Ahmed and M. A. Hossain, “Cloud Computing and security issues
in the cloud, International Journal of Network Security & Its
Applications, 6(1), 25, 2014.
[5]
F. Hang, and L. Zhao, “Supporting end-user service composition a
systematic review of current activities and tools” IEEE International
Conference on Web Services (ICWS), June 2015, pp. 479-486.
[6]
R. Masood and M. Aslam, “Innovative approach ensuring security
and privacy in cloud computing” Pakistan Journal of Science, 68(1)
2016.
[7]
A. Juels, and T. Ristenpart, “Honey encryption: Encryption beyond
the brute-force barrier,” IEEE Security & Privacy, 12(4), 2014, pp.
59-62.
[8]
L. He, F. Huang, J. Zhang, B. Liu, C. Chen, Z. Zhang, and W. Lu,
“Dynamic secure interconnection for security enhancement in cloud
computing,” International Journal of Computers Communications &
Control, 11(3), 2016, pp. 348-357.
[9]
T. H. Noor, Q. Z. Sheng, S. Zeadally, and J. Yu, “Trust management
of services in cloud environments: Obstacles and solutions,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 46(1), 12, 2013.
[10] https://www.alertlogic.com/blog/top-5-cloud-security-issues-for-
2018//
[11] W. Stallings, “Foundation of Modern Networking SDN, NFV, QoE,
IoT, and Cloud,” Addison Wesly, 2016.
[12] ITU-T Y.3500, “Cloud computing- overview and vocabulary,”
August 2014.
[13] L. Wang, J. Tao, M. Kunze, A. C. Castellanos, D. Kramer, and W. Karl,
“Scientific cloud computing: early definition and experience,” 10th
Biometric Multiple functions
3. Iris Scan
1. Fingerprint
2. Voice Recognition
4. Facial
Recognition
UID
PW
Cloud
User
Cell
Cloud
Computin
Authentication
Server
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

IEEE
Int.
Conference
on
High-Performance
Computing
and
Communications, Dalian, China, Sep. 2008, pp. 825-830, ISBN:
978-0-7695-3352-0.
[14] A. B. Angadi and K. C.Gull, “Security issues with possible solutions
in cloud computing- a survey,” International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer Engineering & Technology (IJARCET),
Volume 2, Issue 2, February 2013, ISSN: 2278 – 1323.
[15] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST definition of cloud computing,”
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
Accessed [12/4/2018]2011.
[16] B. Akashdeep, G. Subrahmanyam, V. Avasthi, and H.
Sastry,
“Review of solutions for securing end user data over cloud
applications,” International Journal of Advanced Computer Research,
Vol 6 (27), June 2016 pp. 222-229.
[17] http://www.m2sys.com/blog/biometric-hardware/advantages-
biometric-identification-management-system/ [Accessed 4-2018]
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-625-5
ICN 2018 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networks

