Motivations and Challenges of Global Mobility with Universal Identity:  
A Review  
 
Walaa F. Elsadek, Mikhail N. Mikhail  
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the American University in Cairo,  
P.O. Box 74, New Cairo 11835, Egypt 
 walaa.farouk@aucegypt.edu, mikhail@aucegypt.edu  
 
 
Abstract — Researchers are directing enormous efforts to 
achieve the aim of global mobility by enhancing the standard 
mobile IP with various routing schemes focusing on best routes 
and least cost while ignoring the facts of the organizations 
usual use of private IP’s and the presence of  firewalls. 
Nevertheless, existing Mobile IP models are still missing three 
basic concepts that hinder their applicability in real 
environment. First, global mobility must be independent of the 
different infrastructure technologies (e.g., Wi-Fi, WiMAX, 
UMTS, etc.). Second, a secure authentication mechanism for 
guiding the access of mobile nodes to the corporate network’s 
resources is certainly needed. Third, the capability of 
correlating the mobile node’s activities to a real world identity 
is a requirement of security in a wider since i.e., network, web, 
and national security. This paper defines the role of global 
mobility in facilitating and improving mobile business 
performance. It, also, presents a review of literature for the 
existing standards and schemes of mobility and analyzes their 
limitations. Finally, a reference is made to a practical approach 
for secure global mobility without the current limitations.   
 Keywords- Mobile Computing; Interworking; Mobility; 
Mobile IP; Security;  Wireless.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobility in the enterprise is derived by both technology 
availability and the increase in user demand. The merging of 
4G and WLAN networks prompts the needs of operators to 
increase their coverage with a blended service offering that 
makes best use of their old investments in legacy 
infrastructure, low price technology and new technology at 
least price to address the higher volume of delivered rich 
data services [1]. Many people think of wireless and 
mobility as plumbing – focusing only on infrastructure and 
the fundamental technical security challenges, privacy, 
platform standardization, and legacy system integration [2]. 
However, the real target should be the ability to drive 
business improvement, and that requires vision in scoping 
mobility to fit the enterprise while preserving the privacy 
and security of mobile users accessing critical applications 
and identifying them with unique universal digital identities. 
For true global mobility, the following key features need to 
be emphasized: 
• 
Seamless roaming between heterogeneous wireless, 
wired, and ad-hoc networks as illustrated in Figure 1.  
• 
No restriction on the type of the hardware (mobile sets, 
PDA, laptop, etc.) or their operating systems. 
• 
The connection between different mobile operators and 
internet service providers must be smooth without the 
need of complex reconfiguration. 
• 
Enhanced security mechanism to facilitate the creation 
of e-commerce, banking services as well as any other 
services that need strong authentication. 
• 
Transparency to end-user that does not need  complex 
application or  am increase in power consumption. 
• 
Scalable routing mechanism that is flexible in adopting 
large-scale macro-mobility and local scale micro-
mobility. 
• 
Minimum 
handover 
interruptions 
to 
enhance 
availability and reliability of the services provided 
either to or by roaming clients. 
• 
The capability of correlating the user activities to a 
unique universal digital identity. 
 
 
                   Figure 1. Overview of Global Mobility 
81
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

II. 
MOTIVATIONS  FOR GLOBAL MOBILITY WITH 
UNIVERSAL IDENTITY 
A. Carriers’ Motivations 
Threats such as distributed-denial-of-service (DDoS) 
attacks, turbo worms, phishing, viruses and e-mail spam 
generates a huge amount of infected traffic that lead to 
subsequent outbreaks and disrupt the normal operation of a 
modern network. The primary challenges faced by today’s 
service providers are maintaining service availability in the 
presence of such outbreak of malicious traffic. Security has 
become a critical characteristic of all services due to the 
direct effects reflected on the profit line of service providers. 
Universal digital identity can help in identifying the real 
identity of sources of threats then blocking their traffic or 
redirecting it to fake destinations. 
Carriers are, also, challenged to meet the demand of their 
subscribers of enhanced mobility.  They have to do so while 
avoiding new huge investment in remote areas by signing 
service level roaming agreements (SLRA) with other 
operators to make use of other infrastructure. 
B. Subscribers’ Motivations   
New devices and business practices, such as PDAs and 
the next-generation of data-ready cellular phones and 
services, are the driving interest in the ability of a user to 
roam while maintaining two-way network connectivity:   
• 
Roaming employees need to remain connected to their 
home corporate accessing local resources without any 
change to the corporate security policy and with least 
cost.  
• 
Corporate employees need to keep accessing resources 
or services hosted by their roaming colleagues 
independent of their physical location using the same 
local private addresses.   
In 
addition, 
the 
Mobile 
Nodes 
should 
remain 
transparently accessible to any corresponding node. 
Corresponding nodes are able to keep using the same 
addresses and with no need to any additional software. 
C. Governments’ Motivations   
Criminals and terrorists are migrating to the digital world as 
it is tremendously lucrative and has less risk. They are 
willing to commit identity fraud and eager to sell it for 
profit. Negative impacts are induced on trusted transactions 
in online commerce, cyber investigations, authenticated 
individuals, or organizations, who want to gain access to 
services, systems, and facilities. Protection of assets and 
critical infrastructure such as telecommunications, public 
health, and the power grid, are necessary for the functioning 
of society [3]. In battle, war fighters must be able to identify 
people and determine if they are friend or foe, as well as if 
and how much of a risk they present. The challenge is to 
provide the war fighter with real time accurate information 
[4].The resultant escalation of cyber crimes and cyber 
attacks has resulted in the need for improved cyber 
investigations, security, and cyber defense. Grouping the 
network activities by universal digital identities enhances 
the cyber crime investigations with a tool that can simply 
reveal the real-world identities. 
1) The Cyber Threats [4] 
‐ 
Account take-over fraud in banking sectors, retailer, 
and healthcare provider. 
‐ 
Access fraud on credit and financial information. 
‐ 
Identity fraud in thin file situations and attack on an 
identity database. 
‐ 
Cyber threat to enterprise attribute-based controls. 
‐ 
Internal abuse of corporate assets and information. 
‐ 
Wrest or hijack identity using Zombie networks. 
2) The Cyber Challenge [4] 
‐ 
Cyber security includes data protection, fraud detection, 
and preventions. 
‐ 
Policy management that relies on security policies 
legislation to protect from identity theft. 
‐ 
Breach detection by monitoring unauthorized system 
access or data acquisition using intrusions detection 
systems. 
‐ 
Tracing and monitoring the usage of identities to detect 
unauthorized usage. 
‐ 
Strong authentication methodology that correlates the 
identity user to the real identity owner. 
III. 
REVIEW OF STANDARD MOBILE IP IN IPV4 
Mobile IP (MIP) is an open standard, defined by the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) RFC 3344. Mobile 
IP enables users to keep the same IP address while traveling 
to a different network, ensuring that a roaming individual can 
continue communication [5]. Mobile IP does not drop the 
network prefix of the IP address of the node. Consequently, 
IP routing will succeed to route the packets to the node after 
movement to the new link [6].  RFC 3344 is considered the 
base for MIP. It defines the various entities involved in 
Mobile IP protocol and how they interact together to enable 
the registration of a roaming mobile node (MN) to the home 
network thus the home agent can forward the packet  
destined to MN to its care-of-address obtained from the 
foreign network. 
RFC 
4721: 
“Mobile 
IPv4 
Challenge/Response 
Extensions” updates RFC 3344 by including a new 
authentication extension called the Mobile-Authentication, 
Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) Authentication 
extension.  This new extension enables a mobile node to 
supply credentials for authorization, using commonly 
available AAA infrastructure elements. This authorization-
enabling extension may co-exist in the same Registration 
Request with authentication extensions defined for Mobile IP 
Registration by RFC 3344 [6].   
RFC 3344 assumes that tunneling is required for packet 
from the home agent to the mobile node's care-of address, 
but rarely in the reverse direction. It assumes that routing is 
independent of the source address and MNs can send their 
packet through the router in the foreign network. This 
assumption is not valid. This raises a need to establish a 
topologically correct reverse tunnel from the care-of address 
to the home agent [7]. RFC 2344: “Reverse Tunneling for 
82
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Mobile IP” proposes backwards-compatible extensions to 
Mobile IP in order to support topologically correct reverse 
tunnels. When the mobile node joins a foreign network, it 
listens for agent advertisements and selects a foreign agent 
that supports reverse tunnels.  It requests this service when it 
registers through the selected foreign agent. At this time, and 
depending on how the mobile node wishes to deliver packets 
to the foreign agent, it also requests either Direct or 
Encapsulating Delivery Style. 
• 
In the Direct Delivery Style: the mobile node 
designates the foreign agent as its default router and 
proceeds to send packets directly to the foreign agent, 
that is, without encapsulation.  The foreign agent 
intercepts them, and tunnels them to the home agent. 
• 
In the Encapsulating Delivery Style: the mobile node 
encapsulates all its outgoing packets to the foreign 
agent.  The foreign agent decapsulates and re-tunnels 
them to the home agent, using the foreign agent's care-
of address as the entry-point of this new tunnel. 
The MIP RFC3344 standard falls short of the promise in 
fulfilling the need of an important customer segment, 
corporate users (using VPN for remote access), who desire to 
add mobility support to have continuous access to Intranet 
resources while roaming outside the Intranet from one subnet 
to another, or between the VPN domain (i.e., trusted domain) 
and the Internet (i.e., un-trusted domain). Both firewall and 
VPN devices typically guard access to the Intranet.  The 
Intranet can only be accessed by respecting the security 
policies in the firewall and the VPN device. In addition, any 
solutions to be proposed would need to minimize the impact 
on existing VPN and   firewall deployments [8]. IP-in-IP 
tunneling does not generally contain enough information to 
permit unique translation from the common public address to 
the particular care-of address of a mobile node or foreign 
agent, which resides behind the NAT; in particular, there are 
no TCP/UDP port numbers available for a NAT to work 
with. For this reason, IP-in-IP tunnels cannot in general pass 
through a NAT, and Mobile IP will not work across a NAT 
[9]. 
RFC 3591: “Mobile IPv4 Network Address Translation 
(NAT) Traversal” enables mobile devices in collocated mode 
that use a private IP address (RFC 1918) [10] or foreign 
agents (FAs) that use a private IP address for the care-of 
address (CoA) are able to establish a tunnel and traverse a 
NAT-enabled router with mobile node (MN) data traffic 
from the home agent (HA) [9].  However, if the network 
does not allow communication between a UDP port chosen 
by a MN and the HA UDP port 434, the Mobile IP 
registration and the data tunneling will not work. Only the 
IP-to-UDP encapsulation method is supported. 
The need is increasing for enabling mobile users to 
maintain their transport connections and constant reach 
ability while connecting back to their target "home" 
networks protected by Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
technology.  This implies that Mobile IP and VPN 
technologies have to coexist and function together in order to 
provide mobility and security to the enterprise mobile users. 
RFC 4093: “Mobile IPv4 Traversal OF Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) Gateways” addressed the previous limitation 
by forcing any MN roaming outside the Intranet to establish 
an IPSec tunnel to its home VPN gateway first, in order to be 
able to register with its home agent.  This is because the MN 
cannot reach its’ HA (inside the private protected network) 
directly from the outside.  This implies that the MIPv4 traffic 
from the MN to a node inside the Intranet is forced to run 
inside an IPSec tunnel.  This in turn leads to distinct 
problems depending on whether the MN uses co-located or 
non-co-located modes to register with its HA 
In co-located mode, successful registration is possible but 
the VPN tunnel has to be re-negotiated every time the MN 
changes its point of network attachment, as the MN's IP 
destination address changes on each IP subnet handoff, 
IPSec tunnel needs to be re-established.  This could have 
visible performance implications on real-time applications 
and in resource-constrained wireless networks [11].   
In foreign agent care-of address, MIPv4 registration 
becomes impossible.  This is because the MIPv4 traffic 
between MN and VPN gateway is encrypted, and the FA 
(which is likely in a different administrative domain) cannot 
inspect the MIPv4 headers needed for relaying the MIPv4 
packets.  The use of a 'trusted FA' that is actually a combined 
VPN GW and FA can work fine in this case, as the tunnel 
end-points are at the FA and the VPN gateway as shown in 
Figure 2. 
Limitation: 
(i) However, due to security limitation, this scenario is not 
realistic in the general mobility case. It is not expected 
that the FA in access networks (e.g., wireless hot spots 
or CDMA 2000 networks) will have security 
associations with any given corporate network to apply 
'trusted FA'. 
(ii) This solution would leave the traffic between FA and 
MN unprotected. This is clearly undesirable as this link 
in particular may be a wireless link 
Foreign Network
VPN Domain (Intranet)
MNs
away
FA
VPN GW
MNs
home
CN
1..n
HA 1..n
Router
1..n
Firewall
NAT
MN expect 
IP traffic
MIP inside 
IPSEC
VPN GW
Figure 2. The use of a 'trusted FA' In foreign agent care-of address 
83
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

IV. 
REVIEW OF STANDARD MOBILE IP IN IPV6 
3775: “Mobility Support in IPv6” specifies a protocol, 
which allows nodes to remain reachable while moving 
around in the IPv6 Internet. This protocol allows a mobile 
node to move from one link to another without changing the 
mobile node's "home address".  Packets may be routed to the 
mobile node using this address regardless of the mobile 
node's current point of attachment to the Internet.  The 
movement of a mobile node away from its home link is thus 
transparent to transport and higher-layer protocols and 
applications [12]. A mechanism, known as "dynamic home 
agent address discovery" is added in Mobile IPv6 to provide 
support for multiple home agents and the home network 
reconfiguration. This mechanism allows a mobile node to 
dynamically discover the home agent IP addresses on its 
home link, even when being away from home.  Mobile nodes 
can also learn new information about home subnet prefixes 
through the "mobile prefix discovery" mechanism.   
A. Comparison between  Mobile IPV4 and IPv6 
1. There is no need to deploy special routers as "foreign 
agents", as in Mobile IPv4.  Mobile IPv6 operates in 
any location without any special support required from 
the local router. 
2. Support for route optimization is a fundamental part of 
the protocol, rather than a nonstandard set of 
extensions. 
3. Mobile IPv6 route optimization can operate securely 
even without pre-arranged security associations 
4. Support is also integrated into Mobile IPv6 for allowing 
route optimization to coexist efficiently with routers 
that perform “ingress filtering" [13]. 
5. The IPv6 Neighbor Unreachability Detection assures 
symmetric reachability between the mobile node and its 
default router in the current location. 
6. Most packets sent to a mobile node while away from 
home in Mobile IPv6 are sent using an IPv6 routing 
header rather than IP encapsulation, reducing the 
amount of resulting overhead compared to Mobile IPv4. 
7. Mobile IPv6 is decoupled from any particular link 
layer, as it uses IPv6 Neighbor Discovery instead of 
ARP.  This also improves the robustness of the 
protocol. 
8. The use of IPv6 encapsulation (and the routing header) 
removes the need in Mobile IPv6 to manage "tunnel 
soft state". 
9. The dynamic home agent address discovery mechanism 
in Mobile IPv6 returns a single reply to the mobile 
node.  The directed broadcast approach used in IPv4 
returns separate replies from each home agent. 
B. Summary of  Mobile limitations 
Unluckily, standard MIP faced many limitations that 
hindered its applicability in real environments as: 
1. Ignoring that the Mobile Node (MN) can exist behind a 
Firewall or NAT device. 
2. Considering only Forward Tunnel; that Corresponding 
Node (CN) packets has to be forwarded by Home 
Agent (HA) to MN while Ignoring Reverse Tunnel; that 
MN needs to access the corporate services. 
3. With updated RFC 2344, that includes Reverse Tunnel; 
MIP becomes subjected to DoS and Session Hijacking 
due to the lack of a secure method for authenticating 
MN [7]. 
4. Ignoring the corporate security policy, during the tunnel 
establishment phase or the MN’s registration with the 
HA. 
5. Ignoring that the DNS domain name is used for locating 
and addressing devices worldwide. 
6. The VPN tunnel has to be re-negotiated every time the 
MN changes its point of attachment. 
7. Ignoring the Scalability Factor; Home agent and 
Foreign agents are a single point of failure. 
V. NEW MOBILITY ARCHITECTURE 
In the paper: “Universal Mobility with Global Identity 
(UMGI) Architecture” [14], a new mobile IP concept has 
been introduced to address the limitations of previous 
proposed mobile IP. The UMGI correlates mobile users’ 
credentials as IP, hostname, and network equipment 
identifiers (ex. network cards or mobile sets) with their 
(U)SIM (Universal subscriber identity module) cards .Not 
only this corelation provides a strong method for 
authenticating subscribers but also it acts as the foundation 
of the newly proposed mobile IP protocol. The  extracted 
“Country codes” and “Carrier Code” stored in the (U)SIM 
enable the dynamic discovery of the home agent thus 
facilitate routing the traffic to the home network. In addition, 
this paper has discussed the integration of the MN 
authentiation with the standard methods of authentionation in 
the UMTS network. This architecture extends the 
capabilities of standard mobile IP, solves its applicability 
problems, and links mobile users’ activities to unique 
universal identities 
A. Advantages of the suggested UMGI: 
1. Not like the standard MIP, which runs on the mobile 
node and keeps monitoring the network prefix, the 
UMGI Architecture makes the mobile node unaware of 
any procedure. All UMGI services and modules run on 
distributed servers administrated by the carriers or the 
corporate networks thus enhancing the performance of 
mobile subscriber while decreasing the battery 
consumption of the MN.  
2. Standard MIP has not considered any handover 
procedure. It focuses on stationary hosts that moved to 
different location other than the home network. UMGI 
MIP inherits its mobility from the wireless technology 
adopted. It opens rooms for programmers to enhance 
the handover procedures thus movement can be 
unnoticeable.  
84
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

3. The security policy of the corporate network is 
preserved: 
a. By restricting the Home UMGI  IPSec tunnel 
establishment to authorized the carrier gateways 
and the predefined UMGI Tunnel Subnet. 
b. The corporate firewall can be configured with an 
advanced security policy controlling the UMGI 
roaming subscribers’ access and privileges. 
4. DHCP Classification: preserves the UMGI  roaming 
subscriber’s CoA during the movement inside Hot Wi-
Fi spots covering one or more buildings that  have 
multiple APs but with a single border gateway and 
during the movement between multiple Node B or 
BTSs connected to the same access point on the GGSN. 
The UMTS or (E) GPRS access point can cover a 
country region. 
5. 
Automatic private IP addressing procedure: Preserves 
the mapping of UMGI  subscriber public address and 
private addresses as well as the DNS domain name 
while roaming in the foreign network. This enables 
MNs, in either foreign carrier, to handoff between 
multiple Wi-Fi hotspots and multiple UMTS or (E) 
GPRS access point even if the CoA obtained from the 
DHCP server is changed. The only challenge is the time 
required to update the mapping on the FG of the 
network to which the subscriber is attached. The FA 
should be capable to update the FG in few seconds. In 
TCP traffic, no packet will be lost as this will be 
regarded as congestion and retransmission will occur. 
For UDP, any packet lost in range of few seconds will 
not be noticed. 
6. The combination of “UMGI  Trust Relation” and the 
“Hierarchical Discovery Routing Procedure” increases 
the scalability and the security of the new mobile IP 
architecture 
while 
preserving 
the 
security 
of 
communication between foreign and home networks. 
The combination makes the architecture extremely 
customizable fitting small ISPs and large carriers. In 
addition, it increases the architecture flexibility to adopt 
several designs and different types of agreement 
starting from small ISPs inside the country and ending 
with regulators agreements cross-countries boundaries. 
7. The carriers can freely add or modify the configuration 
of its gateway even the IP addresses without any need 
to update any other carrier under UMGI SLRA. 
8. The architecture solves the current MIP applicability 
limitation. With UMGI, it is simple to create dynamic 
IPSec tunnel on demand with the home VPN gateway 
and to path through any firewall security policy. 
9. Added a security layer that is boasted by a strong client 
authentication mechanism as EAP. This provides a 
strong protection against session hijacking and Denial 
of Service attack. 
10. Using a single path between remote and local carrier, 
UMGI Remote Tunnel, to carry the MNs’ traffic from 
multiple corporate networks connected to the same 
carrier gateway, decreases the UMGI  subscriber’s 
joining time by avoiding the process of “Tunnel setup 
Procedures” for MNs belonging to the same carrier. 
11. The synchronization between both foreign and home 
carrier through AAA and HLR enforces the status 
consistency and increases the security by restricting 
access to only one UMGI subscriber per IMSI at time, 
even if having multiple registered equipments. 
12. Mobile IP leaves transport and higher protocols 
unaffected. Other than mobile nodes/routers, the 
remaining routers and hosts will still use current IP 
address format without any modification. Unlike, 
Standard MIP, UMGI  MIP does not need enabling 
jumbo frames or any change in the IP frame format. 
Thus, UMGI suits LAN/WAN topology. 
13. UMGI  is Multi-Vendor Interoperable. It can be 
considered as an organized setup of the standard 
protocols thus, no need to any software upgrade or any 
major change to the existing infrastructure. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Enhancements to the standard Mobile IP techniques are 
being developed to improve mobile communications and to 
overcome the existing limitations by making the process 
more 
secure 
and 
more 
efficient. 
Researchers 
are 
continuously 
adding 
achievement 
to 
augment 
its 
applicability to the new business needs. In this paper, the 
importance of secure global mobility as motivated by the 
needs of corporate organizations, service providers, and 
governments is highlighted.  State of the art schemes and 
standards dealing with facilitating and managing mobile 
computing both in the current IPv4 and the coming IPv6 are 
reviewed.  
A reference is made to a suggested architecture that is 
aimed at overcoming the current practical limitations. As it 
should be, the suggested scheme is transparent, secure, 
scalable, independent of any communication protocol, and 
valid for hybrid infrastructure. This shows that designing an 
architecture for global mobility with universal identity that 
satisfies the requirements of service providers, governments, 
and corporate organizations is a challenge and needs an 
enterprise secure cooperations between the various entities. 
This architecture has proposed a new mobile IP that solves 
the standard mobile IP scalabilty limitations by proposing a 
solution that can be easily deployed with the presence of 
firewalls and VPNs. Also, the proposed solution has shown 
that a mobile user can handover hybrid infrastructure with 
very short delay without changing its real IP address or DNS 
domain name. Solving the challenges that hindered the 
applicability of standard Mobile IP becomes possible by 
adopting the new mobile IP protocol as it has correctly 
analyzed all the obstacles in standard mobile IP and proposes 
a complete solution fitting the different wireless technologies 
and the new business needs. Finally, the proposed correlation 
of the mobile users’ credentials as IP, hostname, and network 
equipment identifiers with their (U)SIM cards provides a 
85
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

strong method for authenticating and authorizing mobile 
users while creating a unique universal identity that can 
reveal the real world identity. Without doubt this can 
facilitate the cyber crime investigation and enhance the cyber 
security.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Durresi1, L. E.s, V. Paruchuri, and L. Barolli: “Secure 3G User 
Authentication in Adhoc Serving Networks”, Proceedings of the First 
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security 
(ARES’06), June 2006. 
[2] 
J. LaFlamme and M. Litwin, Deloitte Development LLC  “Wireless 
and Mobility”, 2010.  
[3] 
H. Luo, P. Zerfos, J. Kong, S. Lu, and L. Zhang, “Self-securing Ad 
Hoc Wireless Networks”, UCLA Computer Science Department. 
[4] 
CAIMR (Center for applied Identity Management Research), “An 
Applied 
Research 
Agenda 
for 
confronting 
Global 
Identity 
Management Challenges, May 2009.” 
[5] 
C. Perkins, Ed. Nokia Research Center, “IP Mobility Support for 
IPv4,” RFC 3344, August 2002. 
[6] 
C. Perkins - Nokia Research Center, P. Calhoun - Cisco Systems, 
Inc., 
J. 
Bharatia 
- 
Nortel 
Networks, 
“Mobile 
IPv4 
Challenge/Response Extensions (Revised)”, IEFT RFC 3775, January 
2007. 
[7] 
G. Montenegro, Sun Microsystems, Inc., “Reverse Tunneling for 
Mobile IP”, RFC 2344, May 1998 
[8] 
F. Adrangi, Ed. Intel and H. Levkowetz, Ed. Ericsson, “Mobile IPv4 
Traversal of Virtual Private Network (VPN) Gateways,” RFC 4093, 
August 2005.  
[9] 
Cisco Systems, Inc. , Design of the Mobile IP—Support for RFC 
3519 NAT Traversal Feature, 2007 
[10] Y. Rekhter - Cisco Systems, B. Moskowitz - Chrysler Corp., D. 
Karrenberg - RIPE NCC, G. J. de Groot - RIPE NCC, E. Lear - 
Silicon Graphics, Inc., “Address Allocation for Private Internets”, 
RFC 1918, February 1996. 
[11] S. Kent - BBN Corp,  R. Atkinson - @Home Network, “Security 
Architecture for the Internet Protocol”, RFC 2401, November 1998. 
[12] D. B. Johnson, C. E. Perkins and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in 
IPv6” IEFT RFC 3775, June 2004. 
[13] H.Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. El-Malki, and L. Bellier, “Hierarchical 
Mobile IPv6 Mobility Management (HMIPv6)-0,” IETF RFC 4140, 
August 2005. 
[14] W. F. Elsadek and M. N. Mikhail, Department of Computer Science 
and Engineering, the American University in Cairo “Universal 
Mobility with Global Identity (UMGI) Architecture”, Proceedings 
2009 International Conference on Wireless Networks and Information 
Systems (WNIS 2009), December 2009. 
 
86
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

