 An Integrated Location Method using Reference 
Landmarks for Dead Reckoning System 
Mingmei Li, Kazuyuki Tasaka and Kiyohito Yoshihara 
KDDI R&D Laboratories Inc. 
2-1-15 Ohara Fujimino-shi, 356-8502 
Saitama, Japan 
Email: {mi-li, ka-tasaka, yosshy}@kddilabs.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Dead reckoning system is a promising solution for 
pedestrian location, which determines the user’s location by 
using multiple built-in sensors in the wireless devices or wearable 
sensors (3-axis, magnetic, gyro) on the pedestrian. However, most 
location estimation methods in dead reckoning systems meet the 
problem of accumulated location errors due to magnetic field 
disturbances. Some existing methods solved the problem by 
forcing the user to take the phone in a fixed gesture. However, 
they are not practical for the users in daily life and also 
accumulate errors with time flying. To solve the above problem, 
in this paper, we propose a new method to integrate wireless 
time-of-arrival landmark signals into dead reckoning system. The 
proposed method utilizes the hearable Time Difference of Arrival  
signals from the LMs, which are placed in the known locations to 
help correct the accumulated location estimation errors in dead 
reckoning systems. We evaluate the location estimation error 
with the proposed method when different number of reference 
LMs is placed and compare with location estimation in a dead 
reckoning system. Simulation results show that location 
estimation errors drop when different number of reference LMs 
are used.  
Keywords- dead reckoning system; integrated location method; 
mobile phone built-in sensors (3-axis, magnetic, gyro); TDOA 
landmarks. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Recently, mobile devices are widely spreading. The 
location information of mobile devices is expected to be used 
in many new services, such as friend finding, shopping guide, 
etc. Many mobile phones have GPS receivers, but some 
services should be provided in the situations where the 
function of GPS receivers is not available, such as indoor 
areas, underground areas and complicated urban districts with 
a lot of buildings.  
Many 
studies 
have 
investigated 
indoor 
location 
technologies, and some services based on time difference of 
arrival (TDOA) [1-4], wifi access points [5] are available 
today. However, providing many sensors with localization 
hardware (e.g., GPS) is expensive in terms of cost and energy 
consumption [6-7]. A more reasonable solution to the 
localization problem is to allow mobile phones to have their 
step information at all times, and allow users to infer 
information from these sensors [8-11]. Recently, mobile 
phones with built-in sensors (e.g., 3-axis, magnetic, gyro 
sensors, etc) have been widely spreading. These sensors help 
providing a lot of user's information that can be used in a 
location system: arm swing detection, step count estimation, 
direction estimation and step length estimation. Swing 
detection, step count estimation, direction estimation and step 
length estimation. Therefore, relative location systems- DR 
systems offer a promising solution [12-15]. Dead reckoning 
(DR) systems use sensors (e.g., accelerometer and gyroscope) 
to determine the user’s current location without external 
infrastructures, they derive the characteristics of human such 
as the number of steps, step length, and direction.  
However, most location estimation methods in DR 
systems meet the problem of accumulated location errors due 
to magnetic field disturbances. Existing works solved the 
problem by using the following methods: required the user to 
input their step size before the location estimation [12-13]; 
forced the user to mount the mobile phone in a fix gesture on 
his/her body [14]. Obviously, the first one is not accurate once 
the users step into crowded environment, user’s step size is 
changed into smaller ones; and the second one brings 
inconvenience to the users. Taking these into considerations, 
in this paper, we propose a new method to correct the 
accumulated estimation errors. The proposed method 
integrates wireless TDOA LMs signals (LMs are placed in 
known places) into location estimation in a dead reckoning 
system. Once the user walks near the transmission range of a 
TDOA LM, the TDOA signal information are received, and 
the accumulated errors are compensated with the received 
ranges. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly 
describes dead reckoning system. Section III presents the 
proposed integration location system. Section IV illustrates the 
details of the proposed integrated method. Section V compares 
simulation results of the proposed method and the dead 
reckoning location method. Finally, Section VI concludes the 
paper.  
II. 
DEAD RECKONING SYSTEM 
A. System Overview 
In a pedestrian navigation system, it is necessary to locate 
the position of the user in any environment. Dead reckoning 
location system is such a system that can estimate the user's 
location based on a previously determined location, without 
external infrastructures. For this reason, a self-contained  
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Integrated location system 
 
navigation system based on a dead reckoning principle is 
ofinterest. To locate the position of the user, distance and 
heading from a known origin have to be measured at an 
acceptable level of accuracy [14-15]. In a pedestrian 
navigation system, an electronic pedometer can be used to 
count the number of steps, which can be combined with the 
step size for obtaining the distance traveled. In addition, a 
terrestrial magnetic compass can be used as a heading sensor. 
B. Problem in Dead Reckoning System 
 The dead reckoning system is dependent upon the 
accuracy of measured distance and heading and the accuracy 
of the known origin. Recently, mobile phones with built-in 
sensors (e.g., 3-axis, magnetic, gyro sensors, etc) have been 
widely spreading. These sensors help providing a lot of user's 
information that can be used in a dead reckoning location 
system. The current relative location of the user is calculated 
as movement in an estimated direction, based on the step 
length estimated from the last position at each estimated step. 
However, most studies on dead reckoning system accumulated 
estimation errors, which greatly reduced location accuracy.  
Apart from sensor measurement noise, the main factors 
that have effect on the estimation accuracy are step size error 
and direction bias error. The step size error is the difference 
between the actual step size and the predetermined step size 
entered by the user. Although the exact step size is not 
necessary for the distance calculation, the average step size 
over a short period has to be measured. The reason for this is 
that the step size of the user may vary according to the 
environment; for example, the step size of the user is shorter 
when the user is walking in a crowded area. Hence, the 
predetermined step size cannot be used effectively for the 
distance measurement. The direction bias error is a result of 
several causes such as magnetic declination and body offset [2, 
8]. In a clean environment, the total bias can be changed 
slowly over a long period and may need to be re-calibrated 
occasionally. Therefore, how to alleviate the accumulated 
location errors is the challenging issue. We solve this problem 
by introducing the reference TDOA LMs in the system to 
alleviate the accumulated estimation errors. The details are 
described in the next sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. System architecture 
 
III. 
INTEGRATED LOCATION SYSTEM 
A. Requirements and Scope  
Our method is to develop an integrated location method 
using some reference LMs and mobile phone built-in sensors. 
The requirements and scope are as follows, 
 
Commercial mobile phones with built-in sensors 
(3-axis, magnetic, gyro sensors). 
 
Reference LMs located at known places, e.g., the 
intersections or corners of the road.   
 
Location estimation should be compensated when the 
user received TDOA signals from LMs, accuracy 
guaranteed even in a magnetically noisy environment.  
B. System Architecuture  
The integrated location system is shown in Figure 1. It 
includes some reference LMs (RF/acoustic signals deployed at 
some known locations) which are deployed at the corners or 
intersections of shops. The transmission range of each LM is 
different based on the space of the corners and intersections of 
shops. The user walks in the room, and the walking trace is 
shown in red line. The system architecture is shown in Figure 
2, which constitutes mobile phones with built-in (3-axis 
accelerometer / magnetic / gyro) sensors and TDOA LMs. 
Each LM broadcasts its ID and location periodically. The 
number of steps is counted by detecting the peaks of 
acceleration in the same way as a typical pedometer and the 
orientation of a mobile phone with the sensors is found in the 
same way as an electronic compass. The step size and the 
compass bias were calculated from step size average and 
compass bias average of the last 100 seconds. In location 
correction part, the mobile phone corrects its location, by 
using information from TDOA signals [14-15]. 
C. Reference TDOA LMs  
The reference LMs use TDOA ranging method, which 
are based on the time difference of arrival between radio and 
acoustic signals. TDOA ranging utilizes the fact that two 
signals propagate at different speeds: an instantaneously at 
short distances for radio waves, and approximately 340m/s for 
sound. The TDOA LMs operate as follow; the sender 
broadcasts a radio message followed by an acoustic signal 
(chirp) with a known frequency signature. The mobile phone 
receives the radio message by starting to listen the chip using  
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

Table 1. Definitions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrated RF reader [15]. Once the mobile phone detects the 
radio message, it estimates the distance by computing the 
difference in arrival time of the radio and acoustic signals. As 
an example, the MCS410CA Cricket mote can be used as the 
TDOA reference LM [1].  The Cricket Mote includes all of 
the standard MICA2 hardware and an ultrasound transmitter 
and receiver. This device uses the combination of RF and 
ultrasound technologies to establish differential time of arrival 
and hence linear range estimates [16]. The Cricket mote works 
at a frequency in the 433MHz band, but the frequency can be 
fine tuned within several megahertz either at compile time or 
runtime [17]. 
   For the mobile phone users, Wireless Dynamics has 
announced a device called the iCarte that will add both RFID 
and NFC capabilities to the iPhone, which can be used for the 
users to receive RF signals [18].  
IV. 
INTEGRATED LOCATION METHOD 
As discussed in Section II, there are several sources of 
errors in the dead reckoning system, mainly as step error and 
direction error. Most existing methods solved the problem by 
using the following methods: required the user to input their 
step size before the location estimation; forced the user to 
mount the mobile phone in a special position on his/her body. 
Obviously, these methods accumulate estimation errors with 
time flying. The first one is not very accurate once the users 
step into crowded environment, they may change their step 
size into smaller ones; and the second one brings 
inconvenience to the users. Taking these into considerations, 
we propose an integrated location method utilizing the 
received TDOA range from reference locations to correct the 
accumulated estimation errors.  
There are two parts in the proposed integrated location 
method. The first part is that, when TDOA LM signal is not 
available, the location is estimated using the method in a DR 
system [15]. The second part is that, when the TDOA LM 
signal is available, the received TDOA signal will be 
incorporated in the estimation process. We will describe the 
detail steps of the whole method, and two parts in the 
following subsections. Table 1 shows the definitions that are 
used in the paper. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The flowchart of the proposed method 
 
A. Overview of the Proposed Method 
The following describes the detail steps of the overall 
method. The flowchart is illustrated in Figure 3. 
[Step 1] Get initial location from the nearest LM. 
[Step 2] Get 3-axis/magnetic/gyro sensor information from the 
mobile phone.  
[Step 3] Estimate current mobile phone’s location by using the 
method in a DR system [15].  
[Step 4] Receive signals from LMs, and record LM’s ID, and 
location.  
[Step 5] Check if LM signals can be heard. If LM signal can 
be heard, go to step 5; if LM signals cannot be heard, go to 
step 6.  
[Step 6] Stop location estimation by DR method. Estimate the 
mobile phone’s location by using the following method, then 
go to step 7.  
[Step 7] Location output. 
Definitions:  
rLM- maximum transmission range of a LM; 
rTDOA- received TDOA signal distance from a LM;  
 
Intersection- arcs of a circle of a radiu rTDOA centered at 
LM by roads which locates within the circle. 
 
(xk, yk)- LMk location; 
(xest, yest)- mobile phone location estimated by DR method; 
dest- the distance between (xest, yest) and (xk, yk); 
 
(xmk, ymk)- centroid location of intersection m within LMk; 
(xcross,ij, ycross,ij)- location of the road’s cross-point i and j; 
 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

B. Road Determination 
As the LMs locate at the corners or the intersections of 
the roads, once the user receives TDOA signals, we need 
determine the direction of the user’s road first. There are two 
cases for road determination: 
 
-Case 1: (xest, yest) is on a single road 
The signal road is determined as the current road. 
e.g., (xest, yest) is on road 1-> road 1 is its current road. 
-Case 2: (xest, yest) is on several roads (inside the transmission 
range of a LM) 
e.g., (xest, yest) is on road 1,2,3 
[step 1] Calculate the distance between the current location 
and the centroids of those roads. 
e.g., (xest, yest) is on roads 1,2, and 3. Calculates the distance 
d11, d21, d31, for (xest, yest) with (x11, y11), (x21, y21), and (x31, y31). 
[step 2] Sort the calculated distance. The road with the shortest 
calculated distance is determined as current road. 
e.g., d11< d21<d31, then road 1 is current road.  
C. Location Correction 
Once the user receives TDOA signals from the reference 
LMs, the user should locate in the transmission range of the 
reference LMs. We have determined the user’s road in the 
previous subsection. However, the user’s location estimated 
by a DR system may be different from the transmission range 
of the heard LM, due to accumulated errors [17-18]. Therefore, 
we discuss the location correction based on the estimation 
differences between DR location and received LM ranges. 
Three cases are studied: within hearable TDOA ranges; within 
twice TDOA ranges; and out of twice TDOA ranges. Figure 4 
shows the detail of the studied scenario.  
 
-Case 1: dest < rLM 
[Step 1] List the user’s possible intersection(s) (i=1,…,N) 
based on the past location (last three steps, t-3,t-2,t-1,t).  
e.g.,  
road 1 at time t-1, t-2, t-3 -> possible intersection is 1. 
road 3 at time t-3, t-2, road 1 at time 1 -> possible intersection 
is 1,3. 
[Step 2] Estimate the output location using the intersection’s 
location obtained in step 1 and the estimated location (xest, 
yest).  
                           ݔ௢௨௧ ൌ
1
N ൅ 1 ൭ݔ௘௦௧ ൅ ෍ݔ௜௞
N
୧ୀଵ
൱                       ሺ1ሻ 
                            ݕ௢௨௧ ൌ
1
N ൅ 1 ൭ݕ௘௦௧ ൅ ෍ݕ௜௞
N
୧ୀଵ
൱                      ሺ2ሻ 
 
[step 3] If (xout, yout) is on the map, then outputs it. If (xout, yout) 
is not on the map, then go to step 4. 
[step 4] Calculate the distance between the location (xout, yout) 
and the centroids of those roads. 
e.g., calculates the distance d11, d21, d31, d41 between (xout, yout) 
and the (x11, y11), (x21, y21), (x31, y31) (x41, y41). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Study scenario 
 
[step 5] Sort the calculated distances, and find the 
intersections with two shortest distances 
e.g., the calculated result is as d11< d41< d31 <d21,  then 
intersections 1 and 4 are two intersections founded; 
[step 6] Estimate and output the location by using the 
cross-point between the two intersections, xout=xcross,ij, 
yout=ycross,ij e.g., xout=xcross,ij, yout=ycross,ij 
 
-Case 2: rLM < dest<2 rLM 
[Step 1] Calculate the distance between the estimated location 
and the centroids of all the intersections, d1,d2,d3,d4;  
 
4
2
3
1
Road 2
Road 3
Road 1
Road 4
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Simulation scenario 
[Step 2] Sort the intersections in distance order, e.g., 
d1<d4<d2<d3 , then 1<4<2<3; 
[Step 3] Calculate the centroid on the arc between the shortest 
centroid and the second shortest centroid; and another centroid 
on the arc between the shortest centroid and the third shortest 
centroid,  
e.g., (x141, y141) is the centroid on arc between (x11, y11) and (x41, 
y41). (x121, y121) is the centroid on arc between (x11, y11) and (x21, 
y21).  
[Step 4] Calculate the centroid on the arc between the two 
centroids calculated from step 3; and output it, e.g., (xout yout) = 
centroid on the arc between (x121, y121) and (x141, y141). 
 
-Case 3: dest>2rLM   
[Step 1] Determine the intersection based on the user’s current 
road; e.g., user is in road 1, then the current intersection is 1; 
[Step 2] Select a random location from the intersection 
determined in step 1, and output it, e.g., (xrandom, 
yrandom)∈intersection( xmk, ymk), then (xout=xrandom, yout=yrandom). 
V. 
SIMULATION 
In this section, simulations are performed to evaluate the 
performance of the proposed method. 
A. Simulation Setup 
The simulation is evaluated in Matlab. We consider a 
simulation area, where six reference LMs are placed at the 
corners in a simulation area of 1000x500m, as shown in 
Figure 5. The coordinates of each LM are: (10, 10), (500, 10), 
(990, 10), (10, 490), (500, 490), (990, 490). The transmission 
distance of a LM is assumed to be 15m. Considering wireless 
radio wave propagation which may cause serious uncertainty 
while measuring signals from LMs, the noise is added to the 
simulated 
transmission 
distance 
with 
Gauss 
distributionNሺ0, 1ଶሻ. In the simulations, we do not consider to 
adaptively change LM coverage.  
We simulate the user’s walking trajectory using a random 
walk model. The user’s step length uses built-in sensor data 
from references [2, 3]. The user’s walking speed is selected 
between 0.6m/s~1.4m/s. The user’s walking distance is 
obtained at each second; and step size is sampled at each 
second. The walking distance is considered with േ10% error 
[15]. Walking direction detection is considered within േ30% 
error [15].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6(a). Location error, route 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6(b). Location error, route 2 
Figure 6 (b) shows location errors evaluated in route 2, where the user 
walks in the direction 
 
estimation by using location error. Location error is  
 
Figure 6(b). Location error, route 2 
The goal of a wireless location system is to accurately locate a 
user. In the simulations, we evaluate the system performance 
using location error as the metric. Location error is defined as 
the difference between the user’s pre-determined route and the 
estimated route. Two routes are studied in the simulation: 
route 1, LM0->LM1->LM2->LM3->LM4 ->LM5->LM0; and 
route 2, LM1->LM4->LM5->LM0. The location estimation 
method in the DR system [16] is used as a comparison method, 
represented as DR method. All the simulation results are the 
average of 10 runs. 
B. Simulation Results 
Figure 6 (a) shows the simulation results for location 
errors evaluated by two methods when the user is simulated to 
walk in route 1. From the figure, we see that DR method 
accumulates more location errors when the user walks in the 
direction of LM0->LM1->LM2->LM3->LM4 ->LM5->LM0. 
For instance, location error is about 15m2 at LM1, 23m2 at 
LM2, and about 40m2 when the user comes back to LM0. 
Obviously, this is due to accumulated errors with time being. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

From the same figure, we see that using the proposed 
integrated location method, location error drops obviously, 
which means better location accuracy for the mobile phone 
user. For example, the user accumulates about 12 m2 errors 
before coming to LM2, and drops about 6m2 after receiving 
TDOA signals and re-estimating the location near LM2. 
Finally, the location error drops to 10 m2 when the user goes 
back to LM0.  
Figure 6 (a) shows the simulation results for location 
errors evaluated by two methods when the user is simulated to 
walk in route 2. Using DR method, location error is about 15 
m2 at LM4 and about 18 m2 when the user goes back to LM0. 
Using the proposed integration method, location correction 
works when the user receives TDOA signal from each 
reference LM. The highest location error is about 14 m2 that 
happens at LM5, and it quickly drops to 1~2 m2. Finally 
location error is about 8~9 m2 when the user comes back to 
LM0. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a new method to integrate 
wireless TDOA LM signals (TDOA LMs locate at several 
fixed locations) as reference location information into dead 
reckoning system. We evaluated the location estimation error 
when different number of reference LMs is used to 
compensate the accumulated location errors.  Performance of 
the proposed method is compared with the location method in 
a DR system.  Simulation results demonstrate that average 
9m2~25m2 location estimation error in a simulation area of 
1000x500m can be obtained, verify the effectiveness of the 
proposed method. This level of location accuracy helps 
mothers locate their children more accurate and easier in a 
shopping mall. Map matching, implementation and evaluation 
of a practical system will be a part of our future work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A.Smith, H.Balakrishnan, M. Goraczko, and N. Priyantha. “Tracking 
Moving Devices with the Cricket Location System”. In Proceeding of 
Mobisys 2004.(2004) 
[2] 
M. Rudafshani, and S. Datta. “Localization in Wireless Sensor 
Networks”. In Proceedings of IPSN 2007, pp. 51-60.(2007) 
[3] 
G.Zhang,S.Krishnan, F.Chin, and K.C.Chung. “UWB MultiCell Indoor 
Localization Experiment System with Adaptive TDOA Combination”. 
In Proceeding of VTC 2008-fall.(2008) 
[4] 
Lui, K.W.K., So, H.C., and Ma, W.-K. “Maximum A Posteriori 
Approach to Time-of-Arrival-Based Localization in Non-Line-of-Sight 
Environment”. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,Vol. 59, 
Issue. 3, pp. 1517 - 1523, 2010 (2010). 
[5] 
Koozyt, Inc.,: PlaceEngine, http://www.placeengine.com/, accessed May 
17, (2010). 
[6] 
M.J.Caruso, “Application of magnetoresistive sensors in navigation 
systems”. Sensors and Actuators, SAE SP-1220, pp. 15-21, 1997. (1997) 
[7] 
B., N., Schmidt, G., “Inertial sensor technology trends”. Sensors Journal, 
IEEE, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 332-339, (2001) 
[8] 
G.Gartner, A.Frank, G.Retscher, “Pedestrian Navigation System in 
Mixed Indoor/Outdoor Environment”. Journal of. CORP. pp24-27, 
2004 (2004) 
[9] 
M.Kourogi and T.Kurata, “Personal positioning based on walking 
locomotion analysis with self-contained sensosrs and a wearable 
camera”. In Proceeding of ISMAR 2003, pp.103 (2003). 
[10] R. Stirling, K.Fyfe, and G. Lachapelle. “Evaluation of a new method of 
heading estimation for pedestrian dead reckoning using shoe mounted 
sensors”. Journal.Navigation. Royal Society of Navigation, vol.58, no.1,, 
pp31-45 (2005). 
[11] S. H. Shin, C.G. Park, J.W. Kim, and H.S. Hong and J.M. Lee, 
“Adaptive Step Length Estimation Algorithm Using Low-Cost MEMS 
Inertial Sensors”. IEEE Sensors Applications System (SAS)(2007). 
[12] L.F, P.J. Antaklis, L.A. Montestruque, M.B. McMickell, M.Lemmon, 
Y.Sun, H.Fang, I.Koutroulis, M.Haenggi, M.Xie, and X.Xie. “Design of 
a wireless assisted pedestrian dead reckoning system”. The NavMote 
experience. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 2342-2358, 
(2005).  
[13] U. Steinhoff and B.Schiele, “Dead reckoning from the pocket- An 
experimental study”. in Proceeding of PerCom 2010, pp. 162-170, 
(2010). 
[14] P.Pombinho, A.P. Afonso, and M.B.Carmo. “Indoor positioning using a 
mobile phone with an integrated accelerometer and digitial compass”. 
INForum, (2010). 
[15] D. K, S. Muramatsu, T. Iwamoto, and H. Yokoyama, “Design and 
Implementation of Pedestrian Dead Reckoning System on a Mobile 
Phone”. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, Vol. E94. No. 
6, pp. 1137-1146, 2011. 
[16] N. B. Priyantha, “The Cricket Indoor Location System PhD Thesis”. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2005. 
[17] Y. Wang, S.Goddard, and L.C.Perez “A Study on the Cricket 
Location-Support System Communication Protocols”. in Proceeding of 
IEEE EIT 2007, pp. 257-262, 2007. 
[18] D. Etherington, “iCarte Turns the iPhone Into an RFID Reader”,  
http://gigaom.com/apple/icarte-turns-the-iphone-into-an-rfid-reader/ ，
Nov, 2009 
[19] X. C. Xu, N. S. V. Rao, and S. Sahni, “A Computational Geometry 
Method for Localization using Differences of Distances”. ACM Trans. 
on Sensor networks, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 10, Article. 10, 2010.  
[20] S. Minamimoto, S. Fuji, H. Yamguchi, and T. Higashino, “Local Map 
Generation using Position and Communication History of Mobile node”. 
in Proceeding of IEEE percom, pp. 2-10, 2010. 
[21] Beauregard, “Omnidirectional pedestrian navigation for first responders”. 
in Proeedings of 4th Workshop on Positioning, Navigation and 
Communication, pp. 33-36, 2007. 
 
 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

