An Approach for Reduction of the Security Overhead in Smart Grid
Communication Infrastructure Employing Dedicated Encryption
Miodrag J. Mihaljevi´c
Mathematical Institute, Serbian Academy
of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, Serbia, and
RISEC, National Institute AIST, Tsukuba, Japan
Email: miodragm@turing.mi.sanu.ac.rs
Aleksandar Kaviˇci´c
Department of Electrical Engineering
University of Hawaii
Honolulu, USA
Email: kavcic@hawaii.edu
Abstract—This paper considers an approach for partial
reduction of the overhead implied by request for data secu-
rity within the Smart Grid communications infrastructure. A
signiﬁcant part of the implementation and processing overhead
appears as a consequence of the data conﬁdentiality request
and the related requirement for massive data encryption.
Accordingly, this paper points out to the related requirements
and employment of certain light-weight and highly secure
encryption dedicated to the noisy communication channels.
Keywords—Smart Grid; information-communication infras-
tructure; overheads; data conﬁdentiality; light-weight encryption;
randomness; coding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Generally, a Smart Grid is an autonomous system consist-
ing of an information collection network, a data management
center, a power grid control center and power generation and
transmission infrastructures (see [16], for example). The in-
formation collection network is a complex network involving
a multi-hop ad hoc network, WiFi, cellular network, and
Internet. The sensor nodes, such as Phasor Measuring Units
(PMUs) and Smart Meters (SMs), are deployed over the
power grid to monitor the states of the system.
A communication infrastructure is an essential part in the
Smart Grid and a scalable and pervasive communication
infrastructure is crucial for the operation of a Smart Grid.
To ensure the correct functionality of a Smart Grid, it
is essential that communications are secured, devices are
protected, and privacy is respected. Two main requirements
regarding communications are data authentication and conﬁ-
dentiality, and the information-communication infrastructure
as a whole must be robust. Note that conﬁdentiality of
communications also support the privacy of Smart Grid
customers.
In certain domains of information-communications infras-
tructure of the Smart Grid, the communications channels
suffer from unavoidable and high noise (see [2][7], for ex-
ample). A particular example are the ﬂoating wind turbines
where only wireless and power line cable (PLC) are available
for communications and control purposes, and both of these
channels are extremely noisy.
On the other hand, it is interesting to address the following
issues: utilization of the inherent noise for design dedicated
cryptographic algorithms (based on which the security mech-
anism are built), when appropriate, to employ the available
error-correction coding within a cryptographic algorithm.
Extensive employment of cryptography as ”a must” im-
plies request for light-weight cryptographic primitives in or-
der to minimize the overheads. Overheads as a consequence
of information security requests can be listed as follows: (i)
implementation overhead; (ii) computational overhead; (iii)
communications overhead.
Motivation for the Work. In order to reduce the overheads
in a lot of scenarios the requirement is employment of the
lightweight cryptographic techniques On the other hand, also
in a lot of scenarios, the requirement is high (provable,
preferably) security of the employed cryptographic primi-
tives; particularly the above requirements appear regarding
a number cryptographic techniques required in the Smart
Grid. As illustrations of the previous statements, note the
following: (i) a lot of IT components requires power supply
from batteries, because it is too expensive to equip each
tiny IT device with AC to DC convertor; (ii) the smart-
meters are two-way communication-control devices which
could remotely control the power availability at a home, and
in order to avoid potential disastrous impacts of malicious
control the employed cryptographic techniques should be
highly secure and preferably provably secure ones.
Organization of the Paper. A background on Smart Grid
relevant for this paper is given in Section II, and Section III
discusses corresponding data security issues and implica-
tions. Section IV points out to the noisy nature of the main
communication channels within Smart Grid. An approach
for light-weight and dedicated encryption which ﬁts into
the security and implementation requirements is given in
Section IV, and its implementation complexity is considered
in Section V. Concluding discussion is given in Section VI.
II. A BACKGROUND ON SMART GRID
In the Smart Grid, data collection is performed by mea-
suring devices, including PMUs and SMs. The data manage-
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

ment center communicates with the sensors and the control
centers through the network. It analyzes the information
of the power grid and makes corresponding decisions. The
power grid control centers receive instructions from the data
management center and rule the power system according to
the received instructions. The whole system works in a real-
time manner, which implies real-time situation awareness,
real-time response, and real-time control.
According to the above discussion, Fig. 1 points out the
important two-way nature of the information transmission
within the information-communications sub-infrastructure
related to SMs (advanced metering infrastructure - AMI),
and the required basic cryptographic techniques for provid-
ing security of this infrastructure.
Cryptographic Backend
Authentication               Encryption          Key Management 
AMI
Center
smart
meter
two-way communications
Figure 1.
Illustrative model of security issues regarding communications
within advanced metering infrastructure (AMI).
In addition to the above, particularly note the following.
The measuring nodes are usually implemented as embedded
systems to perform data processing and two-way communi-
cations. Due to the vast amount of deployment, each node is
relatively cheap and simple. Thus, they have very limited on-
board resources including power availability. For example,
they usually have one simple low speed Micro Control Unit
(MCU) as the processor, very limited memory space and
very tight power budget due to their deploying areas, cost
and physical sizes. The MCU is a small computer integrated
on a single chip. It runs programs to support computation
and control tasks in an embedded system. The MCUs are
usually much simpler than the CPUs for the general purpose
computers. Therefore, only some basic tasks, like simple
computation and communication, can be implemented on
these nodes.
Also, basically, most of the PMUs and SMs are deployed
”in the wild”. The collected data are usually transmitted
through wireless links that rely on the open media (i.e.,
wireless channel). The adversaries can easily physically
destroy or replicate these devices by capturing them. The
attackers can also launch attacks by setting up some hacker
equipment.
III. DATA SECURITY ISSUES AND IMPLICATIONS
A. Preliminaries
The network based monitoring system provides efﬁcient
remote monitoring and control, but also exposes the Smart
Grid to potential cyber attacks. On the other hand, mislead-
ing information (or stale information) can cause severe (even
disastrous) consequences to the system, as well as to the
customers. Illustrations of the previous claim are given as
follows. For example malicious modiﬁcation of phasor infor-
mation can cause wrong management operations. Malicious
analysis against the smart meter data can reveal the living
schedule of the householders or production activities of a
plant. In an attacking scenario, which should not be excluded
due to the interconnection of the system, the terrorists could
collect (for example) 80% of the sensitive information that
can be used to mount further attacks on the whole Smart
Grid. Accordingly, communication security which provides
integrity, authenticity, availability and conﬁdentiality over
the whole system has to be enforced by appropriate crypto-
graphic algorithms (as illustrated in Fig. 1).
B. On the Need for Advanced Cryptographic Techniques for
Information Security within the Smart Grid
A consideration of suitable cryptographic components
could begin from the following simple question: Do we
face any speciﬁc security requirement regarding the Smart
Grid information-communication infrastructure, in compar-
ison with traditional security requirements for wireless net-
works, for example. If we claim ”Yes”, a natural follow-up
question is: ”Why”. On the other hand, if we need advanced
cryptographic techniques a natural question is: ”What are the
related requirements”. This section addresses the previously
mentioned issues.
First, we stress the following:
• Security requirements should be related to the im-
pacts of potential security problems. We can identify
a number of very different impacts of the security
problems in the Smart Grid information-communication
infrastructure in comparison with a mobile telephony
network, for example.
• Compromising
the
security
of
the
information-
communication infrastructure could imply a collapse of
the Smart Grid, and recovering the Smart Grid is much
more complex then recovering a wireless network. Ac-
cordingly, the Smart Grid information-communication
infrastructure requires stronger security in comparison
with a wireless network because of possible more
severe impacts of compromising the security.
Regarding the question ”Do we need cryptographic tech-
niques different than currently standardized ones”, we em-
phasis the following:
• For example, if AES (Advanced Encryption Standard)
is enough, why we do not employ it in mobile telephony
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

and in a number of other possible applications;
• If the existing cryptographic techniques are enough than
we already have the best ones, and this is very unlikely
...
C. Requirements on Cryptographic Techniques for the Smart
Grid
In a number of application scenarios within the Smart
Grid, an important request is employment of light-weight
cryptographic algorithms in order to reduce the overhead to
the system implied by involved cryptographic mechanisms
(see, for example, discussions in [5][12][16]). At the same
time, beside the light-weightiness, the employed crypto-
graphic algorithms should be highly secure. These issues
are elaborated in more details as follows.
1) Light-Weight and Highly Secure: Employed crypto-
graphic techniques:
• should provide low overhead implied by implementa-
tion of cryptographic elements - massive employment
of cryptographic techniques if they are not light-weight,
cumulatively could imply high overhead, and particu-
larly regarding extensive device-to-device (M2M) com-
munications; particularly, note that complex encryption
algorithms also imply heavy power consumption and
when the power is obtained from batteries a conse-
quence is the excessive drain on batteries.
• should not be a weak point because impacts of com-
promised security could be much more stronger in
comparison with other systems - a Smart Grid requires
employment of strong cryptographic primitives because
impacts of compromising a cryptographic primitive
could be disastrous.
2) Dedicated: In order to achieve the above implemen-
tation and security requirements, we need advanced and
dedicated cryptographic primitives which are light-weight
and provably secure ones in order to provide/support efﬁ-
cient and effective Smart Grid security and privacy; taking
into account the entire overhead which security requirements
imply, dedicated cryptographic techniques that meet security
requirements and minimize the overhead are very welcome.
IV. NOISY COMMUNICATION CHANNELS IN THE SMART
GRID
In certain domains of information-communications infras-
tructure of the Smart Grid, the communications channel suf-
fer from unavoidable and high noise. A particular example
are the ﬂoating wind turbines where only wireless and power
line cable (PLC) are available for communications and
control purposes, and both of these channels appear as very
noisy. Accordingly, for reliable communications we need an
adequate error-correction coding scheme. On the other hand
it is interesting to address the issues of employment the
inherent noise for design dedicated cryptographic algorithms
based on which the security mechanism are built, as well as,
when appropriate, to employ the available error-correction
coding within a cryptographic algorithm.
Particularly, note the following communications problems
regarding ﬂoating wind turbines.
• Highly reliable (low noise) communication channels are
not available, and standard Internet-like communication
channels are not available.
• Basically, there are only two communication options:
Wireless or via Power Line Cable (PLC). Both options
suffer from high noise (as discussed in [2][7], for
example).
– Wireless Channel: Mostly assumed AWGN, pres-
ence of impulsive noise in certain environments
– PLC Channel: More complicated noise structure:
colored background noise, narrow band noise and
impulsive noise.
V. AN APPROACH FOR DEDICATED ENCRYPTION
As discussed in the previous sections, in certain Smart
Grid scenarios we need light-weight and highly secure cryp-
tographic components and at the same instance we face a
noisy implementation environment. This and the next section
address design and analysis of a cryptographic algorithm for
encryption which employ the channel noise for the crypto-
graphic security enhancement. Light-weight cryptographic
algorithms are very important but currently available ones
suffer from security weaknesses (as an illustration, see [13]
and [14]). On the other hand, it has been shown that physical
noise could play a supporting role in cryptographic security
enhancement (see [8][11], for example). This section points
out to an encryption scheme suitable for the scenarios
where (i) the requirement is employment of lightweight (in
order to reduce the overweight implied by the employed
cryptography) and highly secure algorithms; (ii) physical
noise is available for enhancing the security. It is assumed
that the symmetric key management is based on a pre-
distribution paradigm.
A. Encryption and Decryption Algorithms
The approach [15] pointed out in this section yields a
framework for achieving light-weight implementation and
processing complexity and a high cryptographic security
level implied by employment of the randomness which
appears as a supporting element for enhancing the security
implied by hardness of the so called LPN problem (Learning
Parity with Noise).
We assume the following notation:
-
a
=
[ai]ℓ
i=1:
ℓ-dimensional
binary
vector
of
message/plaintext data;
- r = [ri]m−ℓ
i=1 : (m−ℓ)-dimensional binary vector of random
data where each ri is a realization of the binary random i.i.d.
variable Ri such that Pr(Ri = 1) = Pr(Ri = 0) = 1/2,
i = 1, 2, ..., n;
- u = [ui]k
i=1: k-dimensional binary vector of random data
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

where each ui is a realization of the binary random i.i.d.
variable Ui such that Pr(Ui = 1) = Pr(Ui = 0) = 1/2,
i = 1, 2, ..., k;
- S = [si,j]k
i=1
n
j=1: k × n-dimensional binary matrix of the
secret key
- v = [vi]n
i=1: n-dimensional binary vector of random
data
where
each
vi
is
a
realization
of
the
binary
random i.i.d. variable Vi such that Pr(Vi
= 1) = p
and Pr(Vi = 0) = 1 − p, i = 1, 2, ..., n;
- CH(·) and C−1
H (·): operators of the homophonic encoding
and decoding, respectively; CH(·) denotes a mapping
{0, 1}m → {0, 1}m;
- CECC(·) and C−1
ECC(·): operator of the error-correction
encoding and decoding, respectively; CECC(·) denotes a
mapping {0, 1}m → {0, 1}n.
This section points out to a symmetric key encryption
scheme [15], where the encryption and decryption operations
are speciﬁed by the following.
• Encryption
1) Employing r, perform the homophonic encoding
of a, and the error-correction encoding of the re-
sulting vector as follows: CECC(CH(a||r)) where
|| denotes concatenation.
2) Generate the ciphertext in form of n an dimen-
sional binary ciphertext vector z as follows:
z = CECC(CH(a||r)) ⊕ u · S ⊕ v .
(1)
• Decryption
Assuming availability of the pair (u, z) decrypt the
ciphertext as follows:
a = tcatℓ(C−1
H (C−1
ECC(z ⊕ u · S))) ,
(2)
where tcatℓ(·) denotes truncation of the argument vec-
tor to the ﬁrst ℓ bits and the assumption is that the
employed code which corresponds to CECC(·) and
C−1
ECC(·) can correct the errors introduced by a binary
symmetric channel with the crossover probability p.
Note that the random vector u is a public one, and the
decryption part assumes availability of the pair (u, z). Also
note that the decryption does not require knowledge of r.
The proposed encryption scheme is displayed in Fig. 2.
B. Algebraic Structure Assuming Employment of Linear
Codes
Encoding Issues. When the employed homophonic and error-
correcting codes are linear, the encoding operations in both
cases are vector-matrix multiplications. Accordingly, the
encoded version of a||r is given by the following:
CH(a||r) = [a||r]GH,
(3)
Secret Key Matrix 
plaintext
public
random vector
plaintext
Encryption
Decryption
Source of Randomness
Secret Key Matrix
a
a
Error-Correction
Encoding
+
+
Error-Correction
Decoding
+
ciphertext
ciphertext
X
X
u
z
z
u
Homophonic
Encoding
Homophonic
Decoding
Figure 2.
Encryption scheme [15] which involves randomness and
dedicated coding.
and GH is an m × m matrix, and thus
CECC(CH(a||r))
=
CECC([a||r]GH)
=
[a||r]GHGECC
=
[a||r]G
(4)
where GECC is an m × n binary generator matrix corre-
sponding to CECC(·), and G = GHGECC is an m × n
binary matrix summarizing the two successive encodings at
the encryption side, implying that
z = [a||r]G ⊕ u · S ⊕ v .
(5)
Decoding
Issues.
Assuming
that
the
employed
error-
correction code can correct all the errors introduced by the
vector v we have
C−1
ECC(z⊕u·S) = C−1
ECC(CECC(CH(a||r))⊕v) = [a||r]GH
(6)
and accordingly,
C−1
H (C−1
ECC(z ⊕ u · S)) = [a||r]GHG−1
H = [a||r] ,
(7)
implying that
tcatℓ(C−1
H (C−1
ECC(z ⊕ u · S))) = a .
(8)
C. A Summary of Security Issues
The encryption technique [15] is based on a framework
for enhancing security of light-weight stream ciphers em-
ploying randomness and dedicated coding. Security evalua-
tion of the considered framework has been discussed from
information-theoretic and computational-complexity points
of view in [15]. Regarding the information-theoretic ap-
proach, the equivocation of the secret key is analyzed. The
computational-complexity evaluation approach shows that
recovering of the secret key appears as hard as decoding
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

of certain general linear block codes, i.e. certain problems
of learning the parity in noise (the LPN problem) assuming
appropriate design a linear block codes, which provide joint
error-correction and homophonic coding.
LPN based schemes offer a very strong security guaran-
tee. The LPNk,ϵ problem is equivalent to the problem of
decoding certain random linear code (k, n) after the binary
symmetric channel with the crossover probability (”noise
level”) equal to ϵ, a problem that has been extensively
studied in the last half century and which is provably NP-
complete in the worst case scenario as shown in [3]. On the
other hand hardness of the LPN problem in the average case
has been studied and still, the fastest known algorithms run
in exponential time.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
This section discusses the implementation resources
required
and
complexity
of
the
considered
encryp-
tion/decryption which shows that the entire implementation
is light-weight. Particularly, we point out to a technique for
the inner product evaluation which provides an opportunity
for a trade-off between time and space implementation com-
plexity. Finally, a brief summary of the Advanced Encryption
Standard (AES), relevant for comparison with the approach
given in this paper regarding the implementation, is given.
A. Implementation Requirements
The implementation of the considered encryption requires
the following: (i) a source of randomness, (ii) suitable error
correction code; (iii) suitable homophonic code, and (iv)
resources for the computations over GF(2). The following
discussion show that the above requirements ﬁt into a
framework of the light-weight encryption.
Regarding requirement for a source of randomness, note
that it is the same as requirement discussed regarding HB-
authentication protocols (see [9], for example) designed for
resource limited implementation scenarios like RFID ones,
and accordingly the assumption on availability of a ”light-
weight” source of randomness is justiﬁed, particularly noting
that the generation of randomness could be supported by the
assumed environmental noise.
Following [1], the ECC reported in [17] can be employed
in the proposed cipher as well. Particularly note that the
codes reported in [17], have the property that the encoding
can be computed via a circuit of size O(n) and the decoding
can be decoded by a circuit of size O(nlog2n) making them
the candidate codes.
Regarding the required homophonic coding we point out
to the following. Homophonic coding or ”multiple substi-
tution” (see [10], for example) is a technique for mapping
source data employing certain random bits into the encoded
data which are the randomized form of the source ones
so that the source data can be recovered from the noise-
free encoded ones without knowledge of the random bits.
Homophonic encoding provides that many particular outputs
of encoding become possible substitutes (or ”homophones”)
of the source data based on employment of different ran-
dom sequences. Perfect homophonic code provides that the
encoded data appear as truly random ones.
A particular class of homophonic codes are the universal
ones reported in [10]: These codes provide the randomiza-
tion without knowledge of the source data statistics which is
a request for some homophonic coding schemes. The source
data can be recovered from the homophonic encoder output
without knowledge of the randomizing data by passing the
encoded data through the decoder and then discarding the
randomizer bits.
Finally, note that the Wire-tap channel coding [18] is
based on assigning multiple codewords to the same infor-
mation vector and from that point of view, particularly when
the main channel is noise-free, it shares the same underlying
idea employed in the homophonic coding.
Next subsection discusses some of the issues regarding
implementation of the operations over GF(2).
B. Discussion of the Encryption and Decryption Operations
We assume that implementation of the proposed scheme is
based on employment of light-weight source of randomness,
based on the existing channel noise, and error-correction
coding. Particularly, we assume that a low-implementation
complexity linear error correcting code is employed: such
coding scheme has encoding and decoding complexities lin-
early proportional to the codeword length n. Also note that
the proposed scheme requires only one additional (homo-
phonic) encoding at the encryption side and one additional
(homophonic) decoding at the decryption side
Accordingly, the algebraic representation of encryption
and decryption, when liner codes are employed, implies
the following: (i) Encryption requires mn + kn binary
multiplications and mn + kn + n mod 2 additions (see
(5)); (ii) Decryption requires kn+m2 binary multiplications,
kn + n + m2 mod 2 additions, and O(n) operations for
decoding of the employed linear error correcting code.
Also, note the following: When the linear codes are
employed, the algebraic representation of encryption and
decryption directly shows that the implementation com-
plexity is dominated by the required number of the inner
products between binary vectors. The next section points
out that we can employ dedicated look-up tables instead
of binary multiplications and additions for obtaining (if
appropriate) certain trade-offs between the time and space
implementation complexity.
C. An Implementation of the Inner Products Evaluation
Here is given an approach for time-memory trade-off
based on a read-only memoriy (which play role of a number
of look-up tables) In a look-up table implementation, all the
possible outputs of the function are pre-calculated and stored
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

in the memory. Each time the output of an input is looked up
in the memory instead of being calculated calculated. The
look-up table can save the computation operations at cost of
storage space.
Let A be a set of binary vectors a = [ai]n
i=1, and B be
a set of binary vectors b = [bi]n
i=1 with the cardinalities
|A| >> |B|.
Any inner product
a · b =
n

i=1
aibi ,
(9)
can be considered as
a · b =
n
Δ −1

j=0
(
Δ

i=1
bjΔ+i ajΔ+i) ,
(10)
assuming that
n
Δ is an integer. On the other hand, each
sub-sum Δ
i=1 bjΔ+i ajΔ+i can be considered as a liner
Boolean function of Δ arguments. Accordingly, the inner
product (9) can be considered as the modulo 2 sum of of the
outputs of Δ linear Boolean functions. Taking into account
that |A| >> |B|, it is suitable to consider that a segment of
b speciﬁes a linear Boolean function fj(·), and a segment
of a the arguments of this Boolean function. Accordingly,
we have:
fj,b([ajΔ+i]Δ
i=1) =
Δ

i=1
bjΔ+i ajΔ+i .
(11)
Consequently, the inner product (10) appears as
a · b =
n
Δ −1

j=0
fj,b([ajΔ+i]Δ
i=1) .
(12)
It is well known that any Boolean function of Δ arguments
(see [4], for example) can be implemented employing a look-
up table of dimension 2Δ. Also, the cumulative inner product
(12) can be evaluated employing a binary look-up table of
dimension 2n/Δ. (Of course, instead of one-step look-up
table evaluation of (12), a multiple step approach could be
considered employing a cascade of look-up tables, but this
approach is out of the scope of the current consideration.)
According to the above discussion, any of the considered
inner products can be evaluated with time complexity O(1)
employing
n
Δ binary look-up tables each of dimension 2Δ,
and an additional look-up table of dimension 2n/Δ. So, the
total space complexity CS of the above approach for the
inner products evaluation is upper-bounded as follows:
CS ≤ 2n/Δ + |B| n
Δ2Δ
(13)
where m is a parameter. In order to have a balance between
the space complexity required for the evaluation of partial
inner products (11) and the cumulative one (12), we have
the following requirement:
2n/Δ ≤ |B| n
Δ2Δ
(14)
which for the given parameters |B| and n yields the
maximal n
Δ such that (14) is fulﬁlled.
D. Elements for an Illustrative Comparison
A number of different encryption schemes are employed
in Smart Grid: Some are proprietary algorithms (not dis-
closed) and some are the standardized/recommended ones
like Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
For the illustrative preliminary comparison of the pro-
posed encryption technique and the currently recommended
ones, we point out to the recommendation from [6], where
AES is pointed out as an encryption algorithm and discus-
sions of its energy consumption from [16].
AES is an encryption algorithms which generates the
ciphertext through a number of iterative recalculations. AES
with 128-bit secret key consists of the following operations:
(i) Key Expansion round keys are derived from the secret
key; (ii) Initial Round each byte of the state is combined
with the round key using bitwise xor (iii) 10 Rounds each
consisting of the following four procedures: (a) Sub Bytes
- a non-linear substitution step where each byte is replaced
with another according to a lookup table; (b) Shift Rows
- a transposition step where each row of the state is shifted
cyclically a certain number of steps. (c) Mix Columns
- a mixing operation which operates on the columns of
the state, combining the four bytes in each column. (d)
Add Round Key; (iv) Final Round (no Mix Columns):
Sub Bytes, Shift Rows, Add Round Key.
The above description illustrates that AES has signiﬁ-
cantly higher implementation complexity, particularly be-
cause AES operates through 10 main rounds plus the initial
and ﬁnal ones, and the employed operations are more com-
plex in comparison with mod 2 additions. This higher im-
plementation complexity, in a number of scenarios, implies
a heavy overhead at least regarding the power consumption.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper elaborated that Smart Grid communication
infrastructure requires low-weight and highly secure crypto-
graphic techniques and particulary the ones for encryption.
Also, it is shown that certain communications channels are
highly noisy. Taking into account the addressed scenario, this
paper points out to a light-weight and highly secure stream
cipher encryption technique which employs the unavoidable
channel noise for enhancing the cryptographic security.
This paper shows an alternative approach for encryption
which is based on joint employment of pseudorandomness,
randomness and dedicated coding. The approach is based
on an enhanced underlying LPN problem. The LPN problem
based schemes provide a background for simple and efﬁcient
designs in terms of code-size as well as time and space
requirements. This makes them prime candidates for light-
weight devices like RFID tags, which are too weak to
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

implement standard cryptographic primitives like the block
cipher AES.
This paper points out to a particular light weight symmet-
ric encryption as a component for reduction of the follow-
ing overheads: (i) implementation overhead; (ii) processing
overhead, and (iii) power consumption overhead. At the
same time the considered encryption provides a high level of
provable security required because of possible high impacts
of the broken encryption algorithms and particularly in the
scenarios which assume pre-distribution of the symmetric
secret keys.
The algorithm proposed for the encryption, within noisy
communication channels of the Smart Grid communica-
tion infrastructure, provides the required light-weightiness
and high security. Particularly, note that the encryp-
tion/decryption operations are based only on simple mod 2
additions and table look-up operations which directly imply
low complexity (as well as the related overheads) implemen-
tation, processing and power-consumption. In order to illus-
trate its simplicity, the considered encryption is preliminary
compared with AES. Quantitative consideration of the com-
plexities as well as an in-details comparison of the proposed
approach with the traditional ones is highly dependable on
the particular instantiations of implementation constraints,
and so is out of the scope of this paper. Accordingly, the
paper yields a construction and application framework which
is a proposal for an alternative encryption approach which
contributes to reduction of the security overheads in certain
application scenarios. This proposal could be considered as
a background for the planed experimental implementation
and analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Parts of this work were supported by NSF grant ECCF-
0129081.
The authors thank to the anonymous reviewers for their
comments and suggestions resulting in an improved presen-
tation of the addressed issues.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Applebaum, D. Cash, C. Peikert and A. Sahai, ”Fast Cryp-
tographic Primitives and Circular-Secure Encryption Based on
Hard Learning Problems”, CRYPTO 2009, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 5677, pp. 595-618, Aug. 2009.
[2] J. Anatory, N. Theethayi, R. Thottappillil, M. M. Kissaka,
and N. H. Mvungi, ”Broadband Power-Line Communica-
tions: The Channel Capacity Analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Delivery, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 164-170, Jan. 2008.
[3] E.R. Berlekamp, R.J. McEliece, and H.C.A. van Tilborg, “On
the Inherent Intractability of Certain Coding Problems”, IEEE
Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 24, pp. 384-386, 1978.
[4] T.W. Cusick and P. Stanica, Cryptographic Boolean Functions
and Applications. Academic Press (Elsevier), San Diaego,
USA, 2009.
[5] M.M. Fouda, Z.M. Fadlullah, N. Kato, Rongxing Lu and
Xuemin Shen, ”A Lightweight Message Authentication
Scheme for Smart Grid Communications”, IEEE Transactions
on Smart Grid, vol. 2, pp. 675-685, dec. 2011.
[6] ”Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security: Vol. 1, Smart
Grid Cyber Security Strategy, Architecture, and High-Level
Requirements”, NIST TR 7628, August 2010.
[7] M. Katayama, T. Yamazato, and H. Okada, ”A Mathematical
Model of Noise in Narrowband Power Line Communication
Systems,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1267-1276, Jul 2006.
[8] Y.S. Khiabani, S. Wei, J. Yuan, and J. Wang, ”Enhancement
of Secrecy of Block Ciphered Systems by Deliberate Noise”,
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 7, pp. 1604-1613, Oct 2012.
[9] E. Kiltz, K. Pietrzak, D. Cash, A. Jain, and D. Venturi,
”Efﬁcient Authentication from Hard Learning Problems”,
EUROCRYPT 2011, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
6632, pp. 7-26, 2011.
[10] J. Massey, “Some Applications of Source Coding in Cryptog-
raphy”, European Transactions on Telecommunications, vol.
5, pp. 421-429, July-August 1994.
[11] M.J. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, ”An approach for stream ciphers
design based on joint computing over random and secret
data,” Computing, vol. 85, pp. 153-168, June 2009.
[12] M.J. Mihaljevi´, H. Imai, M. David, K. Kobara and H.
Watanabe, ”On Advanced Cryptographic Techniques for In-
formation Security of Smart Grid AMI”, CSIIRW 2011,
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, USA, 11-14 Oct.
2011, Proceedings, ACM International Conferences Series,
Article no. 64, 4 pages, March 2012.
[13] M.J. Mihaljevi´c, S. Gangopadhyay, G. Paul and H. Imai,
“State Recovery of Grain-v1 Employing Normality Order of
the Filter Function”, IET Information Security, vol. 6, no. 2,
pp. 55-64, June 2012
[14] M.J. Mihaljevi´c, S. Gangopadhyay, G. Paul and H. Imai,
“Internal State Recovery of Keystream Generator LILI-128
Based on a Novel Weakness of the Employed Boolean
Function”, Information Processing Letters, vol. 112, no. 21,
pp. 805-810, November 2012.
[15] M.J. Mihaljevi´c, ”An Approach for Light-Weight Encryption
Employing Dedicated Coding”, IEEE GLOBECOM 2012,
CISS, Anaheim CA, USA, 03-07 Dec. 2012, Proceedings, pp.
892-898.
[16] M. Qiu, H. Su, Z. Ming and T. Yang, ”Balance of Security
Strength and Energy for a PMU Monitoring System in Smart
Grid”, IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 142-149, May
2012.
[17] D.A. Spielman, ”Linear-time encodable and decodable error-
correcting codes”. IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 42,
No 6, pp. 1723-1732, 1996.
[18] A.D. Wyner, “The wire-tap channel”, Bell Systems Technical
Journal, vol. 54, pp. 1355-1387, Oct. 1975.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-245-5
ICN 2013 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networks

