A Flexible Self-Aligning Communication Solution for Multinational Large Scale 
Disaster Operations 
 
Peter Dorfinger, Ferdinand von Tüllenburg, Georg Panholzer, Thomas Pfeiffenberger 
Advanced Networking Center 
Salzburg Research Forschungsgesellschaft mbH 
Salzburg, Austria 
email: {firstname.lastname}@salzburgresearch.at 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a communication solution for 
large scale multinational and multi-organizational disaster 
operations. The work is motivated by real world requirements 
depicted from well experienced forces in disaster management. 
The core design principles for the solution are flexibility and 
easy installation. The solution has proven its applicability 
during several training and large scale exercises, such as floods 
or earthquakes. With our solution we present a communication 
infrastructure for connecting mobile devices of relief forces in 
large-scale disaster operations to Command, Coordinate and 
Control Systems. The infrastructure can be set up by one 
single, non-IT-expert person. 
Keywords—Emergency 
network; 
self-alignment; 
interoperability; communication; wireless coverage simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Communication is one main building block to enhance 
interoperability 
between 
multinational 
and 
multi-
organizational disaster relief actions. To provide targeted and 
fast help, relief organizations are highly reliant on the 
possibility to share important information across different 
organizations and national borders. 
Compared to former days, when mostly voice radio 
communication was used for information interchange, 
modern broadband communication technologies can now 
provide a clear added value to the cooperation in large scale 
disaster actions. For example, some of the most valuable 
disaster information is gathered by relief forces directly at 
incident locations. Sharing these information between relief 
workers and management could bring a clear benefit to find 
the best supporting measures shortly. To get out the best, all 
the information should be made available in an automated 
way to all relief organizations and personnel involved in the 
disaster response actions. 
With broadband communication, automatic exchange of 
relevant data between relief organizations as well as voice 
communication will be possible. One main research issue is 
now, how to bring broadband connectivity to almost any 
arbitrary location in a large scale disaster area. 
The presented communication solution is part of the 
European FP7 research project IDIRA (Interoperability of 
data and procedures in large-scale multinational disaster 
response actions) [1]. IDIRA has its overall objective target 
in enhancing and streamlining the cooperation between relief 
organizations by enabling interoperability of information 
systems used for disaster management.  
IDIRA addresses this interoperability topic twofold. 
First, at an organizational level, IDIRA shall examine 
possibilities to reach administrative coordination of multi-
national disaster relief organizations, with all their own 
specific workflows and procedures. Second, on technical 
side, IDIRA shall provide a complete solution consisting of 
information systems, communication protocols, software 
interfaces, and standard data formats. This solution is the 
enabler technology to exchange disaster related information 
between administrative operators, executive personnel, and 
other disaster management systems connected to IDIRA. 
With 
IDIRA, 
information 
on 
incidents, 
resources, 
observations, and sensor data should be collected and shared 
to various other information systems like, mobile devices 
and command and control systems (C&C). To reach the 
required level of interoperability and automatic information 
exchange, IDIRA has a strong focus on a flexible, reliable, 
and easy to deploy communication infrastructure. 
One of the major problems, we address with our 
proposed communication infrastructure is, that after a large 
scale disaster, the existing public broadband network is often 
partially destroyed, overloaded, or at least hit by power 
outages. Consequently, first responders cannot rely on any 
pre-existing infrastructure which may fail as consequence of 
the disaster. 
As the communication network is essential for a better 
and more efficient collaboration between first responders, 
there is a critical need for the fast setup of alternative 
communication means. In such a case, another issue arises: 
First responder organizations neither are experts in setting up 
communication equipment, nor there are a large number of 
IT experts available within their field staff. Thus, easy setup 
and maintenance is heavily required for such systems.  
This paper is structured as follows: Section II gives a 
brief overview on related work, Section III describes the 
system requirements on the IDIRA communication network, 
Section IV presents our proposed solution; the results of the 
systems’ usage is discussed in Section V. Section VI 
concludes the paper and outlines further steps and ideas to 
improve our solution.  
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

II. 
RELATED WORK 
Communication technologies used by relief organizations 
is manifold. Beside everyday mobile communication 
technology like 2G, 3G, 4G, or even standard voice radio, 
there are numerous technologies which are more specific to 
action forces or disaster relief organizations. Some of these 
technologies 
are 
designed to be 
transportable 
and 
independent of any pre-existing infrastructure like satellite 
communication. Satellite communication systems like 
BGAN [2], VSAT [3], or Emergency.lu [4] are specially 
designed to provide data and voice communication in remote 
areas. As such, it can be used as communication uplink in 
large-scale disasters, if the pre-existing infrastructure is 
damaged or not usable due to power outages. Drawback of 
most satellite communication technologies are the high 
expenses for data exchange, so making them not the number 
one solution for commanders in the field, but a feasible 
approach for one Internet uplink in the operational area. 
BGAN additionally has only a very limited bandwidth. 
In the case of a disaster, affecting many people and large 
areas, the public landline and mobile phone networks are 
often affected by overload, power blackouts, and damaged 
infrastructure. Consequently, these networks are often 
unusable as reliable communication infrastructure. Among 
others, this problem was addressed by TETRA. TETRA 
allows both, range limited direct device to device 
communication without usage of a fixed infrastructure and 
range unlimited indirect communication via a fixed 
infrastructure. To be more protected against power outages 
and damages, the components of the fixed infrastructure are 
constructed on a redundant basis. 
A disadvantage of these technologies is the provided low 
bandwidth for data exchange. IDIRA heavily depends on 
data exchange between multiple components - for example 
for user interactions via IDIRAs web interface, the so called 
Common Operational Picture (COP). Here, data are 
exchanged between web clients of tactical personnel at the 
command & control center and field commanders. The 
bandwidth provided by TETRA will not be sufficient to 
operate several end devices in parallel. 
Other available communication technologies have 
drawbacks regarding operating licenses. E.g., licenses are 
needed 
for 
operating 
WiMAX 
[5] 
communication 
equipment. Highly Mobile Network Node (HiMoNN) [6]  is 
a communication system specific to public protection and 
disaster 
relief 
(PPDR). 
In 
compliance 
with 
ECC 
Recommendation (08)04 [7], HiMoNN operates with 
transmission power of 8W in the 5GHz frequency band, and 
is able to transmit data over a distance of several kilometers 
with a bandwidth of 28Mbit/s. Shortcoming of the HiMoNN 
technology is the lack of international operating permissions, 
which make it not the best choice for an international 
deployment.  
The authors of [15] propose to use end-user devices such 
as mobile phones to establish a mobile ad-hoc network 
(MANET) between first responders. The devices use their 
802.11 wireless network interfaces, to automatically build up 
connections to other devices within their transceiver range. 
During operation, first responders sending data via this 
MANET to a central host located in a command center. 
Special routing protocols are employed for routing the 
network traffic. To have a practical solution, a rather dense 
concentration of devices is needed, so that MANETs are 
only usable at limited incident areas of less than some 100 
square meters. As a general communication solution, this 
approach seems not to be sufficient, as it cannot be assumed 
to have an adequate density of devices in the field to span a 
network across all devices. 
The solution proposed in this paper uses 802.11 [8] 
technologies, which can be used all over the world without 
special licenses, but the possible distance between two 
devices is more limited than with WiMAX or HiMoNN. As 
routing protocol we use the Optimized Link State Routing 
Protocol (OLSR) [9], which is optimized for constrained 
wireless LANs. OLSR is based on multipoint relays which 
reduce the routing overhead on the network. 
Within IDIRA, disaster information is represented in a 
standardized and open XML-based messaging format known 
as Emergency Data Exchange Language (EDXL) [10]. Out 
of this suite of standards, the EDXL-CAP (Common Altering 
Protocol) [11] data format is applied to data concerning 
occurred incidents. These incidents are registered e.g., by a 
sensor system and shared with some central C&C system. 
Information respective to availability, demand, and status of 
resources, such as specialized rescue units or even power 
generators, is shared by the EDXL-RM (Resource 
Messaging) [12] standard. The EDXL-SitRep (Situation 
Report) [13] messaging standard is used within the IDIRA 
context for exchanging information on observations and 
situation reports sent by commanders in the field via their 
mobile devices.  
III. 
REQUIREMENTS 
The proposed networking solution is intended for 
multinational and multi-organizational large scale disaster 
operations. The work is part of the IDIRA project. 
Consequently, it has to fulfill both the generic requirements 
brought in by first responder organizations and the needs 
pushed by the IDIRA framework on the communication 
solution. 
Within the IDIRA project several end user organizations 
are involved and more than 20 organizations are part of the 
end user advisory board. The requirements concerning the 
communication solution for first responders in emergency 
situations were conducted within IDIRAs’ end user advisory 
board.  
As nobody knows where the next disaster will strike the 
communication solution has to be allowed for usage (almost) 
all over the world. This allowance has to be given in 
advance, as asking for e.g., WiMAX frequencies in a disaster 
area right after the disaster strikes, is not an applicable 
approach (REQ1). 
Whenever open broadband communication networks are 
at least partially operational, the emergency network should 
be able to use or interact with the existing network (REQ2). 
For end device connectivity, the network should use open 
standards to ensure that different end devices can easily be 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

added to the network and can interchange information with 
the emergency network (REQ3). 
After a large scale disaster, only few human resources are 
available to setup a communication network. Especially IT-
staff is a scarce resource. Thus, the setup of the 
communication network, especially of the remote nodes, has 
to be easy. There must not be the need for an IT guy to setup 
a remote communication node (REQ4). 
Even in case the network is down, the information, that 
was already in the system when the connection was lost, 
should be available to the end-user (REQ5). 
The interaction with the system should be the same when 
the network is down, as it would be if the network is up - for 
sure with a limited number of functionalities (REQ6). 
The result of a survey within the end user advisory board 
was that REQ1, REQ2 and REQ4 are the most important 
ones and are thus crucial for the applicability and acceptance 
of a proposed solution. 
The main design principle of IDIRA is to use 
standardized interfaces. Standardized interfaces, as for 
example the XML based EDXL standards family, often have 
the drawback to increase the communication overhead. 
Consequently the bandwidth needs within IDIRA are higher 
than they could be in case the design would have been 
performed with the bandwidth as main scarce resource. The 
IDIRA communication network will be used to access the 
Common Operational Picture (COP). The COP is a web 
application which presents the needed information in a 
Geographic Information system (GIS) manner to tactical and 
strategic personnel. For bootstrapping a device, COP needs 
about 10MByte of data as initial load. During operation data 
containing sensor information, incident information, and 
information on resources and their activities are exchanged. 
All this leads to a bandwidth requirement of around 2Mbit/s 
for a seamless operation of the COP. For field commanders 
(operational commanders) a dedicated Android App has been 
developed, where specific attention was given to reduced 
bandwidth consumption. This operational app needs less 
than 100kBit/s to be operational, if voice communication is 
used the needed bandwidth is in the range of 200kBit/s. 
Depending on the number of clients a few Mbit/s of 
bandwidth are required to support the IDIRA needs (REQ7). 
IV. 
SOLUTION 
Core of our proposed communication solution is a set of 
multiple communication nodes, called Wireless Gateway 
(WGW). The WGWs are used for both, to build up a 
backbone network and to provide end users access to this 
network. 
Based on the requirements presented in section III, 
802.11 based technology was chosen as the main 
communication solution used in the WGWs. The usage of 
802.11 ensures that it can be used almost all over the world 
without the need to apply for licenses (REQ1). Within the 
proposed solution for the backbone network the 5GHz 
frequency range is used. 802.11 technology also is used 
between WGW and end devices. We are using the 2.4GHz 
frequency band to connect to end devices. This technology is 
widely used in end devices such as smart phones, netbooks, 
tablet devices or laptops. This ensures that a large number of 
commodity hardware will be available to be used as end 
devices (REQ3). 
To overcome the limitations of the limited distance 
between two 802.11 endpoints we are using directional 
antennas. The disadvantage of directional antennas is that 
they have to be aligned to each other. As this is not a task 
which can easily be performed by first responders, it was 
decided to develop a self-alignment algorithm. The proposed 
solution consists of three directional antennas at each WGW 
which are automatically aligning themselves to build up a 
meshed backbone network with a maximum number of three 
direct links to other WGWs. 
WLAN station 1
motor
WLAN station 2
motor
WLAN station 3
motor
routerboard
microcontroller
switch
WLAN AP 
2.4 GHz
WLAN AP 
5 GHz
Power over Ethernet
 
Figure 1.  WGW building blocks. 
Figure 1 shows the main building blocks of the WGW. 
The upper three layers are built identically. They consist of a 
WLAN station with a 16dBi directional antenna and a motor 
to rotate the antenna. In the bottom layer, a switch is 
mounted to connect the WLAN stations to a router-board. 
On the router-board the self-alignment algorithm is running, 
which controls to which remote WGW the individual WLAN 
stations are connected. A microcontroller is connected to the 
router-board which is responsible for performing the rotation 
of the upper three layers. In addition, the router-board is 
equipped with two miniPCI WLAN cards, where the first 
one is configured for the 2.4GHz band, and used for the 
connection to the end devices, the second operates within the 
5GHz band and is used for the self-alignment algorithm. 
Details on the self-alignment algorithm can be found in [14]. 
The WGW will span a meshed network automatically, and 
each WGW is working as relay node for other WGWs. 
The installation of the system is quite easy, it is just 
needed to mount the WGW on top of a pole and connect the 
cable and the Omni antennas for the 2.4GHz and 5GHz 
access points. Thus, the installation can be performed by 
non-IT experts, bringing us closer to REQ4. Nevertheless, an 
easy to setup network is only half of the job. In advance, it 
has to be decided where to set up the communication nodes. 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

To support the first responders in positioning of the WGW, a 
simulation environment has been developed. The COP 
visualizes incidents, resources, tasks and other relevant 
information for disaster management on a map. Based on 
this information the incident areas are known, where field 
commanders need a working communication infrastructure 
to interact with the IDIRA system. Within one single 
incident area there may be preferred positons for WGWs 
(where they are able to communicate to each other) and 
positions where a WGW should not be placed. For first 
responders, it is not an easy task to identify accurate 
positions for the WGWs. We have embedded into COP a 
highly accurate simulation model based on digital elevation 
and digital surface model with a resolution of 1/10 of an arc 
second. This allows visualizing together with the tactical 
information also the communication feasibilities. Both used 
together allow an accurate positioning of the WGWs within 
the operational area, which allows the field commanders to 
fulfil their tactical needs and being able to communicate to 
each other. More details about the simulation can be found in 
[16]. 
Figure 2 shows such an example output. The simulation 
output shows clearly where it will be possible to install a 
WGW and where it is not possible, based on the simulation 
result for a remote position. 
 
  
Figure 2.  Simulation results. 
The figure shows four incident areas (A-D) where 
communication coverage is needed. A central WGW has 
already been installed on the left border of the picture 
showing its simulation results. The lurid green color 
indicates the area where communication between end 
devices and the WGW will be possible. The yellow color 
shows areas where the installation of a remote WGW would 
be possible. The simulation results shows that for incident 
area A, the positioning of a WGW would be possible, but not 
for B, C and D. Consequently in a next step, a WGW will be 
positioned within area A and a simulation will be performed 
to show the coverage of the WGW positioned in that area. 
The aim is to find locations at the areas B, C, or D which are 
reachable from the WGW at location A. In doing so, it is 
possible to connect incident areas over multiple hops to the 
central WGW. For example, at position R1 on the map, a 
WGW is used as relay node to build a multi-hop-connection 
to incident area C. 
The self-alignment algorithm of the WGW together with 
the simulation model allows the positioning and installation 
of the WGW by non-IT experts, thus the solution fulfills 
REQ4. 
To be flexible to also integrate other technologies each 
WGW is using a so called Communication Field Relay 
(COFR). The Communication Field Relay is positioned at 
the foot of the pole on which the WGW is mounted, and it is 
connected to the WGW by Ethernet LAN. Furthermore, the 
COFR offers the ability to connect wired end devices such as 
desktop computers to the network. It provides all the needed 
networking services such as DHCP or DNS server for the 
machines. This link can also be used to integrate other layer 
2 technologies, such as WIMAX, to the network. An 
additional link of the COFR is configured as DHCP client. 
On this link, different Internet uplink technologies such as 
DSL, Cable, 3G, 4G or anything else using an Ethernet 
interface can be connected. This Internet uplink can be 
shared by all clients connected to this COFR, to the local 
WGW or, to any remote COFR or WGW. The route is 
distributed by the OLSR dynamic gateway plugin. 
Beyond networking, the COFR has a responsibility as 
power supply for the COFR/WGW compound. The COFR 
can be connected either to a 230V power socket or, to be 
independent of an available and working power grid, to a 
battery via a 12V cigarette lighter socket. The COFR 
provides power to the WGW via the PoE enabled Ethernet 
wire. 
The IDIRA system consists of two more components the 
so called Fixed Infrastructure and the Mobile Integrated 
Command 
and 
Control 
Structure (MICS). 
From a 
networking perspective, the Fixed Infrastructure operates an 
OpenVPN server. As the COFR and WGW should work in 
different network environments two VPN configurations are 
used. One is using the default setting of an UDP VPN server 
on port 1194. The second one (overcoming some firewalls) 
is using a TCP VPN server running on Port 443. Moreover, 
the Fixed Infrastructure is running a DNS server. All the 
COFRs using an Internet uplink to connect to the IDIRA 
network will establish a VPN connection to the Fixed 
Infrastructure. 
233
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

DSL/Cable
3G/4G
other
SAT
COFR
Fixed Infrastructure
COFR
COFR
COFR
3G/4G
DSL/Cable
3G/4G
other
COFR
MICS
COFR
 
Figure 3.  IDIRA communication network 
The MICS allows shipping all the IDIRA services on 
site. This is of importance if a major network disruption 
occurs. When using the MICS, no Internet uplink is needed 
as all the services are running inside the MICS. All WGWs 
and COFRs will connect to the MICS. In the case that an 
Internet uplink can be established the MICS will setup a 
VPN 
connection 
to 
the 
Fixed 
Infrastructure 
and 
consequently, also hosts using the Internet can access the 
MICS.  The flexible approach which allows using also 
existing networks to connect the COFRs to the Fixed 
Infrastructure and using other layer 2 technologies to 
interlink two COFRs ensure that also still existing network 
parts can be easily integrated into the network (REQ2). 
Figure 3 shows a deployment of the IDIRA communication 
network.  
The proposed solution offers a speed of several Mbit/s 
which is sufficient for the needs of IDIRA (REQ7). 
To fulfill REQ5 and REQ6 different steps on different 
components have been designed. When the system is fully 
operational, all the services can be accessed also including 
external expert systems which are running somewhere in the 
Internet. If the clients are only able to access the MICS, all 
services will be accessible, only the access to external expert 
systems will not be possible. When the connection between a 
COFR and the MICS is lost, the COFR will provide static 
information such as a map. Furthermore, all the information 
that has been viewed by a user before the network failure has 
been cached at the COFR and can be accessed. Also Voice 
over IP calls between end devices connected to the same 
COFR will still be possible. Finally, a native Android App 
has been developed to be used by the operational staff. All 
the data is synchronized between the MICS/Fixed 
Infrastructure and the Android App, so when the network is 
down all the information is still accessible by the users. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The presented communication solution has been used 
during several training actions and large scale exercises 
within the IDIRA project. Here, we will describe the setup 
used during two large scale exercises. The first exercise 
represents a disaster response operation after intense rainfall 
conditions. As a result, it came to severe flooding around the 
city of Görlitz at the Polish/German border. Due to the heavy 
rainfall, it came to landslides and building collapses. The 
exercise consisted of two parts - incident 1 and incident 2. At 
the incident 1 location, several people had to be rescued from 
the water. At the incident 2 location, (several kilometers 
apart from incident 1) some people had to be freed, as they 
were buried under a collapsed building. 
 
3G
COFR
Fixed Infrastructure
COFR
COFR
3G
(Backup)
MICS
Ethernet
relay
Ethernet
 
Figure 4.  Real world deployment for first large scale exercise 
Figure 4 shows the deployed infrastructure for the first 
large scale exercise. Incident 1 took place in close proximity 
(some 100m) to the on-site deployed MICS infrastructure. 
To provide connectivity to mobile end devices used at 
incident 1, a Wireless Gateway was used as access point and 
wire-connected directly to the MICS. Several workstations 
were connected to the MICS via Ethernet LAN. 
Also at the location of incident 2, mobile end devices 
should also be connected to the MICS infrastructure via 
wireless LAN and a WGW access point. The problem here 
was, that incident 2 took place at a location 3.5 km distant 
from the MICS installation, separated by hills, dense forests 
and even urban area. To span a point-to-point WLAN 
connection over more than 3 kilometers, and to bypass 
obstacles (hills, trees, buildings, etc.), it was decided to 
install two relay nodes to provide the needed communication 
coverage at the incident 2 location. All four WGW nodes – 
the one at the MICS location, the two relay nodes, and the 
one at the incident 2 location - were separated by distances 
234
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

between 200m and 1.3 km. Except for the WGW located at 
the MICS, all relay nodes were installed by a unit of the 
Austrian Red Cross. 
In addition, at location of incident 2, a mobile command 
and control vehicle was connected to the MICS using the 
Ethernet LAN connection offered by the COFR. The 
connection was used to access and operate the COP. 
At location of incident 2, we decided to prepare an 
additional 3G uplink. This uplink should provide backup 
connectivity in case of a lost WGW point-to-point 
connection and could have been used to connect mobile 
devices over 3G to the MICS Infrastructure - even though 
with a very limited bandwidth and performance. These 
bandwidth 
and 
performance 
limitations 
are 
further 
exacerbated, as the MICS itself uses only a 3G Internet 
uplink due to a lack of availability of other broadband 
connections like DSL. 
Both, the 3G uplink and the WGW point-to-point 
connection were tested during the exercise. 
Figure 5 shows the deployment as it has been used during the 
second described large scale exercise. The exercise scenario 
was about an earthquake and fire disaster. As a result of the 
earthquake (which had its’ epicenter in the area of Attica, 
Greece), it came to multiple blocked roads, collapsed 
buildings and fires. The exercise consisted of four incident 
areas, which were spread over an area of several kilometers 
in square. 
In contrast to the first exercise, where end devices have been 
connected only via WGWs and 802.11, at one incident 
location, tablet devices have been equipped with 3G SIM 
cards to use the existing 3G network. Similar to the backup 
solution at incident 2 in the first exercise, we also used a 3G 
uplink for the COFR/WGW compound at one incident 
location. In contrast to the first exercise, the on-site deployed 
MICS could be connected to a DSL uplink. Several PCs have 
been directly connected to the MICS via Ethernet. A remote 
PC was using a legacy WIFI network which is normally used 
for cameras, and a COFR/WGW network has been 
established to be fully independent in two disaster areas. 
Also the Offline functionality with the Android App has 
been tested by switching off the data connection on the tablet 
device using the SIM card. 
Again, the installation of the wireless communication 
infrastructure was done by a unit of the Austrian Red Cross. 
The deployments in both exercises have shown the 
flexibility of our solution in combining existing networks 
with COFR/WGW networks (REQ2). 
All over the exercises the communication infrastructure 
was installed by different personnel of various first responder 
organizations. The setup of the system has been proven to be 
easy and can be fulfilled by non-IT experts (REQ4). During 
the trainings it was shown, that battery, pole, tripod, COFR 
and WGW were able to be transported and installed by one 
single person. 
DSL
COFR
Fixed Infrastructure
COFR
COFR
3G
3G
MICS
 
Figure 5.  Real world deployment of the IDIRA communication network 
Furthermore, the assessment of the communication 
system was part of surveys, which collected the views of all 
relief forces using the IDIRA system. A majority of those 
questioned about the communication infrastructure are of the 
opinion that the communication solution would be helpful in 
real deployments and the communication quality and 
coverage was (very) sufficient for the use with the IDIRA 
system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents a flexible, communication solution 
for large scale multi-national and multi-organizational relief 
operations. The concept complies with several requirements 
which have been introduced by action forces of relief 
organizations, such as easy installation and transportation, 
interoperability with existing communication systems and, 
international operation permission. The core of the system 
consists of the WGW/COFR compound. The WGW are able 
to automatically build up meshed wireless networks, using 
self-aligning directional antennas. The COFR provides 
power supply and Internet uplink technologies to the 
compound. During several trainings and large scale 
exercises, the system was able to prove its workability for 
the use within the IDIRA system. 
For the future it is planned, to mechanically enhance the 
prototypes to fulfil the mechanical requirements of 
robustness for being used in real world large scale disasters. 
Furthermore, we plan to integrate a MANET based 
approach similar to the one described in [15] to expand the 
communication coverage created by the proposed WGW 
solution. 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the IDIRA 
European FP7 261726 research project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IDIRA Project. Interoperability of data and procedures in 
large-scale multinational disaster response actions, 2011-
2015 [Online]. Available from: http://idira.eu/. 2015.02.19 
[2] Immarsat BGAN. Broadband Global Area Network [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.inmarsat.com/service/bgan/ 
2015.02.19 
[3] GVF VSAT. Global Very Small Aperture Terminal Forum 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.gvf.org 2015.02.19  
[4] Emergency.lu. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.emergency.lu 2015.02.19 
[5] IEEE 802.16 WIMAX. IEEE Standard for Local and 
metropolitan area networks [Online]. Available from: 
http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.16.html 
2015.02.19. 
[6] IABG mbH. HiMoNN Higly Mobile Network Node [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.himonn.de 2015.02.19  
[7] Electronic 
Communications 
Committee 
(ECC). 
The 
Identification of Frequency Bands for the Implementation of 
Broad Band Disaster Relief (BBDR) Radio Applications in the 
5 GHz Frequency Range [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.erodocdb.dk/docs/doc98/official/pdf/REC0804.pd
f 2015.02.19  
[8] IEEE 802.11. IEEE Standard for Information Technology--
Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between 
Systems--Local and Metropolitan Area Networks--Specific 
Requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) [Online]. Available from: 
http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.11.html 
2015.02.19 
[9] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet. (2003), “Optimized Link State 
Routing Protocol (OLSR)”, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
IETF, RFC 3626. 
[10] OASIS Emergency Management TC. Emergency Data 
Exchange Language (EDXL) [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=emergency 
2015.02.19 
[11] OASIS Emergency Management TC. Common Alerting 
Protocol 
Version 
1.2, 
2010-07-01 
- 
CAP-v1.2-os 
[Online].Available 
from: 
https://www.oasis-open.org/standards#capv1.2 2015.02.19  
[12] OASIS Emergency Management TC. Emergency Data 
Exchange Language Resource Messaging, EDXL-RM-v1.0-
OS-errata-os, 22 Dec. 2009 [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.oasis-open.org/standards#edxlrm-v1.0 
2015.02.19  
[13] OASIS Emergency Management TC. Emergency Data 
Exchange Language Situation Reporting, edxl-sitrep-v1.0-
wd19, Draft 02, 2012-08-07 [Online].Available from: 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/emergency/edxl-
sitrep/v1.0/cs01/edxl-sitrep-v1.0-cs01.zip 2015.02.19  
[14] P. Dorfinger, G. Panholzer, F. von Tüllenburg, M. Christaldi, 
G. 
Tusa, 
and 
F. 
Böhm, 
“Self-aligning 
Wireless 
Communication for First Responder Organizations in 
Interoperable Emergency Scenarios”, Proc. of the 2014 
International Conference on Wireless Networks (ICWN 
2014), July 2014, pp. 151 – 157, ISBN: 1-60132-278-X. 
[15] C.Raffelsberger and H. Hellwagner, “Evaluation of MANET 
Routing Protocols in a Realistic Emergency Response 
Scenario” Proc. of the 10th  Workshop of Intelligent Solutions 
in Embedded Systems (WISES’12). July 2012, pp. 88-92. 
[16] T. Pfeiffenberger, P. Dorfinger and F. von Tüllenburg, 
„Communication Coverage Awareness for Self-Aligning 
Wireless Communication in Disaster Operations“ Proc. of the 
5th International Workshop on Perversave Networks for 
Emergency Management (PerNEM2015). In press. 
 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

