A Review Study on Image Digital Watermarking
Charles Way Hun Fung
CPGEI / UTFPR
Avenida Sete de Setembro, 3165
Curitiba-PR - CEP 80.230-910
E-mail: charleswhfung@gmail.com
Antˆonio Gortan
CPGEI / UTFPR
Avenida Sete de Setembro, 3165
Curitiba-PR - CEP 80.230-910
E-mail: gortan@dgmdesign.com.br
Walter Godoy Junior
CPGEI / UTFPR
Avenida Sete de Setembro, 3165
Curitiba-PR - CEP 80.230-910
E-mail: godoy@utfpr.edu.br
Abstract—There has been an increase in broadcasting media
since the begin of this century, because many techniques had been
developed to solve this problem. Watermarking is the greatest
bet from many researchs around the world. Digital watermarks
can be used by a lot of applications like: copyright protection,
broadcast monitoring and owner identiﬁcation. In this paper, we
will show a classiﬁcation of watermarks, propose a basic model
for watermarking and explain some recent algorithms for image
watermarking and their features, citing examples applicable to
each category.
Index Terms—digital watermarking; wavelets; security; dwt;
lwt; svd.
I. INTRODUCTION
The increased Internet usage has turned a technique that
is able to protect the copyright of published medias into a
necessity. The easy of distribution of these documents through
the web may transgress protection laws against unauthorized
copies and make ﬁdelity questionable. Digital watermarking
has been proposed as a solution against these practices.
Digital watermark is a labeling technique of digital data
with secret information that can be extracted in the receptor.
The image in which this data is inserted is called cover image
or host [1]. The watermarking process has to be resilient
against possible attacks, keeping the content of the watermark
readable in order to be recognized when extracted. Features
like robustness and ﬁdelity are essentials of a watermarking
system, however the size of the embedded information has
to be considered since data becomes less robust as its size
increases. Therefore a trade-off [2] of these features must be
considered.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
described the classiﬁcation and each feature. In Section III,
we explain the main applications of watermarking. A basic
model and the discussion about each block of the process that
is proposed in Section IV. Section V is the conclusion and
Section VI the acknowledgments.
II. CLASSIFICATION
A watermarking system has requirements which must be
met when implemented, however the application will dictate
which features should be emphasized. In this section a clas-
siﬁcation of marks according with their requirements will be
proposed.
This paper is ﬁnancial supported by CAPES-Brazil.
A. Robustness:
This feature refers to the ability to detect the watermark after
some signal processing operation [1]. Marks cannot survive all
kinds of attacks, hence attacks resilience must be optimized
according to application. For example: To verify data integrity
a correlation between the received image and the signal is
carried out when the watermark is extracted. If differences are
found then manipulations must have occured [3]. With that in
mind the following classiﬁcation can be made:
1) Fragile: These marks can be destructed by small ma-
nipulations of the watermarked image [4]. Such marks have
been used for authentication and integrity veriﬁcation.
2) Semi Fragile:
These behave as fragile watermarks
against intentional modiﬁcations and as robust watermarks
against casual manipulations [5] like noise. These marks have
been used in image authentication and tamper control.
3) Robust: According to [4], these watermarks are designed
to resist heterogeneous manipulations. They can be used in
copy control e monitoring.
B. Fidelity:
This requirement could be called invisibility. It preserves the
similarity between the watermarked object and the original im-
age according to human perception [1]. The mark must remain
invisible notwithstanding the occurrence of small degradations
in image brightness or contrast.
C. Capacity or Data Payload:
The number of bits that can be inserted through watermark-
ing varies with each application. In case of images, a mark will
be a static set of bits. In videos, capacity will be gauged by
the quantity of inserted bits per frame, in audio ﬁles by the
quantity of inserted bits per second [1].
D. Detection Types:
This classiﬁcation determines which resources are necessary
for the analysis to extract the watermark from the cover image.
1) Blind: In this detection type the original image and mark
data is not available to the receiver. For example: Copy control
applications must send different watermarks for each user and
the receiver must be able to recognize and interpret these
different marks [1].
24
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

2) Non-Blind: In this case, the receiver needs the original
data, or some derived information form it, for the detection
process [1]. This data will also be used in the extraction
algorithm.
E. Embedding:
The method used to embed the watermark inﬂuence both
the robustness against attacks and the detection algorithm, but
some methods are very simple and cannot meet the application
requirements. El-Gayyar and von zur Gathen [2] showed that
designing a watermark should consider a trade-off among the
basic features of robustness, ﬁdelity and payload.
There are two approaches for the embedding process:
1) Spatial Domain: These watermarks insert data in the
cover image changing pixels or image characteristics [4]. The
algorithms should carefully weight the number of changed bits
in the pixels against the possibility of the watermark becoming
visible [2]. These watermarks have been used for document
authentication and tamper detection.
2) Transform Domain: These algorithms hide the water-
marking data in transform coefﬁcients, therefore spreading
the data through the frequency spectrum [1] making it hard
to detect and strong against many types of signal processing
manipulations. The most used transforms are: Discrete cosine
transform (DCT) [1], discrete wavelet transform (DWT) [6]
and discrete lifting transform (LWT) [7].
III. APPLICATIONS
Before discussing watermarking algorithms let us review
some common applications:
A. Broadcast Monitoring:
This type of monitoring is used to conﬁrm the content that
is supposed to be transmitted [1], [3], [8]. As an example,
commercial advertisements could be monitored through their
watermarks to conﬁrm timing and count.
B. Owner Identiﬁcation:
The conventional form of intellectual ownership veriﬁcation
is a visual mark. But, nowadays, this is easily overcome by the
use of softwares that modify images. An example is images
with a copyright registration symbol
c⃝
which have this
mark removed by specialized softwares. In this case invisible
watermarks are used in order to overcame the problem.
C. Fingerprinting:
A watermarked object contains information about the owner
permissions. Several ﬁngerprints can be hosted in the same
image since the object could belong to several users [3], [8].
D. Publication monitoring and copy control:
The watermark contains owner data and speciﬁes the cor-
responding amount of copies allowed. This presupposes a
hardware and a software able to update the watermark at
every use [3]. It also allows copy tracking of unauthorized
distribution since owner data is recorded in the watermark.
IV. BASIC MODEL
Liu and He [3] present a model with three stages: Gen-
eration & Embedding, Distribution & Possible Attacks and
Detection. In this paper, we adapted this model dividing the
ﬁrst block in Generation and Embedding, because the both
use different watermarking algorithms and can be studied
independently. The basic model proposed is presented below:
Fig. 1.
Basic Model
The explanation about the Embedding and Detection stage
will be presented together, because the algorithms are related.
In Fig 1 the basic model can be divided in four stages:
A. Generation
In this stage the mark is created and its contents must be
unique and complex in order to be difﬁcult to extract or not
to be damaged by possible attacks. Some algorithms that have
been used for watermark generation will presented below:
1) Images in grayscale or binary: Many marking objects
can be images or brands that represent some enterprise or
have some data that identify the cover image. Depending on
the application the marks can be binary images or grayscale
containing a larger amount of data and even some intrinsic
features that helps in the extraction process [8].
2) Pseudo-Random Sequence: This mark has a random
seed that is used to generate the marked matrix. This seed must
be stored like a secret key and will be used in the detection
process to reconstruct the mark. The use of binary marks with
this algorithm is rather common.
3) Chaotic Sequence: The watermarks are prepared using
maps of chaotic functions [9]–[11]. These sequences are easy
to implement because there are predeﬁned models to create
them. Due to statistic features these watermarks resist several
types of attacks, like simple attacks and distortion.
4) Error Correcting Codes and Cryptography: The inser-
tion of redundancy in watermarks or in the cover image can
improve the extraction process or the reconstruction of the
watermark after attacks. However codes can cause collateral
effects by increasing the amount of embedding data, which
may in turn harm the watermark robustness or decrease its
data payload. The most commonly used codes are: Hamming
[12] Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghen (BCH) [12]–[14], Reed
Solomon [12], [13], Low density parity check (LDPC) [15],
and Turbo [16].
B. Embedding and Detection:
The embedding is directly related with the extraction algo-
rithm, in this section we will discuss how this has been done
in recent algorithms. The embedding algorithm is basically a
combination of the watermark with the chosen media [3], so
the result is equivalent to:
25
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

IW = E(I, W)
(1)
where I is the original media, W the watermark, E is the
embedding function and IW the watermarked media. The
function depends on the algorithm and the analyzed domain.
1) Spatial Domain: In this case the embedded watermark
is equivalent to noise addition to the original media, thereby
inﬂuencing the watermarked object characteristics. Two fol-
lowing we will be presented below:
• Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB):
This is the simplest approach, because the least signiﬁcant
bits carry less relevant information and their modiﬁcation does
not cause perceptible changes. Among these approaches there
are types using only the salient points [17] or type, which
use some kind of cryptography on the watermark message
before the embedding process [18], In this last case, a cipher
called ”datamark” is created, which is embedded in the cover
image using a key. This key determines which points must be
modiﬁed by the embedding process.
The extraction algorithm is the inverse of embedding. The
marked object must be analyzed and its least signiﬁcant pixel
bits isolated. These extracted bits can be used together with
the cryptography keys in decoding algorithms to recover the
original watermark.
• Singular Value Decomposition (SVD):
It is a numeric analysis of linear algebra which is used
in many applications in image processing. It is used to
decompose a matrix with a little truncate error according to
the equation below:
A = USV T
(2)
Where A is the original matrix, U and V are orthogonal
matrices with dimensions MxM and NxN respectively, S is
a diagonal matrix of the Eigenvalues of A and T indicates
matrix transposition. [19] did the decomposition of the cover
image and added the watermark using a scale coefﬁcient α to
get the following equation:
S + αW = UW SW V T
W
(3)
Multiplying matrices U, V T and SW result in the marked
image AW :
AW = USW V T
(4)
This was possible due to the high stability of singular
values (SV) of SVD. In another approach, the cover image
was separated in blocks and the SVD applied to each block
[20], in this case the dimension of watermark must be equal
to the blocks size and a copy of the watermark is embeded in
each block. This method improves watermark robustness and
resistance against many kinds of attacks.
2) Transform Domain: The mark is embedded into the
cover image spectrum, thus not directly inﬂuencing the se-
lected image quality. The following transforms are used,
among others, in image spectral analysis: DCT, DWT. Some
watermarking algorithms using these transforms are presented
below:
• Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT):
The DCT makes a spectral analysis of the signal and orders
the spectral regions from high to low energy. It can be applied
globally or in blocks. When applied globally, the transform
is applied to all parts of the image, separating the spectral
regions according to their energy. When applied in blocks, the
process is analogous, only the transform is applied to each
block separately.
Below, we list the typical algorithm steps found in the
literature [1], [8]:
1) Segment the image into non-overlapping blocks of 8x8;
2) Apply forward DCT to each of these blocks;
3) Apply some block selection criteria;
4) Apply coefﬁcient selection criteria;
5) Embed watermark by modifying the selected coefﬁ-
cients;
6) Apply inverse DCT transform on each block.
• Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT):
The wavelet transform decompose the image in four chan-
nels (LL, HL, LH and HH) with the same bandwidth thus cre-
ating a multi-resolution perspective. The advantage of wavelet
transforms is to allow for dual analyses taking into account
both frequency and spatial domains.
Wavelets are being widely studied due to their application
in image compression, owing to which compression resistant
watermarks may be achieved through their use. Another inter-
esting feature of the DWT is the possibility to select among
different types of ﬁlter banks, tuning for the desired band-
width. The most commonly used ﬁlters are: Haar, Daubechies,
Coiﬂets, Biorthogonal, Gaussian.
When the DWT is applied to an image, the resolution is
reduced by a 2K, where K is the number of times the transform
was applied.
These algorithms are called the ”Wavelet based Water-
marking” [8]. The watermark is inserted by substituting the
coefﬁcients of the cover image for the watermark’s data.
This process improves mark robustness, but depends on the
frequency. The low frequency (LL) channel houses image
contents in which a coefﬁcients change, however small, will
damage the cover image, which in turn challenges the ﬁdelity
propriety. However when this region of the spectrum is wa-
termarked, a robust mark against compressions like JPEG and
JPEG2000 is attained. Furthermore, when the middle and high
frequency channels are marked, some beneﬁts against noise
interference and several types of ﬁltering show up. Therefore
these algorithms tend to be adapted for human visual system
(HSV) to avoid small modiﬁcation in the cover image being
perceptible.
26
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Taskovski et al. [21] implemented two watermarks using
binary marks in LL2 and HH2 respectively, resulting in a mark
which is robust against manipulations like compression and
weak against cropping and rescaling. Similarly, [22] created
a watermark adapted to JPEG2000 using two algorithms to
modify the wavelet coefﬁcients of the LH2 band of the
cover image, introducing only minimal differences between
the watermarked image and the original. The decision, which
algorithm to use, is based on which one produces the smallest
change.
To create a watermark which is resistant against noise
and some kinds of processing [23] proposed an algorithm
that makes three watermarks: pseudo-random, luminance and
texture. The ﬁrst mark is embedded in LL1 band and the
others are inserted by segmenting the cover image in blocks
and ordering according to the sum of coefﬁcients and standard
deviation. This algorithm is robust against cropping, noise and
several compression levels.
In order to increase its recovery capacity, error correcting
codes can be applied to the watermark; however, its storage
capacity will be reduced due to the additional redundancy. A
performance comparison of the Hamming, BCD, and Reed-
Solomon codes is presented in [12]. For small error rates, the
codes are effective in error elimination when compared to no
coding; on the other hand for higher rates, no beneﬁt has been
observed.
Mixing spatial and transform analysis, we have a robust
watermark with different features. An algorithm that applies
the SVD in all bands of the ﬁrst level of DWT is proposed
[24], making this a watermarking process in all frequencies.
Bao [25] made a watermark of the singular values (SV) of
each band of the cover image, in order to achieve the least
possible distortion according to the human visual system. This
watermark is resistant against JPEG encoding, but is fragile
against ﬁlter manipulation and random noises. An algorithm
with greater robustness against cropping, Gaussian noise and
compression is proposed in [24]. Initially, the DWT is applied
to HL1 or HH1. In the selected band, HH2 or HL2 must be
selected and divided into 4x4 blocks. Finally, SVD is applied
to each block, and the watermark is embedded into the S
matrix.
• Lifting Wavelet Transform (LWT):
Also called second generation wavelet transforms, its use
has grown due to low memory consumption and easy imple-
mentation [26]. The following LWT scheme below is adapted
from [7]:
Fig. 2.
Lifting scheme
In Figure 2, there are three basic operations: split, predict
and update.
In split stage the input xk is separated into odd (xi) and
even (xp) samples, so that each of these variables contains
half the number of samples of xk.
In the prediction stage, even samples are used to predict the
odd samples. The details coefﬁcients or high frequency (h) are
calculated as prediction errors of the odd samples through the
use of the prediction operator P:
h = xi − P(xp)
(5)
To create the low frequency samples s, the even samples
are updated through the update operator U:
s = xp − U(d)
(6)
Some approaches use the LWT in spatial domain operations,
as in [27], which embedded a watermark in band LL3,
changing the least signiﬁcant bits of the wavelet coefﬁcients.
On the other hand, [26] used a combination of SVD and LWT
to apply two levels of wavelet to the cover image and select
among one of bands: HH2, HL2 and LH2. In that approach,
SVD is applied separately to the watermark and the selected
band. The resulting S matrices must be combined into an S
matrix, which will be used to create the watermarked image.
This process is not blind, however it is robust against many
types of manipulations like: noises, rotation, JPEG compres-
sion and quantization. It also exhibits very good performance
concerning PSNR and normalized correlation values.
C. Distribution and Attacks:
The transmission media can cause some loss in the sig-
nal implying in a damaged content. These attacks may be
intentional or accidental [3]. Intentional attacks use all avail-
able resources to destroy or modify the watermark making
it impossible to extract it, the methods usually used are:
signal processing techniques, cryptanalysis, steganalysis. On
the other hand, accidental attacks are inevitable, because
every image processing or transmission noise may introduce
distortions.
Hartung et al. [28] classiﬁed these attacks in classes:
1) Simple Attacks: These attacks change the data of the
cover image without attempting to target the watermark loca-
tion. Example: Noise addition, cropping, conversion to analog
and wavelet-based compression.
2) Disabling Attacks: The goal of these attacks is to attempt
to break the correlation between the watermark and the cover
image, making extraction impossible. Example: Geometric
distortions, rotation, cropping and insertion of pixels.
3) Ambiguity Attacks: These attacks confuse the receptor
embedding a fake watermark, making it impossible to discover
which was the original embedded mark in the cover image.
4) Removal Attacks: In this type of attack a study of the
watermark is carried out, estimating the watermark content
and attempting to separate it from the host image. Example:
Certain non-linear ﬁlter operations and attacks tailored to a
speciﬁc watermark algorithm.
27
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have reviewed some recent algorithms,
proposed a classiﬁcation based on their intrinsic features,
embedding methods and detection forms. Also a basic four
steps model for the watermark process was presented.
Many watermarking algorithms have been reviewed in the
literature which show advantages in systems using wavelet
transforms with SVD. These marks are robust against several
different attacks. Another highlight is the replacement of DWT
by LWT which improves computational performance and has
an easier hardware implementation.
In future works, the use of coding and cryptography water-
marks will be approached. There is a large amount of literature
on these topics showing that robustness increments can be
gained through the addition of coding techniques.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge CAPES-Brazil for ﬁ-
nancial support.
REFERENCES
[1] I. J. Cox, M. L. Miller, J. A. Bloom, J. Fridrich, and T. Kalker, Digital
Watermarking and Steganography.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2008.
[2] M. El-Gayyar and J. von zur Gathen, “Watermarking techniques spatial
domain,” University of Bonn Germany, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[3] J. Liu and X. He, “A review study on digital watermarking,” First Inter-
national Conference on Information and Communication Technologies,
pp. 337–341, 2005.
[4] M. Arnold, M. Schmucker, and S. D. Wolthusen, Techniques and
Applications of Digital Watermark and Content Protection.
Artech
House, 2003.
[5] X. Wu, J. Hu, Z. Gu, and J. Huang, “A secure semi-fragile watermarking
for image authentication based on integer wavelet transform with param-
eters,” Australasian Information Security Workshop, vol. 44, 2005.
[6] M. Antonini, M. Barlaud, P. Mathieu, and I. Daubechies, “Image coding
using wavelet transform,” IEEE Transaction on Image Processing, vol. 1,
pp. 205–220, 1992.
[7] I. Daubechies and W. Sweldens, “Factoring wavelet transforms into
lifting steps,” SIAM Journal on Mathematical Analysis, 1997.
[8] V. M. Potdar, S. Han, and E. Chang, “A survey of digital image water-
marking techniques,” 3rd IEEE International Conference on Industrial
Informatics, pp. 709–716, 2005.
[9] A. Tefas, A. Nikolaidis, N. Nikolaidis, V. Solachidis, S. Tsekeridou,
and I. Pitas, “Performance analysis of watermarking schemes based on
skewtent chaotic sequences,” NSIP’01, 2001.
[10] S.Teskeridou, V. Solochidis, N. Nikolaidis, A. Tefas, and I. Pitas,
“Bernoulli shift generated chaoticwatermarks: Theoretic investigation,”
SCIA2001, 2001.
[11] W. Yan, Z. Shi-qiang, and W. Yan-chun, “Wavelet digital watermark
based on chaotic sequence,” ICICIC’08, 2008.
[12] K. L. W. G. Natasa Terzija, Markus Repges, “Digital image watermark-
ing using discrete wavelet transform: Performance comparison of error
correction codes,” Visualization, Imaging and Image Processing, 2002.
[13] L. Haiyan, Z. Xuefeng, and W. Ying, “Analysis of the performance of
error correcting coding in audio watermarking,” 3rd IEEE Conference
on Industrial Electronics and Applications, pp. 843–848, 2008.
[14] P. Cika, “Watermarking scheme based on discrete wavelet transform
and error-correction codes,” 16th International Conference on Systems,
Signals and Image Processing, pp. 1–4, 2009.
[15] A. Bastug and B. Sankur, “Improving the payload of watermarking
channels via ldpc coding,” Signal Processing Letters, vol. 11, pp. 90–92,
2004.
[16] C. Nafornita, A. Isar, and M. Kovaci, “Increasing watermarking robust-
ness using turbo codes,” International Symposium on Intelligent Signal
Processing, pp. 113–118, 2009.
[17] N. Pantuwong and N. Chotikakamthorn, “Line watermark embedding
method for afﬁne transformed images,” ISSPA 2007, pp. 1–4, 2007.
[18] S. Riaz, M. Y. Javed, and M. A. Anjum, “Invisible watermarking
schemes in spatial and frequency domains,” International Conference
on Emerging Technologies, 2008.
[19] R. Liu and T. Tan, “An svd-based watermarking scheme for protecting
rightful ownership,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, vol. 4,
pp. 121–128, 2002.
[20] R. A. Ghazy, N. A. El-Fishawy, M. M. Hadhoud, M. I. Dessouky, and
F. E. A. E.-S. Samie, “An efﬁcient block-by-block svd-based image
watermarking scheme,” National Radio Science Conference, pp. 1–9,
2007.
[21] D. Taskovski, S. Bogdanova, and M. Bogdanov, “Digital watermarking
in wavelet domain,” FIRST IEEE BALKAN CONFERENCE ON SIG-
NAL PROCESSING, COMMUNICATIONS, CIRCUITS, AND SYSTEMS,
2000.
[22] G. Hai-ying, L. Guo-qiang, L. Xu, and X. Yin, “A robust watermark
algorithm for jpeg2000 images,” Fifth International Conference on
Information Assurance and Security, 2009.
[23] D. R. Sans, “Identiﬁcao de propriedade em imagens com marcas d’gua
no domnio da transformada wavelet,” Master’s thesis, Universidade
Federal do Paran - UFPR, 2008, in portuguese.
[24] E. Ganic and A. M. Eskicioglu, “Robust dwt-svd domain image water-
marking: Embedding data in all frequencies,” Proceedings of the 2004
workshop on Multimedia and security, pp. 166 – 174, 2004.
[25] P. Bao and X. Ma, “Image adaptive watermarking using wavelet domain
singular value decomposition,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS
AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, vol. 15, pp. 96–102,
2005.
[26] K. Loukhaoukha and J. Y. Chouinard, “Hybrid watermarking algorithm
based on svd and lifting wavelet transform for ownership veriﬁcation,”
11th Canadian Workshop on Information Theory, pp. 177–182, 2009.
[27] F. B. C. Mendes, “Uma proposta de assinatura digital para imagens
por meio de marca d’gua,” Master’s thesis, Universidade Federal de
Uberlandia, 2008, in portuguese.
[28] F. Hartung, J. K. Su, , and B. Girod, “Spread spectrum watermarking:
Malicious attacks and counterattacks,” pp. 147–158, 1999.
28
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

