Design of Composite Routing Metrics in LOADng Routing Protocol for IoT
Applications
Deepthi Sasidharan and Lillykutty Jacob
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering
National Institute of Technology Calicut, India 673 601
Email: deepthi_p140058ec@nitc.ac.in and lilly@nitc.ac.in
Abstract—Machine to machine communication has gained in-
creasing importance in the context of Internet of Things (IoT).
The existing routing protocols for low-power, lossy networks
(LLNs) mainly support multipoint to point or point to multipoint
communications and have very limited support for point to
point communication. The LOADng routing protocol is a source
initiated reactive protocol with support for point to point commu-
nication. In this paper, a composite routing metric is proposed to
improve the packet delivery ratio and the lifetime of a network
using LOADng routing protocol. The results obtained through
simulation show that using a composite metric can signiﬁcantly
improve the performance of LOADNg routing protocol for low-
power, energy constrained networks with sparse trafﬁc.
Keywords–IoT; LOADng routing protocol; routing metrics, low-
power lossy networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Thing (IoT) has gained importance in recent
years. The IoT is composed of smartphones, laptops, health-
care and home devices, and industry sensors [1]. Machine to
machine communication has gained increasing importance in
the context of Internet of Things (IoT) [2]. MTC avoids human
intervention, and the machines communicate with each other
to form an intelligent environment. MTC is an enhancement
of the third generation partnership project (3GPP) [3]. Low
power devices or sensor nodes constitute the majority of
elements in IoT. The sensor nodes are limited in memory,
bandwidth and energy requirements and often run on non-
rechargeable batteries. These hardware constrained devices
form a network known as low power lossy networks (LLNs)
and follow IEEE802.15.4 standard [4].
The primary driving force behind the growth of IoT is
the effectiveness of Ipv6 over low power lossy personal
area networks (6LoWPAN). 6LoWPAN is an adaptation layer
between the network layer and the data link layer [5]. The
primary function of the 6LoWPAN is to convert IPv6 packets
from the network layer into short IEEE802.15.4 frames. To en-
capsulate IPv6 packets in IEEE802.15.4 frames [4], 6LoWPAN
requires performing IPv6 header compression, fragmentation,
and defragmentation. The 6LoWPAN adaptation layer also
performs routing between the nodes within the network. There
exist many protocols for LLNs and consider the network to
follow a source - sink architecture. Thus, most of the protocols
are designed to support multipoint-to-point (M2P) or point-
to-multipoint (P2M) communications. Moreover, they have
limited options for point-to-point (P2P) communication.
IoT is more than just connecting a collection of sensor
nodes to a common server and making it available from
anyplace in the world through the Internet. IoT has enabled
machines to communicate with each other without human
intervention. So, the demand for one-to-one communication
is as much as or even more than that of M2P or P2M. De-
vices in IoT are mostly low power and hardware constrained.
Routing is an important procedure in IoT as the choice of
the routing protocol can signiﬁcantly improve the network
performance. The selection of routing protocol is to support
the application requirements [6]. Based on the procedure of
establishing routes, routing protocols fall into three categories,
namely, proactive, reactive and hybrid routing schemes. The
proactive routing scheme periodically sends a short probe,
such as a HELLO message, to its neighboring node. The node
establishes a route to all possible destinations. When there is
a data packet ready for transmission to a destination, the node
checks its routing table and sends the data packet on the pre-
calculated route. The reactive routing scheme, on the other
hand, initiates a route discovery only when there is some data
packet to be sent across the network over to a destination
node and the routing information to the destination is not
available at the sending node. The route to the destination is
immediately available in proactive routing, but reactive routing
needs time to discover a route to the destination. The hybrid
routing scheme is a combination of both proactive and reactive
routing schemes. The reactive routing scheme is best suited
for a network with P2P communication. The Lightweight
On-demand Ad hoc Distance-vector Routing Protocol - Next
Generation (LOADng) [7] is a routing protocol speciﬁcally
designed to address P2P communication between energy and
hardware constrained nodes.
LOADng is a simpliﬁed adaptation of Ad-hoc On-demand
Distance Vector (AODV) and is a reactive routing protocol for
LLNs. LOADng is a source initiated reactive routing protocol
and generates a route discovery when there is some data to
be sent to the destination. The route is maintained as long it
is in use and nodes discard any idle route from its routing
table. Traditionally, LOADng uses hop count as the metric
during route discovery. The hop count does not consider the
constraints of the nodes in the network leading to the premature
death of nodes, reducing the network lifetime.
The impact of different routing metrics on the performance
of routing protocols in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are
widely studied in the literature [8]–[11]. Yang et al. [12]
discuss the design considerations of routing metrics for mul-
tihop wireless networks and Zahariadis et al. [13] discuss the
design aspects of primary and composite routing metrics from
the LLNs perspective. The Routing Protocol for Low power
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

and Lossy Networks (RPL) is a proactive rank based routing
protocol speciﬁcally designed for LLNs and is standardized
by the Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (ROLL)
working group [14]. RPL calculates the rank of a node
using the route metrics. This rank is used to establish the
node’s position in a destination oriented directed acyclic graph
(DODAG). An appropriate choice of RPL routing metrics can
signiﬁcantly improve Quality of Service (QoS) requirements
in an LLN [15]–[21]. However, they all consider the LLNs as
M2P and P2M networks and have the least support for P2P
communication. Routing by Energy and Link quality (REL)
is a variant of AODV and uses energy and link quality as the
route metrics [22], [23]. The node requires sending periodic
HELLO messages to maintain the list of neighbors.
The routing metrics fall into two categories, namely, node
based and link based. Node based routing metrics consider the
properties of the node such as the remaining energy, number
of active connections through the node and transmission queue
utilization. Link based routing metrics quantify the link prop-
erties between the nodes such as the Received Signal Strength
Indicator (RSSI) and the expected transmission count (ETX).
Each metric enumerates one or more distinct characteristics
needed to enhance the QoS required such as packet delivery
ratio, packet loss, latency, reliability, energy consumption and
network lifetime. The selection of route metrics depends on
the requirement of the application.
In literatures, network lifetime is deﬁned as the time taken
in the network for the ﬁrst node to die or a percentage of nodes
to die. Network lifetime can also be deﬁned as the time taken
by the network to get partitioned. This deﬁnition considers the
time period when communication is not possible with one or
more nodes in the network. The network can be represented
as a fully connected graph where the nodes of the graph are
the devices in the network and the connectivity between the
devices form the edges of the graph. Efﬁcient utilization of
node energy is the prime concern to improve the network
lifetime.
A Routing protocol that uses Remaining Energy (RE)
metric can ﬁnd a path with nodes which has maximum
remaining energy. However, overusing such paths can quickly
deplete the nodes energy. Live routes (LR) metric keeps track
of the number of live or active routes through a node. The
higher the value of LR, the higher the trafﬁc through the node.
Energy consumption rate of a node signiﬁcantly depends on
the energy required for transmitting and receiving data packets.
The number of active routes through a node indicates the trafﬁc
load which is directly proportional to the energy consumption
rate of the node.
LOADng has a provision to incorporate user-deﬁned met-
rics in its METRIC TLV, and can contain 32-bit dimensionless
additive metrics with single precision ﬂoat value. It is possible
to exploit this feature of LOADng to perform route discovery
using alternate route metrics. However, there are hardly any
works on route metrics design that address the node congestion
due to large number of active routes.
In this paper, we propose a composite routing metric for
LOADng to improve the lifetime of a network with P2P trafﬁc.
The network under consideration has sparse trafﬁc density
and the nodes have strict energy constraints. We propose a
composite route metrics called LR+RE which combines LR,
RE and Hop Count (HC) metrics. The resolution is to deal
with the node congestion and the residual energy of the node
to improve the network lifetime, improve the reliability of
packet transmission and reduce the energy wastage of the
nodes. We compare our results with the traditional HC metrics
and also with LR and RE as the primary metrics. The rest
of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a brief
overview of the LOADng routing protocol. Section III explains
the routing algebra used. Section IV deﬁnes and describes the
composite routing metrics for LOADng. Section V discusses
the numerical results. The conclusion and future works are
presented in Section VI.
II.
LOADNG ROUTING PROTOCOL
LOADng routing protocol is a simpliﬁed version of AODV
routing protocol. LOADng has eliminated the HELLO mes-
sages of AODV and mandates that only the intended destina-
tion replies to the request message. LOADng uses a single
message sequence number to uniquely identify its protocol
messages. To ensure the freshness of the route, LOADng forces
each node to monotonically increase its message sequence
number with each protocol message which also ensures a
loop-free path [24]. Clausen et al. [7] discuss how each node
should process a LOADng protocol message and speciﬁes the
condition on which LOADng protocol messages are forwarded.
The route discovery in LOADng starts with the source
initiating a Route Request (RREQ) message to a destination
when the source has packets to send to the destination and a
route entry for the destination is not available in its routing
table. The source node will broadcast the RREQ message
across the network. The intermediate nodes will process and
rebroadcast RREQ messages. The destination node generates
Route Reply (RREP) messages which will unicast back to the
source node. A Route Reply Acknowledgement (RREP ACK)
message is generated by the intermediate nodes if the route
reply acknowledgment required ﬂag in the RREP message is
true. This process will establish a bi-directional route between
the source and the destination. The Route Error (RERR) mes-
sage handles the route maintenance and connection failures.
III.
BASICS OF ROUTING ALGEBRA
In this work, the network is designed with low power
wireless nodes. Graph G(V, E) represents the model of the
network. Vertices, V , is the set of all low power wireless
devices and edges, E, is the set of links that stand for the
connectivity between the nodes. An edge is present between
two nodes if they are within the transmission range of each
other and communication is possible between the two nodes.
G is a strongly connected graph. Thus, every node is reachable
from every other node through some path in the network.
Routing algebra is formally deﬁned and studied in the
literatures [12], [25]–[27], and it is also known as path weight
structure. The quadruplet (S, ⊕, ω, ⪯) represents the routing
tuple, where, S represents the set of all paths in the network,
ω represents the function that maps a path to the weight, and
⊕ represents the concatenation operator used for two paths in
the network [12]. The fourth element ⪯ represents the ordered
relation between the paths p, q ∈ S; ω(p) ⪯ ω(q) means that
the path p is lighter than the path q and ω(p) ≺ ω(q) means
p is strictly lighter than q. Here, the lighter route is taken as
a better route for routing option.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

The optimality, loop-freeness, and consistency are the
three essential requirements to ensure a routing protocol
is usable. R(s, d) represents the path converged by the
routing protocol. A weight structure with route R(s, d) =
p
=<
s, v1, v2, ..., vn−1, vn, d
> between the source s
and the destination d is consistent if all the intermedi-
ate nodes choose the same path to destination d, then,
R(vi, d) =< vi, vi+1, vi+2, ..., vn, d >, ∀vi ∈ p. A path
r =< v1, v2, ..., vn−1, vn > is loop-free if vi ̸= vj∀ i ̸= j.
A path structure for a routing protocol, R, is optimal if it
ﬁnds the lightest path from all the paths between two pair of
nodes (s, d) ∈ V . That is, R(s, d) ⪯ ps.d where ps,d is any
non-empty path between the nodes s and d. This also ensures
lightness of the route.
Isotonicity and monotonicity are the two properties of path
weight structure. A routing metric must satisfy these two
properties to ensure the optimality, loop-freeness, and consis-
tency of the routing protocol. Isotonicity and monotonicity are
deﬁned as follows [12]:
The quadruplet (S, ⊕, ω, ⪯) is isotonic if ω(p) ⪯ ω(q)
implies both ω(p ⊕ r) ⪯ ω(q ⊕ r) and ω(s ⊕ p) ⪯
ω(s ⊕ q)∀ p, q, r, s ∈ S. And, (S, ⊕, ω, ⪯) is strictly
isotonic if ω(p) ≺ ω(q) implies both ω(p⊕r) ≺ ω(q⊕r)
and ω(s ⊕ p) ≺ ω(s ⊕ q)∀ p, q, r, s ∈ S.
The quadruplet (S, ⊕, ω, ⪯) is monotonic if ω(p) ⪯
ω(p ⊕ q) and ω(p) ⪯ ω(r ⊕ p) holds ∀ p, q, r ∈ S. And,
(S, ⊕, ω, ⪯) is strictly monotonic if ω(p) ≺ ω(p ⊕ q)
and ω(p) ≺ ω(r ⊕ p) holds ∀ p, q, r ∈ S.
Isotonicity implies that the order relation will not be
affected by preﬁxing or sufﬁxing a third route. Isotonicity
ensures that the path formulated by the routing protocol is
optimal and strict optimality ensures the path is consistent.
Monotonicity means that the path will not get lighter by
preﬁxing or sufﬁxing another path to it. Monotonicity ensures
that the path found using the routing protocol is loop free.
IV.
ROUTE METRIC FOR LOADNG
In this section, we deﬁne the routing metric in two stages.
The ﬁrst stage deﬁnes the Remaining Energy (RE) metric and
the Live Route (LR) metrics. The second stage is to establish
a composite metric called LR + RE and it is designed based
on RE, LR, and HC. The RE metric is a ratio of the initial
energy and the residual energy of the node.
RE = Ei
Ere
(1)
where Ei is taken as the initial energy, and Ere is the residual
energy of the node. The value of RE increases slowly until
residual energy reaches 10% and then increases rapidly after
residual energy is less than 10%. This increment in RE will
enable the routing protocol to avoid low energy nodes during
the route discovery phase.
The LR metric counts the number of active connections
through the node and the value of LR can be taken from the
nodes routing table.
LR = routingTable.GetActiveRouteCount
(2)
While identifying the existing route from the routing table,
any loopback addresses are to be avoided and all interfaces of
the node are to be accounted for. Active number of connections
per node indicates the trafﬁc congestion through the node. As
the value of LR increases for a node, the trafﬁc congestion
increases and can lead to dropping of packets. Choosing LR
route metric can improve the packet delivery ratio by reducing
the packet drop due to trafﬁc congestion at a node.
A composite metric, LR + RE is proposed by combining
the RE, LR and HC metrics. Equation 3 gives the LR+RE
metrics for the node n.
ω(n) = αREn + βLRn + γHC
or,
ω(n) = αω1(n) + βω2(n) + γω3(n)
(3)
where, REn is the ratio of Remaining Energy of the node
n, LRn is the active connections through the node n, HC is
the hop count (equal to 1) and provides the minimum hop
increment, and α, β, and γ are the tuning factors for REn,
LRn, and HC respectively. The route cost is the sum of the
hop costs over all nodes along the path.
ω(p) =
X
n∈p
ω(n)
(4)
Minimum increment (HC) is necessary to ensure a minimum
increase in the route cost when a node is added to the path
to the destination. The choice of α and β depends on the
application. When α = 0 and β = 0, the routing protocol
works like the traditional LOADng routing protocol. When
α = 1 and β = 0 LOADng works with RE as the routing
metric and α = 0 and β = 1 LOADng works with LR as
the routing metric. When α ≥ 1 and β ≥ 1, LOADng routing
protocol work with the composite routing metric. γ ≥ 1 is used
to ensure there exists a minimum hop cost increment when a
new node is added to the existing path and ω(n) > 0 ∀ n ∈ V .
In this work, the concatenation operator ⊕ represents an
addition of weight calculated by the node to the weight
present in the routing packet. Equation 5 deﬁnes concatenation
operator ⊕.
ω(p ⊕ q) = ω(p) + ω(q)
= αω1(p) + βω2(p) + γω3(p)
+ αω1(q) + βω2(q) + γω3(q)
(5)
Ordered relation ⪯ means less than of equal to (≤) and
Equation 6 deﬁnes the ordered relation ⪯ .
ω(p) ⪯ ω(q) ∼= ω(p) ≤ ω(q)
(6)
The proposed composite routing metric (LR + RE) is
additive and should hold the two properties: isotonicity and
monotonicity.
Theorem The LR + RE composite routing metric is
isotononic.
Proof: Since we add the minimum hop increment HC = 1
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

with γ ≥ 1, ω(p) > 0 and r ∈ S is a non empty path. Then,
ω(p) ⪯ ω(q) ⇒ ω(p) + ω(r) ⪯ ω(q) + ω(r)
⇒ αω1(p) + βω2(p) + γω3(p)
+ αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r) ⪯
αω1(q) + βω2(q) + γω3(q)
+ αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r)
⇒ ω(p ⊕ r) ⪯ ω(q ⊕ r) {from Eqn. 5}
and,
ω(p) ⪯ ω(q) ⇒ ω(r) + ω(p) ⪯ ω(r) + ω(q)
⇒ αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r)
+ αω1(p) + βω2(p) + γω3(p) ⪯
αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r)
+ αω1(q) + βω2(q) + γω3(q)
⇒ ω(r ⊕ p) ⪯ ω(r ⊕ q) {from Eqn. 5}
⇒ metric is Isotonic
Since ω(p) > 0, the above statements are valid for ω(p) ≺
ω(q) as well. Hence, LR + RE metric is strictly isotonic.
Theorem The composite routing metrics proposed is
monotonic.
Proof: Since we add the minimum hop increment HC = 1
with γ ≥ 1, ω(p) > 0 and r ∈ S is a non empty path. Then,
ω(p) ⪯ ω(p ⊕ r)
⇒ ω(p) ⪯ αω1(p) + βω2(p) + γω3(p)
+ αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r) {from Eqn. 5}
⇒ ω(p) ⪯ ω(p) + ω(r)
since, we know ω(p) > 0 and ω(r) > 0,
the metric is right monotonic.and,
ω(p) ⪯ ω(r ⊕ p)
⇒ ω(p) ⪯ αω1(r) + βω2(r) + γω3(r)
+ αω1(p) + βω2(p) + γω3(p) {from Eqn. 5}
⇒ ω(p) ⪯ ω(r) + ω(p)
since, we know ω(p) > 0 and ω(r) > 0,
the metric is left monotonic.
⇒ metric is Monotonic.
Since ω(p) > 0, the above statements are valid for ω(p) ≺
ω(p ⊕ r) as well and hence, (LR + RE) composite metric is
strictly monotonic. Thus, the proposed routing metric satisﬁes
the two properties and it is a suitable candidate for LOADng
routing protocol.
LOADng routing protocol is designed to use the LR+RE
composite routing metric instead of hop count as its metric.
Figure 1 shows the route update rules while processing its
route discovery messages.
V.
NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
LOADng routing protocol with the proposed metric was
implemented and simulated in Network Simulator 3 (NS3).
Initially, LOADng protocol was developed using the traditional
Hop Count metric and then it was modiﬁed to incorporate
the composite metric. The results obtained are compared with
HC, RE, and LR as the primary metrics for LOADng routing
protocol. The packet drop, packet delivery ratio (PDR), the
Figure 1. Route Update Rule - LOADng
maximum residual energy of any node after the network dies,
the energy wastage of the network and the network lifetime
are analyzed and compared. The simulation is allowed to run
until any of its nodes run out of battery. Network lifetime
is taken as the time at which the ﬁrst node in the network
dies off. All values are computed with the assumption that
the network is homogeneous, and all nodes start with the
same initial energy. The network is uniformly distributed with
constant node density. Random trafﬁc is generated between
two distinct pairs of nodes where 15% of the nodes are active
sources. The paper does not consider mobility and consider all
nodes in network static.
Figure 2 shows the percentage of packet dropped versus
the total number of nodes in the network. The packet drop
over the traditional LOADng with HC route metric is higher
compared to the other three options. The LOADng with LR
metric performs better than the RE and HC, as the LR metric is
capable of identifying the congested nodes in the network and
avoid them whenever possible. However, when using LR +
RE, the packet drop was further reduced. The reduction in
the percentage of packet dropped is owing to the ability of
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of Nodes
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Packet Drop(%)
HC
LR
RE
LR+RE
Figure 2. Percentage of Packet Drop
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of Nodes
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Packet Delivery Ratio
HC
LR
RE
LR+RE
Figure 3. Packet Delivery Ratio
LR + RE to identify the congested node and nodes with low
energy and avoid them as much as possible.
The direct consequence of the reduction in percentage
packet drop is the improvement in the PDR. Figure 3 shows
the PDR versus the number of nodes in the network. PDR
decreases when the number of nodes in the network increase
and the number of hops required to reach the destination
increases. HC has the lowest PDR compared to other three
metrics. HC only considers the shortest path towards the
destination. PDR is better for the LR metric in comparison
to the RE metric. LR + RE outperforms all the other metrics
under consideration.
Energy wastage is also a signiﬁcant concern in a low power
network. Energy wastage is the amount of energy remaining
in the node after the network reaches its lifetime. Routing
protocol should distribute the energy consumption to ensure
the minimum energy wastage. Reduced energy wastage also
shows the ability of the protocol to distribute the load within
the network in a fair manner.
Emax residual energy = max(vi(Ere) : ∀vi ∈ V )
(7)
where, vi(Ere) is the residual energy of node vi.
Figure 4 shows the maximum residual energy of some
node after the network reaches its lifetime. The corner node in
the network remains largely unused in case of the traditional
LOADng routing protocol. Thus, the HC metric does not
distribute the load in an efﬁcient manner. The RE metric
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of Nodes
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
MAX Residual Energy
HC
LR
RE
LR+RE
Figure 4. Maximum Residual Energy
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of Nodes
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Average Residual Energy
HC
LR
RE
LR+RE
Figure 5. Average Residual Energy
shows a better distribution than LR. However, as the number
of nodes in the network grows the routing protocol with LR
metric surpasses the performance of RE metric. LR + RE
takes the advantage of both LR and RE. The maximum residual
energy by any node in the network is lowest for LR + RE.
The average residual energy of the network is computed
using the Equation 8.
Enetavg =
PN
i=1(vi(Ere))
N
(8)
where N is the total number of nodes in the network.
Simulation results show that the energy distribution of RE
metric is better than LR metric. LR + RE has the lowest
average network energy. Here, the low values of Enetavg
indicate even distribution of the load and reduced energy
wastage. This scenario satisﬁes the primary requirement of
LLNs with energy constrained devices. Figure 5 shows the
comparison of Enet avg for different metrics.
The network lifetime comparison is given in Figure 6.
LOADng with HC metric has the lowest lifetime because
it fails to address congestion and energy constraints of the
node. Network lifetime of RE metric is better than LR metric
as RE metric addresses the energy constraints of the node.
The composite metric LR + RE gives the best performance
out of all metrics under consideration. LR + RE shows an
initial improvement in the network lifetime when the number
of nodes in the network is 40. This improvement is attributed to
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of Nodes
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Network Lifetime (Days)
HC
LR
RE
LR+RE
Figure 6. Network Lifetime
higher number of the nodes, and hence more path options avail-
able. The network lifetime decreases as the number of nodes
increases because the hop distance between the source and
destination also has increased. LOADng routing protocol with
composite routing metric, LR+RE, signiﬁcantly improves the
network lifetime and the PDR compared to the conventional
LOADng routing protocol with HC as the routing metrics.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we consider routing metrics design for LLNs
to support machine to machine communication in IoT. The
LOADng routing protocol supports point to point communi-
cation in a network with sparse trafﬁc. A composite routing
metric LR + RE is proposed in this paper which combines
the remaining energy and the number of active routes through
the node. The packet drop, packet delivery ratio, the maximum
energy of any node after the network dies, the energy wastage
of the network and the network life are analyzed and compared.
The results obtained through simulation show that using com-
posite metric LR + RE with LOADng routing protocol can
signiﬁcantly improve the performance of LLNs with energy
constrained devices with sparse trafﬁc. As a future work, we
propose to incorporate link quality metrics to improve QoS
requirements of the network.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The internet of things: A survey,”
Computer networks, vol. 54, no. 15, 2010, pp. 2787–2805.
[2]
A. Kunz, A. Prasad, K. Samdanis, S. Husain, and J. Song, “Enhanced
3gpp system for machine type communications and internet of things,”
in 2015 IEEE Conference on Standards for Communications and
Networking (CSCN), Oct 2015, pp. 48–53.
[3]
T. Taleb and A. Kunz, “Machine type communications in 3gpp net-
works: potential, challenges, and solutions,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 50, no. 3, 2012.
[4]
IEEE, “Ieee standard for local and metropolitan area networks–part
15.4: Low-rate wireless personal area networks (lr-wpans) amendment
3: Physical layer (phy) speciﬁcations for low-data-rate, wireless, smart
metering utility networks,” IEEE Std 802.15.4g-2012 (Amendment to
IEEE Std 802.15.4-2011), April 2012, pp. 1–252.
[5]
N. Kushalnagar, G. Montenegro, and C. Schumacher, “Ipv6 over low-
power wireless personal area networks (6lowpans): overview, assump-
tions, problem statement, and goals,” Internet Requests for Comments,
RFC 4914, August 2007.
[6]
M. Boushaba, A. Haﬁd, and M. Gendreau, “Source-based routing in
wireless mesh networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 10, no. 1, 2016,
pp. 262–270.
[7]
T. Clausen et al., “The lightweight on-demand ad hoc distance-vector
routing protocol-next generation (loadng),” draft-clausen-lln-loadng-15
(work in progress), 2016.
[8]
S. D. Odabasi and A. H. Zaim, “A survey on wireless mesh networks,
routing metrics and protocols,” International journal of electronics,
mechanical and mechatronics engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, 2010, pp. 92–
104.
[9]
N. Javaid, A. Javaid, I. A. Khan, and K. Djouani, “Performance study
of etx based wireless routing metrics,” in Computer, Control and
Communication, 2009. IC4 2009. 2nd International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–7.
[10]
M. E. M. Campista et al., “Routing metrics and protocols for wireless
mesh networks,” IEEE network, vol. 22, no. 1, 2008, pp. 6–12.
[11]
M. G. Gouda and M. Schneider, “Maximizable routing metrics,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON), vol. 11, no. 4, 2003,
pp. 663–675.
[12]
Y. Yang and J. Wang, “Design guidelines for routing metrics in
multihop wireless networks,” in INFOCOM 2008. The 27th conference
on computer communications. IEEE.
IEEE, 2008.
[13]
T. Zahariadis and P. Trakadas, “Design guidelines for routing metrics
composition in lln,” Internet RFCs- (Expired Internet-Draft), 2012.
[14]
T. Winter et al., “Rpl: Ipv6 routing protocol for low-power and lossy
networks,” Internet Requests for Comments, RFC 6550, March 2012.
[15]
W. Xiao, J. Liu, N. Jiang, and H. Shi, “An optimization of the object
function for routing protocol of low-power and lossy networks,” in
Systems and Informatics (ICSAI), 2014 2nd International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 515–519.
[16]
P. Karkazis et al., “Evaluating routing metric composition approaches
for qos differentiation in low power and lossy networks,” Wireless
networks, vol. 19, no. 6, 2013, pp. 1269–1284.
[17]
X. Yang, J. Guo, P. Orlik, K. Parsons, and K. Ishibashi, “Stability metric
based routing protocol for low-power and lossy networks,” in 2014
IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC). IEEE, 2014,
pp. 3688–3693.
[18]
T.-H. Lee, X.-S. Xie, and L.-H. Chang, “Rssi-based ipv6 routing metrics
for rpl in low-power and lossy networks,” in 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC).
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 1714–1719.
[19]
O. Iova, F. Theoleyre, and T. Noel, “Improving the network lifetime with
energy-balancing routing: Application to rpl,” in Wireless and Mobile
Networking Conference (WMNC), 2014 7th IFIP.
IEEE, 2014, pp.
1–8.
[20]
P. Karkazis et al., “Design of primary and composite routing metrics
for rpl-compliant wireless sensor networks,” in Telecommunications and
Multimedia (TEMU), 2012 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2012,
pp. 13–18.
[21]
S. Capone, R. Brama, N. Accettura, D. Striccoli, and G. Boggia,
“An energy efﬁcient and reliable composite metric for rpl organized
networks,” in Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing (EUC), 2014 12th
IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 178–184.
[22]
K. Machado et al., “A routing protocol based on energy and link quality
for internet of things applications,” Sensors, vol. 13, no. 2, 2013, pp.
1942–1964.
[23]
J. V. Sobral, J. J. Rodrigues, K. Saleem, J. F. de Paz, and J. M. Corchado,
“A composite routing metric for wireless sensor networks in aal-iot,” in
Wireless and Mobile Networking Conference (WMNC), 2016 9th IFIP.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 168–173.
[24]
D. Sasidharan and L. Jacob, “Energy and bandwidth efﬁcient multipath-
enhanced loadng routing protocol,” in 2016 Twenty Second National
Conference on Communication (NCC), March 2016, pp. 1–6.
[25]
J. L. Sobrinho, “Algebra and algorithms for qos path computation and
hop-by-hop routing in the internet,” in INFOCOM 2001. Twentieth
Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications
Societies. Proceedings. IEEE, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2001, pp. 727–735.
[26]
Y. Yang, J. Wang, and R. Kravets, “Designing routing metrics for mesh
networks,” in IEEE Workshop on Wireless Mesh Networks (WiMesh),
2005, pp. 1–9.
[27]
J. L. Sobrinho, “An algebraic theory of dynamic network routing,”
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON), vol. 13, no. 5, 2005,
pp. 1160–1173.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-546-3
ICN 2017 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2017)

