Security Vulnerabilities of Popular Smart Home Appliances 
Fida Hussain, Abhaya Induruwa (Retired), Man Qi 
School of Engineering, Technology and Design 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Canterbury, United Kingdom 
e-mail: fh51@canterbury.ac.uk; beko539@gmail.com; man.qi@canterbury.ac.uk
Abstract—A Smart Home (SH) essentially is a communication 
network that connects smart devices, sensors and actuators, 
enabling the owner to locally and remotely access, monitor and 
control them.   However, SHs are currently facing increasing 
challenges due to the underlying home automation systems, 
which are affected by network security issues. This paper 
presents an SH testbed comprising SH devices that employ 
IEEE 
802.11 
standard 
protocol 
for 
communication. 
Comprehensive tests were conducted using the testbed that 
incorporated popular SH devices with the aim to observe and 
understand vulnerabilities that exist in smart device networks 
when they are attacked using different types of attacks, such as 
Eavesdropping, Denial of Service (DoS), and Man-In-The-
Middle (MITM).  This paper presents the details of the SH 
testbed and reports and discusses the findings obtained from 
these experiments. 
Keywords-Smart Homes; device vulnerabilities; Smart Home 
Testbed; Eavesdropping; DoS; MITM attacks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 SH is a user-oriented home communication system 
where gadgets are interconnected through a local network 
and exposed to the Internet, so that it can be remotely 
controlled from anywhere through the Internet by using 
network or mobile devices (smartphone or tablet). Gadgets 
on a SH network permit the authentication of a user to control 
different tasks, such as temperature control, adjusting the 
lighting, locking-unlocking of doors, and security access to 
the home from a distance [1]. Different apps can be installed 
on a smartphone or other devices connected to the network, 
or the user can use a timer programme and set up a schedule. 
Some smart home appliances come with artificial 
intelligence (self-learning skill) so they can learn homeowner 
behaviour over time and alert the user or react by making 
necessary changes when something out of the ordinary 
happens [2][3]. They will alert the user if they detect 
suspicious activities for example, when motion is detected in 
the home when the user is away. Smart Homes face different 
challenges due to issues and features related to home 
automation systems. These include home automation 
standards, high installation costs, varying consumer 
inexperience with technology, additional and support costs, 
limited cooperation of smart devices manufacturers, complex 
user interfaces and security challenges from different security 
threats [2]. 
Connecting the SH to the Internet gives the user almost 
24x7 access to it, subject to the availability of Internet.  This 
allows the attacker from either locally, or remotely anywhere 
in the world to target the SH [4]. Such an attacker can scan for 
certain vulnerabilities related to a specific device or can keep 
searching until a particular vulnerability they are looking to 
exploit is found. 
Internet of Things (IoT) devices that are used in SHs use 
different Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) protocols, 
such as Bluetooth, ZigBee, Z-Wave, and IEEE 802.11. Due to 
convenience, most smart devices in SHs use IEEE 
802.11variants. The legacy IEEE 802.11, released in 1997 and 
clarified in 1999, is now obsolete but the newer variants based 
largely on Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing 
(OFDM) have witnessed continuous growth in popularity [5]. 
In current times, WLAN 802.11n through to 802.11ah are the 
more popular and successful indoor wireless solutions, having 
progressed as a key enabling technology to cover smaller to 
large organisations, public area hot-spots and so on [6]. The 
IEEE 802.11 standardisation committee has actively pursued 
to publish new draft modifications to integrate with up-to-date 
technologies and current challenges. However, there are 
currently different security challenges facing IEEE 802.11 
based WLANs, such as Eavesdropping, DoS, MITM attacks, 
and so on.  
For the purpose of the study reported in this paper, the SH 
testbed has been created by using different SH devices, which 
use the IEEE 802.11 standard protocol to communicate. To 
find vulnerabilities present in these devices forming the SH 
network, different types of attacks have been performed.  The 
rest of this report is organised as follows. 
Section II is a literature review. Section III is a summary 
of different types of attacks and their importance to a SH 
application. Section IV describes the smart devices used in 
developing the SH testbed. Section V presents the results that 
were achieved by performing different experiments (different 
attacks) using the SH testbed.  Finally, Section VI closes the 
paper with conclusions and some ideas for future work.   
II. 
REVIEW OF RELATED WORK 
Alsahlany, Almusawy and Alfatlawy [7] analysing the risk 
of a fake Access Point (AP) attack against Wi-Fi networks, 
discuss the security issues of the Wi-Fi user, such as those 
posed by fake APs.  They have carried out experiments by 
creating fake APs to launch a MITM attack to sniff, capture 
and analyse the victim’s traffic. However, their scope is 
somewhat limited as the work focuses only on a fake AP 
attack against Wi-Fi networks, but the chances that the user 
would connect to the fake AP are rather low.  
 Jose and Malekian [4] explain the different SH structures 
from a security viewpoint. They examine the current security 
flaws and challenges in home automation systems from the 
standpoint of both the homeowner and the security engineer. 
They have carried out a literature review about the challenges 
faced by home automation, but have not set up an SH testbed 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

to carry out experiments to find vulnerabilities and apply 
suggested security measures.   
Kilincer, Ertam and Şengür [8] propose an automated 
technique to detect and prevent fake AP attacks in a network 
with IoT devices. In the experiment, they use a Single Board 
Computer (SBC) and a wireless antenna (ODROID module). 
The whole operation has been divided into three stages. In the 
first stage, a fake AP broadcast has been created. The second 
stage is to scan the surroundings using the SBC and Wi-Fi 
modules and in the last stage, to prevent detecting fake AP 
broadcasts. The fake AP has been assigned to an unauthorised 
Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN).  This research is limited 
and focuses on fake AP attack detection and prevention, but 
the data collection about the network and some of the attacks 
are still possible without connecting to it. 
Doughty, Israr and Adeel, [9] have studied vulnerabilities 
in six different Internet Protocol (IP) cameras by performing 
various attacks using Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) 
poisoning. Their findings show that IP cameras are still 
vulnerable to ARP poisoning and spoofing, and the criminals 
can take advantage of it. Due to the lack of security in devices 
and applications, they remain insecure to ARP poisoning. At 
the end of their research, they suggest methods of preventing 
ARP poisoning. Their research is limited to some IP cameras, 
and not to other SH devices where ARP poisoning attack is 
possible when used as part of an SH network.  
Yoon, Park and Yoo [10] analyse security vulnerabilities 
in SHs in IoT environments and propose countermeasures. 
Although they talk about different vulnerabilities and 
countermeasure, such as trespass, monitoring and personal 
information leakage, DoS/ Distributed Denial of Service 
(DDoS)  attacks and falsification, all of which are possible to 
happen in SHs, they have not set up an SH testbed to carry out 
experiments to find the sugested vulnerabilities and study how 
to prevent them with counter measures. 
Davis, Mason and Anwar [11] conducted vulnerabilities 
and security posture studies of smart home IoT devices. They 
conducted their own vulnerabalities experiments that 
compared security posture between well known and less 
known vendors through misuse and abuse case analysis. 
Based on their analysis, the main finding was the need for a 
stronger focus on the security posture of lesser known vendor 
devices. Their approach utilised software engineering 
modeling methods, such as use cases, misuse cases, and abuse 
cases.  These use cases were defined based on the device 
functionality and assumptions of interconnectivity by the 
manufacturer. However an SH testbed was not setup to carry 
out these experiments. 
III. 
NETWORK SECURITY THREATS FOR IOT IN THE SH  
Based on their key features, wireless protocols can be 
further divided into different communication protocols, such 
as ZigBee, Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), Z-Wave, IPv6 Low-
power wireless Personal Area Network (6LoWPAN), 
Bluetooth, etc. [12]. The properties and key features of these 
protocols are shown in Table I. Due to high bandwidth and 
fast speed, wireless is most used everywhere [13], and most 
IoT devices use a wireless connectivity protocol.  The work 
reported in this paper is based on IoT devices that use Wi-Fi 
connectivity (IEEE 802.11x).      Due to the high use of IEEE  
TABLE I.  WIRELESS PROTOCOLS AND THEIR FEATURES 
 
802.11x by different devices nearly everywhere, including 
IoT in houses, hospitals, and hotels, they attract a lot of 
attention of attackers to launch different types of attacks either 
remotely or locally for different motives. Some of the 
common types of local attacks that are still dangerous to local 
IoT devices are eavesdropping (aka sniffing or spoofing), de-
authentication, and man-in-the-middle, which are further 
explained in the next sections. 
A. Eavesdropping Attack 
This is also known as sniffing or spoofing attack. It is used 
to sniff the network traffic in wireless networks that connect 
IoT devices via Bluetooth, IEEE 802.11x, or Radio Frequency 
Identification (RFID). It is carried out by illegally 
impersonating a legal IoT device to gather information via 
sniffing [14]. Eavesdropping attack is an important first step 
before launching any type of attack on IoT devices. For 
example, by the launch of this attack an attacker can obtain 
passwords, credit card numbers, emails, documents, browsing 
history, login details, File Transfer Protocol (FTP) login 
details, FTP documents, web addresses, and other confidential 
information, that users or devices may normally send over the 
network [15].   
This kind of attack is performed to gain illegal access to 
information to launch de-authentication or man-in-the-middle 
attack [16]. It gathers all types of traffic including encrypted 
traffic. A tool, such as Sniffer may be used to sniff packets to 
gather information. It is impossible to detect and penetrate 
vulnerabilities on the system’s (i.e., computer’s) wireless 
adapter. Therefore, to manage and monitor IEEE802.11 b/g/n 
devices’ traffic, two types of wireless adapters, namely ALFA 
AWUS036NHA 2.4 GHz and ALFA AWUS036ACH 2.4 & 
5 GHz were used. These wireless adapters have been used as 
they are compatible with IEEE802.11 b/g/n traffic, and work 
with a maximum connection rate of 150 Mbps [7]. When 
devices are communicating with each other using wireless 
protocols, their Medium Access Control (MAC) addresses are 
encrypted. 
 
Features 
Wireless Protocols 
Wi-Fi 
ZigBee 
Z-Wave 
Bluetooth 
6LoWPAN 
Standardis
ation 
IEEE 
802.11a/
b/g 
IEEE 
802.15.4 
Proprietary 
IEEE 
802.15.1 
IETF 
Frequency 
band 
2.4GHz,  
5GHz 
868/915
MHz, 
2.4GHz 
900MHz 
2.4GHz 
868MHz, 
900MHz  
and 2.4GHz 
Range 
(m) 
46/ 92  
10-100 
30 
1, 10, 100 
20 
Security 
algorithm 
WPA, 
WPA2 
AES-128 AES-128 
E0, E1, E3, 
E21, E22 
56-128 bit 
AES- 128 
Topology 
one-hop star, tree, 
mesh 
star, mesh 
p2p, 
scatternet 
mesh 
Channel 
bandwidth 
22MHz 
0.3/0.6 
MHz, 
2MHz 
300kHz, 
400kHz  
1MHz 
600kHz, 
2MHz, 
5MHz 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

It is known in packet communications basics that a MAC 
address makes sure that a packet is delivered only to the right 
destination (identified by the recipient’s MAC Address). This 
in turn leads to the question how a device can receive a packet 
which is not destined for it? In sniffing, since Wi-Fi packets 
are present all around in an area within a specific range, i.e., 
the wireless footprint, the external wireless adapter is used by 
the attacker after changing the setup from ‘manage mode’ to 
‘monitor mode’.  Doing this makes it possible to capture all 
the packets in the surrounding Wi-Fi range. 
To change a wireless adapter from manage mode to 
monitor mode, an open-source tool called Airodump-ng, 
which also includes an Aircrack-ng package, has been used.  
Aircrack-ng is a tool used for analysing network security, 
especially by monitoring, attacking, testing and cracking Wi-
Fi networks [7][17][18].  
Once the attacker selects a specific network to target, the 
attack is launched by giving a specific AP MAC address, a 
channel with monitor mode to write (save) the data in a file so 
it can be analysed later. By analysing the saved file some 
useful information, such as manufacturer’s name and MAC 
address of all devices that are connected to that specific AP, 
can be found. A de-authentication attack can be launched by 
a tool called Aireplay-ng [7], which enables the attacker to 
disconnect specific devices by using their MAC addresses. 
B. Denial of Service (DoS) De-authentication attacks on 
802.11 based networks   
DoS is a challenging attack on computing devices, caused 
by bombarding with requests during a certain period, forcing 
the target devices to crash, go-slow, or shutdown altogether 
[19].  As IoT devices are limited in resources, DoS attacks 
may cause more damage to them [20]. Most IoT devices use 
low priced hardware with low-cost deployment of IEEE 
802.11-based networks. Due to their popularity, IoT devices 
(roughly 30 billion devices in use in 2020) and 802.11 
networks are attacked by the largest number of attackers 
[20][21]. Researchers are working hard to fix these 
vulnerabilities in 802.11 networks by bringing out different 
security standards in the protocol, such as Wi-Fi Protected 
Access (WPA), Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), 
802.11i, 802.1x [22].  Even so, there are still some 
vulnerabilities that are not yet dealt with by any of these 
security standards.   One such attack is the de-authentication 
attack.  802.11 networks can operate in infrastructure mode 
(i.e., devices communicating with one another by first going 
through an access point) or in ad-hoc (peer to peer) mode.  An 
802.11 network, when operating in infrastructure mode, needs 
the wireless device to connect to an AP before the data 
messaging takes place.  In this process the device needs to 
validate itself to the AP before communicating with the AP.  
If either the client device or the AP wants to disconnect itself 
from the other, they send a de-authentication frame to leave 
the network. When client devices and AP are communicating 
with each other these frames are unencrypted, and an attacker 
can easily spoof these frames, which have the unencrypted 
MAC addresses of the devices and the AP.  Using them, the 
attackers can easily launch a DoS attack (de-authentication 
attack) to disassociate the client device from the AP. 
In a pre-connection type of attack, where the attacker is 
not part of the network, a DoS attack that targets 
communication between the AP and the gadget is launched 
allowing the attacker to disconnect the gadget from the 
network for a certain period of time defined by the attacker. 
The attacker sends a packet to the AP and the target device, 
therefore it will disconnect the device for a defined period of 
time. This kind of attack can be used to disable SH IoT 
devices, such as a Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) IP 
camera, gateway, smartphone, or any other device present in 
home automation to gain access to the home without notice 
[23].  In this, the attacker sends packets to the router by 
pretending that it is a target device using the spoofed MAC 
address.  In the meantime, the attacker is pretending to be a 
router to the target and is telling it to re-authenticate itself. 
This is a kind of ethical hacking attack performed by placing 
different gadgets like Amazon Echo, Google Home, Android 
smartphone, iOS phone, Android tablet and IP Dynamode 
Camera. 
This kind of attack is useful to the attacker in many ways.  
It is very useful in social engineering exercises where you 
could disconnect clients from the target network, and then call 
the user and pretend to be a person from the IT Department 
and trick them to install a virus or a backdoor. The attacker 
can also create another fake access point and persuade the 
gadgets to connect to the fake access point to spy on them, 
sniff and spoof their traffic.  Besides, it is also possible to 
launch a man- in-the-middle attack because the attacker would 
have gathered all the useful information. This kind of attack 
can also be used to capture the handshake, which is vital when 
it comes to WPA cracking. 
C. MITM (Man-In-The-Middle) attack 
It is the type of attack where the attacker successfully 
changes the communication between two parties (i.e., sender 
and receiver), where the sender and receiver believe that they 
are communicating with a genuine party but the entire 
communication is controlled by the attacker. MITM can be 
known by different names like Bucket-brigade attack, Fire 
brigade attack, Monkey-in-the-middle attack, Session 
hijacking or Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) hijacking. 
Before the MITM attack is lunched, the communication 
traffic is only monitored and read. This is a passive act, but it 
gathers plenty of information to launch the subsequent 
attacks. 
An MITM attack can be implemented through different 
ways, but in the testbed, it has been implemented by 1) using 
fake access point, and 2) by using ARP poisoning. A fake 
access point can be set up by using the information, such as 
MAC address, channel, and Service Set Identifier (SSID), 
that was gathered by sniffing and spoofing.  Using a tool 
called Mana-toolkit in Kali Linux, a fake AP will be 
configured to have the same setup as the target AP, such as 
identical user name AP, but it will be a network without 
encryption and that broadcasts a strong signal by using a 
Network Interface Card (NIC), [1] such as ALFA 
AWUS036ACH, with an external antenna.  Before 
connecting target devices to the fake AP, a DoS (de-
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

authentication) attack is launched to disable devices on the 
target network. When the target devices connect to the fake 
AP then the whole traffic will be going to the man-in-the-
middle and it will make it easier to steal the information from 
the compromised devices. Method 2, ARP poisoning, is an 
attack performed on a LAN, where the attacker falsely 
advertises the MAC addresses of the default gateway and the 
target device and fools both devices to connect to the attacker. 
The ARP poisoning is only possible when the attacker is part 
of the target network.  ARP poisoning can be carried out 
using a tool called Man-In-The-Middle framework (MITMf). 
MITMf is a powerful tool that can be used to intercept and 
modify the flow of packets between the victim and AP 
because the flow of the packet is now through the attacker.  
As all the traffic is going through the MITM, the attacker 
knows about the victim using the Internet. 
IV. 
DEVELOPING THE SMART HOME TESTBED 
To practically test, analyse and understand the security of 
SHs, an expert needs to develop an SH testbed containing a 
mix of different, random, IoT devices that are commonly 
found in a modern smart home.  For this purpose, the testbed 
shown in Figure 1 has been developed by incorporating a 
range of devices representing home gateways, IP cameras, 
various smart phones and tablets, programmable single board 
computer, all connecting to the home router.  The particular 
devices chosen are Amazon Echo, Amazon Dot, Google 
Home, smart IP Camera (IP Dynamode White DYN-630), 
IPhone4, Sony Xperia Tablet, and Nest Cam Indoor Security 
Camera. Amazon Echo, Amazon Dot, and Google Home are 
home gateways that allow voice control. They are all very 
popular and millions of people use them in their homes in 
everyday life to ease their life [24].  Amazon Echo and Google 
Home are smart speakers with the ‘assistant features’, using 
which the user can ask about the weather, news, use them as a 
search engine, in addition to controlling other smart devices 
that are connected to them.  IP Dynamode White (DYN-630) 
is a wireless camera that has a range up to 8 metres.  Among 
its features are zoom, motion detection, video support control, 
two-way voice talkback, and an external alarm which sends 
information directly to the server via email or FTP. With all 
these functionalities and an affordable price, it makes it 
perfect to use in a SH. Google Nest Cam Indoor Security 
Camera with a good quality picture (1080p), viewing angle 
with 130 diagonal degrees, private and secure communication 
(128-bit AES encryption, TLS, 2048-bit RSA private keys, 
Perfect Forward Secrecy) is more advanced than IP 
Dynamode.  However, it is more expensive than IP Dynamode 
White (DYN-630).  Sony Xperia Tablet Z LTE and Samsung 
Galaxy s7 edge are used as a user interface to install different 
SH apps to control and monitor systems. The Raspberry Pi 3 
used in the SH testbed is a low cost, yet powerful, 
programmable computer.  Among its many useful features is 
the General Purpose Input Output (GPIO) interface that is 
being used to create IoT solutions for the smart home.  The 
testbed also includes an iPhone4.  Although quite a few years 
old now, this is a smart device that is increasingly being used 
as DIY security cameras in SHs [25][26].  The use of old iOS 
devices in SHs is an attractive proposition, but such appliances 
open up vulnerabilities and introduces security threats in SHs 
making it very important to understand how SH security 
landscapes are impacted with such use.  It is in this context an 
old, but popular device, such as iPhone4 is included in the 
testbed.   
After developing this testbed, different security tests were 
carried out. As it is impossible to detect and penetrate 
vulnerabilities on the system through a local wireless adapter 
in a laptop, two types of wireless adapters namely ALFA 
AWUS036NHA 2.4 GHz and ALFA AWUS036ACH 2.4 & 
5 GHz were used to manage and monitor the devices’ Wi-Fi 
traffic. Kali Linux is operating on the attacking machine. In 
the eavesdropping, de-authentication and fake Access Point 
attacks, it is playing the role of the outside attacker and in the 
ARP poisoning attack, it plays the role of an internal actor. 
V. 
RESULTS  
To get the results of these attacks, the attacker needs to go 
into monitor mode, which is called sniffing or spoofing 
(passive attack) where it sniffs all the traffic without a 
connection to an AP or to ad-hoc network. Collecting 
information in this stage is important in order to launch a 
further attack on the target device. All the APs and connected 
devices can easily be identified in a limited range. Figure 2 
shows the features of the APs and devices that are connected 
to these APs after executing the Airodump-ng tool in the 
neighbouring area, and it provides us with very useful 
 
 
Figure 1. Smart Home Testbed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Features of the Access Points 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

information. The first column shows the Basic Service Set 
IDentifier (BSSID) also called the MAC address of all APs in 
the surrounding area. The AP signal strength (PWR) is shown 
in the second column in decibels (db).  The highest db value 
means the AP is nearest to the attacker. Information about the 
channel of the AP is important where the CH column exposes 
the information about the AP in the channel they operate. 
Most APs are using encryption keys for connection but some 
of them are open and do not have an encryption key. ENC 
column shows whether encryption is being used.   OPN 
indicates an open connection. The last column shows the 
Extended Service Set Identification (ESSID), the names of 
APs that are broadcasting. 
The detailed information that has been obtained and 
shown in Figure 2 can be used to launch a de-authentication 
attack (DoS) on each individual IoT that is connected to the 
specific AP. To launch a de-authentication attack, the MAC 
addresses of the target AP and the IoT device connected to it 
are required. To obtain the MAC addresses of the connected 
devices to AP, Airodump-ng with MAC address of AP is 
needed to be launched. 
Figure 3 shows the MAC address of the connected device 
to the target AP.  It is easy to launch a de-authentication attack 
after obtaining the required information (MAC Addresses of 
AP and target device). Figure 4 shows the successful launch 
of de-authentication for a certain defined time period where 
the target device is not aware of it. The target will not be able 
to connect to the AP unless it is restarted, or the end period 
defined by the attacker has been reached.  As shown in Table 
II, the voice control of Amazon Echo, Google Home, and 
Amazon Echo Dot has strong resistance to a de-authentication 
attack.   Although a de-authentication attack was successfully  
TABLE II.  RESULTS OF DE-AUTHENTICARTION ATTACK 
 
launched on the target devices the attacker was unable to 
disable the target devices’ connections from the target AP.  
However de-authentication was successful and Android 
mobile devices (Model nos. SM-G935F, SM G930F) were 
disabled when they were at roughly 10 metres from the 
connected AP. Furthermore, Nest Cam Indoor Security 
Camera was disabled for short duration of time (1 to 2 
seconds) by the launching of de-authentication. As shown in 
Table II, IP DYNAMODE DYN-630, Apple IPhone4, 
Raspberry Pi 3 with Linux operating system, and Sony Xperia 
Tablet devices were successfully targeted, the connection was 
interrupted and the connection from the AP was disabled.  
This scenario presented the worst security concerns as they 
allowed every single attempt to drop their connection from 
any distance within the SH. 
There are different ways to implement MITM attacks, but 
in the testbed, it has been implemented by using 1) fake access 
point and 2) ARP poisoning.  In this experiment, as shown in 
Figure 5, the fake AP created is called Smart Home. It is 
similar to the target AP, but the fake Smart Home AP is 
without encryption. In this kind of situation, the attacker uses 
IoT Appliances  
De-authentication Attack 
Amazon Echo 
Google Home 
Amazon Echo Dot 
Connection interrupted.  Unable to disable 
their connection from the AP. 
Android Mobile (Model 
no. SM-G935F, SM-
G930F) 
Nest Cam Indoor 
Security Camera 
Sometimes connection interrupted and 
device disabled from the connected AP. 
DYNAMODE DYN-
630 
Iphon4 Apple 
Raspberry Pi 3 
Sony Xperia Tablet 
Connection interrupted and device disabled 
from the connected AP 
 
 
Figure 3. MAC addresses of the connected devices 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Victim connected to fake AP 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Launch of successful de-authentication attack 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

DoS attack to force devices to disconnect from the genuine 
AP and connect to the fake AP.  
In this experiment, an attacker can force the smart devices 
by using de-authentication attack and target device connect to 
fake AP as shown in Figure 5. But as it was evident from 
previous tests, it is hardly possible to disable many devices 
from the legitimate AP. Also, it would be harder to convince 
the victim to use the fake AP. For these reasons, it is not highly 
successful to target the SH by using a fake AP.  
ARP poisoning MITM attack is possible when an attacker 
is part of the network. To launch ARP poisoning in Kali 
Linux, MITMf tool was used to perform ARP poisoning but 
before using MITMf, the attacker has to scan the whole 
network using a scanning tool, such as NMAP to know the 
MAC address of the target device and the IP address of the 
default gateway (AP).  The target device responds and sends 
its MAC address. The ARP table, the IP address and MAC 
address of different devices including the gateway becomes 
available to the attacker. The attacker knows in detail about 
the time and what website the victim is using. To further 
capture and analyse the data packets, the attacker can use 
Wireshark [7].  This way some other vulnerabilities, such as 
session hijacking and denial of services can be exploited. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The use of wireless Wi-Fi devices is growing day by day 
with the extensive use of the Internet. If adequate security 
measures are not taken, it could have serious implications for 
SH devices. There is the possibility to view, capture and 
modify the data packets by the attacker using the existing 
vulnerabilities in SH devices and IEEE802.11 b/g/n traffic 
captured by nefarious means. The primary contribution of the 
research work is building and evaluating a testbed suitable for 
finding security vulnerabilities and threats in SH networks 
incorporating both new and old IoT devices.  The testbed can 
then be expanded to include many more diverse SH IoT 
devices as they become available, and explore their 
vulnerabilities and possible security attacks on them.  
This paper demonstrates that due to vulnerabilities 
remaining in some SH devices they are prone to attacks, such 
as eavesdropping, DoS and MITM.  Throughout the whole 
experiment, Kali Linux operating system was used with 
ALFA AWUS036NHA 2.4 GHz and ALFA AWUS036ACH 
2.4 & 5 GHz wireless adapters. Eavesdropping attack was 
used to sniff the network traffic of the wireless network. An 
open-source tool called Airodump-ng was used to sniff 
packets to gather information that would allow to mount an 
attack. The tool gathers some useful information, such as 
MAC address, channel, and ESSID. This information can 
later be used to mount DoS and MITM attacks. This kind of 
attack could be fatal as the IoT device can be disabled for a 
certain period.   For the MITM attack the Mana-toolkit and 
MITMf were used. The two MITM attack types, i.e., using 
fake AP and ARP poisoning have been used to target SH 
devices as they are more effective and can damage SH 
devices. To avoid de-authentication attack, the device need to 
have a wired connection to the network, or if the connection 
is wireless, use the IEEE 802.11w, the amendment adding 
management frame protection functionality to 802.11 
standard. This amendment was brought to provide better 
protection to control and management frames against forgery, 
replay and disconnect attacks. Security can also be enhanced 
by enabling 802.11w/WPA3 combination.  Although a fully-
fledged discussion on WPA3 is beyond the scope of this 
paper, it is worth noting that WPA3 secures a device even 
when weak passwords are used or when an attacker attempts 
to crack them using brute force techniques.  The AP can add 
Message Integrity Check Information Element (MIC IE) to 
each management frame it transmits to protect them against 
any attempt to copy, alter, or replay by invalidating the MIC.  
To protect broadcast/multicast management frames a new 
key called Integrity Group Temporal Key (IGTK) is used. 
ARP poisoning can be detected through different ways, 
such as using an open-source packet analyser, e.g., 
Wireshark, or using proprietary options, such as XArp and 
command prompt.  The easy way to finding an ARP 
poisoning attack is by opening a command prompt as 
administrator.  Running command ‘arp –a’ will show ARP 
table IP address and MAC address of connected devices. In 
this table, if two different IP addresses are displayed with the 
same MAC address, then it is possible that the network 
undergoing an ARP poising attack. To prevent this kind of 
attack, the ARP table needs to be configured with the static 
IP address and the MAC address.  Chances of connecting to 
fake AP may be low but the SH user needs to be educated to 
avoid connecting to fake APs and to use a Virtual Private 
Network 
(VPN) 
connection 
which 
will 
encrypt 
communication between sender and receiver.  The testbed 
will be used to study and understand how future SH devices 
can be secured from these attacks, and hope to share the 
knowledge thus created with the community. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  J. Chen, "Investopedia," 2015. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/smart-home.asp. 
[retrieved: February, 2021] 
[2]  V. S. Gunge and P. S. Yalagi, "Smart Home Automation: A 
Literature Review," International Journal of Computer 
Applications, pp. 6-10, 2016.  
[3]  K. E. Skouby and P. Lynggaard, "Smart Home and Smart City 
Solutions enabled by 5G, IoT, AAI and CoT Services," 2014 
International Conference on Contemporary Computing and 
Informatics (IC3I), pp. 874-878, 2014.  
[4]  A. C. Jose and R. Malekian, "Smart Home Automation 
Security: A Literature Review," Smart Computing Review, 
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 269-285, 2015.  
[5]  E. Perahia, "IEEE 802.11n Development: History, Process, 
and Technology," IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, 
no. 7, pp. 48-55, 2008.  
[6]  M. S. Afaqui, E. Garcia-Villegas and E. Lopez-Aguilera, 
"IEEE 802.11ax: Challenges and Requirements for future 
High Efficiency WiFi," IEEE Wireless Communications, 
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 130-137, 2017.  
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

[7]  A. M. Alsahlany, A. R. Almusawy and Z. H. Alfatlawy, "Risk 
Analysis of a Fake Access Point Attack Against Wi-Fi 
Network," International Journal of Scientific & Engineering 
Research, vol. 9, pp. 322-326, 2018.  
[8]  F. Kilincer, F. Ertam and A. Şengür, "Automated Fake Access 
Point Attack Detection and Prevention System with IoT 
Devices," Balkan Journal of Electrical & Computer 
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, 2020. 
[9]  T. Doughty, N. Israr and U. Adeel, “Vulnerability Analysis of 
IP Cameras using ARP Poisoning,” 8th International 
Conference on Soft Computing, Artificial 
Intelligence and Applications (SAI 2019), June, 2019. 
[10]  S. Yoon, H. Park and H. S. Yoo, “Security Issues on 
Smarthome in IoT Environment,” SpringerLink, vol. 330, pp. 
691-696, 2015.   
[11]  B. D. Davis, J. C. Mason and M. Anwar, “Vulnerability 
Studies and Security Postures of IoT Devices: A Smart Home 
Case Study,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 10, 
pp. 10102-10110, 2020. 
[12]  A. N. Gollu and J. Kumar, “Wireless Protocols: Wi-Fi SON, 
Bluetooth, ZigBee, Z-Wave, and Wi-Fi,” in Innovations in 
Electronics and Communication Engineering: Proceedings 
of the, H.S.Saini, Ed., Springer, 2019, pp. 229-239.  
[13] F. Hussain and M. Qi, “Integrated Privacy Preserving 
Framework for Smart Home,” 14th International Conference 
on Natural Computation, Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge 
Discovery (ICNC-FSKD), pp. 1246-1253, 2018. 
[14]  L. Xiao, X. Wan, L. Xiaozhen, Z. Yanyong and W. Di, “IoT 
Security Techniques based on Machine Learning: How do 
IoT Devices use AI to Enhance Security?,” IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 41-49, 2018. 
[15]  J. Melnick, “Top 10 Most Common Types of Cyber Attacks,” 
Netwrix 
Blog, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://blog.netwrix.com/2018/05/15/top-10-most-common-
types-of-cyber-attacks/#Eavesdropping%20attack [retrieved: 
February, 2021] 
[16]  L. Xiao, Y. Li, G. Han, G. Liu and W. Zhuang, “PHY-Layer 
Spoofing Detection with Reinforcement Learning in Wireless 
Networks,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 
12, pp. 10037-10047, 2016. 
[17]  C. N. Klokmose, M. Korn and H. Blunck, “WiFi Proximity 
Detection in Mobile Web Applications,” p. 123–128, 2014. 
[18]  I. P. Mavridis, A.-I. E. Androulakis, A. B. Ηalkias and P. 
Mylonas, “Real-life Paradigms of Wireless Network Security 
Attacks,” 15th Panhellenic Conference on Informatic, pp. 
112-116, 2011. 
[19]  G. J. Brajones, C. J. Murillo, J. F.V. Valdés and L. F. Valero, 
“Detection and Mitigation of DoS and DDoS Attacks in IoT-
Based Stateful SDN: An Experimental Approach,” Sensors , 
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1-18, 03 02 2020. 
[20]  A. K. Sikder, G. Petracca, H. Aksu, T. Jaege and U. Selcuk, 
“A Survey on Sensor-based Threats to Internet-of-Things 
(IoT) Devices and Applications,” vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 291-319, 
2018. 
[21]  N. Apthorpe, D. Reisman and N. Feamster, “A Smart Home 
is No Castle: Privacy Vulnerabilities of Encrypted IoT 
Traffic,” 
ArXiv 
Cryptography 
and 
Security, 
vol. 
abs/1705.06805, 2017. 
[22]  T. Nguyen, D. Nguyen, B. Tran, H. Vu and N. Mittal, “A 
Lightweight 
Solution 
for 
Defending 
Against 
Deauthentication/Disassociation 
Attacks 
on 
802.11 
Networks,” IEEE , pp. 185-190, 2008.  
[23]  R. Trimananda et al., “Vigilia: Securing Smart Home Edge 
Computing,” Third ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge 
Computing, pp. 74-89, 2018. 
[24]  S. Hornick, S. Santhanam, A. Hill and S. B. Krous, “How 
Smart Speakers will Reinvent Travel,” 2018. [Online]. 
Available:https://www.oliverwyman.com/our-
expertise/insights/2018/sep/oliver-wyman-transport-and-
logistics-2018/how-smart-speakers-will-reinvent-travel.html. 
[retrieved: February, 2021] 
[25]  Household Hacker, “How To Turn Your Phones Into WiFi 
Security Cameras”, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y7h8L2zeLdE 
[retrieved: March, 2021] 
[26] H. Luijten, “Use your old iPhone as a Security Camera (IP 
Camera)”, https://www.tweaking4all.com/mobile- 
devices/ios/repurpose-old-ios/old-iphone-as-ip-
camera/#related [retrieved: March, 2021] 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-837-2
ICN 2021 : The Twentieth International Conference on Networks

