A Study on GPS Positioning Method with Assistance of a Distance Sensor
Yasuhiro Ikeda, Hiroyuki Hatano, Masahiro Fujii, Atsushi Ito, Yu Watanabe
Graduate School of Engineering,
Utsunomiya University
e-mail:{ikeda@degas., hatano@, fujii@, at.ito@, yu@}is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Tomoya Kitani
Graduate School of Informatics,
Shizuoka University
e-mail:t-kitani@ieee.org
Toru Aoki
Research Institute of Electronics,
Shizuoka University
e-mail:rtaoki@rie.shizuoka.ac.jp
Hironobu Onishi
Graduate School of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
e-mail:onishi@hatanolab.eng.shizuoka.ac.jp
Abstract—In order to estimate a receiver’s position, a
Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver has to re-
ceive the signals from at least four observable satellites.
However, in urban areas, the number of the observable
satellites decreases because urban areas have many
buildings. In such cases, the position estimation cannot
be performed well. So, our research considers position
estimation in case that the observable satellites are
decreased. Many vehicles have the distances sensors
which can measure traveling distance. Our proposal can
estimate own position by using the traveling distance
and the previous position which is estimated under
good GPS condition. Our experimental results will
show our eﬀectiveness of the proposal.
Keywords–GPS; Positioning; Urban canyon; Lack of
observable satellites.
I.
Introduction
In recent years, location-based services have been in-
creasing. Many of these services require the information
of user’s position. Car navigation systems can be given
as an example. In general, these services use the Global
Positioning System (GPS). GPS is a system that can
estimate user’s position by using ﬂying satellites around
the Earth.
The position estimation by GPS calculates the position,
based on the measurement of the distances between the
GPS receiver and the GPS satellites. In order to perform
the position estimation, GPS receiver requires at least four
satellites which can be received in line-of-sight [1]. How-
ever, in urban areas, the number of the observable satellites
decreases because of the buildings. These situations are
called urban canyon. In urban canyon, GPS signals from
observable satellites tend to degrade because of multi-path
propagation. The signals via multi-path should not be
used because the errors are included in the propagated
paths. In order to avoid multi-path signals, the number
of direct-path satellites which we prefer to use is more
decreased. In such cases, the position estimation cannot
be performed well. For example, the estimator cannot
estimate the receiver’s position if the number of observable
satellites becomes less than three. Or, the performance
becomes worse compared to the conditions in open sky
where we can observe more than four satellites. Actually,
conventional GPS systems rely on other information such
as map information, base stations of 3G cellular networks,
or Wi-Fi networks against the bad GPS measurement. The
positioning method which does not rely on other informa-
tion is desired because the simple positioning should not
use big data and wireless links to get other information.
So, our research considers the position estimation in
the case that the observable satellites are decreased. Many
vehicles have wheel rotation sensors which can measure
the traveling distances. We propose the novel position-
ing method which uses the information of the previous
traveling distance [2][3]. Our proposed method uses the
information of both the distance sensor and the previous
position which is estimated under good condition, to GPS
positioning. Higher accuracy in position estimation is ex-
pected by our proposed method, even when the number of
observable satellites is decreased. Also, it can be expected
to prevent the position estimation impossibility when the
number of the observable satellites becomes three.
In this paper, we will show the case that the number of
the observable satellites becomes three as the worst case
to introduce and evaluate our proposed method. Here, the
position estimation is performed by traveling on a bicycle.
Using experimental results, we will show the eﬀectiveness
of our proposed method.
This paper organized as follows. In Section II, we will
introduce related works brieﬂy. In Section III, we will
show our proposal in detail. In Section IV, we will present
the proposal’s performance by ﬁeld experiments. Finally,
Section V summarizes the paper.
II.
Related Work
In this section, we will show the related methods to
improve the accuracy of the position estimation. Here, we
are introducing the traditional and basic technologies.
A. Diﬀerential GPS (DGPS)
The Diﬀerential GPS (DGPS) is the method for im-
proving the position estimation accuracy [4]. The DGPS
uses the GPS base station. The GPS base station trans-
mits the information of the error amount in the GPS
measurement to near GPS receivers. Measuring of the
error information is performed accurately at the GPS base
station.
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Generally, the position estimation by GPS calculates
the position by using the measurement of the distances
between the GPS receiver and the GPS satellites. However,
some errors are included in the distance measurement. The
distance errors by clock diﬀerence, the ionospheric delay,
and the troposphere delay can be given as examples. The
estimation accuracy of user’s position can be improved by
correcting the error information which is generated at the
GPS base station. However, the GPS estimation is used in
various locations, such as urban areas, rural areas, sea, and
mountains. In the urban areas, the DGPS cannot correct
the propagation delay caused by the reﬂection at buildings.
Therefore, in such case, the position estimation cannot be
performed well.
B. Dead Reckoning (DR)
The Dead Reckoning (DR) is the method of performing
position estimation by the information of the relative
movement [5]. In other words, DR uses the information
how much we traveled from the previous position. Since
the DR does not require any infrastructures, the DR is
not limited to any area.
In vehicles, various sensors exist to detect the direction.
Usually, the angular velocity is detected by the angular
velocity sensor. The angular velocity can be calculated by
integrating the traveling direction [6]. Also, it is possible
to detect the direction by using a ﬁber optic gyroscope.
The ﬁber optic gyroscope is a device for determining the
direction by measuring the time diﬀerence of the light
when the angular velocity is added to the ﬁber optic.
By using vehicle speed pulses, it is possible to detect
the traveling distance. The vehicle speed pulse is the signal
which is generated according to the rotational speed of the
drive shaft of the vehicle. We can measure the traveling
distance based on the circumference of the tire and the
vehicle speed pulse.
In the DR, the relative position can be estimated by
using the moved direction and the traveled distance. The
DR is often used with a map matching technique, as
described in the next section. The combination of both
DR and map matching are often used in the car navigation
systems.
C. Map Matching
The map matching is the method for ﬁnding the ap-
propriate position of the vehicle on the road by using the
map information [7]. It is used in combination with the
position estimation methods such as GPS and DR.
Currently, the map matching and the DR are com-
monly used in the car navigation systems [8]. The DR is
a system for determining the relative position from the
previous position. In DR, the error accumulates when the
error occurs in the distance sensor and the direction sensor.
This problem can be solved by using the map matching,
but the map matching cannot be used in a place which does
not have the map information. So, in order to estimate the
absolute position, the DR with the map matching is often
used with GPS. However, the sensor data from the DR
does not improve the positioning accuracy of GPS directly.
As a new method, we want to improve the position
estimation accuracy by adding the sensor data, to the GPS
position estimation directly. Here, we use a distance sensor.
We proposed the positioning method which can estimate
the absolute position by the combination of the distance
sensor and GPS [2][3]. By our proposed method, the
absolute position can be estimated even if only GPS cannot
estimate own position because of the bad environment.
The bad environment for the conventional GPS is under
lack of the observable satellites. This case often happens
in urban areas. In our proposal method, we can keep
estimating the user’s absolute position by assistance of the
distance sensor.
III.
Proposed Method
In this section, ﬁrst, we will show the problems of the
position estimation by GPS. Thereafter, we will show our
proposed method which uses the distance sensor and the
previous position information.
A. Problems of Position Estimation by GPS
The GPS positioning estimates the receiver’s posi-
tion based on the distances between the receiver and
the satellites [9]. For estimating the 3D position of the
receiver, the receiver needs three relations, that is, three
satellites. Moreover, the receiver needs to estimate own
clock error because the general receivers are equipped with
inexpensive crystal clocks. Therefore, the GPS position
estimation needs four relations, that is, four satellites. For
carrying out the positioning calculation, the GPS position
estimation needs at least four observable satellites. The
observable satellite means the satellite which can receive
its signal in line-of-sight. However, in urban areas, the
number of the observable satellites is decreased because
the receiver cannot observe the low elevation satellites due
to the interference of buildings. Therefore, the receiver
is not always possible to observe more than or equal to
the four satellites in line-of-sight. So, the number of the
observable satellites tends to decrease. Such decrement
results in degradation of the position estimation accuracy.
As a worst case, the receiver cannot estimate its own
position if the number of the observable satellites becomes
less than four. This is the most common problem in urban
area.
To solve the above problem, we propose the novel GPS
estimation which uses the distance sensor and the previ-
ous position information. The proposal method uses the
previous receiver’s position. We can measure the traveling
distance from the previous position by the distance sensor.
We assume the previous position as the quasi-satellite
which uses both the previous position and the traveled
distance. By the proposed method, we expect that the
position estimation is possible even if the number of the
observable satellites are three. In addition, we also expect
the improvement of position estimation accuracy when the
number of the observable satellites are low. The detailed
procedure is shown in the next subsection.
B. Proposed Position Estimation Algorithm
The proposed method is assumed to be used in position
estimation on vehicles such as cars or bikes. The assumed
situation of our research is shown in Figure 1. We consider
2 observation times (the time t and t + τ). The position
coordinate of the receiver at the time t is (x0, y0, z0). And
the position coordinate of the receiver at the time t + τ
is (x, y, z). We want to estimate the position (x, y, z). We
deﬁne that the position of the i-th satellite is (xi, yi, zi).
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1. Assumed situation of our research.
By using the orbital information of the satellites which
is contained in the satellite signals, the positions of the
satellites can be deﬁned. Also, the variables ri(i = 1, 2, 3)
are the distances between the receiver and the satellites.
On the other hand, the variables r0 is the distance between
the time t position and the time t + τ position. Here, we
assume that the position was correctly estimated by the
adequate satellites at the time t. After traveling, we assume
that the observable satellites are decreased at the time t+
τ. The number of the observable satellites at the time t+τ
are assumed as three. In this case, the position estimation
becomes impossible because of lack of observable satellites.
In this paper, for the purpose of simple explanation,
we assume that the number of the observable satellites
are four at the time t. The GPS positioning at the time t
uses the satellite positions and the distances between the
receiver and the satellites. The true distance ρi between
the i-th satellite and the receiver can be expressed as
follows.
ρi =
√
(xi − x0)2 + (yi − y0)2 + (zi − z0)2
(1)
The clock error may be included to the distance between
the receiver and the satellite. Therefore, the distance ri
can be expressed by (2).
ri = ρi + s
(2)
Here, the clock error is represented as the parameter s.
The unit of clock error s is meter. This equation can be
applied to all the observable satellites. As the number of
the observable satellites are four at the time t, the following
four equations can be obtained.





r1 = ρ1 + s
r2 = ρ2 + s
r3 = ρ3 + s
r4 = ρ4 + s
(3)
By solving (3), it is possible to ﬁnd out the position of the
receiver (x0, y0, z0) and the clock error s [10].
In case of the time t + τ, the above method is not
applicable for the position estimation because the number
of the observable satellites are three. Therefore, we will
estimate the position (x, y, z) by adding the quasi-satellite.
That is, we use the previous position (x0, y0, z0) and the
distance between the current position and the previous
position r0. The distance r0 can be represented by (4).
r0 =
√
(x0 − x)2 + (y0 − y)2 + (z0 − z)2
(4)
At the time t + τ, we can observe the three satellites. So,
we can obtain the three equations (2). By using the three
relations based on (2) and (4), we can derive the following
equations.







r1 =
√
(x1 − x)2 + (y1 − y)2 + (z1 − z)2 + s
r2 =
√
(x2 − x)2 + (y2 − y)2 + (z2 − z)2 + s
r3 =
√
(x3 − x)2 + (y3 − y)2 + (z3 − z)2 + s
r0 =
√
(x0 − x)2 + (y0 − y)2 + (z0 − z)2
(5)
It is possible to estimate the position (x, y, z) by (5).
The advantage of the proposed method is that we can
increase the available satellites by adding (4). In addition,
the proposed method only uses the GPS receiver and
the distance sensor, no other infrastructure is needed. In
our proposal, we need the distance between the current
position and the previous position. In recent vehicles, it is
easy to measure the traveling distance because most of the
vehicles have distance sensors, such as speed pulses.
C. Calculation Process of Position Estimation
Because the simultaneous equation (5) is nonlinear, the
solution can be obtained by the sequential approximation
that is performed the linearization around the initial value.
Here, the procedure of the sequential approximation is
shown below. As a notation, subscripts of the right shoul-
der of the following variables indicate the times of the
sequential approximation.
1)
we prepare the suitable initial values x0, y0, z0, s0
about x, y, z, s.
2)
By using the receiver position x0, y0, z0 and the
clock error s0, we calculate the distances between
the receiver and the satellites.







r0
1 =
√
(x1 − x0)2+(y1 − y0)2+(z1 − z0)2+s0
r0
2 =
√
(x2 − x0)2+(y2 − y0)2+(z2 − z0)2+s0
r0
3 =
√
(x3 − x0)2+(y3 − y0)2+(z3 − z0)2+s0
r0
0 =
√
(x0 − x0)2+(y0 − y0)2+(z0 − z0)2
(6)
3)
The residual error ∆ri = ri−r0
i can be determined
by using the distance ri(i = 0, 1, 2, 3) which is
actually measured.
4)
Since it is possible to approach the correct solu-
tion by compensating same amount corresponding
to the residual error for x0, y0, z0, s0, the com-
pensation amount is determined using the partial
derivative about x, y, z, s.
∂ri
∂x
=
− (xi−x)
ri
∂ri
∂y
=
− (yi−y)
ri
∂ri
∂z
=
− (zi−z)
ri
∂ri
∂s
=
{
1(i = 1, 2, 3)
0(i = 0)
(7)
From
(7),
the
compensation
amount
∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s
to
update
x0, y0, z0, s0
can
be represented as follows.









∆r1 =
∂r1
∂x ∆x + ∂r1
∂y ∆y + ∂r1
∂z ∆z + ∂r1
∂s ∆s
∆r2 =
∂r2
∂x ∆x + ∂r2
∂y ∆y + ∂r2
∂z ∆z + ∂r2
∂s ∆s
∆r3 =
∂r3
∂x ∆x + ∂r3
∂y ∆y + ∂r3
∂z ∆z + ∂r3
∂s ∆s
∆r0 =
∂r0
∂x ∆x + ∂r0
∂y ∆y + ∂r0
∂z ∆z
(8)
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Here,
the
simultaneous
equation
(8)
can
be
represented
by
the
matrix
form
in
order
to
simplify
handling.
We
deﬁne
the
vectors
∆⃗x
=
[∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s]T
and
∆⃗r
=
[∆r1, ∆r2, ∆r3, ∆r0]T（the notation T
expresses a transpose）, the equation (8) can be
expressed as follow.
G∆⃗x = ∆⃗r
(9)
Here, the matrix G is usually called as the obser-
vation matrix or the design matrix. The matrix G
can be expressed as follows.
G =


∂r1
∂x
∂r1
∂y
∂r1
∂z
∂r1
∂s
∂r2
∂x
∂r2
∂y
∂r2
∂z
∂r2
∂s
∂r3
∂x
∂r3
∂y
∂r3
∂z
∂r3
∂s
∂r0
∂x
∂r0
∂y
∂r0
∂z
∂r0
∂s


=


− (x1−x)
r1
− (y1−y)
r1
− (z1−z)
r1
1
− (x2−x)
r2
− (y2−y)
r2
− (z2−z)
r2
1
− (x3−x)
r3
− (y3−y)
r3
− (z3−z)
r3
1
− (x0−x)
r0
− (y0−y)
r0
− (z0−z)
r0
0

 (10)
The compensation amount ∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s in (8)
can be derived by multiplying the inverse matrix
of G from the left of (9). Therefore, the compen-
sation amount ∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s can be determined
by solving (11).
∆⃗x = G−1∆⃗r
(11)
5)
The initial values x0, y0, z0, s0 are updated by
∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s as follows.
x1
=
x0 + ∆x
y1
=
y0 + ∆y
z1
=
z0 + ∆z
s1
=
s0 + ∆s
(12)
6)
After updating the initial value to x1, y1, z1, s1, we
return to the Procedure 2. These procedures are
repeated until ∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆s becomes enough
small.
By following the above procedure, our proposed method
has the possibility to calculate the receiver’s position
(x, y, z). In our experience, the solution can converge
by repeating several times even if the initial values are
x0 = y0 = z0 = s0 = 0.
IV.
The Characterization by Field Experiment
A. Setup and Environment
The experiments were conducted in order to evaluate
the ability and the eﬀectiveness of the proposed method. In
the proposed method, the position estimation is performed
while updating the traveling distance and the previous
position. The assumed environment is an urban area.
There are many buildings in urban areas. The satellites
with low elevations tend to be shaded by the buildings.
So, we trust only the satellites with high elevations.
In the experiment, we are using a bicycle as the moving
vehicle. The bicycle is shown in Figure 2. As shown
in Figure 2, a GPS antenna is attached to the loading
platform. Also, the cycle computer is attached to the front
Figure 2. Experimental vehicle.
Figure 3. Cycle computer.
wheel. The cycle computer is shown in Figure 3. The
cycle computer is a device which senses a magnet mounted
on the spokes of the tire to generate a pulse after each
rotation. The bicycle also has a data logger system. Each
generated pulse is saved in the data logger. The sampling
interval of the data logger is 1 ms. The example of the
saved pulses is shown in Figure 4. From Figure 4, the cycle
computer outputs 0V when the magnet passes the front
of the sensor. Except above, the cycle computer usually
outputs 2V. We can recognize the rotation of the tire by
the pulses. Based on these pulses, the distance r0 can be
measured. The duration between an edge of a pulse and
that of the next pulse is equal to the circumference of
the tire. The traveling distance r0 is calculated for each
position estimation by using the circumference of the tire.
The experiment has been conducted under an open
sky. The distance r0 had measured while traveling by the
bicycle. The position estimation of the proposed method
is performed using the three satellites with high elevation
and the previous position. For comparison, the positions
are also estimated by the conventional method with all the
observable satellites.
A total distance of the experimental riding is 100 me-
ters. In the ﬁrst 20 meters, we rode toward east straightly.
Then, we turned right. In the next 80 meters, we rode
toward south straightly again. The cycle computer has a
function that displays the speed according to the rotational
speed of the tire. We kept the speed of the bicycle 10
km/h. From the start to the end, the time is 50 seconds.
Table I summarizes the parameters of the experiment
environment.
By using the data obtained in the experiment, the
position estimation is performed per second. The GPS
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 4. Waveform from the cycle computer.
TABLE I. SPECIFICATIONS OF THE EXPERIMENT
ENVIRONMENT
GPS receiver
JAVAD GNSS DELTA-G3T
Number of
8 satellites
observable satellites
Total traveling time
50 s
Estimation interval of
1 s
GPS receiver
Data logger
EasySync DS1M12
Cycle Computer
CATEYE CC-VL820 VELO 9
Sampling interval of
1 ms
the data logger
Circumference of
1.515m
the tire of the bicycle
receiver can output the distance between the receiver and
the satellites. The output distance includes some errors,
such as the ionospheric delay error and the tropospheric
delay error (so, the output distance is often called as the
pseudo range). The ionospheric delay can be estimated by
the transmitted messages from the satellites because the
messages have coeﬃcients of equations which are modeled
as the ionospheric delay. So, we subtract the modeled
ionospheric delay from the output distance. Similarly, we
subtract the modeled tropospheric delay from the output
distance. We use the remaining distance as the distance ri
For comparison, the position estimation using all satellites
was also calculated per second. In the proposed method,
the position coordinates of the start is estimated by using
the four satellites with high elevation.
B. Position Estimation Results
Figure 5 shows the results of the proposed and conven-
tional method of position estimation. The origin of Figure
5, is the starting point. The positioning results are plotted
every second. According to Figure 5, by using the proposed
method, the position estimation can be performed even
when the number of the observable satellites are three.
First, the bicycle is moving towards east, from the start
point. After going 20 meters straightly, the direction is
changed to the south. Finally, the bicycle stops when the
traveling distance becomes 80 meters from the turned
point. As we can see, the proposal method can keep
estimating the position when the direction of the traveling
is changed while traveling.
Figure 5. Position estimation results of all satellites and the
proposed method.
Figure 6. Positioning diﬀerence.
In Figure 6, the positioning diﬀerence between the es-
timated position by the proposed method and the position
by all the satellites is shown. The positioning diﬀerence is
deﬁned as Euclidean distance between both the positions.
Figure 6 is plotted every second. The total traveling time
is 50 seconds. The positioning diﬀerence is 5 meters or less
until 11 seconds from the start time. In addition, from 22
seconds to 50 seconds, the positioning diﬀerence also under
5 meters. Also, the few samples are 7 meters or less. From
12 seconds to 21 seconds, the positioning diﬀerence is over
10 meters.
As another viewpoint of discussion, Figure 7 shows the
cumulative probability distribution in order to check the
distribution of the positioning diﬀerence. From Figure 7,
76 percent of the positioning diﬀerences are 5 meters or
less. The rate of the positioning diﬀerences over 10 meters
is about 17 percent.
By considering these results, the proposed method
is able to estimate the receiver’s position by using the
previous position and the three satellites with high eleva-
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 7. Cumulative probability distribution of the positioning
diﬀerence.
tion. However, there are some cases when the positioning
diﬀerences are more than 10 meters. These large diﬀerences
are a problem which will have to be resolved. One of the
above reasons is the satellites constellation. Generally, in
case of the four satellites, the good satellites constellation
can be presented as follows [11].
•
One satellite is near zenith, that is, with high
elevation.
•
Other three satellites are distributed and sur-
rounded uniformly with low elevations.
In this experiment, three satellites with high elevation have
been selected. A better selection has to be consider for
the above appropriate satellite constellation. By a better
selection, we expect that the proposal can become better.
We now investigate other reasons why the large diﬀer-
ences occur. In this paper, the properties were evaluated
by comparing the position estimation results of using all
satellites. However, the measurement error of the estima-
tion results by all satellites may be included. In oder to
investigate in more detail, it is necessary to evaluate the
characteristics by comparing the true position with the
proposed method.
The proposed process is not much diﬀerent from the
conventional process. In the proposed method, we just use
the traveling distance instead of the range from a satellites.
So, there is no big diﬀerence in calculation time compared
to the conventional positioning. We hope that our proposal
can be calculated in real-time.
V.
Conclusion
In this paper, our proposal was to make position esti-
mation possible in places where the observable satellites
are decreased. In order to compensate the decrement, our
proposed method assumed the previous own position as
the quasi-satellite. For using the previous position as the
quasi-satellite, we needed the traveling distance from the
previous position. So, we focused on the traveling distance
sensor which general vehicles have. By using the distance
sensor, we proposed the position estimation method which
can keep estimating own position even when the number of
the observable satellites becomes low. In order to evaluate
the proposed method, the positioning experiment was
done using the bicycle. Through the experimental results,
possibility of the position estimation and the characteristic
of the position estimation were shown when the proposed
method is used. Also, there were some cases where the
position estimation error was larger than expected. As a
future work, we have to consider the reason of the large
error and will provide countermeasures.
Acknowledgment
A part of this research is supported by the Coopera-
tive Research Project of Research Institute of Electronics,
Shizuoka University and the research promotion of the
Murata science foundation.
References
[1]
T. H. Dixon, "An introduction to the global positioning system
and some geological applications," Reviews of Geophysics, vol.
29, no. 2, 1991, pp. 249-276.
[2]
H. Hatano, T. Kitani, M. Fujii, Y. Watanabe, and H. Onishi, "A
Helpful Positioning Method with Two Gnss Satellites in Urban
Area," IARIA International conference on Mobilie Services,
Resources, and Users, 2013, pp. 41-46.
[3]
H. Hatano et al., "Positioning Method by Two Gnss Satellites
and Distance Sensor in Urban Area," IEICE Transactions on
Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer
Sciences, vol. E98-A, no. 1, 2015, pp. 275-283.
[4]
S. Skone, and S. M. Shrestha, "Limitations in DGPS posi-
tioning accuracies at low latitudes during solar maximum,"
Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 81-1-81-4,
2002, doi:10.1029/2001GL013854.
[5]
Y. Fuke, and E. Krotkov, "Dead Reckoning for a Lunar Rover
on Uneven Terrain," IEEE, vol. 1, 1996, pp. 411-416.
[6]
H. Kanoh, "Dynamic route planning for car navigation systems
using virus genetic algorithms," IOS Press, vol. 11, no. 1, 2007,
pp. 65-78.
[7]
S. Kim, and J. H. Kim, "Adaptive Fuzzy-Network-Based C-
Measure Map-Matching Algorithm for Car Navigation System,"
IEEE, vol. 48, no. 2, 2002, pp. 432-441.
[8]
C. Brenner, and B. Elias, "Extracting landmarks for car naviga-
tion systems using existing GIS databases and laser scanning,"
ISPRS Archivers, vol. XXXIV, part3/W8, 2003, pp. 131-136.
[9]
M. S. Braasch, "GPS Receiver Architectures and Measure-
ments," IEEE, vol. 87, no. 1, 1999, pp.48-64.
[10]
P. Misra, and P. Enge, "Global Positioning system: signals,
measurements, and performance," Ganga-Jamuna Press, 2001.
[11]
X. Meng, G. W. Roberts, A. H. Dodson, E. Cosser, J. Barnes,
and C. Rizos, "Impact of GPS satellite and pseudolite geometry
on structural deformation monitoring: analytical and empirical
studies," Journal of Geodesy, vol. 77, no. 12, 2004, pp. 809-822,
doi:10.1007/s00190-003-0357-y.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

