Performance evaluation of Burst deflection  
in OBS networks using Multi-Topology routing  
 
Stein Gjessing 
Dept. of  Informatics,  University of Oslo & Simula Research Laboratory, 
P-O. Box 1080, N-0316 Oslo, Norway.    Email: steing@ifi.uio.no 
 
Abstract – This paper evaluates the combination of Optical 
Burst Switching (OBS) and Multi-Topology (MT) routing. 
Using MT routing, a source router has a choice of sending IP 
packets on several different paths to the destination. In OBS 
networks, deflection may reduce burst loss rate. We evaluate a 
deflection method that is based on MT routing and that 
ensures that deflected bursts will not loop indefinitely in the 
network. The performance of the method is evaluated by 
simulation and compared to two other deflection methods as 
well as just discarding burst that can not be scheduled. 
Performance is evaluated in three irregular networks with 
different topology characteristics. Our main load is IP-packets 
that arrive according to a self similar process. These packets 
are assembled into bursts that are transmitted either when the 
burst buffer is full or a timer expires.   
   Keywords: Optical burst switching, Multi-Topology routing, 
Performance modeling, Burst loss rate, Burst deflection, Self-
similar and Poisson arrival processes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
In Optical Burst Switched (OBS) networks [1], packets 
(e.g. IP packets) are assembled into bursts in the optical 
network ingress nodes, and the complete burst is transmitted 
either when the burst buffer is full or when a timer expires 
(hybrid burst assembly).  A control packet precedes the burst 
in the network and reserves resources for the succeeding 
burst. In this paper “Just Enough Time” scheduling is used 
[2]. The burst is kept in the optical domain, while the control 
packet is converted from optical to electrical (and back) in 
each switch.  
When the time slot that a burst needs on the output fiber 
is not completely available, there is a contention on the 
output line. The simplest approach is then to discard the 
burst.  However, by deflecting the burst and send it out on 
another line, the burst may later arrive safely at its 
destination [4]. 
In general, deflection methods have three main 
drawbacks [5,6,7]: Some methods deflect bursts in a random 
direction, 
which 
might 
be 
counterproductive 
when 
considering the destination of the burst. The burst may also 
return to the point from which it was originally deflected, 
which may cause indefinite looping and even more 
contention. Some deflection methods try to deflect the 
packet on an alternative (loop free) path towards the egress. 
With connection-oriented routing, this will always be 
possible (given that the topology is bi-connected). In this 
paper we assume connection-less routing, and then an 
alternative loop free path may not be readily available [8]. 
Multi-Topology (MT) routing is developed within the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [9]. MT routing is 
used in IP networks so that different streams, different traffic 
classes or different services (eg. multicast and unicast) can 
be forwarded in different topology images, and hence take 
different paths to the network egress node.  These different 
topology images are subsets of the original topology. In each 
subset (topology) all routers are still present, but some links 
are removed. However, links should only be removed such 
that the network is still fully connected.  The IETF “Request 
for Comments” for MT routing ([9]) specifies that a packet 
is forwarded in one and the same topology from ingress to 
egress. When used as a method for burst deflection, as will 
be described in the sequel, this will not be the case, but 
topology changes must be restricted in order to avoid 
indefinite looping.   
In this paper we evaluate burst deflection in OBS 
networks based on MT routing by simulating traffic in three 
networks.  The arrival process of bursts into the OBS-
networks [10] is made up from self-similar IP-packets, and 
simulate a hybrid burs assembly method. At the end of the 
paper we compare these results to results achieved by an 
arrival process using Poisson distributed bursts. 
The deflection method used in this paper was proposed 
in [20]. The contribution of this paper is a much more 
thorough discussion and evaluation of its performance.  
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section we 
present MT routing and our deflection method based on MT 
routing that guaranties freedom from (indefinite) looping in 
any (bi-connected) topology.  In section 3 we describe our 
performance evaluation method. In sections 4 we compare 
the performance of the different methods using three 
different irregular network topologies and self similar IP-
traffic. In section 5 we compare our results with Poisson 
distributed burst arrivals. Finally in section 6 we conclude. 
 
II. 
MULTI-TOPOLOGY BURST DEFLECTION 
 In an MT-capable IP-router there is (conceptually) one 
forwarding table for each topology image. One topology is 
the original topology, usually called the default topology, 
while in this paper we call the other topologies backup 
topologies.  These backup topologies are subsets of the 
original topology, where some links are removed in each 
topology, while the network is still fully connected. In order 
to identify the topologies and the forwarding tables, the 
original (default) topology/table is numbered 0, and the 
backup topologies/tables are numbered from 1 and up. 
MT routing is developed for shortest path, connection-
less forwarding, and we assume that the switches in our 
OBS networks forward the bursts the same way. However, 
more sophisticated routing algorithms e.g. based on 
109
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

knowledge about the traffic matrix, may be used instead of 
shortest path routing (e.g. [11]).   
All bursts are initially routed in the default topology. 
When the control packet that precedes the burst, arrives at a 
switch, the switch first tries to forward the burst (and the 
control packet) on the primary output link as decided by the 
default 
forwarding 
table. 
By 
installing 
wavelength 
converters, the probability of finding an available time slot 
increases [3]. In this paper we assume full wavelength 
conversion. 
If there is a contention on the primary output link, the 
burst (and the control packet) is deflected according to one 
of the backup forwarding tables.  As in MT routing, all 
switches contain one pre-calculated forwarding table for 
each topology.  In order to be able to handle contention on 
any link, we need each link to be removed from at least one 
topology. We define a complete set of backup topologies as 
a set of topologies in which all links in the original topology 
are removed at least once. Figure 1 shows a full (the original 
network) topology on top left, and a complete set of 3 
backup topologies.  
We have devised algorithms to find complete sets of 
backup topologies for a given network [12,13]. The sizes of 
these sets have been shown to be surprisingly small; we 
have never come across a (normal) network that needs more 
than 5 backup topologies. When a complete set of backup 
topologies are found, each switch calculates one (loop free) 
forwarding table for each topology. In the network in figure 
1 each switch will have four forwarding tables: One default 
forwarding table (according to the full topology) and three 
backup forwarding tables (These tables might be optimized 
to fill less space than four times what is needed for one 
table). MT routing does not specify what type of traffic 
maps to the different topologies, although the Type of 
Service (TOS) field in the IP header might be used if 
available.  
In our burst deflection mechanism based on MT routing, 
a number in the control packet header tells which topology 
the burst (and the control packet) is currently forwarded in. 
Whenever a control packet arrives at a switch, this topology 
number is extracted and the corresponding forwarding table 
is used to find the bursts primary output link. If a switch can 
not send a burst out on a primary link because of contention, 
it deflects the burst by sending it out in any of the backup 
topologies that does not contain this link. Because of the 
way the complete set of backup topologies is constructed, at 
least one such topology does exist. The number in the 
control packet header is then set to this new topology 
number, and the burst is forwarded all the way to the egress 
in this topology (assuming no more deflections). If the burst 
experience a second (or third etc.) contention, it may 
conditionally be deflected once more. However, in order to 
avoid indefinite looping, we restrict all bursts to be routed in 
each topology at most once. This is achieved by only 
allowing a burst to be deflected to a topology with a higher 
number. When there is no higher numbered topology 
available, the control packet and the burst is discarded. 
All backup topologies are fully connected, and loop-less 
forwarding tables are precomputed for all topologies. When 
deflected to another topology, the burst may return back to a 
node in the network it has visited before. However, because 
of the restriction that the burst is routed in each topology at 
most once, the burst will never loop indefinitely in the 
network.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Original network top left, and a complete set of three backup 
topologies. Removed links are dashed.  Notice that all links are dashed at 
least once. 
III. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION  
We have implemented a full OBS discrete event 
simulation model in the J-sim framework [14].  The data 
sources and burst assembly modules, as well as the OBS-
switches and schedulers are built from scratch. Topologies, 
link propagation times and forwarding tables for the specific 
scenarios are read from files at system start up time. 
The traffic load onto an OBS core network may come 
from IP-subnets and Ethernets. It is well known that 
Ethernet and IP traffic exhibit self similar properties [16]. 
We generate a self similar arrival process using a large 
number (100) of Pareto sources, with Hurst parameter 0.9, in 
each ingress node [17]. Whenever a Pareto source starts a 
new on period, a destination address is chosen according to 
the probability given by the traffic matrix, and IP packets are 
generated and sent to the same destination with constant 
intervals of 10 µs for the duration of the on period.   
The size of the IP packets is varied from 80 to 1600 
bytes, with a mean of 500 bytes. IP packets are assembled 
into bursts by a hybrid burst assembly method, meaning that 
a burst is transmitted when it is full, or a timer expires, 
whatever comes first (a 2 ms timer value is used in this 
paper). In this paper fixed burst size (50 000 bytes) is used.  
When, at the end of the paper, we generate network load 
using Poisson distributed bursts, each ingress node runs one 
Poisson process per optical egress node, generating fixed 
sized bursts (50 000 bytes). The mean arrival rate is 
determined by load in the traffic matrix. 
While the bursts are kept in the optical domain, and use 
very short time through a node, the control packet delay 
used in this paper is 10 µs in each node. The control packet 
lead time (CPT, i.e. how long ahead of the burst the ingress 
sends the control packet) is varied from 90 to 200 µs, 
depending on the diameter of the network (in number of 
switches). Hence, if a burst loops in the network, it will 
overtake the control packet (and they both become 
discarded) in between 9 to 20 hops.  All experiments 
reported in this article are set up with equal capacity links. 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
110
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Each link has 10 channels (lambdas) and each channel has a 
capacity of 1 Gbit/sec.   
We compare deflection based on MT routing (denoted 
Multi-Topology in the plots) with two other well known 
deflection methods: Hot Potato that chooses an alternative 
output link at random and Second Shortest path that tries to 
output the bursts to the output link where the next switch has 
the shortest distance to the destination (excluding the 
primary output link). Notice that for both methods a packet 
may be deflected back to where it came from, and hence in 
general these methods can not guarantee freedom from 
looping.  Indefinite looping in the network is only prevented 
by the fact that when the burst is overtaking the control 
packet they are both discarded. In the case that the control 
packet is not able to reserve the needed resources for the 
data burst at all (deflection is not possible), the burst (and 
the control packet) is discarded by the switch. 
In addition to comparing MT deflection with Hot Potato 
and Second Shortest, we also compare it with Regular burst 
dropping, i.e. when a burst may not be scheduled on the 
primary output link, it is immediately discarded (no 
deflection). The performance evaluation is carried out using 
three realistic and irregular networks with different 
characteristics; the Pan-European COST 239 network [18] 
and two networks from the Rocketfuel project from 
Washington University [15]; the Exodus network and the 
Sprint US network. 
The COST 239 network is a proposed Pan-European 
core network topology consisting of 11 nodes (European 
cities) 
connected 
by 
26 
(bidirectional) 
links. 
The 
propagation delays are estimated based on the distances 
between the cities. The control packet lead time used by the 
ingress nodes is 90µs.  The Exodus network is described by 
the Rocketfuel project and is AS number 3896. By 
collapsing switches in the same cities, and also collapsing 
parallel links, we have reduced the network to 17 nodes 
connected by 29 links. The link latencies vary from 2 to 15 
ms. Initial control packet lead time is set to 120 µs. The 
second network from the Rocketfuel project is the Sprint US 
network (AS 1239). Also this network we have reduced, this 
time to 45 switches and 95 links. Link latencies vary from 2 
to 64 ms.  Initial CPT is set to 200 µs.  All nodes are ingress 
nodes (generating traffic), egress nodes and internal 
switching nodes in the network. The traffic matrix is 
symmetric all-to-all. For each experiment we have made a 
one-second run for each load value. 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION OF IP-TRAFFIC 
In this section we report simulation results from running 
the three deflection methods, Multi-Topology, Hot Potato 
and Next Shortest as well as no deflection (Regular). The 
burst arrival process is a hybrid burst assembly of simulated 
self similar IP traffic. 
  
0,0001
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Network Load (1000 bursts/sec)
Burst loss rate
Regular
Multi-Topology
Hot Potato
Next Shortest
 
Figure 2.  Burst loss rate in the Cost network with increasing network 
load. 
A. The Cost network 
The results are depicted in figure 2. With 100 Pareto 
sources per ingress node, the maximum load it is possible to 
send into the network from the 11 ingress nodes is 
approximately one M bursts/sec. As long as the total traffic 
generated is below 150 000 bursts/sec (i.e. each of the 11 
ingress nodes generates about 5.5 Gbit/sec), there is no 
packet loss anywhere in the network. 
When the load has increased to 300 000 bursts/sec, the 
burst loss rate for the Regular method is above 1%, while all 
the other methods still yield very good results. There is a 
very distinct change in the increase for the Hot Potato 
deflection method compared to the other methods at about 
3% loss rate. Here the loss rate of this deflection method 
starts to increase steeply, while the loss rate of Multi-
Topology and Next Shortest continue with a much smaller 
increase.  
Also observe that Multi-Topology and Next Shortest 
perform almost identical for all load values, although Next 
Shortest seems to always perform slightly better. These 
methods are the most stable ones, meaning that they perform 
quite well for all loads.  
 
B. The Exodus network 
The simulated performance of the Exodus network is 
depicted in figure 3.  Again, notice how Hot Potato 
deflection performs badly at high loads, and good at low and 
medium loads.  
Also in this network, Next Shortest and Multi-Topology 
perform about the same, but this time Multi-Topology is 
mostly the better of the two. Above about 4% loss rate, 
Multi-Topology also performs better than Hot Potato 
deflection. 
 
111
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

0,0001
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
Network load (1000 bursts/sec)
Burst loss rate
Regular
Multi-Topology
Hot Potato
Next Shortest
 
Figure 3.  Burst loss rate in the Exodus network with increasing network 
load.  
 
C. The Sprint network 
The performance in the Sprint network is seen in figure 
4. Here the Hot Potato method is not performing so badly 
for high loads; in fact it seems that the difference in 
performance decreases for high loads. In the Sprint network, 
Multi-Topology deflection is clearly the best method for all 
load values. 
 
 
0,0001
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Network load (1000 bursts/sec)
Burst loss rate
Regular
Multi-Topology
Hot Potato
Next Shortest
 
Figure 4.  Burst loss rate in the Sprint network with increasing network 
load. 
0,0001
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Network load (1000 bursts/sec)
Burst loss rate
Regular
Multi-Topology
Hot Potato
Next Shortest
 
Figure 5.  Burst loss rate in the Sprint network with increasing Poisson 
distributed load. 
 
 
V. 
POISSON DISTRIBUTED BURST ARRIVALS 
We have also run the experiments described above using 
Poisson distributed burst arrival processes. Figure 5 shows 
the burst loss rate in the Sprint network, and figure 6 
compares simulated performance of the Multi-Topology 
method in all the three networks. For low loads, there are 
only few losses in a second, and then the results are of 
course less statistical significant. 
In our experiments there is not much difference between 
the performances caused by aggregated self similar traffic 
and Poisson distributed traffic. First we see this by 
comparing the plots in the figures 4 and 5. In fact these two 
plots seem almost identical for burst loss values above 1%.  
In figure 6 we see that in the Exodus and Sprint networks, 
Poisson distributed burst loads performs a little better than 
aggregated self similar traffic, while in the Cost network the 
situation is reversed. For low loads, however, simulated self 
similar traffic seems to perform better than Poisson 
distributed burst load in all three networks, although here we 
have very little data. 
 
If we assume that a bursty load performs worse (have 
more burst losses in the network) than a smooth load, and 
we compare the performance of aggregated self similar 
traffic (assembled into bursts) with Poisson distributed burst 
traffic, there is nothing in our experiments that indicates that 
one of these arrival processes produces smoother burst loads 
than the other. In future work we will look closer into this 
problem scenario [10]. 
 
112
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

0,0001
0,001
0,01
0,1
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Network load (1000 bursts/sec)
Burrst loss rate 
Exodus Self-Sim
Exodus Poisson
Sprint Self-Sim
Sprint Poisson
Cost Self-Sim
Cost Poisson
 
Figure 6.  . Simulated performance of Multi-Topology deflection 
comparing aggregated self similar IP traffic and Poisson distributed bursts 
in the three networks with increasing network load. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper we have made a thorough evaluation with 
realistic traffic of a burst deflection method based upon 
Multi-Topology (MT) routing. As outlined in the 
introduction, deflection in OBS networks has been 
extensively studied before. Also forwarding in sub-graphs of 
the original optical network has been proposed in order to 
handle link failures, but, among other things, then the source 
must know in which sub-graph to forward [19]. 
MT routing is a novel way to do burst deflection, and 
hence a way to decrease burst loss probabilities in OBS 
networks.  We have developed a special way to find backup 
topologies where all links are removed from at least one 
topology. By pre-calculating shortest paths in these 
topologies, a burst that can not be scheduled on the primary 
link, is deflected to an alternative path to the optical egress.  
The performance of the MT deflection method is 
evaluated by comparing it with “Next Shortest” path and 
“Hot Potato” deflection, as well as with no deflection (just 
discarding bursts that can not be scheduled on the output 
link). 
Three 
irregular 
topologies 
with 
different 
characteristics have been used, with number of switches 
varying from 11 to 45 and ratio between links and switches 
varying between 1.7 and 2.3.  
For high network loads our experiments confirms 
previous results [5], i.e. that deflection, and in particular Hot 
Potato deflection, creates more network traffic, and hence 
makes the burst drop probability higher than Regular routing 
with immediate dropping of packets when the primary 
output link is congested. 
The arrival processes of bursts have been generated by a 
hybrid burst assembly method, fed by simulated self similar 
traffic with variable sized IP packets. At the end of the paper 
we re-evaluated the performance using a Poisson distributed 
burst arrival process.  The results from these new tests are, 
for medium and high loads, very similar to the results 
obtained using self similar IP traffic, and hence strengthen 
the results from section 4.  
Except for very high loads, when Hot Potato routing 
performs very badly, Multi-Topology seems to be 
comparable in performance with the two other deflection 
methods.  In the Sprint network, Multi-Topology performs 
best for all network load values. Next Shortest deflection 
may (and will in some cases) loop the burst immediately 
back to the point of congestion, and as long as the original 
output link is congested, the burst may continue to loop in 
the network (until discarded when overtaking the control 
packet). Deflection based on Multi-Topology routing 
guarantees that such indefinite looping never occurs, and 
may hence be a viable alternative to other deflection 
methods in OBS networks. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks to Audun Fosselie Hansen who took part in the 
initial design of the OBS simulation model, has provided 
that backup topologies and programmed most of the 
algorithm that finds complete sets of backup topologies used 
in the reported experiments. The author would also like to 
thank Amund Kvalbein for making the Pareto source 
module. Our OBS simulation model is based upon another 
network simulator developed by him and the author.  Thanks 
also to the rest of our colleagues at Simula Research 
Laboratory.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y. Chen, C. Qiao and X.Yu, “Optical Burst Switching (OBS): A 
New Area in Optical Networking Research,” IEEE Network Magazine 18, 
16-23 , May/June 2004. 
[2] 
Myungsik Yoo, Chunming Qiao, “Just-Enough-Time (JET): A high 
speed protocol for bursty traffic in optical networks”,  In Vertical Cavity 
Lasers, 1997 Digest of the IEEE/LEOS Meetings, pp. 26–27, Aug. 1997. 
[3] 
J. Ramamirtham, J. Turner, J. Friedman, “Design of Wavelength 
Converting Switches for Optical Burst Switching”, IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 21, No. 7, Sept. 2003. 
[4] 
X. Wang, H. Morikawa, T. Aoyama, “Burst optical deflection 
routing protocol for wavelength routing WDM networks”,  Proc. SPIE, 
2000. 
[5] 
C.-F. Hsu, T.-L. Liu, N.-F. Huang, “Performance Analysis of 
Deflection Routing in Optical Burst-Switched Networks”, Proceedings 
IEEE INFOCOM, pp. 66-73, 2003 
[6] 
Zalesky, A.; Hai Le Vu; Rosberg, Z.; Wong, E.W.M.; Zukerman, 
M.;  “Modelling and performance evaluation of optical burst switched 
networks 
with 
deflection 
routing 
and 
wavelength 
reservation”,  
INFOCOM 2004,  Twenty-third Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies, Vol. 3, 2004, pp:1864 – 1871. 
[7] 
SuKyoung Lee; Sriram, K.; HyunSook Kim; JooSeok Song, 
”Contention-Based Limited Deflection Routing Protocol in Optical Burst-
Switched Networks”, Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal 
on, Volume 23,  Issue 8,  Aug. 2005 pp:1596 – 1611 
[8] 
Xiaowei Yang and David Wetherall, “Source Selectable Path 
Diversity via Routing Deflections”, In Proceedings SIGCOMM’06, ACM, 
September 2006. 
113
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

[9] 
P. Psenak et al., “Multi-Topology (MT) Routing in OSPF. RFC 
4915, IETF, June 2007 
[10] G. Hu, K. Dolzer, C. Gauger, “Does burst assembly really reduce 
the self-similarity?”, in Optical Fiber Communications Conference, 
OFC2003, vol.86 of OSA Trends in Optics and Photonics Series, 
Washington, D. C, 2003, pp.124-126. 
[11] Jing Teng,  Rouskas, G.N., “Routing path optimiza-tion in optical 
burst switched networks”, Optical Network Design and Modeling,  pp: 1- 
10, Feb. 7-9, 2005 
[12] A. Kvalbein, A. F. Hansen, T. Cicic, S. Gjessing and O. Lysne, 
“Fast Recovery from Link Failures using Resilient Routing Layers”, In 
10th IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC 2005), 
pp 554-560, IEEE Computer Society, 2005. 
[13] A. Kvalbein, A.F. Hansen, T. Cicic, S. Gjessing, O. Lysne, “Fast IP 
Network 
Recovery 
using 
Multiple 
Routing 
Configurations”. 
In 
proceedings IEEE 25th Annual Conf. on Computer Communications 
(INFOCOM) May 2006. 
[14] John A. Miller, Andrew F. Seila and Xuewei Xiang, "The JSIM 
Web-Based Simulation Environment," Future Generation Computer 
Systems, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 119-133. Oct. 2000. 
[15] http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/networking/ 
rocketfuel/ 
[16] Willinger, W., Taqqu, M.S., Sherman, R., Wilson, D.V., “Self-
similarity through high-variability: statistical analysis of Ethernet LAN 
traffic 
at 
the 
source 
level”, 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp: 71 – 86 , Feb. 
1997.  
[17] G. Horn, A. Kvalbein, J. Blomskøld, E. Nilsen, “An Empirical 
Comparison of Generators for Self Similar Simulated Traffic”, Elsevier 
Performance Evaluation 64(2): 162-190, 2007. 
[18] O’Mahony, M.J., ”Results from the COST 239 project. Ultra-High 
Capacity Optical Transmission Networks”, 22nd European Conference on 
Optical Communication, pp: 15-19,  Sept. 1996 
[19] M. T. Frederick, P. Datta, A. K. Somani “Sub-graph routing: A 
generalized fault-tolerant strategy for link failures in WDM optical 
networks”, Computer Networks, Vol. 50, No. 2, Feb. 2006, pp. 181-199, 
Elsevier 2006. 
[20]  S. Gjessing, “A novel method for re-routing in OBS networks”, In 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Communications 
and 
Information 
Technologies, 2007. ISCIT '07. Sydney, NSW, October 2007. 
 
 
114
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

