CQI Reporting Imperfections and their Consequences  
in LTE Networks 
 
Kari Aho, Olli Alanen 
Magister Solutions Ltd. 
Rautpohjankatu 8 
FIN-40700 Jyväskylä, Finland 
firstname.lastname@magister.fi 
Jorma Kaikkonen 
Nokia 
Elektroniikkatie 3 
FIN-90570 Oulu, Finland 
firstname.lastname@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract — In modern wireless networks, the signal quality in 
wireless channel is estimated based on the channel quality 
measurements. The measurement results are used to select 
appropriate 
modulation 
and 
coding 
scheme 
for 
each 
transmission. The target of the link adaptation is to reach the 
desired block error rate operation point. Operation point and 
system performance could potentially be compromised by non-
consistent / biased channel quality indicator reporting caused by, 
e.g., differently calibrated user equipments or hardware 
inaccuracies. This paper evaluates the extent of that phenomenon 
through different combinations of traffic types, bias settings and 
system loads by the means of fully dynamic system simulations. 
The in-depth results verified that on the system level the 
performance is not significantly impacted by reporting 
imperfections. Long term evolution is used as an example 
technology in this study, but the same concepts are applicable to 
other wireless technologies also. 
Keywords: Link adaptation, BLER target 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The tremendous success of wireless cellular High Speed 
Packet Access (HSPA) networks together with a “push” from 
competing technologies has fueled the development of cellular 
technologies even further. Third Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) has already completed first specification 
release of Long Term Evolution (LTE) [1] [2] which is 
considered to be the successor of HSPA. 
LTE utilizes more simplified architecture and new radio 
access technologies, namely Orthogonal Frequency Division 
Multiple Access (OFDMA) in the downlink and Single Carrier 
Frequency Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) in the uplink. By 
introducing these changes among others the 3GPP has set a 
range of strict performance requirements for LTE [3]. For 
instance, LTE should achieve 2-4 times higher spectral 
efficiency than Release 6 HSPA is capable for. 
When compared to the HSDPA, the adaptation to fast 
wireless channel variations LTE utilizes different techniques, 
since the transmission power is constant in the downlink. First 
of all, the Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) is adapted 
with frequent interval to the channel quality, based on the User 
Equipment (UE) feedbacks. Secondly, the evolved NodeB (e-
NodeB) has capability to perform Frequency Domain Packet 
Scheduling (FDPS) to allocate the most suitable resources for 
the UEs. The purpose of the Link Adaptation (LA) is to handle 
the feedback information gotten from the UEs and then 
perform the selection of the appropriate MCS for the UE based 
also on the information about the allocation position in the 
frequency domain. 
Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) plays a key role in the 
link adaptation process. It is a message sent by UE to e-NodeB 
describing the current downlink channel quality of the UE. It is 
measured from the reference symbols transmitted by e-
NodeBs. The CQI measurement interval, measurement 
resolution in frequency domain, reporting mechanisms, etc. are 
all configurable parameters. These parameters have a 
tremendous impact on the system performance and their 
performance is studied e.g. in [4][5]. 
The Inner Loop Link Adaptation (ILLA) has the first hand 
responsibility on selecting the suitable MCS for the UE. The 
selection is done based on the mapping between the measured 
Signal to Interference plus Noise Ratio (SINR) of the reference 
symbols to the most appropriate MCS for an allocation. For 
various reasons the ILLA does not however always provide the 
perfect adaptation and therefore Outer Loop Link Adaptation 
(OLLA) function is also needed. The target of the OLLA is to 
adapt the MCS selection to provide certain Block Error Rate 
(BLER). The target BLER (s.c. Operation Point) is usually set 
to provide optimal performance depending on whether 
retransmission mechanisms like Automatic Retransmission 
reQuest (ARQ) and/or Hybrid ARQ (HARQ) are utilized. 
II. 
RESEARCH PROBLEM AND MOTIVATION 
LTE UE radio transmission and reception requirements are 
specified in [6]. One of these requirements is related to how 
tightly the BLER operation point should be set. Operation point 
and system performance could potentially be affected by non-
consistent CQI reporting by the UE. In other words non-
consistent CQI reporting could lead to having suboptimal 
BLER operation point. Non-consistent CQI reporting by the 
UE 
can 
be 
caused 
by 
e.g. 
hardware 
inaccuracy, 
misconfiguration or calibration. 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate how system level 
performance is affected if UEs report biased (more aggressive 
and/or non-aggressive) CQI values instead of the ones that they 
actually should in their current radio channel conditions. Thus, 
241
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

bias is directly related to the initial offset value of Outer Loop 
Link Adaptation (OLLA) which is then being corrected. In this 
study bias is referred also as initial LA/OLLA offset. 
 
Figure 1.  Simulation scenario 
III. 
SIMULATION METHODOLOGY AND ASSUMPTIONS 
This study has been performed using a fully dynamic time 
driven system simulator which supports both uplink and 
downlink directions with a symbol resolution. In this study 
only downlink direction is simulated in detail and uplink traffic 
is considered as ideal to keep the scope of this study within 
reasonable limits. 
We have used periodically reported full CQI information 
(separately from each Physical Resource Block (PRB))) in 
these studies to show the impact of bias in worst-case scenario 
as very accurate CQI information would be available without 
the bias. The actual bias is studied with two different 
alternatives: fixed and random bias. Fixed bias means a 
situation where all terminals have (the same) fixed bias in the 
beginning of the call whereas with random bias the terminals 
have bias set according to uniform distribution. Both in the 
random and fixed bias cases, the bias is constant during the 
whole call for each UE. 
As implied earlier, in this study we assume both an inner 
loop and an outer loop LA unit. The OLLA algorithm imposes 
an offset margin that is subtracted from the SINR 
measurements in the CQI manager before being used by the 
inner loop LA to estimate the supported data rate, and 
modulation and coding scheme. The OLLA algorithm aims to 
control the experienced average BLER for the first 
transmissions, and it follows the same principle as the 
traditional outer loop power control algorithm for dedicated 
channels in IS-95 and WCDMA and for HSDPA. Hence, if an 
Acknowledgement (Ack) is received for a first transmission, the 
offset factor, A, is increased by Aup decibels (defined with a 
parameter), while it is decreased by Adown decibels if a Negative 
Acknowledgement (Nack) is received. Offset factor has limit 
for maximum and minimum to prevent situations where 
channel conditions change significantly and OLLA would take 
very long time to shift the offset back to the other way. The 
ratio between the step up and down determines the average 
BLER that the OLLA converges to, i.e. 
BLER  = 1 / ( 1 +  Aup / Adown ). 
(1)  
Simulations have been conducted with Constant Bit Rate 
(CBR) type of service which has certain amount of source data 
and thus certain amount of packets (varied throughout the 
simulations). See more detailed parameters from TABLE III. 
Different file sizes do not model any specific applications but 
are rather just selected to see at which size the CQI bias does 
have an impact. The smallest sizes like 10kB and 50kB are, 
however, very small when considering the traffic volume of the 
modern network applications. 
These studies have been conducted in a macro cellular 
scenario presented in Figure 1.  The scenario consists of 19 
base stations where two inner tiers (i.e. the orange and green 
areas) are the one were mobiles are allowed to move. Statistics 
are collected from the innermost tier (orange cells). Third tier 
(i.e. cells indicated with light blue colour) are normal active 
BSs which have background load adapting to statistic BS load. 
In addition to the adaptive load of the third tier, in this study 
also the two innermost tiers are adjusted to have minimum 
level of cell load (0-100 %) which is reached generating 
artificial (background) load if UEs (avg. 10 per cell) 
themselves do not reach the target. 
 
Figure 2.  Example of required OLLA iterations to meet the BLER target 
IV. 
PREANALYSIS 
As described above, the biased CQI reporting impacts to 
the performance of OLLA as it needs to fix also the bias in 
addition to its normal operation. The purpose of this section is 
to briefly analyze the background of OLLA operation and how 
the performance would change due to the bias. 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLE OLLA PARAMETERS 
BLER 
Aup 
Adown 
5% 
0.5 
~ 0.026 
10% 
0.5 
~ 0.056 
20% 
0.5 
0.125 
40% 
0.5 
~ 0.333 
 
 
242
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Normally, when the UE sends its CQI reports to the e-
NodeB the scheduler will do the scheduling assignments 
according to the received and processed information. The 
purpose of the e-NodeB link adaptation units is to modify the 
received CQI information and thus allocated MCS so that 
certain BLER target is met. This means in practice that UE will 
experience delay before the certain level of BLER is 
converged. The delay depends on how high difference there is 
between OLLA starting point and the actual channel situation. 
Figure 2. illustrates an example of how many OLLA iterations 
it takes to fix the offset between the starting point of OLLA 
and the actual channel situation of the UE. The numbers of 
iterations are calculated for different BLER levels according to 
the Equation (1) with Aup being 0.5 dB. The resulting Adown 
values for each of the used BLER percentages can be found in 
TABLE I.  As the figure shows, positive offsets, i.e., situations 
where the OLLA starts with more conservative MCSs are 
changed with relatively low pace when compared to the 
negative offsets where MCSs would be more aggressive. The 
reasoning behind this is simple, too aggressive MCSs can cause 
BLER levels to rise rapidly and thus affect to quality of service 
that users experience whereas more moderate MCSs are likely 
only to drop the BLER levels. The downside of more moderate 
MCSs is, however, the drop in user throughput levels, 
presuming that packets would go through with more aggressive 
MCSs. 
When considering that the bias could further increase the 
offsets it is possible that system level performance would be 
affected. However, when considering that the range of actual 
bias values that would present in the network should remain on 
quite low level (+-1 dB) the impact should be able to be 
mitigated quite well by the OLLA unit. 
TABLE II.  
MAIN SIMULATION ASSUMPTIONS 
Feature/Parameter 
Value / Description 
Operational Bandwidth 
10 MHz 
Duplexing 
FDD 
Number of sub-carriers 
600 
Network synchronicity 
Asynchroneous 
Sub-frame length 
1 ms 
Cell layout 
57 
hexagonal 
macro 
cells 
NodeB Inter site distance (ISD) 
500 m 
Multipath channel 
Typical Urban 
UE velocity 
3 kmph 
UE receiver 
2 Rx MRC 
Outerloop link adaptation 
BLER target 0.2 
Aup 0.5 dB 
Adown 0.125 dB 
Max offset 15 dB 
Min offset -15 dB 
Channel quality indicator 
Measument period 5 ms 
PRBs per CQI 6 
Reporting delay 2ms 
SINR error variance 1 
dB 
Bias +-[0, 1, 2, 4] 
TABLE III.  
CBR TRAFFIC ASSUMPTIONS 
Feature/Parameter 
Value / Description 
File size 
[10, 50, 100, 200, 1000, 
5000] kbytes 
Packet size 
1500 bytes 
Packet inter-arrival time 
1 step 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The system level performance is evaluated in this study 
mainly through normalized Spectral Efficiency (SE), user 
throughput, first transmission BLER per call and distribution of 
OLLA offset collected at the end of the call. SEs and user 
throughputs are normalized so that bias 0 dB, i.e., no bias case 
is the reference point. User throughputs are presented as 
percentile bars and e.g. 10 percentile bar height means that 10 
percent of the calls experience throughput of that or less. 
A. Performance with fixed bias 
Spectral efficiency of CBR type of service with different 
source data amounts is illustrated in Figure 3. As that figure 
shows the impact of fixed bias is moderately sensitive to the 
amount of data that is transmitted during the call. If the calls 
are very short (deductable from the user throughputs and the 
amount of source data, illustrated in Figure 4. and Figure 5. ) 
the performance can be impacted in terms of SE, depending on 
the magnitude of the bias. The impact is higher if more 
aggressive bias (negative values) i.e. higher MCS is selected 
than the actual CQI would imply. However, if the call length is 
more realistic, i.e. there is more data and the packets during the 
call; the performance starts to become more balanced.  
User throughputs for 10 and 90 percentiles illustrated in 
Figure 4. and Figure 5.  show that the trend is similar to SE 
figures above, i.e., the impact of bias starts to diminish once 
there is reasonable amount packets/data during the call. 
Moreover, small and moderate positive bias (non-aggressive) 
can even improve the performance in terms of 90 % user 
throughput where the MCSs are generally quite high. On 
another hand more aggressive bias results in 10-15% loss for 
UEs in similar situation. 
 
Figure 3.  Normalized Spectral Efficiency, Fixed Bias 
243
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Figure 4.  User Throughput, 10 Percentile, Fixed Bias 
 
Figure 5.  User Throughput, 90 Percentile, Fixed Bias 
The reason why call length and amount packets affects to 
the fact that bias becomes more insignificant is that with longer 
calls OLLA has enough time to correct it. Thus, the impact of 
bias is directly proportional to the amount of OLLA iterations 
available during the call. With large file sizes the bias is 
corrected already when only e.g. 10% of file has been sent and 
then the rest of the file can be sent without the impact of bias. 
This naturally decreases the effect of the bias when e.g. 
throughput of the whole call is evaluated.  This, behavior is 
confirmed by Figure 6. and Figure 7. which illustrate how well 
OLLA is able to converge the offset (CQI bias) when the call 
length is longer. Moreover, it should be also noted that even 
with ideal offset and low amount packets OLLA will not have 
time to converge in general as confirmed by distribution with 
higher amounts of source data. The relatively big amount of 
very low OLLA offsets in the end of the calls are results of 
UEs being in very good position where even the most 
aggressive MCSs are not enough aggressive. 
B. Performance with random bias 
The spectral efficiency with more realistic bias, which 
models the penetration levels of, e.g., different manufacturers’ 
or differently configured terminals, is shown in Figure 8. In 
simulation environment realistic bias means bias which is 
randomized separately to each UE. As the figure shows, with 
random bias the performance is, expectedly, much more robust 
against the bias even with high range of bias values and low 
amount of data. Similarly to fixed bias study, with reasonable 
amount of source data the OLLA has enough samples and has 
time to fix the bias and thus it is not visible in SE. Moreover, it 
can be seen that the system load 0-100 % does not have 
noticeable impact to how bias impacts the performance.  
Finally, first transmissions BLERs are illustrated in Figure 
9. and Figure 10. As those figures show, if there is adequate 
amount of data the BLER operation point, which was assumed 
to be 20 %, in these simulations is maintained quite well, 
regardless of the bias. With lower amount of source data the 
OLLA operation point remains on higher level than the desired 
20% target even without bias. 
 
Figure 6.  OLLA offset distribution, fixed bias, 10 kbytes source data 
 
Figure 7.  OLLA offset distribution, fixed bias, 200 kbytes source data 
244
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
 
Figure 8.  Normalized Spectral Efficiency, Random Bias 
 
Figure 9.  First transmission BLER per call, 10 kbytes data,                
Random Bias [-2,2] dB 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study we have shown with fully dynamic 
simulations how non-consistent CQI reporting by the UE 
impacts to the system level performance. Performance was 
evaluated with different combinations of traffic types, bias 
settings and bias values.  
The results show that the system level performance can be 
affected by biased CQI values only when there is very low 
amount of data / packets and the bias is relatively high. In 
practice it is not, however, very likely that all of the users 
would have such a small amount of data and large bias. It is 
shown that OLLA is able to correct +-2 dB (random) bias 
range without affecting the spectral efficiency or user 
throughput but even higher bias values can be compensated 
with reasonable amount of data i.e. with high enough number 
of OLLA iterations. 
 
Figure 10.  First transmission BLER per call, 50 kbytes data,                  
Random Bias [-2,2] dB 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is a collaborative work with Nokia and Nokia 
Siemens Networks. The authors would like to thank all of their 
co-workers and colleagues for their comments and support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, J. Sköld, and P. Beming, 3G evolution – HSPA 
and LTE for mobile broadband, 1st ed., Elsevier Ltd., 2007. 
[2] H. Holma, and A. Toskala, LTE for UMTS – OFDMA and SC-FDMA 
based radio access, 1st ed., John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 2009. 
[3] Technical Requirement Group, Requirements for Evolved UTRA (E-
UTRA) and Evolved UTRAN (E-UTRAN), 3GPP TR 25.813, Rev. 
7.3.0, March 2006. 
[4] K.I. Pedersen, G. Monghal, I.Z. Kovacs, T.E. Kolding, A. Pokhariyal,  
F. Frederiksen, P. Mogensen, “Frequency Domain Scheduling for 
OFDMA with Limited and Noisy Channel Feedback”, in Proceedings of 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007, VTC Fall 2007., 
September 2007.  
[5] N. Kolehmainen, J. Puttonen, P. Kela, T. Ristaniemi, T. Henttonen, M. 
Moisio, ”Channel Quality Indication Reporting Schemes for UTRAN 
Long Term Evolution Downlink”, in Proceedings of IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2008, VTC Spring 2008.,  May 2008. 
[6] Technical Specification Group, User equipment (UE) radio transmission 
and reception, 3GPP TS 36.101,  Rev. 8.6.0, June 2009. 
 
245
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

