Forwarding and Routing Stateless Multi-Hop
Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks
Rivo S. A. Randriatsiferana∗, Richard Lorion∗, Frederic Alicalapa∗ and Fanilo Harivelo†
∗University of La Reunion, LE2P Lab, Saint Denis, Reunion, France,
Email: rivo.randriatsiferana, richard.lorion, frederic.alicalapa@univ-reunion.fr
†University of La Reunion, LIM Lab, Saint Denis, Reunion, France, Email: fanilo.harivelo@univ-reunion.fr
Abstract—Energy conservation can be achieved by the use
of clustering routing protocols in Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSN). They have a great impact on the system lifetime. In
these WSNs, the concepts of communication between Cluster
Head (CH) nodes and Base Station (BS), data aggregation and
round can be approached in a different way. This paper studies a
cluster-based multi-hop routing protocol. The proposed approach
introduces a progressive data aggregation, and a sequential data
request during a round. Simulation results show that the new
Forwarding and Routing Stateless Multi-Hop (FRSM) protocol
extends network lifetime (improved by 50%) and lowers energy
consumption. The comparison with an existing cluster-based
protocol shows better performances.
Index Terms—clustering, geographic routing, greedy forward-
ing, perimeter forwarding, network lifetime.
I. INTRODUCTION
In general, a WSN consists of a large number of small
and cheap sensor nodes that have limited energy, processing
power and memory storage capacity. They usually monitor
areas, collect data and report them to the Base Station. Due
to the achievement in low-power digital circuits and wireless
communication facilities, many applications of the WSN are
developed and are already been used in building monitoring,
military object and object tracking. They can also be used in
hostile area where it is difﬁcult to replace embedded batteries
[1]. Hence, energy is the fundamental resource constraints. Its
conservation represents one of the two issues addressed by
this work to prolong the network lifetime. On the other hand,
node’s role and functions relative to network communication
or the network topology cause some nodes to die quicker than
the others. It is then essential to balance load among nodes.
That constitutes the second purpose of this work.
The overall energy consumption can be reduced by allow-
ing only a portion of the nodes, which are called Cluster
Heads (CHs), to communicate with the base station (BS).
Thus the data sent by each node is then ﬁrst collected by
Cluster Heads and compressed. After that, the aggregated data
is transmitted to the BS. Low Energy Adaptive Clustering
Hierarchy (LEACH) [2], is one of the ﬁrst clustering protocols
that was proposed for reducing power consumption. LEACH
forms clusters by using a distributed algorithm, each node
has a certain probability of becoming a CH per round, and
the task of being a Cluster Head is rotated between nodes.
A non-CH node determines its cluster by choosing the CH
that can be reached with the least communication energy
consumption. At the data transmission step, each Cluster Head
sends an aggregated packet to the base station by a single
hop communication. A well-known evolution of LEACH is
Hybrid Energy-Efﬁcient Distributed (HEED) [3]. In HEED,
the initial probability for each node to become a tentative
Cluster Head depends on its remaining energy, and the ﬁnal
CHs are selected according to the intra-cluster communication
cost. HEED also consider one-hop communication between
CH nodes and base station. Although clustering can reduce
energy consumption, it has some problems. The main problem
is that energy consumption is concentrated on the Cluster
Heads, which have to transmit over long distance.
In the following, the BS is within the transmission range
of every CH. Thus, each CH node can forward the data to
the base station directly. However, it consumes much more
energy in this way, and that does not necessarily balance
the energy consumption among the network. So, a cluster
routing method with equalized energy expenditure must be
found. As mentioned in [4], short hops are generally more
energy-efﬁcient than one-hop with a few long hops. So, we
propose a multi-hop routing between CHs in order to mini-
mize energy consumption during transmission. Thus, GPSR
(Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing) protocol [5] [6] and
his energy aware evolution GEAR (Geographical and Energy
Aware Routing) [7] are two approaches aiming to improve
the extensibility of the network in the presence of a large
number of nodes. Their main advantages lie in the fact that the
propagation of information on topology is necessary only for
one hop. GPSR and GEAR make greedy forwarding decisions
and perimeter forwarding using information about a router’s
immediate neighbors in the network topology. Consequently
by using the same path to BS, the GPSR protocol leads to a
premature failure of the nodes constituting the preferred way.
Other approaches were proposed to improve the performance
of clustering. EEUC [8] tackles the hot spot issue ; the Cluster
Heads closer to the base station are burdened with heavy relay
trafﬁc and tend to die early. EEUC partitions the nodes into
clusters of unequal size, and clusters closer to the base station
have smaller sizes than those farther away from the base
station. EECS [9] extends LEACH by realizing a localized
election of Cluster Heads and a near uniform distribution of
them. In cluster formation phase, a non-Cluster Head node
chooses its Cluster Head by considering not only saving its
own energy but also balancing the load of Cluster Heads. A
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

new weighted function is then introduced.
In this paper, we propose and evaluate a Forwarding and
Routing Stateless Multi-Hop (FRSM) Protocol for WSNs
mitigating the considered problems. FRSM combines a clus-
tering scheme with a multi-hop routing while addressing the
mentioned premature failure of the nodes by a rotation of roles.
It consists of two phases: one relates to cluster management
in sensor area, and the other handles the data transmission
between clusters and the BS. In order to improve the efﬁciency,
we consider an aggregation of data of each cluster during the
transmission from a source CH to the BS. Hence, this work
introduces a progressive data aggregation and a sequential
data request during a round. In the present primary study,
we choose not take into account energy remaining in sensors.
Therefore we only evaluate the coupling method between
clustering, multi-hop routing and aggregation method. This
early evaluation aims to quantify the contribution of this
coupling. For that reason, comparisons will be made with
a single-hop protocol, namely, LEACH protocol. Simulation
model is choosen to make those comparisons feasible. Future
work will address comparisons with other multi-hop protocols.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes our
FRSM protocol and its algorithm. In Section III, simulation
context and results will be presented and discussed. Finally,
in Section IV, conclusions will be given.
II. FORWARDING AND ROUTING STATELESS MULTI-HOP
PROTOCOL
Forwarding and Routing Stateless Multi-Hop Protocol
(FRSM) is proposed in order to increase the lifetime of the
network, and to ensure the balance of energy consumption.
The idea is to adopt GPSR protocol with Cluster Head
elections by LEACH protocol. Data gathering is performed
with a new algorithm: furthest CH data request, inter-CH data
aggregation.
A. Assumptions and modeling of the system
We assume a wireless sensor network model with the
following hypothesis: the system lifetime is the main objective
and latency is not a major criteria. We consider a multi-hop
homogeneous WSN where all nodes are alike. Each node
can reach the BS if needed by controlling the transceiver
power. Nodes location is recorded in the BS memory (using
additional GPS function). The nodes have uniform initial
energy allocation and the nodes are stationary. This assumption
about node mobility is typical for sensor networks. The sensing
ﬁeld dimension is 100m ∗ 100m and we consider that the BS
is located at (XBS = 50, YBS = 0) in a two-dimensional XY
plane.
The network is organized into clusters under the control
of Cluster Heads. The BS collects the overall data using a
sequential data request towards CHs. Each node senses the
environment at a ﬁxed rate and sends to the Cluster Heads.
During the CHs selection process, each node n computes a
random number between 0 and 1. If this number is lower than
a threshold T(n), the nodes becomes a Cluster Head. T(n) is
given by the following equation for the current round number
(r) :
T(n) =
(
p
1−p∗(r mod 1
p )
if n ∈ G
0
otherwise
where p is the average number of Cluster Heads during a round
(10% will be considered in the simulation section). G is the
group of nodes that have not been Cluster Head in the last
1/p rounds, otherwise T(n) equals zero.
B. FRSM algorithm
The solution relies on the following algorithm :
1) T(n) is calculated at each node to elect CHi.
2) Cluster creation: all nodes organize themselves into
clusters, under the control of the closest CH using the
k-means algorithm [10].
3) Flooding phase to inform the BS and each CHs of other
CH’s position.
4) Physical data and CH identity aggregation is done in
each cluster.
5) Furthest CH (deﬁned as CHF 1), which has not been yet
interrogated, is activated by the BS.
6) CHF 1 sends its packets to a forwarding CH (which is
closest to the BS, deﬁned as CH2) using GPSR routing
algorithm.
7) Data aggregation and identity aggregation are computed
at this second CH2 (Data from CHF 1 and from CH2,
and CH2 and CHF 1 identities).
8) From CH2, data are sent to a third CH using GPSR
routing algorithm (CH3), which will again perform data
and identities aggregation.
9) After x hops, the BS is reached. The data are then stored.
Furthest CH (CHF 2), which has not been interrogated
in the present round, is contacted by the BS.
10) Data are routed through inter-CH, which has never sent
data during the current round. If needed RF transceiver
is tuned to reach the BS.
11) This data collect process is repeated until each cluster
have sent their data.
12) A new round begins with T(n) calculation at each node
(return to step 1).
Route or next hop selection is done on geographical routing
basis as introduced in GPSR [5]: greedy forwarding, is used
wherever possible, and perimeter forwarding, is used in the
regions greedy forwarding cannot be. In greeding forwarding,
a forwarding node make a locally optimal, greedy choice in
choosing a packet’s next hop. Upon receiving a greedy-mode
packet for forwarding, a node searches its neighbor table for
the neighbor geographically closest to the packet’s destination.
If this neighbor is closer to the destination, the node forwards
the packet to that neighbor. When no neighbor is closer, the
node marks the packet into perimeter mode. GPSR forwards
perimeter-mode packets using a simple planar graph traversal.
When a packet enters perimeter mode at node x bound for
node D, GPSR forwards it on progressively closer faces of
the planar graph, each of which is crossed by the line xD.
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

III. SIMULATION AND DISCUSSION
To evaluate the performance, our algorithm has been simu-
lated in Matlab and the results were compared with LEACH.
It is noted that the comparison with GPSR is illogical because
GPSR does not consider clusters and CHs. Before presenting
the simulation results, the radio model and some important
parameters should be described.
A. Radio model
We use a simple model for the radio hardware energy
dissipation introduced by [11] [12], where the transmitter and
receiver dissipate energy to run the radio electronics (see Fig.
1). It was initially used to calculate the power consumption of
LEACH protocol.
Fig. 1.
Radio energy dissipation model
Power control can be used to invert this loss by appropri-
ately setting the power ampliﬁer. If the distance is less than
a threshold, the free space (fs) model is used; otherwise,
the multipath (mp) model is used. Energy consumed during
transmission (ET x) is calculated with :
ET x(k, d) = ET x−elec(k) + ET x−elec(k, d)
(1)
while developing:
ET x(k, d) =
 Etx · k + ϵfs · k · d2, if
d ≤ do
Etx · k + ϵmp · k · d4, if
d > do
(2)
where Etx is the transmit energy consumption by the radio
transceiver for one transmission, k is the size of the message
in bits, Efs and Emp represent the energy consumed by the
radio ampliﬁer, depending on the transmission distance d, and
d0 equals
q
Efs
Emp .
The energy consumed during message reception is calcu-
lated by:
ERx(k) = ERx−elec(k) = Erx · k
(3)
where Erx is the receiving energy consumption by the radio
transceiver and k is the size of the message in bits. En-
ergy consumption during reception is only calculated when
a message is received, i.e., the radio transceiver only expends
power during message reception. Power consumption for the
calculation operations is much weaker than the communication
energy. In addition, data aggregation also costs some energy
and the energy consumption for aggregating a certain data
signal is represented as Eda. Eda is calculated by applying
the following [13]:
Eda = 5 nJ/bit
(4)
TABLE I
PARAMETERS USED IN OUR SIMULATION
Radio model
Description
Value
Eo
Initial energy
100 mJ
Etx
Transmitting energy
0.208 mJ/packet
Erx
Receiving energy
0.121 mJ/packet
Eda
Consume Energy data aggregation
5 nJ/bit
ϵfs
Transmit ampliﬁer free-space
10 pJ/bit/m2
ϵmp
Transmit ampliﬁer for two-way
0.0013 pJ/bit/m4
Other parameters
Description
Value
n
Number of nodes
100
p
CHs selection probability
10%
k
Packet size
320 bits
BS
Base station located
(50, 0)
Fig. 2.
Comparison of the number of dead nodes over time.
The energy consumption of each aggregation node for
aggregating the data from itself and m neighbor nodes is
represented as:
EDA = (m + 1) · k · Eda
(5)
The parameters used for the simulations of the implemented
protocols are shown in Table I. Those parameters are taken
from Chipcon RFIC datasheet [14].
B. Simulation results- Base station located at (50,0)
Fig. 2 gives the comparison between FRSM protocol and
LEACH protocol in term of the lifetime per rounds. It is clearly
shown that our FRSM algorithm outperforms LEACH in the
number of alive nodes. If the lifetime metric is deﬁned as
number of rounds for which the ﬁrst node died, FRSM can
reach 442 rounds, whereas LEACH only reaches 261 rounds.
For half of the nodes being alive, FRSM can reach 475 rounds,
but LEACH only reaches 315 rounds. The lifetime metrics are
improved by 50% for FRSM. Besides, the noticeable nearly
linearity of the FRSM curve starting at 442th round proves
the efﬁciency of load balancing.
Considering the two protocols, the remaining energy of
nodes over the number of rounds has been presented (see Fig.
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

Fig. 3.
Energy remaining after 200 rounds in the XY plane and X axis.
3) in the XY plane and in X axis. We show that the FRSM
has much more desirable energy expenditure than the LEACH
protocol. As the number of rounds is equal to 200, the average
remaining energy of all the nodes in the networks for FRSM
and LEACH are respectively 0.064 J and 0.035 J. So, the
FRSM exhibits a 80% reduction in energy consumption over
LEACH.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
The Forwarding and Routing Stateless Multi-hop protocol
for wireless sensor networks has been introduced in this paper.
We adopt the cluster-based algorithm to make sure the well-
balanced energy in the network. Thus, shorten communication
distance among Cluster Heads and progressive aggregation
data during transmission, were considered to reduce the global
communication energy consumption. Based on speciﬁc net-
work assumptions, simulation results show that this method
obtains satisfactory performance on prolonging the network
lifetime (increased by 50%). To go further, other points are
under study: simulation of a fairly comparison with HEED,
measurements on a more accurate energy consumption model
and the use of energy aware information’s for the routing
process.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of structural funds
of the structural funds of the European Community, and the
Regional Council of Reunion Island (Region Reunion) for pro-
viding research grants (N/REF.: 201029758/DIREM/AS/lrs).
REFERENCES
[1] M. G. Rashed, M. H. Kabir, and S. E. Ullah, “An energy efﬁcient
protocol for cluster based heterogeneous wireless sensor network,”
International Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems, vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 54–60, 2011.
[2] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, “An
application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for wireless microsensor net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on wireless communication, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 660–670, October 2002.
[3] O. Younis and S. Fahmy, “Heed: a hybrid, energy-efﬁcient, distributed
clustering approach for ad hoc sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 366–379, 2004.
[4] Y. Bolian, S. Hongchi, and S. Yi, “A two-level topology control strategy
for energy efﬁciency in wireless sensor networks,” in 11th International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems., vol. 2, Washington,
DC, USA.
IEEE Computer, November 2005, pp. 358–362.
[5] B. N. Karp and H. T. Kung, “Gpsr: Greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks,” in the Sixth Annual ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom 2000),
Boston, MA, August 2000, pp. 243–254.
[6] B. N. Karp, “Geographic routing for wireless networks,” Ph.D. Disser-
tation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, October 2000.
[7] Y. Yu, R. Govindan, and D. Estrin, “Geographical and energy aware
routing: a recursive data dissemination protocol for wireless sensor
networks,” UCLA Computer Science Department, Tech. Rep., 2001.
[8] C. Li, M. Ye, G. Chen, and J. Wu, “An Energy-Efﬁcient Unequal
Clustering Mechanism for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in IEEE Mobile
Adhoc and Sensor Systems Conference, 2005, p. 8.
[9] M. Ye, C. Li, G. Chen, and J. Wu, “EECS: An Energy Ecient Clustering
Scheme in Wireless Sensor Networ,” in IEEE Performance, Computing,
and Communications Conference, 2005, pp. 535–540.
[10] S. P. Lloyd, “Least squares quantization in pcm,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 28, pp. 129–137, 1982.
[11] T. Voight and H. Ritter, “Solar-aware clustering in wireless sensor net-
works,” in Ninth IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications,
vol. 1, 2004, pp. 238 – 243.
[12] L. Dehni, Y. Bennani, and F. Krief, “Lea2c: Low energy adaptive
connectionist clustering for wireless sensor networks,” in MATA’05,
2005, pp. 405–415.
[13] G. J. Pottie and W. J. Kaiser, “Wireless integrated network sensors,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 43, pp. 51–58, May 2000.
[14] (2006) Cc2420 data sheet. [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.com/
product/cc2420⟨retrieved:12,2011⟩
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

