Extension of the Shared Regional PACS Center MeDiMed to Smaller Healthcare
Institutions
Karel Slavicek, Michal Javornik, Otto Dostal
Institute of Computer Science
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Email: karel@ics.muni.cz, javor@ics.muni.cz, otto@ics.muni.cz
Abstract—Masaryk University in Brno is operating a re-
gional Picture Archiving and Communications System serving
to mostly all hospitals in Brno metropolis and a lot of
remote healthcare institutions. The system known under name
MeDiMed is utilized by most of the regional hospitals. The
last MeDiMed enhancements, which open this system for small
healthcare institutions and private doctor’s ofﬁces, is discussed
in this paper.
Keywords-PACS; DICOM; shared solution.
I. INTRODUCTION
The PACS - Picture Archiving and Communications Sys-
tem - [1] is a currently used procedure and methodology for
processing medical multimedia data obtained from picture
acquisition machines like computer tomography, ultrasound,
x-ray, etc. Multimedia medicine data obtained from these
machines - in PACS terminology called modalities - are
stored in central PACS server. The PACS server then pro-
vides these multimedia data to viewing stations. Viewing sta-
tions serve to radiologists for analyzing the multimedia data.
This approach offers much more capabilities than former
ﬁlm medium. Viewing stations allow image transformation,
combination of images from more modalities etc. National
Electrical Manufacturers Association - NEMA - [2] has
developed a standard DICOM [3] - Digital Imaging and
Communications in Medicine - for communications between
modalities, PACS servers and viewing stations. DICOM
version 3.0 is the currently used by mostly all modalities
and PACS servers. The structure of PACS is presented on
the Figure 1. In depth background of PACS principle and
DICOM protocol is discussed in [4] and [5].
This paper is organized as follows: The overview of
MeDiMed project is presented in Section II. Section III
describes describes the underlying networking infrastructure.
Sections IV and V discuss the service reliability and data
redundancy and the overall impact of the MeDiMed project
to the healthcare institutions. Currently, we are improving
the MeDiMed system to better support small healthcare in-
stitutions and private doctor’s ofﬁces. This effort is discussed
in Section VI. The conclusion and further work is presented
in Section VII.
WIEVING FACILITY
NIS / RIS
MODALITY
SERVER
Ultrasound
Figure 1.
Common structure of PACS system. Modalities serve for
acquisition of medicine multimedia data. These data are stored in PACS
server and examined and analyzed in viewing stations.
II. MEDIMED
The Shared Regional PACS project MeDiMed started as a
collaborative effort among Brno hospitals to process medical
multimedia data. Masaryk University is the co-coordinator
of this project ensuring that the demands and requirements
of radiology departments are met, overseeing the changing
legislative standards and the practical limitations of technol-
ogy. Masaryk University, in cooperation with CESNET (the
Czech national research and education network operator),
also provides the necessary network infrastructure.
The system serves for transmitting, archiving, and shar-
ing medical image data originating from various medical
modalities (computer tomography, magnetic resonance, ul-
trasound, mammography, etc.) from hospitals. The central
PACS serves as a metropolitan communications node as
well as a long term archive of patients’ image studies.
More detailed information about regional PACS archive
maintained under the MeDiMed project is described in [6],
[7], [8], [9] and [10]. The MeDiMed demand for dedicated
communication channels has induced some exploration of
backbone optical transport network [11].
Outsourcing of the hospitals’ archiving and communica-
tions technology permits cooperation among hospitals and
the use of existing patient multimedia data. The Shared
Regional PACS is more than just a computer network.
Gradually, it changes the thinking of medical specialists
and gets them to cooperate and share data about patients in
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

electronic form. It builds a network of medical specialists.
The impact of this work is not only in patient care but also
in the education of medical specialists. The data stored in
the shared archive can be converted to anonymous study or
survey (i.e., personal data of patients is replaced by ﬁctitious
data) and used for educational purposes.
The realization of the project facilitates fast communi-
cation among individual hospitals, allows decision consul-
tations, and brings various other advantages due to direct
connections via optic networks. The Masaryk Memorial
Cancer Institute is an important node in the regional network
of hospitals. It specializes, in a complex way, in oncology
diagnostics, treatment and prevention as well as respiratory
diseases and gynecology [12]. In general, the proposed
MeDiMed project is clearly designed to support society-
wide healthcare programs in the Czech Republic as well as
programmed implemented by other countries. The system is
also supposed to serve as a learning tool for medical students
of the Masaryk University as well as physicians in hospitals.
The system works in the context of the existing legislative
system and will also reﬂect its changes, especially in the
ﬁeld of data security. The long-term goal will be to adapt
legislative standards to the needs of the medical practice (an
obligation to provide information, data security issues, etc.).
Nowadays, some type of modalities are commonly used
not only by large hospitals but also by small healthcare
institutions or even private doctor’s ofﬁces. This fact brings a
new demand for PACS systems. There are ICT departments
in large hospitals with enough staff for servicing PACS
systems powerful enough server farms, dedicated computer
rooms, etc. In small institutions, there is no ICT department
so the PACS system should be more robust and reliable.
Development of PACS system tailored for small healthcare
institutions and private doctor’s ofﬁces is goal of our current
project.
The new goal for the MeDiMed project is to offer PACS
system to small institutions. Small healthcare institutions
and private doctor’s ofﬁces usually have limited Internet
connectivity and data network availability in general. They
are typically located near patients and data communication
is not their priority. ICT staff in such institutions is also
very limited if it exists at all. For this reason the solution
used by large hospitals is not suitable for small institutions.
Eventhough the basic principles used in large hospitals can
be preserved also in this case.
III. THE BASIC NETWORKING PRINCIPLES OF MEDIMED
Medicine picture data like X-Ray, CT, US, MR, etc.
cannot be used without additional information like picture
data description or evaluation, diagnosis, may be reference
to history of patients health, previous treatments and other
information relevant to patients health. All medicine images
have to be equipped with patients identity as well. We are
dealing with sensitive information about the patient. The
patients privacy must not be compromised.
We have to provide high level of security for medicine
picture data maintained by regional PACS archive. We have
to protect the data at three stages: data stored on servers of
regional PACS, data transported over network between this
archive and user, and users access to these data. Security
of data stored in regional PACS servers is provided by
usage of dedicated hardware for this application and by strict
limitation of access (both physical and network based) to
this equipment. Security of data transported over network
is provided by usage of dedicated ﬁbre optics lines when
available and by employing of strong cryptography (IPSEC
with AES-256 encryption algorithm) on all lines, which are
shared with other data communication trafﬁc.
The main principle of hospital to MeDiMed connection is
usage of two ﬁrewalls. One of them is in from of MeDiMed
PACS servers and is under control of MeDiMed staff. The
second one is hospitals ﬁrewall and is controlled by hospital
staff.
It allows us, as administrators of the application, to control
the access to central resources and allows the administrators
of the hospital’s network to control the access to the hospi-
tal’s network. That way everybody has under control access
to the network he is responsible for. This principle holds
for all types of connections (dedicated ﬁber optics, IPSEC
tunnel, or any other) between MeDiMed and the hospital.
The communication infrastructure principle is easy to see
from Figure 2.
Since Regional PACS system is used on a regular pro-
duction basis it should provide users with reliable and
safe services. Because we are dealing with very sensitive
information, we strongly relay on data storage and transport
security. Regional PACS archive is running on dedicated net-
work infrastructure with mostly no interaction with another
data networks. In case that it is necessary to use public data
networks for servicing remote hospitals, we are using strong
cryptography to secure medicine data transport.
IPSEC VPN server is connected to the PACS ﬁrewall in
the same way like local hospitals connected via dedicate
ﬁbre optics pairs. The VPN server provides only secure
data transport channel. Users connected via IPSEC tunnel
then have to follow the same packet ﬁltering like locally
connected users.
IV. SERVER REDUNDANCY
For all applications provided to MeDiMed users, we have
to offer reliable enough service. Reliability of a service is
a quite complicated thing. MeDiMed uses a client-server
model. Clients are modalities and viewing station and servers
are PACS servers and other servers used to store and retrieve
medical images. Under the term reliable enough service we
understand the situation when the client can in a reasonable
time store or retrieve the medicine image.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

PACS
Hospital’s 
Firewall
Hospital
Internet
MEDIMED
Firewall
Servers
Figure 2.
Common principle of hospital to MeDiMed connection. There
are two ﬁrewalls on the path form modalities and viewing stations to the
PACS server. One of them is controlled by hospital and the second on by
university.
For better reliability, the key services of Regional PACS
system are operated in two distinct locations. PACS systems
from different vendors may be used on primary and backup
sides if requested. This way, the Regional PACS is able
to survive failure of any single ﬁbre optics line, server,
storage, electricity (though it is backup-ed via UPS and
motor-generator) in one location or even vendor of PACS
software.
There is a set of PACS servers used for a routine storage
of medicine images. PACS server for this type of service
runs on dedicated hardware in both university sites used
by MeDiMed. PACS server installations on these sites are
standalone and up to some extent independent. One site
serves as a primary and until it fails all images are stored
into this server. The second site serves as a backup and all
data are automatically copied from master to the backup.
The backup server is all the time available for retrieving
of the medicine images in a read-only mode. This way
the overall performance of the system can be improved. If
the master site fails we can manually switch the backup
site to read-write mode and the former master site to read-
only. In many cases the primary and the backup PACS
servers are from different vendors. To keep bidirectional
synchronization of PACS servers is more than complicated.
This manual switching of primary and backup PACS servers
provides good enough service with regards to number of
failures. Moreover, modalities have some local cache; so,
that they can keep images for several days. Older images
are available for reading on both primary and backup site.
V. PACS COMMUNICATION SERVERS
A distinct set of PACS servers are so-called communi-
cations PACS servers. That means PACS servers used for
interchange of medicine images between healthcare insti-
tutions. Communications PACS subsystem allows medicine
specialist to share the picture data for diagnosis consulta-
tions, second reading or even load balancing of radiologists.
Many PACS installations are only limited to the scope of
a particular radiology department. An effective use of that
technology means image distribution at least throughout the
whole healthcare institution. However, the most promising
approach to exploiting the PACS technology is to use it at
the regional or national level and to support the associated
medical processes this way. That means not only basic sup-
port of daily routines in radiology departments but also the
support of distant consultations, digital long-term archiving
or development of shared knowledge databases for research
and teaching in this particular area.
Current ICT, as well as existing and developing standards,
enable physicians in the region to deliver some services
through the computer network. It means that medical spe-
cialists from distant specialized departments can consult
urgent cases or make decisions. It is a concept of expert
centers based on the practices of telemedicine. Image studies
of every patient can be referred to a distant expert center for
a primary diagnostic or second opinion. This way a much
higher quality diagnosis can be assured.
Another important application of the shared regional
PACS servers is education. Interesting cases rid of patients
personal data and used for both education and research.
The shared regional collaborative environment is more
than just a set of computer network applications. Gradually,
it changes the thinking of medical specialists and enables
them to cooperate and share data about patients in elec-
tronic form. It builds a network of medical specialists. The
implementation of the system has increased the speed of
communication among individual hospitals, allowed deci-
sion consultations, and brought various other advantages due
to dedicated network connections.
VI. INSTANTPACS PROJECT
The new goal for the MeDiMed project is to offer PACS
system to small institutions. Small healthcare institutions
and private doctor’s ofﬁces usually have limited Internet
connectivity and data network availability in general. They
are typically located near patients and data communication
is not their priority. ICT staff in such institutions is also
very limited if it exists at all. For this reason the solution
used by large hospitals is not suitable for small institutions.
Eventhough the basic principles used in large hospitals can
be preserved also in this case.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

Viewing
MEDIMED
Firewall
MEDIMED
Firewall
Servers
PACS
Backup
Internet
MEDIMED
Firewall
MEDIMED
Firewall
InstantPACS
Modalities
stations
Figure 3.
Common principle of InstantPACS communication with the
centralized PACS servers.
The aim of the InstantPACS project is to develop a
maintenance-free PACS system suitable for small and mid-
sized healthcare institutions. This PACS system should offer
a user amenity obvious in hospitals including e.g. automatic
backup of medicine data. The most important properties are
user friendliness, maintenance free operations and pricing
acceptable for private doctor’s ofﬁces. The project is an
integral part of the MeDiMed shared regional PACS server
overlay project.
As small healthcare institutions and private doctor’s of-
ﬁces are being more and more equipped with diagnostics de-
vices, like CT X-ray ultrasound, etc., we expect demand for
medicine picture data processing capabilities and services.
Our intention is to offer PACS services also to these new
perspective medicine users. The speciﬁc property of PACS
or any ICT services in small healthcare institution is lack
of technical staff capable to solve issues on place. For this
reason we are developing an ”all-in-one” device, which will
serve as local PACS server for the healthcare institution and
provide backup and communication services. This device
will be fully remotely controllable and from point of view
of users will not ask for any local maintenance.
Typical user of the InstantPACS will be private doctor’s
ofﬁce, which is typically equipped with an ultrasound and
one or two more modalities like CT. Currently, modalities in
private doctor’s ofﬁce are (from point of view of data com-
munication) isolated devices and data transport is usually
performed on USB sticks or the data are processed locally on
the modality’s console. To offer medical picture processing
comfort usual in large hospitals we need to interconnect
modalities and viewing stations in the doctor’s ofﬁce. Once
the data will be transported from the modality outside we
need to provide at least the following services:
• Transport data to the viewing station
• Backup the data on any external device
• Long term archive of the data
• Prevent any unauthorized access to the data while the
data are in our device
• Allow to share data between authorized users
The InstantPACS server will be used in a very similar
manner like PACS systems in large hospitals. Of course
there are some technology discrepancies given by different
server placement possibilities in large hospitals (dedicated
computer room with air conditioning enough space, etc.)
and private doctor’s ofﬁces (one shared room for treatments
and server hosting, room temperature, etc). These worst
environmental conditions have introduced some InstantPACS
server hardening demands. Backup of medicine picture
data from Instant PACS server will be performed on two
backup PACS servers located at Masaryk University. The
data communication will be performed over Internet via two
IPSEC tunnels as shown on Figure 3.
The main properties of the InstantPACS server located at
doctor’s premises are the following:
• Small dimensions
• General environmental conditions
• No demand for regular local maintenance
• Easy to use
• Expenses corresponding to small size of user’s com-
pany
The key requirement is no or as small as possible demand
for regular local maintenance of the system. Users of the
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

InstantPACS are expected to have no or very little experience
with management of servers operating systems, etc. On the
other hand we expect rather large number of users. This
leads to demand for maintenance performed by systems
user. All critical events and states should be automatically
detected and reported. Daily routine maintenance of the sys-
tem should be practicable in an intuitive way. For example,
introduction of new modality (which is typically performed
by trained ICT staff in large hospitals) should be performed
by general InstantPACS user (medicine doctor).
The hardware platform used for InstantPACS is based on
off-the-shelf components. However, it is not like a general
PC-like station. It has dedicated memory for system software
and conﬁguration and redundant disk subsystem for storage
of medicine picture data. It contains also embedded ethernet
switch for simple connection of few modalities in a typical
private doctor’s ofﬁce. Currently there are two versions
available with active and passive cooling system. IPSEC
tunnels for backup data encryption are terminated directly
in the InstantPACS so no additional equipment is needed.
There is yet one important property of the system to
discuss: data protection under marginal or special cases like
disk replacement in the InstantPACS or even theft of the
whole system. PACS systems are typically located in areas
with limited and controlled access in large hospitals. This
way enough physical protection of the media containing
sensitive patients data is enforced. In case of failure of
a disk in raid containing patients data the failed disk is
usually physically destroyed so that the data can’t leak to
unauthorized persons. We expect to use more service or
implementation companies who will install the system so it
is very difﬁcult to enforce data protection in case of disk
replacement. We intend to protect sensitive patients data
even in the case when unauthorized person can gain physical
access to the InstantPACS device. The work on this topics
is still in progress.
VII. CONCLUSION
Medicine modalities are becoming more widely deployed
in medicine public and more commonly used even by
private doctor’s ofﬁces. Development and deployment of
PACS systems should follow this trend and offer proper
services to new smaller users of medicine modalities. This
can improve the healthcare and potentially save life of pa-
tients. The introduction of PACS system to small healthcare
institutions will bring both some comfort and order into
processing of medicine picture data necessary for proper
medical examination. The InstantPACS project intends to
bring PACS environment commonly used in large hospitals
to all medicine users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Czech Technology Agency
fund project number TA01010268 - ”Maintenance-free
PACS system for small and mid-sized healthcare institu-
tions”.
REFERENCES
[1] O. Dostal, M. Petrenko, and M. Filka, “Picture archiving and
communication systems,” in Telecommunications and Signal
Processing - TSP 2000. Brno.
cwVUT Brno, 2000, pp. 25–
27.
[2] “Nema homepage,” Online, http://www.nema.org, Retrieved
November, 2011.
[3] “Dicom
3.0
standard,”
Online,
http://medical.nema.org/standard.html, Retrieved November,
2011.
[4] K.J.Dreyer, D.S.Hirschorn, J.H.Thrall, and A. Mehta, PACS
A Guide to the Digital Revolution.
USA: Springer Science
+Business Media, 2006.
[5] H. K. Huang, PACS and Imaging Informatics: Basic Princi-
ples and Applications.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004.
[6] O. Dostal, M. Javornik, and K. Slavicek, “Medimed-regional
centre for archiving and interhospital exchange of medicine
multimedia data,,” in IASTED International Conference
on Communications, Internet, and Information Technology,
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, IASTED, 2003, M. H. Hamza, Ed.
IASTED/ACTA Press, 2003, pp. 609–614.
[7] O. Dostal, M. Javornik, K. Slavicek, M. Petrenko, and P. An-
dres, “Development of regional centre for medical multime-
dia data processing,” in IASTED International Conference
on Communications, Internet, and Information Technology,
November 22 - 24, 2004, St. Thomas, US Virgin Islands, M. H.
Hamza, Ed.
IASTED/ACTA Press, 2004, pp. 632–636.
[8] O. Dostal, M. Javornik, and K. Slavicek, “PKI utilisation
for
PACS
users
authentication,”
in
ICN/ICONS/MCL.
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, p. 84. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ICNICONSMCL.2006.170
[9] O. Dostal and K. Slavicek, “Wireless technology in medicine
applications,” in PWC, ser. IFIP, R. Bestak, B. Simak,
and E. Kozlowska, Eds., vol. 245.
Springer, 2007, pp.
316–324. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
0-387-74159-8 30
[10] O. Dostal, M. Javornik, and K. Slavicek, “Opportunity of
current ICT in the processing of medical image information,”
in IASTED International Conference on Advances in Com-
puter Science and Technology, January 23-25, 2006, Puerto
Vallarta, Mexico, S. Sahni, Ed. IASTED/ACTA Press, 2006,
pp. 193–195.
[11] K. Slavicek and V. Novak, “Introduction of alien wavelength
into cesnet dwdm backbone,” in Sixth International Confer-
ence on Information, Communications and Signal Processing.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–5.
[12] O. Dostal, M. Petrenko, and P. Ventruba, “First application
of picture archiving and communication system (pacs) in
gynecologic endoscopy,” in ISGE - 6th Regional Meeting.
ISGE, 2002, pp. 53–56.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-183-0
ICN 2012 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networks

