Analysis of the Implementation of Utility Functions to Define an Optimal Partition 
of a Multicast Group 
 
Joël Penhoat, Karine Guillouard 
France Télécom 
Issy-les-Moulineaux, France 
{joel.penhoat; karine.guillouard}@orange-ftgroup.com 
Tayeb Lemlouma, Mikaël Salaun 
Université de Rennes 1 
Rennes, France 
{tayeb.lemlouma; mikael.salaun}@univ-rennes1.fr
 
 
Abstract— As the optimal use of network resources is a major 
issue for telecoms operators, we started works aiming to, 
firstly, improve the utilization of network resources by 
transmitting the IP packets in multicast when possible, 
secondly, to adapt the format of the data transmitted in 
multicast to take into account the context of the members of 
the multicast group, and thirdly to preserve the Quality of 
Service when a member of the multicast group moves from a 
radio network to another radio network. The paper shows, 
through a scenario, how our work will improve the utilization 
of the resources and then describes our approach. 
Keywords- Handover; Multicast group partition; Resource 
optimization; User's context; Utility function  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The optimization of the use of the resources of the 
networks is a major issue for a telecoms operator because it 
allows him to reduce his operational expenditure (OPEX). In 
particular, the improvement of the use of the resources of the 
radio spectrum is necessary as showed in a study [1] led in 
2002 by Federal Communications Commission (FCC). This 
study showed that in a frequency band the rate of use of the 
radio resources could vary between 5% and 85%. 
According to us, the solutions that aim to optimize the 
use of the network resources must be implemented in each 
level of the TCP/IP stack. Moreover, interactions must exist 
among each solution implemented in each level of the stack, 
i.e. the optimization is based on cross-layer solutions. In the 
PHY and MAC layers, the Cognitive Radios [2] are designed 
to improve the use of the radio spectrum resources by 
exploiting the radio resources vacated by their owners. In 
2004, the FCC has asked the IEEE to implement the 
Cognitive Radios in the frequency range 54 -698 MHz [3]. 
The IEEE P802.22 standard [4] meets this demand by 
allowing the use of vacant TV channels by radio equipments 
operating without radio licenses. In the IP layer, the 
multicast transmission of data [5] is a known technique for 
improving the use of the resources in an IP network because 
it reduces the number of IP packets transmitted over a 
network when several receivers must receive the same data. 
In the transport layer, numerous studies have improved the 
throughput of TCP by taking into consideration the physical 
characteristics of the networks. For example, the TCP 
Westwood protocol [6] improves the throughput of a TCP 
connection when the IP packets are transmitted over a radio 
network. 
Our study focuses on the improvement of the use of the 
resources of networks at the IP level by implementing 
multicast transmissions when the services asked by the users 
can be transmitted in multicast. During a multicast 
transmission, all the members of a multicast group (i.e. the 
users) receive the data in the same format because a 
multicast transmission does not take into account the 
heterogeneity of the receivers (mobile phones, laptops, 
smartphones, tablets), the heterogeneity of the radio 
networks (GSM, Wi-Fi, WiMAX ...), or the diversity of the 
profiles of the members of the group (engineer, accountant, 
student …). The diversity of the receivers, radio networks, or 
the profiles of the users, are elements that characterize the 
context of a user. In the article, we use the definition of 
Abowd et al [7] to define the context of a user. Figure 1 
illustrates a scenario in which the members of a multicast 
group G have different contexts. In addition, as the members 
of the group may be mobile, their contexts vary during the 
transmission because they can connect themselves to 
wireless networks having different characteristics, for 
example during a handover between a Wi-Fi network 
transmitting in multicast the IP packets and an Universal 
Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) network 
transmitting in unicast the IP packets. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Multicast transmission in a heterogeneous context 
So, the three objectives of our work are, firstly, to 
improve the utilization of the resources of the networks by 
transmitting in multicast the IP packets when possible, 
secondly, to adapt the format of the data transmitted in 
multicast to take into account the context of the members of 
the multicast group, and thirdly to preserve the Quality of 
418
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Service (QoS) when a user moves from one radio network to 
another radio network. 
The structure of the article is the following. The second 
section describes a scenario showing the interest of our 
works for the telecoms operators. The third section makes an 
inventory of the works that take into account the context of 
the users during a multicast transmission and analyzes their 
loopholes; then the fourth section presents our approach to 
implement our three objectives. Finally, the fifth section 
concludes the article and exposes our future works. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF A SCENARIO ESTABLISHING A 
SYNERGY BETWEEN UNICAST AND MULTICAST NETWORKS 
In this section we describe a scenario that could improve 
the utilization of the resources of the radio networks of a 
telecoms operator by establishing a synergy between unicast 
and multicast networks. In our scenario, eight persons, 
Anatole, Antoine, Bernard, Bertrand, Alice, Bénédicte, 
Catherine, and Isabelle, take part in a video-conference. The 
video-conference is made up of a Voice over IP (VoIP) flow 
and a Video flow. The Video flow is encoded with a 
Scalable Video Codec [8] that splits the flow into several 
sub-flows. Our scenario consists of six stages. In the first 
stage (Figure 2), Anatole and Antoine receive the VoIP flow 
on a fixed phone and the Video flow on a video-projector. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (first stage) 
The VoIP flow is transmitted in unicast over a UMTS 
network that uses IPv4 addresses. The Video flow is 
transmitted in unicast over an Evolved Universal Terrestrial 
Radio Access Network [9] that uses IPv6 addresses. The 
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network is 
noted E-UTRAN in the figure 2. Bernard, Bertrand and Alice 
receive the VoIP and Video flows on their smartphones. The 
VoIP and Video flows are transmitted in multicast over a 
Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service network [10] that 
uses IPv4 addresses. The Multimedia Broadcast Multicast 
Service network is noted MBMS in the figure 2. Bénédicte, 
Catherine and Isabelle receive the VoIP and Video flows on 
their Personal Computers. The VoIP and Video flows are 
transmitted in multicast over a Wi-Fi network that uses IPv6 
addresses. In the second stage (Figure 3), Bertrand moves. 
His smartphone, initially connected to the MBMS network, 
connects itself to the E-UTRAN network. The VoIP and 
Video flows are transmitted in unicast over the E-UTRAN 
network that uses IPv6 addresses. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (second stage) 
In the third stage (Figure 4), Bernard moves. His 
smartphone, initially connected to the MBMS network, 
connects itself to the Wi-Fi network. The VoIP and Video 
flows are transmitted in multicast over the Wi-Fi network 
that uses IPv6 addresses. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (third stage) 
In the fourth stage (Figure 5), Bernard, who has a laptop 
with a Wi-Fi interface, decides to take part in the video-
conference via his laptop. Having connected his laptop to the 
Wi-Fi network, he turns off his smartphone and takes part in 
the video-conference via his laptop. 
419
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

 
Figure 5.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (fourth stage) 
In the fifth stage (Figure 6), the operator who manages 
the MBMS network notices that the smartphone of Alice is 
the only device connected to this network. As the 
smartphone of Alice has a MBMS interface and a Wi-Fi 
interface, the operator decides that Alice will take part in the 
video-conference via the Wi-Fi interface of her smartphone 
without decreasing her QoS. At the end of this operation the 
resources of the MBMS network are no longer used. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (fifth stage) 
In the last stage of our scenario (Figure 7), Antoine, who 
has a laptop with a Wi-Fi interface and an E-UTRAN 
interface, moves. After having turned on his laptop, he 
receives the VoIP and Video flows via two different 
interfaces: the VoIP flow is received in unicast via the E-
UTRAN interface, while the Video flow is received in 
multicast via the Wi-Fi interface. 
The six stages of our scenario show that a synergy 
between IPv4/IPv6 unicast radio networks and IPv4/IPv6 
multicast radio networks is possible and could interest a 
telecoms operator. But its implementation raises many 
questions. Here is a non-exhaustive list of questions. 
Knowing that the contexts of the members of the multicast 
group are different, in what format the server should send the 
data when the IP packets carrying the data are transmitted in 
multicast? Knowing that the structure of the multicast group 
may change over time, as we see by comparing the structure 
of the multicast group between the first and the sixth stage, 
how to adapt the format of the transmitted data to reflect 
these changes? Knowing that the users are mobile, what are 
the criteria for selecting a radio network during a handover? 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  A scenario describing a synergy between multicast and unicast 
networks (sixth stage) 
III. 
IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS OF THE EXISTING 
WORKS 
In this section we identify and analyze the works taking 
into account the context of the users in a multicast 
transmission. The first works date from the 1990s. In 1996, 
McCann et al [11] have proposed to split a multicast group 
according to the throughput that the terminals of the users 
can receive. The data flow to be transmitted is encoded in 
several layers, each layer being transmitted with a certain 
throughput. The first layer, called the base layer, is necessary 
to decode the flow, whereas the other layers are used to 
improve the QoS of the received flow. The QoS of a user is 
better if the number of layers decoded by his terminal is 
higher. Each layer is associated with a subgroup of the 
partition of the multicast group. The subscription to one or 
several subgroups is made with the Receiver-driven Layered 
Multicast (RLM) protocol: the terminal of a user chooses to 
subscribe to one or several subgroups, i.e. to receive one or 
several layers, according to its decoding capabilities and the 
available bandwidth in the network. In 2000, Yang et al [12] 
defined a utility function [13] in the terminal of each user by 
taking as parameter the throughput received by the terminal. 
The optimum of the utility function is reached when the 
throughput received by the terminal is equal to the 
throughput that it would receive if it was alone in the group. 
Then, having defined a utility function for each subgroup 
making up a partition of the multicast group, they 
mathematically demonstrated that there is a partition, among 
all the possible partitions, whose sum of the extremums of 
the utility functions of the subgroups making up the partition 
is bigger than the sum of the extremums of the utility 
functions of the subgroups of the other partitions. This 
partition, which is the optimal partition, is obtained by a 
centralized process. Several works redefined the utility 
function implemented in the terminals by Yang et al [12]: 
Maimour et al [14] modified the function by taking a 
parameter easier to get than the throughput, namely the 
transmission delay between the source emitting the flow of 
420
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

IP packets and each terminal; then Yousefi' zadeh et al [15] 
chose a utility function continuously differentiable to reduce 
the complexity of the calculations to realize to obtain the 
optimal partition. In 2003, Li et al [16] showed that the 
consideration of the context of the users during a 
transmission of a video flow in multicast requires a video 
source having a method of transmission capable of 
transmitting the flow with various throughputs. Having 
established a taxonomy of the various methods of 
transmission of a video flow, they compared the three 
methods 
(stream 
replication, 
cumulative 
layering, 
noncumulative layering) implemented in the processes of 
partition of a multicast group. From the years 2005, several 
projects aim to take into account the context of the users in 
the multicast architectures: in 2008, the C-Mobile project 
[17] defines a MBMS architecture that takes into account the 
context of the users; then in 2009, the C-Cast project [18] 
defines methods for collecting and analyzing the contexts in 
a multicast architecture. 
In the works that we identified, a centralized process 
calculates the optimal partition from a utility function 
implemented in each terminal. However, other entities could 
also implement a utility function: the operators managing 
networks, the suppliers of a service … Each entity can have 
its own criteria to define an optimal partition. For example, 
an operator can define a single multicast group to improve 
the use of his networks, whereas the users will prefer to 
define a number of subgroups equal to the number of users 
for improving the consideration of the contexts of each user. 
When several entities take part in the partition process, what 
partition to choose among those proposed by every entity? 
Who chooses the partition? 
Furthermore, in the identified works, the mobility of the 
users is little studied. The analysis of the mobility requires 
the following definition. During a handover, when a terminal 
disconnects itself from a network, this network is called 
outgoing network; when it connects itself to a new network, 
this network is called incoming network. The analysis of the 
existing studies shows two issues. During a handover, what 
incoming network to choose? Who chooses the network? 
According to Zdarsky [19], the user chooses the incoming 
network, while according to Antoniou et al [18], it is the 
operator managing the network that chooses the incoming 
network. To take into account the diverse objectives of the 
entities participating in the selection process, Suciu et al [20] 
proposed a method called Hierarchical and Distributed 
Handover (HDHO), and analyzed a scenario composed of 
three entities, namely a content provider, an operator 
managing networks, and a user. The objective of the content 
provider is to choose an incoming network offering a QoS 
adapted to the flow to be transmitted. The objective of the 
operator is to choose the least loaded network for 
transmitting the flow of the content provider. The objective 
of the user is to choose a network offering the best QoS/Cost 
ratio for receiving the flow. 
It is important to notice that the mobility of a user can 
cause a new partition of the multicast group due to the 
variation of the number of the terminals connected to the 
outgoing and incoming networks. Conversely, a new 
partition can cause the mobility of one or more users as 
shown in the fifth stage of the scenario described in the 
second section. The works that we identified do not address 
the interactions that can exist between the partition process 
of a group and the selection process of an incoming network. 
IV. 
PRESENTATION OF OUR APPROACH 
In this section we present our approach to implement our 
three objectives. The first two objectives seem contradictory. 
Indeed, the more the number of members in a multicast 
group is higher, the better the use of network resources. But 
the more the number of members in a multicast group is 
higher, the more it will be difficult to take into account the 
variety of the contexts of the users. It is thus necessary to 
find a compromise between, on one hand, the multicast 
transmission of the IP packets and, on the other hand, the 
consideration of the contexts of the users. Our approach aims 
at defining several entities that will divide the multicast 
group into several subgroups according to the context of the 
users. Three entities, namely the content provider, the 
operator managing the networks, and the users, are involved 
in the partition process. The objectives of the three entities 
are the following ones. The objective of the content provider 
is to encode his content into one or more different formats 
according to the encoding processes available on his servers 
(objective 1); the objective of the operator is to transmit the 
data in multicast when the multicast transmission is possible 
and when the consumption of the resources of networks 
during a multicast transmission of data towards N users is 
lower than the consumption of the resources of networks 
during a unicast transmission of data towards N users 
(objective 2); the objective of the users is to receive the data 
in a format adapted to their context (objective 3). 
The implementation of the third objective is made with 
the HDHO method. The three entities participating in the 
selection process of an incoming network are the content 
provider, the operator managing the networks, and the users. 
The objective of the content provider is to choose an 
incoming network offering a QoS adapted to the flow to be 
transmitted (objective 4). The objective of the operator is to 
choose the least loaded network for transmitting the flow of 
the content provider (objective 5). The objective of the user 
is to choose a network offering the best QoS/Cost ratio for 
receiving the flow (objective 6). Since our approach is based 
on the definition of three entities, each with their goals, we 
must specify how these three entities interact among them to 
split the multicast group and to select an incoming network 
during a handover. By referring to the works of Suciu et al 
[20], we chose the Free Conflict method, the Compromise 
and Negotiation method, and the Team Enforced method for 
implementing these interactions. 
Since the mobility of a user can cause a new partition of 
the group and as a new partition can cause the mobility of 
one or more users, the partition process and the selection 
process interact among them. The interaction between the 
two processes is described by the heuristic presented in 
Figure 8. During a handover, the end of the selection process 
triggers the beginning of the partition process. At each 
iteration of the partition process, the operator managing the 
421
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

network can initiate a handover of one or more users to meet 
its objective. The selected networks must not degrade the 
QoS of the users. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Heuristic describing the interaction between the selection 
process and the partition process 
Currently we are working on the modules composing the 
heuristic and we reflect on the way to integrate our approach 
in a MBMS architecture. Figure 9 shows a possible 
integration. The objectives of the content provider, namely 
the objectives 1 and 4, can be implemented in the Broadcast 
Multicast Service Center (BM-SC) and in the Gateway 
GPRS Support Node (GGSN). The objectives of the 
operator, namely the objectives 2 and 5, can be implemented 
in the GGSN and in the Radio Network Controller (RNC). 
The objectives of the user, namely the objectives 3 and 6, 
can be implemented in the user's terminal. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
As the optimization of the use of the resources of the 
networks is a major issue for telecoms operators, we initiated 
works that aim to, firstly, improve the use of the resources of 
the networks by transmitting the IP packets in multicast 
when it is possible, secondly, adapt the format of the data 
transmitted in multicast to take into account the context of 
the users, and thirdly preserve the Quality of Service when a 
user moves from a radio network towards another radio 
network. After having shown, through a scenario, how our 
work would allow to establish a synergy between multicast 
and unicast networks, we analyzed the works taking into 
account the context of the users during a multicast 
transmission. The analysis revealed three loopholes: the 
terminals of the users are the only entities that participate in 
the partition process; the mobility of the users is little 
studied; the listed works do not tackle the interactions that 
can exist between the partition process and the selection 
process. Our work, that takes into account these 
shortcomings, aims to, firstly, define the entities involved in 
the partition process and the selection process, secondly, 
define the objectives of these entities, thirdly, define the 
partition algorithm according to the objectives of each entity, 
fourthly, define the interaction between the partition process 
and the selection process. When these four steps will be 
made, we will model the partition process and the selection 
process with OPNET®. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Integration of our approach in a MBMS architecture 
REFERENCES 
[1] Federal Communications Commission Spectrum Policy Task Force. 
Report of the Spectrum Efficiency Working Group, 2002. 
[2] B.A. Fette, Cognitive Radio Technology (2nd ed). Burlington, MA: 
Academic Press, 2009. 
[3] Federal Communications Commission. Notice of Proposed Rule 
Making. ET Docket no 04-113, 2004. 
[4] IEEE. 
IEEE 
Draft 
Standard 
for 
Information 
technology 
Telecommunications and information exchange between systems 
Local and metropolitan area networks Specific requirements Part 
22.1: Standard to Enhance Harmful Interference Protection for Low 
Power Licensed Devices Operating in TV Broadcast Bands, 2009. 
[5] S. Deering, IETF Network Working Group: RFC 1112. Host 
Extensions for IP Multicasting, 1989. 
[6] S. Mascolo, A. Grieco, G. Pau, M. Gerla and C. Casetti, End-to-End 
Bandwidth Estimation in TCP to Improve Wireless Link Utilization. 
European Wireless Conference, 2002. 
[7] G.D. Abowd and A.K. Dey, Towards a Better Understanding of 
Context and Context-Awareness, LNCS 1707, pp. 304-307, 1999. 
[8] H. Schwarz, G. Sullivan, T. Wiegand and M. Wien, Text of ISO/IEC 
14496-10:200X/FDIS Advanced Video Coding (4th Edition). 
International 
Organisation 
For 
Standardisation 
ISO/IEC 
JTC1/SC29/WG11 Coding of Moving Pictures and Audio, 2007. 
[9] P. Lescuyer and T. Lucidarme, Evolved Packet System (EPS) The 
LTE and SAE Evolution of 3G UMTS. Chichester, England: John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2008. 
[10] R. Huzenlaub, MBMS from A-Z. Karlsruhe, Deutschland: INACOM 
GmbH, 2006. 
[11] S. McCanne, V. Jacobson and M. Vetterli, Receiver-driven Layered 
Multicast. ACM SIGCOMM, pp. 117-130, 1996. 
[12] Y.R. Yang, M.S. Kim and S.S. Lam, Optimal Partitioning of 
Multicast Receivers. International Conference on Network Protocol, 
pp. 129-140, 2000. 
[13] P. Anand, Foundations of Rational Choice Under Risk (3rd ed). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
[14] M. Maimour and C. Pham, A RTT-based Partitioning Algorithm for a 
Multi-rate Reliable Multicast Protocol. Proceedings of the IEEE 
High-Speed Network and Multimedia Communications Conference, 
2003. 
422
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

[15] H. Yousefi' zadeh, H. Jafarkhani and A. Habibi, Layered Media 
Multicast Control (LMMC): Rate Allocation and Partitioning. 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 13(3), pp. 540-553, 2005. 
[16] B. Li and J. Liu, Multirate Video Multicast over the Internet: An 
Overview. IEEE Network, pp. 24-29, 2003. 
[17] J. Santos, D. Gomes, S. Sargento, R.L. Aguiar, N. Baker, M. Zafar 
and A. Ikram, Multicast/broadcast network convergence in next 
generation mobile networks. Computer Networks: The International 
Journal of Computer and Telecommunications Networking, 52(1), pp. 
228-247, 2007. 
[18] J. Antoniou, C. Christophorou, C. Janneteau, M. Kellil, S. Sargento, 
A. Neto, F.C. Pinto, N.F. Carapeto and J. Simoes, Architecture for 
Context-Aware Multiparty Delivery in Mobile Heterogeneous 
Networks. 
International 
Conference 
on 
Ultra 
Modern 
Telecommunications & Workshops, 2009. 
[19] F.A. Zdarsky and J.B. Schmitt, Handover In Mobile Communication 
Networks: Who is In Control Anyway? Proceedings of the 30th 
EUROMICRO Conference, pp. 205-212, 2004. 
[20] L. Suciu, M. Benzaid, S. Bonjour and P. Louin, Assessing the 
Handover Approaches for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks. 18th 
International Conference on Computer Communications and 
Networks, 2009. 
 
 
423
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

