An Error Reduction Algorithm for Position Estimation Systems
Using Transmitted Directivity Information
Hiroyuki HATANO
Faculty of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
3-5-1 Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
thhatan@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Tomoharu MIZUTANI
Graduate School of Engineering,
Shizuoka University,
3-5-1 Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
f0930142@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Yoshihiko KUWAHARA
Faculty of Engineering,
Shizuoka University
3-5-1, Johoku, Naka-ku,
Hamamatsu-shi, Shizuoka
432-8561, JAPAN
tykuwab@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp
Abstract—We consider a position estimation system for tar-
gets that exist in near wide area. The system has multiple sen-
sors and estimates position using multiple receivers. Previously,
receivers arranged in a straight line would generate a large
position error in the direction of the line. In order to reduce
this error, we herein propose a novel estimation algorithm using
the directivity information of the transmitter. The proposed
system uses the directional emission of an array of antennas in a
transmitter. In the present paper, the error characteristic to be
solved is introduced. The proposed algorithm is then presented.
Finally, the error reduction performance is demonstrated
through computer simulations. The obtained results indicate
good error reduction performance.
Keywords-sensor network; position estimation; localization;
radar network; directivity
I. INTRODUCTION
Interest in position estimation systems has been growing.
In this paper, we focus on the estimation of the position
of targets in the near wide area. Our position estimation
systems are built with multiple sensors that are connected
with networks (Figure 1). These sensors achieve reliable de-
tection and accurate position estimation. Good performance
can be achieved using even inexpensive devices. Moreover,
networked sensors can cover a wide detection area. Several
attractive applications of position estimation systems have
been suggested, including indoor monitoring systems and
near-range automotive radars [1], [2].
We assume that the sensors in the network can output
only measured ranges (a measured range list) to the targets
because of low cost and the simplicity of the components
used to construct the sensors. The estimator must calculate
target positions with high accuracy from only measured
range lists provided by multiple sensors. For accurate posi-
tioning, it is important to discuss data processing of position
estimation, which deals with measured range data from all
of the sensors.
Over the past few years, several algorithms have been
developed for position estimation using multiple sensors. As
related work with multiple sensing devices, several studies
Figure 1.
Position estimation system
have been made on sensor network systems [3]–[7]. Radar
network systems have also been proposed [8]–[10]. Based
on previous studies, trilateration techniques using geomet-
ric operations are popular for estimating target positions.
These techniques are not optimum in terms of accuracy
with respect to position estimation and may also detect
“ghost targets”, which are falsely detected about non-existent
targets. This often occurs when the measured errors are large
[1], [10].
In other techniques, measured ranges are treated as
stochastic variables [11]–[13]. Typical techniques include
estimation using minimum mean square error (MMSE) and
maximum a posterior probability (MAP). The accuracy
of these techniques is high compared to basic trilater-
ation techniques. However, applying the MMSE method
to the estimation of multiple targets is not easy. Among
stochastic methods, the accuracy of the MAP method is
optimum. However, data processing in the MAP method is
complex. Therefore, we proposed a novel estimation algo-
rithm, namely, the existence probability estimation method
(EPEM). The EPEM calculates the existence probability
of targets and estimates the target positions [14]. In the
proposed method, the measured ranges are also treated
as stochastic values. Moreover, the proposed method has
approximately the same estimation accuracy and a lower
267
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

calculation burden compared to MAP methods.
However, the estimation errors depend on the layout of the
receivers. In particular, for the case in which the receivers
are arranged in a straight line, large errors are generated in
the direction of the line. Usually, a straight-line arrangement
is useful because such an arrangement is easy to build and
can be set up within a limited space. Thus, a technique to
reduce the estimation errors is needed.
The goals of the present paper are as follows:
• Introduction of the EPEM algorithm,
• Clariﬁcation of the error performance depending on the
sensor arrangement and description of the problem,
• Proposal of the existence probability estimation method
with directivity information (EPEMD) algorithm,
• Evaluation of the error reduction through computer
simulations.
The existence probability of the EPEMD is calculated
using the directivity information of a cooperative transmitter.
In the case of radar network systems, transmitters often
use a directivity scan in order to reduce misdetections
and expand detectable ranges for a limited power [15]. In
the case of sensor network systems, the construction of
electrical directivity antennas is advantageous because the
sensor device requires a long deliverable range with low
power. Therefore, it is meaningful to propose an estimation
algorithm that considers the directivity pattern. As such, we
evaluate the error reduction through computer simulations.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we present the system model and assumptions
of the present study. In Section III, we introduce the EPEM
algorithm, which is a position estimation algorithm. The al-
gorithm is explained analytically, and the error performance
and problems are presented. In Section IV, the proposed
EPEMD algorithm is presented. In Section V, the perfor-
mance of the error reduction is evaluated. Finally, Section
VI summarizes the present study and presents suggestions
for further research.
II. SYSTEM MODEL OF THE POSITION ESTIMATION
SYSTEM
We consider an estimation system with a transmitter and
multiple receivers (Figure 1). Figure 2 and 3 show the system
model. Figure 2 shows the sensor layout and the targets for
position estimation. The numbers of receivers and targets are
K and N, respectively. The origin of the coordinate system
is the center of the receivers. The target position is given
as (xn, yn), 1 ≤ n ≤ N. Each receiver is assumed to be
located on the x-axis. The x positions of the receivers are
α1, α2, α3, · · · , αK.
The kth receiver outputs a measured range list composed
of the ranges, namely, ˜Rk = (˜rk1, ˜rk2, ..., ˜rkNk). Here,
Nk(≤ N) is the number of ranges included in the measured
range list ˜Rk. We assume the existence of a only direct
Figure 2.
Layout of sensors and targets
Figure 3.
A data ﬂow
path between target and transmitter/receiver. Subscript (˜)
indicates measured values.
Each measured range ˜rkn in the list includes a measure-
ment error:
˜rkn = rkn + ϵk,
(1)
where rkn is the true range between the nth target and the
transmitter / the kth receiver, and ϵk is a stochastic variable,
the variance of which is denoted as σ2
k. Using the measured
range lists obtained from all receivers and the position of
the receivers, the target positions are estimated as shown in
Figure 3.
III. ESTIMATION ALGORITHM
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the proposed position
estimation algorithm using the existence probability. The
estimation characteristics are then summarized, and the
problem is described.
268
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

A. Existence probability estimation method (EPEM)
Commonly used trilateration methods have a number of
problems, as mentioned in Section I. In order to address
these problems, the proposed estimation method, which is
described below, deals with the measured rages as stochastic
variables.
In order to estimate the target positions using the mea-
sured range lists provided by the receivers, we consider the
following existence probability, which includes the condi-
tional probability:
P(ˆx, ˆy| ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK).
(2)
The probability of Equation (2) is the conditional prob-
ability of the target existence at (ˆx, ˆy) when the measured
range lists ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK are obtained. Using Bayes’
theorem, Equation (2) may be written as follows:
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK|ˆx, ˆy)
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK)
· P(ˆx, ˆy).
(3)
In Equation (3), the denominator does not depend on
the estimated parameter (ˆx, ˆy). Therefore, when P(ˆx, ˆy)
is distributed uniformly, Equation (3) may have the same
distribution shape:
P( ˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK|ˆx, ˆy).
(4)
Each receiver is independent. Equation (4) may be expressed
as follows because the measured range is an independent
Gaussian variable:
K
∏
k=1
P( ˜Rk|ˆx, ˆy).
(5)
Considering the combinations of targets and ranges, Equa-
tion (5) may be expressed as follows:
K
∏
k=1
N
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆx, ˆy)
(6)
where we assume no pre-knowledge of the targets. In other
words, the receivers do not know the relationship between
the targets and the measured ranges. Next, the estimated
parameters (ˆx, ˆy) can be transformed with the range from
the transmitter/kth receiver to the target, i.e., ˆrkn as follows:
ˆrkn =
√
(ˆx − αk)2 + ˆy2 + ˆx2 + ˆy2
(for all n).
(7)
Using the above relationship, Equation (6) is transformed
into the following:
K
∏
k=1
N
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆrk).
(8)
The probability of P(˜r|ˆr) indicates the error characteristic
of the known receiver. Using Equations (7) and (8), the
distribution of the probability of the target existence at
position (ˆx, ˆy) can be calculated when the measured ranges
Figure 4.
Distribution of estimated target positions (EPEM)
Table I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 1
Number of receivers: K
3
Number of targets: N
2
Target positions
#1 (x1, y1) = (0, 2)[m]
#2 (x2, y2) = (0, 9)[m]
Array width of receivers
2 m
Distribution of
Gaussian distribution
measurement error ˜r
(σk = 0.075)
Number of iterations
20,000
˜R1, ˜R2, ˜R3, · · · , ˜RK are obtained. By selecting the local
maximums of the distribution of Equation (8), the target
positions can be estimated. The EPEM has approximately
the same estimation accuracy as the MAP method, which is
optimum in terms of maximum a posteriori probability [14].
B. Estimation characteristics and problems
In the following, we present the estimation characteristics
of the EPEM algorithm described in the previous section.
The simulation parameters are shown in Table I. In the
simulations, we assume the measurement error to be 0.3
m, which is typical [16]. According to this value, we set the
standard derivation σk of the measured ranges (4σk = 0.3
[m]). The estimation trials of the targets are simulated. The
trials generate the distribution of estimated positions. The
results are shown in Figure 4. Moreover, the mean and
variance of the distribution for each target position in Figure
4 are summarized in Table II. Figure 4 and Table II show
that the error in the x-direction is larger than that in the
y-direction. The reason for this is that the receivers are
arranged along the x-axis. That is, large errors are generated
in the direction of the receivers. In order to reduce the x-
axis errors, we propose an estimation algorithm that uses the
directivity of the transmitter.
IV. ESTIMATION ALGORITHM USING THE DIRECTIVITY
OF THE TRANSMITTER
In this section, we ﬁrst propose the estimation algorithm
to solve the problem of the large error described in the pre-
269
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Table II
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ESTIMATED TARGETS (EPEM)
Target 1
Target 2
E[ˆx] [m]
-0.001
-0.022
Var[ˆx]
0.014
0.240
E[ˆy] [m]
1.997
8.987
Var[ˆy]
0.002
0.002
Figure 5.
Image of the proposed system
vious section. The proposed algorithm is named as EPEMD
(the existence probability estimation method with directivity
information).
Figure 5 shows an image of the proposed
system. The difference between Figure 1 and Figure 5 is
that the transmitter of Figure 5 has directivity.
A signal is radiated from the transmitter, which is com-
posed of two or more antennas to achieve directivity. The
reﬂected signal from the target is received by the receivers,
which are placed along a straight line (x-axis). We introduce
a transmission array antenna composed of L antennas, as
shown in Figure 6. The antennas, which are centered at the
origin of the coordinate system, are arranged symmetrically.
The positions of the transmission antennas are assumed to
be (β1, 0), (β2, 0), . . . , (βL, 0). The variables Al and sl(t)
indicate the amplitude coefﬁcient and the radiated signal
from the lth antenna, respectively. The total signal in the
θ direction is as follows:
Ssum(θ, t) = s(θ, t)
L
∑
l=1
Al exp{j2πf0(βl
c sin θ)}
(9)
where f0 is the center frequency of the signal, and c is the
speed of light. The based signal and common characteristic
of the antennas, such as the directivity pattern of the element,
is substituted as s(θ, t). In the present study, |Ssum(θ, t)|,
which indicates the gain generated by the array, is named as
the directivity response pattern.
We attempt to reduce the estimated errors using this
directivity response pattern. An example of a directivity
response pattern is shown in Figure 7. Given this directivity
response pattern, the signal can be reﬂected only from
obstacles that exist in the area within the beam, such as
Target #1. In contrast, Target #2 does not reﬂect the signal.
Figure 6.
Structure of the transmitter
The function to specify the detectable area is as follows:
Dp(x, y) =
{
1
(area that can be detected)
0
(area that cannot be detected) . (10)
Equation (10) expresses the area in which the target can
reﬂect the signals or not. The reﬂectable area of the x-y
plane can be calculated from the directivity response pattern.
The directivity response pattern is converted to the re-
ﬂectable area of the x-y plane using the following radar
equation:
S = γPt
R4
(11)
where S is the electric power of the reﬂected signal, i.e.,
the signal received at the receiver, and γ is determined
on the basis of, for example, the antenna gain and the
effective reﬂection area of the targets. In addition, Pt is
the power of the transmitter, and R is the range from the
transmitter/receivers to the target. If S is deﬁned as the
minimum power detectable at the receiver, then the R is the
maximum detectable range. Equation (11) can be rewritten
as follows:
R =
4
√ γ
S
4√
Pt
(12)
Next, we assume that the transmitting power becomes δPt,
that is δ times. Then, maximum detectable range R′ can be
rewritten in terms of R as follows:
R′ =
4
√ γ
S
4√
δPt =
4√
δR
(13)
As mentioned above, |Ssum(θ, t)| in Equation (9) is the
gain of the array, which is related to δ. When the gain of
the electric power is |Ssum(θ, t)|, the maximum detectable
range R′ can be calculated from Equations (9) and (13).
As a result, from Equations (10) and (8), we obtain the
following equation:
[ K
∏
k=1
N
∑
n=1
P(˜rkn|ˆrk)
]]
· Dp(x, y)
(14)
270
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Figure 7.
Directivity response pattern and targets
Figure 8.
Designed directivity response pattern
Equation (14) gives the existence probability considering
the directivity of the transmission signal. The generation of
the directivity often results in null directions. In order to
compensate for the null directions, the direction of the main
lobe of the directivity response pattern is changed a small
number of times in order to change the directivity in a trial,
such as beam scanning.
V. NUMERICAL EVALUATION
We evaluate the characteristics of the EPEM algorithm
and the EPEMD algorithm from the viewpoint of error
reduction.
We designed the directivity pattern as shown in Figure 8.
We then converted the directivity pattern into the detectable
area using Equations (9) and (13). The detectable area is
shown in Figure 9. In the simulations, we assume that
the maximum value of the |Ssum(θ, t)| is 2 and that the
maximum detectable range R′ is 10 m. As mentioned in
Section IV, it is necessary to change the directivity in a
detection trial such as beam scanning in order to detect
targets over a wide area. However, for the evaluation of the
position estimation characteristics of the algorithms, only
one ﬁxed directivity pattern is simulated. The parameters
of the transmitter are shown in Table III. Considering that
targets exist in the near ﬁeld, the width of the transmission
array is set to 0.1 m. We simulate two cases. In Case
1, the target is located at (0,9) [m], which is a relatively
long distance from the sensors. In Case 2, the target is
located at (0,2) [m], which is short. For the evaluation of the
estimation errors, we use the variance of the distribution of
the estimated positions, which are used in Section III-B, as
Figure 9.
Detectable area
Table III
PARAMETERS OF THE TRANSMITTER
Frequency: f0
24 [GHz]
Number of transmitters: L
3
Width of array [m]
0.1
Element positions [m]: Bl
-0.05, 0, 0.05
Amplitude control: Al
0.5, 1, 0.5
the performance measure. The other simulation parameters
are as listed in Table I.
The results for the variance are shown in Table IV.
These variances are derived from the distribution of the
estimated positions. For example, the obtained distributions
in Case 1 are shown in Figure 10,11. From Table IV, in
the case of the EPEMD algorithm, the variance of both the
x- and y-directions can be reduced compared to the EPEM
algorithm. Moreover, in the case of a long distance, the
reduction in variance is large compared to the case of a
short distance. In particular, the variance in the x-direction,
which is the direction of the arrangement of the receivers,
can be decreased signiﬁcantly.
VI. CONCLUSION
We considered the position estimation algorithm for tar-
gets that exist in the near wide area. A problem exists
in that the position estimation error in the direction of
the arrangement of receivers is large if the receivers are
arranged along a straight line. In order to reduce this error,
the proposed EPEMD algorithm uses the target existence
probability, which is calculated based on range, and the
directivity information of the transmitter. Computer simu-
lations revealed that the proposed algorithm achieved low
errors. Moreover, the error in the direction of the receivers
arrangement was effectively reduced as intended.
As presented in Table IV, the variance in the y-direction
is very small, which indicates that the multiple networked
sensors have signiﬁcant potential for application. Compared
to the error in the y-direction, the error in the x-direction is
relatively large. As the future work, we will continue to
reduce this error. We will ﬁrst ﬁnd a suitable directivity
pattern for the EPEMD algorithm. Next we will apply the
271
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

Table IV
MEAN AND VARIANCE VALUES
Target
Method
Var[ˆx]
Var[ˆy]
position [m]
Case 1
(0,9)
Conventional
0.240
0.00237
EPEMD
0.0339
0.00179
Case 2
(0,2)
Conventional
0.0139
0.00216
EPEMD
0.0115
0.00227
Figure 10.
Distribution of estimated positions (Conventional, Case 1)
Figure 11.
Distribution of estimated positions (EPEMD, Case 1)
reﬂected signals, which are often dealt with as multipath
signals, to the EPEMD algorithm. The reason is that the
multipath can surround the target whereas the receivers
cannot surround the target.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present study was supported in part by a Grant-in-
Aid for Young Scientists (B) and by the Telecommunications
Advancement Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Klotz and H. Rohling, “A high range resolution radar
system network for parking aid applications,” International
Conference on Radar Systems, May 1999.
[2] H. Rohling, A. Hoess, U. Luebbert, and M. Schiementz,
“Multistatic radar principles for automotive radarnet appli-
cations,” German Radar symposium 2002, Sep. 2002.
[3] A. Boukerche, H. Oliveira, E. Nakamura, and A. Loureiro,
“Localization systems for wireless sensor networks,” Wireless
Communications, IEEE, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 6 –12, dec. 2007.
[4] V. Ramadurai and M. L. Sichitiu, “Localization in wireless
sensor networks: A probabilistic approach,” Proceedings of
the International Conference on Wireless Networks, ICWN
’03, pp. 275–281, June 2003.
[5] D. Niculescu and B. Nath, “Ad hoc positioning system (aps)
using aoa,” INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second Annual Joint
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications.
IEEE Societies, vol. 3, pp. 1734–1743, April 2003.
[6] N. B. Priyantha, A. K. Miu, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Teller,
“The cricket compass for context-aware mobile applications,”
Proceedings of the 7th annual international conference on
Mobile computing and networking, pp. 1–14, July 2001.
[7] S. Simic and S. S. Sastry, “Distributed localization in wireless
ad hoc networks,” no. UCB/ERL M02/26, 2002.
[8] Y. Chengyou, X. Shanjia, and W. Dongjin, “Location accuracy
of multistatic radars (trn) based on ranging information,”
Radar, 1996. Proceedings., CIE International Conference of,
pp. 34–38, oct. 1996.
[9] A. Hoess, H. Rohling, W. Hosp, R. Doerﬂer, and M. Brandt,
“Multistatic 77GHz radar network for automotive applica-
tions,” ITS World congress 2003, Nov. 2003.
[10] R. Mende, “A multifunctional automotive short range radar
system,” German Radar Symposium 2000, Oct. 2000.
[11] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, H. Okada, and M. Katayama, “Target
position estimation using MMSE for UWB IPCP receiver,”
The 5th international conference on intelligent transportation
systems telecommunication, no. 45-3963283501, Jun. 2005.
[12] D. Oprisan and H. Rohling, “Tracking system for automotive
radar networks,” RADAR 2002, pp. 339–343, Oct. 2002.
[13] M. Klotz and H. Rohling, “24 GHz radar sensors for automo-
tive applications,” International Conference on Microwaves,
Radar and Wireless Communications, vol. 1, pp. 359–362,
Sep. 2000.
[14] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, H. Okada, and M. Katayama, “A
simple estimator of multiple target positions for automotive
short range radar networks,” IEEE vehicular technology con-
ference 2007-spring, pp. 2511–2515, Apr. 2007.
[15] H. Hatano, T. Yamazato, and M. Katayama, “Automotive
ultrasonic array emitter for short-range targets detection,”
IEEE international symposium on wireless communication
systems, pp. 355–359, Sep. 2007.
[16] M. E. Russell, C. A. Drubin, A. S. Marinilli, W. G. Wooding-
ton, and M. J. D. Checcolo, “Integrated automotive sensors,”
IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, vol. 50,
no. 3, pp. 674–677, Mar. 2002.
272
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

