Tree Structured Group ID-Based Routing Method for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks
Hiroaki Yagi, Eitaro Kohno, and Yoshiaki Kakuda
Graduate School of Information Sciences, Hiroshima City University
Email: {yagi@nsw.info., kouno@, kakuda@}hiroshima-cu.ac.jp
Abstract—In ad hoc networks, wireless links can be disconnected
by both the wireless instability and the node mobility. To tackle
the wireless instability problem, multipath routing methods have
been proposed. The multipath source initiated tree-based routing
ID routing method (SRIDR) employs a tree-structured node ID
that is assigned from a speciﬁc source node. While SRIDR is effec-
tive in compensating for disruptions due to wireless instability, it
is not effective when the nodes are mobile. To counter disruptions
due to mobile nodes, nodes have to reconstruct paths. Tree
structured IDs can be assigned by each node in a self-organized
manner. In this paper, we proposed a new tree-structured group
ID-based routing method for mobile ad hoc networks. We have
conﬁrmed that our proposed method can maintain a high data
delivery ratio even if the nodes are mobile.
Keywords-Tree structured group ID; Mobile ad hoc networks;
Bottom-up ID re-assignment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ad hoc networks are self-organized networks, which con-
sist of wireless terminals with routing and forwarding func-
tions. In ad hoc networks, links between nodes can be dis-
connected due to both the instability of wireless connec-
tions and the node’s mobility. These disruptions decrease the
data delivery ratio. In previous research, we proposed the
ﬁrst source node initiated tree structured ID-based multipath
routing method, referred to as the source initiated tree-based
routing ID routing (SRIDR)
[1] [2] in this paper. While
SRIDR is an effective method to compensate for the insta-
bility of wireless connections, it is poor at compensating for
disconnections due to node mobility.
SRIDR’s ID assignment process employs the dynamic
address routing (DART) [3] process. While this process is
useful for static ad hoc networks, this process is problematic
for mobile ad hoc networks. In mobile ad hoc networks,
SRIDR’s ID assignment process lead to the reassignment of
all nodes in a network.
Jain et al. [4] proposed for assigning node ID in heteroge-
neous systems of wired access networks with mobile terminals.
It provides a reassignment system for mobile terminals’ IDs. It
utilizes the same ID assignment process as the one described
in [5]. [4] also utilizes the more effective ”bottom up” method
presented in [6] [7].
In this paper, we propose a new group ID-based multipath
routing method that is an extension of SRIDR. Our proposed
method employs group-based ID and “bottom-up” ID reassign-
ment processes to improve the data delivery ratio of (mobile)
ad hoc networks. We implemented our proposed method on
a network simulator and conﬁrmed the effectiveness of our
proposed method.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section II,
we discuss the background of our research. In Section III, we
describe our proposed method. In Section IV, we show the
results of our simulation experiments. We conclude the paper
in Section V.
II.
BACKGROUND
SRIDR is a multipath routing method for establishing
multiple detouring paths that keeps a communication path con-
nected even if some nodes fail in their data packet forwarding.
SRIDR employs tree-structured node IDs in order to suppress
the control packet count. A node ID is a unique identiﬁer that
shows the relationship between two or more nodes. Each node
is assigned its node ID from the ﬁrst source node [1] [2] [3],
named the start node. In this paper, this assignment procedure
is referred to as the “top down ID assignment procedure.”
In SRIDR, a node constructs its routing table using node
IDs or subnet IDs. A node forwards data packets using the
constructed routing table. A subnet ID shows a group of nodes
which share the same node ID preﬁx. SRIDR has the following
characteristics:
•
Top down assignment of node IDs
•
The utilization of routing tables to construct detour
paths for data packets
In SRIDR, a node ID is assigned by a top down assignment
process from the most signiﬁcant bit of the node ID. Fig. 1
shows a network with nodes that have assigned node IDs. In
SRIDR, the ﬁrst source node (S) becomes the start node, which
initiates the ID assignment process. The start node has the node
ID (000) and it assigns a new node ID to adjacent nodes. Node
C is an adjacent node of node S in Fig. 1. As an example, let
us imagine node C is the ﬁrst node in the network to make an
ID request. In this case, node S assigns the node ID (100) to
node C. Then node A, also an adjacent node of node S makes
an ID request. So node S assigns the node ID (010) to node A.
When a node is assigned its node ID, it can assign node IDs to
adjacent nodes. Subsequently, in Fig. 1, node A assigns node
B the node ID (011) and node C assigns node D the node ID
(110). This is how nodes are assigned their node IDs. Nodes
with assigned IDs exchange routing entries and make a routing
table that constructs multiple paths. A node utilizes this routing
table to ﬁnd detouring paths for data packets. Thus, SRIDR can
compensate for wireless instability by using detouring paths.
In mobile ad hoc networks, node ID based detouring paths are
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 1: “Top-down” node ID assignment procedure.
usually invalid for SRIDR because node IDs might differ in
more than one bit and therefore cannot connect and forward
data. To counter this, node IDs must be reassigned. However, if
every node is reassigned, the resulting inﬂux of control packets
will reduce the data packet delivery ratio. In addition, when a
reassignment request occurs too frequently on a speciﬁc node,
the node cannot have a stable node ID and therefore cannot
forward data appropriately. For this reason, we have proposed
the following method.
III.
PROPOSED METHOD
A. Overview
In this paper, we propose a new group ID assignment
method in order to deal with the reduction of the data delivery
ratio due to node mobility in the tree-structured group ID. In
our proposed method, nodes share the same ID and constructs
groups to minimize the frequency of assignment requests. We
propose reassigning group IDs in a self-organized manner,
referred to as the “bottom-up” reassignment process. The
“bottom-up” reassignment process is localized to the parent-
child relationship of the mobile nodes. This reassignment
process can suppress the escalation of control packets. Our
proposed method has the following characteristics:
1)
Group formulation
2)
“Bottom-up” group ID assignment
3)
Group ID reassignment
In our proposed method, nodes ﬁrst form a group. After
that, each group is assigned its initial group ID. Adjacent
groups exchange information to form a tree structure of
group IDs. When the links between two or more groups are
disconnected, our method reassigns group IDs. We describe
our proposed method below.
B. Group formulation
In our proposed method, multiple nodes that have the same
node ID form a group. Nodes in a group are categorized
as either a head node or member nodes. The formulation of
groups is as follows:
1)
Randomly selected nodes in the network become
head nodes.
2)
The adjacent nodes to the head nodes become mem-
ber nodes.
3)
If a node is not a head or a member node, it performs
the above-mentioned procedures (1 and 2) until all
nodes become either head or member nodes.
(a) Before group formula-
tion.
(b)
Randomly
selected
nodes become head nodes.
(c) The adjacent nodes to
head nodes become mem-
ber nodes.
(d)
Group
formulation
completed.
Figure 2: Group formulation procedure.
Fig. 2 shows the group formulation procedure. Fig. 2(a)
shows an example topology of a network. In Fig. 2(b), nodes
A and F are randomly selected to become head nodes. Sub-
sequently, the nodes adjacent to A and F become member
nodes. This is shown in Fig. 2(c). The solid black line denotes
this relationship. In Fig. 2(c), nodes B and D become member
nodes of node A. Node C, E, and I become member nodes of
node F. These procedures are repeated and the network forms
groups such as Fig. 2(d).
C. “Bottom-up” group ID assignment
When the network forms groups, the head nodes start group
ID assignment procedures. In contrast with the “top down” ID
assignment process, the “bottom-up” ID assignment process
assigns group IDs from the least signiﬁcant bit. When the head
node in a group is assigned its group ID, the member nodes
share the same group ID as the head node. In the procedure of
assigning group IDs between two head nodes, one head node
establishes itself as a parent head node and the other as a child
head node. At this time, parent and child head nodes and their
member nodes form a subnet. A subnet is a small group of
nodes which shares the same preﬁx as the larger group ID.
After that, each group starts to construct a group ID tree using
the following procedures:
1)
Every head node has the initial group ID, (0).
2)
Each head node searches its adjacent head node to
construct a subnet.
3)
The constructed subnet searches for its adjacent head
nodes or subnets to construct a new larger subnet.
4)
Two subnets/head nodes construct a new larger subnet
by adding 0 or 1 at the beginning of the assigned
group ID.
5)
Procedures 2-4 are performed repeatedly during the
predetermined time.
Fig. 3 shows the procedures of group ID assignment. For
convenience, Fig. 3 shows only head nodes. Each head node
has an initial group ID, (0), and constructs a new subnet by
combining with other head nodes. Suppose that head nodes A
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

(a) Conbine between head
nodes.
(b) Conbine between sub-
nets.
Figure 3: Group ID assignment procedure.
and C combine. If , for example, node C is the ﬁrst to request
combining, node A becomes the parent head node, and assigns
a 1 in front of its assigned group ID, (0). Then node C becomes
the child head node and it assigns a 0 in front of the assigned
group ID, (0). As a result, the group IDs of nodes A and C
become (10) and (00), respectively. In the same manner, head
nodes B and D form a new subnet and become child and parent
head nodes as shown in Fig. 3(a).
Next, we assume that subnets A-C and B-D will combine
and construct a new subnet. When head node A becomes the
parent head node, head nodes in subnet A-C add a 1 at the
beginning of their existing group IDs (10) and (00). In addition,
head nodes in subnet B-D add a 0 at the beginning of their
existing group IDs (00) and (10). Consequently, head nodes
A, B, C, and D acquire their group IDs (110), (000), (100),
and (010), respectively.
D. Group ID reassignment
When a child head node or its member node detects
a disruption in the link to its parent head node, the child
head node or member node starts the group ID reassignment
procedure. While the parent head node also detects a disruption
in the link with the child head node or member node, it does
not perform the group ID reassignment procedure, maintaining
a higher packet delivery ratio. The following is the group ID
reassignment procedure in our proposed method:
1)
A child head node or a member node detects a
disruption in the link to its parent head node.
2)
If a child head node or a member node locates another
head node, it reassigns its group ID to join the new
head node. This completes the group ID reassignment
procedure.
3)
If a child head node or a member node cannot locate
another head node, it starts the group ID reassignment
procedure with the member nodes in its group.
4)
After procedure 3, the “bottom-up” group ID assign-
ment procedure will start and the child head node’s
group will join the group ID tree of an adjacent group.
Fig. 4 shows the result of this group ID assignment
procedure. In Fig.
4, X indicates a “don’t care bit” that is
a 1 or a 0. “1XX” shows the subnet that includes head nodes
A and C, and member nodes E and G. These nodes shares the
same preﬁx “1” at the beginning of their group ID/node IDs.
Similarly, “0XX” shows the subnet that includes head nodes
B and D, and member nodes F and H. These nodes share the
Figure 4: Result of group ID assignment procedure.
same preﬁx “0” at the beginning of their group ID/node IDs.
“XXX” indicates the whole network. It is special a subnet.
E. Data packet forwarding
As in SRIDR, our proposed method forwards data packets
in the following way:
1)
A node compares its group ID with the destination
node’s group ID, and calculates the subnet to which
the destination node belongs.
2)
The node refers its own routing table and determines
the next hop node using the subnet information.
3)
The node forwards the data packet to the next hop
node.
4)
Our proposed method repeats procedures 1-3 until the
destination node receives the data packet.
IV.
SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
A. Overview
We have conducted simulation experiments of our proposed
method on a network simulator, QualNet ver.5.0 [8], to evalu-
ate its effectiveness. We have measured the data packet delivery
ratio and the control packet count. We compared our proposed
method to SRIDR and a tree structured bottom-up node ID-
based routing method without group IDs.
B. Simulation Environment
TABLE I: Parameters for experiments.
Simulator
QualNet ver.5.0 [8]
Number of nodes
50
Field size (m2)
1100 × 1100
Number of source and destination pairs
1, 5
Data packet size (Byte)
512
Data packet interval (sec)
0.25
Radio area (m)
250
MAC layer protocol
IEEE802.11b
Max. bandwidth (Mbps)
2
Simulation time (sec)
2000
Node distribution
RANDOM
Max. node speed (m/s)
5
Node mobility model
Random waypoint model [9]
Table I shows the parameters for the simulation experi-
ments. We set the ﬁeld size to accommodate an average of
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 5: The data packet delivery ratio.
eight adjacent nodes. In addition, nodes are randomly deployed
and there is one source and destination pair (In Figs. 5 and 6
we denoted as “Source and destination pairs:1 ”) or ﬁve source
and destination pairs (In Figs. 5 and 6 we denoted as “Source
and destination pairs:5 ”).
C. Methodology
When a run of the simulation experiment starts, each node
starts group formulation procedures and performs bottom-up
group ID assignment procedures. 20 seconds after the start
of the simulation run, the ﬁrst source node starts transmitting
the data packets. With the conﬁguration of ﬁve source and
destination pairs, 10 seconds after that, the second source node
starts transmitting data packets. Thereafter the other source
nodes start to transmit data packets one after another every
10 seconds. When a node detects a disruption, SRIDR sends
data packets using detouring paths. In contrast, our proposed
method and the tree structured bottom-up node ID-based
routing method performs their group ID/node ID reassignment
processes instead.
D. Result
Figs. 5 and 6 show the results of the data packet delivery
ratio and the control packet count with respect to our proposed
method, SRIDR, and the tree structured bottom-up node ID-
based routing method, respectively. The vertical axes show
the results of the data packet delivery ratio and the control
packet count, respectively. The horizontal axes are the routing
methods. Each result is the average of 50 simulation runs. The
error bars show 95 percent conﬁdence intervals.
To measure the amount of control packets, we created an
output ﬁle in a simulator. In the simulator, when a control
packet was transmitted, the simulator added a line to the output
ﬁle indicating the data size of the control packet. When the
simulation experiment was concluded, we calculated the total
amount of control packets.
Control packets varied in size from 8 to 28 (Byte/packet).
However, control packet containing node routing tables varied
with a larger range.
E. Discussion
Fig. 5 shows our proposed method has the highest data
packet delivery ratio among the methods. This shows that
Figure 6: The amount of control packets.
our proposed method is the most effective. Additionally, the
data packet delivery ratio of SRIDR and that of the tree
structured bottom-up node ID-based routing method are almost
the same. In the tree structured bottom-up node ID-based
routing method, there is a high frequency of reassignment
procedures which slows down data packet delivery ratio to
about the same as SRIDR. Therefore, the data packet delivery
ratio is the same as SRIDR.
Fig. 6 shows that the control packet count of SRIDR is
the smallest and the control packet count of our proposed
method is slightly smaller than that of the tree structured
bottom-up node ID-based routing method. In SRIDR, since
the node ID reassignment procedures were not performed,
the control packet count of SRIDR is smaller than that of
our proposed method. While the control packet count of our
proposed method was larger than SRIDR, the frequency of
group ID reassignment was low. In our proposed method, links
between groups were increased by forming groups, leads to a
smaller control packet count than that of the tree structured
bottom-up node ID-based routing method.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a new tree structured group ID-
based routing method to tackle the disruptions caused by the
node mobility. We implemented our proposed method on a
network simulator and performed the experiment to compare
and evaluate the results. Our proposed method showed a high
data delivery ratio and lower control packet count than that of
the tree structured bottom-up node ID-based routing method.
As future work, we planned to measure characteristics over
time of our proposed method. We have to improve our method
taking into account the connectivity of groups.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number (B) (No.24300028), and (C) (No.25330109). This
research is also supported by the Ministry of Internal Af-
fairs and Communications under Strategic Information and
Communications R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE) Grant
No.131408006, and by The Telecommunications Advancement
Foundation (TAF), Japan.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

REFERENCES
[1]
T. Okazaki, E. Kohno, T. Ohta, and Y. Kakuda, “A multipath routing
method with dynamic ID for reduction of routing load in ad hoc
networks.” in ADHOCNETS’10, ser. Lecture Notes of the Institute
for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering, J. Zheng, D. Simplot-Ryl, and V. C. M. Leung, Eds., vol. 49,
no. 2, 2010, pp. 114–129.
[2]
T. Okazaki, E. Kohno, and Y. Kakuda, “Improvement of assurance for
wireless sensor networks using packet detouring and dispersed data
transmission,” Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International Conference
on Internet of Things and Cyber, Physical and Social Computing
(iThings/CPSCom 2011), 2011, pp. 144–151.
[3]
J. Eriksson, M. Faloutsos, and S. V. Krishnamurthy, “DART: Dynamic
address routing for scalable ad hoc and mesh networks,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 15, no. 1, Apr. 2007, pp. 119–132.
[4]
S. Jain, Y. Chen, and Z.-L. Zhang, “Viro: A scalable, robust and names-
pace independent virtual id routing for future networks,” in INFOCOM,
2011 Proceedings IEEE, 2011, pp. 2381–2389.
[5]
L. Ramachandran, M. Kapoor, A. Sarkar, and A. Aggarwal, “Clustering
algorithms for wireless ad hoc networks,” in Proceedings of the 4th
International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile
Computing and Communications, ser. DIALM ’00.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2000, pp. 54–63.
[6]
S. Jain, Y. Chen, Z.-L. Zhang, and S. Jain, “Veil: A ”plug-&-play” virtual
(ethernet) id layer for below ip networking,” in GLOBECOM Workshops,
2009 IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[7]
G.-H. Lu, S. Jain, S. Chen, and Z.-L. Zhang, “Virtual id routing:
A scalable routing framework with support for mobility and routing
efﬁciency,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Mobility
in the Evolving Internet Architecture, ser. MobiArch ’08.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp. 79–84.
[8]
Scalable Network Technologies, Inc., “QualNet network simulator.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.scalable-networks.com/
[retrieved:
December, 2013]
[9]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks,” in Mobile Computing. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1996, vol. 353, pp. 153–181.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

