1
Planning with Joint Clustering in Multi-hop
Wireless Mesh and Sensor Networks
Y. Drabu and H. Peyravi
Department of Computer Science
Kent State University
Kent, Ohio 44242
email: ydrabu@cs.kent.edu and peyravi@cs.kent.edu
Abstract—Wide spread deployment of wireless mesh networks
for broadband access requires careful deployment and planning
in terms of laying down the network infrastructure. Deploy-
ing such networks comes with some major inter-related issues
including capacity planning, scalability and access reliability.
Planning includes determining the number of gateways, optimal
placement of gateways and relay nodes, maximizing coverage
while minimizing the operational cost.
This paper focuses on a planning approach that aims at
increasing access fairness and fault tolerance using an overlap-
ping clustering technique. It provides alternate paths for nodes
residing at the edge of the clusters and mitigates upstream
blocking towards the gateways to control delay, congestion and
loss rate.
Keywords-wireless mesh network; clustering; wireless deploy-
ment; gateway placement;
I. INTRODUCTION
The demand for seamless broad-band wireless Internet ac-
cess has been the major driving force behind the development
of multi-hop wireless mesh networks (WMNs) [1]. Wireless
mesh networks combine several existing technologies and
concepts from cellular, ad hoc, and sensor networks to improve
network coverage, easy of deployment and better throughput.
The shared wireless nature of the medium makes them more
susceptible to failure. Transmission link failure, in which a
wireless link experience an excessive loss rate or prolonged
delays, is a common case of failure. This is mainly due to
outdoor noise, interferences, multi-path fading, contention and
congestion. Wireless mesh networks may also be subject to a
variety of other faults including faults in network elements
and protocol faults [2]. These faults result in low throughput
and excessive delay or no connection at all. Some faults that
are supposed to recover from path failure may create routing
loops or a black holes. However, these faults can be mitigated
or prevented by a careful and robust planning.
For a successful deployment of WMNs in such an envi-
ronment, it is essential to provide certain resilience to the
network connectivity during planning and deployment to avoid
potential failures [3]. WMNs planning involves several inter-
dependent factors that include network topology, network cov-
erage, trafﬁc demand, and capacity assignment. The optimal
number of gateways and their locations have to be determined
in advance and before deployment.
Gateway placement has a signiﬁcant impact on the overall
network performance including its ﬁnancial viability and ac-
cess reliability. In WMNs, trafﬁc congestion is mostly due
to up-stream aggregate trafﬁc heading towards a gateway
and that can be controlled by proper placement of gateways.
While minimizing the number of gateways will reduce the
deployment cost, fewer gateways will increase the average hop
distance and consequently increases the average delay and the
average relay load of the intermediate routers. Finding the
optimal number of gateways can formulate as an optimization
problem in which an objective function minimizes the number
of gateways subject to a set of QoS requirements.
The gateway placement problem is similar to the clustering
problem. Clustering has been studied extensively in the con-
text of operation research with different objective functions
and optimization goals. One of the main distinctions among
clustering techniques is in their objective function. In the
context of wireless mesh works, a set of more complicated
and dynamic objective functions is involved in the clustering
The set could include cluster size, number of clusters, hop
count, and relay load. Given a signiﬁcant portion of delay
a packet suffers is associated with the hop count the packet
travels, it is important to put a limit on the hop count towards
a gateway and then optimize the other objectives.
In this paper, the optimal layout of the network has been
integrated to the planning phase of a WMN deployment.
It will allow diverse routing and fault-tolerant provisioning,
particularly for links that face higher blocking probability to
access a gateway. Generally, an edge node of a cluster faces
more blocking probability and hence higher delay and loss
rate than nodes closer to the cluster head. A new clustering
technique is introduced by which the gateway placement
algorithm allows redundant cluster membership to improve
access reliability while keeping the optimality intact.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
summarizes related work with respect to the gateway place-
ment problem in wireless mesh networks. Section III covers
basic preliminaries and deﬁnitions. Section IV presents a new
network clustering techniques based on maximal independent
sets. Section V extends the clustering algorithm of Section IV
for joint cluster membership for disadvantaged nodes. Section
VII concludes the paper.
309
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

2
II. RELATED WORK
Link failure in a wireless network is commonly caused due
to interference in the medium or trafﬁc congestion and on rarer
occasion due to the radio malfunction.
Fault tolerance has been getting a lot of attention in the area
of sensory networks [2], due to the higher node failure rate,
large scale of the network and the desire to increase automa-
tion. Fault recovery in such networks has been addressed in
terms of routing [4], topology control [5], power assignment
[6] and channel assignment [7], [8].
On the other hand, fault tolerance in wireless mesh net-
works, which are more stable than sensory networks, has
been studied in the context of networking layer using routing
protocols [9]. The routing protocols ﬁnds an alternate path to
route a packet from a source to a destination if the primary
path fails. However, all routing algorithms assume some route
redundancy in the underlying network topology, which is more
apparent in WMNs than in sensor networks.
In [10] the authors discuss fault tolerance with respect
to gateway placements. To address node and link failures
they modify the gateway placement LP formulation and add
a fault tolerance constraint to ensure over-provisioning via
multiple independent paths. They propose a greedy heuristic
to address gateway placement that iteratively picks up nodes
that increasingly satisfy the trafﬁc demand without necessarily
selecting a node that satisﬁes the most demand. Therefore, in
this work we focus on building wireless network that are fault
tolerant at the network topological level.
A. Gateway Placement Problem
In the following, we give an overview of the gateway
placement problem and provide the most common approaches
proposed in the context of wireless mesh networks.
1) Placement with Integer Linear Programming: The op-
timal placement can be obtained by minimizing the number
of clusters(k in Equation 8) subject to a set of constraints
such maximum cluster size, maximum cluster radius, etc. The
combinatoric algorithm checks all possible combinations to
ﬁnd a solution that satisﬁes all the QoS constraints. This
approach is prohibitively expensive and does not scale beyond
very small network.
2) Placement with Greedy Approach: In [10], the authors
suggest to place the gateway simply at a location where it
satisﬁes the most trafﬁc demand subject to the capacity of the
gateway and relay nodes. However their greedy approach can
lead to an imbalance loading of certain gateway and does not
support all the quality of service requirements.
3) Placement with Iterative Clustering: The earliest work
that directly addressed the placement of gateways in a wireless
mesh network [11] describes the problem as a capacitate fa-
cility location problem with additional constraints. The author
solves the placement problem by breaking it into two sub
problems. First a polynomial time approximation algorithm
that cuts the network into disjoint clusters using a shifting
algorithm or a greedy dominating independent set algorithm.
Once the initial clustering is completed, each cluster is eval-
uated to that ensure QoS constraints are met. If the QoS is
violated, then the cluster is sub-divided into smaller clusters
at the node where QoS is violated. However, for the solution
to work, it is assumed that the underlying medium access
protocol is TDMA(Time-Division Multiple Access). TDMA
protocols require synchronization, which is hard to achieve in
large multi-hop wireless networks. Additionally, the proposed
solution generates higher fragmented clusters.
4) Placement with Recursive Clustering: Similar to [11],
in [12], the authors form a cluster and a spanning tree within
each cluster to obtain a near optimal solution. They propose a
recursive algorithm that builds a clustering and then admits
it into the solution only if it meets the QoS constraints.
The algorithms is able to produce lesser number of clusters
than those in [11]. However, the cluster sizes have a large
variance and the clustering does not vary uniformly when with
a uniform change in QoS constraints.
5) Split-Merge-Shift: The Split-Merge-Shift [13] starts with
an initial clustering graph and then it goes through a few
iterations of Split, Merge, and Shift operations to form the
ﬁnal clustering. The algorithm does not necessarily generate
an optimal solution initially, but over a set of iterative Split-
Merge-Shift operation it converges close to optimality.
III. PRELIMINARIES
In planning, deployment or updating a wireless network, it
is often necessary to determine the transmission range with an
acceptable throughput. While there are many factors that affect
the tranmission range, the theoretical transmission distance can
be obtained from a few key speciﬁcations.
Deﬁnition 1 (Transmission Range): Given the transmission
power Pt, the receiving power Pr, the transmission range d
can be calculated as,
d = λ
4π
r
PtGtGr
PrFt
(1)
where Gt, Gr are the transmitting and receiving gains with
an acceptable loss factor Ft and λ is the wavelength of the
communication channel.
Deﬁnition 2 (Transmittance Matrix): We deﬁne the binary
transmittance matrix T = [tij] as
tij =
 1
if
dij ≤ tr,
i ̸= j
0
otherwise.
1 ≤ i, j ≤ N
(2)
where dij be the Euclidian distance between node i and node
j obtained from Equation 1.
Deﬁnition 3 (Reachability Matrix): The
h-hop
binary
reachability matrix Rh = [rij] is deﬁned as
Rh = T 1 ∨ T 2 ∨ · · · ∨ T h =
h_
k=1
T k,
(3)
where ∨ is the binary OR operation, and
rij =



1
if node i is at most h hops away from
node j, i ̸= j
0
otherwise.
(4)
310
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

3
Deﬁnition 4 (Hop Count Matrix): The entries of the hop
count matrix H = [hij] give the hop distance between nodes
within the reachability range such that,
hij =
 k
if node j is within k ≤ h hops from node i
0
otherwise.
(5)
where h = max{hij | 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N}.
Corollary 1: The reachability matrix Rh = [rij] can be
obtained from the hop-count matrix H as,
rij =
 1
if hij > 0
0
otherwise.
(6)
Deﬁnition 5 (Cluster): A cluster C(V ′, E′) ⊆ G(V, E) is
an acyclic sub graph of G such that, V ′ ⊆ V and E′ ⊆ E.
Deﬁnition 6 (Clustering): A clustering is a way of parti-
tioning graph G(V, E) and can be formally deﬁned as a set
of clusters Ω, where,
Ω = {C1, C2, · · · , Ck},
1 ≤ k ≤ N,
(7)
with the following properties:











P1 :
Tk
i=1 Ci = ∅
P2 :
Sk
i=1 Ci = G
P3 :
V (Ω) = V (G)
P4 :
E(Ω) = Sk
i=1 E(Ci) ⊆ E(G).
(8)
Property P1 guarantees that clusters are independent with no
nodes in common. Relaxing this property allows overlapping
clusters. Ω can be represented by an N ×N asymmetric binary
matrix with k non-zero rows, each representing a cluster with
exactly a 1 on each column, characterizing each node to belong
only to one cluster. Formally,
ΩN×N = [ωij] ∈ {0, 1}
with the following constraints,
(a) :
N
X
i=1
wij = 1,
1 ≤ j ≤ N
(b) :
N
X
j=1
wij > 0,
for some i
(9)
Constraint (a) guarantees that each node belongs only to
one cluster, and constraint (b) makes node i as a cluster head
with its member nodes j, where ωij = 1 (1 ≤ j ≤ N).
Later, in Section V, we relax the property P1 in Equation
8 and its corresponding constraint (a) in Equation 9 to allow
a node to participate in more than one cluster.
Generally, clustering formation and optimal placement of
gateways (cluster heads) with some QoS constraints is known
to be an NP-hard problem [14]. Several heuristic are proposed
in [11], [10], [12] and [13] to place gateways efﬁciently in a
given network. However limited work has been done to allow
fault-tolerant through joint memberships.
While ad hoc routing algorithms such as AODV (Ad hoc
On-demand Distance Vector) and some of its variations can
be used to route packets in multi-hop wireless mesh net-
works, generally they face a few shortcomings when directly
applied to WMNs. First, their throughput performance does
not typically scale to meet the expectation, particularly for
real-time applications that are delay-sensitive or even loss-
sensitive for data transmission. Their effective performance in
terms of QoS requirements such delay, loss and jitter depends
strongly on the underlying topology and the transmission
range. Second, unlike ad hoc networks, where the trafﬁc
ﬂows between arbitrary nodes, WMN trafﬁc is either to or
from a designated gateway (similar to a cellular system). A
WMN routing algorithm must exploit this property to gain
efﬁciency, which is the intention of this paper. Third, ad hoc
routing algorithms are designed to deal with the possibility of
highly mobile nodes and that requires a signiﬁcant amount of
overhead for route discovery, mobility and maintenance. On
the other hand, WMNs routers have minimal mobility. This is
yet another characteristic that can be exploited for efﬁciency.
Finally, in terms of planning, ad hoc network planning is
mostly done manually without any systematic approach, and
often without paying attention to the overall system cost.
Because of their relatively ﬁx position (or change of po-
sition is limited within a certain range) of WMN nodes, the
implication is that the routing paths can be created that are
likely to be stable. This will substantially reduce the routing
overhead. The most commonly used topology for WMNs is a
grid layout which is due to the layout of building and blocks.
The relatively stationary topology of WMNs suggests that we
can develop a more simpliﬁed routing algorithm along with a
systematic approach to the planning and deployment. All these
necessitate a different approach to the planning, deployment,
and routing in WMNs which is the focus of this paper.
IV. PLANNING WITH DISJOINT CLUSTERING
By strictly applying property P1 in Equation 8 along with
constraint (a) in Equation 9, a clustering matrix in the form
of Equation 2 can be formulated to represent an optimal set
non-overlapping clusters covering the mesh network.
One of the important QoS requirements in WMNs is to
determine the maximum number of hops a packet can travel
before reaching its intended destination (gateway). For that,
we form the h-hop reachability matrix Rh from Equation 3
that identiﬁes the reachability set for each node on its rows.
This can be viewed as an initial clustering (trivial clusters)
in which every node is considered to be a cluster head with
all its members within h-hop distance. Clearly, this will create
the maximum possible number of clusters (N) with maximum
overlap amongst them. However, condition P1 in Equation 8 is
not satisﬁed for non-overlapping clusters. To satisfy property
P1, we introduce a cluster graph in which cluster Ci is
connected to cluster Cj if Ci ∩ Cj = ∅, 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N, i ̸= j.
We further deﬁne the corresponding clustering overlap matrix
as follows.
Deﬁnition 7 (Clustering Overlap Matrix): The entries of
the clustering overlap Matrix, O = [oij] is deﬁnes as,
oij =





N
X
k=1
rik ∧ rjk
i ̸= j
0
i = j
1 ≤ i, j ≤ N,
(10)
311
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

4
where ∧ is the binary operation AND, and oij is the inner
product of row i and row j of Rh. In effect oij gives the
number of common nodes in two adjacent clusters headed by
nodes i and j are considered two cluster heads. We deﬁne
the adjacency clustering matrix A = [aij] that describes
relationships between clusters as follows.
Deﬁnition 8 (Clustering Adjacency Matrix): The
clustering adjacency matrix A = [aij] is deﬁned as,
aij =
 1
if oij ≥ Ic ̸= 0
0
otherwise.
(11)
For disjoint clustering, ﬁrst, we consider the case where
Ic = 1. We start with the transmission matrix T in Equation 2
and a maximum clustering radius of h. We compute the reach-
ability matrix within h-hop distance for each node according
to Equation 3. The clustering adjacency matrix A identiﬁes
the relationship between potential clusters in terms of node
sharing. We deﬁne matrix A′ as the complement of A where,
a′
ij =
 1
if ai,j = 0
0
if ai,j = 1
(12)
A′ identiﬁes all pair-wise disjoint clusters.
Deﬁnition 9 (Inter Cluster Distance): Inter cluster distance
Dh is deﬁned as the maximum number of hops between any
two clusters.
To ﬁnd the optimal location of cluster heads with maximum
coverage, one has to ﬁnd the maximum clique (maximum
complete subgraph) of the graph associated with the adjacency
matric A′. We use the Algorithm original developed by [15] to
ﬁnd the largest clique (complete subgraph). The current imple-
mentation of the algorithm searches for maximal independent
vertex sets in the complementer graph. Given we have applied
the constraint of hop-count h on each cluster, depending on
the network topology, the algorithm does not necessarily cover
all the nodes in the clustering.
Consider the 100-node mesh network of Figure 1. The initial
Fig. 1.
A 100-node mesh network.
clustering is shown in Figure 2 in which 8 gateways optimally
cover the network with maximum hop count h = 2. The
initial clustering does not cover nodes all the nodes mainly
due to the inter-cluster constraints applies. For example, nodes
{41, 45, 48, 52, 55, 57, 60, 64, 66, 73, 79, 81, 82} have not been
assigned to any of the clusters due to: (i) the maximum 2-
hop coverage (h = 2) by the cluster heads, and (ii) the inter-
cluster distance Ic = 1, i.e., neighboring clusters are at least
one hop away from each other. However, uncovered nodes
Fig. 2.
Initial clustering with h = 2 and Ic=1.
nodes are at most h hops away from a nearby cluster. For
that we identify the inter-cluster distance matrix for the above
clustering algorithm.
Theorem 1: A node is either a cluster head or at most 2h
hops away from a cluster head.
Proof: Given, the clustering algorithm forms only disjoint
clusters, there are two cases.
If Sk
i=1 Ci = G, then the clustering algorithm covers all
nodes in the network and Property P2 holds. Every node is
within h hops from a cluster head and no nodes lies between
two adjacent clusters, and hence Dh = 1.
If Sk
i=1 Ci ̸= G, then there is at least one node that does not
belong to any of the clusters. Let v ∈ G but v /∈ Sk
i=1 Ci be
such a node. Let the closest cluster to v be Ci with its cluster
head node u. The h-hop reachability set of v is either disjoint
or it has some nodes in common with the h-hop reachability
set of u. Let Rh(v) and Rh(u) be the h-hop reachability sets
for node v and u, respectively.
• Case 1: Rh(v)∩Rh(u) ̸= ∅. Let w be a common node in
both reachability sets. Then the hop distance H(v, w) ≤
h and the hop distance H(u, w) ≤ h. Hence H(u, v) ≤
2h.
• Case 2: Rh(v) ∩ Rh(u) = ∅. Then v by itself constitutes
an independent reachability set within its h radius and
forms an independent cluster.
From Theorem 1, we can conclude the following corollaries.
Corollary 2: The maximum inter-cluster distance Dh = h.
Corollary 3: A node that has not been assigned to any
clusters is at most h hops away from a neighboring cluster.
312
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

5
h
u
w
v
v
Case 1
Case 2
u
Rh(u)
Rh(v)
Rh(v)
Rh(u)
h
h
Fig. 3.
Inter-cluster distance.
This
is
shown
in
Figure
2
in
which
nodes
{41, 45, 48, 52, 55, 57, 60, 64, 66, 73, 79, 81, 82}
are
either
one hop or two hops away from a neighboring cluster, where
h = 2. After the initial clustering, we will ﬁnd the nearest
cluster for the remaining nodes them to join. This is shown
in Figure 4. Therefore, the radius of the ﬁnal clustering is at
Fig. 4.
Final disjoint clustering, 2 ≤ h ≤ 4, Ic = 1.
most 2h = 4 hops. While the inter-cluster distance Ic = 1 is
one hop among the neighboring clusters, due to the network
topology some clusters are affected by the residual nodes left
out from the constraint h in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: Disjoint Clustering
Input : Transmittance Matrix T, h, Ic = 1
Output: Array C of cluster heads
1 Calculate Rh = Wh
k=1 T k
Eqn. 6
2 Calculate oij = PN
k=1 rik ∧ rjk
Eqn. 10
1 ≤ i, j ≤ N
3 Calculate A from O for Ic = 1
Eqn. 11
4 Calculate A′ from A
5 Use the maximal independent set [15] to identify the
cluster heads.
6 Form clusters by incorporating the reachability set (from
Rh) for each cluster head.
7 Assign nodes outsides clusters to the closest cluster.
A. Analysis
The processing time involved in Steps 1-4 in Algorithm
1 are all based on two-dimensional matrices (mostly sparse
matrices) and bounded by O(N 2). The processing time and
memory space in step 5 are bounded by O(N + m) and
O(Nmδ), respectively, where N is the number of nodes, m
is the number of edges and δ is the maximal independent sets
of the graph [15].
V. PLANNING WITH JOINT CLUSTERING
By relaxing property P1 in Equation 8 and constraint (a)
in Equation 9, we can obtain clusters that can share available
bandwidth at the edge of clusters. Nodes at the edge of clusters
belong to more than on cluster simply because they are in
disadvantage positions as far as gateway access is concerned.
They can dynamically switch their cluster membership due to
a weak or bad connection at the edge of each cluster. This
can be achieved in two ways; i) making Dh = 1 and allow
the inter-cluster links be shared by the neighboring clusters,
or ii) make clusters overlap by one or more hops. Note that
the objective of this paper is to compensate access disparity
with access redundancy for those nodes further away from a
gateway to improve their throughput.
In this clustering scheme, nodes that are h hops away from
a gateway have memberships in more than one cluster. The
joint clustering algorithm is simply an extention of disjoint
clustering algorithm with inter-cluster nodes having at least
dual membership in neighboring clusters. This is shown in
Algorithm 2. The difference between Algorithms 1 and 2 are
Algorithm 2: Joint Clustering
Input : Transmittance Matrix T, h, Ic ≥ 1
Output: Array C of cluster heads
1 Calculate Rh = Wh
k=1 T k
Eqn. 6
2 Calculate oij = PN
k=1 rik ∧ rjk
Eqn. 10
1 ≤ i, j ≤ N
3 Calculate A from O for a given Ic
Eqn. 11
4 Calculate A′ from A
5 Use the maximal independent set [15] to identify the
cluster heads.
6 Form clusters by incorporating the reachability set (from
Rh) for each cluster head.
7 Assign nodes outsides clusters to adjacent clusters.
in steps 3 and 7. Figures 5 and 6 show one hop (h = 1)
clustering with Ic = 1 and Ic = 2, respectively.
Similarly,
Figure 7 for h = 2 and Ic = 3 The choice for h and Ic
depends on the planning. Clearly, increasing Ic reduces the
number of clusters and hence the number of gateways and
higher fault-tolerance. The drawback is the amount of delay.
VI. PERFORMANCE
In multi-hop networks, the throughput performance of a
connection decays exponentially with an increase in hop count.
313
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

6
Fig. 5.
h = 1, Ic = 1
Fig. 6.
h = 1, Ic = 2
Fig. 7.
h = 2, Ic = 3.
This is illustrated in Figure 8 for a simple network that is illus-
trated in Figure 9 in which a packet hops towards a gateway. A
packet may runs into successive contentions and that results
in higher blocking probability on each hop along the path
towards its intended gateway. Each link carries a local trafﬁc
load (ρ) and relays up-stream trafﬁc from previous nodes.
Fig. 8.
Maximum throughput performance across different trafﬁc loads.
. . .
G
4
3
2
1
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
ρ
Fig. 9.
A linear multi-hop network.
Figure 8 illustrates the theoretical end-to-end throughput as a
function Erlang blocking probability for different trafﬁc load
(ρ) excluding loss rates. While Erlang blocking probability
has been studied extensively in the content of switching
networks and telephony, it can be used to approximate the
blocking probably for applications such as VoIP in packet
switching networks or wireless cellular systems, in which the
end-to-end is connection-oriented. The exponential throughput
degradation has also been observed in several experiments we
conducted with Roofnet [16] which is discussed in Section
VI-A, and simulation results we obtained in Section VI-B.
A. Roofnet Experiment
In our Roofnet experiment, a 5-node mesh network was
created in a 3D indoor environment. The conﬁguration of
wireless network is depicted in Figure 10. With the Roofnet
Fig. 10.
A small Roofnet conﬁguration.
protocol [16] installed on each router (54 GHz, 802.11g),
we measured the effect of the number of hops as well as
314
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

7
the hop distance (in dB) between each pair of relay routers.
File with various sizes destined towards the gateway (node
A in Figure (10) were generated by the clients that are
connected to a neighboring relay router. Each experiment was
conducted ﬁve times at different times of the day and the
results were averaged. The experiment was then repeated by
increasing the hop distance. We also varied the Euclidian
distance within each hop. Figure 11 illustrates the exponential
decay of throughput performance when a hop distance (left)
or the hop count (right) increases. The two major observation
Fig. 11. The effect of hop distance (left) and hop count (right) on throughput.
from Figure 11 are: (i) the transmission range between routers
has to be factored into the clustering and deployment, as
incorporated in Algorithm 1, and (ii) the throughput disparity
for nodes distant away from the gateway has to be mitigated,
as incorporated in Algorithm 2.
B. Simulation Experiment (Qualnet)
In addition to Roofnet experiment, we also used Qualnet
[17] simulator to perform two separate experiments. The ﬁrst
was to study the effect of hop distance on throughput and
access fairness, and the second was to see the effect of
providing alternate cluster membership for a source node on
the edge of a cluster as proposed in this paper to increase
network resilience with respect to failure.
In the ﬁrst experiment, we setup ﬁve wireless nodes as a
linear multi-hop network, similar to the network in Figure 9,
with the ﬁrst node being the trafﬁc source and the gateway
node being the trafﬁc destination. We then increased the load,
by increasing the trafﬁc generated on the source node and
observed the effect of load on the throughput. We repeated
the simulation with trafﬁc ﬂows between source destination
pairs. In this experiment, we limit the hop-counts to 4, as
the throughput performance deteriorates signiﬁcantly beyond
4 hops. Figure 12 shows the throughput performance varying
based on the load for different hop distances. We observed
that the throughput of the ﬂows with fewer hop count is
signiﬁcantly better than the throughput of ﬂows with higher
hop count. As load increases beyond 40-50%, the throughput
for all scenarios start decreasing, mainly due to the contention
resolution and back-off algorithms provisioned in the 802.11
protocol. This result is in line with our analysis and the
Roofnet experiments.
Fig. 12.
Load vs. throughput with hop distance.
In the second experiment as shown in Figure 13, we allowed
overlapping of clusters in the planning phase, thus enabling
node S to be part of cluster C1 and C2. We created a trafﬁc
ﬂow from node S to node D. We then studied the effect of load
on the throughput with and without the overlapping clustering.
Figure 14 illustrates the effect of load on the throughput with
S 
D 
G 
C1 
C2 
C3 
G 
G 
Fig. 13.
Overlapping clusters simulation setup.
a node belongs to one or two clusters. The throughput for a
node is signiﬁcantly higher if it belong to two clusters.
VII. CONCLUSION
Mesh networks, due to their multi-point to multi-point
architecture, inherently lend themselves to being more resilient
to faults. However, the placement of wired gateways in these
WMNs has a signiﬁcant impact the on network throughput
performance, cost and capacity to satisfying the quality of
service (QoS) requirements as well as fault tolerance. In the
context of gateway placement, the QoS is inﬂuenced by the
number of gateways, the number of nodes served by each
gateway, the location of the gateways, and the relay load on
each wireless router.
In this paper we developed a new clustering technique
that improves fault-tolerance in wireless mesh networks. It
315
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

8
Fig. 14.
Load vs. throughput with and without overlapping
also mitigates the throughput disparity among nodes distant
way from a gateway by allowing them to join multi-cluster.
Simulation results and measurements have shown a signiﬁ-
cant improvement in terms of throughput once clustering is
incorporated during the deployment process. The clustering
is independent of underlying network routing protocol, but
improves the overall performance.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Bahl, “Opportunities and challenges of community mesh networking,”
May 2004.
[2] Q. H. Lilia Paradis, “A survey of fault management in wireless sensor
networks,” Journal of Network and Systems Management, vol. 15, no. 2,
pp. 171–190, June 2007.
[3] W. W. Ian F. Akyildiz, Xudong Wang, “Wireless mesh networks: a
survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 445–487, March 2005.
[4] E. Royer and C. Toh, “A review of current routing protocols for ad-hoc
mobile wireless networks,” Apr 1999.
[5] X.-Y. Li, P.-J. Wan, Y. Wang, and C.-W. Yi, “Fault tolerant deployment
and topology control in wireless ad hoc networks: Research articles,”
Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 109–125, 2004.
[6] S. A. et al., “Distributed power control in ad hoc wireless networks,”
PIMRC, 2001.
[7] W. Si, S. Selvakennedy, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An overview of channel
assignment methods for multi-radio multi-channel wireless mesh net-
works,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 505–524, 2010.
[8] K. L. E. Law and A. Kohn, “Topology designs with controlled in-
terference for multi-radio wireless mesh networks,” in Mobility ’08:
Proceedings of the International Conference on Mobile Technology,
Applications, and Systems.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008, pp.
1–6.
[9] R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B. Zill, “Routing in multi-radio, multi-hop
wireless mesh networks,” in MobiCom ’04: Proceedings of the 10th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking.
New York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2004, pp. 114–128.
[10] R. Chandra, L. Qiu, K. Jain, and M. Mahdian, “Optimizing the place-
ment of integration points in multi-hop wireless networks,” Proceedings
of IEEE ICNP, 2004.
[11] Y. Bejerano, “Efﬁcient integration of multihop wireless and wired
networks with QoS constraints,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 1064–1078, 2004.
[12] B. Aoun, R. Boutaba, Y. Iraqi, and G. Kenward, “Gateway placement
optimization in wireless mesh networks with QoS constraints,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 24, no. 11, Nov
2006.
[13] Y. Drabu and H. Peyravi, “Gateway placement in wireless mesh networks
with qos constraints,” Seventh International Conference on Networking
(ICN 2008), Nov 2007.
[14] D. B. Shmoys, E. Tardos, and K. Aardal, “Approximation algorithms
for facility location problems,” in STOC ’97: Proceedings of the
twenty-ninth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 1997, pp. 265–274.
[15] S. Tsukiyama, M. Ide, H. Ariyoshi, and I. Shirakawa, “A new algorithm
for generating all the maximal independent sets.” SIAM J. Comput.,
vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 505–517, 1977.
[16] B. A. Chambers, “The grid Roofnet: a rooftop ad hoc wireless network,”
MIT Masters Thesis, 2002.
[17] Q. N. Simulator, “http://www.scalable-networks.com/.”
316
ICN 2011 : The Tenth International Conference on Networks
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-113-7

