MLSD: A Network Topology Discovery Protocol for 
Infrastructure Wireless Mesh Networks  
 
Daniel Porto, Gledson Elias 
Informatics Department 
Federal University of Paraíba 
João Pessoa, Brazil 
d.porto@campus.fct.unl.pt , gledson@ci.ufpb.br
 
 
Abstract—In Infrastructure Wireless Mesh Networks (IWMN), 
the network topology discovery protocol has an essential role 
for responding proactively and promptly to topology 
modifications. It is responsible for disseminating link state 
updates, managing the tension between update frequency and 
number of messages, which has strong impact in protocol 
performance, network resource consumption and scalability. 
In such a context, this paper proposes the Mesh Network Link 
State Discovery (MLSD) protocol, which has been specifically 
designed considering IWMNs features. MLSD adopts a 
proactive, reliable, incremental, controlled and event-based 
delivery strategy, which avoids periodic messages and 
coordinates how information is propagated for enhancing 
efficiency. Besides, it joins several updates for reducing 
network resource consumption. 
Keywords-wireless 
mesh 
networks; 
routing 
protocols; 
link-state protocols 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As an evolution of wireless networks, Infrastructure 
Wireless Mesh Networks (IWMNs) have emerged as a key 
technology for dynamic self-configurable and self-healing 
networks that provide large-scale, reliable service coverage, 
allowing devices to automatically reconfiguring, establishing 
and maintaining connectivity among themselves [1][2]. In 
essence, an IWMN is a multi-hop wireless network that 
introduces a hierarchy of devices, called mesh routers and 
mesh clients [3]. Mesh Routers (MRs) are dedicated, 
stationary 
and 
power 
enabled 
devices, 
strategically 
positioned to provide a multi-hop wireless backbone for 
stationary or mobile, power constrained Mesh Clients (MCs). 
In IWMNs, connectivity among non-neighboring nodes 
is achieved through multi-hop communication in which MRs 
forward packets hop by hop to other intermediate MRs in 
direction to the destination node. Note that, in IWMNs, MCs 
cannot forward packets and besides cannot communicate 
directly with each other. Thus, MRs have to manage and 
disseminate routing information, and to do that, a routing 
protocol must be adopted. 
In practice, taking into account shared similarities among 
IWMNs and Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs), routing 
protocols designed for MANETs have been applied to 
IWMN projects [1]. For instance, the VMesh [4] project 
employs the Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) 
protocol [5]. 
As 
another 
example, 
Microsoft 
mesh 
networks [6] are built using a modified version of the 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) protocol [7]. 
However, according to Akyildiz [1], ad hoc routing 
protocols do not scale very well in IWMNs and the 
throughput drops as the number of nodes increases. 
Therefore, despite the large availability of ad hoc routing 
protocols, considerable research efforts are still needed for 
designing more efficient and effective routing protocols for 
IWMNs, which can be specifically designed to explore and 
take advantage of their built-in features. 
Taking into account IWMN architectural features, in 
order to be able to forward packets, MRs ought to support 
advanced routing capabilities, which need to detect fast 
topology changes and keep updated routes. In such a context, 
the link-state routing approach has the advantage of fast 
convergence when contrasted with the distance-vector 
routing approach, updating in a faster way routing 
information in all nodes of the network. Thus, in IWMNs, 
link-state routing protocols seem to be more adequate than 
distance-vector routing protocols. 
In link-state routing protocols, a key element is the 
Network Topology Discovery Protocol (NTDP), in which 
network topology updates are propagated using messages 
called Link-State Advertisements (LSAs) [8]. Such protocols 
can generate LSAs on a periodic basis or can adopt an event-
based approach for generating LSAs when detect changes in 
the state of the wireless links among nodes [9]. 
In such a context, this paper presents a scalable, robust 
and reliable network topology discovery protocol, called 
Mesh Network Link State Discovery (MLSD), based on the 
link-state approach and specifically designed taking into 
account IWMNs features. In order to reduce the control 
overhead related to topology update messages, the MLSD 
protocol adopts a proactive, reliable, incremental, controlled 
and event-based approach for generating LSAs, making 
more efficient use of network resources. Simulations show 
over 60% reduction in the control overhead of topology 
discovery compared to a periodic-based link-state protocol. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 examines the strategies adopted in related work for 
disseminating topology information. Then, Section 3 
presents the MLSD protocol, detailing its several strategies 
for disseminating link state updates. Next, Section 4 presents 
initial performance evaluation results, and, in conclusion, 
Section 5 draws final remarks and delineates future work. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

II. 
RELATED WORK 
In order to contextualize the proposed protocol, this 
section identifies routing protocols that have been adopted in 
IWMNs, highlighting their strategies for disseminating 
topological information. According to Chen [10], IWMNs 
represent a recent research field, favoring the adoption of ad 
hoc routing protocols, in special, the strategies employed by 
Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) [5] and Ad hoc 
On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) [11] protocols. 
OLSR [5] is a proactive, link-state routing protocol that 
disseminates topological information using a flooding 
process that consists in choosing a set of Multipoint Relays 
(MPRs), which are responsible for periodically generating 
and forwarding topology control messages throughout the 
wireless network. Thus, OLSR simply floods topology data 
often enough to make sure that the topological database does 
not remain unsynchronized for extended periods of time. 
In 
OLSR, 
MPRs 
are 
chosen 
considering 
the 
neighborhood of the nodes. Each node discovers 2-hop 
neighboring information and performs a distributed election 
of a set of MPRs. Nodes select MPRs such that there exists a 
path to each of its 2-hop neighbors via a node selected as an 
MPR. Then, MPR nodes source and forward Topology 
Control (TC) messages that contain the MPR selectors. Note 
that each node independently selects its own set of MPRs. 
In order to build the topology database, each node, which 
has been selected as MPR, periodically generates and 
broadcasts TC messages at a regular time interval around 5 
seconds by default. Thus, TC messages are broadcasted and 
retransmitted by MPRs only. Upon receiving a TC message 
from a neighboring MPR, the receiving MPR must 
retransmit the message in at most 0.5 seconds. 
Given the link state information acquired through 
periodic TC messages, the routing table for each node can be 
computed using the shortest path algorithm. In route 
calculation, the MPRs are used to form the route from a 
given node to any destination in the network. 
OLSR has been largely adopted without modification in 
IWMNs, and besides, new routing protocols specifically 
designed for IWMNs, such as Radio Aware Optimized Link 
State Routing (RA-OLSR) [12], Hybrid Wireless Mesh 
Protocol 
(HWMP) 
[12] 
and 
Wireless-mesh-network 
Proactive Routing (WPR) [13], have adopted OLSR as a 
basis, including its strategy for disseminating topological 
information. 
Consequently, as a common strategy, OLSR, RA-OLSR, 
HWMP and WPR propagate link-state information in a 
periodic basis, since their messages are transmitted without 
any guarantee of delivery. Thus, such protocols do not bother 
with reliability. They simply flood link-state information 
often enough to make sure that the topological databases do 
not remain unsynchronized for extended periods of time. 
Indeed, they suppose that, in some moment, all nodes receive 
updated topological information, and then, their topological 
databases can become consistent and synchronized. 
In contrast, the MLSD protocol proposed herein adopts a 
reliable, event-based approach. Taking into account that 
MLSD messages are transmitted with guarantee of delivery, 
it does not require periodic and repetitive propagation of 
link-state advertisements, and so, has the potential for 
reducing the control overhead. 
III. 
THE MLSD PROTOCOL 
The protocol proposed herein has been developed to be 
adopted in the topology layer of a three-layered routing 
architecture, called Infrastructure Wireless Mesh Routing 
Architecture (IWMRA) [14], specifically designed taking 
into account IWMNs architectural features. The IWMRA 
architecture splits routing functionalities into 3 layers: 
neighborhood, topology and routing. The neighborhood 
layer detects the presence or absence of directly reachable 
neighbors. Based on a flooding approach, the topology layer 
disseminates neighborhood information all over the network. 
Then, the routing layer builds the best routes for all nodes. 
Consequently, a specific protocol ought to be developed for 
dealing with issues and functionalities in each layer. 
This section presents the Mesh Network Link State 
Discovery (MLSD) protocol, a link state topology discovery 
protocol for IWMNs, which takes in account requirements 
related to scalability, robustness and reliable delivery. In 
order to become scalable, MLSD tries to reduce the signaling 
overhead for disseminating link state updates. 
In order to reduce the signaling overhead for updating 
topology information, instead of using a periodic-based 
signaling strategy, MLSD adopts a proactive, reliable, 
incremental, controlled and event-based signaling strategy. 
In such an event-based strategy, a given node only sources 
and emits a signaling message in the event that occurs a 
modification in the network topology, for instance, a given 
mesh client (MC) establishes a new wireless link by moving 
within the coverage range of a given mesh router (MR). 
However, taking into account the event-based strategy 
for fast mobile MCs, the number of messages could 
drastically increase as the number of events related to 
establishment and disconnection of wireless links among 
MRs and MCs intensively occurs. To deal with such an 
issue, MLSD adopts a controlled strategy for limiting the 
time interval between messages, and so, it tries to reduce the 
transmission of excessive messages in a short time interval. 
Consequently, considering fast mobile MCs, the controlled 
strategy dynamically adapts the event-based strategy to a 
periodic-based strategy. 
To further reduce the signaling overhead, MLSD adopts 
an incremental strategy for disseminating link state 
information. In such a strategy, instead of propagating the 
whole set of link state information, MLSD propagates only 
updates related to modifications detected in the state of 
wireless links among MRs and MCs. Thus, it reduces the 
size of the signaling messages and consequently the 
signaling overhead. 
Unlike other link-state routing protocols, which do not 
bother with reliability, MLSD adopts a reliable strategy for 
disseminating link state updates as another mechanism for 
reducing signaling overhead. In such a strategy, MLSD 
adapts the classical flooding process as a mean to implement 
an implicit scheme known as positive acknowledgement with 
retransmission, which guarantees reliability of flooded 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

signaling messages, ensuring consistent and synchronized 
topological databases without the need of repeatedly 
propagate the same link state information, as implemented 
by other link-state routing protocols. 
In complement, the proposed protocol adopts a compact 
format for messages, grouping link state information 
whenever possible and eliminating outdated link state 
information. By acting together, all of such strategies have 
the potential of reducing the signaling overhead. 
The MLSD protocol has been designed taking into 
account IWMNs architectural features. In summary, MLSD 
assumes that IWMNs meet the following requirements: (i) 
the set of stationary MRs provides a multi-hop wireless 
backbone that completely covers the interested area; (ii) the 
set of MRs are power enabled devices directly connected to 
an unlimited power supply; (iii) MCs can move or stay 
stationary within the wireless backbone area; and (iv) 
wireless links are bidirectional. In this initial version of the 
proposed protocol, each MR and MC has only one wireless 
network interface card. 
In the following, the main concepts, strategies, and 
features of the MLSD protocol are presented and discussed. 
Initially, an overview of the proposed protocol and its 
operation are described. Then, the message and data 
structures adopted by MSLD are introduced, depicting how 
the protocol propagates and stores topological information. 
Thereafter, the strategies for disseminating link state 
information 
are 
detailed, 
describing 
their 
control 
mechanisms. Note that, due to space limitation, several 
details have to be omitted, but can be found in [15]. 
A. Fundamentals 
The MLSD protocol implements the topology layer of 
the IWMRA architecture. It is responsible for disseminating 
link state information throughout the wireless backbone 
using topology update messages, which are emitted 
whenever occurs an event related to establishment and 
disconnection of wireless links among MRs and MCs. Such 
events are triggered by the neighborhood layer of the 
IWMRA architecture, which is implemented by another 
protocol called Scalable Neighborhood Discovery Protocol 
(SNDP) [16]. As examples of events, it can be cited a given 
MR adding or removing a given MC as a neighbor. 
In MLSD, only MRs can source, process and broadcast 
topology update messages, called Link State Updates 
(LSUs). Thus, MCs cannot source, process or broadcast 
LSUs. MLSD manages the emission of LSUs for reducing 
the signaling overhead, making possible to provide better 
scalability by allowing a large collection of MCs in the 
wireless network. Besides, the proposed protocol eliminates 
outdated link state information, avoiding inconsistences in 
the topological database, which must be identical in all MRs, 
allowing each one to construct a complete and consistent 
picture of the wireless network topology. 
The main MLSD contribution is the generation of 
messages using a reliable, incremental and event-based 
strategy for disseminating link state information. The 
consistence of the topology databases are ensured by two 
cooperating processes: (i) a reliable, incremental flooding 
process for disseminating link state updates, and (ii) a 
synchronization process for synchronizing topological 
databases in all MRs. 
In order to reduce the total number of LSUs, MLSD 
controls the emission of messages aggregating several events 
in a single LSU message. In addition, it controls the time 
interval between consecutive LSUs by managing and 
delaying the dissemination of events related to fast mobile 
MCs. In complement, by adopting a compact format for 
representing link state operations, it also reduces the 
signaling overhead transported in LSUs. 
B. Message Structure 
Each Link State Update (LSU) is a packet employed by 
MLSD for disseminating link state updates in the wireless 
backbone. As illustrated in Fig. 1, each LSU can carry one or 
several announcements related to events that occur in the 
network topology. In MSLD, such announcements are called 
Link State Advertisements (LSAs). In turn, each LSA can 
carry one or several Link State Operations (LSOs) that occur 
in a given MR, represented by the establishment or 
disconnection of wireless links with other MRs or MCs. 
When 
generated, 
an 
LSU 
message 
is 
directly 
encapsulated in a frame of the data link or Media Access 
Control (MAC) layer and then transmitted in broadcast. All 
MRs that receive an LSU must evaluate each encapsulated 
LSA, and then decide whether or not to process or forward 
(or both) each encapsulated LSO. 
In complement, each LSO can require an additional 
processing taking into account the type of neighboring node 
(MR or MC) involved in the respective link state update. On 
the one hand, if the involved node is a MC, such a 
processing is always the simple addition or removal of the 
wireless link in the topological database. On the other hand, 
if the involved node is another MR, such a processing can 
also initiate a synchronization process for synchronizing 
topological databases or a garbage collection process for 
removing all unreachable nodes from the topological 
database. 
Header 
LSA 
LSA 
LSA 
LSU 
Header 
LSO 
LSO 
LSO 
LSA 
 
Figure 1.  Message structure. 
C. Send Buffer 
The send buffer is an internal data structure adopted by 
all MRs for storing LSOs and their related information. 
Considering a given MR, all LSOs present in its send buffer 
can have the following origin: (i) auto-generated by the own 
MR, considering link state updates with its neighboring 
nodes; and (ii) received in LSUs generated or forwarded by 
other neighboring MRs. Note that, all LSOs in the send 
buffer must be disseminated in broadcast for all MRs in the 
wireless backbone. Therefore, LSOs in the send buffer 
constitute the base for creating LSAs and then LSUs, which 
are flooded in the wireless backbone. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Each LSO in the send buffer is classified as: (i) a new 
operation that still needs to be forwarded to all neighboring 
MRs; or (ii) an already-transmitted operation that needs to be 
confirmed by or retransmitted to neighboring MRs. Besides, 
MLSD also keeps timers that indicate when the LSO must be 
transmitted for the first time or retransmitted, if at all need. 
The retransmission of a given LSO is required whenever 
the delivery control mechanism detects that one or several 
neighboring MRs did not acknowledge the receipt of the 
previous transmission of the LSO. Such a delivery control 
mechanism is implemented by defining a list of forwarders 
associated with each LSO in the send buffer. The list of 
forwarders represents all neighboring MRs that still need to 
receive and forward the respective LSO. 
D. Topological Database 
The topological database represents a map of the wireless 
network topology. It is important to emphasize that the 
topological database is employed by the routing layer of the 
IWMRA architecture for proactively calculating all routes 
between each pair of nodes. In a given MR, its topological 
database stores link state information, which are directly 
auto-generated by the neighborhood layer of the own MR or 
received in LSUs propagated by other neighboring MRs. 
It is important to note that link state information in the 
topological database does not expire ever. Such information 
can only be included or removed through LSOs propagated 
by the MLSD protocol. The topological database must be 
identical, consistent and synchronized in all MRs that 
compose the wireless backbone. Thus, all MRs know the 
state of the wireless links defined among all MRs and MCs 
in the wireless network. 
MLSD also adopts a versioning scheme for LSOs. In 
such a scheme, each LSO generated by a given MR has a 
unique sequence number, which is managed and assigned by 
the initial source MR. Upon receiving a given LSO, the 
receiving MR substitutes the old version of the LSO in its 
topological database with the new one. 
E. Link-State Propagation 
As already indicated, the MLSD protocol keeps 
consistent topological databases exploring two independent 
but cooperating processes: (i) a reliable, incremental flooding 
process for disseminating link state updates, and (ii) a 
synchronization process for synchronizing topological 
databases in all MRs. 
The dissemination of link state updates integrated in the 
MLSD protocol adopts the well-known concept of flooding. 
The flooding process is performed via LSUs, which contain 
incremental updates of the network topology in encapsulated 
LSAs, which in turn encapsulate LSOs. Such LSOs, when 
processed by a given MR, are forwarded to its neighboring 
MRs, until reaching hop-by-hop all MRs in the wireless 
backbone. 
In order to perform the reliable delivery, the flooding 
process implements an implicit scheme known as positive 
acknowledgement with retransmission. Besides, when 
processing LSU messages, it determines the type of action to 
be taken for each encapsulated LSO, which can be to 
forward, acknowledge, retransmit or simply ignore the LSO. 
Thus, the flooding process allows disseminating link state 
updates throughout the wireless backbone and, together with 
the versioning scheme, also ensures that old versions of 
LSOs, identified by their sequence numbers, do not affect the 
consistence of the topological databases. In complement, 
MLSD manages the time interval between retransmissions, 
avoiding the excess of messages triggered by topological 
events in the wireless network. 
Taking 
into 
account 
the 
implicit, 
positive 
acknowledgement with retransmission scheme, a given 
MR-X that propagates an LSU detects the effective reception 
of each encapsulated LSO by all neighboring MRs, indicated 
as the list of forwarders for each LSO in the send buffer, 
when they forward the same LSOs in their own LSUs. Since 
all LSUs are transmitted in broadcast, MR-X also receives the 
LSUs from its neighbors, and so, such LSUs can serve as 
delivery acknowledgements from the forwarders to MR-X. 
If a given forwarding MR-F does not transmit a given 
LSO within a specified time interval, MR-X retransmits the 
LSO again, until detecting that MR-F has forwarded it. Upon 
detecting that all forwarders have received the LSO, 
internally, MR-X declares the successful forwarding of the 
LSO, removing it from the send buffer. 
Fig. 2 illustrates the implicit, positive acknowledgement 
scheme. In Fig. 2a, MR-A sends an LSU that contains an 
LSO to its unique forwarder MR-B, indicating the 
establishment of a wireless link between MR-A and MC-X. In 
turn, MR-B forwards the LSO in another LSU, indicating 
MR-C as a forwarder (Fig. 2b). In this case, note that, the 
LSU from MR-B is received by both MR-A and MR-C. On 
the one hand, MR-A interprets the LSU from MR-B as an 
acknowledgement. On the other hand, since MR-C has been 
indicated as forwarder by MR-B, it must forward the LSO. 
Though, MR-C does not have neighbors to forward the 
message. Even thus, MR-C transmits the LSO with no 
forwarders, allowing MR-B to acknowledge that MR-C has 
successfully received the LSO (Fig. 2c). 
 
Mesh Client 
Mesh Router 
LSU 
Forwarders FW{ } 
A 
C 
(b) 
x 
 FW {C} 
B 
A 
B 
(c) 
x 
 FW { } 
C 
B 
C 
(a) 
x 
FW {B} 
A 
 
Figure 2.  Implicit, positive acknowledgement mechanism. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

It is important to stress that no extra message needs to be 
sent since the acknowledgement is implicit. Thus, when 
LSOs are successfully received and forwarded, each MR 
needs transmit each LSO only one time. Such a strategy is 
different from the flooding process employed by the OLSR 
protocol, in which topology control messages are also 
transmitted only one time by each node, however, since 
OLSR does not provide any guarantee of delivery, messages 
have to be periodically retransmitted. 
In order to avoid collisions between neighboring MRs 
that forward link state updates in the flooding process, and so 
retransmissions of LSUs, MLSD adopts a time-slot based 
strategy. In such a strategy, time slots are time intervals in 
which MRs are allowed to transmit LSUs. Considering a 
given transmitted LSU, all forwarding MRs configure their 
time slots according to the position of each MR in the list of 
forwarders indicated in the LSU. Thus, each LSU indicates 
the specific and distinct time slot for each forwarding MR. 
Note that the MAC layer of IEEE 802.11 wireless 
networks adopts the Distributed Coordination Function 
(DCF) with a contention window for dealing with collisions. 
However, in MLSD, upon receiving an LSU, all forwarding 
MRs would try at the same time to forward the encapsulated 
LSOs, and so, as widely known, DCF can lead to collisions 
in situations in which many nodes attempt to communicate at 
the same time. Thus, in a more efficient way, the time-slot 
mechanism distributes in different time slots the instant at 
which each forwarding MR tries to transmit. 
In a given MR, upon receiving an LSU, the forwarding of 
the encapsulated LSOs is delayed by taking into account the 
time slot allocated to the forwarding MR in the LSU. As 
mentioned, the time slots are calculated using the position of 
the MR in the list of forwarders indicated in the LSU. Thus, 
the first MR in the list forwards in the first slot, the second 
MR in the second slot, and so on. Note that the time-slot 
mechanism acts together with the 802.11 DCF, but now, 
forwarding MRs do not try at the same time to send LSOs, 
avoiding collisions that could not be avoided by DCF only. 
F. Synchronizing Topological Databases 
Whenever an MR is initialized in the wireless backbone, 
it needs to create a topological database, which ought to have 
all link state information already stored in other MRs. 
Consequently, once a given MR detects as neighbor another 
MR, they must perform the synchronization of their 
topological databases. 
Such a synchronization process is initiated by the MR 
that firstly detects the establishment of the wireless link with 
another neighboring MR. In the initial phase, the detecting 
MR assemblies all LSOs based on its topological database, 
and then inserts them in the send buffer, indicating as 
forwarder the recently discovered neighboring MR. The 
assembly of LSOs is possible because the topological 
database stores the original sequence number of each stored 
link state information. 
LSOs associated with the synchronization process only 
have operations for adding wireless links between MRs and 
MCs, since no information is stored in the topological 
database about already disconnected wireless links. 
In the synchronization process, the dissemination of 
LSOs follows the same procedures and rules adopted in the 
flooding process. It is important to emphasize that, upon 
receiving LSOs, the forwarding MR evaluates each one and 
decides what to do according to the implicit, positive 
acknowledgement with retransmission scheme. For instance, 
the forwarding MR can decide to retransmit as an 
acknowledgement. 
However, 
in 
case 
of 
partitioned 
backbone, it has to forward to other neighboring MRs. 
Fig. 3 depicts the synchronization process. When MR-B 
detects the wireless link with MR-A, it inserts in its send 
buffer all LSOs related to link state information stored in its 
topological database, indicating MR-A as a forwarder. Then, 
MR-B sends one or more LSUs encapsulating such LSOs 
(Fig. 3a). Thus, upon receiving LSUs, MR-A confirms MR-B 
as neighbor, if at all needed. Then, MR-A inserts in its send 
buffer LSOs related to link state information stored in its 
own topological database and also LSOs received from 
MR-B that need to be acknowledged. Thereafter, MR-A sends 
one or more LSUs encapsulating such LSOs (Fig. 3b). After 
receiving 
LSUs, MR-B 
declares 
as 
successful the 
transmission of its LSOs to MR-A, and besides, it sends 
acknowledgements for all LSOs received from MR-A 
(Fig. 4c). In conclusion, MR-A declares as successful the 
transmission of its LSOs to MR-B. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The signaling overhead generated by topology discovery 
protocols has a strong impact on the performance of the 
routing protocols [17]. Thus, in order to evince the MLSD 
performance 
gains, 
a 
simulation-based 
performance 
evaluation has been conducted using the NS-2 simulator 
[18], contrasting MLSD and the OLSR topology discovery 
process. Note that other protocols for IWMNs, including 
RA-OLSR [12], HWMP [12] and WPR [13], also adopt 
topology discovery processes similar to OLSR. Thus, it 
makes sense to contrast MLSD against the OLSR topology 
discovery process, which is the basis for all other ones. 
 
(a) 
A 
B 
FW {A} 
MR-B detects and sends LSU to MR-A 
(b) 
A 
B 
FW {B} 
MR-A sends LSU to MR-B 
(c) 
FW { } 
A 
B 
MR-B sends LSU as acknowledment  
Figure 3.  Synchronizing topological databases.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

The efficiency of MLSD has been evaluated in several 
simulated scenarios, varying the number and the speed of 
devices. As a way to show the general MLSD behavior, this 
paper presents the performance gains in scenarios defined by 
a grid of 10x10 stationary MRs, in which up to 100 mobile 
MCs adopt an average speed of 10 m/s, varying uniformly 
between 0 and 20 m/s. For each scenario, average values of 
the signaling overhead are calculated based on several 
simulation experiments, considering a relative estimation 
error of 5% and a confidence interval of 95%. Each 
experiment has a simulation time of 3.000 seconds, from 
which the first 160 seconds are discarded as an initial 
transient. Interested readers can find in [15] a detailed 
description of simulation settings, scenarios and outcomes. 
In the context of IWMNs, as illustrated in Fig. 4, 
simulation results make clear that MLSD is a better option 
than the OLSR topology discovery process in terms of 
signaling overhead in bytes. In Fig. 4, it is possible to note 
that OLSR suffers more influence from the increase in the 
quantity of mobile MCs in the wireless network. The poor 
behavior of the OLSR protocol is mainly influenced by its 
periodic-based strategy, adopted by MRs and also MCs for 
disseminating link state information through their MPRs. In 
contrast, the excellent MLSD behavior is a direct 
consequence of the combination of its controlled, event-
based strategy, in which only MRs disseminate LSUs in the 
event that occur modifications in the network topology. 
Signaling load (MB) 
OLSR 
MLSD 
Number of mobile MCs 
0             10                                                           50                                                                       100 
        1.400 
        1.200 
        1.000 
           800 
            600 
            400 
            200 
0 
 
Figure 4.  Signaling overhead 
In Fig. 4, considering 0, 10 and 50 MCs, the event-based 
strategy makes possible MLSD to have a significant smaller 
signaling overhead, but that grows in a comparable way with 
OLSR. But, from 50 to 100 MCs, the controlled strategy 
begins to act in MLSD when the frequency of link state 
updates increases as a whole, and consequently the signaling 
overhead for MLSD has a growth smaller than OLSR. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has proposed MLSD, a network topology 
discovery protocol based on the link-state approach and 
specifically designed for IWMNs. Regarding the signaling 
overhead, MLSD has an excellent behavior in typical 
IWMNs, becoming much more scalable than the OLSR 
topology discovery process. Thus, it is possible to guess that 
MLSD has the potential to become a better choice than the 
IEEE 802.11s proposal for mesh networks, in which 
RA-OLSR adopts the OLSR topology discovery process. 
Despite the interesting outcomes in terms of signaling 
overhead, as a future work, it is still needed to evaluate 
MLSD in relation to other performance metrics. For 
instance, it is under laboratory work the evaluation of the 
convergence time for the topological database, which can 
reveal the time interval required for synchronizing link-sate 
information in all nodes. In pilot investigations, considering 
the reliable strategy adopted by MLSD for disseminating 
link-state updates, it is expected to confirm that MLSD also 
has a behavior better than OLSR in terms of convergence 
time. Also, as known, OLSR has problems with topological 
database convergence, which do not occur in MLSD. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, and W. Xudong, “A survey on wireless mesh 
networks”, Communications Magazine, IEEE, v.43, n.9, 
2005, pp. S23-S30. 
[2] Y. Zhang, J. Luo, and H. Hu, “Wireless mesh networking: 
architectures, protocols and standards”, Auerbach Pub, 2006. 
[3] E. Hossain, and K. K. Leung, “Wireless mesh networks: 
architectures and protocols”, Springer, 2008. 
[4] N. Tsarmpopoulos, I. Kalavros, and S. Lalis, “A low-cost and 
simple-to-deploy peer-to-peer wireless network based on open 
source Linux routers”. 1st Int. Conf. on Testbeds and 
Research Infrastructures for the Development of Networks 
and Communities, 2005, pp. 92-97. 
[5] T. Clausen, and P. Jacquet, “RFC3626 - Optimized Link State 
Routing Protocol (OLSR)”, IETF, 2003. 
[6] Microsoft Mesh Networks. Available from: <http://research. 
microsoft.com/mesh/> [retrieved: 12, 2013]. 
[7] D. Johnson, D. Maltz, and Y. Hu, “RFC4728 - The Dynamic 
Source Routing protocol (DSR) for mobile ad hoc networks 
for IPv4”, IETF, 2007. 
[8] A. Nezhad, A. Miri, and D. Makrakis, “Efficient topology 
discovery for multihop wireless sensor networks”, IEEE 
Computer Society, 2008, pp. 358-365. 
[9] X. Zou, B. Ramamurthy, and S. Magliveras, “Routing 
techniques in wireless ad hoc networks classification and 
comparison”, 6th World Multiconference on Systemics, 
Cybernetics and Informatics, 2002, pp. 1-6. 
[10] J. Chen, et al., “Performance comparison of AODV and 
OFLSR in wireless mesh networks”, IFIP Mediterranean Ad 
Hoc Networking Workshop, 2006, pp. 271-278. 
[11] C. E. Perkins, and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc on-demand distance 
vector routing”, 2nd IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing 
Systems and Applications, 1999, pp. 90-100. 
[12] M. Bahr, “Proposed routing for IEEE 802.11s WLAN mesh 
networks”, 2nd Int. Workshop on Wireless Internet, 2006. 
[13] M. E. Campista, L. Costa, and O. Duarte, “WPR: a proactive 
routing protocol tailored to wireless mesh networks”, IEEE 
Global Communicattions Conference, 2008, pp. 538-542. 
[14] D. C. Porto, G. Cavalcanti, and G. Elias, “A layered routing 
architecture for infrastructure wireless mesh networks”, 5th 
Int. Conf. on Networking and Services, 2009, pp. 366-369. 
[15] D. C. Porto, “MLSD: a link-state topology discovery protocol 
for infrastructure wireless mesh networks”, Master Thesis, 
Federal University of Paraíba, 2010 (in portuguese). 
[16] G. Elias, M. Novaes, G. Cavalcanti, D. C. Porto, “Simulation-
based performance evaluation of the SNDP protocol for 
infrastructure WMNs”, 24th IEEE Int. Conf. on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications, 2010, pp. 90-97. 
[17] F. J. Ros, “UM-OLSR”. Available from: <http://masimum. 
inf.um.es/fjrm/development/um-olsr/> [retrieved: 12, 2013]. 
[18] K. Fall, and K. Varadhan, “The ns manual”, The VINT 
Project, UC Berkely, LBL, USC/ISI, and Xerox PARC, 2011. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

