QoS Constrained Path Optimization Algorithm in NFV/SDN Environment
Yujeong Oh, Jonghun Kim, Jaiyong Lee
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Yonsei University
Seoul, Korea
E-mail: rmang@yonsei.ac.kr, roro7773@yonsei.ac.kr, jyl@yonsei.ac.kr
Abstract—
Network
Functions
Virtualisation
(NFV)
and
Software-Defined
Networking
(SDN)
have
emerged
as
promising technologies in the telecommunication business. An
important problem of NFV architecture is how to allocate
virtualised resources to network services. Efficient resource
allocation should consider not only the status of the Virtualized
Network Function (VNF) but also the network condition. We
propose
a
Quality
of
Service
(QoS)
constrained
path
optimization
algorithm
to
set
up
the
optimized
VNF
Forwarding
Graphs
(VNFFG)
considering
an
available
bandwidth.
When
the
link
bandwidth
is
not
sufficient,
competitor selection and priority switching of the super
problem could find the optimized VNFFGs to accept more
service requests by utilizing replaceable VNFs.
Keywords-network functions virtualisation; software-defined
networking; QoS; link capacity allocation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Network Functions Virtualisation (NFV) and Software-
Defined Networking (SDN) are significant industry trends
these days. The network abstraction and programmability of
SDN
complements
the
NFV
architecture.
ETSI
NFV
Industry Specification Group (ISG) proposes a NFV/SDN
architecture and discusses the technical challenges [1][2].
Especially, a resource allocation to multiple network services
and performance maintenance regardless of Virtual Network
Function (VNF) status variation and network condition are
the key challenges of NFV realization. To solve these
problems, the only way is a proper link capacity allocation
and VNF selection.
Some systems on the Internet provide QoS with certain
packet processing in routers. There are two system models,
which are, the integrated service model and the differentiated
service model. For QoS service in NFV/SDN architecture,
the integrated service model (e.g., RSVP-TE in MPLS) is
more appropriate to provide a certain level of QoS
requirement. There are many QoS parameters such as delay,
bandwidth, jitter, loss probability and cost, but the crucial
one is bandwidth [3][4][5]. If bandwidth for a packet flow is
not enough, congestion will occur in bottleneck links, which
causes severe packet drops and increases end-to-end delay.
Thus, NFV/SDN architecture should manage link capacity
allocation of the entire service and VNFFG simultaneously.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II outlines our
proposed QoS constrained path optimization algorithm and
architecture. Section III describes the competitor selection
and priority switching with a simple scenario. Finally, we
conclude the paper with potential future work in Section IV.
II.
QOS CONSTRAINED PATH OPTIMIZATION
In the NFV/SDN environment, some VNFs can be
deployed in multiple data centers, or some busy VNFs can be
established in the same data center for a load sharing
purpose. Those VNFs which are performing identical
functions are called a VNF set and are located in multiple
service provider’s data centers. For instance, Figure 1
describes a NFV/SDN network of a mobile cellular network
provider.
Figure 1.
NFV/SDN based telecommunication network.
The telecommunication network is composed of Evolved
Packet Core (EPC) and data centers, which are operated by
the mobile cellular network provider. The operator manages
the network between data centers with SDN. First, the
service
provider
notifies
the
service
request
that
characterizes their new value-added network service to the
orchestrator. The orchestrator not only manages virtualized
resources (e.g., CPU, memory, storage, switch of data
centers), VNFs and lifecycle of network services, but also
creates a sequence of VNF sets (e.g., WAN Optimization
Controller (WOC) – Firewall (FW) – Monitoring (MON))
based on descriptors [2]. The sequence of VNF sets and its
VNFs status are delivered to the VNFFG optimization
algorithm on SDN controller. The SDN controller should
maintain link capacity information of other network services
as well as available network bandwidth information. In SGi-
LAN, the telecommunication service provider operates three
geographically split data centers for reasons related to
operational cost or security issues. Maybe an external cloud
service
provider
contracts
with
the
telecommunication
service provider. The VNFFG optimization algorithm creates
and sets up the optimized VNFFG (e.g., WOC1 – FW3 –
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

MON2) considering VNF status, network topology and
network condition. Finally, the packet flows from the user
device and is forwarded to the EPC and classifier. The
classifier marks network service header to packets based on
pre-defined service header information that notifies what
VNFFGs would be proper to this flow. Then, the SDN
switch forwards the flow with pre-defined forwarding tables.
The QoS constrained path optimization algorithm of the
SDN controller is composed of a super problem and sub
problems, as depicted in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
QoS constrained path optimization algorithm.
The super problem provides the virtual map to sub
problems. The virtual map is an abstraction of the network
that describes related VNFs and available bandwidth
between the VNFs. The sub problems are created when a
new service request arrives. Each sub problem chooses the
virtual path that has the largest available bandwidth and the
appropriate VNFs. The VNFFG, the result of the sub
problem,
is
delivered
taking
into
account
the
super
problem’s resource condition, and then the super problem
deducts the resources that the VNFFG uses. When all of the
sub problems are satisfied, the super problem forwards the
optimized forwarding tables to the SDN switches.
Figure 3.
Competitor selection and priority switching.
III.
COMPETITOR SELECTION AND PRIORITY SWITCHING
The super problem is a heuristic optimization algorithm
based on competitor selection and switching priority. When
the resource condition is not enough, the super problem is
not able to create the virtual map for a new service request.
However, in NFV/SDN environment, there is a chance that
the prior sub problems could modify their VNFs and virtual
path. For instance, the left side of the Figure 3 shows two
different paths for using VNF 3.
The number on the links means the number of acceptable
VNFFGs. The first chart of Figure 3 shows five service
requests that are requested to SDN controller and their
sequence of VNF sets. However, Service E is not accepted
because of insufficient link resource. If prior services change
their VNFFG, service E could be accepted.
To maximize network service acceptance, competitor
selection of the super problem finds the prior sub problems
that use bottleneck link of the unaccepted sub problem. Then,
priority switching of the super problem switches the
priorities of unaccepted sub problem and the sub problem,
which has the lowest priority among the competitors. The
second chart shows the priorities of service C and service E
are changed but the service C is not accepted. Finally,
priority switching of service E and the other competitor,
which is service B, makes all services to be accepted. This
heuristic optimization maximizes the number of service
requests by utilizing replaceable VNFs.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the NFV/SDN environment, a link capacity allocation
is an important problem to provide a stable QoS of network
services. We propose a QoS constrained path optimization
algorithm considering VNF status, network topology and
network
condition.
The
super
problem
of
VNFFG
optimization algorithm manages resources and creates the
virtual map about the related VNFs and virtual path between
them. The sub problem chooses sufficient VNFs and links at
the given virtual map. Furthermore, we propose a heuristic
super problem algorithm, which uses competitor selection
and priority switching to maximize the network service
acceptance. For the next step of research, we will include
real-world performance comparison with other researches
and analytic tools of a sequence of VNF sets and network
conditions to prove the resource efficiency of the proposed
algorithm.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by LG Electronics Co. Ltd.
REFERENCES
[1]
ETSI. Group specification. Network Functions Virtualisation;
Infrastructure
Overview.
[online].
Available
from:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/ 2016.1.11
[2]
ETSI. Group specification. Network Functions Virtualisation;
Management and Orchestration. [online]. Available from:
http://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/ 2016.1.11
[3]
Y. Wang and Z. Wang, “Explicit routing algorithm for
Internet traffic engineering,” Eight International Conference
on Computer Communications and Networks, 1999, pp. 582–
588, doi:10.1109/ICCCN.1999.805577.
[4]
S. Floyd and V. Jacobson, “Link-sharing and resource
management
models
for
packet
networks,”
IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, vol. 3, no. 4, Aug. 1995, pp.
365-386, doi:10.1109/90.413212.
[5]
R. Trivisonno et al., “Virtual link mapping in future SDN-
enabled networks,” IEEE SDN for Future Networks and
Services
(SDN4FNS),
Nov.
2013,
pp.
1-5,
doi:
10.1109/SDN4FNS.2013.6702562.
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-450-3
ICN 2016 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networks (includes SOFTNETWORKING 2016)

