A Policy for Group Vertical Handover Attempts
Nivia Cruz Quental and Paulo Andr´e da S. Gonc¸alves
Centro de Inform´atica – CIn
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco – UFPE
Recife, Brasil
Email: ncq@cin.ufpe.br, pasg@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract—The rising of heterogeneous networks brings vertical
handover as an important topic in research. Current challenges
include proposing efﬁcient handover schemes or adapting classic
existing schemes. In this paper, we propose a policy for Group
Vertical Handover (GVHO) attempts. We evaluate our solution
by modifying an existing GVHO scheme. Such scheme handles
vertical group handovers based on a threshold that limits han-
dover blocking probability. Although our study was made based
on a speciﬁc scheme, the proposed solution is generic enough to be
applied in other GVHO schemes. Results show that our solution
reduces the handover latency in comparison to the original
GVHO scheme studied while maintaining the handover blocking
probability under a pre-deﬁned threshold. In particular, we could
reduce latency from 20% to 40% in the scenarios studied.
Keywords-GVHO; handover; attempt; latency.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, the concept of handover (or handoff) has evolved
to take into account the continuity of communication sessions
even among different Radio Access Technologies (RATs) [1].
This replaces the classic concept of transferring an ongoing
call or data session from one channel to another over networks
using the same technology. The new deﬁnition is motivated
by the recent popularity of devices such as tablets and smart-
phones, which are capable of supporting multiple link-layer
technologies and handling different kinds of trafﬁc. Inter-RATs
handover is the main concern in Vertical Handover (VHO)
studies [1]–[9] and issues such as the continuity of telephone
calls and streaming sessions may also deﬁne requirements
for handover decisions. Use cases in trains and on buses
introduce new challenges. This leads us to look into the Group
Handover (GHO) problem [10]. GHO takes place when two
or more Mobile Nodes (MNs) intend to request handover at
the same time to the same base station. During GHO, MNs
are not necessarily aware of the presence of each other. Thus,
GHO procedures must carry out load balancing. To achieve
this, criteria such as energy saving, available bandwidth, and
type of service may be considered [11]. Research related
to Group Vertical Handover (GVHO) covers simultaneously
issues from GHO and VHO [12]. GVHO brings the complexity
of associating load balancing needs with the implications of
choosing one technology instead of another. It must also handle
legacy systems and individual handovers.
Among the handover phases of discovery, decision, and
execution [9], the decision phase interests us the most. The
decision process in GVHO is still an open issue and it may
impact the GVHO overall performance, not only the decision
algorithm itself, but the policy for GVHO attempts. GVHO
research seeks to provide efﬁcient decision techniques. Some
of them are based on centralized entities [13], distributed algo-
rithms [14], random delays [12], reinforcement learning [13],
game theory [12], and optimization problems [11]. We give
special attention to Lee et al. [11], since it addresses the latency
reduction while considering load balancing, support to legacy
networks, and handover blocking probability. Those issues are
fundamental for advances in GVHO. The objective of Lee
et al. [11] is to model GVHO decision as an optimization
problem. Latency is minimized given the condition of main-
taining the handover blocking probability under a pre-deﬁned
threshold. Although Lee et al. [11] present encouraging results,
the scheme does not scale well. As the number of MNs grows,
we have noticed a pronounced increase of latency.
We believe that if the handover scheme could control efﬁ-
ciently handover attempts, performance might be enhanced and
the latency increase might be controlled as the number of MNs
grows. In this paper, we propose a policy for handover attempts
that is based on exponential backoff and uses information
from the GVHO scheme itself. The proposed solution reduces
average latency and eases the slope of the latency curve in
comparison to results found in [11]. The main objective of this
paper is to show the importance of choosing a proper policy
for GVHO attempts. This paper is organized as follows: we
present GVHO concepts in Section
II. We present related
work in Section III. We detail the scheme proposed in [11]
in Section IV. We present the proposed policy for GVHO
attempts in Section V. We present a comparative performance
evaluation between the scheme with and without the proposed
solution in Section VI. Finally, we highlight our conclusions
in Section VII.
II.
GROUP VERTICAL HANDOVER - GVHO
Recently, technological evolution has allowed the rising
of cheaper gadgets supplied with multiple network interfaces.
This fact has encouraged new research in mobility management
considering brand-new use-cases. A remarkable challenge is to
manage different connections taking place at the same time in
public spaces with a diverse number of available technologies.
The problem of a high number of users connecting simultane-
ously to the same base station supporting a different technol-
ogy from their previous base station is studied in the Group
Vertical Handover (GVHO) area of interest [1]. A GVHO
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

scenario is illustrated in Figure 1. Suppose an open event,
like a music festival where users desire to communicate with
friends, transmit multimedia data, and are constantly changing
their location. There may be several available RATs and dozens
of devices in communication sessions simultaneously.
LTE
WiMAX
Figure 1. A GVHO scenario.
The proposal of efﬁcient and effective handover procedures
for mobility management including handover decisions and
optimal resource allocation is a critical need for GVHO [1].
Proposals may involve the three handover phases [9]:
•
Discovery - Service discovery and network infor-
mation gathering. A speciﬁc criterion is adopted to
determine if handover is necessary. It may be signal-
to-noise ratio, transmission rate, Point of Attachment
(PoA) load, battery consumption, etc.
•
Decision - One network in a list of candidates is
chosen, taking into consideration data collected in the
earlier phase. This phase is the focus in this paper
because the decision technique and the policy for han-
dover attempts strongly impact the overall handover
performance. Depending on the network technology,
handover may be MN-initiated or network-initiated.
•
Execution - Networks and MNs exchange control mes-
sages to make channel switching. This phase should
minimize service interruption in order to appear im-
perceptible to the user. This phase is strongly media-
dependent.
IEEE 802.21 standard [5] describes the Media Independent
Handover Function (MIHF). MIHF intends to be a common
mean over the link layer in order to allow different RATs to
communicate with each other during handover. Each RAT must
provide its own implementation of MIHF and map the MIHF
messages to its media-dependent primitives. Thus, MIHF may
offer information that can be used as discovery or decision
parameters [11] [15]–[17].
There may be many different decision criteria for GVHO
such as available bandwidth, expected QoS, or battery con-
sumption. The type of service (voice or data) is a deter-
minant factor for choosing the most suitable criterion for
GVHO decision. Decisions made without network analysis and
without considering the MNs in the neighborhood may bring
disastrous performance results. Wrong handover decisions may
cause MNs to choose the same PoA, overloading it, or to
choose an inadequate network for the application in use. The
main handover decision approaches found in GVHO research
include:
•
Centralized entities [13] - A relay station handles
GVHO management, removing complexity from MNs.
This approach also reduces the uncertainty level and
ensures better performance than decentralized ap-
proaches. The main drawback is the lower fault toler-
ance.
•
Distributed algorithms [14] - The decision algorithm
makes use of well-known parallelism and synchro-
nization techniques. Distributed algorithms are usually
simple to understand. However, they are not built to
adapt themselves to new scenarios.
•
Random delays [12] - MNs attempt to handover after a
random delay. This procedure minimizes simultaneous
handover attempts and is considered a subtype of the
distributed algorithm approach.
•
Reinforcement learning [13] - It employs Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AI) techniques to make MNs learn about
their surrounding environment as they make handover
attempts. This approach does not require message
exchange among users. However, learning algorithms
can cause performance issues.
•
Game theory [12] [13] - This approach maps handover
scenarios in cooperative or non-cooperative games
in which MNs are players interested in getting the
best payoff as possible. The payoff may be a larger
bandwidth, energy saving, or better security. Nash
equilibrium is the desired stable state in which all
MNs do not have anymore strategies to obtain better
payoffs. The main advantage of this approach is the
almost perfect match between a GVHO scenario and
the Game Theory competitive models. On the other
hand, it is not always possible to model additional
parameters.
•
Mathematical optimization problems [11] - Mathe-
matical equations are used to describe the handover
decision under predetermined conditions. Then, the
problem is solved by ﬁnding the ideal value for the
equation variables. This approach requires a more
complex modelling and is more ﬂexible than Game
Theory-based models.
For any GVHO approach, the MN or the serving PoA may
determine if it is possible to request handover in a certain
time, or if it is preferable to postpone it, given the network
conditions. Policies for handover attempts can inﬂuence han-
dover performance, for better or for worse, depending upon
the adopted solution.
III.
RELATED WORK
In [18], a relay station is used as a centralized entity to
coordinate GVHO. The scenario studied is the movement of
users in a train. Handover blocking and interruption proba-
bilities are evaluated with the increase of the calls-per-minute
ratio. The evaluation compares schemes with and without the
relay station. The authors conclude that the proposed scheme
reduces handover blocking and interruption probabilities. In
this case, the relay station is responsible for executing the
policy for handover attempts. The solution has limitations
if co-existence with legacy systems is needed. This is due
to the need of introducing a new infrastructure with special
requirements.
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Cai et al. propose three decentralized algorithms for GVHO
in [12]. The ﬁrst is a Nash equilibrium-based algorithm where
the policy for handover attempts is based on the game strategy
of each player. The second algorithm adopts random delays,
thus using a simpler policy for handover attempts. The third
algorithm is a more reﬁned version of the previous one. It
considers latency as a basis for delay calculations. Performance
evaluations show that latency values under the three algorithms
are similar. Handover blocking probability is not considered.
Handover blocking probability is the probability of the MN
having its handover request denied by the target network.
Niyato et al. propose a model for network selection that is
based on evolutionary games [13]. The model consider two ap-
proaches: a central entity-based approach and a decentralized-
based approach that uses a reinforcement learning model.
In the ﬁrst approach, the central entity controls handover
attempts. In the second approach, MNs are allowed to infer
the best period of time to request a handover. The fraction
of MNs choosing the same PoA is the load-balancing metric
adopted. They conclude that each approach has its advantages
in accordance with the scenario. One drawback is not evalu-
ating the impact of the approaches on latency.
Lei et al. [14] present three GVHO schemes. The ﬁrst
scheme schedules simultaneous attempts to random time peri-
ods. In the second scheme, MNs select PoAs using a predeﬁned
probability as a base. In this case, the policy of handover
attempts consists in an immediate attempt. The last scheme
requires the network to be responsible for the handover de-
cision. Results show that the last approach is more efﬁcient.
However, it may be difﬁcult to adapt it to legacy systems.
Lee et al. [11] propose a GVHO scheme, which is based on
the solution of an optimization problem. The main objective
is to minimize latency while limiting the handover blocking
probability. Some factors make the scheme in [11] more
promising than the other researches:
•
it does not require the presence of a relay station.
•
it may work together with legacy systems.
•
it considers two of the main GVHO metrics: load
balancing and latency.
Despite of presenting a promising GVHO scheme, the work
in [11] lacks a good policy for handover attempts. It is based
on a constant delay, which causes a negative impact on the
overall GVHO performance as the number of MNs increases.
We detail such scheme in Section IV.
IV.
REFERENCE GVHO SCHEME
Lee et al. [11] propose an optimization for the total han-
dover latency L, considering the handover blocking probability
as follows:
Minimize L
Subject to PHoBlock(t) ≤ PHoBlockT hreshold ,
where PHoBlock(t) is the handover blocking probability in
a time t and PHoBlockT hreshold is the maximum acceptable
value for the handover blocking probability. Latency is calcu-
lated as follows:
L = NHO.∆t,
(1)
where NHO is the total number of attempts until the MN
requests the handover; ∆t is the period of time between
consecutive attempts. If the MN decides to request in the ﬁrst
attempt, total latency would be ∆t. This is because in [11],
execution time is also equal to ∆t.
Equation (2) presents the calculation of PHoBlock(t). The
value of PHoBlock(t) is dependent on the number of candidate
networks, their available bandwidth, and the number of par-
ticipating MNs in GVHO. In [11], it is considered that these
values can be obtained by using IEEE 802.21 MIH (Media
Independent Handover) queries and ad hoc communication.
PHoBlock(t) =
K
X
k=1
M−1
X
i=Ck(t)
(i + 1 − Ck(t)).(M − 1)!
(i + 1)!.(M − 1 − i)!
×
((P k
sel)i+1.(1 − P k
sel)M−1−i),
(2)
where:
•
M represents the number of participating MNs.
•
K represents the number of candidate networks with
overlapping areas.
•
Ck(t) is the available bandwidth in a time t for
a networkk. The model considers that the available
bandwidth is represented by an integer value. Each
MN takes one unity for handover;
•
P k
sel : The probability of selecting networkk.
The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) condition is used in opti-
mization problems and it can be applied to (2) to determine
the P k
sel value. However, P k
sel can be obtained by using (3),
which is simpler than using KKT and induces minor changes
in results.
P k
sel(t) = Ck(t)/
K
X
k=1
Ck(t).
(3)
Now, we can ﬁnd the Moptimal(t) value that ensures the
optimization problem condition. This value can be found by
setting it initially to one, then increasing it by one unit
while the PHoBlock(t) value is still less than or equal to
PHoBlockT hreshold. The probability PHO(t) with which a MN
can request handover is given by:
PHO(t) = Moptimal(t)/M.
(4)
If the MN decides not to request the handover immediately,
a new attempt will be made after a constant time interval.
The MN requires the number of attempts necessary to have a
well-succeeded handover with blocking probability less than
or equal to PHoBlockT hreshold. Algorithm (1) summarizes this
process and can also be found in [11]:
where:
•
Mtotal is the total number of MNs in GVHO.
•
Mremaining is a counter that checks for the algorithm
end.
•
decision() is a function that returns true with
probability PHO(t).
•
LHOexec is the handover execution time. It is equal to
∆t.
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Algorithm 1: Reference GVHO scheme
L = 0;
c_atts = 1;
Mtotal = number of GVHO participants;
Mremaining = Mtotal;
while Mremaining ≤ 0 do
find Moptimal
in function of (2);
calculate PHO;
if decision(PHO) then
choose networkk depending on P k
sel;
NHO = c_atts;
break ;
else
L += t_atts(c_atts);
c_atts++;
end
Mremaining = Mremaining - Moptimal
end
L += LHOexec;
•
t_atts() is a function to calculate the period of
time between consecutive attempts. In [11], the return
value of this function is always ∆t.
•
c_atts counts the number of attempts. When
decision() is true in the ﬁrst attempt, the total
execution latency is LHOexec.
Function t_atts() characterizes the policy for handover
attempts. In [11], the return value of this function is constant
and equals to the execution latency LHOexec. We observe that
the increase of latency is directly related with the number of
attempts. Latency always grows by a constant factor because of
t_atts(). We conclude that this policy of handover attempts
does not take advantage of information provided by the scheme
itself. Additionally, it causes a negative effect in the overall
handover performance as the number of MN grows, as shown
in [11].
V.
THE PROPOSED POLICY FOR GVHO ATTEMPTS
In this section, we present a policy for GVHO attempts
that aims at providing reduced handover latency for GVHO
schemes like the one proposed in [11]. At the same time, we
intend to reduce the slope of the latency curve as the number
of MNs grows.
In order to enhance performance results, we propose to
modify the t_atts() function in Algorithm (1). Our pro-
posed solution is exponential backoff-based. It depends upon
the c_atts counter and the duration of a reference slot time.
It is a particular case of random delay. Exponential backoff
algorithms have the particularity of keeping the probability
of collision and the probability of transmission stable as the
number of nodes which are sharing a medium grows [19].
Although our solution is motivated by the performance issues
in [11], it is generic enough to be applied in other schemes.
Equation (5) shows our modiﬁed version of t_atts():
t atts(c atts) =





random[0..2c atts − 1] . timeSlot ,
if c atts ≤ LimBackFactor
random[0..2LimBackF actor − 1] . timeSlot ,
otherwise
(5)
where random picks a uniformily distributed number over the
given interval; LimBackFactor is the number of attempts that
limits the range of values for random; and timeSlot is the
duration of a reference time slot, which depends on the target
network. This information is obtained via MIH.
Total latency depends directly on the number of attempts,
which varies with the return of decision(). The expo-
nential backoff approach in t_atts() give to the MN an
opportunity for a new handover attempt after a time interval
shorter than ∆t, or even immediately. When the MN chooses
not to request handover, other MNs may request it, reducing
concurrency during the next attempts. Thus, the total number
of attempts reduces, decreasing total latency and easing the
slope of the latency curve as the number of MNs grows.
VI.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND COMPARISON
The metrics evaluated are the same as in [11]: latency
and handover blocking probability, both versus the number
of MNs. The majority of the parameters also follows the
work in [11]. The value of ∆t is set to 0.1s. We study
scenarios with different values for PHoBlockT hreshold: 0.02
and 0.05. Telecordia (formerly Bellcore) [20] recommends a
value of 0.01 as a QoS objective. However, typical values
range around 0.02 [21] [22]. We consider the value of 0.05 for
PHoBlockT hreshold in order to observe the effects of choosing a
less conservative probability. The number of MNs varies from
20 to 100. It differs from Lee et al. [11], where this number
varies from 20 to 65. The characterization of heterogeneity in
simulations presented by Lee et al. [11] is made through the
use of different available bandwidths. The number of available
PoAs is 3, considering the following scenarios:
Scenario 1 - All PoAs have 18 bandwidth units.
Scenario 2 - PoAs have 5, 13, and 18 bandwidth units,
respectively.
Scenario 2 is only used in [11] for validating their simulator
and in a situation of co-existing individual handover, which
is out of the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we include
Scenario 2 in our evaluations. The FatorLimBack parameter
is set to 10. This value is based on preliminary experiments.
We consider that MNs are switching from an arbitrary network
to an IEEE 802.11 area. The parameter timeSlot is set to
9.10−6s, which is equivalent to the SIFS time slot in IEEE
802.11 standard. We have implemented the reference scheme
and our solution in a discrete-event simulator, which was
written in C++. The implementation of the reference scheme in
our simulator was validated by the authors of [11]. We consider
a group of MNs simultaneously entering a new coverage
area and starting handover procedures deﬁned by the GVHO
scheme studied. We represent conﬁdence intervals with 99%
of conﬁdence level. Conﬁdence intervals appear imperceptible
in Figures 2-5. It is important to point out that we are not
interested in evaluating the decision algorithm itself, but the
impact of our policy for GVHO attempts on performance.
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

Figure 2 shows results for handover blocking probability
under Scenario 1. The probability increases as the number
of MNs grows to 45 for threshold 0.02 and to 50 MNs for
threshold 0.05. Thereafter, the curves are stable. This happens
because blocking probability is getting closer to the threshold
deﬁned in the optimization problem. Since blocking probability
is directly related to the cell utilization [23], it is necessary
to limit the number of MNs entering a new cell at the same
time in order to maintain the blocking probability under the
threshold. When the blocking probability reaches the threshold,
the value of Moptimal(t) that is calculated in function of (2)
can not increase anymore. This leads the remaining MNs to
wait for another handover attempt. Thus, the stabilization of the
blocking probability curve as the number of MN grows always
implies the increase of the average latency. It is important to
notice that the curves with and without our solution are similar
because the optimization problem conditions are still the same.
It means that the application of the proposed solution does not
cause damages to the handover blocking probability, despite
of the shorter time between attempts.
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average handover blocking probability
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Figure 2. Handover blocking probability versus the number of MNs in
Scenario 1.
Figure 3 presents results for the Scenario 2. It present
similarities with Figure 2 but the curves gets stable sooner:
from 30 MNs for the threshold 0.02 and from 35 MSs for
the threshold 0.05. This anticipation is due to the shorter total
available bandwidth in the scenario studied. Thus, handover
blocking probability increases faster, but it also gets stable in
accordance with the established threshold.
Figure 4 shows results for latency in Scenario 1. With
respect to the scheme in [11], we can observe that latency starts
growing from 45 MNs for threshold 0.02. Values in that curve
are greater than those for threshold 0.05, which starts growing
from 50 MNs. As we have stated before, the stabilization of
the blocking probability curve observed in Figure 2 implies
the increase of the average latency. Also, there is a greater
number of handover attempts when we use a lower threshold.
Thus, the threshold 0.02 is more conservative and tends to
make MNs wait for more time than those using threshold 0.05.
The lower the threshold is, the greater is the average latency.
We can also observe in Figure 4 the impact of the proposed
 0.0001
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average handover blocking probability
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Figure 3. Handover blocking probability versus the number of MNs in
Scenario 2.
solution on the latency curve. The curve becomes smoother
than the curve that does not adopt the solution. For threshold
0.05, the latency is 20% smaller in the case of 65 MNs and
28% smaller for 100 MNs. For threshold 0.02, latency is 24%
smaller for 65 MNs and 33% smaller for 100 MNs. The latency
reduction is due to the proposed solution, which makes the
delay between attempts more ﬂexible. The exponential backoff
also brought randomization to the scheme allowing MNs to
try handover again sooner and in different periods of time,
eventually reducing the total number of attempts.
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average latency (s)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Figure 4. Latency versus the number of MNs in Scenario 1.
Figure 5 shows results for latency in Scenario 2. As in
Scenario 1, the curve for threshold 0.02 has greater latency
values than the one with threshold 0.05. In [11], latency starts
growing from 25 MNs for threshold 0.02 and from 30 MNs
for threshold 0.05. In Scenario 2, we also notice that there
is a greater slope in latency as the number of MNs increases
as shown in [11]. Greater latency values are expected because
the total available bandwidth is shorter than in Scenario 1.
However, the latency value is two times greater when the
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
 0.25
 0.3
 0.35
 0.4
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
#MNs
Average latency (s)
Reference, threshold 0.05
Reference, threshold 0.02
Proposal, threshold 0.05
Proposal, threshold 0.02
Figure 5. Latency versus the number of MNs in Scenario 2.
number of MNs reaches 60 for the threshold 0.02. Regarding
the same curve, we have 350 ms for 100 MNs. It is important
to notice that more than two-thirds of this time is spent only in
the handover decision in [11]. Figure 5 also shows that once
again the proposed solution had the effect of reducing latency
and easing the slope of the latency curve. For the threshold
0.05, latency has a reduction of 29% for 65 MNs and 36% for
100 MNs. For the threshold 0.02, we observe a reduction of
24% for 65 MNs and 40% for 100 MSs.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have proposed a policy for GVHO
attempts. Our solution uses exponential backoff in order to
allow a better distribution of handover attempts over time.
Performance evaluations have shown that our proposal makes
it possible to reduce handover latency and ease the slope of
the latency curve as the number of MNs grows. In particular,
results have shown that latency was reduced up to 40% in
accordance with the scenarios evaluated. In future work, we
will evaluate our proposal in other scenarios. We will take
into account a varying number of PoAs, trafﬁc data, different
parameter values, and additional evaluation metrics. Also, we
intend to include MIH queries in the solution design and
to include the information gathering phase in performance
evaluation. We are also planning to study the impact of our
solution on other GVHO schemes.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Lee, K. Sriram, K. Kim, Y. Kim, and N. Golmie, “Vertical Handoff
Decision Algorithms for Providing Optimized Performance in Heteroge-
neous Wireless Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 58, no. 2, 2009, pp. 865–881.
[2]
S. Zeadally and F. Siddiqui, “An Empirical Analysis of Handoff Per-
formance for SIP, Mobile IP, and SCTP Protocols,” Wireless Personal
Communications, vol. 43, no. 2, 2007, pp. 589–603.
[3]
W. Shen and Q. Zeng, “Cost-function-based network selection strategy
in integrated wireless and mobile networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 6, 2008, pp. 3778–3788.
[4]
E. Stevens-Navarro, Y. Lin, and V. Wong, “An MDP-Based Vertical
Handoff Decision Algorithm for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 2, 2008, pp.
1243–1254.
[5]
K. Taniuchi, Y. Ohba, V. Fajardo, S. Das, M. Tauil, Y. Cheng,
A. Dutta, D. Baker, M. Yajnik, and D. Famolari, “IEEE 802.21: Media
Independent Handover: Features, Applicability, and Realization,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 1, 2009, pp. 112–120.
[6]
C. Cicconetti, F. Galeassi, and R. Mambrini, “Network-assisted Han-
dover for Heterogeneous Wireless Networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE
GLOBECOM Workshops, Miami, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[7]
K. Andersson, A. Forte, and H. Schulzrinne, “Enhanced Mobility
Support for Roaming Users: Extending the IEEE 802.21 Information
Service,” in Proc. of the 8th International Conference on Wired/Wireless
Internet Communications, Berlin, 2010, pp. 52–63.
[8]
I. Kim and Y. Kim, “Performance Evaluation and Improvement of TCP
Throughput over PFMIPv6 with MIH,” in Proc. of the 12th IFIP/IEEE
International Symposium on Integrated Network Management, Dublin,
2011, pp. 997–1004.
[9]
M. Zekri, B. Jouaber, and D. Zeghlache, “A Review on Mobility
Management and Vertical Handover Solutions over Heterogeneous
Wireless Networks,” Computer Communications, vol. 35, no. 17, 2012,
pp. 2055–2068.
[10]
H. Jeong, J. Choi, H. Kang, and H. Youn, “An Efﬁcient Group-Based
Channel Scanning Scheme for Handover with IEEE 802.16e,” in Proc.
of the 26th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops, Fukuoka, 2012, pp. 639–644.
[11]
W. Lee and D. Cho, “Enhanced Group Handover Scheme in Multi-
Access Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60,
no. 5, 2011, pp. 2389–2395.
[12]
X. Cai and F. Liu, “Network Selection for Group Handover in Multi-
access Networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on
Communications, Beijing, 2008, pp. 2164–2168.
[13]
D. Niyato and E. Hossain, “Dynamics of Network Selection in Hetero-
geneous Wireless Networks: an Evolutionary Game Approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, no. 4, 2009, pp. 2008–
2017.
[14]
S. Lei, T. Hui, and H. Zheng, “Group Vertical Handover in Heteroge-
neous Radio Access Networks,” in Proc. of the 72nd IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conference Fall, Ottawa, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[15]
S. J. Bae, M. Y. Chung, and J. So, “Handover Triggering Mechanism
Based on IEEE 802.21 in Heterogeneous Networks with LTE and
WLAN,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Information
Networking (ICOIN), Barcelona, 2011, pp. 399–403.
[16]
M. Q. Khan and S. H. Andresen, “PoA Selection in 802.11 Networks
Using Media Independent Information Server (MIIS),” in Proc. of the
26th International Conference on Advanced Information Networking
and Applications Workshops (WAINA), Fukuoka, Japan, 2012, pp. 454–
459.
[17]
Y.-H. Liang, B.-J. Chang, and C.-T. Chen, “Media Independent
Handover-based Competitive On-Line CAC for Seamless Mobile Wire-
less Networks,” Journal Wireless Personal Networks, 2011.
[18]
L. Shan, F. Liu, L. Wang, and Y. Ji, “Predictive Group Handover
Scheme with Channel Borrowing for Mobile Relay Systems,” in Proc.
of the International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
Conference, Crete Island, 2008, pp. 153–158.
[19]
B. Kwak, N. Song, and L. Miller, “Performance Analysis of Exponential
Backoff,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 13, no. 2, 2005,
pp. 343–355.
[20]
Transport Systems Generic Requirements (TSGR): Common Require-
ments. GR-499, Issue 2, Telecordia Report, 2009.
[21]
M. K. Karray, “Evaluation of the Blocking Probability and the Through-
put in the Uplink of Wireless Cellular Networks,” in Proc. of the
International Conference on Communications and Networking, Tozeur,
Tunisia, 2010, pp. 1–8.
[22]
C. Chekuri, K. Ramanan, P. Whiting, and L. Zhang, “Blocking Prob-
ability Estimates in a Partitioned Sector TDMA System,” in Proc. of
the 4th international workshop on Discrete algorithms and methods for
mobile computing and communications, Boston, USA, 2000, pp. 28–34.
[23]
G. Haring, R. Marie, R. Puigjaner, and K. Trivedi, “Loss Formulas
and Their Application to Optimization for Cellular Networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 43, no. 3, 2001, pp. 664–
673.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-318-6
ICN 2014 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networks

