Centralised Multihop Routing Techniques for Device-to-Device Communication
Mustafa Khaleel Hamadani
Politehnica University of Bucharest - UPB
Bucharest, Romania
E-mail: mkhaleel190@gmail.com
Al-Alwash Husam Mahdi
Politehnica University of Bucharest - UPB
Bucharest, Romania
E-mail: al.aloosh.92@gmail.com
Abstract—Device-to-Device (D2D) communication is a new
paradigm in mobile networks that allows users in proximity to
each other to communicate directly, without passing data
through a central Base Station. However, due to users’
mobility and their location, the users may be far away from
each other and this can lead to low-performance data
transmission. The multihop approach allows the source user to
relay data to the destination user through hop by hop. The
advantages of D2D communication can be fully exploited in a
multihop communication environment given that the single-
hop communication usually limits the communication scope to
a specific geographic area. However, routing in multihop
cellular D2D networks raises performance-related challenges,
versus a traditional cellular network, if non-optimal routes
decisions are made. The contribution of this paper is a short
review of multihop D2D networks and then a selection is made
to discuss more details on a number of centralised routing
techniques. The work is still in progress and tries to identify
some open research issues to be considered in the future.
Therefore, this work will serve as a base model for future
performance
comparisons,
made
by
simulations
between
multihop routing techniques.
Keywords-multihop; routing; device-to-device; SDN; IoT;
v2v; overhead.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In traditional cellular communication, if two users close
to each other want to communicate, the source User
Equipment (UE) has to relay its message to a Base Station
(BS), and the BS relays the message to the destination UE.
Due to the user’s mobility or physical obstruction, the
communication session may suffer from varying signal
quality, resulting in low data transfer. In addition, more
battery life is consumed by the UEs to communicate between
each other.
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication allows users in
proximity to each other to exchange data directly without
passing or relaying data to the BS. Moreover, this direct
communication can be controlled by the BS, i.e., the BS will
have responsibility for establish and authorize the D2D
connection among users. Additionally, the BS can handle the
Quality
of
Service
(QoS)
policies
and
the
mobility
management. D2D communication has been approved as a
part of the cellular communication systems since LTE
(Long-Term Evolution) Release 12 [1].
This direct communication has been offered by other
technologies, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee or Wi-Fi [19], but
these technologies are limited to short ranges (approximately
100 meters) [15]. In addition, interference issues exist, given
the operating spectrums (The industrial, scientific and
medical (ISM) band 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz). On the other hand,
the communication range in D2D communication is about 1-
2 Km. The interference issue could be handled in a
centralised way due to the presence of BS [15].
However, when two UEs are not in proximity to each
other,
the
result
is
a
low
throughput
in
the
D2D
communication session. The multihop approach allows the
source UE to relay data to the destination UE through hop by
hop. The multihop communication can increase the D2D
communication
coverage
and
possibly
increase
the
throughput rate.
The advantages of multihop D2D communication can be
fully
realized
in
the
public
safety
and
commercial
applications. In case of natural desasters, when the cellular
infrastructural is partially unavailable or when the network is
congested, the multihop approach provides an alternative
solution for the mobile node by relaying the emergency
messages
to
evacuation
centers
through
other
mobile
terminals.
Many Internet of Things (IoT) applications require the
transmission of data between a set of devices to a central
station for processing or storage. Moreover, most IoT
equipment is capable for short-range transmission due to
energy
constraints.
Therefore,
relying
the
information
through intermediary nodes is required. The integration of
cellular and multihop networks provides reliability, and
flexibility, and guarantees QoS.
In multihop D2D communication, D2D devices which
are out of the coverage could use the intermediary nodes to
relay data to the infrastructure network or to communicate
with other end-users, resulting in overall network expansion
and increased network coverage.
Moreover, the multihop
communication
supports a
number of applications, such as broadcast information (e.g.,
related to collisions on the roads) between vehicles, in
vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) network, or broadcast messages to
specific nodes in a geographical area in the Internet of
Things network.
Due to node mobility and dynamic network topology,
routing in multihop D2D networks is a critical issue if wrong
routing decisions are made. An efficient routing scheme
needs to be designed for better performance in terms of
higher network capacity and efficient energy consumption.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
gives an overview of the D2D multihop network. Section III
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

addresses the centralised multihop routing schemes. A
number of research challenges are presented in Section IV.
Finally, the conclusion and future works are provided in
Section V.
II.
THE DEVICE-TO-DEVICE MULTIHOP NETWORK
This section presents a short introduction to Device-to-
Device communication and multihop network. The first
subsection describes the D2D communication and the types
of communication in the cellular network. The multihop
network classifications and relay types are provided in the
second subsection.
A.
Device-to-Device Communication
In
a
traditional
cellular
network,
a
user
node
communicates with the BS via a single-hop path. However,
despite the fact that this type of communication provides
good delay characteristic, it suffers from traffic overloading,
as the traffic demand grows rapidly [2]. One solution is to
deploy more BSs inside a cell, but this leads to increased
costs of installation and management [3]. Thus, the D2D
communication can be considered as a potential candidate
technology to handle the network capacity/coverage problem
[4]. The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) LTE
Release 12 indicated that two devices in proximity to each
other
could
communicate
directly.
This
kind
of
communication can be seen in different network scenarios
[5]:
In-coverage scenario when both UEs are under the
same network coverage, Partial coverage scenario - one of
UEs is outside the network coverage, and the Out of
coverage scenario when both UEs are outside the network
coverage. In releases 13, 14 and 15, the UE which is out of
the network coverage can use another nearby device which is
within network coverage as a relay to communicate with the
network. There are two types of D2D communications,
either, i.e., supervised (under the control of the BS) or
unsupervised (when a node is out of the coverage of the
cellular network). In the supervised communication, the BS
controls the communication and guarantees performance and
security by complete control over the control plane and the
data plane [7][8]. The control plane is responsible for the
establishment of a connection, its maintenance, termination
and also enforces security policies, e.g. authentication,
encryption. Additional functions of the control plane include
collision avoidance and mobility management. Moreover,
the data plane is responsible for resource allocation based on
control
plane
instructions.
For
the
supervised
communication, the communication can be either: Network-
based communication, i.e., all devices are under the full
control of a centralised node (BS); or Network-assisted
communication,
i.e.,
all
devices
can
make
decisions
autonomously, but based on the measurements provided by
the
centralised
node.
Moreover,
in
unsupervised-
communication, the devices are stand-alone and work
exactly like adhoc networks. These networks do not have
any constraints due to the failure of the centralised entity,
e.g. the (BS). For example, in an adhoc networks, failure of
any node has an insignificant effect on the overall network
performance.
The
only
difference
between
adhoc
routing
and
unsupervised D2D routing is in the usage of spectrum
frequency bands. D2D nodes can use both the licensed
and/or the unlicensed bands while adhoc nodes can only use
unlicensed bands.
B.
D2D Multihop Communication
In a multihop network, a UE communicates with another
user by relaying the data hop by hop, through intermediate
nodes until reaching the destination UE. Thus, the UEs can
communicate in one of the four modes [6]: Single-hop D2D
communication,
Multihop
Device-to-Infrastructure
(D2I)/Infrastructure-to-Device
(I2D)
communication,
Multihop
D2D communication, and
traditional cellular
communication. In single-hop communication, two devices
are in the proximity of each other and directly communicate
without needing any relay. For the multihop D2I/I2D
communication, the multihop route is established between
the node and the network service entity, i.e., BS.
In the multihop network, the UEs communicate through
an intermediate node that acts as a relay. Thus, the type of
relay could be classified into: The Network Relay: The relay
used by multihop D2I/I2D routing scheme, as this relay
helps the UEs to communicate with the BS. This is further
classified into fixed network relay, mobile network relay, and
Device Relay. The fixed network relay is static and installed
by the network operator. A mobile network relay can be a
user node, which provides services for data forwarding
between the BS and the other users.
III.
MULTIHOP ROUTING TECHNIQUES
The multihop routing decision could have been taken
by the centralised entity (BS) or distributed, when each node
could take the route decision autonomously, while taking
into account the presence of other nodes.
The multihop D2D routing schemes could be classified
into
incentive-based,
security-based,
content-based,
location-based and flat topology-based routing [9]. The
security-based routing is used for security concern when the
content-based routing used when the frequent data has to be
shared among users (e.g., video). The incentive-based
routing is used when the users are encouraged to participate
in relaying the data of other nodes by using some incentive.
In the location-based routing scheme, a centralised entity
(location servers) has location information for all nodes. The
route decision is either take by nodes using the location
information
(distributed
routing
strategy)
or
with
a
centralised approach by BS. In the flat topology-based
routing case, the network nodes do not have any specific
structure (e.g., cluster), nor have any location awareness
mechanism.
Another
classification
based
on
route
mechanism
discovery is presented below:
-
Reactive
routing
(on
demand-driven):
the
information about the possible paths between end devices is
obtained after a transmission request is issued in the network.
- Proactive routing (table-driven): each node always
maintains a routing table containing routes for different
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

destinations and the updates of routing tables are done
regularly.
- Hybrid routing: both the reactive and proactive
routings operate at the same time. Hybrid routing divides
networks into local neighborhoods (known as zones).
- Adaptive routing: in this scheme, the routing
mechanism switches between reactive and proactive routing
depending upon network dynamics and their network zones.
Next, we review some related works for a multihop
routing scheme.
In case the nodes in the network do not have any specific
structure or any location awareness mechanism, then the flat
topology routing protocols will be integrated into the
network.
In this work, we only focus on centralised flat topology-
based routing. The centralised flat topology routing schemes
for multihop D2D communications are categorised into
reactive and proactive routing (see Table I).
In Centralised-Based Routing schemes, a centralised
entity (BS) regularly gathers neighbor nodes information
from all the network nodes in order to construct and update
the network topology. Serval work routing schemes have
been proposed based on centralized reactive approach:
multihop cellular network (MCN) [10], cellular based source
routing (CBSR) [11] and A Base-centric routing (BCR) [12].
In the Multihop Cellular Network (MCN) routing [10],
every node maintains a neighbours table based on the
“HELLO” message exchange procedure. The entry of the
table includes the received SNR (signal to noise ratio) of the
neighbor nodes; if there is a change in the received power
level, then updates will be sent to the BS. Thus, the BS has
an up-to-date database about all the links in the cell.
The MCN protocol also supports the detection of a
broken route. Thus, consider the following scenario when the
route between two nodes A and B is (A – X – Y – B), where
X and Y are intermediate nodes. Suppose that when X
receives a packet from A to B, (the next hop form X is Y), X
detects that the link X-Y is no longer available (e.g. timeout
of the HELLO message from Y). Here, X will send a route
request to the BS; then, the BS responds with a new route
update to X and A (to update the cache route at A).
However, this route update will result in a high routing
overhead,
which
may
severely
degrade
the
network
performance.
Another variant of the proactive centralised routing is
Cellular Based Source Routing (CBSR) [11]. In this scheme,
each node contains a table of its neighbor nodes and
periodically exchanges HELLO packets with its neighbors.
The HELLO packets contain current address and traffic load
information. After receiving a HELLO message, each node
updates its neighborhood table and periodically reports it to
the BS. The report update contains neighbor load, link
quality (between the sender node, of HELLO and its
neighbor) and HELLO packet receive instant of time.
Using the information from reported neighbourhood
table, the BS builds network topology based on two tables,
the node table, and adjacency table. The node table stores
information about each node in the cell. The adjacency table
contains details about each node with its neighbours. In
addition, the adjacency table includes additional information
of the distance (hop count) between nodes if the hop count is
1 than the two nodes are adjacent.
If two UEs want to communicate, the source node (UE)
first checks its routing table cache. If some routes are
available, the source UE chooses one of the routes (if there is
more than one route available) and start sending the data
packet. In case there is no route information available, then
the UE sends a unicast route request (RREQ) to BS, with
source and the destination addresses as parameters. Then BS
replies with all available routes via RREP message, or
otherwise, an error route (RERR) will be returned in case of
no route available.
A Base-Centric Routing (BCR) protocol is proposed in
[12]; it is a hybrid of demand-driven and table-driven
routing. The BS draws the network topology by the table
driven method and can thus compute paths. The nodes use
the demand-driven approach to find the route to the required
destinations. These nodes send a route request to the BS, and
if there is no route from BS, then the node broadcast route
request like in Adhoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)
routing protocol [16].
The designed BCR protocol is based on two ideas: the
first is that the BS tracks the intra-cell network topology, and
lists the user's nodes that reside in the cell. The second is that
the mobile node sends a route request on demand to avoid
extra overhead.
Adaptive centralised routing: In adaptive centralised
routing, a central controller (usually BS) is responsible for all
routing decisions.
A Centralised Adaptive Routing (CAR) is proposed in
[6]. The algorithm switches between reactive and proactive
routing based on network conditions, e.g., node density,
average node mobility or traffic load [13][14].
The authors of [6] introduced six types of messages
involved in building the route:
-
RREQ: it is send by the node to BS requesting a
route to another node.
-
B-RREQ: the BS broadcast B-RREQ all node to
initial neighbourhood discovery phase.
-
HELLO
message:
the
node
exchange
HELLO
message for updating their neighborus list.
-
U-RREP: after updating the neighbourhood list, the
nodes broadcast the updated list to BS.
-
Route reply: after the BS received the updated
neighbours list from the nodes. The BS computes the
route between source and distention.
-
B-RREP:
In centralised proactive routing, as shown in Figure 1,
each node periodically exchanges HELLO packets with each
other in order to update the neighbour table, and broadcast
the neighbour table (U-RREP message) to the BS. When a
node wants to communicate with another node, it sends a
route request (RREQ) packet to the BS. The BS either will
provide a route if available (route reply message), or
establishes a traditional cellular connection between them.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

For the centralised reactive routing, when a node wants
to communicate with another node it sent routes (RREQ
message) to request to the BS as shown in Figure 2. Upon
receiving a route request packet from a node, BS broadcasts
the neighbour's list request (B-RREQ message) to all nodes
in order to update the network topology by exchange
HELLO messages between them.
Figure 1.
Centralised proactive scheme
Next, all the nodes exchange HELLO packets and then
send the updated neighbour list to the BS. The BS computes
the route to the destination and sends the routing message to
participating nodes (step 5 in Figure 2). In order to further
reduce the routing overhead, the authors proposed Node
Level Decisions that allow the nodes to decide whether to
participate in the route discovery or not, based on their
remaining battery energy and current traffic.
Figure 2.
Centralised reactive scheme
In adaptive routing, the routing algorithm switches
between the proactive and reactive scheme depending on the
different network conditions (e.g., node density and traffic
load). The authors proposed a threshold in order to avoid a
ping pong effect from switching between the reactive and the
proactive scheme (see Figure 3).
When the traffic load is above a given threshold 2, the
routing switches from reactive to proactive. However,
when the traffic load is below the threshold 1 the routing
switches from to reactive scheme. In addition, the oscillation
timer is used with the threshold value in order to avoid
switching fluctuation.
Figure 3.
Threshold value
Authors introduced a number of features that could be
integrated into the proposed protocol for reducing the routing
overhead.
A.
Node Level Decisions:
Each node autonomously decides about participation in
the route discovery (i.e., neighborus discovery). The node
level decision reduced the resources consumption (e.g.,
energy) in the route discovery phase. Serval criteria (e.g.,
energy and traffic load) are involved in node decisions.
Authors classified the nodes based on residual energy. The
nodes participate in the route discovery if residual energy is
greater than 50%. Moreover, the node with residual energy
less than 25% will never take part in the route discovery.
Another criterion is based on the change of the data
traffic load by comparing the current load with the previous
average load. When the current load is greater than 90%,
then the node never participates in route discovery. However,
if the current load is less than 75% and the previous average
load is higher than 75%, then the node participates in the
route discovery.
B.
Variable route’s timeout:
In order to break a route, the route expiration timer
(timeout) that is defined as the minimum value of the link
expiration timer among all links in the whole route is taken
as the route timer. A node participates in route discovery
only if the timer is greater or equal to the minimum required
route timer.
C.
Earlier stop message (ESTOP):
This message is broadcast by BS to inform nodes not to
send any route request message due to a large number of
messages received by the BS. The ESTOP message could
reduce the routing overhead by limiting the number of nodes
replying to a route request.
In order to provide a reliable connection and, in case the
multihop route is not possible, then the BS will provide a
traditional
cellular
link
between
the
source
and
the
destination node.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Both the cellular mode and multihop D2D mode could be
enabled on the user device. Through cellular mode, the UE
report updated neighbours list and BS draw Network
topology view and provided a suitable route to UEs. This
could be seen as a separation of control plane and data plane
where the control plane provides the decision of the data
forwarding. Moreover, the data plane route the data traffic
through multihop D2D.
Based on that, the authors in [15] proposed a multihop
D2D SDN network architecture and the low-overhead
routing (LODR) protocol. It is known that SDN separates the
control plane from the data plane; decisions on the routing of
the traffic flows are taken in the control plane; then, flow
tables are installed in the forwarding nodes of the data plane.
The proposed architecture assumes that each UE has an
OpenFlow
capability
installed.
In
addition,
the
SDN
controller controls the forwarding behavior of multihop D2D
UE. The authors proposed five procedures to route the data
traffic in the multihop D2D network. These procedures
include: how to handle an unknown route, add a new UE,
installing, maintaining, and updating the routing flow in the
multihop D2D, etc. The results show that the proposed
procedures perform better then Open Link State Routing
(OLSR) [17] in terms of control overhead.
TABLE I.
COMPARISON OF CENTRALIZED MULTIHOP D2D
ROUTING ALGORITHMS
Routing
algorithm
Routing
scheme
Simulation
implementation
Simulation metrics
MCN[10]
Proactive
GloMoSim
Throughput
(TCP,UDP)
CBSR[11]
Proactive
NS-2
Delay, Packet
delivery ratio,
Routing overhead
BCR[12]
Hybrid
GloMoSim
Throughput under
UDP, TCP
with/without
mobility
CAR[6]
Adaptive
-
No simulation
evaluation
LORD[15]
Proactive
CORE
Overhead, Routing
convergence time
IV.
CHALLENGES AND OPEN RESEARCH ISSUES IN
MULTIHOP D2D ROUTING
Based on the works reviewed in Section III, there are
several challenges and, at the same time, open research in
multihop D2D routing protocols that need to be considered
and solved in the design of the future protocols. This section
identifies some of the research challenges in Multihop D2D
routing protocols.
A.
Reduce Routing Overhead
In centralised multihop routing, the nodes exchange
HELLO messages (periodically or on demand) with each
other in order to build/update the neighbor’s list. This list is
sent (periodically or on demand) to the BS, which creates a
global
view
of
network
topology
and
computes
the
suitable/short path between source and destination in the
multihop D2D network. This exchange of messages between
the nodes (i.e., BS and UEs) consumes resources. For
example, the nodes regularly update their neighbor’s list and
send it to the BS; such a scheme leads to high-energy
consumption and high delay. Thus, the control messages
should be reduced.
Therefore, an open research issue is how to route the data
in multihop D2D communication while assuring a low
control overhead.
B.
Applying SDN to Multihop networks
In the SDN approach, the control logic of network nodes
is logically centralised, which programs the whole network
(e.g., adjust forwarding rules on network devices based on
particular policies and protocols). Applying such approach
brings a number of challenges, as indicated below.
The first issue is that UEs need to discover the
controller. In some studies, there is an assumption that all
network devices know about the controller. In other papers,
firstly, the controller broadcasts its existence to all network
devices.
Moreover,
the
network
devices
(UE)
can
communicate with the controller in one hop or in a multihop
fashion. In one
hop
communication,
network
devices
connected to the controller directly via a wireless link (e.g.,
cellular link).
While in the multihop approach, the connected UEs
communicate with the controller through intermediary nodes.
Thus, the shortest path between the controller and network
devices (UE) is important to meet the energy constraints of
mobile devices.
Minimizing the control messages exchanged between the
controller and mobile devices is another issue that should be
handled when applying SDN to the cellular network. The
control messages are important in reducing delay and
optimising the energy consumption.
The controller can be implemented as a single centralised
entity or a distributed approach. Selecting an appropriate
type of the control plane implementation (centralised or
distributed) can affect the performance of the network. The
controller
manages
the
overall
network
view
and
consequently provides the forwarding rules (based on
information collected from network nodes).
Several optimisation problems can be identified, such as:
a) the amount of information to be sent to the forwarding
nodes; b) how frequently should the controller setup/update
flow rules, in order to avoid too much control overhead but
still keeping an enough fast response to the network
dynamics; c) how frequently should be updated (at the
controller level) the image of the current network topology.
C.
Failure Recovery Mechanism
In the works reviewed in Section III, a centralised entity
(e.g., BS) has a network view and provides suitable routes
for UEs. In case of failure of a node (e.g., BS) or no route
received,
a
backup
recovery
mechanism
should
be
introduced.
The
authors
of
[12]
proposed
a
backup
mechanism when there is no route from BS. Then the node
broadcast
route
request
via
AODV
routing
protocol.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

Therefore, introducing a failure recovery mechanism is
important to provide a reliable, stable connection between
UEs.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In the single-hop D2D communication, the users are
limited to communicate with only nodes in the proximity.
However, in cases when the UEs are not in the vicinity, a UE
has to relay data to a destination through a multihop route. In
a centralised multihop network, an updated neighborus list is
collected by the BS (periodically or on demand); then, the
BS will create a global view of the network topology and
will provide the suitable routes to UEs.
Several challenges for D2D centralized routing have been
identified in this paper.
The control messages exchange between UEs and BS
should be further minimized, aiming to meet energy
constraints on UEs. In addition, in order to provide a stable
connection between UEs, a backup mechanism should exist,
to act in case of failure of the centralised entity or if no route
is provided. Applying SDN to the multihop network is a
promising approach that should be handled carefully in terms
of communication between network nodes and controller and
the control plane implementation.
As a future work, a simulation model and a tool (e.g.,
NS-3) will be developed for D2D routing, to implement the
proposed centralised schemes. The simulations will provide
as results a comparison of solutions, in terms of routing
control overhead (in the control plane) and packet delivery
ratio, network throughput and delay (in the data plane).
REFERENCES
[1]
X. Lin, J. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and R. Ratasuk, “An overview
of
3GPP
device-to-device
proximity
services,”
IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 40–48, 2014.
[2]
S.-H. Kim and S.-J. Han, “Contour routing for peer-to-peer
dtn delivery in cellular networks,” in Communication Systems
and Networks (COMSNETS), 2012 Fourth International
Conference on, 2012, pp. 1–9.
[3]
H. Imai, H. Okada, T. Yamazato, and M. Katayama, “The
effect of a multipath hybrid routing protocol in multihop
cellular networks,” in Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications, 2006 IEEE 17th International Symposium
on, 2006, pp. 1–5.
[4]
H. Yuan, W. Guo, and S. Wang, “D2D multihop routing:
Collision
probability and
routing
strategy with
limited
location information,” in Communication Workshop (ICCW),
2015 IEEE International Conference on, 2015, pp. 670–674.
[5]
T. G. P. P. (3GPP), “LTE Device to Device (D2D) Proximity
Services (ProSe) User Equipment (UE) radio transmission
and reception,” 2015.
[6]
F. S. Shaikh, “Centralized Adaptive Routing in Multihop
Cellular
D2D
Communications,”
in
Computer
and
Communication Systems (ICCCS), 2017 2nd International
Conference on, 2017, pp. 0–4.
[7]
F. Malandrino, C. Casetti, and C.-F. Chiasserini, “Toward
D2D-enhanced heterogeneous networks,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 94–100, 2014.
[8]
M. N. Tehrani, M. Uysal, and H. Yanikomeroglu, “Device-to-
device communication in 5G cellular networks: challenges,
solutions, and future directions,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol.
52, no. 5, pp. 86–92, 2014.
[9]
F. S. Shaikh and R. Wismuller, “Routing in Multihop Cellular
Device-to-Device
(D2D)
Networks:
A
Survey,”
IEEE
Commun. Surv. Tutorials, no. c, pp. 1–37, 2018.
[10] R. Ananthapadmanabha, B. S. Manoj, and C. S. R. Murthy,
“Multihop cellular networks: the architecture and routing
protocols,” 12th IEEE Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mob. Radio
Commun. PIMRC 2001. Proc. (Cat. No.01TH8598), p. G-78-
G-82.
[11] H. Li, D. Yu, and H. Chen, “New approach to multihop-
cellular based multihop network,” in Personal, Indoor and
Mobile Radio Communications, 2003. PIMRC 2003. 14th
IEEE Proceedings on, 2003, vol. 2, pp. 1629–1633.
[12] Y.-C. Hsu and Y.-D. Lin, “Base-centric routing protocol for
multihop cellular networks,” Glob. Telecommun. Conf. 2002.
GLOBECOM ’02. IEEE, vol. 1, pp. 158–162 vol.1, 2002.
[13] T. Finke, “Self-Organized Routing in Heterogeneous Mobile
Ad Hoc Networks.” Technische Universität Ilmenau, 2016.
[14] T. A. Ramrekha, G. P. Millar, and C. Politis, “A model for
designing scalable and efficient adaptive routing approaches
in emergency ad hoc communications,” in Computers and
Communications (ISCC), 2011 IEEE Symposium on, 2011,
pp. 916–923.
[15] R. Jayadi and Y. C. Lai, “Low-overhead multihop device-to-
device
communications
in
software
defined
wireless
networks,”
In
Soft
Computing,
Intelligent
System
and
Information Technology (ICSIIT), 2017 (pp. 144-149). IEEE.
[16] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-
demand
distance
vector
(AODV)
routing,”
IETF
Net.
Working Group, RFC3561, 2003.
[17] T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, Optimized Link State Routing
Protocol (OLSR), RFC 3626, Oct. 2003.
[18] IEEE Std 802.15.1-2002 IEEE Std 802.15.1 IEEE Standard
for
Information
technology-
Telecommunications
and
informationexchange
between
systems-
Local
and
metropolitan area networks- Specific requirements Part 15.1:
Wireless Medium Access Control(MAC) and Physical Layer
(PHY) Specifications for Wireless Personal Area Networks
(WPANs).
[19] Official Homepage of the IEEE 802.11 Working Group,
http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/11
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-695-8
ICN 2019 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Networks

