A Study of the Effects of Electromagnetic Fields on Digital Television Antenna 
Radiation: A Simulation and Evaluation of Exposure 
 
Diogo Seiji Ishimori 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: diogoishimori@gmail.com 
 
 Ramz Luís Fraiha Lopes 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: ramzfraiha@ufpa.br 
 
 Rita de Cássia Souza 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: ritasosil@gmail.com 
 
 Jasmine Araújo 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, Bolsita CNPq-Brasil, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: jasmine.araujo@gmail.com 
Josiane Rodrigues 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Instituto de Estudos Superiores do Pará – IESAM, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: josi@ufpa.br 
 
Gervásio Cavalcante 
Computer and Telecommunication Engineer Faculty 
Federal University of Pará, UFPA, 
Belém, Brasil 
e-mail: gervasio@ufpa.br
 
 
Abstract—Electromagnetic compatibility is the ability of 
systems or equipment to be tested in the intended environment 
through levels of efficiency without degradation caused by  
electromagnetic interactions. Compliance with safety limits  
requires tests to measure the device when operated at w 
maximum power  maintained over an average period of time. 
However, the average transmitted power of many of these 
devices depends on a range of system parameters, such as 
power control and others. Several agencies now require  these 
devices to be subjected to  safety limit  tests, but are faced with 
the problem of a lack of standardized assessment procedures. 
This is a cause of anxiety among agencies, industry and 
consumers. The objective of this study is to examine  
procedures that can determine the maximum permissible 
exposure to radiation and that are scientifically and technically 
sound. Compliance with standards can be investigated on the 
basis of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) measurements and 
derived quantities, i.e, the electric field and magnetic field. In 
this study, compliance with the electric field was carried out 
through the development of simulations, to aid in the 
evaluation of the exposure of populations that currently are  
(or will be) the subject of digital TV services in the frequency 
range of 599 MHz.  
Keywords-electromagnetic compatibility; simulation; method 
of moments; antenna array 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Electromagnetic fields naturally come from three main 
sources: the sun (130 mW/cm2 at all frequencies), storm 
activities (electric fields in the range of many volts per 
meter) and the Earth's magnetic field (in the order of 40 
A/m). In the last hundred years, radiofrequency fields 
generated by man, with much higher intensities and with a 
very different spectral power distribution, have changed 
these natural electromagnetic fields; and as a result they are 
now under study. The radiofrequency fields are classified as 
non-ionizing radiation because the frequency is too low for  
the photon energy to ionize atoms but at a sufficiently high 
power density to heat body tissue. 
The general public has been exposed to these 
electromagnetic fields since the mobile phone market is one 
of the fastest growing services in the telecommunications 
industry. Owing to the damage that can be caused by Non-
Ionizing Radiation (NIR) emitted by base stations, the use of 
mobile phone stations has begun to be questioned and raised 
serious concerns regarding the adverse effects of radiation. 
This problem is not limited to mobile phones, but any 
antenna in the range of non- ionizing radiation. 
Since 1974, many countries have conducted research to 
enable them to lay down safety standards for protection. The  
Environmental Health Division of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) and International Radiation Protection 
Association/ International Non-Ionizing Radiation Commitee 
(IRPA/INIRC) jointly drew up a number of reports that form 
a part of the program of the WHO criteria for Environmental 
Health, sponsored by the United Nations Environmental 
Programme (UNEP). Each report includes an overview of 
physical and technical features such as measurement, 
instrumentation and sources of NIR applications. These 
provide criteria for fixing the exposure limits in scientific 
experiments and adopting procedures with the NIR data. The 
guidelines complied with the International Commission on 
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP), set up in 1994, 
and stipulated the limits of exposure to electromagnetic 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

fields at frequencies between 9 kHz and 300 GHz. In Brazil, 
Resolution 
No. 
303/2002 
of 
the 
National 
Telecommunications Agency (ANATEL) National Council 
adopted the ICNIRP guidelines for limiting exposure to 
electromagnetic fields [1]. 
In [2], an estimate was made of the probable source of 
maximum exposure to electromagnetic fields from a radio-
communication station, based only on information about the 
height of the antenna, half-power angle and tilt. In [3], there 
is an evaluation of the levels of non-ionizing radiation 
subjected to by people inhabiting an area adjacent to the 
Radio Base Station (RBS). These measurements show the 
relationship between power versus distance used to calculate 
the far field (the electric field in the region). This field is 
used to calculate the levels of exposure to non-ionizing 
radiation that the general public is exposed to. In [4], a 
computational 
method 
is 
proposed 
for 
predicting 
electromagnetic wave propagation in the UHF range using 
the Method of Moments (MoM). The authors employed  a 
prediction model. This also estimates the protection zone 
from the frequency and feed power values. In [5] and [6], 
there is a study of the radiation level from mobile telephony 
base-station antennas using electromagnetic (EM) field 
simulation and making comparisons with the on-site EM 
field measurement. In [7], a minimum distance requirement 
based on a SAR simulation is proposed for mobile base 
station antennas, and in [8], the impact of Wi-Fi access 
points is investigated to determine electromagnetic field 
exposure. The evaluations were carried out through 
measurements and the simulation through a ray tracing 
method. Stratakis et al. [9] evaluated the authors evaluated 
the electromagnetic field exposure, using measurements 
generated by Wimax Base Stations. 
In this study, methods were employed to assess the  
compliance of wireless systems with the established limits of 
electromagnetic exposure in humans. A method is proposed 
for numerical analysis. Exposure assessments of wireless 
systems, under a limited set of operating conditions, were 
performed to estimate the maximum levels of the electric 
field. 
In this paper, a system is proposed and implemented that 
involves the calculation of the limits of human exposure, by 
assessing the electric field that is simulated by antenna arrays 
in the UHF Range. The electric field was obtained by 
numerical simulation through the software implementation 
of the Method of Moments, expanded from the dipole 
antenna (as described in [4]) to the antenna array. The results 
obtained can aid the regulatory agencies by providing 
information about the location, antenna heights or Effective 
Isotropic Radiated Power (EIRP) irradiated by these 
antennas. 
This work is structured as follows: Section 2 will  
address the question of exposure levels. In Section 3, the tool 
developed to assess exposure is described. In Section 4, the 
results are shown. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the  
conclusions of the proposed work. 
II. 
EXPOSURE LEVELS 
The board of directors of the ANATEL Council as its 
meeting of July 15, 1999, decided to adopt, (as a provisional 
measure),  the radiation limits proposed by the ICNIRP. 
These were based on an evaluative study of human exposure 
to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields from  transmission 
stations of telecommunications services. The purpose of the 
ANATEL regulatory requirements is to set limits and define 
the evaluation methods and procedures that must be followed 
by radio stations when granted licences. In the case of human 
exposure to electric, magnetic and electromagnetic fields 
radio frequencies have to be in the range of 9 kHz to 300 
GHz [4]. 
The parameters used to define exposure limits are the 
electric field, magnetic field and plane-wave equivalent 
power density, subject to basic restrictions. The basic 
restrictions are based on the health risks caused by exposure 
to electric fields, or magnetic and electromagnetic variables 
in time. Depending on the frequency of the field, the physical 
quantities used to specify these restrictions are current 
density (J), SAR and power density (S).  
These limits correspond to those of the ICNIRP 
guidelines and have been established by employing  
quantities that can be more easily measured or calculated 
than the basic restrictions.  
Table I shows the exposure limits of the general public  
to electromagnetic fields in a range of frequencies between 9 
KHz and 300 GHz. 
TABLE I.  
LIMITS OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC TO ELECTROMAGNETIC  
FIELDS IN A RANGE OF FREQUENCIES BETWEEN 9 KHZ AND 300 GHZ [10] 
Radio 
Frequency 
Range 
E Field Intensity 
(V/m) 
H Range 
Intensity 
(A/m) 
Power Density 
Seq (W/m2) 
9 KHz to 65 KHz 
87 
5 
_____ 
0.065 KHz to 1 
MHz 
87 
0.73 / f 
_____ 
1 MHz to 10 
MHz 
87 / f 1/2 
0.73 / f 
_____ 
10 MHz to 400 
MHz  
28  
0.073 
2 
400 MHz to 2000 
MHz 
1.375 f1/2 
0.0037 f1/2 
f / 200 
2 GHz to 300 
GHz  
61 
0.16 
10 
 
III. 
TOOL FOR MODELLING OF ELECTROMAGNETIC 
WAVES 
Guerreiro et al. [4] proposed a tool that employed the 
method of moments to model a radiated field with a dipole 
antenna. 
This study used a customization of a Matlab ® package 
described in [11][12] and extended the work [4] to predict 
the irradiation of an array of antennas. It is necessary to rely 
on Rao-Wilton-Glisson (RWG) basic functions [11], the 
electric field integral equation, and the feedingedge model of 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

the underlying MoM code [11] to stimulate radiation and the 
scattering of basic Radiofrequency (RF) waves, wireless 
communication antennas and microwave structures.  
The customization implemented in this work is able to 
calculate the exposure level in a diagram based on the 
voltage signal in the array antenna feed, the antenna structure 
and the operation frequency, as input of the updated  
software. The flowchart of the code execution and the new  
software proposed, is shown  in Fig. 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                        Initialized   MoM 
array.mat                                                                             Method 
 
 
 
mesh1.mat                                                                        Input Frequency 
                                                                                          of the Antenna 
mesh2.mat 
 
 
     impedance.mat                                                                   Input Voltage of 
                                                                                        the Antenna Feed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current.mat 
 
 
                                                                                         Hfield, Efield, U 
 
 
 
 
 
mesh2.mat                                                                       Calculation of          
current.mat                                                                       Logarithimic 
                                                                                         and Linear Gain                                                                                         
 
 
                                                                                         Display of 
                                                                                         Radiation   
                                                                                          Patterns,  
                                                                                          Protected Zone. 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart of code execution sequence, adapted from [4], [11] and 
[12]. 
 
In the box 1, the antenna mesh is the input of the box 2 
where the software builds the structure of the array and 
generates the file array.mat. This file, array.mat, is the input 
of the third box and where the edge elements are created 
generating the file mesh2.mat. The fourth box is responsible 
to calculate the impedance matrix and saving the file as 
impedance.mat. This file, impedance.mat, is the input of the 
MoM solver, after the surface current can be plotted using 
the sixth box and a file current.mat is generated. This last file 
is the input of the seventh box which calculates the radiated 
field in a single point. The box eighth and nineth are 
responsible to display the radiated field over a sphere surface 
and to calculate the radiated field directivity. Our 
customization was made in the box seventh to nineth where 
the evaluation of safe field according to ANATEL´s rules 
was implemented and finally a determination of the 
protected zone around the antenna can be defined according 
to the results described in the next section and showed in Fig. 
2. 
This tool mainly contributed to calculate the electric field 
in a practical way, aiding other possible works which needs 
this metric to develop proposed reseachers models. 
Moreover, despite in [4], where the electric field value 
was calculated to dipole antenna. At this work the electric 
field is calculated to antenna array. This way, adding a new 
realistic possibility to attend wireless communications in the 
UHF range as digital TV. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
An array of antennas was used for the evaluation 
operating at a frequency of 599 MHz, horizontal 
polarization, with feed power of 1,333 kV,  0.288 m long and 
0.5 cm wide. The antenna had a height of 125 meters. The 
antenna array used was of the broadside type with 8 elements 
and 0.25 cm spacing between the elements. These settings 
were adjusted in the multilinear.m file, dipolo599.mat, 
rwg3.m, rwg4.m and efield3.m [11].  
In the MATLAB code efield1.m [11], the radiated 
scattered/field is calculated at a point that is outside the 
antenna surface. This corresponds to Box Seven in Fig. 1. 
The Efield1.m code was modified to discover where the 
electric field is considered to be non-compliant (larger than 
the minimum field permitted by the ANATEL regulations) 
and where it is considered to be safe.  
In the code efield3.m [11], a customization was carried 
out to meet the objectives of this work, i.e., to trace a 
diagram exposure level around the antenna array in 
accordance with ANATEL regulations. Thus, a loop that can 
vary the radius of 1 meter to any value specified by the 
decision maker, was added to the code. The results of the 
electric field, the corresponding radius, and angle were 
stored for further analysis and are shown in Fig. 2.   
The straight line described in the caption in Fig. 2 is the 
protection zone; this defines the contour of the protection 
zone. Electric field values below the ANATEL reference-
point are represented by the plus (‘+’) signal and values 
above the limit of ANATEL are represented by a dot (‘.’) 
signal. In Fig. 2, it can be seen that the lowest height of a 
building near the antenna should be approximately 120 
meters and the antenna distance should be about 20 meters. 
At a distance of about 40 meters from the antenna, any 
building could be built at about 125 meters of height, as 
shown in Fig. 2. ANATEL defines a range of 599MHz, in 
accordance with Table I, which is an exposure below 33.65 
V/m. 
Create Structure Array 
Load the antenna 
Mesh Analyzed 
Create Edge  
Elements 
Calculation of 
Impedance Matrix 
Solve MoM Equations 
Visualizes  
Surface Current 
Calculation of Radiated  
Field at a point and  
Radiated Intensity 
Display Radiation  
Intensity Distribution 
Over the Sphere Surface 
Calculation of Radiated 
 Field Directivity 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

It was confirmed that the MoM gives feasible results as  
shown in [13] even when it is employed to predict an array 
of antennas. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Diagram of Exposure Levels  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Values of EIRP versus Voltage feedback  
 
In Fig. 3, there are three curves and the data are 
simulated to 125 meters in height. This chart shows the 
EIRP, (effective isotropic radiated power in Watts) and was 
calculated on the basis of different voltage feedback (0.88 
kV, 1.333 kV and 4.6 kV) of the antenna array. It 
demonstrated that with a high voltage feed of 4.6 kV, the 
EIRP values are very high. This should give a warning to  
the decision makers. The two other values used in the 
simulation showed low values of EIRP, (less than 50 kW). 
 
 
Figure 4. Electric field simulated on  each floor [*In chart > Number of 
Floors] 
 
The most interesting analysis is found in Fig. 4, where 
the electric field is simulated on each floor of a building that 
is higher than 125 meters and at a distance of 66 meters from 
the antenna array. The simulation showed the electric field 
increased as far as the main lobe of the antenna array and 
then decreased. The maximum value of the electric field was 
4.28 V/m at floor number 29. This situation is similar to 
what happens in real life where buildings are often built near 
to the antenna locations or vice-versa. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper outlines the results of the effects of 
electromagnetic fields generated by antenna arrays. An 
antenna array has the advantage of providing a high gain for 
long distances, which means it can be used for emerging 
applications. One of its applications is in digital televisions 
and mobile devices that use smart antennas. 
In this study, the effects are predicted by calculating 
antenna patterns using MoM, if the antenna construction is 
known and using the proposed model to generate the 
protection zone (as shown in Fig. 2). The tool also generates 
numerical simulations of the EIRP versus voltage feedback,  
as shown in Fig. 3 and finally, from a specific distance from 
the antenna location, it generates an electric field of any 
height to predict the exposure level of buildings surrounding 
the antenna. 
The main problem in a practical application of complex 
computational techniques (when compared with the findings 
of this study) is that ray tracing, for example, requires the 
geometry to be specified in detail. On the othe hand, in 
practice, the obstacle to using even simple two-ray models, is 
a lack of adequate information about the antenna and the 
exposure level to the environment. This means that the  
available data about the terrain may have limited resolution. 
Another example is when the antenna pattern provided by 
the manufacturer is valid for the far-field region. Thus, it is 
believed that this study has made a feasible contribution to 
this field of studies. 
The research contributions of the paper is a practical tool 
to calculate electric field to predict the protection zone 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

around the antenna arrays, aiding the researches without any 
complexity technique as ray tracing or too simplicity as two 
ray model, providing the researchers in this area with 
predicted electric fields values to aid ou to validate their 
works in electromagnetic compatibility and so on.  
 Moreover, despite the scientific uncertainty surrounding 
this issue and the absence of tools and practical procedures, 
this research has sought to continue to assist public decision 
making by making a calculation of the exposure levels of 
NIR emitted by the antennas that will be designed. The next 
stage is to perform signal strength measurements to confirm 
the validity of the developed tool. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present work was done with the support of CNPq, 
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e 
Tecnológico – Brasil. The authors also would like to thank 
the Laboratory for Computing and Telecommunications 
(LCT), Federal University of Pará (UFPA-BR), and National 
Institute 
of 
Science 
and 
Technology 
- 
Wireless 
Communication (INCT- CSF) for the support given to the 
research described in this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. International Commission on Non Ionizing Radiation Protection, 
“Guidelines for Limiting Exposure to Time-varying Electric, 
Magnetic, and Electromagnetic Fields (up to 300 GHz)”, Health 
Phys., vol. 74,  pp . 494-522, 1998. 
[2] L. Agostinho, T. B. A. Marco, and S. M. J. Antonio, “Estimating the 
Location of Maximum Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields 
Associated with a Radiocommunication Station”, Journal of 
Microwaves, Optoelectronics and Electromagnetic Applications, vol. 
12, no. 1, June 2013, pp. 141-157. 
[3] C. Guerreiro, R. Fraiha, I. Ruiz, J. Rodrigues, S. Fraiha, H. Gomes, J. 
Araújo, and G. Cavalcante, ”Software Tool to Aid the Definition ofC 
Protection Zones of Non-Ionizing Radiating in UHF Range”, 7th 
European Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), vol. 1,  
April 2013, pp. 1003-1006. 
[4] C. Guerreiro, R. Fraiha, I. Ruiz, J. Rodrigues, S. Fraiha, H. Gomes, J. 
Araújo, and G. Cavalcante, “Modeling electromagnetic wave 
propagation in the UHF range using the MoM to assess NIR exposure 
level”, Microwave & Optoelectronics Conference (IMOC), 2013 
SBMO/IEEE MTT-S International, vol. 1, Aug. 2013, pp. 1-4. 
[5] C. Chio, S. Ting, X. Zhao, T. K. Sarkar, Y. Zhang, and K. Tam, 
“Prediction model for radiation from base station antennas using 
electromagnetic simulation”, Microwave Conference Proceedings 
(APMC), vol. 1, Dec. 2012, pp. 1082 – 1084. 
[6] A. Lala, B. Kamo, and S. Cela, "A Method of GSM Antenna 
Modeling for the Evaluation of the Exposed Field in the Vicinity", 
Network-Based Information Systems (NBiS), 2011 14th International 
Conference on, vol. 1, Sept. 2011, pp. 513-516. 
[7] B. Thors, M. L. Strydom, B. Hansson, F. J. C. Meyer, K. Karkkainen, 
P. Zollman, S. Ilvonen,  and C. Tornevik,  “On the Estimation of SAR 
and Compliance Distance Related to RF Exposure From Mobile 
Communication Base Station Antennas”, IEEE Transactions on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 50 , no. 4, Nov. 2008, pp. 837-
848. 
[8] M. Barbiroli, C. Carciofi, and D. Guiducci, “Assessment of 
Population 
and 
Occupational 
Exposure 
to 
Wi-Fi 
Systems: 
Measurements 
and 
Simulations”, 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 53, no. 1, Feb. 2011, pp. 219-
228,. 
[9] D. Stratakis, A. Miaoudakis, T. Yioultsis, and T. Xenos, “Evaluation 
of the electromagnetic fields exposure produced by WiMAX signals”,   
International Conference on Telecommunications and Multimedia 
(TEMU), vol.1, July 2012, pp. 185-189. 
[10] ANATEL, Resolution 303/2002 - regulation limiting the exposition to 
electrical, magnetic and electromagnetic fields in the 9 kHz to 300 
GHz frequency band, in www.anatel.gov.br [retrieved: 02/2015] (in 
Portuguese). 
[11] S. N. Makarov, Antenna and EM Modeling with Matlab, John Wiley 
& Sons, New York 2002. 
[12] S. Makarov, “MoM antenna simulation with Matlab: RWG basis 
functions,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propagation Magazine, vol. 43, no. 
5, Oct. 2001, pp. 100–107. 
[13] Telecommunication Standardization Sector of ITU, "Guidance on 
measurement and numerical prediction of electromagnetic fields for 
compliance with human exposure limits for telecommunication 
installations," 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union, 
Recommendation Rec. ITU-T K.61 (02/2008), 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-398-8
ICN 2015 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networks

