The Impact of Corporate Culture in Security Policies – A  Methodology 
 
Edmo L. Filho1, Gilberto T. Hashimoto1, Pedro F. 
Rosa1, Joao H. P. de Souza2 
Universidade Federal de Uberlândia1 
Uberlândia – Minas Gerais – Brazil 
Universidade de São Paulo2 
São Paulo – São Paulo – Brazil 
edmo,gilbertot@algartelecom.com.br,     
frosi@facom.ufu.br, joaohs@usp.br   
Albene Teixeira Chaves 
UNIMINAS/FACIMINAS – União Educacional Minas 
Gerais 
Uberlândia – MG – Brazil  
atchaves2@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Despite security policies, standards, awareness 
strategies and tools currently in place, employees are still being 
involved in risky behaviors that jeopardizes businesses. 
Meanwhile, although security policies are the cornerstone of 
well-designed 
security 
strategies, 
recent 
studies 
have 
demonstrated 
poor 
adherence 
or 
even 
negligence 
in 
accordance with the rules security policies specify. This 
observed behavior is related to the fact that business permeates 
different countries, cultures, and understanding human nature 
and culture is still a key success factor to information security 
not well-supported by established security policy development 
and deployment methodologies. As its outcome, this paper 
addresses a ubiquitous methodology to develop security 
policies considering the evaluation of culture and its impacts 
over security policy adherence. 
Keywords-security policy; awareness; culture, congruence 
model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As far as employees are using business networks to 
communicate, collaborate and access data, critical corporate 
information is being introduced into a broader environment 
that is more vulnerable and difficult to protect. Employees 
have available an increasing number of interactive 
applications and devices such as smart phones and 
handhelds. Besides that, individuals find it difficult to have a 
true boundary between work and home life [1] and they 
spend time sharing personal and business information on 
social networking sites [2]. As a result the frontiers between 
working inside or outside the company have completely 
disappeared and calling into question the traditional method 
to secure the perimeter.  
The situation is further complicated by the increasing in 
the outsourcing activities. Although outsourcing can increase 
information security risks, in today’s increasingly global 
competitive environment, most organizations have had to 
transform and outsourcing is a common strategy to reduce 
costs. In addition, this strategy can pose a company to 
different cultures in the same business process or a project. 
The current scenario can lead to the extension and 
potential dilution of protection controls and an increase in 
the number of third parties given the same access rights and 
privileges as ―natural‖ employees. Examples of common 
risks and mistakes [3]-[4]-[5] include (being not limited to): 
using 
unauthorized 
programs, 
misuse 
of 
corporate 
computers, unauthorized physical and network access, 
misuse of passwords and transfer sensitive information 
between work and personal computers.  
Corporate culture is the total sum of the customs, values, 
traditions and meanings that make a company different from 
others.  It is often called "the character of an organization" 
since it embodies the vision of the company’s founders. The 
values of a corporate culture influence the ethical standards 
within a corporation, as well as managerial and security 
behavior. 
Senior management may try to determine a corporate 
culture. They may wish to impose corporate values and 
standards of behavior that specifically reflect the objectives 
of the organization. Generally, these corporate values and 
standards of behavior are derived from the culture of the 
nation.  As a consequence an obstacle to adherence of 
corporate 
culture 
naturally 
arises 
when 
companies 
extrapolate its frontiers by business expansion or acquisition 
of other companies. Regional and cultural differences will 
manifest themselves in a variety of security threats and 
business risks. 
 In addition, there will also be an extant internal culture 
within the workforce. Work-groups within the organization 
have their own behavioral quirks and interactions which, to 
an extent, affect the whole system. Roger Harrison's four-
culture typology, and adapted by Charles Handy, suggests 
that unlike organizational culture, corporate culture can be 
imported. For example, computer technicians will have 
expertise, language and behaviors gained independently of 
the organization, but their presence can influence the culture 
of the organization as a whole. 
Security Policies [8] are the cornerstone of a successfully 
information security architecture, because it provides clear 
instructions about information security and establishes 
management support.  Policies are used as a reference point 
for a wide variety of information security activities 
including: designing controls into application systems and 
networks, establishing user access controls, conducting 
cybercrime investigations; and keep workers aware of 
punishment related to security violations.  
98
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

However, in order to be effective security policies must 
be accompanied by an exhaustive and endless awareness 
program. The education and training helps minimize the cost 
of 
security 
incidents, 
and 
assure 
the 
consistent 
implementation of controls across an organization's 
information systems and business process. 
Firewall [7]-[12] and Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) 
[6] are important building blocks of a security topology. 
Network and/or security administrators often rely on their 
services to protect against the majority of threats and to 
enforce security policies. However, security is not keeping 
up with technological and social changes in the workplace, 
there are ways to circumvent or ignore enforcement rules 
and, depending on the way security policies are deployed, 
people’s culture has strong influence on adherence or not of 
these security policies. 
Even in experienced international companies, many well-
meaning universal applications of management theory ended 
up being a fiasco when these practices were faced with other 
cultures. It is not different when considering a security 
policy. What performs well in a country company may not in 
another country. Security controls need to be workable in a 
variety of environments and developed, implemented and 
supported with people’s behavior in mind. 
The goal of this paper is to propose and evaluate a 
method to develop and deploy security policies considering 
the diversity of culture that companies may confront. The 
groundwork of the methodology is built over an integrated 
and consistent approach. As far as we know, to evaluate the 
impacts of people’s culture in the security policy 
development and deployment is a hard task. In Section II, III, 
and IV the necessary background to develop the 
methodology is presented. In Section V, the methodology is 
described and detailed. In Section VI, the most important 
results are shown. Finally, section VII presents some 
concluding remarks and suggestion for future work. 
II. 
CORPORATE CULTURE BACKGROUND 
Culture is a common system of meanings, which shows 
what people should pay attention, how should act and what 
to value. Strong culture is said to exist where staff respond to 
stimulus because of their alignment to organizational values. 
In such environments, strong cultures help companies 
operate with efficiency, cruising along with outstanding 
execution and perhaps minor tweaking of existing 
procedures. 
Conversely, there is weak culture where there is little 
alignment with organizational values and control must be 
exercised through extensive procedures and bureaucracy. 
Considering security policies, this control is mainly 
exercised through application of enforcement rules by 
configuration and usage of security appliances. 
Where culture is strong people do things because they 
believe it is the right thing to do, however there is a risk of 
another phenomenon, ―group think‖. This is a state where 
people, even if they have different ideas, do not challenge 
organizational thought, and therefore there is a reduced 
capacity for innovative thoughts. This could occur, for 
example, where there is heavy reliance on a central 
charismatic figure in the organization, or where there is an 
evangelical belief in the organization’s values, or also in 
groups where a friendly climate is at the base of their identity 
(avoidance of conflict). In fact group think is very common, 
it happens all the time, in almost every group. Members that 
are defiant are often turned down or seen as a negative 
influence by the rest of the group, because they bring 
conflict. 
Of all the data losses reported by the UK Government 
after the nefarious case of the leaking of personal details of 
25 million people in a single incident involving the UK 
Government’s Revenues and Customs Department (HMRC), 
95% is due to cultural factors or the behavior of people 
whilst only 5% is believed to be due to technology issues 
[13]. 
Every culture distinguishes itself from others by means 
of specific solutions to specific problems [14]. The 
categories of problems can be viewed under three aspects: 
problems that arise from people’s relationship, passage of 
time and environment. Due to its main objective the article 
focus on people’s relationship and the five guidelines to 
understand the ways humans relate to each other: 
Universalism versus Particularism – In the universalism 
approach is possible to define what is good and what is bad 
and this criterion is always applicable. In the Particularism 
culture more attention is given to the obligations of the 
relationships and specific circumstances. For example, 
instead of assuming that a good law should always be 
followed, the Particularism reasoning is that friendship has 
special obligations and hence may be a priority. 
Individualism 
versus 
Collectivism 
– 
People 
see 
themselves primarily as individuals or basically part of a 
group? Moreover, it is more important to concentrate on the 
individual so that they can contribute to the community, or is 
it more important to consider the community first? 
Neutral or Emotional – The nature of our interactions 
should be objective and impartial or is it acceptable to 
express emotion? In several places the business relationships 
are generally tools for reaching an objective. Emotions are 
avoided in order not to compromise discussions. However, 
several cultures consider the manifestation of emotions a 
natural part of business. 
Specific versus Diffuse – When the person is engaged in a 
business relationship, there is real and personal contact rather 
than the specific relationship recommended in the contract. 
Achievement versus Attribution – Achievement means 
that the person is judged by his recent activities and history. 
Attribution means that the status is conferred by birth, 
kinship, gender or age, but also for their connections, who 
you know and professional training. 
Innovative organizations need individuals who are 
prepared to challenge the status quo—be it groupthink or 
bureaucracy, and also need procedures to implement new 
ideas effectively. 
Most 
organizations 
are 
facing 
some 
kind 
of 
transformation and traditional cultures are facing the impacts 
of globalizations and being rebuilt, including perceptions and 
behavior towards security. If not addressed clearly, cultural 
99
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

changes can cause uncertainty and doubts in employees or 
third parties, impacting adherence to security policies. 
The Congruence Model [15] is a methodology to address 
the cultural and business changes. The methodology deals 
with changes to both formal and informal cultures as well as 
the infrastructure and business processes. The congruence 
approach is already being applied by the security community 
[13]. 
III. 
SECURITY POLICY BACKGROUND 
In spite of organization's size, their businesses, or the 
extent to which it uses technology, information security is an 
important matter that should be addressed by explicit 
policies. However, the settlement of security policies is itself 
based on a specific framework that requires methodology to 
write, structure, effective review, approval, enforcement and 
awareness process [8]-[9].   
Security policies are high-level statements that provide 
guidance to those who must make present and future 
decisions. An information security policy document is vital 
for many reasons.  Beyond the definition of roles and 
responsibilities for workers, partners, suppliers, a policy 
document 
sensitizes 
them 
to 
the 
potential 
threats, 
vulnerabilities and problems associated with modern 
information systems.  A consistent awareness program is 
fundamental to achieve the security policy goals. Education 
and training helps minimize the cost of security incidents, 
and helps assure the consistent implementation of controls 
across an organization's information systems. 
The well-known methodologies for developing security 
policies [8] do not address the issue of corporate culture in 
depth, only guidance to make policies compliance to 
corporate culture is provided.  Many obstacles to compliance 
of security policies arise when these policies are deployed as 
canned goods in different cultures. For example, is difficult 
to understand some of the cultural, religious and societal 
pressures of the India’s caste system and its implications: 
orders are expected to be obeyed and the rules required at 
work will always be less important than behavior deep-
rooted over countless generations. 
Figure 1 depicts the approach mainly used around the 
world to develop and deploy security policies. 
 
Figure 1.  Security Policy development fluxogram. 
Legal aspects are also an important aspect of security 
policy life cycle. Each country has its own legal system that 
must be evaluated before developing or deploying an 
imported policy. 
Currently, 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
security 
policies 
considering data leakage is an important concern. Regardless 
of the type or mode of data leakage,  recent research [9] 
reveals that one out of four companies does not even have a 
security policy and for businesses with policies, the findings 
reveal a significant gap between the beliefs of security staff 
regarding employee compliance and the actual behavior of 
them. The reasons why employees knowingly overlook or 
bypass security policies and put corporate data at risk are 
mainly a result of a failure to communicate security policies 
and create an awareness behavior in accordance with local 
culture.  
The proposed methodology presents an adaptive strategy 
to security policy development and awareness program based 
on the analysis of the culture throughout the five guidelines 
to understand the ways humans relate to each other and the 
application of the Congruence Model. 
IV. 
 AWARENESS BACKGROUND 
The data loss issue encompasses everything from 
confidential information about one customer being exposed, 
to strategic files of a company’s product being sent to a 
competitor. Whether deliberate or accidental, data loss occur 
any time employees, third-party, or other insiders release 
sensitive data about customers, finances, intellectual 
property, or other confidential information in violation of 
company policies and regulatory requirements. 
Beyond the methods used to educate about information 
security the approach needs to sensitize employees to the 
types of attacks that they might encounter. Employee 
thinking needs to be stimulated via real-world examples. The 
awareness program must include topics about the threats, and 
on how to secure ―your own‖ environment. The awareness 
approach is a key success factor to the development of a 
security framework and shall be measured. Surveys are a 
traditional method of measuring awareness [11]. However, 
measuring attitudes and awareness have a poor correlation 
with behavior.  
An adaptive strategy to the awareness program is based 
on marketing, psychology principles, and a qualitative 
information security awareness scorecard [10]. Blogs and 
social network forums integrated with monitoring process 
are used to energize employee involvement. The expected 
results may be evaluated through internal quizzes 
considering a rewarding process. 
Repetition of information security policy ideas is 
essential. Repetition impresses users and other audiences 
with the importance that management places on information 
security. Education also prevents workers from saying "I 
never heard about that." 
The channels used to express a policy will determine how 
the policy should be written. For example, if videotape will 
be used, then an abbreviated colloquial style should be 
employed. If a policy document will reside on an intranet 
web server, then a more graphic and hypertext-linked style is 
Security Policy Development
Policy Life Cycle
Policy Writing
Policy 
Structuring
Risk 
Assesment
Gathering Key 
Reference 
Materials
Start
Preparing A 
Coverage Matrix
Defining A 
Framework For 
Policies
Preparing A 
Coverage Matrix
Policy Writing 
Process
Making Critical 
Systems Design 
Decisions
Structuring Review, 
Approval, And 
Enforcement Processes
Policy 
Monitoring
Is it necessary to 
review? Are there 
business changes?
YES
Security Policy 
Document
Awareness 
Program
NO
100
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

appropriate. If policies will be issued through a series of 
paper memos, then short and concise text-oriented 
expressions will be required. The ways that the organization 
currently uses or intends to use information security policies 
should also be examined [8]. 
The education process must consider the third parties as 
they are now always present somewhere in the organizations.  
Effective education is difficult in multicultural an outsourced 
environments where suppliers are growing rapidly and hiring 
hundreds of new employees to support companies’ 
requirements. The cost and time spent to education tends to 
prove its benefits in a short time. 
V. 
PROPOSAL 
Based on the analysis of the culture throughout the five 
guidelines to understand the ways humans relate to each 
other, it is possible to define four types of companies related 
to corporate culture: the Family, Eiffel Tower, Guided 
Missile and Incubator [14].  Figure 2 summarizes the 
relationship between the employees and their notion of 
company. 
• Canada
• Greece
• Australia
• Ireland
• USA
Hierarchical
Person
Task
Egalitarian
Incubator
Guided Missile
Family
Eiffel Tower
Power
Function
Satisfaction
Project
Culture relates to: 
• India
• UK
• Italy
• Denmark
• South Korea
• France
• Germany
• Sweden
• Venezuela
• Israel
• Spain
• Nigeria
 
Figure 2.  Cultures of the company. 
A comprehensive study on the types of culture related to 
companies and how to determine the type through research 
can be found at [14] and Trompenaars’ database. Examples 
from the 16 questions used to measure corporate culture 
include how to measure the hierarchy level and conflicts. 
According to the type of corporate culture that will be 
generally derived from the culture of the nation, security 
policies will have more adherence or not depending on the 
strategy to develop and implement. 
Another important study of how values in the workplace 
are influenced by culture can be found at [16]. For example, 
―Brazil's highest Hofstede Dimension is Uncertainty 
Avoidance (UAI) is 76, indicating the society’s low level of 
tolerance for uncertainty. In an effort to minimize or reduce 
this level of uncertainty, strict rules, laws, policies, and 
regulations are adopted and implemented. The ultimate goal 
of this population is to control everything in order to 
eliminate or avoid the unexpected. As a result of this high 
Uncertainty Avoidance characteristic, the society does not 
readily accept change and is very risk adverse‖.  
For the purpose of this article the factors thinking, 
learning and change (responses) should be evaluated in order 
to determine the impacts in the development and awareness 
process of security policies. 
The Family culture deals more with the intuition than 
rational process. It focuses on the development of people 
over people’s performance. The knowledge is based on trial 
and error and the individual is more important than the task. 
The change process is essentially political and top down. The 
mentors and managers are important actors in the learning 
process. Pattern examples of national corporate culture 
include France, Spain, India and Japan [14]. 
The Eiffel Tower considers that in order to perform his 
functions the professional must accumulate the necessary 
skills and always keep evolving. Human resources are 
evaluated like financial capital and cash. The change process 
in this culture is always slow, executed through rules of 
change and considering a formal process. This kind of 
culture doesn’t adapt well to turbulent environments. 
Companies with this culture profile generally avoid and 
resist to changes. Examples include Germany, Holland and 
Denmark [14]. 
The Guided Missile culture reviews its objectives 
through a constant feedback process. Then it is a circular and 
not linear culture. It rarely changes its main objective and 
everything necessary is done to keep and achieve the 
objectives. The directions are corrective and conservative. 
The learning process includes the personal contact and 
interactions within a group. It has a practical approach 
instead of theoretical and focuses on the problems instead of 
discipline.  Changes are fast in this kind of culture, as the 
objectives moves new groups of work are formed to support 
the new demands and the old groups are diluted. This culture 
tends to be individualist. Examples include Canada, USA 
and United Kingdom [14]. 
The Incubator culture is based on the idea that people’s 
satisfaction is more important than the company itself.  To 
tolerate the company the main people’s objective is to serve 
the incubator for self-expression and self-satisfaction. 
Companies in this kind of culture often operate as an intense 
emotional environment, having a minimal hierarchical 
structure and the authority is strictly personal. When the 
members are in harmony the change process is usually fast 
and spontaneous.  This culture is creative, although doesn’t 
survive to changes on the demand patterns. Sweden is a 
common example of this culture [14]. 
Figure 3 depicts the relation between the types of culture 
and the level of difficult to develop and deploy security 
policies. 
As the authors could observe during the process of 
development and deployment of security policies in the last 
10 years considering wholesale, telecom, data center, 
agribusiness, transportation and real estate companies – some 
of them multinational – formal cultures tends to facilitate the 
whole process. However, exceptions can happen. 
 
 
101
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Figure 3.  Impacts of culture in Security Policy process. 
Table I depicts the relation between corporate culture, the 
security policy development, awareness process and the 
necessary steps to include in the traditional security policy 
development process after the analysis of the culture pattern 
predominant in the organization.  
The pattern analysis must follow or be included in the 
Risk Assessment phase. The guidelines are an adaptation of 
Trompenaars’ ―how to manage and be managed by the 
corporate culture‖ to the Security Policy (SP) development 
and deployment phases . 
TABLE I.  
CORPORATE CULTURE AND SECURITY POLICY 
Culture 
SP Development 
SP Deployment 
Awareness 
Family 
 
Top Down 
approach1; 
 
Conquer the 
corporate 
leaders2; 
 
Evangelize 
the CEO and 
leaders3; 
 
Abuse of risk 
examples to 
convince 
them4. 
 
Make the 
leaders feel 
more 
powerful and 
with more 
control 
through SP’s; 
 
Show to the 
leaders the 
impacts of 
errors more 
than the 
advantages of 
SP’s 
 
1 and 2; 
 
Make people 
feel as the 
―owner of the 
process4‖ 
 
 
1 and 4; 
 
Conquer 
the team’s 
members; 
 
Repetition 
is a must6; 
 
 
Eiffel 
Tower 
 
1 and 2; 
 
Show the 
leaders the 
advantages 
of SP’s5;  
 
Decentralized; 
 
Usage of 
Project 
Management 
methodology. 
 
 
The 
awareness 
program 
should 
sell SP as 
status; 
Guided 
 
Top Down 
and 
 
Decentralized 
approach; 
 
The 
awareness 
Missile 
decentralized 
approach. 
 
5; 
 
Present the 
avoided risks 
in financial 
numbers;  
 
Usage of 
project 
management 
methodology. 
 
program 
must 
show 
results in 
financial 
numbers 
and 
impact 
over 
―salary‖.  
Incubator 
 
Decentralized 
approach. 
 
Discover the 
most influent 
individuals of 
the network 
and 
evangelize 
them. 
 
Make people 
feel SP as 
innovative 
and important 
to their 
objectives.  
 
6. 
 
The 
awareness 
program 
should 
create 
―challeng
e 
conditions
‖; 
 
6. 
There are different methods to apply the guidelines that 
will depend on the available time and resources. 
Understanding corporate culture, security professionals will 
have strong likelihood to establish security policies 
integrated into the organization’s culture. 
VI. 
 EVALUATION 
In spite of the methodologies already in place and the 
proposal, developing and deploying security policies is not   
a easy project even in corporate cultures classified as guided 
missile. The authors’ experience and observation through the 
last 10 years showed that evangelization is a good strategy.  
Being nearest the employee and third party bring results in a 
short time than being far from.  
Security metrics is a nascent discipline with more 
questions than answers [17]. Moreover, the choice of 
security metrics may lead to a false sense of security or 
otherwise 
misdirect 
security 
efforts 
and 
strategy. 
Measurement does not guarantee safety as usually the 
metrics are related to past events. 
The best way to measure the effectiveness of the proposal 
is to observe human behavior towards information security. 
The number of incidents per amount of employees is a 
suggested metric to be monitored. Then, it is necessary to put 
in place tools to monitor frauds and other incidents.  
Table II presents examples of the most predominant type 
of culture [14], the difference between the number of end 
users and the number of decision makers who are aware of a 
policy regarding acceptable use of company resources [9].  
Why is there a lack of connection between policy makers 
and the employees who must conform to policies every day? 
According to the survey results [9] one crucial reason is a 
lack of direct and consistent communication, and 11% of 
employees 
say 
that 
security 
policies 
were 
never 
communicated to them or that they were never educated 
about the policy. 
TABLE II.  
THE DISCONNECT BETWEEN END USER AND SECURITY 
POLICY AWARENESS  
Country 
End User 
Decision  
Makers 
Culture 
USA 
45% 
76% 
Guided Missile 
France 
49% 
74% 
Eiffel Tower 
Security Policy Development
- Difficult
+ Difficult
+ Difficult
Security Policy Deployment
and Awareness
+ Difficult
Family
Eiffel Tower
Guided Missile
Incubator
102
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Italy 
46% 
77% 
Family 
India 
54% 
77% 
Family 
UK 
50% 
71% 
Incubator 
Europe had the highest prevalence of this belief, where 
the United Kingdom – Incubator – (25%) and France – Eiffel 
Tower – (20%) far exceed the global average. Germany – 
Eiffel Tower – also has a high percentage of employees who 
claim that IT never communicates security policies to them 
(16%). 
 The survey results associated with the analysis of 
corporate culture support the author’s proposal and the 
relation presented in Figure 3. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The organization’s performance rests upon the alignment 
of each of the components – the work, people, structure and 
culture – where the higher the congruence between them, 
higher will be the performance of the organization. 
Information security risks may damage the desired company 
results and security policies are the cornerstone of a security 
framework – the starting point to avoid or minimize 
damages. 
However, the methodologies already in place to develop 
security policies didn’t consider the impacts of culture in 
adherence to them. Information security risks are a critical 
issue for companies, as the number of incidents continues to 
increase. Whether it’s a malicious attempt, or an inadvertent 
mistake, these risks can decrease a company’s trademark, 
reduce shareholder value, and blemish the company’s 
goodwill and reputation. Furthermore, applied security 
technology is not enough once the human factor is 
essentially the weakest part considering corporate culture. 
The article proposes a starting point to discuss and evolve 
the impacts of culture in security policies adherence. The 
article also presents a methodology which, in a nutshell, is to 
include in the Risk Assessment phase the verification of the 
predominant pattern of culture in the organization, and after 
that follow the proposed guidelines to the specific culture in 
order to achieve success. The proposal is likely to progress in 
conjunction with further research in this area.  
Future work is necessary to investigate an evolution of 
the corporate culture analysis considering automation of the 
process through the usage of OWL (Web Ontology 
Language). Ontologies have been used to knowledge 
management and organization [18], for example, in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) ontologies have been used to explicitly 
declare the knowledge embedded in knowledge-based 
system and to facilitate knowledge share and re-use.  
Another challenge is to develop an effective method to 
evaluate employees’ adherence and commitment to security 
policies considering the established corporate culture. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Walker, R. Samani, M. Henshaw, A.Yeomans, P. Wood, T. 
Holman, M. Westmacott, A. Davis, O. Ross, A. Sehmbi, L. Orans, 
and S. Janes, ―CW Security Think Tank: How to prevent security 
breaches from personal devices in the workplace‖, 12/07/2010, 
http://www.computerweekly.com/Articles/2011/01/05/244377/CW-
Security-Think-Tank-How-to-prevent-security-breaches-from-
personal-devices-in-the.htm 03/24/2011. 
[2] E. L. Filho,  G. Hashimoto, P. Rosa, and J. Machado, ―A Security 
Framework to Protect against Social Networks Services Threats‖ 
Proc. IARIA Symp. The Fifth International Conference on Systems 
and Networks Communications (ICSNC) 2010, IEEE Press, Aug. 
2010, pp. 189-194, doi: 10.1109/ICSNC.2010.36. 
[3] W. Willinger, R. Rijaie, M. Torkjazi, M. Valafar, and M. Maggioni, 
―Research on online social networks: time to face the real 
challenges,‖ ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, 
Dec. 2009, pp. 49-54, doi: 10.1145/1710115.1710125. 
[4] CISCO (2008), ―Data Leakage Worldwide: The High Cost of Insider 
Threats‖, 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns170/ns896/ns895/
white_paper_c11-506224.html 03/23/2011.  
[5] CISCO (2008), ―Data Leakage Worldwide: Common Risks and 
Mistakes 
Employees 
Make‖, 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns170/ns896/ns895/
white_paper_c11-499060.html 03/23/2011. 
[6] M. Rash, A. Orebaugh, G. Clark, B. Pinkard, and J. Babbin, 
―Intrusion Prevention and Active Response: Deploying Network and 
Host IPS‖, SYNGRESS PUBLISHING, p. 4-20, 2005. 
[7] E. L. Filho, ―Arquitetura de Alta Disponibilidade para Firewall e IPS 
Baseada em SCTP‖, Department od Computer Science, Federal 
University of Uberlândia, p. 50-59, 2008. 
[8] C. Wood,  ―Information Security Policies Made Easy‖ 10th Edition,  
INFORMATION SHIELD, Inc., 2005. 
[9] CISCO (2008), ―Data Leakage Worldwide: The Effectiveness of 
Security 
Policies‖ 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns170/ns896/ns895/
white_paper_c11-503131.html 03/23/2011. 
[10] G. Stewart, ―Maximising the Effectiveness of Information Security 
Awareness Using Marketing and Psychology Principles‖ Department 
of Mathematics, Royal Holloway, University of London, RHUL-MA-
2009-2, Feb. 2009.  
[11] C. Roper, J. Grau, and L. Fischer, ―Security Education, Awareness 
and Training, SEAT from Theory to Practice‖. ELSEVIER 
BUTTERWORTH-HEINEMANN, 2006. 
[12] E. L. Filho,  G. Hashimoto, and P. Rosa, ―A High Availability 
Firewall Model Based on SCTP Protocol,‖ Proc. IARIA Symp. 
Systems and Networks Communications (ICSNC 08), IEEE Press, 
Dec. 2008, pp. 202-207, doi: 10.1109/ICSNC.2008.63. 
[13] C. Colwill, ―Human Factors in Information Security: The Insider 
Threat – Who Can You Trust These Days?‖, ELSEVIER, Inform. 
Secur. Tech. Rep. (2010), doi: 10.1016/j.isrt.2010.04.004. 
[14]  F. Trompenaars and C. Hampden-Turner, ―Riding The Waves of 
Culture: Understanding Diversity in Global Business‖, 2th Edition, 
MCGRAW-HILL, 1998. 
[15] O. Wyman, ―Congruence Model: A Roadmap for Understanding 
Organizational 
Performance‖, 
http://www.oliverwyman.com/ow/pdf_files/Congruence_Model_INS.
pdf 03/23/2011.  
[16] G. Hofstede, ―Cultural Dimensions‖, http://www.geert-hofstede.com/ 
03/23/2011. 
[17] C. Nelson, ―Security Metrics An Overview‖, ISSA Journal, August 
2010, pp. 12-18. 
[18] E-S. Abou-Zeid and J. Molson, ―Towards a Cultural Ontology for 
Interorganizational Knowledge Processes‖, IEEE Press, Jan. 2003, 
vol. 1, pp. 8c, Proceedings of the 36th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference 
on 
System 
Sciences 
(HICSS’03), 
doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2003.1173645.
 
103
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

