Ubiquitous Home-Based Services
Jean-Charles Gr´egoire
INRS-EMT
Montreal, CANADA
gregoire@emt.inrs.ca
Abstract—Remotely accessing services or content based at
home is increasingly required as high speed wireless networks
become more widespread and mobile terminals more capable.
Still, providing such access in reliable and secure fashion presents
challenges, especially since media is involved. We explore here
how this can be done in a SIP-based framework, taking into
account more recent developments in media architectures such
as IMS, from extension to home-based (DSL, cable) access to
new means of exchanging information between end users through
messaging. We demonstrate how MSRP is used to that effect.
Keywords - SIP; SDP; MSRP; Home monitoring; Home Ser-
vices.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cheap, ubiquitous Internet access, from hotspots to greater
affordability of wireless (3G and beyond) services, means that
users can be connected to the Internet in almost continuous
fashion. This however does not translate into universal access
to services as speciﬁc, remote access terminals (e.g. RIM’s
blackberry) remain the norm. We thus tend to see the cre-
ation of mobile-device speciﬁc variants of common services,
or services created speciﬁcally for mobility (again, RIM’s
service)[2], [6]. Even for newer devices (e.g. the iPhone), there
tends to be a distinction between a hotspot-based use and a
cellular-based use.
We can argue that there are really two different markets
at play here, one based on the mobile terminal, “always”
connected, the other that of the mobile computer, served
by hotspots in a context such that, for the user, connec-
tivity is indistinguishable from the home network, at least
as long as massive data transfers are not involved. In the
case of the mobile terminals, the restrictions in the nature
of the service which can be accessed are manifest: while
some are infrastructure-based, most applications are essentially
terminal-based, with simple client-server behaviour, and acti-
vated on demand or periodically, typically the “app” market
for new devices. In either case, user to user (IP–based)
communications are elusive.
The emergence of middleware for mobile services, such as
the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) puts another twist on this
issue, as they allow the creation of new services with proper
mechanisms to overcome restrictions that mobility and/or
restricted bandwidth access can impose. These operator-based
services can come in competition with Internet-based services
and this is actually a topic of some controversy, although this
is not our focus here.
Both models, Internet-based service speciﬁc or operator-
based middleware multi–service, present restrictions in the de-
livery of services. In the ﬁrst case, we depend on a silo model,
where only services deployed on Internet servers are available,
with little—or proprietary—means for extension. While this
model serves some applications such as social networks or
personal communications rather well, it has clear limits in
terms of integration (e.g., [3], [9]. The middleware-based
model is more ﬂexible in that respect, but users themselves
usually have no possibility to provide personal extensions. In
both cases, access to personal information is quite limited,
restricted to repositories, or conﬁned within applications (e.g.
pictures).
Our focus here is on providing access to home-based
services or information from remote terminals, as well as
allowing home-based applications to communicate remotely
with owners, in a secure way, where both parties can mutually
authenticate and protect their communications.
In this paper, we show how current SIP–related features
actually provide most of the required support for such services,
with minimal extra effort. Such an approach has advantages
over network-based services as it can more easily enable
direct (user to user) communications. It also avoids holding
information in the network for the user, which may have
security and legal ramiﬁcations. Finally, it also allows us to
take advantage of established mechanisms to bypass devices
which restrict communications.
In section II, we start with an overview of the different
elements upon which our argument is built. Section III presents
our view of home-based services. Section IV discusses all the
issues which need to be resolved. Section V illustrates how
messaging mechanisms can be used to transport various forms
of date. Our solution is discussed in Section VI and we draw
our conclusions in Section VII.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section we present the key elements required to
understand the foundations of our work. We assume that
the reader will be familiar with most of the technological
underpinnings and we keep this presentation succinct.
A. Home Monitoring Services
Remote access to home services from a wireless terminal is
hardly a new concept. For example, we ﬁnd in [6] a description
of the use of off–the–shelf protocols and programming tools to
implement alarm monitoring. More recently, wireless operators
20
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

have started to offer such services, again centred around
monitoring and alarms. In AT&T’s case[2], for example,
the application was proprietary and required users to deploy
speciﬁc hardware, which included a remotely operable video
camera and various sensors. Motion, door and window activity,
water leakage, and temperature changes are cited as common
examples.
Building a home sensor network is certainly no longer a
challenge, and it is also straightforward to program alarms
based on monitored values. The issue is rather the intercon-
nection of this network — or a home-based driving application
— with the remote user. In AT&T’s case, the application had
a web interface and the user had to connect to the server
remotely via IP to access the services, essentially enabling
access to a web server from any terminal, including cellular
phones with such a capacity.
However, while conceptually straightforward, remote access
to home–based servers is blocked by many operators, and
IP addresses may change through time. Furthermore such a
form of remote–access is open to various forms of attacks, as
typically befalls web servers.
B. Other services
While sensors/actuators and video surveillance are the most
often cited examples of home applications, there are many
other possibilities we can imagine, such as access to various
forms of content, including audio and video, or pictures.
Such access can take different forms, as we shall see later.
Accessing content directly from the home is important to
alleviate such issues as protecting copyrighted, personal or
sensitive information.
C. SIP & SDP
The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)[10] is the foundation
of media services. SIP is a signalling protocol which supports
negotiation of parameters for the establishment of an end-
to-end session for multimedia communications. The Session
Description Protocol (SDP)[7] is used to present parameters.
While SIP was originally proposed for multimedia services,
we must take notice that it resolves many issues that arise
in home connectivity and enriched, interactive end-to-end
communications. The challenge is to identify whether it offers
all the ﬂexibility we need for home services and, in the next
section, we clarify our expectations in that respect.
III. HOME SERVICES
There is no single deﬁnition of what home services can be,
so we must deﬁne what we mean in this context. We have
seen earlier examples of monitoring, alarms and surveillance.
We broaden this deﬁnition with entertainment. We must insist
here that we focus on remote services, namely services which
must be accessible (but not exclusively) remotely.
Figure 1 presents a schematics view of home services and
their connection to the outside world. We consider a network
for home devices, with possibly separate dedicated networks
for sensors based on proximity technology such as variants of
802.15 (Bluetooth, Zygbee). Communications with the Internet
go through a gateway device, which acts as an SIP User
Equipment (UE); this device would integrate other functions
described below.
Note also that we can have internal home communications
as well as communications between the home and an external
user. Home communications can be device to device, device
to person or person to device. These communications need
not be SIP-based, and can be supported through proprietary
means. We shall come back to this issue later.
A. Remote services
Home Monitoring: Monitoring is a classical example of
remote home automation. This includes remotely receiving
alarms notiﬁcation, reading sensor, setting actuators but also
possibly reading documents, such as a shopping list of a family
memo and receiving a video stream.
From an Internet-based service perspective, such services
do not present many challenges. Access and security are the
key issues, but the functionality required to manipulate sensors
and actuators and the network resources required are readily
available.
Home Entertainment: We mean here access to media
sources, such as music and video, from a home server, not
unlike what is achievable through Apple’s iTunes software in
a LAN.
Such an offering is more challenging. We need to be able
to browse directories and activate transmission of a speciﬁc
content. It may be necessary to choose a suitable codec—
or suitable parameters/proﬁle—for the medium. Depending
on the quality desired, as well as the degree of interactivity
required, bounded bandwidth and delay constraints may exist.
B. Some support
We require to make some assumptions about support func-
tions for these services.
Connectivity: We assume that all services are supported
by a home IP network, wired and/or wireless. Monitoring
devices on a wireless sensor network could be accessible
indirectly, i.e. through a control centre which itself would be
part of a home network.
Access: For uniformity, we suppose that internal/external
access to services is organized through a home-based portal. It
receives requests and redirects them to the appropriate device
and answers back to the query device. It must also keep track
of whether requests are internal—within the home, or external.
In the latter case, it would also have to act as a relay for media
communications.
Presence: Because alarms are to be sent unrequested, it
is important to know whether the user is inside or outside the
home to notify her with the suitable means. The portal must
therefore also register presence information for the user and
forward requests accordingly. Our assumption is that, unless
the user is registered internally, the portal will attempt to reach
her externally. In any case, all events will always be logged
and the logs available for consulting.
21
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Relay
IMS−UE
Sensor Network
Media Devices
Portal
Home
Gateway
User
Equipment
Control
Media
External
Access
Figure 1.
Home Services
Inter-Networking: To allow external access, the portal
must be reachable from the outside network. As we have seen
in examples above, this can sound like a simple statement,
but there are practical limits: network connectivity is one, as
is security and possibly quality of service.
Networking restrictions can be imposed by the operator
or also the networking equipment used to connect the home
network to the Internet: use of private addresses or ﬁrewall
blocking impose typical limits. Networking devices will typi-
cally allow trafﬁc to originate from the home network towards
the Internet, but block incoming requests for connection.
When private addresses are used translation devices (i.e.
NAT boxes) may impose restrictions on application trafﬁc. It
is necessary to translate private to public addresses, including
communication ports. If we have SIP trafﬁc, for example, this
requires that its SDP content be modiﬁed.
IV. ISSUES
The simple challenge we are confronted with is to provide
access to home services remotely. Some would argue that it
could easily be done directly, in a typical Internet end–to–end
(e2e) model, but there are many practical restrictions to such a
model and we propose that there are beneﬁts to take advantage
of the access to the IMS infrastructure and its features. Most
important, network-based support is required to circumvent
restrictions imposed by the presence of middleboxes, which we
have mentioned before but revisit below in closer relationship
with SIP/SDP. Beyond transport-level connectivity, we must
also consider user to user connectivity, i.e. that either home
and user can initiate communications at any time.
A. Middleboxes
Middleboxes are network devices which impair communica-
tions in some way, either for security reasons, such as ﬁrewalls,
or for address reuse, such as NATs. Each create speciﬁc
problems. In the ﬁrst case, TCP connection establishment can
be blocked in one direction and authorized in the other. Still,
once established, trafﬁc can freely ﬂow on both directions
although this may require modiﬁcation of signalling content—
in our case SDP bodies.
Extensions to SDP provide support to help alleviate the
problem; they are speciﬁc annotations in SDP bodies which
are read and possibly manipulated by middleboxes. For TCP
transport, it is possible to set an attribute (a=setup:) with
the values of active, passive, actpass or holdconn. These
values announce whether or not the end point can set up the
connection or not, does not care one way or the other (actpass),
or whether the establishment should be suspended for the time
being.
Another attribute, a=connection:, allows to specify whether
a new connection must be established or an existing one can be
reused. It supports modifying the parameters of an established
connection without having to tear down and re-establish a new
TCP session.
We must note that the protocol does not support the estab-
lishment of several TCP connections for the same medium.
On the other hand, the secured form of TCP, TLS, is also
available for transport.
B. Presence & Reachability
Alarms are sent from the home to the user and the user
can contact her home to access sensor status and media. This
requires that:
• User and home must have names well-known to each
other,
• The home knows whether the user is “present” in the
network and,
• Both user and home can initiate connections, which
implies that,
• Both user and home can access each other’s address.
Names are important because home and user need to be
able to reach each other, i.e. initiate data transfer. This is done
trivially if both are customers of the same service network, but
generalized with URIs. Presence should also indicate whether
the user is reachable at all.
22
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

C. Relays
Middlebox traversal can be sufﬁcient to achieve user to
network communications, but may not be sufﬁcient to achieve
end to end connectivity, e.g. if both end users are behind
ﬁrewalls. In this case, application relays in the network have
to be used. Such architecture is commonly used by services
such as Skype[12] and are also fundamental to the architecture
of the Asterisk[11] soft PBX.
The use of such relays raise several issues of security. They
require proper authentication, protection against hijacking or
DoS. Note that there is also a chicken and egg issue at work
here: To enable a relay, there must be a way to discover
it to force its presence on exchanges. This can be done
through a separate discovery process, or through registration
mechanisms `a la SIP: either communications are permanently
enabled between both ends, or an enabling signalling channel
is established which allows to negotiate and setup proper
connections.
The relay may provide added value to the communication.
Minimally, it can be buffering and ﬂow control, in case
of mismatched performance in the links. Media conversion
(transcoding) can also be performed.
D. Information transmission
The remaining issue is the transmission of information from
end to end. This includes:
• Commands and values for sensors and alarms;
• Menu, menu selection;
• A/V streaming and streaming control, e.g. play/pause.
A protocol is therefore required to carry this information.
V. MSRP
The Message Session Relay Protocol (MSRP[4]) is a pro-
tocol to support session-oriented instant messaging. It is text-
based, connection-oriented and supports exchange of arbitrary
(binary) MIME-encoded content. Unlike SIP’s page–mode
messages, MSRP allows messages of any length and structure.
Unlike other messaging protocols, MSRP is integrated with
SIP and its offer-answer mechanism, and thus blends naturally
into IMS. Note here that we have three protocols present in
MSRP exchanges:
• SIP carries the information required to negotiate the
exchange between endpoints, possibly through relays;
• SDP is used to capture this information, including data
format, ports, transport used, etc.;
• MSRP formats the IM messages, supports chunks, frag-
mentation, success reports, etc.
The speciﬁc use of SDP and MSRP is illustrated below.
A. Basic MSRP Operations
The following example, borrowed from [4], illustrates key
elements of the use of MSRP; it is a typical ﬁrst step in a SIP
transaction between Alice and Bob.
INVITE sip:bob@biloxi.example.com SIP/2.0
To: <sip:bob@biloxi.example.com>
From: <sip:alice@atlanta.example.com>;tag=786
Call-ID: 3413an89KU
Content-Type: application/sdp
c=IN IP4 atlanta.example.com
m=message 7654 TCP/MSRP *
a=accept-types:text/plain
a=path:
msrp://atlanta.example.com:7654/jshA7weztas;tcp
The c ﬁeld sets the address (Internet, IPv4) of the source
point. The m ﬁeld speciﬁes an IM protocol, based on MSRP,
and the port used for communications. The a ﬁelds contain
MSRP-speciﬁc information, including encoding supported.
The presence of “path” information in mandatory.
The ﬁeld values “TCP/MSRP” and “TCP/TLS/MSRP” have
been added to the SDP protocol for explicit support of MSRP.
They support two forms of transport for MSRP content, one
plain TCP the other one encrypted.
Note that, with MRSP and unlike other use of SDP, the
attributes—and more speciﬁcally the a=path attributes—rather
than the information contained on the c and m lines are to
be used to determine where to connect. Also note that a TCP
connection can be used for several different transfers.
Bob’s answer could be the following:
SIP/2.0 200 OK
To: <sip:bob@biloxi.example.com>;tag=087js
From: <sip:alice@atlanta.example.com>;tag=786
Call-ID: 3413an89KU
Content-Type: application/sdp
c=IN IP4 biloxi.example.com
m=message 12763 TCP/MSRP *
a=accept-types:text/plain
a=path:msrp://biloxi.example.com:12763/
kjhd37s2s20w2a;tcp
The answer contains Bob’s contact information which
matches Alice’s, i.e. IP address (or name) and port, together
with protocol.
And Alice’s ﬁnal answer:
ACK sip:bob@biloxi SIP/2.0
To: <sip:bob@biloxi.example.com>;tag=087js
From: <sip:alice@atlanta.example.com>;tag=786
Call-ID: 3413an89KU
We see that this exchange follows the normal SIP 3–way
handshake of INVITE, OK and ACK. After this, both Alice
and Bob can open a TCP connection and exchange MSRP
messages over it. MSRP has SEND methods and acknowl-
edgement. The SEND method supports sending fragments of
large messages. It is also possible to specify the nature of the
content of the message.
MSRP a786hjs2 SEND
To-Path: msrp://biloxi.example.com:12763/
kjhd37s2s20w2a;tcp
From-Path: msrp://atlanta.example.com:7654/
jshA7weztas;tcp
Message-ID: 87652491
Byte-Range: 1-25/25
Content-Type: text/plain
Hey Bob, are you there?
23
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

-------a786hjs2$
All messages sent are acknowledged with a copy of the
transaction identiﬁers present in the message header, as well
as a copy of information present in the SDP body: to-path and
from-path.
MSRP has several provisions for reporting on message
sent. It is possible to request in the header whether or not
a report should be sent in situations of success or failure.
Reports use the message ID to differentiate between different
transmissions.
B. URIs, Paths and Relays
MSRP endpoints are identiﬁed by URIs, with am msrp (or
msrps, when carried by TLS) preﬁx, as seen in the example
above. From-Path, To-Path ﬁelds in MSRP contain sequences
of URIs, which are relays to the ﬁnal destination. Beyond the
protocol used, URIs have features we are accustomed to from
other uses of SIP. Rather than a fully qualiﬁed name, it is also
possible to use IP addresses.
An endpoint that uses one or more relays will indicate that
by putting a URI for each device in the relay chain into the
SDP path attribute. The ﬁnal entry will point to the endpoint
itself. The other entries will indicate each proposed relay, in
order.
Since both ends of communications can be isolated behind
security devices, it may be necessary to communicate through
relays, not unlike what is done for SIP. In our speciﬁc case,
we would consider the use of a single relay. In the following
section, we see how it can be inserted in the communication,
and its practical beneﬁts.
VI. DISCUSSION
We propose that both a home user agent and the remote
user are both customers of the same IMS infrastructure. End
to end communication establishment is done by the basic
mechanisms of IMS. Both parties know each other’s name
and correct authentication is guaranteed by IMS. e2e signalling
is thus quite trivially established between parties. The issues
remaining are the transparency of the home services (for the
IMS infrastructure) and the support for information exchange.
Services: Home services and their nature are essentially
transparent for the IMS operator: media exchanges can be no
different from typical usage, while notiﬁcations, menus and
operations are embedded in MSRP messages and encoded
in, say, XML, in a simple command–parameter format. The
following example shows a sequence of sensor information.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="ISO-8859-1"?>
<status date=31/01/2009>
<sensor>
<name code="1">Kitchen</name>
<value>empty</value>
</sensor>
<sensor>
<name code="2">Living Room</name>
<value>empty</value>
</sensor>
...
</status>
A generic application can associate operations and (GUI)
presentation based on XML documents exchanged through a
SIP UA. This application has a home and a remote ﬂavour. At
home, it interacts with devices and with the user either through
the UA or through a local menu. On the remote terminal, it is
only interacting with the user.
We are not investigating the application any further here as
it presents no speciﬁc challenge.
Communications: The main hurdle we face is the possi-
ble presence of devices restricting the establishment of com-
munications in one direction. While IMS-related standards[5]
are designed to circumvent such restrictions, we may still re-
quire that a relay be present in the network; this relay acts as a
back to back user agent (B2BUA), typical in SIP architectures.
Note that this relay has two dimensions: signalling, and media.
IMS is structured in such a way that a signalling relay is not
necessary, beyond what is supplied by the CSCF. Yet in some
circumstances, the use of a B2BUA has been mandated (e.g.
[1]).
Media is a more critical issue, especially when TCP is used
for transport, which is also why MSRP relays [8] were created.
Typical UDP-based SIP communications are initiated from
the user to the network, with the ﬁrst REGISTER message,
which would be allowed to traverse NATs and ﬁrewalls and
set the path for future SIP exchanges. TCP connections must
be initiated from one side only. Our alternative is either to use
a B2BUA, or simply an MSRP relay.
The relay issue is important for another reason: the provider
must not hold any personal information for the user, unlike
typical Internet “service in the cloud” models, beyond sub-
scription information. We must therefore exclude architectures
where a storage server would act as a temporary repository.
Note however that communications between home and relay,
and user and relay can be encrypted, but other solutions must
be found if strict end-to-end conﬁdentiality is required.
We propose that a B2BUA would be required for all
communications, i.e., media and data. While some forms of
communication could be authorized by middleboxes and not
others, it is simpler to use a single connectivity model for all.
Relay Discovery: An issue with the B2BUA is to 1)
decide whether or not it is necessary and 2) discover its
location.
For the ﬁrst problem, it is simpler to impose its systematic
use, as we have just discussed. For the second one, S-CSCF
ﬁlters must be used to route the call through the B2BUA.
This can simply be done by assigning homes a special class
of URIs, and recognizing a communication between the user
and the home.
Conﬁguration: Home User Agent and Remote User must
share some information for proper inter-operation, such as list
of known devices/sensors and other supported media services,
e.g. audio, video or pictures. We would typically create a
remote conﬁguration based on that of the home application
and transfer it to the remote terminal.
24
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Home
Data/Media Flow
Control Flow
B2BUA
RAN
/RACS
NASS
CSCF
P/S
HSS
UA
UA
Remote
Figure 2.
e2e View
They would also obviously know each other’s URI and
could also share keys for mutual authentication and message
encryption.
All these issues are beyond the IMS infrastructure’s inﬂu-
ence, however.
Integration: Figure 2 illustrates an example of end-to-end
connectivity. The home is connected to the IMS infrastructure
via a Network Attachment Subsystem (NASS), associated with
a Resource and Administration Control Subsystem (RACS)
which can perform network security operations. At the other
extremity, the user would have a mobile terminal exploiting a
radio access network (RAN).
Home-User SIP sessions are switched by the CSCF function
towards the B2BUA which bridges requests and connects
data/media ﬂows. As we have explained above, the use of
the B2BUA can be transparent to the users and inserted in the
signalling path through the S-CSCF ﬁlters.
The functionality required of the B2BUA for the data/media
path is minimal, and content dependent. Audio/Video codecs
are negotiated end-to-end and media frames, carried over UDP,
need only be relayed towards their destination.
MSRP data is carried over TCP and presents a different
problem. While it would be possible to collect TCP segments
and relay them directly, it is more appropriate to collect well-
formed messages and forward them, as would an MSRP relay.
Again, it is possible to use encryption to keep message content
private if necessary.
Overall, we see that the infrastructure we need for our
communications is well within the IMS model. Since ﬁltering
is involved, the participation of the IMS operator is required,
although we should put a caveat there: all IMS services
(A/V communications, Messaging) are straightforward, except
that operator support is required to overcome networking
restrictions imposed in some domains. While we can imagine
that, in some circumstances, offered IMS services could be
integrated into a suitable application, it may also well be the
case that a B2BUA would have to be deployed in the operator’s
network, with a matching service offering. Considerations for
a suitable business model are beyond the scope of this paper,
however.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We have shown a SIP-based model to support home-based
services and how it is possible to use an IMS infrastructure to
deploy such basic tools. Beyond established A/V services, the
use of MSRP, for data exchange, combined with a B2BUA in
the operator’s network are sufﬁcient to allow the user to safely
exchange information between home and remote locations.
The application itself can be designed independently, for ex-
ample on an XML basis, while beneﬁting from IMS’ services.
The scheme proposed is overall rather straightforward and
would support applications of various degree of complexity.
Further work is required to study how to support streaming
more efﬁciently, or closer to an Internet model, since we have
here IMS’ interactive model. We believe this would require
special support in a network B2BUA.
Finally, we should be able to bridge the gap between home-
internal and home-external communications, if only to be able
to transparently reuse the same devices. This is also the focus
of further investigations.
REFERENCES
[1] Open Mobile Alliance.
Instant message using simple.
[OMA-TS-
SIMPLE IM-V1 0-20080312-D, Sep. 2008.
[2] AT&T.
AT&T launches remote home monitoring video service na-
tionwide. last visited March 15th, 2011, http://www.att.com/gen/press-
room?pid=4800&cdvn=news&newsarticleid=23003.
[3] Paula
Bernier.
Verizon
tests
home
monitoring
and
control
service.
Last
visited
March
15th,
2011,
http://www.techzone360.com/topics/techzone/articles/134094-verizon-
tests-home-monitoring-control-service.htm, January 2011.
[4] B. Campbell, R. Mahy, and C. Jennings. The Message Session Relay
Protocol (MSRP). Request for Comments (RFC) 4975, September 2007.
[5] ETSI.
Telecommunications and internet converged services and
protocols for advanced networking (tispan); resource and admission
control sub-system (racs): Functional architecture.
ETSI Standard
282 003 B3.2.0, Nov. 2008.
[6] David Fox. Home monitor on a cell phone, o’reilly, last visited march
15th, 2011.
[7] M. Handley, V. Jacobson, and C. Perkins. SDP: Session Description
Protocol. Request For Comment (RFC) 4566, July 2006.
[8] C. Jennings, R. Mahy, and A.B. Roach. Relay extensions for the message
session relay protocol (msrp).
Request for Comments (RFC) 4976,
September 2007.
[9] Meye. A ground-breaking home-monitoring service. Last visited March
15th, 2011, http://www.meye.com.my/.
[10] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston, J. Peterson,
R. Sparks M. Handley, and E. Schooler. SIP: Session Initiation Protocol.
Request For Comment (RFC) 3261, June 2002.
[11] www.digium.com. Asterisk is a registered trademark of digium inc.
[12] www.skype.com. Skype is a registered trademark of skype ltd,.
25
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

