On Security and Energy Efﬁciency in Underwater Wireless
Sensor Networks for Maritime Border Surveillance
Seungmo Kim∗
∗seungmokim@georgiasouthern.edu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Southern University
Statesboro, GA, USA
Abstract—Underwater wireless sensor networks (UWSNs)
based on acoustic communications attract interest as an en-
abling technology of maritime border surveillance. However, due
to differences in environments, many of the techniques used
in typical terrestrial wireless communications are not directly
applicable to UWSNs. Of the challenges, designing a secured
and energy-efﬁcient UWSN takes the greatest signiﬁcance for
application to maritime surveillance applications. To provide an
overview on the UWSN technology, this paper (i) characterizes
key technical challenges that are drawn in UWSNs and (ii)
discusses methodologies to improve security and energy efﬁciency
of an UWSN.
Index Terms—Underwater acoustic communications; UWSN;
Security; Energy efﬁciency
I. INTRODUCTION
Underwater wireless sensor networks (UWSNs) contain
several components such as vehicles and sensors that are
deployed in a given geographic area to perform collaborative
monitoring and data collection tasks. Today, the UWSN has
become a key wireless communication technology that can be
used for a wide range of homeland security applications in-
cluding tactical surveillance, offshore exploration, monitoring
of subsea machinery such as oil-rigs and pipelines.
A. Challenges
Nonetheless, it is still a daunting task to establish a stable
UWSN due to several key challenges. Focusing on maritime
border surveillance applications, we identify the following two
challenges particularly important to revolve.
1) Challenges in Security: First, time synchronization is im-
portant in several underwater applications resembling coordi-
nated sensing tasks. Also, programming algorithms resembling
time division multiple access (TDMA) need precise temporal
order between nodes to regulate their sleep-wake up schedules
for power saving. Achieving precise time synchronization is
particularly tough in underwater environments because of the
characteristics of UWSNs.
Second, localization could be a vital issue for detection and
sharing the sensed knowledge. Nevertheless, the localization
techniques built for ground-based wireless networks cannot be
directly be applied to the underwater underwater environment
because of the aforementioned unique challenges. Hence, more
concern should be given to the architecture of underwater
wireless networks.
2) Challenges in Energy Efﬁciency: With UWSN protocol
designs, saving energy is a major concern, especially for long-
term aquatic monitoring and sensing applications and due to its
node mobility, most of the energy-efﬁcient protocols designed
for terrestrial wireless networking are not feasible [5].
B. Contribution of This Paper
As a survey, this paper describes the present-day techniques
to address the challenges. We provide an extensive inves-
tigation on the system model–i.e., path loss, noise, multi-
path, and Doppler spread–in order to draw accurate analyses
subsequently. Accounting the system model, we study the
methodologies to improve security and energy efﬁciency–the
two aspects that this paper identiﬁes as the key challenges in
operation of maritime border applications.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
The key rationale that we put a particular signiﬁcance on
an accurate characterization of a UWSN system model is as
follows. UWSN and terrestrial wireless systems share common
properties but they have critical differences, which is attributed
to the communication medium.
It is less efﬁcient for UWSNs to use radio frequency
(RF) signals since they have an enormous attenuation in
the subaquatic medium. Therefore, acoustic signals are more
commonly used in underwater communications scenarios [1].
Acoustic communication regarding underwater environment
is a complex phenomenon because a lot of environmental
factors affect acoustic communication. These factors vary
including long propagation delays, environmental noise, path
loss, Doppler spread, and multipath effect.
A. Path Loss
When sound propagates from underwater environment then
some of its strength converts into heat. Sound wave propaga-
tion energy loss can be categorized into three main categories
[2]:
1) Geometric Spreading Loss: When source generates
acoustic signal it propagates away from the source in
the form of wave fronts. This loss is independent of
frequency, while only depends on the distance.
2) Attenuation: Within acoustic communication, the most
common attenuation appears as conversion into heat.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

The level of attenuation is directly proportional to fre-
quency and distance.
3) Scattering Loss: This type of loss occurs at the surface
of the water. Surface roughness is usually generated by
the wind, which in turn changes the pattern of scattering.
Scattering at the surface of the water causes power losses
of acoustic signals.
B. Noise
Types of underwater noise are two-fold [2]. First, noise can
generated by humans while operating various activities from
use of underwater machines to shipping and ﬁshery. Second,
ambient noise is generated by a combination of different
sources that are often impossible to identify [3]. Underlying
noise is considered as thermal noise in the absence of all
other sources of noise, including self-noise. Thermal noise
is directly proportional to the frequency which is used for
acoustic communication.
C. Multipath
In terrestrial wireless communications, a multipath effect
is well known to cause delay spread in a signal, which in
turn cause an inter-symbol interference. In underwater acoustic
communications, number of propagation paths, propagation
delays, and its strength are determined by the acoustic channel
impulse response that is determined by the geometry. For
instance, in deep oceans, refraction of sound occurs because of
variable sound speed that cases of multipath effect in acoustic
channel. On the other hand, sound propagation in shallow
water is inﬂuenced by surface reﬂections while deep water
propagation is affected by bottom reﬂection that becomes
cause of large and variable communication delay in acoustic
communication.
D. Doppler Spread
In underwater environments, just as in terrestrial wireless
communications scenarios, there also are relative spatial move-
ment among a transmitter, a received, and obstacles in the
middle of a communications path, which causes Doppler shift.
The subsequent impact is the same to be the frequency offset.
III. SECURITY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN UWSN
A. Security
We identify the key attack types and understand them in
UWSN’s perspectives as follows.
1) Jamming: A jamming attack is a type of denial of ser-
vice (DoS) attack, which prevents other nodes from using the
channel to communicate by occupying the channel that they
are communicating on. UWSNs area unit prone to narrowband
electronic jamming due to the narrowband nature of acoustic
communications.
In terrestrial networks, when a jamming is detected, the
sensors are quickly able to report the intrusion to other nodes
in order to re-route the packets around the impacted area.
However, it is not trivial to apply this resolution to UWSNs
mainly due to ‘sparse deployment’ of nodes in underwater
scenarios. In other words, there usually are not enough sensors
to provide a detour and to re-route trafﬁc around the jammed
area. Another resolution projected for ground-based detector
networks against electronic countermeasures is to use various
technologies for communication resembling in fared or optical.
However, this resolution can’t be applied either, since optical
and infrared waves square measure severely attenuated below
water.
2) Wormhole Attack:
A wormhole attack is known to
severely destroy the performance of an ad-hoc network [4]. In
a wormhole attack, an attacker records packets (or bits) at one
location in the network, tunnels them (possibly selectively) to
another location, and retransmits them there into the network.
For example, most existing ad hoc network routing protocols,
without some mechanism to defend against the wormhole
attack, would be unable to ﬁnd routes longer than one or two
hops, severely disrupting communication.
One methodology for detection of a wormhole attacker in
terrestrial networks is based on estimation of the physical
distance between two nodes as the key indicator of the
“neighborship.” However, the correct estimation of a distance
depends on precise localization and tight clock synchroniza-
tion. In underwater communications, both of them become
extremely challenging.
3) Sybil Attack: In a sybil attack, a node in the network
operates multiple identities actively at the same time and
undermines the authority/power in reputation systems. The
main aim of this attack is to gain the majority of inﬂuence
in the network to carry out illegal (with respect to rules and
laws set in the network) actions in the system. To outside
observers, these multiple fake identities appear to be real
unique identities.
Again, designing a countermeasure against a sybil attack in
an UWSN is challenging because of the difﬁculty in precise
localization of an underwater node. Speciﬁcally, authentication
and position veriﬁcation are efﬁcient countermeasures against
a sybil attack; yet the accurate position veriﬁcation becomes
difﬁcult in an UWSN due to challenges in communications
introduced in Section II.
B. Energy Efﬁciency
Since most of the underwater sensors operate on battery
powers, it is essential for maritime surveillance to design an
UWSN that is energy-efﬁcient.
One popular method that can be applied to UWSN is packet
size optimization. Again, selection of a packet size becomes
more challenging in an UWSN due to wider variations of
environmental factors. Moreover, due to the movement of
sensor nodes under the inﬂuence of ocean currents, collection
of information among a wide enough network also becomes
an issue. This ‘myopic’ sight on a network hinders a faster
dissemination of knowledge on ‘link costs’ over an entire
network, which in turn causes a higher delay in routing.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Today, UWSN has garnered a staggering amount of atten-
tion in the research society for the homeland security. How-
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

ever, when compared to terrestrial wireless sensor networks,
the UWSN presents one with an intricate complexity. This
study identiﬁed security and energy efﬁciency as the major
factors to resolve in design of an UWSN. Then, it went on
discussing the particular reasons that the UWSN makes it
more difﬁcult to address the two goals. This work can form
the basis for further research in designing novel algorithms
for managing a large number of nodes in an UWSN. It will
further show a signiﬁcant contribution to securing the nation’s
land/maritime borders.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Jiang, “On securing underwater acoustic networks: a survey,” IEEE
Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, iss. 1, 2019.
[2] P. Amoli, “An overview on researches on underwater sensor networks:
applications, current challenges and future trends,” Int. J. Electr. Comput.
Eng., vol. 6, no. 3, Ju. 2016.
[3] A. Manigopal and R. Panneerselvam, “Underwater wireless sensor
networks: a survey,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. Security, vol. 2,
iss. 6, 2012.
[4] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. Johnson, “Wormhole attacks in wireless
networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, iss. 2, Feb. 2006.
[5] H. Choudhary, “Challenges of underwater wireless communications
networks,”
[Online]
Available:
https://dspcommgen2.com/
challenges-of-underwater-wireless-communications-networks/,
Accessed on May 14, 2019.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

