Basic System Implementation of the Cloud Type Virtual Policy Based Network
Management Scheme for the Common Use between Plural Organizations
Kazuya Odagiri
Sugiyama Jogakuen University
Aichi, Japan
kodagiri@sugiyama-u.ac.jp,
kazuodagiri@yahoo.co.jp
Naohiro Ishii
Aichi Institute of Technology
Aichi, Japan
ishii@aitech.ac.jp
Shogo Shimizu
Gakushuin Women’s College
Tokyo, Japan
shogo.shimizu@gakushuin.ac.jp
Abstract— In the current Internet system, there are many
problems using anonymity of the network communication such
as personal information leaks and crimes using the Internet
system. This is why TCP/IP protocol used in Internet system
does not have the user identification information on the
communication data, and it is difficult to supervise the user
performing the above acts immediately. As a study for solving
the above problem, there is the study of Policy Based Network
Management (PBNM). This is the scheme for managing a
whole Local Area Network (LAN) through communication
control for every user. In this PBNM, two types of schemes
exist. The first is the scheme for managing the whole LAN by
locating the communication control mechanisms on the path
between network servers and clients. The second is the scheme
of managing the whole LAN by locating the communication
control mechanisms on clients. As the second scheme, we have
studied theoretically about the Destination Addressing Control
System (DACS) Scheme. By applying this DACS Scheme to
Internet system management, we will realize the policy-based
Internet system management. In this paper, as the progression
phase of the second phase for the last goal, we implemented the
basic prototype system of the cloud type virtual PBNM, which
can be used by plural organizations.
Keywords-
policy-based
netwok
management;
DACS
Scheme; NAPT
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the current Internet system, there are many problems
using anonymity of the network communication such as
personal information leaks and crimes using the Internet
system. The news of the information leak in the big
company is sometimes reported through the mass media.
Because TCP/IP protocol used in Internet system does not
have
the
user
identification
information
on
the
communication data, it is difficult to supervise the user
performing the above acts immediately. As studies and
technologies for managing Internet system realized on
TCP/IP protocol, those such as Domain Name System
(DNS), Routing protocol, Fire Wall (F/W) and Network
address port translation (NAPT)/network address translation
(NAT) are listed. Except these studies, various studies are
performed elsewhere. However, they are the studies for
managing the specific part of the Internet system, and have
no purpose of solving the above problems.
As a study for solving the problems, Policy Based
Network Management (PBNM) [2] exists. The PBNM is a
scheme for managing a whole Local Area Network (LAN)
through communication control every user, and cannot be
applied to the Internet system. This PBNM is often used in a
scene of campus network management. In a campus
network,
network
management
is
quite
complicated.
Because a computer management section manages only a
small portion of the wide needs of the campus network,
there are some user support problems. For example, when
mail boxes on one server are divided and relocated to some
different server machines, it is necessary for some users to
update a client machine’s setups. Most of computer network
users in a campus are students. Because students do not
check frequently their e-mail, it is hard work to make them
aware of the settings update. This administrative operation
is executed by means of web pages and/or posters. For the
system administrator, individual technical support is a stiff
part of the network management. Because the PBNM
manages a whole LAN, it is easy to solve this kind of
problem. In addition, for the problem such as personal
information leak, the PBNM can manage a whole LAN by
making anonymous communication non-anonymous. As the
result, it becomes possible to identify the user who steals
personal information and commits a crime swiftly and
easily. Therefore, by applying the PBNM, we will study
about the policy-based Internet system management.
In the existing PBNM, there are two types of schemes.
The first is the scheme of managing the whole LAN by
locating the communication control mechanisms on the path
between network servers and clients. The second is the
scheme of managing the whole LAN by locating the
communication control mechanisms on clients. It is difficult
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

to apply the first scheme to Internet system management
practically, because the communication control mechanism
needs to be located on the path between network servers and
clients without exception. Because the second scheme
locates the communication control mechanisms as the
software on each client, it becomes possible to apply the
second scheme to Internet system management by devising
the installing mechanism so that users can install the
software to the client easily.
As the second scheme, we have studied theoretically
about the Destination Addressing Control System (DACS)
Scheme. As the works on the DACS Scheme, we showed
the basic principle of the DACS Scheme, and security
function [14]. After that, we implemented a DACS System
to realize a concept of the DACS Scheme. By applying this
DACS Scheme to Internet system, we will realize the
policy-based Internet system management. Then, the Wide
Area DACS system (wDACS system) [15] to use it in one
organization was showed as the second phase for the last
goal. As the first step of the second phase, we showed the
concept of the cloud type virtual PBNM, which could be
used by plural organizations [16]. In this paper, as the
progression phase of the second phase for the last goal, we
describes the basic prototype system to
confirm the
possibility of the cloud type virtual PBNM for the use in
plural organizations. In Section Ⅱ, motivation and related
research for this study are described. In Section Ⅲ, the
existing DACS Scheme and wDACS Scheme is described.
In section Ⅳ, the proposed scheme is described.
II.
MOTIVATION AND RELATED RESERACH
In the current Internet system, problems using anonymity
of the network communication such as personal information
leak and crimes using the Internet system occur. Because
TCP/IP protocol used in Internet system does not have the
user identification information on the communication data,
it is difficult to supervise the user performing the above acts
immediately.
As
studies
and
technologies
for
Internet
system
management
to
be
comprises
of
TCP/IP
[1],
many
technologies are studied. For examples, Domain name
system (DNS), Routing protocol such as Interior gateway
protocol (IGP) such as Routing information protocol (RIP)
and Open shortest path first (OSPF) , Fire Wall (F/W),
Network address translation (NAT) / Network address port
translation (NAPT) , Load balancing, Virtual private
network (VPN), Public key infrastructure (PKI), Server
virtualization. Except these studies, various studies are
performed elsewhere. However, they are for managing the
specific part of the Internet system, and have no purpose of
solving the above problems.
As a study for solving the above problem, the study area
about PBNM exists. This is a scheme of managing a whole
LAN through communication control every user. Because
this PBNM manages a whole LAN by making anonymous
communication non-anonymous, it becomes possible to
identify the user who steals personal information and
commits a crime swiftly and easily. Therefore, by applying
this policy- based thinking, we study about the policy-based
Internet system management.
Figure 1. Principle in First Scheme
In policy-based network management, there are two
types of schemes. The first scheme is the scheme described
in Figure 1. The standardization of this scheme is
performed in various organizations. In IETF, a framework
of PBNM [2] was established. Standards about each
element constituting this framework are as follows. As a
model of control information stored in the server called
Policy Repository, Policy Core Information model (PCIM)
[3] was established. After it, PCMIe [4] was established by
extending the PCIM. To describe them in the form of
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Policy
Core LDAP Schema (PCLS) [5] was established. As a
protocol to distribute the control information stored in
Policy Repository or decision result from the PDP to the
PEP, Common Open Policy Service (COPS) [6] was
established. Based on the difference in distribution method,
COPS usage for RSVP (COPS-RSVP) [7] and COPS
usage for Provisioning (COPS-PR) [8] were established.
RSVP
is
an
abbreviation
for
Resource
Reservation
Protocol. The COPS-RSVP is the method as follows. After
the PEP having detected the communication from a user or
a client application, the PDP makes a judgmental decision
for it. The decision is sent and applied to the PEP, and the
PEP adds the control to it. The COPS-PR is the method of
distributing the control information or decision result to the
PEP before accepting the communication.
Next,
in
DMTF,
a
framework
of
PBNM
called
Directory-enabled Network (DEN) was established. Like
the IETF framework, control information is stored in the
server storing control information called Policy Server,
which is built by using the directory service such as LDAP
[9], and is distributed to network servers and networking
equipment such as switch and router. As the result, the
whole LAN is managed. The model of control information
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

used in DEN is called Common Information Model (CIM),
the schema of the CIM（CIM Schema Version 2.30.0）
[11] was opened. The CIM was extended to support the
DEN [10], and was incorporated in the framework of DEN.
In addition, Resource and Admission Control Subsystem
(RACS) [12] was established in Telecoms and Internet
converged Services and protocols for Advanced Network
(TISPAN)
of European Telecommunications Standards
Institute (ETSI), and Resource and Admission Control
Functions
(RACF)
was
established
in
International
Telecommunication
Union
Telecommunication
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) [13].
However, all the frameworks explained above are based
on the principle shown in Figure 1. As problems of these
frameworks,
two
points
are
presented
as
follows.
Essential principle is described in Figure 2. To be concrete,
in the point called PDP (Policy Decision Point), judgment
such as permission and non-permission for communication
pass is performed based on policy information. The
judgment is notified and transmitted to the point called the
PEP, which is the mechanism such as VPN mechanism,
router and Fire Wall located on the network path among
hosts such as servers and clients. Based on that judgment,
the control is added for the communication that is going to
pass by.
Figure 2. Essential Principle
The principle of the second scheme is described in Figure
3.By locating the communication control mechanisms on
the clients, the whole LAN is managed. Because this
scheme controls the network communications on each
client, the processing load is low. However, because the
communication control mechanisms need to be located on
each client, the work load becomes heavy.
Figure 3. Principle in Second Scheme
When it is thought that Internet system is managed by
using these two schemes, it is difficult to apply the first
scheme to Internet system management practically. This is
why the communication control mechanism needs to be
located on the path between network servers and clients
without exception. On the other hand, the second scheme
locates the communication controls mechanisms on each
client. That is, the software for communication control is
installed on each client. So, by devising the installing
mechanism letting users install software to the client easily,
it becomes possible to apply the second scheme to Internet
system management. As a first step for the last goal, we
showed the Wide Area DACS system (wDACS) system
[15]. This system manages a wide area network, which one
organization manages. Therefore, it is impossible for plural
organizations to use this system. Then, as the first step of
the second phase, we showed the concept of the cloud type
virtual PBNM, which could be used by plural organizations
in this paper.
III.
EXISTING DACS SCHEME AND WDACS SYSTEM
In this section, the content of the DACS Scheme which
is the study of the phase 1 is described.
A
Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme
Figure 4 shows the basic principle of the network services
by the DACS Scheme. At the timing of the (a) or (b) as
shown in the following, the DACS rules (rules defined by the
user unit) are distributed from the DACS Server to the
DACS Client.
(a) At the time of a user logging in the client.
(b) At the time of a delivery indication from the system
administrator.
According to the distributed DACS rules, the DACS
Client performs (1) or (2) operation as shown in the
following. Then, communication control of the client is
performed for every login user.
(1) Destination information on IP Packet, which is sent from
application program, is changed.
(2) IP Packet from the client, which is sent from the
application program to the outside of the client, is blocked.
Figure 4. Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme
An example of the case (1) is shown in Figure 4. In Figure
4, the system administrator can distribute a communication
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

of the login user to the specified server among servers A, B
or C. Moreover, the case (2) is described. For example, when
the system administrator wants to forbid a user to use MUA
(Mail User Agent), it will be performed by blocking IP
Packet with the specific destination information.
In order to realize the DACS Scheme, the operation is
done by a DACS Protocol as shown in Figure 5. As shown
by (1) in Figure 5, the distribution of the DACS rules is
performed on communication between the DACS Server
and the DACS Client, which is arranged at the application
layer. The application of the DACS rules to the DACS
Control is shown by (2) in Figure 5.
Figure 5. Layer Setting of the DACS Scheme
The
steady
communication
control,
such
as
a
modification
of
the
destination
information
or
the
communication blocking is performed at the network layer
as shown by (3) in Figure 5.
B
Communication Control on Client
The communication control on every user was given.
However, it may be better to perform communication control
on every client instead of every user. For example, it is the
case where many and unspecified users use a computer room,
which
is
controlled.
In
this
section,
the
method
of
communication control on every client is described, and the
coexistence method with the communication control on
every user is considered.
When a user logs in to a client, the IP address of the client
is transmitted to the DACS Server from the DACS Client.
Then, if the DACS rules corresponding to IP address, is
registered into the DACS Server side, it is transmitted to the
DACS Client. Then, communication control for every client
can be realized by applying to the DACS Control. In this
case, it is a premise that a client uses a fixed IP address.
However, when using DHCP service, it is possible to carry
out the same control to all the clients linked to the whole
network or its subnetwork for example.
When using communication control on every user and
every client, communication control may conflict. In that
case, a priority needs to be given. The judgment is
performed in the DACS Server side as shown in Figure 6.
Although not necessarily stipulated, the network policy or
security policy exists in the organization such as a university
(1). The priority is decided according to the policy (2). In (a),
priority is given for the user's rule to control communication
by the user unit. In (b), priority is given for the client's rule
to control communication by the client unit. In (c), the user's
rule is the same as the client's rule. As the result of
comparing the conflict rules, one rule is determined
respectively.
Those rules and other rules not overlapping
are gathered, and the DACS rules are created (3). The
DACS rules are transmitted to the DACS Client. In the
DACS Client side, the DACS rules are applied to the DACS
Control. The difference between the user's rule and the
client's rule is not distinguished.
Figure 6. Creating the DACS rules on the DACS Server
C Security Mechanism of the DACS Scheme
In this section, the security function of the DACS Scheme
is described. The communication is tunneled and encrypted
by use of SSH. By using the function of port forwarding of
SSH, it is realized to tunnel and encrypt the communication
between the network server and the, which DACS Client is
installed in. Normally, to communicate from a client
application to a network server by using the function of port
forwarding of SSH, local host (127.0.0.1) needs to be
indicated on that client application as a communicating
server. The
transparent use of a client,
which
is a
characteristic
of
the
DACS
Scheme,
is
failed.
The
transparent use of a client means that a client can be used
continuously without changing setups when the network
system is updated. The function that doesn't fail the
transparent use of a client is needed. The mechanism of that
function is shown in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Extend Security Function
D Application to cloud environment
In this section, the contents of wDACS system are
explained in Figure 8. First, as preconditions, because private
IP addresses are assigned to all servers and clients existing in
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

from LAN1 to LAN n, mechanisms of NAT/NAPT are
necessary for the communication from each LAN to the
outside. In this case, NAT/NAPT is located on the entrance
of the LAN such as (1), and the private IP address is
converted to the global IP address towards the direction of
the arrow. Next, because the private IP addresses are set on
the servers and clients in the LAN, other communications
except those converted by Destination NAT cannot enter into
the LAN. But, responses for the communications sent form
the inside of the LAN can enter into the inside of the LAN
because
of
the
reverse
conversion
process
by
the
NAT/NAPT. In addition, communications from the outside
of the LAN1 to the inside are performed through the
conversion of the destination IP address by Destination
NAT. To be concrete, the global IP address at the same of
the outside interface of the router is changed to the private IP
address of each server. From here, system configuration of
each LAN is described. First, the DACS Server and the
authentication server are located on the DMZ on the LAN1
such as (4). On the entrance of the LAN1, NAT/NAPT and
destination NAT exists such as (1) and (2). Because only the
DACS Server and network servers are set as the target
destination, the authentication server cannot be accessed
from the outside of the LAN1. In the LANs form LAN 2 to
LAN n, clients managed by the wDACS system exist, and
NAT/NAPT is located on the entrance of each LAN such as
(1). Then, F/W such as (3) or (5) exists behind or with
NAT/NAPT in all LANs.
DACS
Server
Authentication
Server
(4) DMZ
LAN 1
System
administrator
Operation
User
Client
(3) Router
F/W
(5) Router
F/W
LAN 2
User
Client
LAN 3
LAN n
( DACS Client )
( DACS Client )
(1) NAT/NAPT
(1) NAT/NAPT
(1) NAT/NAPT
(2) Destination NAT
(5) Router
F/W
Network Servers
Figure 8. Basic System Configuration of wDACS system
IV.
THE CLOUD TYPE VIRTUAL PBNM FOR THE COMMON
USE BETWEEN PLURAL ORGANIZATIONS
In this section, the concept and implementation of the
proposed scheme are described.
A
Concept of the Cloud Type Virtual PBNM for the
Common Use Between Plural Organizations
In Figure 9 which is described in [16], the proposed
concept is shown. Because the existing wDACS Scheme
realized the PBNM control with the software called the
DACS Server and the DACS client, other mechanism was
not needed. By this point, application to
the
cloud
environment was easy.
The proposed scheme in this paper realizes the common
usage by plural organizations by adding the following
elements
to
realize
the
common
usage
by
plural
organizations: user identification of the plural organizations,
management of the policy information of the plural
organizations,
application
of
the
PKI
for
code
communication in the Internet, Redundant configuration of
the
DACS
Server
(policy
information
server),
load
balancing configuration of the DACS Server, installation
function of DACS Client by way of the Internet
Network of the own
organization
（Org.A）
Specific administrative organization X
Network group of
plural organizations
LAN
or
WAN
（Org.B）
LAN
or
WAN
（Org.C）
LAN
or
WAN
Policy Information Server
Movement terminal of plural Org. A
(1) Movement and connection
(2) Usage depending on policy information
Application of the policy information
Network of the own
organization
Network of the own
organization
Figure 9. Concept of the proposed scheme
B
Implementation of the basic function in the Cloud Type
Virtual PBNM for the Common Usage Between Plural
Organizations
In the past study [14], the DACS Client was operated on
the windows operation system (Windows OS). It was
because there were many cases that the Windows OS was
used for as the OS of the client. However, the Linux
operating system (Linux OS) had enough functions to be
used as the client recently, too. In addition, it was thought
that the case used in the clients in the future came out
recently. Therefore, to prove the possibility of the DACS
Scheme on the Linux OS, the basic function of the DACS
Client was implemented in this study. The basic functions of
the DACS Server and DACS Client were implemented by
JAVA language. From here, it is described about the order
of the process in the DACS Client and DACS Server as
follows.
(Processes in the DACS Client)
(p1) The information acquisition from Cent OS
From the Linux OS (Cent OS), which the user logs in, the
login user name and Internet domain name, the IP address,
which is setting on the Cent OS are acquired through the
system environment variable.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

(p2)Transmission from the DACS Client to the DACS
Server
This part was implemented by use of the Socket class. The
IP address and port number is set to the Socket, and the
DACS Client is connected to the DACS Server on the server
machine.
(p3) The information transmission from the DACS Client to
the DACS Server
By use of getInputStream() in Socket class, this part was
implemented. The information, which is acquired from the
Cent OS as described in (p1) is sent to the DACS Server.
(p4) The reception of the DACS rules from the DACS
Server
This part was implemented by using getInputStream() in
the Socket class. This process is performed after the server
side process.
(p5) Application of the DACS rules of the DACS Control
This function was implemented by the Runtime class.
Because this function uses the function of “firewalld”,
which is equipped normally, the command of “firewall-
cmd” to execute packet filtering and destination nat. After
the DACS rules are received from the DACS Server, the
DACS rules are applied to the DACS Control in the DACS
Client by this process.
(Processes in the DACS Server)
(p1) The information reception from the DACS Client
In this process, the DACS Server receives the information,
which is sent from the DACS Client. This process was
implemented by the ServerSocket().
(p2) Connection to the database
In this process, the connection from the DACS Server to
the PostgreSQL database is performed. This process was
realized by the function of JDBC driver. To be concrete, it is
implemented by the DriverManager class of JAVA.
(p3) Inquiry of the Database
Based on the information, which receives at the process (1),
the inquiry is performed in the form of using SQL language.
(p4) Transmission of the DACS rules to the DACS Client
The DACS Server sends the DACS rules, which are created
based on the information to the DACS Client. This Process
was implemented by the createStatement method defined by
the Connection Interface in JAVA. About the basic system,
which is realized by these processes, the prototype system
was implemented.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we implemented the basic function of the
cloud type virtual PBNM, which could be used by plural
organizations. This study is the second step of the second
phase for the final goal of Internet management by the
PBNM. In this study, the DACS Client was implemented
and operated on the Cent OS. As the processing processes of
the DACS Client, five processes were implemented. By
these processes, it becomes possible to pass the DACS rules
as the communication control rules to the DACS Control
which was a communication control mechanism. As a future
work, we are going to perform a function experiment and
the performance experiment of this system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 26730037. We express our gratitude.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. CERF and E. KAHN, "A Protocol for Packet Network
Interconnection," IEEE Trans. on Commn, vol.COM-22, May
1974, pp.637-648.
[2]
R. Yavatkar, D. Pendarakis and R. Guerin, "A Framework for
Policy-based Admission Control," IETF RFC 2753, 2000.
[3]
B. Moore at el., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 1
Specification", IETF RFC 3060, 2001.
[4]
B.
Moore.,"Policy
Core
Information
Model
(PCIM)
Extensions", IETF 3460, 2003.
[5]
J. Strassner, B. Moore, R. Moats, E. Ellesson, " Policy Core
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Schema",
IETF RFC 3703, 2004.
[6]
D. Durham at el.,"The COPS (Common Open Policy Service)
Protocol", IETF RFC 2748, 2000.
[7]
S. Herzog at el.,"COPS usage for RSVP", IETF RFC 2749,
2000.
[8]
K. Chan et al.,"COPS Usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-
PR)", IETF RFC 3084, 2001.
[9]
CIM Core Model V2.5 LDAP Mapping Specification, 2002.
[10] M. Wahl, T. Howes, S.Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access
Protocol (v3)", IETF RFC 2251, 1997.
[11] CIM Schema: Version 2.30.0, 2011.
[12] ETSI ES 282 003: Telecoms and Internet converged Services
and protocols for Advanced Network (TISPAN); Resource
and
Admission
Control Subsystem (RACS);
Functional
Architecture, June 2006.
[13] ETSI ETSI ES 283 026: Telecommunications and Internet
Converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking
(TISPAN); Resource and Admission Control; Protocol for
QoS reservation information exchange between the Service
Policy Decision Function (SPDF) and the Access-Resource
and Admission Control Function (A-RACF) in the Resource
and Protocol specifica-tion", April 2006.
[14] K. Odagiri，R. Yaegashi，M. Tadauchi, and N. Ishii,“
Secure DACS Scheme, ”Journal of Network and Computer
Applications,” Elsevier, Vol.31, Issue 4, 2008, pp.851-861,
November.
[15] K. Odagiri, S. Shimizu,M. Takizawa and N. Ishii,”Theoretical
Suggestion of Policy-Based Wide Area Network Management
System (wDACS system part-I),” International Journal of
Networked and Distributed Computing (IJNDC), Vol.1, No.4,
November 2013, pp.260-269.
[16] K. Odagiri,S. Shimizu, N. Ishii, M. Takizawa, "Suggestion of
the Cloud Type Virtual Policy Based Network Management
Scheme for the Common Use between Plural Organizations,"
Proc of Int. Conf. on International Conference on Network-
Based
Information
Systems
(NBiS-2015),pp.180-
186,Septmber, 2015
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

