Practising Problem Solving Using Mobile Technologies
Richard Seaton
The Open University
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
r..k.seaton@open.ac.uk
Abstract- Mobile phones have exceptional computing
abilities and yet are used largely for talking, texting and
telling the time. This paper describes a project using the
mobile phone to provide a learning platform for students
on the United Kingdom Open University’s (UKOU)
distance
learning
module
T216,
Cisco
Networking
(CCNA). Within the project two different applications
were offered and a survey conducted to gather students’
opinions of the applications in particular and the general
use, by the UKOU, of mobile technologies for student
learning and support. The first application allows
practice of IP address subnetting, an area of the module
that
students
find
problematic.
The
second
gives
students
the
opportunity
to
practise
the
types
of
questions used in the Cisco Academy’s online tests. It
also allows them the opportunity to monitor their
progress. The results of a student survey are promising
with students finding that both applications aided their
learning, knowledge and understanding. They liked the
ability to practise whenever they had a few spare
minutes
and
wherever
they
found
themselves.
In
general, UKOU students would like to see greater use of
mobile
technologies
within
their
studies
both
for
learning
and
for
organisation.
Reminders
about
assignments, tutorials and day schools were considered
to be a useful service should this be possible. Overall the
project has been a success. The use of mobile phones to
enhance student learning has been proved. Once the
problems regarding use with all mobile platforms are
resolved, opportunities for use by the University and
other learning organizations look realistic. This is
particularly true in areas of the world where the
availability of computers and broadband are limited and
mobile
phones
are
the
only
method
of
distance
communication.
Keywords
–
Mobile
technologies;
learning;
problem
solving.
I. APPROACH
The work of Kukulska-Hulme and Traxier [1] established
that mobile technologies can be used successfully to support
students’ learning through a range of different activities,
particularly around data collection and recording. Further,
The Open University has undertaken work such as the
Mobile Assisted Language Learning [2] project, which
involved a wide range of mobile devices including mobile
phones.
Other
UK
higher
education
institutions
have
reported use of mobile phones to support students with
timetabling and assessment dates. Research in this area is
being undertaken within the University. A comprehensive
Literature Review in Mobile Technologies and Learning
(Futurelab 2006) [3] demonstrated many opportunities for
use of mobile technologies. It saw the future as offering
genuinely
learner-centred
learning
experience
that
is
specific, personal, collaborative and long term. This may be
offered by exploiting the ubiquitous qualities of today’s
mobile phone technology, demonstrated particularly by the
smartphone represented by devices such as Apple’s iPhone
and the RIM Blackberry. These devices offer facilities over
and above the specific capabilities of mobile phones: high
resolution cameras, PDA features, multimedia players, etc.,
integrated into devices that fit in a shirt pocket and may be
used almost anywhere. Such devices were merely a vision to
the authors of the Futurelab report in 2006.
The Communications Market Report (Ofcom, 2008) [4]
showed 86% of the United Kingdom population owning a
mobile phone, and so it would seem natural to exploit this
device for use among distance learning students. The mobile
phone has considerable computational abilities and yet
anecdotal evidence, confirmed by simple surveys undertaken
during presentations of this project, is that most people only
use their mobile phones for talking, texting and telling the
time. Few of the other applications within even relatively
basic mobile phones, let alone those found in smartphones,
are used.
Learning involving mobile technologies can introduce
some specific issues:

Context – the ability to personalize the learner’s
environment may lead to ethical issues requiring
secure storage of data;

Mobility – promotes the need to manage the
learning environment outside the more traditional
setting;

Informality – the advantages of using mobile
technologies in a formal way may deter students;

Ownership – the necessity to avoid exclusion;

Learning over time – the need for organisation and
tracking of learning.
These issues were taken into account during the progress
of the project.
228
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

II. APPLICATIONS
A.
Subnet Exerciser
The Subnet Exerciser is an application that allows
students to practise the technique of subnetting, something
this is known to be challenging to students. The application
was released to a cohort of 300 Cisco Networking students
towards the end of 2007 to fit in with their study of
subnetting. This was repeated to increased numbers in April
2008. Informal forum-based questionnaires were undertaken
with both cohorts and feedback was received through forum
comment and personal email. A similar trial was conducted
in April 2009 but followed up with an additional application
discussed later and a more formal questionnaire to complete
the project.
The Subnet Exerciser, shown in Fig. 1, allows students to
practice the skills necessary to manipulate IP addresses and
includes:

Denary to Binary conversion

Binary to Denary conversion

Logical AND operation

IP address classification

Practice questions on subnetting
Figure 1. Main menu screen of the Subnet Exerciser
The application is downloaded to students’ phones and
run stand-alone, in much the same way that a games
programme would be used. From the outset it was realised
that not all mobile phones were suitable for this application.
It was written in a dialect of the Java® programming
language designed for mobile phones. Interestingly, the
smartphone caused more issues than the basic mobile phone,
something which seemed somewhat perverse. This was
because the former does not conform to the mobile phone
Connection Limited Device Configuration (CLDC) standard
[5]. Students were able to find out whether or not their phone
was suitable, but it was obvious from students’ messages in
the forums that this facility was not used extensively. For
students unable to run the application on their mobile phone
a simulator could be downloaded from Sun Microsystems [6]
which allowed the Subnet Exerciser to run on their
computers. Care was taken throughout the project to ensure
no student was disenfranchised through lack of a suitable
phone.
Initial
findings
suggested
that
students
valued
particularly the learning opportunities offered by the multi-
choice practice questions. This was because much of the
Cisco assessment is based around this methodology. Further,
there was a need to address the issues raised earlier regarding
mobile learning, specifically those raised by mobility and
learning over time.
B.
Multiple choices
Luzia Research [7] is a company that develops mobile
learning applications.
Their uHavePassed.com application
[8], which allows those learning to drive to practise the
theoretical part of the United Kingdom driving test using
mobile phone and computer platforms, looked particularly
useful. Following registration users download a simple client
onto their mobile phone, see Fig. 2.
Figure 2. The initial client screen of uHavePassed on a mobile phone
This client allows access to different ranges of questions
and progression statistics. A range of multi-choice question
types, including use of graphics and multimedia, are
available for download during the online synchronization
process.
The selection of questions is dependent upon
statistical indication of the student’s progress, with failed
questions being re-sent along with new ones to replace those
which were answered correctly. Importantly, this application
does not require the student to be online except when
synchronizing with the server. Data transfer to mobile
phones can be costly so it is important to keep the need to be
online to a minimum.
Luzia
Research
provided
the
University
with
a
uHavePassed platform (OuHavePassed) and server access to
banks of questions covering the Cisco Academy CCNA
Exploration curriculum. This involved developing over 400
new questions to add to those written for the original Subnet
Exerciser. Many questions needed diagrams, some of which
229
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

were drawn originally for viewing on a computer screen,
others were drawn specifically to suit the reduced size of the
mobile phone screen. Blocks of questions were sub-divided
into chapters to match the Cisco Exploration curriculum.
This ensured that students knew where to seek additional
support, over and above the supplied feedback when
required. An example of a question and answer is shown in
Fig. 3. The smart buttons immediately below the phone
screen move pages and either the cursor or the number pad is
used to select an answer.
Figure 3. uHavePassed screens showing a question and optional answers
C.
Data and evidence gathering
An online survey by questionnaire was the most
appropriate way of reaching all students, for many were
based overseas. Evidence was also gathered from student
forums and face to face meetings at day schools which form
part of the module.
IV. OUTCOMES
A. Main outcomes and supporting evidence
1.
Students are willing to accept using mobile
technologies when they can see a real purpose;
2.
Mobile technology can support students’ learning
but has to be targeted for maximum effect;
3.
Students are concerned about costs of using mobile
technologies;
4.
All mobile platforms must be supported, since
students use a wide range of technologies;
5.
Students would like administrative support with
their studies using mobile technologies.
B. Student statistics
Table 1 shows the student involvement with the project
taken from the uHavePassed server. 32% of the total active
cohort
registered
on
the
website
and
of
these
56%
downloaded the client onto their phones. 612 mobile tests
and 182 web-based tests were attempted, indicating that the
ability to use this resource was more valued by those using
their mobile phones. Making an assumption that those using
the client on their phones would not use the website for tests,
then nearly seven tests were attempted by students on their
phones against just over two tests via the web. This could be
because access via the web was probably seen as no more
beneficial than accessing the formative tests on the Cisco
website, but there is no evidence to support this
TABLE I. STUDENT INVOLVEMENT WITH THE PROJECT
Students:
Number
Percentage of
total
Active on module
500
n/a
Registering on website
160
32
Downloading client
89
56
Taking mobile phone
tests
612
n/a
Taking web-based tests
182
n/a
C. Response to the survey
A personalized email request was sent to over 400
students taking Cisco modules, and Table 2 shows the
student response to the survey. A 10% response was typical
for this form of survey and was just acceptable from a
statistical view. It was pleasing to see that a cross-section of
students responded, not just those who took part in the
project.
TABLE II. STUDENT RESPONSE TO THE SURVEY
Students
Number
Percentage
Received details of
survey
405
n/a
Responded to survey
40
10
Accessed the website
24
60
Used mobile phone
12
30
D. Support of outcomes
D.i. Students are willing to accept using mobile
technologies when they can see a real purpose
The overall response to the project demonstrates students
are willing to embrace mobile technologies or use existing
ones in new and novel ways. The biggest concern raised by
students was the screen size of their phones with regard to
the way in which we expected the students to interact with it.
The responses shown in Fig. 4 were from a question asking
students about using their phone compared with a similar
experience on the website viewed on a conventional PC
screen. Approximately 40% stated they found reading text
somewhat difficult, and overall, they found the experience of
using the phone’s screen less acceptable than that of a PC
screen. Results showed few problems with text size but
230
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

diagrams were more challenging, although this is phone
dependent. The problem with diagrams was in part due to not
having time to rework those drawn originally for PC screens.
Where new diagrams were drawn with the phone screen in
mind fewer problems were experienced. There was the
ability to exploit ‘landscape’ by turning the phone on its side,
as shown in Fig. 5.
Figure 4. Ease of use, the lower the value the better
Figure 5. A diagram imported from a PC version viewed in landscape.
Currently, the text size is restricted by the Java CLDC
specification. This will become less of a problem when the
application becomes available on smartphones as these tend
to have both larger screens and ways to resize text.
D.ii. Mobile technology can support students’ learning but
has to be targeted for maximum effect
The response to a question which asked how helpful
students had found the application in supporting their
learning is shown in Fig. 6. Over two thirds responded
positively to having the questions available on their phone, to
the choice of questions and to being able to monitor their
progress. In particular they found the ability to retake
questions where they been unsuccessful and the provision of
context
related
feedback
very
helpful.
Learning
by
reinforcement is a key to the behaviourist theory which this
project adopts.
Figure 6. Students’ opinions of the application
D.iii. Students are happy to use mobile technologies but
are concerned about costs of data
Fewer than 10% of students expressed concern regarding
costs, but they must be in one’s mind when developing
applications
for
new
technologies.
Unfortunately,
data
communication on mobile phones can seem expensive unless
combined within a bundled contract. The advantage of the
original Subnet Exerciser application was that it involved a
single download of around 50 kilobytes. The ability to
change the question banks and the availability of many
questions does increase data transfer costs. A typical
download when synchronizing is in the order of 300
kilobytes. Many smartphones offer network connections by
Wi-Fi as well as the mobile network connections which can
significantly reduce costs.
D.iv. All mobile platforms should be supported, because
students use a wide range of technologies
Unfortunately,
known
problems
in
supporting
smartphones were not completely solved before the end of
the project. In particular, the Apple iPhone App took longer
to develop than was expected. Blackberry access was
unavailable to corporate users due to problems with firewalls
and this affected several students. Applications must work on
all major platforms if students are to be well served and the
ability to access the project through a website was an
important feature of the project even if, in this case, it
received little use.
231
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

D.v
They would like support with their work through
mobile technologies
Opinions were sought and responses shown in Fig. 7 as
to how students might like to see mobile phones used by the
University in supporting their learning. Reminders about
dates of particular calendar events were thought to be very
worthwhile.
Over 70% thought texts (SMS) reminding
students when particular events, such as due dates for
assignments and results available, a good idea. 60% thought
texts when assignments were not received would also be
helpful.
Interestingly,
support
for
module
specific
applications were less popular. This may reflect the fact that
the current ways of dealing with these applications are
sufficient. A suggestion of using text messages to support
group work seems an excellent idea bearing in mind the
University’s aim to include this activity on every module.
Figure 7. Ways in which the University could use mobile phones
V. IMPACT OF THE PROJECT
V.i. The ways the project impacted on student learning
The student response, shown in Fig. 8, to how they used
the facilities offered by the project demonstrated that they
had accessed all four blocks, and whilst percentages appear
low it should be remembered that only 46% of the
respondents took part in the project. Taking this into account
83% of the students who took part accessed block 2 with the
other values not far below.
The students were moving to
block 2 as the project was made available which may well be
why this was the most popular block
Figure 8 Access to T216 module blocks
The responses to a question regarding student learning,
shown in Fig. 9, further demonstrates the value of this
project. Over 75% of replies stating that the application had
assisted in their learning and understanding of the Cisco
materials. Two thirds of students agreed that the application
had assisted with the completion of Cisco tests. The lesser
impact on University assessments was not unexpected as the
project was not focused in these areas.
Figure 9. Students’ opinions on how the application supported their learning
V.ii. How is your project contributing to increasing student
performance?
Any improvement in student performance must lead to
improved retention. The opportunity for students to gain
more convenient access to module materials and support will
support their learning and the evidence from my project
demonstrates this to be the case. That students report a
benefit to their knowledge and understanding of the areas
targeted by this project establish this as fact. Success in the
Cisco Tests, for which students receive a Cisco Certificate,
can directly affect their employment opportunities. There is
anecdotal evidence, backed up by the large number of
students who take such modules, that proof of competence in
the demonstration of knowledge and understanding of Cisco
materials is highly regarded by employers.
232
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

VI. CONCLUSION
The use of mobile technologies to further enhance
students’ learning is evident from the results presented here.
Whether sole use of such technologies is possible must rest
on the appropriateness of the technology to support the
applications and vice versa. Certainly screen size and the
resultant legibility of both text and diagrams is a particular
problem which may be resolved in future products. The
iPhone and others have provided some improvements by
incorporating expansion techniques but applications need to
be able to exploit these techniques to be of use. An
alternative way is that exploited by applications such as the
Subnet Exerciser which proved that carefully designed
applications may be of considerable help to students.
However, such applications must be available across all
mobile
platforms.
Working
to
the
lowest
common
denominator is probably the most satisfactory way for the
time being.
A possible area to exploit is that of information
dissemination.
Reminding
students
of
impending
assessments and events or availability of results is simple to
achieve, costs very little to implement and can be of huge
benefit to students.
Disenfranchisement of students by technology is not
acceptable in any circumstance. However, the mobile phone
often the most advanced technology available to students,
particularly in developing countries, so opportunities to
provide quality learning through this medium must be taken.
VII. REFERENCES
1.
Kukulska-Hulme, A and Traxier, J, (2005) Mobile
learning, Routledge, Oxford, UK.
2.
Kukulska-Hulme, Agnes and Shield, Lesley (2008). An
overview of Mobile Assisted Language Learning: From
content delivery to supported collaboration and
interaction. ReCALL, 20(3), pp. 271–289.
3.
Naismith L, Lonsdale P, Vavoula G, and Sharples M,
(2006) Literature Review in Mobile Technologies and
Learning, Futurelab, Bristol, UK.
4.
http://www.ofcom.org.uk/research/cm/cmr08/ (accessed
18/08/09).
5.
http://java.sun.com/products/cldc/ (accessed 07/01/11)
6.
http://java.sun.com/products/cldc/ (accessed 07/01/11).
7.
http://luziaresearch.com/ (accessed 13/01/11)
8.
uhavepassed.com/ (accessed 13/01/11).
233
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

