Summaries of Lecture Recordings  
Used As Learning Material in Blended Learning 
 
Sari Mettiäinen, Anna-Liisa Karjalainen 
Tampere University of Applied Sciences 
Tampere, Finland 
sari.mettiainen@tamk.fi, 
anna-liisa.karjalainen@tamk.fi 
 
 
Abstract-In order to enhance learning, it is necessary to develop 
flexible learning methods in conjunction with traditional 
classroom 
teaching. 
Information 
and 
communications 
technology has developed enormously during the past years 
and but its potential as a teaching aid has not yet, however, 
been fully exploited in education. This paper describes the 
opinions of Finnish nursing students’ on the usefulness of 
lecture recordings in nursing education at Tampere University 
of Applied Sciences. Faculty from the nursing education degree 
program of Tampere University of Applied Sciences produced 
thirty-one 10-62 minute lecture summaries or course content 
syntheses in five subjects. They were produced by four 
teachers and listened by 4 student groups in 2010-2011. In the 
study, 93 students completed a questionnaire, with a response 
rate of 52%. According to the results of the questionnaire, 
slightly more than half of the students listened to the 
recordings via computer and slightly less than half listened as 
podcasts on mobile device. Students stated that the recordings 
helped them to understand the key content of lectures and that 
they were of additional value to learning process when 
compared to the traditional PowerPoint teaching slides used in 
contact lectures. Opinions varied, however, as to whether 
students learned as much by listening to the recordings as they 
did by attending contact lectures. The lecture recordings 
enabled better time management, but the recordings did not, 
however, significantly affect the time used for preparing for 
examinations or for participating in contact lectures. The 
students found listening to the recordings an interesting 
experience and most of them would also like to listen to them 
also in the future. In a conclusion, the results of this project 
show that offline recorded lecture summaries are a good 
support for education either as additional course material or as 
a partial substitute for contact teaching. The lecture recordings 
support students’ learning and are an agreeable learning 
method for students. 
 
    Keywords-m-learning; podcast; lecture recording; lecture 
summary. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
     In this paper, we describe the results of our pilot project 
which started with the support of EU-funding and where we 
tested the possibility of using summarized lecture recordings 
in order to enhance blended learning.  
    The purpose of the empirical study was to find out how 
nursing students used lecture recordings, as well as their 
experiences of mobile learning (m-learning) and usefulness 
of recordings in education.  
    The recording of contact lectures in a summarized form 
and then providing students with the recordings may 
promote learning, The teacher can use the recordings with 
several groups and, thus, save resources for the supervision 
of learning. More and more students are working and 
studying, and therefore, it is necessary that accessibility to 
higher education is expanded. One way to achieve this is to 
offer students video and audio recordings to help them in 
time management.  
    In the following sections, we will describe how lecture 
recording technology is currently used and how the use of 
lecture recordings in education has been described in 
literature. We will then present a case study on student views 
and its findings.  The conclusions section presents a short 
summary of the pilot project and the most significant 
findings compared with the findings of earlier literature.  
 
II. 
EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY CURRENTLY USED  
 
It is necessary to develop flexible learning methods 
together 
in 
conjunction 
with 
traditional 
classroom 
education. The possibilities offered by the information and 
communications technology that has been developed have 
not yet been fully exploited in education. Tampere 
University of Applied Sciences has piloted the use of lecture 
recordings as support for education. The aim was to develop 
a mobile and practicable model.  
    The cost of IT support will rise to a high level if free 
programs are used for lecture recording and IT staff is 
needed at diverse phases of the process. As part of the 
project we acquired the Echo360 system [1]. A disadvantage 
of the system was its relatively high price but an advantage 
was the easy process. The Echo360 system includes two 
lecture-recording tools. One is the classroom model, where 
the system records the contact lectures using either the 
AdHoc or timing method. The other is the Personal Capture 
program, in which case the teacher records the lecture 
independently on the computer with the client and headsets. 
The teacher does not need to worry about the technology in 
either model. The system transfers the recordings to a server 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

in three formats: as podcast, vodcast, and flash video. The 
system makes the links and, thus, IT support staff is not 
needed [1]. 
    Podcasting means the distribution of audio and video files 
at the digital format via Internet. By means of podcasting 
feeds, sound and video recordings can be ordered to a media 
player program such as iTunes. It is possible to synchronise 
podcasts from the computer to a mobile device such as an 
MP3 player or mobile phone. The term podcasting emerged 
from the use of Apple's portable audio player the iPod [2]. 
    Currently, Tampere University of Applied Sciences 
provides podcast feeds and video links only for own 
students in the course management system. The student can 
select the link or feed according to the terminal used. The 
student can watch lectures on the computer or transfer 
podcasts to a mobile device as video or sound recordings 
(vodcast and podcast). 
 
III. 
LECTURE RECORDINGS IN BLENDED LEARNING 
 
   Lecture recordings can have different roles in education. 
The most common use is to provide recordings of complete 
lectures for the purpose of review and revision (substitution 
use) when they can be used to enhance student 
understanding of the course content.  The second most 
common use is to provide additional learning material, 
summaries of lectures or syntheses of course content, to 
broaden and deepen student understanding (supplementary 
use) [2]. 
    Lectures can be created in many different ways. Poor 
lectures can leave students bored and frustrated, but good 
lectures can inspire [3]. Isaacs [4] observed that lecturing is 
often characterised by the transfer of the lecturer's notes to 
the students' notepads without any thinking about or 
processing of the information. Anyway, the lecture should 
be more than just the transfer of information. The lecture 
should inspire and enthuse students, assist them in 
understanding the complex material and guide them through 
the topic [5]. Effective lectures can provide the excitement 
of intellectual discovery through the presentation of 
challenging and provocative ideas. The lecturer can relate 
the lecture content to the students' prior knowledge and 
relate it to real life examples thus, making the knowledge 
more meaningful  [6]. 
    Recordings can trigger memories of the lecture that aid 
understanding better than just looking at the notes. Listening 
provides variety for traditional reading. Knowing that there 
is a possibility to “go back” at any time was a great idea 
according to students even if the students did not use the 
files as much they had planned [7]. 
    Student access to audio recordings during assessment 
times might also help to reduce failure rates. The recordings 
could help students to understand at topic when it is difficult 
to take in new concepts and methods the first time they are 
presented or if students miss the lecture for one reason or 
another. They can also free the student from having to make 
notes during the lecture [7]. 
The mobile device offers the possibility to study based on 
individual needs and to download the materials needed in 
the student’s own learning process. The benefit of mobile 
devices is that they can be used in on-the-go situations, such 
as driving a car, travelling by bus or train, walking, and 
exercising. Studying can be practised outside the classroom 
along with other activities [8]. When the student can 
concentrate on learning at a suitable time, it may increase 
the motivation to study. 
    Learning demands a lot of work and concentration from 
the student. Because of this, learning in on-the-go situations 
also includes dangers. The learner may pay attention to 
other things rather than learning at times and the learning 
process can becomes susceptible to diverse distractions [9]. 
However, the student’s thoughts may also become distracted 
in the classroom. 
    Even if lecture recordings make it possible to study in 
different places, the student can also choose the traditional 
way of learning. According to Lee and Chan’s study [10], 
students treated podcast listening as a formal learning 
activity that needed undivided attention and concentration 
within a designed study location, e.g. at home and not as m-
learning while doing other tasks.  
    In most cases, lecture recordings include multimedia 
content such as audio, video, and visual aids [7]. In Brittain 
et al.’s [11] study 66% of students (N=70) preferred the 
audio-only format instead of the video file or audio 
synchronized with PowerPoint slide images when all the 
recordings were exported and available in those three 
formats. Of those students who used media files, 75% 
listened to them at home. In spite of this, the results clearly 
indicated that students preferred the mobility of audio 
recordings rather than video. Most of the students tended to 
download the files close to the relevant examination date 
(44.4 %), one fourth as soon as they were available, and the 
rest of the students infrequently [11]. 
    Huntsberger and Stavitsky [12] found that 40% of 
students used podcasts as a replacement for textbooks. This 
replacement of textbooks with podcasts challenges teachers 
to create recorded material that does not provide too much 
detail in order not to make books or other core texts seem 
unnecessary.  
    On the whole, it is challenging to make meaningful 
lecture recordings. Attention has to be paid to the education 
content because lecture recordings must not be too extensive 
and the content must be short and independently related to 
the wider entity to be learned [8]. The appropriate length of 
lecture recordings is 20-30 minutes. According to feedback 
given by students, it would be better to record content some 
other time that during the lectures or they would need 
editing because it is confusing when there is a discussion in 
class on some topic that lasts for several minutes [7]. Do 
summarized lecture recordings better meet the needs of the 
students?    
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

IV. 
THE EFFECTS OF LECTURE RECORDINGS ON LEARNING 
RESULTS 
     
Does the availability of lecture recordings have an impact 
on lecture attendance? It is a question that needs long-term 
research before it can be answered. According to the 
findings of von Konsky et al. [13], students showed a 
tendency to listen to the recording of a missed lecture but 
the students who achieved a high grade tended to 
supplement lecture attendance with recordings more than 
students who achieved a low grade. According to Balfour’s 
[7] study, there was no consistent relationship between 
audio file use and the end-of-module examination. 
However, students liked audio recordings and gave them a 
valuable role in the learning process.  The use of lecture 
recordings supports the learning of some students, but there 
is also a large variation in other successful learning patterns 
[13]. 
    Foley [14] used lecture recordings before the contact 
lessons in advanced computer science courses. He found 
that the group of students who listened to the lectures via a 
laptop or mobile device before attending the lecture 
performed about 10 percent better on the test than the group 
that only had the traditional classroom lecture. The lecture 
content, homework, and examinations were the same for 
both groups. Foley thought that there was more time for 
meaningful discussion in the classroom once the lecture was 
out of the way [14].  
    In Brittain et al.’s [11] study 85% of the dentistry 
students who used lecture recordings thought that the 
recordings had a positive effect on their grade.  In total, 91% 
of the students used lecture recordings to review the lectures 
they had already attended.  
    According to a student survey (N=687) in the USA, the 
most popular responses to the question: “How did the 
recorded lectures benefit you?” were that they helped 
students to review the classroom material, helped students to 
prepare for examinations, clarified confusing topics, and 
allowed the students to learn independently. Other responses 
were that they improved the overall learning experience, 
helped to use time more efficiently, and were an alternative 
to attending class. Of the respondents, 81% watched the 
recordings once a week and they agreed that watching the 
recorded lecture increased their understanding of the topic. 
A total of 88% of the respondents said that they would like 
to have more lecture recordings in their courses  [15]. 
  
V. 
CASE STUDY 
 
    Finnish nursing teachers at Tampere University of 
Applied Sciences have used the Echo 360 system since the 
fall of 2010. During the first year, four lecturers recorded 
their lectures with Echo360 Personal Capture software. The 
topics of the lectures were anatomy and physiology, the 
basics of cardiology and vascular nursing, social policy, 
nursing administration, and thesis methodology. The 
number of the recordings was a total of 31. The length of the 
recordings varied from 10 minutes to 62 minutes. Most of 
the lectures included Power Point slides and the lecturer’s 
voice explaining the topic. The teachers planned their 
lectures to form short entities and recorded them without an 
audience in the classroom.   
    The lecture recordings were integrated with formal 
learning courses for full-time students.  The students had 
some contact lectures in each course and some of the topics 
were taught totally using virtual methods with the lecture 
recordings. Students had time for listening in their schedule 
and the links to the recordings were available in the e-
learning platform Moodle. The students had the possibility 
to listen to the recordings on a computer or on a mobile 
device as podcasts. They were given guidelines for 
downloading the links to iTunes and the mobile device.  
    After the examination all the students were sent a link to 
the survey questionnaire by email. They were told that the 
aim of the survey was to evaluate a new way of learning by 
using ICT technology. The students were told that 
answering the survey was voluntary and they were able to 
answer anonymously. The survey consisted of 14 structural 
quizzes and three open ended questions.  
    The quantitative data of the structural quizzes were 
analysed using frequency distributions, and the results were 
described using percentage distributions. 
 
VI. 
FINDINGS 
A. Information on the respondents  
 
The recordings were available for four nursing student 
groups. In all, 179 students listened to the recordings. The 
survey questionnaire was answered by 93 students, and the 
response rate was 52%. Most of the students (86%) were 
first-year nursing students and the rest were third-year 
students.  Most of them were under 25-year-old females. 
 
B.   Students’ recording listening habits 
 
Most of the students listened to the recordings only by 
computer (55%) and 42 % of them used podcasts. A total of 
3% of the students did not listen to the recordings at all. The 
majority of the students felt that it was easy to download the 
lectures to podcasts with the instructions given, but for a fifth 
of them downloading sounded so complex that they did not 
even try. Some 17% of the students could download the 
recordings without prior instruction.   
Of the respondents, 42% listened to the recordings at 
home, a third while jogging or walking, and 13% while 
driving. The recordings were also listened to while doing 
housework, during free periods at school, in the gym, and 
while sunbathing. While listening to the recordings, 8% of 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

the students made notes, 70% followed the slides during 
listening, and 19% just listened to the podcasts.   
Of the respondents, 53% listened to the recordings during 
the examination week and 37% as soon as they were 
published. Some 62% said that they liked that they could 
listen to the lecture recordings when they wanted. A further 
14% experienced difficulties in independently finding time 
to listen to the lectures, and 9% said that they had wanted the 
listening to be more scheduled.  
 
C.  Student opinions on the usefulness of lecture recordings 
 
Of the students, 69% agreed fully that the recorded 
lecture brought additional value compared to viewing only 
PowerPoint slides. A total of 84% of the respondents agreed 
fully or partly that the lecture recordings helped them to 
better understand the key contents compared with reading a 
book. Student opinions varied on whether they learned as 
much by listening to the lecture recordings as they did by 
attending the contact lectures (Figure 1). 
Figure 1.    “I learn as much by listening to lecture recordings as by   
attending contact teaching lessons. “1. Fully disagree – 5. Fully agree”. 
   
    Two-thirds of the respondents stated that they had used the 
recordings to review difficult matters. A third of the students 
said that they had read the textbooks less when the lecture 
recordings were available. The respondents felt that the use 
of the lecture recordings had not affected the time used for 
preparing for the examinations. A fifth of the respondents 
said that they attended fewer lectures when the lecture 
recordings were available. Half of the respondents thought 
that the use of the lecture recordings enabled working and 
studying at the same time, and two thirds stated that the 
recordings enabled a combination of studying and family 
life. A third of the respondents considered that the use of the 
lecture recordings enabled the completion of several courses 
at the same time (Figure  2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Students’ perspectives on the usefulness of summaries of 
lecture recordings. 
 
 
    The majority of the students considered the lecture 
recordings as interesting, of suitable length, and a nice 
variety for the studying (Table 1). Of the respondents, 73% 
wanted to listen to lecture recordings also in future and the 
rest would possibly like to listen to them. No one answered 
that they would not want to have lecture recordings anymore.   
 
TABLE 1.     STUDENTS’ OPINION OF LECTURE RECORDINGS 
Opinion 
% 
Interesting 
55 
Suitable length 
76 
Nice variety for the studying 
80 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
 
    This paper studied the use of teachers’ lecture summaries 
as education material, not the recording of authentic 
classroom 
lectures. 
The 
lecture 
summaries 
partly 
compensated for contact teaching lessons and partly were 
support material for education. When students listen to a 
lecture as homework it provides a possibility to create a 
lecture in a new more active way that was piloted by at least 
one lecturer with good feedback. When offline recorded 
lectures are combined with other homework, it is possible to 
create a distance learning method. However, it is important 
to consider the total amount of the students work and be 
realistic how much the students are able to study 
independently. Lecture recordings are an effective teaching 
and learning method from the lecturer’s point of view. The 
learning material can be easily shared with several groups 
once it has been produced. 
    The students stated that the lecture summaries were of an 
appropriate length (10-62 min) and interesting. According to 
the results, the recordings helped students to understand the 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

key contents and that the students used them for revising the 
difficult contents. These results were also found in Balfour’s 
study (2006) [7]. The majority of the students listened to the 
recordings during the examination week, as the students did 
in the study of Brittain et al. (2006) [11]. Earlier studies 
have studied the connection between listening to lecture 
recordings, the learning results, and the course grades 
(Brittain 2006 [11], von Konsky 2009) [13], but this 
connection was not studied in this paper, as it is affected by 
many concurrent factors, such as the teacher, time, other 
studies, and the development of educational contents.   
    Half of the students listened to the lecture recordings on 
the computer and at home concentrating on studying only, 
and not as m-learning on-the-go situations even if it was 
possible, as shown by Lee & Chan’s results (2007) [10]. 
Further study is required to see if m-learners felt studying 
was different than those who listened via computer. 
    Mobile learning is new for students and it takes time to 
learn new studying methods. This problem probably 
concerns attitudes more than skills because students felt that 
the used technologies were easy to use even for those who 
had not experience of podcasts beforehand.  Students also 
have different learning styles, as was shown by the varied 
opinions on whether they learned as well by listening to the 
lecture recordings as they did by attending the contact 
teaching lessons.   
    Many students work and have a family and, thus, it is 
important to develop new blended learning methods. Lecture 
summary recordings as learning materials are one way to 
develop the education contents. Students have experienced 
them as being meaningful and useful and they support at 
least some of the students’ learning.  
In our case some lecture recordings were used to replace 
the contact lessons. This method can save the time of the 
lectures and the students when they do not need to travel to 
the campus. In Finland we have quite long distances to some 
campuses of the University of Applied Sciences.   It is need 
to create some activities how to motivate students to 
concentrate studying, as according to findings some of the 
student said they had wanted the listening to be more 
scheduled.  
    A further challenge is to study what makes a good 
podcast, what elements do students like and what helps them 
learn?  Another challenge is to study teachers’ experiences of 
constructing lecture recording summaries and using them in 
education. The copyrights of the lecturers are a challenge 
question to solve in Finland. We do not have yet a culture as 
some universities for example in America have, where 
professors are willing to share their lecturers in Open 
University.  On the other hand, if recordings are produced in 
Finnish language they are relevant only for the students in 
Finland. However, we believe in future we are more open-
minded and able to share our material more.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Echo 
360. 
http://echo360.com/blended-
learning/instructors/.  <retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[2] O. McGarr. A review of podcasting in higher 
education: 
Its 
influence 
on 
the 
traditional 
lecture. 
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 25(3), 309-
321, 
2009. 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet25/mcgarr.html. 
<retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[3] H. Edwards and B. Smith, G. Introduction. In H. 
Edwards, B. Smith & G. Webb (Eds), Lecturing: Case 
studies, experience and practice (pp. 1-10). London and 
Philadelphia: Kogan Page. 2001. 
[4] G. Isaacs. Lecture note-taking, learning and recall. 
Medical Teacher, 11(3), 295-302, 1989. 
[5] S. Moore, C. Armstrong, and J. Pearson. Lecture 
absenteeism among students in higher education: A valuable 
route to understanding student motivation. Journal of Higher 
Education Policy and Management, 30(1), 15-24, 2008.  
[6] S. Dolnicar. Should we still lecture or just post 
examination questions on the web?: The nature of the shift 
towards pragmatism in undergraduate lecture attendance. 
Quality in Higher Education, 11(2), 103-115, 2005. [verified 
30 
May 
2009] 
http://ro.uow.edu.au/commpapers/299/. 
<retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[7] J. A. D. Balfour. Audio Recordings of Lectures an an 
E-Learning Resource. Higher Education Academy. 2006.  
http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/cebe/resources/detail/events/be
econ_06_p24_audio_recordings. 
<retrieved: 
 
January, 
2012>. 
 [8] M. Leino, H. Turunen, M. Ahonen, and L. Levonen.  
Mobiililaitteet oppimisen ja opetuksen tukena. 2002. 
http://tievie.oulu.fi/koulutusresurssit/artikkelit/leino_ym_200
2.pdf. <retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[9] M. Reagan. In Search on the Learning Bubble. 2000. 
http://studio.tellme.com/newsletter/dialed20001102.html. 
<retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[10] M. Lee, and A. Chan. Pervasive, lifestyle-integrated 
mobile learning for distance learners: An analysis and 
unexpected results from a podcasting study. Open Learning: 
The Journal of Open and Distance Learning, 22(3), 201-218, 
2007.  
 [11] S. Brittain, P. Glowacki, J. Van Ittersum, and L. 
Johnson.  Podcasting Lectures. Formative evaluation 
strategies helped identify a solution to a learning dilemma. 
EDUCAUSE Quarterly Articles. 2006.   
http://www.educause.edu/EDUCAUSE+Quarterly/EDUCA
USEQuarterlyMagazineVolum/PodcastingLectures/157413. 
<retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[12] M. Huntsberger, and A. Stavitsky. The new 
"podagogy": Incorporating podcasting into journalism 
education. Journalism and Mass Communication Educator, 
61(4), 397-410, 2006. 
 [13] BR.von Konsky, J. Ivins, and SJ. Gribble. Lecture 
attendance and web based lecture technologies: A 
comparison of student perceptions and usage patterns. 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 25(4), 581-
595, 2009. 
[14] P. McCloskey. Students Learn Better Via iPod 
Versus Lecture. 2007.  
http://campustechnology.com/articles/2007/03/gt-prof-
students-learn-better-via-ipod-versus-lecture.aspx. 
<retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
[15] Capturing Student Perspectives About Lecture 
Recordings. 2010.  
http://www.echo360.com/pdf/Echo360_CSPALR_whitepape
r.pdf. <retrieved:  January, 2012>. 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

