A Novel Key Management Protocol in Body Area Networks
Jian Shen, Sangman Moh, Ilyong Chung
Dept. of Computer Engineering
Chosun University
Gwangju, Republic of Korea
E-mail: s shenjian@126.com, {smmoh, iyc}@chosun.ac.kr
Abstract—Body Area Networks (BANs) have emerged as
an enabling technique for e-healthcare systems, in which the
data of a patient’s vital body parameters and movements
can be collected by small wearable or implantable sensors
and communicated using short-range wireless communication
techniques. Due to the shared wireless medium between the
sensors in BANs, adversaries can launch various attacks on the
e-healthcare systems. The security and privacy issues of BANs
are getting more and more important. To provide secure and
correct association of a group of sensors with a patient and
satisfy the requirements of data conﬁdentiality and integrity
in BANs, we propose a novel key management protocol based
on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and hash chains. The
authentication procedure and group key generation are very
simple and efﬁcient. Therefore, our protocol can be easily
implemented into the power and resource constrained sensor
nodes in BANs. From the comparison results, furthermore, we
can conclude that the proposed protocol dramatically reduces
the computation and communication cost for the authentication
and key derivation compared with the previous protocols.
Keywords-Body Area Networks (BANs); security; privacy;
sensor association; key management;
I. INTRODUCTION
BANs can be used to continuously or remotely monitor
patients’ health, which have the potential to revolutionize the
capture, processing, and communication of critical data for
e-healthcare systems. As we know, the modern e-healthcare
systems can provide new ways of hospitalization with qual-
ity health care. Wirelessly connected medical sensor nodes
placed in, on, and around the body form a BAN for con-
tinuous, automated, and remote monitoring of physiological
signs to support medical applications [1] [2]. In addition,
a patient controller (PC) is needed to perform a multitude
of functions in BANs. A PC (such as a PDA or smart
phone) can sense and fuse data from sensors across the body,
serve as a user interface, and bridge BANs to higher-level
infrastructures.
The applications of BANs are primarily in the healthcare
domain, especially for continuous monitoring and logging
vital parameters of patients suffering from chronic diseases
such as diabetes, asthma and heart attacks. Moreover, BAN
technology is able to support other personalized applica-
tions, such as sports, gaming, entertainment, military and
so on [3] [4] [5]. A wide range of applications make BANs
have a promising future.
Compared with conventional sensor networks, the most
distinguished difference of BANs is that a BAN needs to
deal with more important medical information. Data conﬁ-
dentiality and integrity are the most important requirements
in BANs, since wireless medium is susceptible to lots of
security attacks. In this paper, we propose a novel key
management protocol to provide secure sensor association
and key derivation in BANs. First of all, in order to
withstand security attacks from malicious insiders such as
off-duty doctors or discharged patients, mutual authenti-
cation between a patient and a healthcare worker should
be provided. Secondly, secure sensor association scheme
should be considered to offer mutual authentication between
medical sensors and a patient controller (PC) such that a
healthcare worker can make sure that a group of medical
sensor nodes are correctly and securely associated with an
intended patient. It is worth noting that the sensor nodes also
need to authenticate each other and establish a group key for
subsequent communications. During the sensor association
procedure, each medical sensor node can share a secret
key with the PC, which is able to be used to encrypt
and transmit the group key. Thirdly, a key management
scheme is required to derive the group key. Our proposed
protocol provides mutual authentication between a patient
and a healthcare worker, mutual authentication between a
sensor node and a PC, and mutual authentication between
each pair of sensor nodes. We’d like to emphasize that a
shared secret key between each sensor node and the PC is
computed based on elliptic curve cryptography (ECC), while
the authentication procedure is based upon hash chains. In
addition, a group key of the sensor nodes is calculated only
by the PC, since the PC is assumed to have no power and
resource restriction.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the
next section, the related work is brieﬂy discussed. A novel
key management protocol in BANs is described in detail
in Section III. Security analysis and performance analysis
of our protocol are presented in Section IV and Section
V, respectively. Finally, the conclusions of this paper are
covered in Section VI.
246
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

II. RELATED WORK
In BANs, secure sensor association is a non-trivial issue,
because a healthcare worker must check whether a group
of sensors are correctly and securely associated with an
intended patient before any data communication happens.
Lots of previous works focus only on group key agreement
in sensor nodes [6], [7], [8], [9].
Recently, Keoh et al. [10] and Li et al. [11] propose some
protocols considering both sensor association and key agree-
ment. In [10], each sensor node can be securely associated
with the controller using public key based authentication.
However, it does not take sensor-to-patient authentication
into account. It is easily for malicious nodes to join the BAN
to achieve the important medical data. In [11], group device
pairing (GDP) is implemented to perform authentication
and establish group keys. However, the computation and
communication cost of GDP is very high. In particular, in
order to achieve the group key, each sensor node needs
n + 3 times modular exponentiation operations, where n
is the total number of sensor nodes in the BAN. It is a
large burden for the power and resource constrained medical
sensor nodes.
In our protocol, we use ECC and hash chains to per-
form authentication and key generation. First, a patient
and a healthcare worker authenticate each other. Secondly,
the authenticated healthcare worker associates the medical
sensor nodes with the intended patient. Each node can
establish a shared secret key with the patient controller
(PC), then the LED blinking pattern can be transmitted
using the shared secret key. The healthcare worker can
conﬁrm the secure sensor association when all the sensor
nodes have the synchronized LED blinking pattern. Thirdly,
a group key is computed by the PC, which then distributes
the group key to all the sensor nodes by utilizing the
shared secret keys. Note here that key distribution based
on symmetric key cryptography is fast and efﬁcient. We’d
like to emphasize that ECC and hash chains are very efﬁcient
methods in cryptography. In particular, a point multiplication
in ECC is more efﬁcient than a modular exponentiation in
RSA [15] [16]. In addition, hash operation is a kind of
lightweight cryptographic primitive. The use of ECC and
hash chains can satisfy the requirement of the resource-
limited medical sensors in BANs.
III. A NOVEL KEY MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL IN BANS
In this section, we elaborate the novel key management
protocol in BANs. We start with describing the protocol
model and threat model brieﬂy, and then present the design
of the proposed protocol in detail. By the way, we need some
notations in our protocol, which are showed in Table I.
A. Protocol and Threat Model
The protocol involves three entities: medical sensor,
patient’s controller (PC) and healthcare worker’s device
Table I
FREQUENTLY USED NOTATIONS
p
A prime number
Zp
A ﬁnite ﬁeld
Ep
An elliptic curve over Zp
G
The generator the group of points over Ep
q
The order of the group of points over Ep
s
The private key of KGC
Ppub
The public key of KGC
n
The number of medical sensor nodes in the BAN
h()
One-way hash function
hz()
z cascade hash operations
IDc
The identity of a PC
IDd
The identity of a HWD
Nx
The identity of a medical sensor node with index x
kc
The secret key of a PC
kd
The secret key of a HWD
kx
The secret key of a medical sensor node with index x
KG
The group key of medical sensor node.
rc
The random number generated by a PC
rd
The random number generated by a HWD
rx
The random number generated by a medical sensor node x
(HWD). In addition, we assume that the hospital is the key
generation center (KGC) which is engaged as a trusted third
party to issue important things to the patients and healthcare
workers. First of all, the KGC chooses a prime number p
and decides a elliptic curve Ep with order q over Zp. Then,
the KGC picks a random integer s ∈ Z∗
p as its private
key, and computes its public key Ppub = sG, where G is
the generator of the group of points over Ep. Note that the
private key s of KGC should be changed periodically. At
last, the KGC issues {p, Ep, q, Ppub} to the patients and
healthcare workers, but keeps s secret. It is worth noting
that only the registered patients and healthcare workers can
obtain these important materials. Our protocol works under
the assumption that the medical sensor has a hash function, a
random number generator and a re-writeable memory. Since
a hash function is a powerful and computational efﬁcient
cryptographic tool, in the proposed protocol, we use the hash
chains to perform the authentication in the BAN. In addition,
a shared secret key between each sensor node and the PC is
computed based on ECC, which is more efﬁcient than RSA
because the computation cost of a point multiplication is less
than that of a modular exponentiation [15] [16]. Much of the
details of ECC can be found in [12] [13] [14]. Furthermore,
a group key of the group of medical sensor nodes associated
with an intended patient needs to be calculated by the PC,
which then distribute the group key to all the sensors.
In this paper, ﬁrst, we’d like to emphasize that only
the hospital is trusted, which is considered as the trusted
third party KGC. In [10] [11], the authors assume that
the patients and healthcare workers are all well-behaved.
247
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

However, in fact, some patients and healthcare workers may
not be always trusted. For instance, an off-duty doctor or
a discharged patient can perform some malicious attacks to
obtain the secret keys by eavesdropping, to impersonate as
a legitimate group member to join the group, or to modify
the information communicated between legitimate group
members so as to disrupt key authentication. In our protocol,
we consider the situations mentioned above in order to deal
with the malicious insiders. Second, we assume that the
medical sensors can be attacked by passive attacks and active
attacks. In BANs, the medical sensor nodes can be placed in,
on, or around a patient’s body, which are capable of sensing,
storing, processing and transmitting data via wireless com-
munications. As we know, wireless channels are susceptible
to passive eavesdropping and message interception. Hence,
adversaries can easily perform passive attacks. On the other
hand, in active attacks, an adversary not only just records the
data, but also can alter, inject, intercept and replay messages.
Note that the sensor nodes do not trust each other before
association and can be compromised after deployment. At
last, the attackers are assumed to be able to eavesdrop on
the wireless communication channel and intercept, modify,
replay or inject the transmitting data.
B. Design of the protocol
The proposed protocol can be divided into three phases:
initialization phase, secure sensor association phase, and key
management phase. The detailed procedures are described
as follows.
1) Initialization Phase: Suppose that there are n medical
sensor nodes with identities {N1, N2, · · · , Nn} in a BAN.
First of all, the registered PC with the identity IDc and
HWD with the identity IDd obtain {p, Ep, q, Ppub} from
KGC. Then, the PC generates its own secret key kc and
a random number rc. Similarly, the HWD derives kd and
rd.
2) Secure Sensor Association Phase: In this phase, ﬁrst,
the registered PC and HWD authenticate each other so as
to withstand the attacks from a malicious off-duty doctor
or a malicious discharged patient. Then, a group of medical
sensor nodes are securely and correctly associated to the
authenticated patient.
(1) The PC and HWD need to authenticate each
other before any data communication happens. Seen from
Fig. 1, the PC and HWD both generate a random number
{rc, rd} and calculate {Sc = kcPpub, Sd = kdPpub}. After
that, they compute hash values {Ac, Ad} and exchange
the messages {Sc, rc, IDc} and {Sd, rd, IDd}. In order
to authenticate each other, the PC and HWD need to
check whether the equations Ac = h(Sc ∥ rc ∥ IDc) and
Ad = h(Sd ∥ rd ∥ IDd) can hold.
(2) After the PC and HWD authenticate each other,
Patient’s controller (PC)
Healthcare worker’s 
device (HWD)
IDc , kc , Ppub
IDd , kd , Ppub
Generates:  rc
Generates:  rd
Computes:  Sc=kcPpub
Computes:  Sd=kdPpub
Ac=h(Sc||rc||IDc)
Ac
Ad
Ad=h(Sd||rd||IDd)
Sc , rc , IDc
Verifies:  
Ac?=h(Sc||rc||IDc)
Sd , rd , IDd
Verifies:  
Ad?=h(Sd||rd||IDd)
Ac
c ,
c ,
c
Ad
Sd
S , rd , IDd
Figure 1.
Mutual authentication between PC and HWD.
a group of sensor node must be securely and correctly
associated with the patient. The authenticated PC ﬁrst
generates n secret keys {k1, k2, · · · , kn} and n random
numbers {r1, r2, · · · , rn}, and then preloads each secret
key kx and each random number rx to node Nx, for
x = 1, 2, · · · , n. Next, the PC computes its own hash
chain hz (kc ∥ rc) as well as the hash chain hz (kx ∥ rx)
of node Nx, for x = 1, 2, · · · , n. After that, the PC
broadcasts all the information hz (kx ∥ rx) to the group
of nodes. Note that z is a large constant number and
hz (m) denotes the application of z cascade hash operations
starting from m. For instance, h2 (m)
=
h (h (m)),
h3 (m) = h2 (h (m)) = h
¡
h2 (m)
¢
= h (h (h (m))), etc..
At last, the PC publishes {p, Ep, q, Ppub}. In our protocol,
we assume that the broadcasting hash chain for node Nx
will be updated after each successful authentication. The
hash chain hz (kx ∥ rx) of node Nx will be replaced with
hz−l (kx ∥ rx) when the node Nx have passed through
authentication l times. Now, it is supposed that node Ni
and PC have passed through authentication u times and v
times, respectively. Then the broadcasting hash chains for
node Ni and PC are hz−u (ki ∥ ri) and hz−v (kc ∥ rc),
respectively. The processes of authentication and key
establishment between node Ni and PC are divided into
ﬁve steps, which are shown in Fig. 2.
(2-1)
The
node
Ni
generates
a
random
number
ti
as
its
secret
key
and
computes
the
point
Ai = tiPpub = (xi, yi) over the elliptic curve Ep and
Si = h
¡
xi ∥ hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
¢
, then it sends a message
{Ni, Ai, Si} to the PC. Similarly, the PC generates a
random number tc and computes Ac = tcPpub = (xc, yc)
and Sc
=
h
¡
xc ∥ hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
¢
, then it sends a
message {Nc, Ac, Sc} to the node Ni. Note here that
xi and xc are the x-component of points Ai and Ac,
respectively. For security, the secret ti and tc cannot be
248
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Node  Ni
PC
Generates ti and 
computes
Ai=tiPpub=(xi , yi)
Si=h(xi||hz-u-1(ki||ri))
Ni , Ai , Si
Generates tc and 
computes
Ac=tcPpub=(xc, yc)
Sc=h(xc||hz-v-1(kc||rc))
Nc , Ac , Sc
Computes
Kic=tiAc=(xic , yic)
Zi=h(xic||hz-u-1(ki||ri))
Zi , hz-u-1(ki||ri)
Verifies
h(hz-u-1(ki||ri))?=hz-u(ki||ri)
h(xic||hz-u-1(ki||ri)) ?=Zi
h(xi||hz-u-1(ki||ri)) ?=Si
Computes
Kic=tcAi=(xic , yic)
Zc=h(xic||hz-v-1(kc||rc))
Zc , hz-v-1(kc||rc)
Verifies
h(hz-v-1(kc||rc))?=hz-v(kc||rc)
h(xic||hz-v-1(kc||rc)) ?=Zc
h(xc||hz-v-1(kc||rc)) ?=Sc
Nc
N , Ac , Sc
S
Ni 
N , Ai , SiS
ZiZ , h
(ki||ri)i
Zc
Z , h
(kc||rc)
Figure 2.
Mutual authentication and key establishment between node Ni
and PC.
reused.
(2-2)
After
receiving
the
message
{Nc, Ac, Sc},
the
node
Ni
computes
a
shared
secret
key
Kic
=
tiAc
=
titcPpub
=
(xic, yic)
and
Zi
=
h
¡
xic ∥ hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
¢
. Then, it delivers a
message
©
Zi, hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
ª
to the PC.
(2-3) Upon receiving the message
©
Zi, hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
ª
and the previous one {Ni, Ai, Si} from (2-1), the PC
checks whether the conditions h
¡
hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
¢
=
hz−u (ki ∥ ri),
h
¡
xic ∥ hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
¢
=
Zi
and
h
¡
xi ∥ hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri)
¢
= Si are satisﬁed. If they are
satisﬁed, the PC can make sure that the node Ni is
a authorized one and subsequently computes a shared
secret key Kic = tcAi = tctiPpub = (xic, yic). Next, the
PC computes Zc = h
¡
xic ∥ hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
¢
and then
sends a message
©
Zc, hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
ª
to the node Ni.
If the conditions mentioned above are not satisﬁed, the
authentication fails and the PC beeps. Note that the shared
secret key between node Ni and PC are deﬁnitely same
due to tiAc = tcAi = titcPpub.
(2-4)
After
receiving
©
Zc, hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
ª
from
the
PC,
the
node
Ni
checks
whether
the
conditions
h
¡
hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
¢
=
hz−v (kc ∥ rc),
h
¡
xic ∥ hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
¢
=
Zc
and
h
¡
xc ∥ hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc)
¢
=
Sc are satisﬁed. If they
are satisﬁed, the node Ni can verify the authenticity of the
PC. Otherwise, the authentication fails and the node Ni
Node  Ni
PC
Computes
 G=tc(A1A2…An)
Encrypts
M=E[Kic] ( G)
Distributes M
 G=D[Kic] (M)
Figure 3.
Group key derivation.
beeps.
(2-5) Finally, node Ni and PC update their broadcasting
hash chains to be hz−u−1 (ki ∥ ri) and hz−v−1 (kc ∥ rc),
respectively.
Now, the PC and the node Ni authenticate each other
and establish a shared secret key Kic, which can be used
to encrypt and transmit the LED blinking pattern. The
healthcare worker indicates “authentication accepted” to the
controller if the LED blinking patterns of the sensor nodes
are same. Furthermore, our scheme can also provide mutual
authentication between nodes. The authentication for each
pair of nodes is same as the authentication for the node Ni
and the PC.
3) Key Management Phase: In this phase, a group key
of participating medical sensor nodes is derived. The PC
in the BAN is responsible for the key distribution and
management since it typically has higher computation ca-
pability and storage capability. Observed from the above
secure sensor association phase, the PC can receive n points
{A1, A2, · · · , An} from nodes {N1, N2, · · · , Nn}. Then, it
calculates the group key KG = tc · (A1A2 · · · An), which
can be subsequently distributed to each sensor node Ni by
using the corresponding shared secret key Kic. Observed
from Fig. 3, the group key distribution is based on symmetric
key cryptography. The PC can distribute the group key to
all the nodes in the BAN. For instance, if the PC wants
to distribute KG to the node Ni, it just needs to encrypt
KG using the shared secret key Kic. After receiving M, the
node Ni can easily derive the group key by decrypting M
using the same shared secret key Kic.
IV. SECURITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we show security of the presented protocol
in withstanding the attacks of passive and active adversaries.
A. Security Against Passive Adversary
A passive adversary (attacker) tries to learn information
about the secret key by eavesdropping on the broadcast
channel. In our protocol, an eavesdropper cannot get any
information about the secret value ti due to discrete loga-
rithm problem in elliptic curves. Therefore, the secret value
249
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

ti of each node Ni can be protected and the attacker is not
able to learn the information of the group key.
B. Security Against Active Adversary
In active attack, an adversary not only just records the
data, but also can alter, inject, intercept and replay messages.
The goal of the authentication mechanism is to convince
a controller that the nodes he is communicating with are
indeed the nodes they claim to be. We show the analysis
of the concrete security properties withstanding the active
attacks that we concerned in our proposed protocol as
follows:
1) Malicious Insiders Resistance:
Malicious insiders
mean that the misbehaved off-duty doctors or the misbe-
haved discharged patients. In our protocol, the KGC can
issue p, Ep, q, Ppub to the registered doctors or patients. Note
that Ppub = sG, where the private key s of KGC will be
updated periodically. For example, if a doctor is off-duty or
a patient is discharged from the hospital, then the private key
s of the KGC must be changed. Then all the subsequent
authentications will fail, since the Ppub is changed. Hence,
the malicious insiders can not perform attacks without being
noticed.
2) Implicit Key Authentication: Implicit key authentica-
tion is a fundamental security property, which implies that
only the users with whom A wants to agree upon a common
key may be able to compute a key. In our protocol, the
sensor nodes agreeing upon a group key are controlled by
the PC. It is clear that our protocol provides implicit key
authentication.
3) Known Session Key Security: Known session key
security indicates that an adversary having obtained some
previous session keys still cannot deduce the session keys
of the current run of the protocol. In our protocol, each node
Ni selects a random number ti as secret for each session and
calculates Ai = tiPpub. It is impossible for the adversary to
derive certain secret key ti so as to obtain the current shared
secret key Kic or the current group key KG.
4) Key-Compromise
Impersonation
Resistance:
Key-
compromise impersonation security ensures that the com-
promise of one user’s long-term private key cannot expose
the other user’s long-term private key. In our protocol, each
user’s long-term private key ki is individually generated by
the PC. Therefore, the adversary having obtained a certain
user’s long-term private key cannot expose the long-term
private key of other user’s.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, we will compare the performance of
the proposed protocol with the protocol presented by Li
et al [11]. Our protocol uses ECC and hash chains to
perform authentication and key generation because ECC
and hash chains are very efﬁcient methods in cryptogra-
phy. In our protocol, the most expensive operation is the
Table II
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF LI’S PROTOCOL AND OUR PROTOCOL
Li et al.’s protocol
Our protocol
Computations for each node
to achieve authentication and
compute a shared secret key
(3 + n) e + 9h(1)
2p + 5h(2)
Total number of transmissions
for the protocol
20
10
(1) n is the number of medical sensor nodes in the BAN, e is the modular
exponentiation operation, and h is the hash operation.
(2) p is the point multiplication operation over elliptic curve.
point multiplication, while in Li et al.’s protocol the most
expensive operation is modular exponentiation. It has been
shown in [15] [16] that a point multiplication needs less
computation time than a modular exponentiation unless the
exponent is chosen as some speciﬁc value.
We summarize the performance comparison of the pro-
posed protocol with Li et al.’s in Table II. As shown in
Table II, in Li et al.’s protocol [11], each node needs to
perform 3 + n times modular exponentiation operations and
9 times hash operations. Moreover, it is required to send
20 transmissions in their protocol to run the authentication
and key generation. However, in the proposed protocol, each
sensor node needs to perform only two point multiplications
over an elliptic curve (Ai = tiP and Kic = tiAc) and
ﬁve hash operations. In addition, our protocol only needs
10 transmissions. Therefore, the proposed protocol is more
efﬁcient than Li et al.’s protocol. It signiﬁcantly reduces
the overhead of communication for sensor node to achieve
secure connectivity. We’d like to emphasize that we do
not compare the performance of our protocol with Keoh
et al.’s protocol since Keoh et al.’s protocol uses public key
cryptography to execute the authentication which is different
from symmetric key cryptography used in our protocol.
VI. CONCLUSION
The BAN system provides a ﬂexible, wearable infrastruc-
ture for acquisition, processing and wireless transmission
of medical data and information at the human body. Using
BAN, multiple vital signs can be wirelessly monitored even
in mobile environments.
In this paper, we propose a novel enhanced secure sensor
association and key management protocol based on ellip-
tic curve cryptography (ECC) and hash chains in order
to provide secure and correct association of a group of
sensors with a patient and satisfy the requirements of data
conﬁdentiality and integrity in BANs. The authentication
procedure and group key generation are very simple and
efﬁcient. Therefore, our protocol can be easily implemented
into the power and resource constrained sensor nodes in
BANs. Compared with the previous works in BANs, our
protocol needs less computation and communication cost
for the authentication and key derivation. Meanwhile, our
250
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

protocol can provide mutual authentication between PC and
HWD, mutual authentication between PC and nodes, and
mutual authentication between nodes. We believe that our
protocol is attractive to the applications of BANs.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Patel and J. Wang, “Applications, Challenges, and
Prospective in Emerging Body Area Networking Technolo-
gies,” IEEE Wireless Communications, pp. 80-88, Feb. 2010.
[2] K. Lorincz, D. Malan, T. F. Jones, A. Clavel, V. Shnayder,
G. Mainland, M. Welsh, and S. Moulton, “Sensor Networks
for Emergency Response: Challenges and Opportunities,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol.3, no. 4, pp. 16-23, Oct.-Dec.
2004.
[3] M. Hanson, H. Powell, A. Barth, K. Ringgenberg, B. Calhoun,
J. Aylor, J. Lach, “Body Area Sensor Networks: Challenges
and Opportunities,” Computer, vol.42, no. 1, pp. 58-65, Jan.
2009.
[4] M. Li, W. Lou, and K. Ren, “Data Security and Privacy in
Wireless Body Area Networks,” IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 51-58, Feb. 2010.
[5] E. Jovanov, A. Milenkovic, C. Otto, and P. C. Groen, “A
Wireless Body Area Network of Intelligent Motion Sensors
for Computer Assisted Physical Rehabilitation,” Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-10,
Mar. 2005.
[6] C. C. Tan, H. Wang, S. Zhong, and Q. Li, “IBE-Lite:
A Lightweight Identity-Based Cryptography for Body Sen-
sor Networks,” IEEE Trans. on Information Technology in
Biomedicine, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 926-932, Nov. 2009.
[7] O. G. Morchon, H. Baldus, and D. S. Sanchez, “Resource-
Efﬁcient Security for Medical Body Sensor Networks,” in
BSN’06, pp. 80-83, Apr. 2006.
[8] T. Donovan, J. Donoghue, C. Sreenan, D. Sammon, P. Reilly,
and K. A. Connor, “A Context Aware Wireless Body Area
Network (BAN),” in proc. of the Pervasive Health Confer-
ence, pp. 1-8, Apr. 2009.
[9] K. Malasri and L. Wang, “Addressing Security in Medical
Sensor Networks,” in HealthNet’07, pp. 7-12, 2007.
[10] S. L. Keoh, E. Lupu, and M. Sloman, “Securing Body Sensor
Networks: Sensor Association and Key Management,” proc.
of the 7th Annual IEEE Int. Conference on Pervasive Comput-
ing and Communications (PerCom), Galveston, Texas, Mar.
9-13, pp. 1-6, 2009.
[11] M. Li, S. Yu, W. Lou, and K. Ren, “Group Device Pairing
based Secure Sensor Association and Key Management for
Body Area Networks,” proc. of IEEE INFOCOM, San Diego,
CA, Mar. 14-19, pp. 1-9, 2010.
[12] N. Koblitz, “Elliptic curve cryptosystems,” Math. Comput.,
vol. 48, pp. 203-209, 1987.
[13] H. Silverman, The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves, 2nd ed.
Springer, 2000.
[14] W. Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security, 4th ed.
Prentice Hall, 2005, pp. 301-313.
[15] R. Watro, D. Kong, S. Cuti, C. Gardiner, C. Lynn, and
P. Kruus, “TinyPK: Securing Sensor Networks with Public
Key Technology,” in Proc. of the 2nd ACM Workshop on
Security of Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks (SASN’04), Wash-
ington, DC, USA, pp. 59-64, Oct. 2004.
[16] D. J. Malan, M. Welsh, and M. D.
Smith, “A Public-
Key Infrastructure for Key Distribution in TinyOS Based
on Elliptic Curve Cryptography,” in 1st IEEE International
Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and
Networks (SECON’04), Santa Clara, California, pp. 71-80,
Oct. 2004.
251
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

