GeoWiFi: A Geopositioning System Based on WiFi Networks 
 
Jaime Lloret, Jesus Tomas, Alejandro Canovas, Irene Bellver  
Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de Zonas Costeras 
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Spain 
jlloret@dcom.upv.es, jtomas@dcom.upv.es, alcasol@posgrado.upv.es, irbelser@upvnet.upv.es 
 
 
Abstract—GPS can only be used in outdoors where the satellite 
signals can be received, so it cannot be used to know the 
position of a device inside buildings. Cellular networks can be 
used to locate devices indoors, but the mobile phone network is 
owned by an enterprise, so a regular user is not allowed to 
know this information. So, new positioning systems are needed 
for urban zones and indoor locations. In this paper, we present 
a geopositioning system that uses public and private WiFi 
networks placed in cities in order to estimate the location of the 
user. Then we present the architecture of the system and the 
prototype implementation. Finally, we will show the developed 
protocol operation.  
Keywords-geopositioning; WiFi location; Wifi placement; 
WiFi tracking. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the society demands new location systems to 
adapt the new services provided by the information 
technology, which demonstrates the acceptation and 
projection of the society in the Information Technologies. 
Some years ago, the Global Positioning System (GPS) [1] 
involved a revolution in the positioning systems (navigators, 
navy control, anti-thief systems, etc.). It is actually the most 
used positioning system in the world because it can be used 
worldwide. Its main features are: 
• 
Global position thanks to a constellation of 30 satellites 
of the Army of USA. 
• 
It is possible to include a random mistake for security 
reasons. 
• 
There is a precision up to 5 meters. 
• 
It is indispensable to have direct view from the devices 
to the satellites, so it cannot operate inside the buildings, 
tunnel, narrow streets, and in adverse atmospheric 
conditions. 
However, although it is a mature system, this technology 
has an important limitation: it is not operative in indoors and 
places where there is a roof, and even in urban environments 
because a direct view to the satellite is required. GPS have 
several well-know limitations [2]. These limitations are 
found in: 
• 
GPS signal reception 
• 
GPS signal integrity 
• 
GPS signal accuracy 
GPS measurements are influenced by several types of 
errors: satellite errors, signal propagation errors, receiver 
errors and those provided by the GPS geometry. There have 
been several researchers with the purpose of solving GPS 
limitations.  
Because the cellular telecommunications infrastructure is 
very large in urban zones, it can be used to locate mobile 
devices inside the cities and towns. Moreover, mobile phone 
networks offer mobile coverage inside the buildings. But 
cellular networks are owned by an enterprise, so a regular 
user is not allowed to know this information. Its main 
features are: 
• 
The mobile device searches all cells that is able to 
connect with. This information is used to estimate its 
position.  
• 
The system has high coverage and can be use in all 
places where there are mobile networks. 
• 
It is cheap because it uses a network that is used for 
other purposes. 
• 
It is quite imprecise, from 200 to 20.000 meters 
(depending on the number of cells). The precision is 
enhanced as a function of the density of cells. 
• 
There are more precise systems that involve signal 
levels and delay times. Nevertheless, this information is 
only available by the mobile service operator. 
Recently, a new location technology based on WiFi 
networks has been developed as an alternative. This 
technology uses the radio signals provided by all WiFi 
networks found in the urban zone in order to estimate the 
position of the device. In addition, the number of private and 
public access points is increasing in the cities and the WiFi 
coverage is getting higher, thus higher precision can be 
provided. Because WiFi networks can cross several walls, a 
continuous service can be offered in outdoors as much as 
building indoors [3]. The position based on WiFi has the 
following features:  
• 
It works inside the buildings. 
• 
The precision is variable and depends on the number of 
WiFi networks. It achieves up to 2 meters of accuracy. 
• 
It requires a training phase in order to measure the signal 
level from a large number of geographic positions. The 
system could not run properly where the training process 
has not been performed. 
• 
The set of signal levels measured in a moment is known 
as a WiFi pattern. 
This new technology will favor a wide range of new 
applications oriented to people positioning and tracking. 
Recent studies show how a campus that has deployed a 
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN), allow the network 
administrators to place the services in the most appropriate 
38
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

sites, and even the behavior of the people could be studied 
and their mobility tracked [4]. Otherwise, GPS technology is 
commonly used for cars with high mobility or pedestrian 
(when they are in rural zones or hill walking). 
Positioning systems based on WiFi networks is a 
promising technology, but its deployment presents many 
Issues: 
• 
The radio coverage of the access points depend on the 
walls crossed and on the obstacles in the in the line of 
sight between the emitter and the receiver. Moreover, in 
indoors, the power received in each point depends on 
many factors (even differs between different IEEE 
802.11 variants) [5]. 
• 
Generally, where the WiFi access points are physically 
placed is unknown. Moreover, their position can vary 
dynamically, new access points could appear and others 
could disappear. Therefore, a training system or a 
baseline data is indispensable to characterize the 
network [6]. 
• 
There is not any WiFi position standard and normalized 
position processes in existence. 
• 
It requires complex algorithms to locate a device starting 
only from radio signals. Nowadays, the research 
community is discussing on which is the most adequate 
algorithm [7]. 
In order to solve these issues and difficulties, some 
algorithms and specific and innovative processes should be 
developed. In this paper we will show a new geopositioning 
system based on public and private WiFi networks for urban 
zones. We have developed several algorithms in order to 
have an accurate system.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In 
Section 2 we will discuss some existing related work. Our 
architecture is explained in section 3. Section 4 details the 
deployed prototype. The protocol operation is shown in 
section 5. Finally, Section 6 draws our conclusion and future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As we have stated before, the global positioning systems 
(GPS) are not efficient in outdoor places where there are 
buildings, because there are shadow areas where there is no 
satellite signal. This related work section has been split in 
three main parts. The first one shows WiFi positioning 
systems for outdoors. The second one shows some 
alternatives or proposals that combine GPS with WiFi and 
other technologies. The third one shows some indoor WiFi-
based positioning systems. 
Y. Cheng et al. evaluate the feasibility of building a 
wide-area 802.11 Wi-Fi-based positioning system in [8]. 
Then, they explore how a user’s device can accurately 
estimate 
its 
location 
using 
existing 
hardware 
and 
infrastructure and with minimal calibration. They evaluate 
the estimation accuracy of a number of different algorithms 
(many of which were originally proposed in the context of 
precise indoor location) in a variety of scenarios. Although 
the accuracy of their system is lower than existing 
positioning 
systems, 
it 
requires 
substantially 
lower 
calibration overhead than existing indoor positioning 
systems and provides easy deployment and coverage across 
large metropolitan areas. They conclude the paper letting us 
know that in dense urban areas Place Lab’s positioning 
accuracy is between 13–20 meters.  
In [9], B. Li et al. analyze two WiFi positioning 
technologies for outdoors: trilateration and fingerprinting. 
Then, they carry out a fingerprinting study case in the 
Sydney central business district (CBD) area where WiFi APs 
are densely deployed. The fingerprint of a specific place can 
be used to identify the location. The key idea of the 
fingerprinting approach is to map location-sensitive 
parameters of measured radio signals in areas of interest. 
Their results show that the fingerprinting-based positioning 
system works well for outdoor localization, especially when 
directional information is utilized, with errors in the tens of 
meters. The same authors propose a location fingerprinting 
method in wireless LAN (WLAN) positioning in [10].  
In [11], Amalina Abdul Halim developed an outdoor 
WiFi positioning system that can estimate the location of 
mobile devices based on the signal strength broadcasted by 
the access points. One of the main innovations of this work is 
the device location algorithm, which uses the K-NN 
algorithm (based on the nearest neighbor). A prototype was 
applied to the bus services of the University of Technology 
of MARA (UiTM), which allows estimating the location of 
the bus and the arrival time at the next stop. 
Hereinafter we will see some positioning proposals that 
combine GPS with WiFi and other systems. 
In [12], M. Weyn and F. Schrooyen combine WiFi 
localization with satellite-based navigation to form a WiFi-
Assisted-GPS ubiquitous solution to make GNSS useful in 
urban and indoor environments. This combination is 
analyzed from a mathematical perspective. The WiFi 
location is based on fingerprints. To minimize the 
initialization and the training of the WiFi-positioning a self 
mapping system is needed. 
The authors of the paper in [13] used the Time 
Difference of Arrival (TDOA) measurement, generated by 
the pseudorange observations of two visible satellites GPS 
with the WiFi fingerprint technology. The authors show that 
the integration of both technologies can improve the 
positioning accuracy by more than 50% when the method is 
applied.  
In [14], Pornpen Ratsameethammawong and M. L. 
Kulthon Kasemsan study cell phone and WiFi positioning 
systems in environments where standard GPS fails. They 
focus their main research on a location system based on the 
Wi-Fi signals received from the existing hardware 
infrastructure of their University. They conclude that is 
better to use combined systems. 
In [15], B. Li propose a client-based mobile phone 
location tracking by the combination of GPS, Wi-Fi and Cell 
location technology. Their proposal use vector calculations 
to track and locate mobile phones whereabouts are 
introduced. The combined methods make the tracking and 
locating of moving mobile phone more accurate and more 
effective despite the fact that GPS signal is not available. 
39
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

In [16], A. Kealy et al. study the potential of positioning 
WiFi to provide solutions in indoor environments. They 
present the practical results generated from a case study 
comparing commercial WiFi positioning systems. 
Because indoor WiFi positioning systems have been 
studied in depth, we will show some methods, some of them 
published by the same authors of this paper.   
The location systems in indoor environments have 
difficulties as the walls, interferences, multipath effect, 
humidity, temperature variations, etc. In [17], the authors 
describe two approaches where wireless sensors could find 
their position using WLAN technology inside a floor of a 
building. Both approaches are based on the Received Signal 
Strength Indicator (RSSI). The first approach uses a training 
session and the position is based on a heuristic system using 
the training measurements. The second approach uses 
triangulation model with some fixed access points, but taking 
into account wall losses and signal variations. 
This idea of combining several positioning systems to 
locate a device is used in [18]. The authors proposed a new 
stochastic approach which is based on a combination of 
deductive and inductive methods whereby wireless sensors 
could determine their positions using WLAN technology 
inside a floor of a building. Their goal is to reduce the 
training phase in an indoor environment, but, without a loss 
of precision. They conclude their paper showing that their 
method is better than the existing ones. 
None of the papers aforementioned use exclusively 
unknown WiFi access points to estimate the position of the 
devices in outdoors. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
This section presents the architecture of the proposed 
geopositioning system. There are three main entities: the 
devices to be located (mobile devices), the one used to 
estimate the position (positioning manager), and the 
application infrastructure. It is shown in figure 1. 
A. Mobile device 
This is the device that is desired to be located. It is 
typically a mobile phone with a wireless interface, although 
it could be a PDA or a laptop. A software application will be 
installed in the mobile device. It will be running hidden and 
transparent to the user, so the device can be used regularly as 
a phone, PDA or laptop. It can be a device exclusively 
developed for location purposes. It can be included in a 
bracelet or a wristband, or could be embedded in any type of 
device that is wanted to be located. 
The operation of the mobile device is as follows. It will 
connect to the positioning manager periodically and the 
positioning manager will reply with the information used for 
to estimate its location. This information consists on the 
radio signal strength received from several access points of 
the WiFi network (hereinafter called WiFi pattern). 
Optionally, the GPS position could also be sent if the device 
allows it and if the device is under several GPS satellites 
coverage. If the device is a mobile phone, it could also use a 
third location system: the location provided by the cells of 
the mobile phone providers. 
B. Positioning manager 
The main function of this entity is to geoposition the 
mobile devices by using the information received from them. 
It can also act as a database to allow the vertical software 
applications ask the position of any mobile device. The 
positioning system can be divided in three modules: 
• 
Positioning module 
The 
positioning 
server 
receives 
the 
positioning 
information from the mobile devices periodically. Using this 
information, the positioning module estimates the position of 
the device and stores it in a database. 
Typically, this information consists of the signal strength 
level received from the access points that are closed to the 
mobile device. It could also receive the GPS position or the 
closest mobile cells. 
In order to find the position from the WiFi signals, we 
use the algorithm described in [18], which has been 
developed by the authors of this paper. Its main drawback is 
that this method needs a previous training process, so it is 
only applicable when the mobile device is placed in a 
previously training area.  
In the case of GPS, a positioning module is not needed 
because it directly provides longitude and latitude 
coordinates. 
The mobile cells positioning case can only used if the 
device is a mobile phone. We have configured our system to 
use this option only if the others are not available. The 
information used to estimate the position is using the closest 
cells signals. We are aware that this method could have 
errors of about 100 meters [19]. Last research includes 
artificial neural networks in the location methods. 
• 
Enquiry module 
It provides service to the vertical software applications. It 
allows to ask the current position of a mobile device, or to 
ask for a historic list of its position. The information 
provided is the code of the device, longitude, latitude, high, 
accuracy estimation, time and date. This module will be 
implemented as a web service. XML documents will be 
exchanged using the HTTP protocol. The web service will be 
used by the vertical applications or by third parties. 
• 
Training module 
A training phase is indispensable for the positioning 
module, so it is performed in the training module. The WiFi 
patterns, jointly the position coordinates, are provided during 
this phase. Its purpose is to create a big database where a 
coordinate is associated with the received signal strengths. 
The training process will be carried out in differently in 
outdoor than in indoor. In outdoor, a device with WiFi and 
GPS is needed. This device will be transmitting both GPS 
and WiFi data to the training module in the area to train. The 
indoor training process is more complex. It has to be carried 
out by a person that has to be indicating its position inside 
the building while it is shifting. A comparison between 
trilateration and training methods is shown in [6]. However, 
there are methods that let us estimate the position inside the 
buildings by using the training carried out outside the 
buildings. These methods are quite less accurate. 
40
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 1.  Positioning System Architecture 
C. Applications infastructure 
Each vertical application will have specific needs that 
will be solved in this entity. All software applications will 
acquire the positioning information using the enquiry 
module. The applications infrastructure is formed by an 
Apache Web Server (using PHP programming) and a 
MySQL database. We have used AJAX (Asynchronous 
JavaScript And XML) to create interactive applications in 
our system. 
Figure 2 shows the architecture operation. 
IV. 
PROTOTYPE IMPLEMENTATION 
In this section we describe the elements needed to 
implement the prototype. As a basis the architecture 
described in the previous section will be used. 
We have deployed two positioning devices with different 
features in order to cover higher number of applications. 
A. Cellular Mobile Device 
Nowadays, the cellular mobile device has become an 
indispensable tool in the personal communications. Thus, a 
location software application installed in the phone may open 
a wide range of new applications.  
In order to use the device, it should have a WiFi interface 
and the software application should be compatible with the 
mobile phone operative system. In order to reach to a high 
number of mobile devices we have developed our software 
application to different operative systems. These Operative 
systems are the following: 
• 
Microsoft .NET (Windows Mobile) 
• 
Google Android 
• 
Apple iPhone 
Many mobile devices are able to obtain their location by 
using additional information sources than WiFi signals. The 
software application detects if the device has GPS and 
identifies the closest mobile phone cells (in case of a cellular 
phone). Then the device will send this jointly with the WiFi 
patters. This information is sent periodically to the 
positioning 
module in 
regular intervals 
which 
are 
configurable by the application and depends on the mobility 
of the user (larger time intervals will be used when there is 
less mobility). 
B. Specific Device  
There are many cases were a mobile phone cannot be 
used so another type of device is needed. Some examples are 
a positioning wristband or bracelet, or an anti-theft device. 
Because of it, a specific device for geopositioning is also 
needed in the market.  
In this case we have chosen a SoC (Solution on Chip), 
from G2 enterprise [20], to develop the device. We used 
G2C543 Wi-Fi SoC model. It embeds a WiFi interface, a 
CPU and an I/O ports in a unique Chip. It has the following 
features: 
• 
32-bits CPU  
• 
Internal memory: 128 KB RAM and 512 KB ROM 
• 
A flexible interface for external sensors. 
• 
An operative System with TCP/IP protocol stack, 
security and IEEE 802.11 b/g.  
• 
A power management subsystem to save energy. 
G2 enterprise has also a module called Epsilon Module 
Family PB which can be used with G2C543 to enhance its 
features [21]. 
• 
8 Mb Memory Flash 
• 
Low consumption WiFi Antenna. 
• 
Real time clock. 
• 
Power regulator for alkaline batteries. 
• 
Reduced dimensions. 
Table I shows a comparison of the main features of the 
two proposed devices for our geopositioning system. 
Positioning 
manager 
Mobile  
Laptop  
WiFi  
GPS 
Cellular 
telephony 
Ad-hoc 
Device 
Vertical Server of 
Application 
Vertical Server of 
Application 
Web 
Navigator 
Web 
Navigator 
41
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
 
Figure 2.  Iteraction between positioning manager modules. 
TABLE I.  
DEVICE FEATURES COMPARITON 
 
Cellular Mobile Device 
Specific Device  
Type of 
device 
Phone + positioning 
Focused only on 
positioning 
Coverage 
area  
Medium city 
Building or campus 
Type of 
connection 
Internet (GPRS/UMTS) + 
WiFi 
Only WiFi 
Application 
Examples 
Teenager control / mobile 
workers … 
Movement Control / 
equipment 
management 
V. 
PROTOCOL OPERATION 
In this section we describe the operation of the developed 
protocol. First, a user connects to the vertical server of 
application using a web navigator. This web page allows 
him/her to authenticate in the database or register as a new 
user. The web page is shown in Figure 3. When there is a 
new user, he/she must click on the "New User" button and 
Figure 4 appears. It shows the information needed for 
registration. This procedure allows registering himself. Then, 
the user must choose the group to join. So after being 
authenticated, it receives a popup asking for the joining 
group (see figure 5). This popup even allows creating a new 
group if the user will. Finally, if the device is not included in 
the system, it must be added by clicking in the "New device" 
button. Figure 6 shows the information that must be filled up 
to add a new device in the system. Only the users with 
enough privileges can add new devices to the system. If the 
device is yet added, this step is not needed because the 
system will know the device (each device has a unique WiFi 
interface MAC address which is also associated to a user or 
users). 
Finally, after having filled up the user and the group and 
having the device recognized in the system, the GeoWiFi 
main window is opened (see figure 7). It shows the device 
list and a map with the placement of all devices in a group. 
We have programmed the application to reply some 
enquires. Thus, a user can know the last position for each 
device in its group. Moreover, the trace of a device can be 
also estimated. The map screen shows the placement of each 
device in real time. The "OK" button leaves the application. 
A registered user, that is already registered in a group and 
is using a device that is included in the system, will follow 
the message flow shown in figure 8. Only four messages are 
exchanged between the Vertical server of the application and 
the user. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have shown the implementation of a 
Geopositioning System Based on WiFi Networks. It uses the 
radio signal strength of the WiFi networks in order to 
estimate the position of the users. 
The system uses a WiFi pattern method that allows 
having the most accurate system. Thus, a previous training 
phase is needed before setting up the system. 
The developed system allows knowing the position or 
tracking 
teenager, 
mobile 
workers, 
and 
equipment 
movement. 
We have shown the web pages used for authentication, 
registering and for displaying the information estimated by 
the system. 
Our next step is to provide higher security in the user 
authentication procedure and to provide a intrusion detection 
system in order to grant access only original MAC addresses 
(not copied or cloned). 
Mobile 
device  
Vertical server of 
the application 
Positioning 
module
WiFi patterns  
GPS 
Mobile Cells. 
Training 
device  
Training 
module 
WiFi pattern 
+ 
position 
Enquiry 
module 
Positioning 
database 
WiFi patterns 
database 
Web 
Service 
Web 
Navigator 
42
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

GeoWiFi 
User Name 
 
Name: ……… 
Password: ………. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Firs access to the vertical server of application  
 
Full Name 
User 
Password 
Repeat Password 
 
 
Figure 4.  New user registration 
 
o 
Grup 1 
o 
Grup 2 
o 
… 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Group selection 
Name of the Device: 
MAC: 
Icon: 
o 
Type 0 
o 
Type 1 
o 
Type 2  
Figure 6.  New device window 
GeoWiFi 
Name of the User and the Group 
 
Map 
 
 
Device List 
Options: real time, trace, bar 
 
Figure 7.  GeoWiFi main window 
Access
User
Server
Group?
Choose Group
Initializemap
Grant Access
 
Figure 8.  Messages Flow 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, Global 
Positioning System. Theory and practice, Springer, Wien (Austria), 
347 pages.1993.  
[2] 
Alfred Kleusberg and Richard B. Langley, The Limitations of GPS. 
GPS World, March/April 1990. pp 50-52. 
[3] 
Diana Bri, Hugo Coll, Sandra Sendra, and Jaime Lloret. Providing 
Outdoor and Indoor Ubiquity with WLANs, chapter of the Handbook 
of Research on Mobility and Computing: Evolving Technologies and 
Ubiquitous Impacts, IGI Global, Pp. 1155-1168, 2011. 
[4] 
S. Sendra, M. Garcia, C. Turro, and J. Lloret, User’s Macro and 
Micro-mobility Study using WLANs in a University Campus, 
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, Vol. 4, Nº 
1&2, 2011. In press 
[5] 
S. Sendra, M. Garcia, C. Turro, and J. Lloret, WLAN IEEE 802.11 
a/b/g/n Indoor Coverage and Interference Performance Study, Int. J. 
on Advances in Networks and Services, Vol. 4, N 1&2,2011. In press. 
[6] 
Miguel Garcia, Carlos Martinez, Jesus Tomas, and Jaime Lloret, 
Wireless Sensors self-location in an Indoor WLAN environment, 1st 
Int. Conf. on Sensor Technologies and Applications (Sensorcomm 
2007), Valencia (Spain), October 14-20, 2007. Pp.146-151. 
[7] 
M. Garcia, F. Boronat, J. Tomás, and J. Lloret, The Development of 
Two Systems for Indoor Wireless Sensors Self-location, Ad Hoc & 
Sensor Wireless Networks, Vol. 8, Issue 3-4, Pp. 235-258. 
[8] 
Y. Cheng, Y. Chawathe, A. LaMarca, and J. Krumm, Accuracy 
characterization for metropolitan-scale Wi-Fi localization, MobiSys 
2005, Seattle, Washington, USA, 6-8 June 2005. Pp. 233–245. 
[9] 
B. Li, I. Quader, and A.G. Dempster, “On Outdoor Positioning with 
Wi-Fi”, Journal of GPS, vol. 7, issue. 1, pp. 18-26. 2008. 
[10] B. Li, Y. Wang, H.K. Lee, A.G. Dempster, and C. Rizos. Method for 
yielding a database of location fingerprints in WLAN, IEE 
Proceedings Communications, vol. 152, no. 5, pp. 580-586.  2005. 
[11] Amalina Abdul Halim, Wifi positioning system, Faculty of 
Information Technology and Quantitative Science, Mara University 
of Teknology Shah Alam. Thesis. May 2006. 
[12] M. Weyn and F. Schrooyen, A Wifi Assisted GPS Positioning 
Concept, 3rd European Conf. on the Use of Modern Information and 
Communication Technologies, Gent, 13-14 March 2008. Pp 479-486. 
[13] Binghao Li, Yong Khing Tan, and Andrew G. Dempster. Using two 
GPS satellites to improve WiFi positioning accuracy in urban 
canyons. IEET Communications. 2011. In press.  
[14] Pornpen Ratsameethammawong and M.L. Kulthon Kasemsan. 
Mobile Phone Location Tracking by the Combination of  GPS, Wi-Fi 
and Cell Location Technology. Communications of the IBIMA. Vol. 
2010, Article ID 566928, 7 pages. 2010 
[15] B. Li, A. G. Dempster, and C. Rizos. Positioning in environments 
where GPS fails. FIG Congress 2010, Sydney (Australia), 11-16 April 
2010. Pp 1-18. 
[16] A. Kealy, B. Li, T. Gallagher, and A. Dempster. Evaluation of WiFi 
Technologies for Indoor Positioning Applications. Surveying & 
Spatial Sciences Institute 
Biennial 
International 
Conference, 
Adelaide, South Australia, 28 Sep. - 2 Oct., 2009. Pp. 411-421. 2009. 
[17] M. Garcia, F. Boronat, J. Tomas, and J. Lloret, The Development of 
Two Systems for Indoor Wireless Sensors Self-location, Ad Hoc & 
Sensor Wireless Networks. Vol. 8, Issue 3-4, June 2009. Pp. 235-258,  
[18] J. Lloret, J. Tomas, M. Garcia, and A. Canovas, Hybrid Stochastic 
Approach 
for 
Wireless 
Sensors 
Self-Location 
in 
Indoor 
Environments, Sensors, Vol. 9, Issue 5, Pp. 3695-3712, May 2009. 
[19] C. Drane, M. Macnaughtan, and C. Scott, Positioning GSM 
Telephones. IEEE Communications Magazine, April 1998. Pp. 46-59. 
[20] G2 Microsystems Website. At http://www.g2microsystems.com/ 
[Last access January 20, 2011]  
[21] G2 
Epsilon 
Module 
Family 
PB 
Website. 
At
 http://www.g2microsystems.com/products/modules.html  [Last access 
January 20, 2011]  
New Group 
New Device 
OK 
OK
Send
Send
Access 
New User 
43
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

