Evaluation of IEEE 802.16j Relay Network Performance
Considering Obstruction of Radio Wave Propagation by Obstacles
Yuuki Ise∗, Go Hasegawa†, Yoshiaki Taniguchi† and Hirotaka Nakano†
∗Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University,
1–5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, Japan
Email: y-ise@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
†Cybermedia Center, Osaka University,
1–32 Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, Japan
Email: {hasegawa, y-tanigu, nakano}@cmc.osaka-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In IEEE 802.16j networks using a time division
multiple access protocol, radio wave interference between links
must be taken into account when time slots are assigned to
the links. The protocol model, which deﬁnes the transmission
and interference ranges as circles, has often been utilized in
related studies for determining the interference between links.
However, previous studies have not considered the presence of
obstacles, which can affect radio wave propagation between
wireless links and consequently network performance. In
this paper, we investigate the performance of IEEE 802.16j
networks considering the effects of obstacles. First we deﬁne
an obstacle model where radio wave propagation is obstructed
by the obstacles, after which we evaluate network performance
by simulation experiments based on this model. The detailed
simulation results reveal that the deployment of additional
nodes improves the service ratio more effectively than an
increase of the transmission range of nodes. Additionally, we
present a method for estimating the performance of IEEE
802.16j networks on basis of regression analysis. By evaluating
the accuracy of the performed analysis, we ﬁnd that the relative
error in the service ratio for 95% of the results is within 0.1
and the relative error in the power-to-throughput ratio for 90%
of the results is within 0.2.
Keywords-IEEE 802.16j; WiMAX; relay network; obstacle;
radio wave obstruction.
I. INTRODUCTION
The IEEE 802.16j protocol [1] utilizes multi-hop wire-
less networks for extending the network service area [2].
Generally, IEEE 802.16j wireless multi-hop relay networks
(hereinafter, relay networks) consist of two types of nodes:
gateway and relay nodes. As shown in Fig. 1, there is a
wired connection between the gateway node and an external
network, while relay nodes communicate with the gateway
node or with neighboring relay nodes through wireless links.
These nodes construct a tree topology where the root is the
gateway node and there is a wireless multi-hop transmission
path from any relay node to the gateway node. A client
terminal can access the external network by connecting to
one of the relay nodes whose service area covers the client
terminal.
Relay networks use a time division multiple access
(TDMA) protocol [3], which gives transmission opportuni-
ties for wireless links between relay nodes. Therefore, radio
wave interference between links should be taken into account
when time slots are assigned to the links. Previous studies on
relay networks have focused on preventing radio wave inter-
ference by introducing concepts such as link scheduling and
External 
Network
Wired Link
Gateway Node
Relay Node
Client Terminal
Service Area
Wireless Upward Link
Wireless Downward Link
Figure 1.
IEEE 802.16j wireless multi-hop relay networks
time slot assignment [4], [5]. In addition, the protocol model
[6], which deﬁnes the transmission and interference ranges
as circles, has often been utilized in previous works [7]–
[10]. In the protocol model, whether a transmission succeeds
or encounters interference depends on only the distance
between the sender and receiver nodes, which are obtained
through comparison with the transmission and interference
ranges of other nodes. Therefore, the connectivity and the
occurrence of radio wave interference in the network can be
easily determined.
However, so far, the presence of obstacles in the ﬁeld
has not been considered. Here, obstacles refer to physical
objects, such as buildings, that obstruct radio wave prop-
agation and might substantially alter the connectivity and
radio wave interference in a relay network. For example,
even if a transmission between two nodes in a network is
possible in the absence of obstacles, the addition of obstacles
can prevent the nodes from communicating with each other.
Furthermore, obstacles can obstruct radio wave propagation,
thus reducing the size of the service area. On the other
hand, in terms of radio wave interference, the presence of
obstacles can increase network performance by reducing
the occurrence of radio wave interference. Therefore, it is
important to consider the presence of obstacles and their
inﬂuence on radio wave propagation.
In this paper, we investigate the performance of relay
networks by considering the presence of obstacles. First, we
deﬁne an obstacle model based on the protocol model. In
the obstacle model, rectangular obstacles are deployed in
the ﬁeld in various patterns. Although typically obstacles
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

Gateway Node
Relay Node
Physical Link
Active Link








	

,
,
,
,
,
,
	,
,	
,
Figure 2.
Network topology
have several effects on radio waves, such as obstruction,
reﬂection, and diffraction, the obstacle model in this work
considers only obstruction since its effects on relay network
performance is the most pronounced. Using the obstacle
model, we evaluate the performance of relay networks
through simulation experiments. We also conduct simulation
experiments using actual obstacles on the Osaka University
campus.
Additionally, we use multiple regression analysis based on
the simulation results and construct a regression equation for
estimating the performance of relay networks.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The relay
network model is introduced in Section II, the obstacle
model is described in Section III, and the simulation results
are presented in Section IV. Furthermore, a method for
estimating the performance of relay networks is presented in
Section V. Finally, our conclusions are presented in Section
VI together with a description of future research directions.
II. NETWORK MODEL
In this section, we brieﬂy describe the network model and
the protocol model utilized for the performance evaluation.
We also explain time slot assignment mechanisms based on
TDMA.
A. Network topology
The network is assumed to consist of N nodes, where
vi (0 ≤ i ≤ (N − 1)) denotes the i-th node. One node
in the network, denoted as v0, serves as the gateway node,
and the remaining nodes function as relay nodes, forming a
network topology that describes the communication between
all nodes in the form of a directed graph. In relay networks,
the gateway node is connected to an external network, and
the relay nodes communicate with the gateway node either
directly or via other relay nodes along the path between the
relay node and the gateway node. The path is determined by
a routing algorithm, and the directed graph is constructed as
a tree structure whose root is the gateway node v0. When
two nodes can communicate directly with each other, the
link between them is referred to as a physical link, and a
link used that forms the network topology is referred to as
an active link. In this paper, an active link from node vi to
node vj is denoted as li,j.
Figure 2 shows an example of a network topology where
a gateway node and nine relay nodes are deployed. In the
ﬁgure, the red circle indicates the gateway node, gray circles




Active Link
Interference
Node     ‘s 
Transmission Range

Node     ‘s 
Interference Range



,
,
Figure 3.
Radio interference based on the protocol model
indicate relay nodes, dashed lines indicate physical links, and
solid arrow lines indicate active links.
B. Protocol model
In this paper, the propagation and interference of radio
waves are modelled by the protocol model [6], which deﬁnes
the transmission and interference ranges of a node as circles
centered at the node, as shown in Fig. 3. Here, ti and ri
represent the transmission range and the radio interference
range of node vi, respectively. In general, ri > ti, and the
ratio of the interference range to the transmission range for
node vi is set to be between 2 and 4 depending on the
environment [11].
In the protocol model, transmission and radio wave inter-
ference depend on the distance between nodes. Node vj can
receive a transmission from node vi when ||vi − vj|| ≤ ti is
satisﬁed, where ||vi − vj|| is the distance between nodes vi
and vj. Figure 3 also shows an example of radio interference
between nodes in the protocol model. In this ﬁgure, there are
four nodes maintaining two active links (li,j and lp,q). The
protocol model deﬁnes the interference between li,j and lp,q
based on the distances between the four vertices vi, vj, vp,
and vq. When ||vi − vq|| ≤ ri is satisﬁed, link li,j interferes
with link lp,q.
C. Time slot assignment
The IEEE 802.16j protocol uses the TDMA mechanism
to control the ability of nodes to transmit by assigning time
slots for transmission. In the TDMA mechanism, different
time slots are assigned to wireless links that interfere with
each other in order to prevent radio wave interference. In
other words, multiple links can communicate simultaneously
within the same time slot as long as the time slot is
assigned to multiple links that do not interfere with each
other. This mechanism is known as spatial reuse [12]. The
throughput of relay networks can be substantially improved
by spatial reuse with concurrent transmissions since such an
approach reduces the total number of time slots assigned to
all active links in the network, which is referred to as frame
length in this paper. The time slot assignment problem with
consideration of spatial reuse is regarded as a vertex coloring
problem [13] of the conﬂict graph [14]. In the conﬂict graph,
a vertex represents a link in the network and an edge between
two vertices is constructed when the corresponding links
interfere with each other, and time slots can be assigned to
links in the network by allocating different colors to adjacent
vertices in the conﬂict graph. However, since the vertex
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services









	

Random Placement
Gateway Node
Relay Node
Obstacle
Radio Wave Obstruction
Node   ‘s
Transmission Range








	

Grid Placement
Active Link

Node   ‘s
Interference Range

,
,
Figure 4.
Obstacle model
coloring problem is known to be NP-hard [15], heuristic
algorithms have been proposed for solving the problem [11],
[13], [16]. In this paper, we use the method proposed in [11]
to assign time slots to links for performance evaluation.
III. OBSTACLE MODEL
In this section, we introduce an obstacle model in which
obstacles are deployed in the network described in Section
II. We also examine the inﬂuence of obstacles on network
performance.
A. Obstacle model characteristics
Figure 4 shows the obstacle model, where rectangular
obstacles are deployed in the ﬁeld following two placement
patterns. In random placement, the obstacles are deployed
at random in the ﬁeld. In grid placement, on the other
hand, the obstacles are deployed in a grid pattern, with
the exception of the center of the ﬁeld, where the gateway
node is located. The side lengths of the obstacles are chosen
at random from within a certain range of values, and the
obstacles are placed parallel to the ﬁeld. The gateway node
and the relay nodes cannot be deployed at locations occupied
by obstacles. Although the inﬂuence of obstacles on radio
waves includes obstruction, reﬂection, and diffraction, in this
paper we consider only the obstruction of radio waves since
its effects on the performance of relay networks is the most
pronounced. We also ignore the height of the obstacles since
the network model is constructed in a plane.
B. Effects of obstacles in relay networks
The obstacle model in this work considers only the effects
of radio wave obstruction, which are described in this sub-
section. When the propagation of radio waves is obstructed
by obstacles, the connectivity and radio interference in the
network can change, either improving or degrading the
performance of the relay network. For example, in the left
panel of Fig. 4, l1,6 and l7,8 become disconnected due
to radio wave obstruction by an obstacle. In this case, v6
can connect to the network via v4. On the other hand, v8
is completely disconnected from the network by another
obstacle. This is a negative aspect of obstacles in relay
networks, owing to the increased number of isolated nodes




Active Link
Interference
Node     ‘s 
Transmission Range

Node     ‘s 
Interference Range

,
,




,
,
Obstacle
(b)
(a)
Figure 5.
The inﬂuence of obstacles on radio wave interference
and the higher average hop count between relay nodes and
the gateway node.
On the other hand, Fig. 5 shows an example of a beneﬁcial
effect of radio wave obstruction. Although in Fig. 5(a) li,j
and lp,q interfere with each other, by adding obstacles as
shown in Fig. 5(b), the interference range of vi is limited
and vq is not affected by interference from vi. As a result,
the addition of an obstacle allows these two links to transmit
simultaneously, which is a positive aspect of obstacles.
As described above, deploying obstacles entails both
advantages and disadvantages in terms of network perfor-
mance. Therefore, it is important to evaluate the performance
of relay networks in the presence of obstacles.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the inﬂuence of obstacles
on relay network performance by using the obstacle model
described in Section III.
A. Evaluation settings
In the simulation experiments, one gateway node was
placed at the center of a 1 × 1 square area, and 99 relay
nodes were distributed at random. Based on the protocol
model, the transmission range for all nodes was set to 0.15,
0.20, 0.25, 0.30, or 0.35 in consecutive experiments. The
ratio of the interference range to the transmission range was
set to 2 for all nodes. A directed transmission graph (Fig. 2)
was constructed with a tree topology rooted at the gateway
node such that the hop count between the gateway node and
each relay node was minimized. The number of obstacles
was set to 0, 25, or 50 in the case of random placement. For
the grid placement, we chose one the following placement
patterns: 3×3 (8 obstacles), 5×5 (24 obstacles), and 7×7 (48
obstacles). The length of the sides of each obstacle was set
to a random value between 0.01 and 0.1. The transmission
range of a node and the length of the sides of each obstacle
are relative value based on the size of simulation area. In
the simulation, the detail of distribution function is not taken
into account.
We monitored the service ratio and the power-to-
throughput ratio as measures of network performance. The
service ratio is the ratio of the area where the relay network
can provide service to the overall ﬁeld area, excepting the
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

 80
 85
 90
 95
 100
 85
 90
 95
 100
Service ratio [%]
Connected nodes
No Obstacles
Obstacles (Random) :  25
Obstacles (Random) :  50
Obstacles (Grid) : 3x3
Obstacles (Grid) : 5x5
Obstacles (Grid) : 7x7
(a) Service ratio
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 85
 90
 95
 100
Power-to-throughput ratio
Connected nodes
No Obstacles
Obstacles (Random) :  25
Obstacles (Random) :  50
Obstacles (Grid) : 3x3
Obstacles (Grid) : 5x5
Obstacles (Grid) : 7x7
(b) Power-to-throughput ratio
Figure 6.
Effect of connected nodes on network performance
area of the obstacles, and the power-to-throughput ratio is the
value of the total power consumption of the nodes divided by
the gateway throughput. Here, the total power consumption
is deﬁned as the sum of the squares of the transmission
ranges of all connected nodes. In addition, the gateway
throughput is deﬁned as the ratio between the number of
time slots assigned to all links to the gateway node and
the frame length. We conducted 100,000 iterations of the
simulation experiments for each set of parameter settings,
where all results were divided according to the number
of connected nodes, and the average values were used for
performance evaluation.
B. Impact of obstacle placement pattern
Figure 6 shows the service ratio and the power-to-
throughput ratio as a function of the number of connected
nodes when the transmission range of the nodes is set
to 0.15. The x-axis of both graphs means the number of
connected nodes. Not that the value of less than 100 means
that there are some nodes disconnected from the network due
to radio wave obstruction by obstacles. The ﬁgure shows
that both measures increase as the number of connected
nodes increase, but there are differences between the two
plots. The service ratio in Fig. 6(a) decreases as the number
of obstacles increases, regardless of the placement pattern,
since radio wave propagation is obstructed by obstacles.
On the other hand, the power-to-throughput ratio in Fig.
6(b) does not display such a simple trend. In the case of
grid placement, the power-to-throughput ratio decreases as
the number of obstacles increases, whereas in the case of
random placement, the ratio increases together with the
number of obstacles. The reason for this is as follows.
In random placement, the obstacles are deployed at ran-
dom in the ﬁeld, and therefore a link to the gateway node
is likely to become disconnected due to the radio wave
obstruction by obstacles. Therefore, the number of nodes
connected to the gateway node decreases, which results
in a decreased gateway throughput. On the other hand, in
grid placement, since the obstacles are regularly spaced, the
number of nodes connected to the gateway node is barely
affected. As a result, the gateway throughput is improved
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 5
 75
 80
 85
 90
 95
 100
Power-to-throughput ratio
Service ratio [%]
100
80
100
80
100
86
100
92
100
94
95
Transmission range: 0.35
Transmission range: 0.30
Transmission range: 0.25
Transmission range: 0.20
Transmission range: 0.15
Figure 7.
Effect of transmission range on network performance
since the interference is reduced effectively due to the
presence of obstacles. Therefore, we ﬁnd that the service
ratio is unaffected by the placement pattern of obstacles,
but the power-to-throughput ratio is sensitive to the obstacle
placement pattern.
C. Effect of the transmission range
Figure 7 shows the relation between the service ratio and
the power-to-throughput ratio when the transmission range
of the nodes is set to 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, and 0.35. In
this case, 50 obstacles are placed at random. In the graph,
the number of connected nodes is indicated for each plot,
where the number of connected nodes increases from left
to right and the rightmost point indicates the average value
when the number of connected nodes is 100.
We focus on the plots denoted with squares in the ﬁgure
when the number of connected nodes is 95. Here, we
consider two methods for improving the service ratio. One
involves increasing the transmission range of the nodes, and
the other involves deploying additional nodes in the network.
As shown in Fig. 7, when the transmission range of the
nodes is increased, the power-to-throughput ratio increases
rapidly as the service ratio increases. On the other hand,
by deploying additional nodes in the ﬁeld, the service ratio
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.05
 0.1
 0.15
 0.2
CDF
Relative error of service ratio
No Obstacles
Obstacles (Random) :  25
Obstacles (Random) :  50
Obstacles (Grid) : 3x3
Obstacles (Grid) : 5x5
Obstacles (Grid) : 7x7
(a) Service ratio
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
CDF
Relative error of power-to-throughput ratio
No Obstacles
Obstacles (Random) :  25
Obstacles (Random) :  50
Obstacles (Grid) : 3x3
Obstacles (Grid) : 5x5
Obstacles (Grid) : 7x7
(b) Power-to-throughput ratio
Figure 8.
Relative error between regression equation results and simulation results
can be enhanced with a small increase of the power-to-
throughput ratio. Therefore, the deployment of additional
nodes improves the service ratio more effectively than an
increase of the transmission range of the nodes.
V. METHOD FOR ESTIMATING NETWORK PERFORMANCE
In this section, we present a method for estimating the
performance of relay networks on the basis of simulation
results and regression analysis.
A. Regression equations
In the process of constructing a network, the ability to
estimate network performance before the network is actually
constructed is highly valuable. For example, such perfor-
mance estimation enables the number of nodes deployed
in the network or the transmission range of the nodes to
be adjusted in order to achieve pre-determined performance
goals such as service ratio, network throughput, and power
consumption. Therefore, as a method for estimating network
performance, we derived regression equations based on the
simulation results presented in the previous section. Specif-
ically, the equations for the service ratio and the power-
to-throughput ratio are denoted as S(n, t, d) and P(n, t, d),
where n, t, and d represent the number of connected
nodes in the network, the transmission range of the nodes,
and the distribution density of obstacles, respectively. The
distribution density of obstacles is deﬁned as the ratio of
the area of obstacles to the overall area. All parameters
are normalized to fall within the range between 0 and 1.
The following regression equations can be derived from the
simulation results. The details of the regression analysis are
omitted due to space limitations.
S(n, t, d)
=
92.8n + 22.8t2 − 14.3d + 7.87
(1)
P(n, t, d)
=
2.34n + 11.3t − 2.28d − 1.30
(2)
The performance of relay networks can be estimated by
using the above equations. In order to examine the accuracy
of the equations, the estimation values from the equations
are compared with the simulation results in the following
subsections, where the relative error is used as a measure of
accuracy.
B. Evaluation of the regression equation accuracy
Figure 8 shows the respective distributions of the relative
error for the service ratio and the power-to-throughput ratio
with several values for the number of obstacles in the case
of both placement patterns. The accuracy of the equations
is clearly high regardless of the obstacle placement pattern
and the number of obstacles in the network. In particular,
for the service ratio (Fig. 8(a)), the relative error for 95% of
the results is within 0.1. For the power-to-throughput ratio
in Fig. 8(b), the relative error for about 90% of results is
within 0.2. These results show that Eqs. (1) and (2) can
provide accurate estimates of network performance without
simulation experiments.
C. Campus model
Finally, to evaluate the accuracy of the equations in a more
realistic situation, simulation experiments and performance
estimation with Eqs. (1) and (2) were conducted with respect
to actual obstacles on the Osaka University campus, as
shown in Fig. 9.
Figure 10 shows a comparison between the estimation and
simulation results for different transmission ranges. In the
graph, lines without plotted points represent the estimation
results, and ones with plotted points represent the simulation
results. When the number of connected nodes is between 75
and 85, the results of estimation and simulation are close;
however, as the number of connected nodes increases further,
the error between the two results becomes large, because
in the campus model, radio wave propagation is obstructed
more frequently as a result of the large number of obstacles
and the difference in shape and size of each obstacle in
the ﬁeld as compared with those in the obstacle model
with random and grid placement. Therefore, although the
service ratio is difﬁcult to improve, the number of connected
nodes increases. The another reason is the heterogeneous
distribution of obstacles in the ﬁeld as shown in Fig. 9,
while both obstacle placement patterns in this paper assume
the homogeneous distribution.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 9.
Campus model
 70
 75
 80
 85
 90
 95
 100
 75
 80
 85
 90
 95
 100
Service ratio [%]
Connected nodes
Transmission range: 0.35
Transmission range: 0.30
Transmission range: 0.25
Transmission range: 0.20
Figure 10.
Comparison between estimation and simulation results
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the performance of IEEE 802.16j multi-
hop networks was investigated by considering the presence
of obstacles, where the obstacle model was deﬁned as an
extension of the protocol model. Simulation experiments
based on using the obstacle model revealed that the obstacle
placement pattern does not affect the service ratio, but
does greatly affect the power-to-throughput ratio. A method
for estimating the performance of relay networks on the
basis of regression analysis was also provided in this study,
and a comparison between the simulation results and the
estimation results derived from the regression equations
conﬁrmed that the equations can yield an accurate estimation
of network performance. However, in testing the model with
respect to a real-world environment (a university campus),
the accuracy of the equations was found to be lower than in
the case of random and grid placement due to differences in
the characteristics of the obstacles, such as shape and size,
and the distribution characteristics of obstacles.
Future work will be directed toward applying other radio
interference models using signal-to-interference-plus-noise
ratio in order to consider other effects of obstacles, such
as reﬂection and diffraction of radio waves. Moreover, addi-
tional research will be conducted with the aim to increase the
accuracy of the regression equations, especially with respect
to real-world networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by KAKENHI 23700079.
REFERENCES
[1] IEEE Std 802.16j, IEEE standard for local and metropolitan
area networks, Part 16: Air interface for ﬁxed broadband
wireless access systems, Jun. 2009.
[2] S. W. Peters and R. W. H. Jr, “The future of WiMAX: Multi-
hop relaying with IEEE 802.16j,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 1, pp. 104–111, Jan. 2009.
[3] D. Gohsh, A. Gupta, and P. Mohapatra, “Scheduling in mul-
tihop WiMAX networks,” ACM SIGMOBILE Mobile Com-
puting and Communication Review, vol. 12, pp. 1–11, Apr.
2008.
[4] C. Y. Hong and A. C. Pang, “3-approximation algorithm for
joint routing and link scheduling in wireless relay networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 856–861, Feb. 2009.
[5] H. Y. Wei, S. Ganguly, R. Izmailov, and Z. J. Haas,
“Interference-aware IEEE 802.16 WiMAX mesh networks,”
in Proc. IEEE VTC 2005, pp. 3102–3106, May 2005.
[6] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “The capacity of wireless net-
works,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 46,
pp. 388–404, Mar. 2000.
[7] H. Venkataraman, A. K. P. Kalyampudi, J. McManis, and
G. M. Muntean, “Clustered architecture for adaptive multime-
dia streaming in WiMAX-based cellular networks,” in Proc.
WCECS 2009, pp. 753–758, Oct. 2009.
[8] P. Thulasiraman and X. S. Shen, “Interference aware sub-
carrier assignment for throughput maximization in OFDMA
wireless relay mesh networks,” in Proc. ICC 2009, pp. 14–18,
Jun. 2009.
[9] C. Cicconetti, I. F. Akyildiz, and L. Lenzini, “Bandwidth
balancing in multi-channel IEEE 802.16 wireless mesh net-
works,” in Proc. INFOCOM 2007, pp. 6–12, May 2007.
[10] Y. Lu and G. Zhang, “Maintaining routing tree in IEEE
802.16 centralized scheduling mesh networks,” in Proc. IC-
CCN 2007, pp. 240–245, Aug. 2007.
[11] W. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Y. Li, W. Z. Song, and O. Frieder,
“Efﬁcient interference-aware TDMA link scheduling for static
wireless networks,” in Proc. MobiCom 2006, pp. 262–273,
Sep. 2006.
[12] L. Kleinrock and J. Silvester, “Spatial reuse in multihop
packet radio networks,” in Proc. the IEEE, vol. 75, pp. 156–
167, Jan. 1987.
[13] M. V. Marathe, H. Breu, H. B. Hunt, S. S. Ravi, and
D. J. Rosenkrantz, “Simple heuristics for unit disk graph,”
Networks, vol. 25, pp. 59–68, Sep. 1995.
[14] K. Jain, J. Padhye, V. N. Padmanabhan, and L. Qiu, “Impact
of interference on multi-hop wireless network performance,”
Wireless Networks, vol. 11, pp. 471–487, Jul. 2005.
[15] S. Khanna, N. Linial, and S. Safra, “On the hardness of ap-
proximating the chromatic number,” Combinatorica, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 393–415, Mar. 2000.
[16] W. Klotz, “Graph coloring algorithms,” Mathematical report
TU-Clausthal, vol. 5, pp. 1–9, May 2002.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

