Application of Human Profiling by Agent for Activating Human Communication
Masafumi Katoh,
Junichi Suga,
Yuji Kojima,
Masaaki Kawai
Service Centric Network Research Center
Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd.
Kamikodanaka 4-1-1, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan
email:{katou.masafumi, suga.junichi, kojima.yuuji, kawai.masaaki}@fujitsu.com
Abstract—In this paper, we propose to put an agent in
the network to help activate human communication. Our
hypothesis is that human behavior depends both on a
static profile and a dynamic context. So, we verify our
hypothesis by performing repeated experiments. In our
experiments, one author acted as the agent and collected
many responses from members in an organization. As a
result, an effective messaging style can be found by
understanding their profile. Next, we categorize their
profiles into stubborn one and flexible one. A small
amount of data could not make any impact on the
members with the stubborn profile, but made an impact
on those with the flexible profile, depending on their
context.
So,
we
confirm
that
the
agent
should
understand the profile and context of the object persons,
and transform the data to effectively convey the client’s
intention. Finally, we address a design method of human
profiling agent.
Keywords- context; profile; agent; human communication;
message; CPS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
People spend a lot of time in the cyber world in
business and daily life because of the popularity in World
Wide Web services [1][2]. Combining sensor data with the
Web by Internet of Things (IoT) [3], data in the physical
world are applied for various context-aware applications [4].
Even a hand gesture can be interpreted in cyber world with
the advanced wearable devices [5]. Such trend suggests a
Cyber-Physical System (CPS) will gradually be positioned,
in which various context data can be handled.
However, we often feel frustrated in communication.
Reference
[6]
broadly
defines
communication
as
all
procedures by which one’s mind affects another. The
authors have categorized problems of communication into
three
levels:
i)
accuracy
of
transmitted
symbol,
ii)
preciseness of conveyed symbol, and iii) effectiveness of
received meaning to lead the receiver’s conducts. Our
objective is the 3rd level, that is, to build networking
environment where the information sender can effectively
transmit his/her intention, emotion, dearness and so on.
On the other hand, problems for the receiver are
predominantly caused by the imbalance between the human
perception and the volume of input data. It is known that the
average human ability to percept information through eye or
ear is limited to 223 bps or 105 bps, respectively [7]. So,
excessive data will interfere in the human cognition, and
will frustrate people, as follows.
A)
People take a lot of time mining data with value.
B)
People receive many data that could miss the mark.
For example, although they hit the category like
classical music, they never hit the favorite composer in
a short time.
C)
People receive data when it is not useful. For example,
the announcement of the disruption of the commuting
train service just before they arrive at the transit station
is too late.
In summary, a data sender wants to convey his/her intent
to a receiver. Then, we envision that a software agent
mediates between them through the network since the agent
could quickly process a lot of data without vital limitation or
emotional barrier.
We will model the human agent and verify its effect. In
Section II, we briefly review the trend of past studies about
context awareness and an agent as the related works. In
Section III, we show our hypothesis on human behavior that
is based on the static profile and the dynamic context of
object persons [8]. In Section IV, we describe the model of
the proposed human agent and its role. In this paper, the
human agent aims to activate the receiver’s reaction by
modifying the input data from the client. In Section V, we
evaluate the effectiveness to figure out the profile and the
context to activate the reaction of the object persons through
repeated experiments. In our experiments, an author of this
paper acts as the agent in place of the software program. In
Section VI, we discuss how to design the human agent. Here,
the design procedures in our experiment are categorized into
those that are programed by designers and those that are
automatically implemented as algorithm by the agent.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Many studies on context awareness have been performed
in the past decade [9]. Typical use scenarios are a dynamic
resource allocation by referring to user status and network
environment [10] [11]. Other scenarios are service control,
such as the screen structure of a mobile terminal that is
switched depending on the user’s location [12]. Most studies
have assumed that the role of the context information could
be common to everybody. However, the significance of
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

context information must be different to each person. So, we
want to coordinate the context and the human profile.
We proposed to have an agent assist the data process in
place of person. Actually, a lot of studies on the agent have
already been done from various viewpoints [13]. The typical
applications of agent is personal assistance [14][15] and the
agent provides the means of a specific issue. For example, an
agent categorizing data was proposed for personal data
market [16]. A personal agent mediating personal knowledge
management like transformation between tacit and explicit
knowledge was proposed too [17]. The design of the multi-
agent has already begun to be studied and the agent’s
ontology model was proposed [18][19]. Further, remarking
the penetration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) speaker or
personal agent
in
mobile phones,
it
is clear
that
a
conversation between a person and AI has progressed
[20][21].
Our viewpoint is different from others since we assume
three kinds of stakeholders, i.e., a client, object persons, and
3rd parties. Our agent assists the client to preferentially
convey his/her messages to the object persons while referring
to the profile of the object persons and the context around
them.
III.
REQUIREMENTS AND HYPOTHISIS
A. General requirements for human communication
Let us describe our approach to activate human
communication. Problem A) in Section I will be resolved by
searching valuable data and filtering out trivial data by an
agent understanding human profile such as concern or taste.
Problem B) can be improved by matching between the input
data and the receiver’s profile. Problem C) is caused by
missing the receiver’s timely requests. This issue will be
resolved
by
understanding
his/her
external
context.
Repeatedly, the value of input data is varied depending on
various elements such as the personality, mind, timing and
place. Therefore, we have proposed to put an agent in the
network, which figures out the profile and the context of the
object persons [8].
B.
Hypothesis and terminologies
Let us discuss factors that affect a person who may
react. We divide the impact factors into a static human
profile and a dynamic human context, as shown in Table I
and Figure 1.
A person grows through the experience with sensory
information and language [22]. Then, the personality has
been formed for a long period and it is relatively static. The
personality is thought the principle how to feel, think and
act, and cannot easily be changed by a small number of
messages. We call the abstraction of the personality a
human profile (profile from now on) which a third party
characterizes through the observation.
On the other hand, we call the dynamic elements a
human
context
(context
from
now
on).
Further,
we
categorize the contexts into 3 elements: (1) internal context,
(2) external context and (3) data input [8][23]. An internal
context is the internal state of a person such as mind, an
emotion and a vital condition. It is thought to be the
dynamic part around the profile and can be changed even by
a small number of messages. An external context is an
external state around the person such as time, place,
company and belongings. Data input is a kind of change of
the external context. However, we conveniently divide the
data input from the external context since the data is an
object which Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT) can process, even though the data is originally
generated based on the sender’s intention. Further, the
person cannot control most of the external context like time.
However, the person can switch the various external
contexts by acting such as talking with colleagues, writing a
document, walking or running, etc.
TABLE I. IMPACT FACTORES ON HUMAN BEHAVIOR
Elements
Examples of element affecting person
Static
Profile
Full name, Mother language, Gender,
Age, Contact address, Address, Career
and
title,
Financial
resource
or
borrowing, Record of health/illness
Dynamic
Internal
Context
Will, Desire, Mind, Emotion,
Physical
condition
External
Context
Time, Place, Accompanies, Belongings,
Social events, Natural phenomenon
Data input
Dialog, Chat, E-mail, Phone call, SNS,
News, Papers, Books
Figure 1. Hypothesis about impact factors on human reactions.
The horizontal line of Figure 1 represents time. The
person encounters various external contexts including data
input. Although the profile grows gradually, the internal
context is dynamically moved by the change of external
context. As a result, the person will react by talking with
friends, writing a document, expressing emotion, and going
somewhere.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

IV.
PROPOSAL OF HUMAN AGENT
A.
Proposed human agent for activating communication
We propose to introduce a human agent between a
sender of information and a receiver of data. The agent
prompts receiver’s reaction according to the intention of its
client [23]. Here, a client is defined as someone who
specifies the role of the agent. Not only the object person
oneself, but also somebody else could be the client. For
example, the object person oneself may hire the agent as
his/her secretary, and his/her parents may hire the agent as a
tutor of their child. It is noted that the client must have a
piece of the profile because they have already accompanied
the object person.
Figure 2 shows the basic model of the human agent
between the client and the object persons. The agent tries to
make the lively reaction of the object persons by moving
their internal context. It temporarily keeps input data which
the client sends, and transforms the data so as to meet the
client’s intention. At that time, the agent refers the profile of
the object persons. It is noted that the profile is just an
abstraction of the personality through observation. So, the
profile is not necessarily true. Further, it is not fixed forever,
since the person grows. Therefore, although a designer
initially sets the profile which is told by the client, the agent
should update it through the observation of the persons’
actual reaction. So, the agent must have a feedback
mechanism which monitors the information output or
reactions to the data input because it is difficult to directly
measure the internal context.
Figure 2. Model of human agent for activating communication.
Currently, we position the agent as an application
program to communicate with the client, the object persons
and a huge number of third parties, as in Figure 2. Any
computing resource is acceptable to carry on the agent
program, such as terminal equipment and the node in the
Internet or a data center as long as it can communicate with
the above stakeholders. If we were to use one word, the
entity for the agent should be located at the center among
the stakeholders to save network resource [8].
B.
Transformation of input data from the client
This paper focuses on the agent to convey the intention
of the client to the object persons, even though the object
person must be frustrated due to the excessive data of little
interest. We assume that the agent is prohibited to abandon
or change any data from the third parties since it could be
significant to the receiver. What the agent can do is to
transform the input data from the client.
Table II is the alternatives of transformation to affect
the person. To senior people, for example, message with
high volume voice can easily be understood, but small size
letters are never welcome. It cannot be doubted that A, B or
C in Table II are effective depending on their profile such as
age and mother tongue. Therefore, we will evaluate the
effect of D and E in the remaining sections.
TABLE II. POSSIBLE TRANSFORMATIONS OF INPUT DATA BY
AGENT
Transformed objects
Example of transformations
A)
Language
Translate message to mother language
B)
Displayed form
Select
displayed
form
such
as
voice/text/graph/picture/animation/video
C)
Size or volume
Adjust letter size or audio volume
D)
Message style
Select message style and arrange timing
to send
E)
Expression
or
rhetoric
Change tone of words such as order,
modest request, or heartstrings
C. Metric of human agent for positive response
Let us assume a scenario where a client wants to know
lively opinions of members in his/her organization. Then,
the client hires the human agent profiling a set of object
members. The agent tries to have the members respond as
much as possible by transforming the request message for
the opinion survey. The mere repeat of requests must be
annoying and ineffective since the human recognition
capability has a limit. So, the agent must find a smart
presentation style of the data from the client without
increasing the amount of data. Considering the above, we
define “response rate” as a metric for activating their level.

Response rate (r) of a person is expressed by no/ni
no: the number of output information, i.e., response
ni: the number of input data, i.e., request for response

Response rate (R) of a set of object persons is
expressed byΣ (no/ni) p(no, ni) / N.
p(no, ni): the number of members such that no
responses to ni requests. Here, N is the total number of
object persons, i.e., examinees in later.
The human agent cuts and tries to transform the
request message from the client to collect many responses
while observing the reactions of the object persons.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

V.
EXPRIMENTS
A.
Method of agent’s simulation
Considering that a software agent is developed by
designers, it cannot execute logical judgement beyond that
of the designers. In our experiments, an author, M. Katoh,
acts as the agent in place of the designer since he knows the
clients profiles and recognizes their context. Next, we
analyze our procedure from the view point of the feasibility
by software. The purposes of the experiments are as follows.
1. Verifying hypothesis that the profile of the object person
is essential to move him/her in experiment I.
2. Verifying hypothesis that the context of the object
person is important to activate him/her in experiment II.
3. Addressing how to design the agent which refers to the
profile and the external context of the object person.
Instead of the software, Katoh requested to return
examinees’ opinions as much as possible by e-mail. The
number of examinees “N” is 42 or 30 in the experiments I or
II, respectively. The question form includes 3 or 4 choices
for answer so that they will respond for a few minutes. The
deadline of response was for 48 hours so that they have
couple of chances to check their received e-mails.
For experiment I, Katoh modified the message style
and expression, and observed responses from 42 examinees
to find out an effective presentation style. Table III
summarizes the presentation styles for 7 trials. One request
mail includes one question and choices for answer as
indicated in APPENDIX. Here, we took care that the content
of the question does not impact their reaction since we want
to observe the impact by message style or expression. That
is, the questions should be nearly equal to interest them in
each trial. So, considering that all examinees are researchers
on ICT, he asked them about the high-level view about ICT.
TABLE III. PRESENTATION FOR EXPERIMENT I
(Examinees N=42)
Trial)
Date
D) Message style
E) Rhetoric
(Naming, Additional data)
#1) 1/24
(I)
Requset: 1 to N
(multicast by mailing
list)
Response: 1 to 1
①
Minimum as standard
#2) 1/29
②
①+Result of #1
#3) 2/1
③
Individual
name
+
Result of #2
#4) 2/6
④
③+Confidence policy
+ Result of #3
#5) 2/14
(II)
Request: 1 to 1
Response: 1 to 1
⑤
Individual name
#5.5)
⑥
Remind for #5
#6) 2/20
⑦
⑤ + Result of #5
#7) 2/27
(III)
Request:1 to 6 groups
Response: 1 to group
(sharing in the group)
⑧
Division to 6 groups.
What is your group’s
choice?
Here, the presentation style such as D) message style
and E) rhetoric was changed for the series of trials. Figure 3
shows 3 message styles. The style (I) is that the request was
sent in multicast (1 to N) by using the mailing list. Each
examinee returns his/her answer to Katoh’s address (1 to 1).
The style (II) is a normal 1 to 1 communication. In the styles
(I) and (II), all responses were gathered by only Katoh. To
avoid
this
moral
hazard
due
to
the
asymmetry
of
information,
the
style
(III)
adopts
a
mesh
type
communication (n to n). Here, 42 examinees were divided
into 6 groups, and they shared his/her response in the group.
Figure 3. Message styles for experiment I.
TABLE IV. REQUEST TIMING FOR EXPERIMENT II
(Examinees N=30)
Traial)
Date
D)
Message style
Style
Request timing
#1) 5/24
(II)
Request: 1 to 1
Response: 1 to 1
Visual check
Absence
#2) 5/29
Presence
#3) 6/4
Due to open
scheduler in
the
organization
Before meeting
#4) 6/14
During meeting
#5) 6/21
During meeting
#6) 7/17
Available
#7) 8/1
Visual
check
Presence
#8) 8/7
Presence
In experiment II, Katoh sent the request mail for an
opinion survey to 30 examinees. In this experiment, the
message style was fixedly (II) since we wanted to find out
not an effective style, but an effective context. Table IV
summarizes requesting timings for 8 trials of this opinion
survey. One mail includes one question and 3 or 4 options
for answer, as in APPENDIX. Again, the contents for
question should equally be interesting to them. So, he asked
them about “working style” as a popular issue in Japan.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

B.
Results of experiement I
Figure 4 shows the results of 8 trials during about 6
weeks. The blue bars represent the number of responses, and
the red broken line represents the response rate (R).
Figure 4. Transition of reactions in the experiment I.
In the message style (I) using mailing list for 42
examinees, the number of responding examines declined
from 18 in the trial #1 to 10 in the trial #4. Although their
curiosity seemed being stimulated at the trials #1 or #2, they
may have gotten fatigued after trial #3. According to reports
of opinion surveys for business persons, more than 2,300 in
Japan, the average number of received and transmitted e-
mails per day are about 40 and 13, respectively [24]. So, the
average rate of information output to data input is 13/40 =
0.32 as a standard response rate. R in the message style (I)
declined from 0.42 to 0.24, which is lower than the standard
response rate. During this period, the rhetoric was devised
with an addition of the result for the previous trial, as in
Table III. However, we could not observe the effectiveness
at all. Rather, we observed that 62% of responses were
returned within 2 hours. About 10 new e-mails pile in one’s
inbox during a meeting of 2 hours. So, the most valuable e-
mails must first be responded after returning to his/her desk.
As a result, the priority of the voluntary reaction becomes
lower than secondary. That is, the effectiveness of our
request is gradually weakened and lost for a couple of hours.
In the message style (II), Katoh sent 42 request mails
to 42 examinees by using individual addresses. Further, the
rhetoric is changed as in Table III. For example, the
addressing
style
changed
from
“Hi,
everybody”
to
“Addressing by individual full name”. The number of
responses of the trials #5 and #6 are 28 and 29, respectively.
It can be recovered in a V-formation, and R is over 0.67. So,
we conclude that individual name and mail address play an
important profile to get many responses. In the trial #5.5, he
sent explicit reminder e-mails to 14 examinees having not
responded yet, and then received 8 responses. It is noted that
the response rate 8/14 of the second request for reminder is
slightly lower than that of the initial response rate of 28/42.
This fact means the request for only cool persons for the
voluntary activity is lower than the average.
In the message style (III), we divided the 42 examinees
into 6 groups according to the actual project in the
organization. Katoh sent request mails to 6 groups and
asked to share the response in the group. This style was
effective to stimulate each other in the group. The number
of responses became 33 and the response rate R became the
best, 0.87. The first reason is due to the effectiveness of one
request. Since one request mail is shared for 7 examinees,
the probability that 7 examinees are incognizant can be
reduced. The second reason is due to the reminder being
sent several times. That is, someone’s response is shared,
and so it can play a role of reminding others that they have
not responded yet. That is, an original request will
repeatedly be valid. So, we conclude that the organization
structure as their profile plays an important role to get many
responses. In fact, the response times were slightly more
distributed than others.
C.
Results of experiment II
Figure 5 shows the results of 8 trials during about 10
weeks. Katoh sent the request mail to return their opinions
by the message style (II). The blue bars represent the
number of responses, and the red broken line represents the
response rate R. In the trials #1 and #2, 26 examinees have
responded, and R is unexpectedly high 0.87. So, we had to
try to reduce R by finding out an inconvenient time due to
their schedule management system. That is, for the trials #3,
#4 and #5, he sent the request mail just before or during the
meeting time. As a result, the number of responses was
reduced to 21 or 22, and R became lower to 0.7. We
succeeded to reduce the number of responses, but it was not
so dynamic. We think that the request timings in Table IV
are all during working hours, so there is no drastic change of
the external context. We got just 20 responses in the trial #6
even though we sent request mails at an available time
according to the calendar. We think that the calendar is not
necessary true to express their actual availability.
Figure 5. Transition of reactions in the experiment II.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

It is sure that the variation of response of Figure 4 is
more dynamic than that of Figure 5. That is, the mail
address of the request message is the most dominant factor
to get a positive response even though the request timing
slightly impacts their reaction.
Figure 6 shows the examinees’ characteristics. The
horizontal line is the number of responses for 8 trials and the
vertical line is the number of examinees. We can categorize
30 examinees into 3 groups. Group A is a set of positive 15
(50%) examinees who responded to all requests. Conversely,
group B is a set of cool 2 (6.7%) examinees who never
responded to any requests by voluntary cooperation. We
define their profile as “stubborn”, which strongly dominates
their reaction. In other words, a small number of messages
cannot impact their reaction.
Figure 6. Characteristics of examinees and the category of profile.
Group C is a set of “flexible” 13 examinees who
responded 2~7 times. Such reaction depends on external
context. That is, if they receive the request when they are
available, they respond for a couple of hours. Nevertheless,
they lose the chance to return their opinions. Therefore, we
conclude that the response of our questionnaire dominantly
depends on the stubborn profile. Next, the reaction of
flexible examinees depends on their availability, that is,
their context.
VI. CONSIDERATIONS
A. Verification of our hypotheisis

Effectiveness of predetermined-profile
Static profile such as individual name, email address,
etc., can be pre-determined. It was clear that such profile
played an important role to adopt the messaging style (II) to
activate reactions of object persons. Further, by knowing the
structure of the organization, the agent was able to adopt the
message style (III), and got very high R, such as 0.85. If the
client did not respond, the agent would have to try the
possible
arrangement
of
6
groups
from
42
persons.
Considering
that
there
are
42!/(7!)6
=
8.57x1028
combinations, such cut and try approach is never feasible.

Effectiveness of learned-profile
Through two experiments, we learned examinees
personality, and were able to roughly predict the response
rate R. Table V shows the result of the additional trial using
the message style (III) for 3 groups consisting of 7
examinees. Before this trail, we averaged past response rate
in experiment I for each examinee (in the second column of
Table V). The third column shows our expectation of the
number of responses in the group, in which Bernoulli trails
are assumed. The right columns are the results, which are
close to our expectation.
TABLE V. EXPECTED RESPONSE NUMBER BASED ON PAST
RESULTS
Group
Average response
rate in the group
Our expectation based
on Bernoulli trial
Result
X
0.142
0.99
1
Y
0.751
4.0
6
Z
0.768
5.38
5
That is, the agent can roughly predict R by learning the
profile through a number of trials, and brush up the profile
of object persons. The group Y was more active than our
expectation based on Bernoulli trials. This means that the
reaction in group Y is more active than an independent trial,
as described in Section V-B.

Effectiveness of context awareness
We observed that examinees’ reactions depend on their
external context, as described in Section V-C. Especially,
the request timing is crucial in order for flexible persons to
be aware of the client’s message and to react.
B. Design Methodology
Although an author played the role of an agent for
experiments, the agent must be described as a software
program. Then, a key question is whether our cut and try
approach in Section V can be described as a software. So,
we classify the procedures into the manually coded ones and
the algorithm based one. The former must be developed by
designers based on the intent of the client, and the latter can
automatically be executed by the agent. Figure 7 shows our
current view. The dashed arrows represent the message flow
by the human agent.

Manually coded procedures by designer
A designer should define the role of the agent based on
the
client’s
requirement.
The
designer
specifies
the
measurable metric to evaluate the effectiveness of the
operation by the agent. Simultaneously, the client tells the
designer the predetermined profile of the object persons.
Next, the designer must set the possible methods which the
agent can choose. In our experiments, alternatives such as 3
message styles, rhetoric transformation and request timing
are set prior to the actual operation.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services


Automatic procedure by algorithm in the agent
In the online operation, the human agent dynamically
chooses one method among pre-set alternatives for data
input from the client to effectively transfer the client’s
intention. In the procedure, the agent refers the profile and
the
context
of
object
person.
Concerning
rhetoric
transformation, it is feasible to replace some words into
stylized words based on a rule. Further, the agent measures
the effectiveness of the selected method by monitoring
reaction, and brushes up the profile.
Figure 7. A design method of the human agent.
- Manual programming or Algorithm -
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We
have
verified
our
hypothesis
about
human
behavior through repeated experiments. One of the authors
acted as the human agent to activate communication in an
organization. As a result, we have found the effective
messaging style that got about 1.5 times of responses by
understanding predetermined profiles such as individual
name and email address, and organization structure. Next,
we have categorized examinees’ profiles into “stubborn
ones” and “flexible ones”. The behavior of examinees with
stubborn profile could not be changed by a small number of
messages. However, the examinees with flexible profile
became reactive by requesting it at their available time. So,
we conclude that human communication can be activated by
figuring out the profile and the context of the object persons.
Therefore, the human agent should have the knowledge
about the context as well as the profile of the object persons.
Further, we have clarified that the agent was able to brush
up their profile by observing the actual reaction of the object
persons. Finally, we classified the procedures in our
experiments
into
manually
coded
by
designers
and
automatically implemented by algorithm implemented in the
agent to address our design method of the human agent.
In the near future, we will refine the suitable location
of processing entity to execute the agent program. In this
paper, we assumed a stand-alone agent between the client
and the object persons. Considering that a huge number of
agents play various roles in the entire network in the future,
the communication between agents will be required. This is
also an open issue.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We appreciate all the volunteers in Fujitsu Laboratories
for joining our experiments. Further, we would like to thank
Mr. Makoto Murakami, Mr. Akio John Iwata, and Mr.
Teruhisa Ninomiya for their encouragements and helpful
suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1]
NETCRAFT
“Web
Server
Survey,”
January
2017.
https://news.netcraft.com/archives/2017/01/12/january-2017-
web-server-survey.html , retrieved April, 2019.
[2]
Internet 2012 in numbers. https://royal.pingdom.com/internet-
2012-in-numbers/, retrieved April, 2019.
[3]
IEEE communication society “COMSOC 2020 Report,” pp.
59-62, December 2011.
[4]
H. Yamaoka, et al., “Dracena: A Real-Time IoT Service
Platform Based on Flexible Composition of Data Streams,”
2019
IEEE/SICE
International
Symposium
on
System
Integrations (SII 2019).
[5]
S. Rajeev, “Seven Sense Technplogy,” 2015 IEEE UP Section
Conference on Electrical Computer and Electronics.
[6]
C. E. Shannon and W. Weaber, “The Mathematical Theory of
Communication,” University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1964.
[7]
S. K. Card and T. P. Moran, “The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction,” Allen Newell, 1983.
[8]
M. Katoh, et al., “Proposal of a Personal Agent for Human
Centric Information Networking,” ICOIN 2018.
[9]
M. Wiser“The Computer for the 21st Century”
Mobile
Computing and Communications Review, Volume 3, Number
3, 1991.
[10] M. Katoh, A. Okada, and T. Kato, “The concept and model of
4 dimensional traffic engineering,”
ICNS 2006.
[11] M. Katoh, Y. Tajima, H. Senoo, and D. Kimura, “Context
aware
cell
selection
in
heterogeneous
radio
access
environment,” AINA2017.
[12] I.
Iida
and
T.
Morita,
“Overview
of
Human-Centric
Computing,” FUJITSU Sci. Tech. J., Vol.48，No2, pp.124-
128, April, 2012.
[13] S. Kurihara “Artificial Intelligence” IEICE 100th Annalistic
publication Section 2, 6.3 p388-389, (in Japanese) September,
2017.
[14] T. Nishigaya, T. Kurita, I. Iida, and K. Murakami, “Proposal
of Agent-based Network Architecture,” IEICE Trans., B-I Vol.
J79-B-I No.5, pp.216-225, 1996.
[15] T-C Huang, C-S Yang, S-W Bai and S-H Wang, “An Agent
and Profile Management System for Mobile Users and
Service Providers,” AINA 2003.
[16] A. Yassine, A. A. N. Shirehjini, S. Shirmohammadi, and T. T.
Tran, “An Intelligent Agent-Based Model for Future Personal
Information Markets,” 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM International
Conference on
Web
Intelligence and
Intelligent
Agent
Technology, 2010.
[17] S. Ismail, M. S. Ahmad and Z. Hassan, “Regression Analysis
on
Agent
Roles
in
Personal
Knowledge
Management
Processes -Significance of a Connect Agent in Mediating
Human’s Personal Knowledge Management-,” CITA2013.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

[18] S. Oishi, and N. Fukuta, “Toward a Flexible Ability Selection
Mechanism for Personal Assistant Agent using Ontology
Reasoning,” 2016 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference
on Web Intelligence Workshops, 2016.
[19] K. Urakawa and T. Sugawara “Reorganization of Agent
Networks
with
Reinforcement
Learning
based
on
Communication Delay” 2012 IEEE/WIC/ACM, International
Conference on Web Intelligence Workshops, 2012
[20] https://www.nttdocomo.co.jp/service/mydaiz/function/
(in
Japanese) retrieved April, 2019.
[21] J. Hill, W. R. Ford and I. G. Farreras, “Real conversations
with artificial intelligence: A comparison between
human–human
online
conversations
and
human–chatbot
conversations, ” Computers in Human Behavior 49 (2015):pp
245-250.
[22] H. Ando “Sensibility Information Processing” IEICE 100th
Annalistic publication Section 2, 6.1 p381-384 , (in Jpanese)
September, 2017.
[23] M. Katoh, M. Murakami, A. Yamada, J. Suga, M. Kawai and
M. Murakami “Views about Context Networking (3)” IEICE
Technical Report NS2018-8, (in Japanese) April, 2018.
[24] Japan Business Association, “Status survey of e-mail for
busines, 2016” (July 1, 2016) (in Japanese) retrieved April,
2019. http://businessmail.or.jp/archives/2016/07/01/5668
APPENDIX
Table A-I and Table A-II shows actual contents of the
opinion survey, i.e., question and choices for answer for our
experiments I and II, respectively.
TABLE A-I. INQUIRIES AND CHOICES FOR ANSWER FOR
EXPERIMENT I
Trial
Inquiry
Choices for answer
#1)
1/24
Memorized
telephone
number
a) 0~2, b)3~5, c) more
than 5
#2)
1/29
Communication tool for
close friend or family
a) Phone, b) Chat,
c)
Others
including
e-
mail
#3)
2/1
Number of transmitted
e-mails per day
a) 0~10, b) 11~20,
c) more than 20
#4)
2/6
How
many
terminals
can
you
have
for
a
walk?
a) 0~1, b) 2, c) more than
2
#5)
2/14
Can you allow AI to
join your meeting?
a) Yes, b) No, c) Others
（case by case）
#6)
2/20
What impression if AI
compliments you?
a) Good, b) Not good, c)
Others（timing）
#7)
2/28
Have
you
heard
the
terminology
“network
effect” and “information
asymmetry”?
a)
None,
b)
One,
c)
Both
TABLE A-II. INQUIRIES AND CHOICES FOR ANSWER FOR
EXPERIMENT II
Trial
Inquiry
Choices for answer
#1) 5/24
Do you like to listen
to
music
during
your job?
a) Often, b)When it is
noizy, c) No
#2) 5/29
Where do you have
lunch?
a)In office, b)Restaurant in
company, c)Restauramt
outside, d)Others
#3) 6/4
How to get news?
a)Broadcast, b) Internet, c)
Newspaper, d) Others
#4) 6/14
Expression
that
makes
you
feel
respected
a) Thanks, b) Interesting, c)
Admire, d) Others
#5) 6/21
Expression
that
makes
you
feel
discouraged
a) No response, b) Not
interesting, c) Consecutive
questions, d) Others
#6) 7/17
Are
you
satisfied
with
communication?
a) Enough, b) Not enough,
c) Others
#7) 8/1
What do you feel
happy
the
most
during
R&D
activity?
a)Achievement,
b)Discovery,
c)Acceptance, d)Others
#8) 8/7
What is an obstacle
to your R&D time?
a)Regulation, b)Side job,
c)Private issue, d)Others
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-711-5
ICNS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

