Impacts of IPv6 on Robust Header Compression in LTE Mobile Networks 
Daniel Philip VENMANI *† 
Marion DUPREZ  
*Orange Labs- 
France Telecom R&D, 
Issy les Moulineaux, France  
danielphilip.venmani@orange.com 
marion.duprez@orange.com 
 
Houmed IBRAHIM 
Yvon GOURHANT 
Orange Labs- 
 France Telecom R&D 
Lannion, France  
houmed.ibrahim@orange.com 
yvon.gourhant@orange.com   
Marie-Laure BOUCHERET 
†INP - ENSEEIHT Toulouse 
Toulouse Cedex 7, FRANCE 
marie-Laure.boucheret@enseeiht.fr   
 
 
 
 
Abstract— LTE is an all-IP based 3GPP architecture, meaning 
that the transport in the network is based on IP, as post-
Release 5 UMTS, unlike the former 3GPP architectures like 
GSM, Release 5 UMTS whose transport is based on ATM. 
Hence, fore-runners in this field have deployed with IPv4 as 
the basic protocol for addressing and transport, although the 
deployment of LTE is still in its initial phase and trial runs are 
executed by various operators. But findings and results prove 
that the exhaustion of IPv4 will not make it possible anymore 
IPv4 addresses for this new technology to take its full fledge. 
Hence, this led to the necessity of considering IPv6 as the 
protocol for addressing and transport. The primary reason to 
perceive IPv6 is its scalability feature meaning that it supports 
large address spacing. Now, with this in mind, when IPv6 is 
considered in the LTE architecture, the possible impacts on the 
network are investigated in depth in this paper. This is began 
by considering IPv6 in transport and application level in the 
different network entities in the LTE architecture like e-Node 
B, Serving-GW, PDN-GW and the transition impacts from 
IPv4 to IPv6 is analyzed. Based on preliminary empirical 
evaluation, our conclusion is that despite the fact that IPv6 
offers large address spacing, the fact that the size of the IPv6 
header is 20 bytes more than the header of IPv4, leads to 
complications as well.  
Keywords- IPv4, IPv6, LTE, ROHC.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Next generation mobile communication systems are 
driven by demands that are expected to provide higher data 
rates and better link quality with the ability to support real-
time and non-real time applications compared to the existing 
systems. The User Equipments (UE) nowadays are able to 
provide various internet applications and services that raise 
the demand for high speed data transfer and Quality of 
Service (QoS) and  the dependency on Internet Protocol (IP) 
addresses [1] becomes a vital ingredient to rolling out 
services. Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access 
(OFDMA) [2] and Single Carrier Frequency Division 
Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) [2] are strong multiple access 
candidates for the uplink of the International Mobile 
Telecommunications-Advanced 
(IMT-Advanced). 
These 
multiple access techniques in combination with the rise of 
the Mobile Internet will be utilized to reach the targeted 
IMT-Advanced system performance. Thus, IP capabilities 
are coming front and center for many operators. 3GPP [3] 
has responded to this trend with an all-IP core network called 
the Evolved Packet Core (EPC) and new packet-optimized 
access technologies like Evolved UMTS Terrestrial Radio 
Access Network (E-UTRAN), otherwise known as Long 
Term Evolution (LTE) [4]. LTE, whose radio access is called 
E-UTRAN, is expected to substantially bring improved user 
experience with full mobility. With the emergence of IP as 
the protocol of choice for carrying all types of traffic, LTE is 
scheduled to provide support for IP-based traffic with end-to-
end QoS. With IP being the basic protocol for transport, the 
issue of Internet Protocol version 4 (IPv4) [5] exhaustion is 
considered to be pit-stop towards the implementation of LTE 
networks widely. Hence, the choice of adapting to another 
version of IP, which is Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) [6], 
[7], is deliberated to be the need of the hour.  
With IPv6 in mind, in this paper, we analyze into various 
impacts on the LTE networks from a mobile network 
operators’ point of view. The particularity of this paper is to 
analyze the impacts of IPv6 on the Radio Access Networks, 
i.e., to look into the impacts on the e-Node B in the LTE 
architecture. It gets deeper into the topic discussion where 
the analysis takes its root into the concepts of analyzing the 
impacts of IPv6 focusing on Robust Header Compression 
(ROHC) [8]-[12] comparing it with the existing IPv4 
addressing scheme and looking into the possible changes that 
could occur when IPv6 comes into existence. The main 
conclusion of this paper is that, IPv6 besides its various 
numerous advantages also brings side effects that have to be 
taken care of. The issue of incompatibility between the 
existing IPv4 protocol and the IPv6 protocol could be one of 
the major problems that should be dealt with great care, 
besides considering the ways to handle the 20 extra header 
bytes of IPv6. Therefore, it must be considered in all phases 
of the development and deployment process by network 
operators and equipment vendors.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
elaborates our motivation to carry out research within this 
area stating briefly the impacts of IPv4 address exhaustion. 
It then describes the role of IP within the context of 
LTE/EPC networks, extending further identifying the role of 
IPv6 within LTE/EPC networks. Continuing further is 
section III which presents a brief state of the art on ROHC 
mechanisms, then the impact of IPv6 address on ROHC and 
finally the performance of ROHC with IPv4 and IPv6 
packets are evaluated empirically, concluding the paper.  
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

II. 
NECESSITY FOR IPV6 IN LTE 
An address goes through a number of stages on the path 
to deployment. Originally the address block is a parameter 
set of the underlying protocol, and the intended purpose of 
segments of the address space is described in an address 
architecture. The number of IPv4 addresses, while vast, is 
finite. The '/8' IANA blocks for Regional Internet Registries 
(RIRs) is 0% as of February 03, 2011 [13]. Subsequently, the 
addressing pool available to RIRs for assignment to Internet 
Service Providers is anticipated to run-out in the following 2-
3 years. Most of the IPv4 address exhaustion mitigation 
strategies rely on network service providers to act as 
gatekeepers to selectively issue temporary IPv4 addresses to 
users. Allocating temporary addresses has technical 
problems, such as limiting users to existing applications. The 
impact of IPv4 address exhaustion includes policy issues, 
where it can be used in a predatory manner to keep 
competitive services out of the reach of a service provider’s 
customer base. The third generation (3G) mobile network on 
its own easily consumed a majority of the available 
addresses. Running out of addresses does not mean the IPv4-
based Internet will suddenly stop working. Nevertheless, it 
does mean it will be difficult, if not impossible, to distribute 
new IP addresses to new or expanding enterprises. Such a 
limitation will have clear impacts on commerce and 
innovation.   
 
A. Impacts of IPv4 Address Exhaustion  
There are two simultaneous approaches to addressing the 
run-out problem: delaying the IPv4 address exhaustion, and 
introducing IPv6 in operational networks. Delaying the 
public IPv4 address exhaustion involves assigning private 
IPv4 addressing for end-users, as well as extending an IPv4 
address (with the use of extended port ranges).  Mechanisms 
such as a Network Address Translator (NAT) and "A+P" 
[14] are used at the provider premises (as opposed to 
customer premises in the existing deployments) to manage 
IP address assignment and access to the Internet. In a mobile 
network, the IPv4 address assignment for a Mobile Node 
(MN) is performed by the Mobile Network Gateway [15]. In 
the 3GPP network architecture, this assignment is performed 
in conjunction with the Packet Data Network (PDN) 
connectivity establishment.  A PDN can be understood to be 
the end-to-end link from the MN to the MNG.  There can be 
one or more PDN connections active at any given time for 
each MN.  A PDN connection may support both IPv4 and 
IPv6 traffic (as in a dual-stack PDN in 4G LTE networks) or 
it may support either one only (as in the existing 3G UMTS 
networks).  The IPv4 address is assigned at the time of PDN 
connectivity establishment, or is assigned using the Dynamic 
Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) after the PDN 
connectivity is established.  This IP address needs to be a 
private IPv4 address which is translated into a shared public 
IPv4 address in order to delay the exhaustion of public IPv4 
addresses as IPv6 is being deployed.  Hence, there is a need 
for private - public IPv4 translation mechanism in the mobile 
network. In the Long-Term Evolution (LTE) 4G network, 
there is a requirement for an always-on PDN connection in 
order to reliably reach a mobile user in the All-IP network.  
If this PDN connection were to use IPv4 addressing, a 
private IPv4 address is needed for every MN that attaches to 
the network.  This could significantly affect the availability 
and usage of private IPv4 addresses. Alternatively, the 
always-on PDN connection may be assigned with an IPv6 
prefix (typically a /64) at the time of connection 
establishment, and an IPv4 address is assigned only on-
demand (e.g., when an application binds to an IPv4 socket 
interface).  This is feasible on the same (dual-stack) PDN in 
LTE networks (with short DHCP lease times), or with on-
demand IPv4 PDNs.  On-demand IPv4 PDN and address 
management can be effective in conserving IPv4 addresses; 
however, such a management could have some implications 
to how the PDN and addresses are managed at the MN. On 
the other hand, in the existing 3G UMTS networks, there is 
no requirement for an always-on connection (a 'link' from the 
MN to the MNG in 3G UMTS is referred to as a Packet Data 
Protocol (PDP) context/connection) even though many 
Smart Phones seldom relinquish an established PDP context.  
And, the existing (so-called pre-Release-8) deployments do 
not support the dual-stack PDP connection.  Hence two 
separate PDP connections are necessary to support IPv4 and 
IPv6 traffic.  Even though some MNs (especially the Smart 
Phones) in use today may have IPv6 stack, such a capability 
is not tested extensively and deployed in operational 
networks.  Given this, it is reasonable to expect that IPv6 can 
only be introduced in the newer MNs, and that such newer 
MNs still need to be able to access the (predominantly IPv4) 
Internet.  
B. IP in LTE/EPC Mobile Networks  
The concept of Fixed-Mobile convergence is already on 
its verge of deployment. The primary reason for this is the 
use of the IP transport layer for both wired and wireless 
networks. These converged networks will be the building 
blocks for “All-IP Networks”. As stated previously, LTE 
evolution calls for a transition to a “flat”, all-IP core network 
with open interfaces, called the Evolved Packet Core or EPC. 
While the EPC has been defined in conjunction with LTE, it 
is an open next generation packet core for all networks, 
including 2.5G, 3G, 4G, non-3GPP, and even fixed 
networks. LTE network, slightly differing from the 
traditional architectures, with the base station controller 
(BSC) or radio network controller (RNC) integrated into the 
access or core layers in a dual network structure. Base 
stations which are e-Node B are connected to the EPC 
through IP, and services are accessed through gateways. The 
traditional circuit switched domain is removed and service 
access, bearing, switching, coordination, charging and 
control are packet domain and IP-based. Therefore, this leads 
to the so-called mobile network IP transformation to enable 
the traditional technologies to co-exist with the emerging IP-
based LTE technologies. This IP transformation can be 
realized through three steps as follows: 
• 
First comes the IP transformation of interfaces. IP 
transmission can be used between 3G base stations 
and BSCs. In this case, lease and construction costs 
are reduced in traditional time division multiplexer 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

(TDM) transmission, and sufficient bandwidth is 
provided for high-speed data services. In the GSM 
system, the IP transformation of A interfaces can 
reduce TransCoder (TC) and network costs, enabling 
TransCoder Free Operation (TrFO) and enhanced 
voice quality. Interface IP transformation has less 
impact on the entire network architecture and is easy 
to achieve.  
• 
The second stage involves the IP transformation of 
the kernel. As the keys for mobile network IP 
transformation, prerequisites to avoid failure are 
strong 
network 
capabilities 
and 
a 
thorough 
knowledge 
of 
transmission 
and 
data 
communications. Data sent from a base station to the 
BSC through IP is not switched or decoded, but is 
transmitted to the core network directly through an 
IP switch. Highly-integrated digital signal processing 
(DSP) and multi-kernels can be applied to enhance 
equipment performance, reduce power consumption 
and save resources.   
• 
The final stage describes the IP transformation of 
services. When network entities and the entire 
network are transformed to IP, service access can be 
simplified to a connection between servers and 
gateways. With the help of an OSS/BSS system, 
mobile network operators can deploy and manage 
telecom services just as Internet service providers 
run their Web services. The IP transformation of the 
mobile network is an important step for LTE All-IP 
and flat network architecture, and also a preparation 
for LTE network architecture.  
C. IPv6 in LTE/EPC mobile networks  
The considerations from the preceding paragraphs thus 
led to the following observations.  First, there is a need to 
support private IPv4 addressing in mobile networks in order 
to address the public IPv4 run-out problem.  This means 
there is a need for private - public IPv4 translation in the 
mobile network.  Second, there is support for IPv6 in both 
3G and 4G LTE networks already in the form of PDP 
context and PDN connections. Also, mobile Internet access 
from smart phones and other mobile devices is accelerating 
the exhaustion of IPv4 addresses. It goes without saying that 
to realize LTE, it needs IPv6. 
III. 
IMPACTS OF IPV6 ON ROHC 
As the networks evolve to provide more bandwidth, the 
applications, 
services 
and 
the 
consumers 
of 
those 
applications and services, all compete for that bandwidth. 
For network operators it is important to offer a high QoS in 
order to attract more customers and encourage them to use 
their network as much as possible. Hence among many, one 
of the advantages could be achieving higher average revenue 
per user (ARPU).  
A. Introduction to IP Header Compression 
In many services and applications like Voice over IP 
(VoIP), interactive games, multimedia messaging etc, the 
payload of the IP packets is almost of the same size or even 
smaller than the header.  Over the end-to-end connection, 
comprised of multiple hops, these protocol headers are 
extremely important but over just one link (hop-to-hop) these 
headers can be compressed and must be uncompressed at the 
other end of the link. It is possible to compress those 
headers, providing in many cases more than 90% savings 
(described in Section IV), and thus save the bandwidth and 
use the expensive resource efficiently. Thus, IP header 
compression is the process of compressing excess protocol 
headers 
before 
transmitting 
them 
on 
a 
link 
and 
uncompressing them to their original state on reception at the 
other end of the link [16]. It is possible to compress the 
protocol headers due to the redundancy in header fields of 
the same packet as well as consecutive packets of the same 
packet stream. IP header compression thus provides a 
reduction in packet loss and improved interactive response 
time by compressing the IP headers. On low bandwidth 
networks, using header compression results in better 
response times due to smaller packet sizes, i.e., improved 
RTT values can be observed. A small packet also reduces the 
probability of packet loss due to bit errors on wireless links 
resulting in better utilization of the radio spectrum. It has 
been observed that in applications such as video transmission 
on wireless links, when using header compression the quality 
does not change in spite of lower bandwidth usage. For voice 
transmission, the quality increases while utilizing lower 
bandwidth.  
B. ROHC Scheme 
The compression mechanism for IP headers described in 
the previous section for IP are not considered robust because 
they do not perform well on links with high error rates and 
long round trip times like the wireless links and do not take 
into account that some applications may actually benefit that 
delivering packets with errors. Therefore, Robust Header 
Compression emerged from the need to standardize a single, 
solid and extendable header compression protocol that 
performed well over links with high error rates and long link 
round trip times, taking into account the problems shown by 
its predecessors. ROHC scheme uses window based least 
significant bits encoding for the compression of dynamic 
fields in the protocol headers. Due to its feedback 
mechanism, ROHC is robust on wireless links with high 
BER and long RTT. It can achieve compression up to 1 byte 
and thus it is more efficient than other compression schemes. 
Even though it is complex compared to earlier schemes, it is 
suitable for wireless networks, which use the very expensive 
radio spectrum resource. 
C. ROHC mechanism 
The fundamental challenge in header compression for 
transmission over wireless links is to maintain the correct 
context at the decompressor in the face of quite frequent bit 
errors in the received packets. ROHC supports three different 
modes for maintaining the context in different wireless 
systems [9]. The unidirectional mode is designed for systems 
without a feedback channel from the decompressor to the 
compressor, 
i.e., 
where 
the 
decompressor can 
not 
acknowledge the correct receipt of context information. To 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

overcome this limitation, the compressor periodically 
retransmits the context information. The bidirectional 
optimistic mode and the bidirectional reliable mode are 
designed for systems with a feedback channel from the 
decompressor 
to 
the 
compressor, 
i.e., 
where 
the 
decompressor can acknowledge the correct receipt of context 
information and/or send negative acknowledgements to 
request the retransmission of context information. With the 
bidirectional optimistic mode, bit errors in the compressed 
header are detected with a 3-bit cyclic redundancy check 
(CRC) code. When the CRC check fails the decompressor 
generally discards the affected packet and attempts to repair 
its context either locally or by requesting a context update 
from the compressor. The reliable mode extends the 
optimistic mode by a more complex error detection and 
correction which uses a larger number of coding bits. Fig. 1 
illustrates ROHC mechanism.  
 
 
Figure 1.  ROHC mechanism 
The ROHC compressor replaces the RTP/UDP/IP 
headers by its own, much smaller header. On the receiver 
side the decompressor transforms the ROHC header into the 
original protocol layer headers. A step by step illustration of 
header compression using ROHC is shown in Fig. 2. A 
multimedia stream packet composed for an IP network 
transmission typically consists of a 20 byte IP header 
(considering it to be an IPv4 address), an 8 byte UDP header, 
and a 12 byte RTP header. The IPv6 version requires a 40 
byte IP header, so the total RTP/UDP/IP header size can sum 
up to 60 bytes. When voice frame is an audio AMR codec of 
12.2 Kbps, it travels on RTP protocol over UDP, besides 
themselves being very small. Payload is 20 to 60 bytes with 
a RTP/UDP/IP header of 40 bytes (IPv4=20 bytes; UDP=12 
bytes; RTP=8 bytes). Then due to the high relation between 
header size and payload size, the transmission of VoIP 
packets is not an efficient process. Being VoIP a protocol to 
service a playback application (voice playback) its maximum 
end to end delay should be less that 150-200ms; where 
150ms is considered to be the best optimal value. This is to 
guarantee the good quality of the sound to be transmitted. 
The efficiency of transmission is low. For transmitting 20-60 
bytes, a header of 40 bytes is needed, that results in a relation 
of 200% to 26.67%. It must be noticed that, because of this 
significant header's size, the necessary throughput for a VoIP 
call would be 28.8 kbps (with IPv4) or 36.8kbps (with IPv6) 
whereas the current service of voice call in circuit switch 
domain needs a throughput of 12.2 kbps. Thus, the support 
of this type of packet corresponds to a waste of radio 
resources and implies the need of performing a compression 
of RTP/UDP/IP header to reduce the ratio between header 
and payload's sizes and consequently the necessary 
throughput, which is carried out by ROHC. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  ROHC in a protocol stack 
D. Impact of IPv6 on ROHC in LTE 
While considering the different protocol layers and their 
functions in the LTE architecture, in the user-plane, the 
Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) layer is 
responsible for compressing and decompressing the headers 
of user plane IP packets using ROHC to enable efficient use 
of air interface bandwidth. PDCP specification applies 
header compression between the e-Node B and the UE in 
Release 8 onwards. This is depicted in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  ROHC applied in LTE architecture  
Incorporation of header compression between two nodes 
places restrictions on underlying link layer. IP payload 
length must be inferred from the underlying link layer. 
Decompressor must receive the packets in the same order 
that the compressor sends them. Packets are not duplicated 
by the link layer between the compressor and decompressor. 
Header Compression requires extra resources on nodes that 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

instantiate the compression algorithms. This can include 
additional memory required on nodes for storage of context 
information and also additional processing required on nodes 
for compression and decompression of packets. As ROHC 
always resides above the link layer, the other Internet 
components do not notice the usage of a compression 
scheme, but the wireless service provider can take advantage 
of a significant reduction of the required bandwidth. ROHC 
requires from the link layer that the packets are sent in a 
strictly sequential order. Also the packets are not allowed to 
contain routing information (single hop restriction). As the 
current LTE architecture implements ROHC with IPv4, the 
implementation of IPv6 introduces concerns related to 
expanded packet headers as the size of packet header 
doubled from 20 Bytes (IPv4) to at least 40 Bytes (IPv6). In 
addition to the above mentioned case, the incorporation of 
network-layer encryption mechanism which includes Internet 
Protocol Security (IPSec) nearly doubles IP operational 
overhead. Hence, the methods that reduce this expanded 
overhead will increase user throughput and/or the number of 
users a network can support.  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 An empirical evaluation considering three different types 
of packets to analyze the effect of overhead and to illustrate 
clearly the use of Robust Header Compression is performed 
in this section. For the sake of illustrating the same, let us 
consider an uncompressed IPv4 packet, uncompressed IPv6 
packet and another packet that is compressed using ROHC 
mechanism. 
1) Considering a Payload that could be the size of the 
maximum allowable MTU size of the network. 
a) Case 1: Uncompressed IPv4 packet with an IPv6 
payload. 
Here, the case deals with the scenario when the UE tries 
to send a packet with an IPv4 header and with an IPv6 
payload of size of 1442 bytes (here 1442 bytes is considered 
as the MTU for the payload since the total payload of the 
whole packet should sum upto 1500 bytes). Also, the packet 
is encapsulated with a RTP and UDP header. Fig.4 below 
illustrates this pictorially. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Uncompressed IPv4 packet with an IPv6 payload   
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (40 / 1442) * 100 = 2.77% 
 
b) Case 2: Uncompressed IPv6 packet with an IPv6 
payload. 
Here, the UE tries to transfer a packet with an IPv6 
header with an IPv6 payload. Hence, the packet format and 
structure looks like in the Fig. 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Uncompressed IPv6 packet with an IPv6 payload 
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (60 / 1442) * 100 = 4.16% 
 
c) Case 
3: 
Packet 
compressed 
using 
ROHC 
mechanism with an IPv6 payload. 
Assuming robust header compression algorithm is 
applied to the RTP/UDP/IP header, overhead calculations 
can be made: 
 
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (2 / 1442) * 100  = 0.14% 
  
2) Considering a VoIP Payload  
Here, inorder to illustrate effect of ROHC in the voice 
packets, we consider VoIP payload with audio codecs. The 
chosen codec is AMR with the mode corresponding to a 
throughput of 12.2kbps. Each 20ms, a 32 bytes long packet 
is generated by the codec. After encapsulation by the 
protocols described before, the packet to transmit on radio 
interface is much bigger than the initial AMR payload 
packet. Hereafter is illustrated the overhead introduced with 
all these encapsulations. 
 
Figure 6.  Overhead introduced with VoIP with AMR 12.2 Kbps 
a) Case 1: Uncompressed IPv4 Header with an VoIP 
payload. 
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (40 /32) * 100   = 125% 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

b) Case2: Uncompressed IPv6 Header with an VoIP 
payload. 
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (60 /32) * 100   = 187.5% 
c) Case3: VoIP Packet Compression with ROHC. 
Overhead = Total Header bytes / Total bytes transmitted 
= (3 /32) * 100   = 9.375% 
 
Therefore, to meet the requirements in terms of delay, 
jitter and latency for interactive communication, like VoIP, 
where delay is also caused due to sampling and 
packetization, the transmission must be minimized. When 
using the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) and 
IP/UDP/RTP headers for encapsulating voice samples, the 
ratio between the IP/UDP/RTP header portion and payload 
size is typically 2:1 and 3:1 for IPv4 and IPv6 respectively. 
Using ROHC in such scenarios will increase the wireless 
capacity by the factor of 3 and 5 for IPv4 and IPv6 
respectively. The table below summarizes the different 
possible compressed gain values that can be obtained from 
various combinations of the headers calculated empirically 
as above.  
TABLE I.  
HEADER COMPRESSION GAINS 
Protocol 
Headers 
Total Header 
Size (Bytes) 
Minimum 
Compressed 
Header Size 
(Bytes) 
Compressed 
Gain % 
IPv4/TCP 
40 
4 
90 
IPv4/UDP 
20 
1 
96.4 
IPv4/UDP/RTP 
40 
1 
97.5 
IPv6/TCP 
60 
4 
93.3 
IPv6/UDP 
48 
3 
93.75 
IPv4/UDP/RTP 
60 
3 
95 
 
Although, from the results above we can conclude that 
the percentage compressed gain for IPv4 header is greater 
when compared to the compressed gain of IPv6 header, 
ROHC yields benefits in both IPv6 and IPv4. Infact, there 
are greater benefits with IPv6 due to a fixed-size header and 
static fields leading to even better compression efficiency 
gains. For e.g., a typical RTP/UDP/IPv4 has static fields of 
25 Octets and dynamic fields of 15 Octets and a typical 
RTP/UDP/IPv6 has a static fields of 49 Octets and dynamic 
fields of 11 Octets. Therefore, IPv6 compressed headers are 
smaller than IPv4 compressed headers, as only fewer octets 
are dynamic. Additionally, there is no fragmentation in the 
network with IPv6 in the presence of path MTU discovery in 
IPv6, making every datagram compressible in IPv6. It should 
be noted, however, that smaller packets offer a smaller target 
for bit errors. So the packet loss rate for any compression 
method should be lower than for uncompressed packets. So 
if ROHC has only a very small probability of loss of sync 
between compressor and/or decompressor state machines, 
there should be a small reduction in overall packet loss rate 
between applications. This is a minor effect. The main 
purpose of ROHC is just to not increase the packet loss rate 
between applications.   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The evolution from existing networks to LTE should be a 
smooth and gradual process through mobile network IP 
transformation. The most interesting question to be 
addressed here is, is this shortage of IPv4 addresses, a 
problem or an opportunity? Hoarding IPv4 addresses and 
postponing IPv6 deployment means that the countries laying 
away IPv4 risks becoming an island in the global next-
generation Internet. Our preliminary results here show that, 
inorder 
to 
facilitate 
quick 
prototyping 
and 
rapid 
implementation, it is very important to consider even small 
details such the impact of ROHC within LTE. Our 
evaluation identifies the global addressing problem in the 
context of efficient network utilization that helps network 
designers and vendors to carefully design their system.  With 
IPv6 widely seen as crucial for the continued operation and 
growth of the Internet, it is critical in mobile networks in 
particular. It goes without saying that to realize this vision, 
LTE needs IPv6. IPv6 is a minor aspect in the big LTE 
scheme of things but is essential for its success as a truly 
global and pervasive means of communications.   
REFERENCES 
[1] An Architecture for IP Address Allocation with CIDR, RFC 
1518.   
[2] H.Holma and A.Toskala: LTE for UMTS: OFDMA and SC-
FDMA based radio access, John Wiley and Sons, Jun 2, 2009 
- Technology & Engineering.  
[3] http://www.3gpp.org/ , available online as on January 2012. 
[4] Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS): 
LTE: Architecture and functional description (3GPP TS 
36.000 series, Release 9) 
[5] Internet Protocol DARPA Internet Program Protocol 
Specification, RFC 791.    
[6] Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) Specification, RFC 2460. 
[7] Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Addressing Architecture 
RFC 3513. 
[8] E. T. David , H. Andreas, D. Andreas, and D. Gero, “Robust 
header compression (ROHC) in next generation network 
processors,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (TON),  
vol. 13 , August 2005.. 
[9] The RObust Header Compression (ROHC) Framework, RFC 
4995. 
[10] RObust Header Compression (ROHC): A Compression 
Profile for IP , RFC 3843. 
[11] G. Boggia, P. Camarda, and V.G. Squeo, “ROHC+: A new 
header compression scheme for TCP streams in 3G wireless 
systems,” IEEE ICC'02, pp.3271-3278, April 2002.  
[12] http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/ROHC/charter/, available online 
as on January 2012.  
[13] http://inetcore.com/project/ipv4ec/index_en.html, 
available 
online as on January 2012.  
[14] IP Network Address Translator (NAT) Terminology and 
Considerations, RFC 2663. 
[15] www.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-v6ops-v6-in-mobile-networks, 
available online as on January 2012.  
[16] W. Yichuan, L. Sun,  and M. Jian, "Adaptive robust TCP/IP 
header compression algorithm for 3G wireless networks," 
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 
WCNC 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1046 - 1050, March 2004. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

