Packet Tracer as an Educational Serious Gaming Platform 
Ammar Musheer, Oleg Sotnikov and Shahram Shah Heydari 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Oshawa, Canada 
{musheer.ammar@gmail.com, oleg.sot@gmail.com, shahram.heydari@uoit.ca} 
Abstract— Serious gaming is quickly becoming an important 
trend in education, as it provides an interactive as well as 
enjoyable environment for learning various technology, 
business and scientific topics. The main objective of this 
research is to explore the possibility of using Cisco packet 
tracer’s multiuser capability to develop several interactive, 
multiuser games for teaching networking topics and assessing 
students skills in the class. We present a list of primary 
principles for design of such games, and design two multiuser 
educational games as in-class activities to showcase the benefits 
of our approach. We demonstrate how students’ skills in 
important network topics such as routing, remote access and 
security help them succeed in these games. We also provide test 
results to evaluate the performance of packet tracer in 
handling multiuser traffic in this scenario.  
Keywords- 
Packet 
Tracer; 
Serious 
Gaming; 
Multiuser; 
Collaborative; Cisco Networking Academy; Emerging Teaching 
Methods; Simulation; Online Teaching 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Background 
The maturing of the video gaming industry has triggered 
significant interest in developing simulated and interactive 
serious gaming platforms. The main advantage of serious 
gaming platforms is that they combine in-depth educational 
topics with goal-oriented and realistic scenarios.  To date 
there have been many applications of serious gaming. These 
games have spanned over many industries, from urban 
planning to business, military, healthcare training etc. These 
applications have provided the means to an individual, or a 
group of individuals, to engage in an artificial conflict, 
assess, and learn the complexities associated with each of 
their individual area of work. Some real world applications 
of serious games include INNOV8 Business Process 
Management simulator by IBM [1], physical conditioning 
games for the general public, e.g. Fitness Shape Evolved for 
the new Microsoft Kinect hardware platform [2], Foldit for 
biologists [3], and flight simulator applications for the 
military [4]. Serious gaming has allowed users of the 
application to attain skills and knowledge related to a 
specific activity. The subject can be as difficult as 
addressing physical and physiological disorders or be as 
simple as promoting physical activity. The main goal of 
serious gaming is to provide a powerful means of 
encouraging people to learn and provide them with a more 
entertaining way to obtain the skills and knowledge 
addressed by the specific serious gaming activities. 
During the research project we focused on creating 
serious games for the purpose of teaching topics in 
information networking at the University of Ontario 
Institute of Technology (UOIT) in Ontario, Canada. UOIT 
has an undergraduate program in networking and IT 
security, and also serves as a regional Cisco Network 
Academy. With growing interest in the networking field and 
the hands-on nature of the topic, the objective of this project 
was to make the classroom lecture hours more interactive. 
The research team began by analyzing and utilizing the 
tools available through the Cisco Networking Academy. 
Cisco Packet Tracer’s is most commonly used as an 
emulation platform for Cisco networking devices and IOS 
network operating system. The new version includes 
multiuser capabilities that enable designers to create large 
group based interactions during classroom hours. The 
Packet Tracer includes many necessary elements needed for 
CCNA-level education.  
The research team explored the area of using packet 
tracer as an educational serious gaming platform by 
developing two gaming activities, Domination & Relay 
Race. Domination & Relay Race utilize the multiuser 
capabilities of packet tracer to the greatest extent. The two 
games provide students with a great educational value and 
help them hone their networking expertise. Packet Tracer 
provides a great interface to gain experience with practical 
configuration scenarios. Our aim was to combine the 
powerful capabilities of packet tracer with serious gaming in 
order to provide a simple and entertaining environment for 
teaching basic and advanced networking topics. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II we examine some of the current serious games that focus 
on networking education. A basic description of the 
multiuser capability in Packet Tracer and our methodology 
is presented in Section III. We describe the design and 
technical details of our serious games in Sections IV and V. 
Some system performance results, e.g. memory, network 
and CPU requirements are presented in Section VI. We 
present our conclusions and future work plan in Section VII. 
II. 
CURRENT NETWORKING SERIOUS GAMES 
Cisco has developed a number of serious games for 
networking education. Most recently, Cisco ASPIRE Beta 3 
has been released. This game utilizes the Packet Tracer 
platform to provide the players a role-playing/SimCity-like 
serious game focused on the business of networking. 
Players take on the role of a network engineer who applies 
his/her entrepreneurial and networking skills to complete 
several contracts that arise during the game. They must 
purchase the correct hardware and apply the correct 
configuration schemes in order to complete the contract. For 
the correct completion of contracts players receive credits 
which they can spend toward improving their network. 
Complete with a mobile device that rings when new 
299
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

contracts are available, Cisco’s Aspire  immerses players 
into the networking world while providing an entertaining 
way to practice your networking and entrepreneurial skills. 
Cisco Systems has also released Cisco myPlanNet 1.0 
[5]. Players are put into the shoes of a service provider 
CEO. They must direct their business through various 
technological ages ranging from dial-up all the way up to 
the broadband/mobile connected ages. Along the way 
players learn about the various technologies that make the 
networking world possible. The game provides a SimCity-
like overlay where issues arise in the city and must be 
resolved. There is a credit system that players must use to 
purchase new technologies to advance their businesses and 
provide better services to the civilians in their cities. There 
is also a leaderboard to encourage players to attain higher 
scores and improve their skills. 
Additionally, Cisco provides many smaller serious games 
that allow users to improve their skills, such as: Wireless 
Explorer, Unified Communications Simulation Challenge, 
Cisco Mind Share, and Edge Quest. These serious games 
provide players with a means to enjoy learning the 
complicating subjects related to the networking field, albeit 
on a smaller scale.  
III. 
GAME DESIGN 
A. Brief Overview of the PT Multuser environment 
One of Packet Tracer’s greatest features is the ability to 
connect two or more lab sessions together, known as a 
Multiuser Connection. By utilizing Packet Tracer’s 
multiuser capabilities very extensively throughout the term 
of the research project and within the completed serious 
gaming activities, the creation of two very unique and 
interactive Packet Tracer game activities was possible. 
Packet Tracer allows users to use a simple drag and drop 
cloud icon to connect to a peer cloud. Each multiuser cloud 
supports one-to-one, many-to-one and many-to-many peer-
connection configurations. The activities that are created 
operate on a model similar to the client/server architecture 
observed widely today. The central file with the game 
scenario is hosted on an instructor PC and the student side 
file is used by each student to connect to the central Packet 
Tracer game file hosted on the instructor PC. This 
instructor/student architecture allows for easy management, 
control and provides an overall view for the instructor 
operating the game. The multiuser capabilities of Packet 
Tracer during testing allowed the connection of up to 60-75 
users simultaneously to a single activity over LAN. The 
number of connections possible is directly limited by the 
hardware performance of the instructor PC. An in-depth 
examination of the multiuser environment was conducted 
and reported in a research paper submit last year, Multiuser 
Collaborative Practical Learning Using Packet Tracer [7], or 
refer to the research paper being submitted to ICNS this 
year,  Building Interactive multi-user in-class learning 
modules for computer networking. 
 
B. Project Objectives 
The simulated-based games were created to provide 
students with a very different approach to networking. Goals 
and objectives had to be met in order to satisfy the CCNA 
course’s academic requirements and the serious game 
aspects of the activities. The main objectives include: 
• 
Easy deployment in large user environments 
• 
Scalability to ensure reusability 
• 
Provide an educational experience 
• 
Can be used to assess student progression 
• 
Have to provide a psychological perception of 
having won or loss 
The psychological perception of having won or loss is 
one of the key elements that make up a serious game. The 
enthusiasm of a student is very crucial in a serious gaming 
aspect. It is an emotional driver that encourages students to 
improve his/her networking abilities in order to better 
compete against fellow classmates. Ensuring that the 
perception of having won or loss exist, improves our 
chances of encouraging students to participate and learn the 
skills and knowledge needed to complete the activities and 
course material more efficiently. 
C. Methodology 
Using the tools and interactive features provided by 
Packet Tracer 5.3, Domination and Relay Race simulation-
based games were created to help teach and observe the 
students progression in the first year CCNA courses. The 
games covered topics learned throughout the whole year. 
Each activity tested the configuration and troubleshooting 
abilities of the players while providing an educational 
experience that was novel and entertaining for the students. 
Each of the games presented students with artificial 
conflicts that resembled several real world networking 
problems that had to be fixed before achieving the game’s 
end goal. DHCP mechanisms were used to provide each 
connected player with a set of unique IP address ranges for 
management and game play structure purposes. A detailed 
explanation of each game follows. 
IV. 
DOMINATION GAME  
A. Topology Structure 
The game topology is broken down into four 
sections. Each section consists of layer 3 switches, multiuser 
clouds, and clusters. The Section switches all connect to a 
central Main Domination Switch. Each section consists of 
15 cluster clouds and 15 multiuser clouds, all of which are 
connected to a Section Domination Switch. Each cluster 
cloud contains an identical network topology that presents 
students with a network problem. Each of the clusters have 
been assigned a /24 subnet, from which the first host IP is 
assigned to the default gateway. The DHCP IP addressing 
scheme has been kept simple, allowing for easy scalability 
and management. Student side Packet Tracer instances 
connect into the multiuser clouds assigned to them by the 
instructor. Multiuser clouds are distinguished by the Peer 
300
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Network Name property within each cloud.  The game is 
initiated by the instructor when all players have obtained a 
connection to the peer multiuser cloud. Once all students 
clouds are active students begin by using the telnet protocol 
to obtain access into their specific cluster. Fig 1 shows an 
overview of the Domination topology. 
B. Game-play 
The student’s main goal is to fix the network problems 
presented to them within their clusters.  The problems 
within the cluster can vary in complexity, but initially the 
clusters have been set up with a basic problem. Once the 
cluster problems are solved the students must quickly telnet 
into the directly connected section switch and shutdown all 
other interfaces except the interface directed toward the 
main domination switch. Once a student has managed to 
dominate their sections switch, they must quickly telnet into 
the Main Domination Switch and shutdown the 3 other ports 
allowing other section switches to telnet into the main 
switch. The first person to quickly dominate their section’s 
switch and the main switch is the winner. The other 3 that 
have managed to dominate only their sections switch are 
runner up’s. It is possible for 1 person to dominate all 5 
switches but for that the player will have to be really fast. 
C. Domination Technical Details 
The domination game comes with only one student side 
file that will work with all of the Multiuser clouds within 
the instructor file. The student file consists of a single 
workstation and a multiuser cloud to allow connectivity to 
the instructor file.  
By providing a standard student file with basic 
configurations already applied to the workstation allows for 
easy deployment in large user environments. Furthermore, 
IP addresses are dynamically assigned by a DHCP located 
in each cluster. Having DHCP enabled on each cluster 
eliminates the need for students to configure an initial IP 
address to their student side Packet Tracer Workstation. 
The cluster problems can be increased in complexity 
easily as needed. Additional devices can be added within a 
single cluster and be duplicated easily across the clusters 
because of the easy IP addressing scheme. The EIGRP 
protocol is running between the 5 switches to allow telnet 
capabilities to the students. IP addressing schemes were 
designed to be as simple as possible so to encourage future 
development within the activity. The number of vty lines 
available within each switch limits the section sizes to 15. 
D. Educational Value 
The domination game allows students to experience the 
pressure sometimes put on network engineers in the real 
world environment. It forces students to apply all of their 
learnt networking knowledge to a problem. By gaining the 
ability to combine the hands-on and theoretical knowledge 
learnt throughout a Cisco Network Academy course, 
students will gain a better understanding of how to apply 
these skills and tools in the networking world. Moreover, 
the game can also be used as an evaluation tool to see if the 
students understand the concepts delivered in the course. 
V. 
RELAY RACE GAME 
A. Topology Structure 
Adapted from the original Relay Race game presented 
by Cisco, this Relay Race game incorporates new and old 
features. The topology is broken down into 4 sections, each 
consisting of 5 Main Line Routers, 4 network clusters and 5 
multiuser clouds. The whole topology is brought together at 
a central Finish Line Router. Each cluster contains 
problematic network scenarios that students must correct in 
order to allow a Runner, designated in each team, to move 
closer to the Finish Line Router. The network scenarios 
within the clusters progressively become harder the closer 
the cluster is to the Finish Line Router. The 5 Main Line 
Routers act as doorways, locked, preventing the runner from 
moving forward. Fig 2 shows an overview of Relay Race 
topology. 
B. Game-play 
Although slightly more complicated, the concept of the 
game remains somewhat similar to the Domination game. 
Relay Race consists of 4 Teams each consisting of 5 team 
members. Each team consists of 1 Runner and 4 members 
responsible for solving the problematic network clusters. 
Once the problem within the cluster is solved they must 
move forward to their Main Line Router and no shutdown 
their routers Serial 0/0/0 interface. This will allow the 
runner of the team to telnet into their routers in order to 
move forward towards the Finish Line Router. Many ACL’s 
have been put in place so that only the appropriate hosts can 
telnet into the appropriate devices. For example, none of the 
team members responsible for solving cluster problems can 
telnet into the Finish Line Router, only the runner will be 
able to telnet into that router. The ACL’s also ensure that 
telnets to other Main Line Routers will only work from the 
Runner’s Workstation on the student Packet Tracer file.  
The Goal of the game is to have the fastest team to no 
shutdown all of their S0/0/0 interfaces within the Main Line 
Routers. The Runner must then run (telnet) into the Finish 
Line Router before any of the other teams and shutdown all 
of the other interfaces allowing the opposing teams access to 
the Finish Line Router.  
C. Relay Race Technical Details 
Only one student file is included with this game because 
DHCP has been implemented in a very unique manner 
allowing the file to be used among any multiuser peer-
connection within the game. The instructor file contains the 
Relay Race game that students must telnet into. The 
students connect to the multiuser clouds according to the 
name of the cloud in correspondence to the role of the 
student 
within 
each 
team. 
By 
providing 
this 
instructor/student architecture we ensure easy deployment 
of the game during play time. The clusters problem can be 
easily changed if need be.  
D. Educational Value 
Relay Race pits students together in a team environment 
where they must communicate and apply their skills to a 
301
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

problem. The activity will help hone communication skills 
and also improve the ability of the students to solve network 
problems. The game will force students to work rapidly and 
correctly to solve their problems the fastest in order to win. 
This environment emulates the fast paced environments of 
the networking world today, where problems arise quickly 
and must be solved rapidly. The game can also be used as an 
evaluation tool to see how far student’s configuration and 
troubleshooting skills have progressed. 
VI. 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
With Packet Tracers ability to manage and create 
Multiuser Packet Tracer sessions, it was still unknown to the 
team whether or not Packet Tracer could handle large scale 
Multiuser environments that consisted of 60+ Multiuser 
sessions. We conducted various stress tests to confirm that it 
could handle the 60+ user load. The tests included: CPU 
Average Utilization, Memory Utilization, Total Network 
Utilization, Instruction Offline File Size, Time to Create 
Offline File, and Memory Utilization by offline File. 
A. The Test Bed 
Two sets of tests were conducted on each of the two 
activities instructor files. The first was done using the 
Domination instructor file and its companion student file. 
The second was done using the Relay Race instructor file 
and its companion student file.  During the testing procedure 
for the Domination game a total of 60 multiuser clouds were 
connected in increments of 5 users to the instructor file. 
Each time 5 users connected to the game, new data was 
collected. The Relay Race game has a maximum capacity of 
20 users playing at the same time therefore, 20 multiuser 
clouds were connected to the Relay Race instructor file in 
increments of 5 users. 
B. CPU Utilization 
The results for this test were very satisfying for both of 
the activities. Figure 3 shows both the CPU utilization for 
Domination and Relay Race. It is evident that the as more 
hosts connect to the instructor files, the CPU utilization 
increases in a logarithmic form. This indicates that the 
packet tracer software is capable of handling higher levels 
of stress if need be. If we compare the Relay Race and 
Domination results it’s evident that continuous even if we 
add up to 60 users. 
C. Memory Utilization 
Test results for both the activities indicated a linear 
growth rate in memory utilization. Figure 4 shows that 
growth rate for both the Domination activity and the Relay 
Race activity is linear as the number of users increases. 
Although memory is not an issue with 50 users connected to 
an activity, if we were to connect up to 100 or more users’ 
memory could potentially become an issue. For our 
university use cases memory does not pose a threat to the 
functionality of our activities. 
D. Network Utilization 
The test results indicated that the multiuser environment 
does not put a huge or rather places a minimal burden on the 
computers network resources. It indicates that we can have a 
large number of users connected to a single instructor file 
without worrying about the burden it puts on the network. 
The network utilization test increased in a linear fashion and 
these values are bound to increase as the number of users 
increase. An important issue to note is that these values are 
bound to change depending on how actively the students 
interact with the instructor side network.  
E. Offline File Save Tests 
Packet Tracer allows the ability to save an offline file. 
The offline file saves can be described as a snapshot of the 
entire network at an instance of time. The file consists of all 
of the peer connected multiuser clouds and each device in 
that peer cloud. The offline file saves also includes all of the 
devices current state, configuration, and connection status. 
The offline file proves to be a great tool to use when 
assessing the results of an activity or grading students 
depending on the configuration status of the devices they 
were responsible for. This gives the instructor the ability to 
save offline files after the completion of the games and 
assess the students after the activity is completed. 
Offline saving times of greater than 5 minutes for a 30 
user Multiuser environment could render useless a 20-
minute activity and a class room limited to an 80 minute 
class. Therefore it is important to test how long it actually 
takes to create the offline file. The results indicated that for 
the Domination activity the time to create the offline file 
grew exponentially. The Relay Race activity indicated a 
linear growth rate. The exponential growth rate for the 
Domination file could prove to be troublesome if more than 
60 users are connected to the Domination activity. Currently 
it takes about 25 seconds for a 50 user multiuser 
environment offline file to save. Although it serves our 
purpose to provide 60 students a reliable platform to use the 
activity, connecting more than 100 users to a single 
instructor file could take much longer. These values are 
bound to change if the complexities of the problems in each 
cluster are increased. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
By using packet tracer as an educational serious gaming 
platform we can provide a simple and entertaining solution 
to present complex networking scenarios to networking 
students enrolled in our courses. We can train students to 
not only improve their configuration and troubleshooting 
skills but also improve communications skills in an IT 
environment. We can also increase the speed at which they 
tackle these problems and provide them with the expertise 
and knowledge to excel in the fast paced networking 
environments of today.  
With Cisco constantly updating their packet tracer 
platform there is an endless possibility of how many 
different types of game activities we can create. Currently 
the activities are limited to only CCNA topics, but future 
packet tracer improvements by Cisco could allow us to 
302
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

cover CCNP topics as well. Cisco has already taken the 
potential of serious gaming seriously and began with 
creating their packet tracer based educational serious 
gaming platforms with Cisco Aspire Passport21 and Cisco 
myPlanNet. 
Using Cisco’s Packet Tracer 5.3 as our serious gaming 
platform, the development of multiuser serious gaming 
activities was made possible. By utilizing the familiar 
environment known to all Cisco Network Academy 
students, we ensured that the activities could be easily 
understood and collaboration between multiple or groups of 
students was possible using the multiuser capabilities.  
Combining the concept of serious gaming with a network 
simulator allows us to approach teaching methodologies for 
Cisco network oriented courses in an entirely new light. 
With the future for serious gaming looking bright, it can 
be surmised that we will see the development of many 
networking educational serious gaming platforms. This 
research has shown the great potential of the topic and the 
educational values its holds. Lastly, Cisco’s packet tracer 
has proven to be a power platform that can be used to 
provide an educational serious gaming platform. 
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported through a 2010 Teaching 
Innovation Funding (TIF) grant from the office of the 
Associate Provost, Academic of the University of Ontario 
Institute of Technology. Packet Tracer is a product of Cisco 
Networks and is provided free of charge to Cisco 
Networking Academy students and instructors.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   A. All, Serious Games Entertain, Educate Employees. IT Business 
Edge, August 5, 
2009.   http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/community/features/articl
es/blog/serious-games-entertain-educate-employees/?cs=34730 
(Accessed March 20, 2011).  
[2]   C. Kohler, Xbox Kinect Games Give You a Serious Workout, Wired 
Magazine, June 15, 
2010. http://www.wired.com/gamelife/2010/06/kinect-hands-on/ 
(Accessed March 20, 2011). 
[3]   J. Bohannon, Unravel the Secret Life of Protein, Wired Magazine, 
issue 17.05, 20 April 
2009, http://www.wired.com/medtech/genetics/magazine/17-
05/ff_protein?currentPage=all (Accessed 20 March 2011). 
[4]   Macedonia, M. 2005. Games, simulation, and the military education 
dilemma. http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ffpiu018.pdf . 
(Accessed 20 March 2011). 
 [5]    M. Torrieri., Cisco's MyPlanNet Simulation Game Touches on 
Broadband Growth and Other Hot Communications Topics, TMCnet, 
Nov. 4, 2009.  http://4g-wirelessevolution.tmcnet.com/broadband-
stimulus/topics/broadband-stimulus/articles/68180-ciscos-myplannet-
simulation-game-touches-broadband-growth-other.htm (Accessed 
March 20, 2011) 
[6]    Behrens, J. T., Frezzo, D. C., Mislevy, R. J. Kroopnik, & Wise, D. 
(2007). Structural, Functional and Semiotic Symmetries in simulation 
based games, and assessments. In E. L. Baker, J. Dickieson, W. 
Wulfeck, & H. F. O’Neil (Eds.) Assessment of Problem Solving 
Using Simulations. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum,  pp. 59-80.  
[7]   A.  Smith and C.  Bluck, "Multiuser Collaborative Practical Learning 
Using Packet Tracer," in Networking and Services (ICNS), 2010 
Sixth International Conference on, pp.  356-362, 2010. 
303
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 1. Domination Game Screen Shot 
Figure 2. Relay Race Game Screen Shot 
304
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
 
 
Figure 3. CPU Utilization: (a) Domination CPU Utilization (b) Relay Race CPU Utilization 
Figure 4. Memory Utilization (a) Domination Memory Utilization (b) Relay Race Memory Utilization 
305
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

