Internet of Things and OPC UA 
 
 
Ravish Kumar 
ABB Corporate Research 
Bangalore, India 
e-mail: ravish.kumar@in.abb.com 
Arijit Kumar Bose 
ABB Corporate Research 
Bangalore, India 
e-mail: arijit.bose@in.abb.com
 
 
Abstract— Internet of Things (IoT) has become very popular 
due to its envisioned capability. Industry, Health care and 
Utility sectors are working actively to take advantage of the 
benefits that the IoT infrastructure can offer. However, it will 
take a long time until a completely developed IoT 
infrastructure is in place. Since this requires a large scale 
technology restructuring, many challenges need to be 
addressed. Certainly, IoT infrastructure development would 
happen step by step and it will be slowly accepted by the users, 
particularly from the industrial sector. In addition, some 
provision is also required to connect the existing automation 
system with the IoT infrastructure. In order to facilitate this 
connection, a bridging technology is required. In this paper, we 
describe how the industry proven OPC UA technology can be 
used for connecting the existing automation system with an IoT 
infrastructure. Furthermore, we also analyze the OPC Unified 
Architecture (OPC UA) security model from an IoT 
perspective and highlight the required improvements. 
Keyword-Internet of Things; OPC UA; Security 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Technology analysts and visionaries have defined 
Internet of Things (IoT) [5] as a network of physical objects 
which can be accessed through the Internet. These objects 
contain embedded technology to interact with the external 
environment. The objective of IoT is to mix the physical 
world and the information world. As a result, it will create an 
environment where one machine can communicate directly 
with other machines without much manual intervention. IoT 
has a great potential to influence Industrial application. It 
will create new ways of organizing processes and 
information flow across industrial production. By connecting 
different 
machines, 
field 
devices, 
production 
units, 
transportation information and goods data seamlessly to an 
IoT infrastructure, a smart production system can be created 
with more flexibility, resourceful and faster production. Such 
a smart production system will leverage to incorporate last 
minute changes in the production cycle and will also possess 
the ability to respond flexibly to disruptions and failures on 
behalf of suppliers and other external factors. In addition, the 
smart system will also induce the capability to respond 
rapidly to dynamic businesses and engineering processes, 
thereby facilitating dynamic changes in the production when 
needed.  
For creating an IoT infrastructure, coordination and 
cooperation between the new generation technologies and 
existing proven technologies must be considered. Most of the 
existing industrial automation systems are based on the 
concept of a Distributed Control System (DCS) [1], which 
works in isolation and cannot be directly operated from the 
Internet. Due to this limitation, it has reduced flexibility to 
handle dynamic business changes in an industrial plant. 
Therefore, to evolve a DCS architecture to handle dynamic 
business changes, a new generation of technologies coming 
traditionally from an Internet world should be considered." 
 DCS has different layers for handling various operations. 
Fig. 1 shows the hierarchy of a typical DCS based industrial 
automation system. Typically, there are four layers in an 
automation system. These layers are Enterprise Network 
layer, Plant Network Layer, Control Network Layer and 
Field Device Network Layer. All the layers are specialized to 
perform specific kinds of operations. For example, the 
Control Network Layer is responsible for the execution of 
control tasks of the plant process.  
Currently, the industrial automation system works in 
isolation with other entities such as Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) [2] and Manufacturing Execution System 
(MES) [3]. ERP is a business management software 
application, which is used for product planning, inventory 
and suppliers’ management, shipping and payment, etc. MES 
is a software application, which is used for accessing current 
conditions of plant processes for resource optimization and 
decision making. Because they work in isolation, the existing 
Figure 1. Distributed Control System Architecture.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

industrial automation systems are not able to handle dynamic 
processes and to incorporate last minute changes into the 
process flow. Currently, incorporating any small updates in 
the production life cycle is expensive because multiple 
changes and synchronizations need to be done in different 
places. Connecting the industrial automation system with 
other entities such as ERP, MES, etc. over the IoT 
infrastructure produces a whole automation system capable 
of handling dynamic business and engineering processes. 
In this paper, we will investigate the solution for 
enhancing the existing industrial automation system to 
leverage benefits from dynamic business and engineering 
process. This is done by enabling connectivity to an IoT 
infrastructure by using the industry proven OPC Unified 
Architecture (OPC) technology [4]. We will also analyze the 
security framework of OPC UA from an IoT perspective and 
will be highlighting the required improvements. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we provide the background and related work of the IoT. 
In Section III, we provide an overview of the existing OPC 
UA standard, followed by describing how OPC UA can be 
used for enhancing the existing industrial automation system 
to connect with an IoT infrastructure. In Section IV, we 
provide an overview of the OPC UA security model. In 
Section V, we analyze the security of OPC UA from an IoT 
perspective and highlight the required improvements. In 
Section VI, we provide a conclusion to our work and 
describe the possible future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
IoT is basically a convergence of multiple technologies 
such as Radio-frequency identification (RFID), sensor 
technology, Internet, wireless, cloud computing, etc. All of 
these technologies contribute to enable an IoT infrastructure. 
The term IoT was first introduced by Kelvis Ashton in the 
year 1999. His initial idea was to empower computers to 
gather information on their own, so that computers can see, 
hear and smell the world by themselves [5]. But, in today’s 
scenario, it is not just limited to empowering computer to 
gather information only. Now, it is considered as a 
communication infrastructure for exchanging information 
among the things around the globe [6]. Things, in the IoT, 
refer to a wide variety of devices. The applicability of IoT is 
not limited to one domain [7][8]. It is suitable for various 
application sectors like industrial domain, health care, utility, 
etc. Tan et al.  [9] described IoT as future Internet for 
establishing communication not only between human to 
human, but expanding to human to machine, and machine to 
machine. Chen [10] discusses the overview of new paradigm 
along with different challenges and opportunities. Imtiaz et 
al. [11] investigated the OPC-UA as a middleware solution 
for resource-limited devices. To handle an enormous volume 
of IoT data, Copie et al. [12] highlighted how IoT data can 
be stored in a cloud database. The Industry 4.0 [13] 
revolution has been envisioned based on IoT and Cyber 
Physical System (CPS). Perera et al. [14] examined a variety 
of popular and innovative IoT solutions in terms of context-
ware technology perspective and evaluated them on a 
framework that they built around well-known context aware 
computing theories. Singh [15] has presented an efficient 
hierarchical identification mapping server for identification 
and location of connected things in the IoT infrastructure for 
enabling global mobility and scalability. Ungurean et al. [16] 
discussed an IoT architecture based on the OPC.NET [17] 
technology. OPC.NET is tightly coupled with Microsoft 
platform. Because of this platform dependency, freedom of 
platform independency cannot be achieved in true sense. 
Furthermore, Ungurean et al. [16] have not discussed the 
security aspects of OPC.NET from the perspective of an IoT 
infrastructure.   
Keoh et al. [18] provide some salient security 
enhancements that are required in the emerging IoT 
protocols like security enhancements for Constrained 
Application Protocol (CoAP), Datagram Transport Layer 
Security (DTLS), etc. Sajjad et al. [19] discussed on the 
security enhancements of IEEE 802.15.4 Media Access 
Control (MAC) in the context of IoT. However, based on the 
prior art, we did not find many studies that explain the 
security enhancements for OPC UA from an IoT perspective. 
III. 
OPC UNIFIED ARCHITECURE  
OPC UA [4] is an Industry proven standard for 
exchanging industrial data. It provides a framework for safe 
and reliable communication among the different industrial 
devices and applications. This standard is developed with 
close cooperation with manufacturers, users and research 
institutes, in order to enable information exchange among 
heterogeneous systems. It was designed to support a wide 
range of systems, ranging from sensor device to enterprise 
server. The services of OPC UA ensure a seamless flow of 
information among multiple heterogeneous entities of an 
industrial automation system. OPC UA performs this 
seamless exchange of information by a typical client-server 
model, and with a platform agnostic approach. Information 
is transacted between OPC UA client and server.  
OPC UA standard is developed and maintained by the 
OPC foundation [20].  Its data modelling and object-
oriented techniques allow the modelling of any kind of 
information data. The specifications of the OPC UA 
standard [4] provide the autonomy for defining industry or 
standards organization, a specific information model for 
exchanging information across various kinds of platforms. 
IV. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE  
Our proposed architecture is presented in Fig. 2. With the 
help of OPC UA technology, the industrial automation 
system is enabled to establish connectivity with an IoT 
infrastructure. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

OPC UA enables, not only pure process data exchange, but 
also 
semantic information 
exchange 
as 
well. This 
architecture is built around three main modules as shown in 
Fig. 2, i.e. OPC UA Connect server, OPC UA Aggregating 
server and OPC UA Cloud proxy Server. Three different 
OPC UA Connect servers, i.e. OPC UA Plant network 
connect, OPC UA Control network connect and OPC UA 
Field network connect, are used for modeling the data at the 
Plant network layer, Control network layer, and Field Device 
network layer respectively. These three OPC UA Connect 
servers are leveraged to model the data from the devices 
located at the factory floor to enterprise applications. The 
OPC UA aggregating server aggregates the data from the 
OPC UA Connect servers into one place. It is helpful for any 
OPC UA client application to access the data from multiple 
OPC UA servers from a single node. This feature is thus 
facilitated by the OPC UA aggregating server. OPC UA 
aggregating server also provides a mechanism for chaining 
the data from multiple OPC UA servers to a particular OPC 
UA client application, for limiting functions and data 
accessibility. OPC UA cloud proxy server provides the proxy 
connection between OPC UA aggregating server and 
remotely located different OPC UA client applications such 
as Enterprise Management System, remote engineering 
workplace, etc. By divulging the different layers of industrial 
information data to an IoT infrastructure, an industrial 
automation system 
will be capable of exchanging 
information with other applications such as ERP and MES. 
Thus, with this architecture, an industrial automation system 
can be enhanced with a capability for handing dynamic 
business processes. For example, if a supplier delays the 
supply of raw materials, with an IoT enabled infrastructure, 
this information can be conveyed to a production site as 
quickly as possible. Instead of shutting down the production, 
the production speed can be slowed down and other 
maintenance activities can be performed in parallel. 
V. 
OPC UA SECURITY MODEL ANALYSIS 
Security model of OPC UA is a very important aspect for 
its reliable operation in an industrial automation plant. A 
security compromised OPC UA server and client application 
can result into devastating effects on the plant, causing huge 
financial damages, and could even lead to severe health 
hazards. The security requirements for OPC UA has been 
addressed in its standard. This section provides a short 
overview of the existing security specifications of OPC UA 
from its reference security standard [21]. OPC UA features 
the 
basic 
security 
primitives 
i.e. 
authentication, 
authorization, integrity, confidentiality and auditability of 
data as illustrated below. 
A. Authentication  
In OPC UA, both the server and client application 
establish a mutual trust between them by validating each 
other’s identities. This verification and validation of each 
other’s identity is performed on the basis of X.509 based 
certificates [22]. Thus, when an OPC UA client application 
wants to establish a connection with the OPC UA server side 
application, the server application performs an authentication 
check of the client application, and vice versa on the basis of 
X.509 based certificates. Thus, a X.509 certificate acts like 
an identity of the OPC UA application. 
B. User authentication  
OPC UA server guards the user access control by 
validating each user’s identity. This can be done with the 
help of username & password or by a X.509 based certificate 
based token. OPC UA server checks the authenticity of the 
Figure 2. Industrial Automation connectivity with an IoT infrastructure. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

users to permit only legitimate users to access the server 
ontents. When an end user tries to access the OPC UA server 
from an OPC UA client application through a network, the 
OPC UA client securely sends the credentials of the user like 
his username and password to the OPC UA server. The 
communication traffic between OPC UA server and OPC 
UA client is made secure by Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
[23] protocol. 
C. User authorization 
OPC UA also features authorization controls of users. 
User can perform only those job functions as per their set 
privileges. 
D. Secure communication 
OPC UA client and OPC UA server communicate over a 
secure channel. The messages that are exchanged between 
OPC UA server and OPC UA client are digitally signed to 
provide authentication and integrity. Messages are optionally 
encrypted to provide confidentiality as per need basis. TLS 
protocol [23] is used for providing these security features to 
the exchanged messages. 
E. Auditability 
Event logging is supported in OPC UA for recording 
important user and system activities such as user access logs 
and communication logs on the OPC UA server, when OPC 
UA clients connects to it. 
F. Security policy management 
Security policies like cryptographic key sizes, type of 
crypto algorithms, key expiry time etc. is maintained in 
Cyber Security Management System (CSMS) [21]. Thus, the 
security policies of the OPC UA server are managed 
centrally from this management system. When an OPC UA 
client tries to connect to a OPC UA server, it performs a 
discovery mode by sending discovery messages to obtain the 
security profiles that are supported by the OPC UA server. 
This helps the OPC UA client to detect, and accordingly use 
the security policies of the OPC UA server for establishing a 
secure connection to it. 
G. Availability 
OPC UA server incorporates protection against message 
flooding, by limiting the processing of concurrent messages. 
Security against replay attacks is done by specifying 
sequence numbers and time stamping for each transacted 
messages. 
VI. 
 OPC UA SECURITY MODEL ANALYSIS FROM AN IOT 
PROSPECTIVE 
When using OPC UA in the IoT computing space, the 
probability of a security attack towards the OPC UA based 
systems will be larger. This is because the world of Internet 
is exposed to different types of sophisticated cyber threats. 
Additionally, the number of cyber security threats will 
grow, and propagation of new threats can also occur from 
the Internet domain. Hence, it is important to increase the 
security level of the OPC UA to defend against the Internet  
 
 
 
based attacks. In this section, we analyze the existing 
security workflow and specifications of OPC UA, and 
propose some ideas for enhancing the security of OPC UA, 
from an IoT perspective. Following are the security 
enhancement areas which we propose. 
A. Certificate management in IoT cloud 
X.509 based digital certificates are recommended to 
attest the identity of OPC UA applications, as per its 
standard prescribed security specifications [21]. During 
communication, an OPC UA client and server application 
shall thus perform an authentication check on each other, 
with the help of their X.509 based digital certificates. 
In Fig. 3, we describe the X.509 certificate generation 
and issuing process for the OPC UA server and client 
applications. Presently, the existing OPC UA configuration 
tool has a built in Certification Authority (CA), which 
generates certificates for the OPC UA applications, and 
stores them in a certificate storage Database. 
During the course of certificate generation process, the 
administrator of OPC UA configuration tool registers the 
credentials of each OPC UA application, and subsequently 
also generates and stores their issued certificates in a 
certificate storage database. The credentials of OPC UA 
applications could be the application name, organization 
that has built the application, etc. Then, each OPC UA 
server and client application accesses this database to obtain 
their corresponding issued certificates, and further uses their 
certificates to securely communicate among each other. In 
Figure 3.  Certificate management of OPC UA. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

the present state, the CA and certificate database of an OPC 
UA based system are managed and operated locally within 
the perimeter of an industrial automation plant. 
As we intend to integrate the existing industrial 
automation system with an IoT infrastructure by using the 
complementary OPC UA technology, we propose to shift 
and deploy the CA functionality and certificate storage 
database of the existing OPC UA based systems into the 
IoT’s cloud computing space. This proposal of shifting is 
depicted using the red dotted mark, as referred in Fig. 3. The 
benefit of shifting the OPC UA certificate management 
functionalities into the IoT cloud is that it will enable to 
manage the ability to manage the certificates of various 
OPC UA server and client applications from any 
geographical location. This will increase the flexibility and 
scalability of managing the certificates of OPC UA 
applications. 
However, operating the certificate management feature 
in the IoT cloud space has some business challenges too. 
Typically, each industrial automation plant tries maintaining 
and operating its CA in its own corporate network. This is 
done in order to maintain the certificate related security 
policies within its perimeter. Therefore, the existing 
industrial automation plant owners may not be ready and 
flexible enough to move their CAs into the IoT cloud space. 
B. Secure registration of OPC UA applications 
We also suggest to consider a secure registration of OPC 
UA application credentials in the CA, which is managing 
the certificates of OPC UA applications. As explained 
before, that in the existing scenario, the OPC UA 
configuration tool registers the credentials of each OPC UA 
application, and subsequently generates certificates for the 
registered applications with its inbuilt CA. Before 
registration, neither the OPC UA configuration tool nor the 
administrator of the tool, verifies whether or not the 
credentials of OPC UA applications are valid. Checking the 
authenticity of these credentials is crucial for the initial trust 
establishment of legitimate OPC UA applications with the 
CA. Before registering each credential of OPC UA 
applications in the CA, it is important to check their 
authenticity. If the registered credentials belong to a rogue 
OPC UA application, the malicious application will manage 
to legitimately obtain a certificate from the CA. An attacker 
can further use the rogue application to inject attacks and 
perform harmful operations on the industrial automation 
system. The legitimate credentials of OPC UA applications 
should also be stored and accessed securely. Access to the 
legitimate credentials of OPC UA applications should be 
granted only to authorize people. If these credentials reach 
the hands of an attacker, then the attacker can register a 
rogue application with the same legitimate credentials in the 
CA, which is managing the certificates of OPC UA 
applications. 
C. Secure management of time synchronization messages 
If a time server from the Internet domain is used for 
synchronizing the timings of OPC UA devices, it is also 
important to validate the authenticity of time server and 
secure the time synchronization messages. A rogue time 
server can synchronize the OPC UA device with incorrect 
timings, which could negatively affect certain automation 
applications. These could have devastating effect on 
automation applications, whose operations are dependent on 
accurate timings. Denial of Service (DoS) attack can also be 
injected in the OPC UA enabled devices by improper 
expiration of OPC UA application certificates. This can be 
caused by wrong device timings. If the certificate of a OPC 
UA server application expires before its lifetime, then OPC 
UA clients may face issues in connecting to the OPC UA 
server due to certificate expiry error. 
D. Enhance user authentication and authorization 
Introducing OPC UA in the IoT space will certainly also 
increase the number of legitimate users, who can access the 
OPC UA server and client applications from the Internet. A 
secure management of such increasing number of user 
credentials is important for allowing only legitimate user 
operations on the OPC UA. 
E. Secure web services 
OPC UA web servers should also adopt security 
measures against Cross-site Scripting (XSS) and code 
injection attacks [24]. In such attacks, the attacker tries 
injecting malicious scripts in a legitimate web server. By 
injecting such rogue scripts, the legitimate OPC UA web 
server can malfunction or be directed to execute devastating 
operations. Such rogue operations include illegitimately 
changing the configuration parameters of the OPC UA 
enabled industrial automation device. This can make the 
device perform unintended and rogue operations inside the 
automation plant. XSS and code injection based attacks are 
becoming very popular web attacks in the Internet space 
[25]. Therefore, OPC UA web server should also consider 
and implement countermeasures against such sophisticated 
web attacks.  
Proper sanitization of data within the OPC UA web 
servers is also recommended for securing against such 
Internet based web attacks. Also, disabling the unnecessary 
web services of OPC UA is a good security practice to 
reduce the attacking surface for the Internet attackers. 
F. Categorization and securing event loggings 
Using OPC UA in the IoT space would create a mixture 
of OPC UA type events and Internet based events, like the 
traditional IT related events. For ensuring a well-structured 
audit log, a clear separation for these two types of event 
would make the event logs more readily understandable to 
the operators of the industrial plant. For example, a OPC 
UA system monitoring engineer would be interested to view 
the OPC UA event logs instead of IT type events. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

Categorization of event logs would enable the OPC UA 
engineers to quickly view the OPC UA event type data. It is 
also required to securely transport the event log messages to 
the OPC UA event logging server. This can be done by 
digitally signing and optionally encrypting them, when 
required. This is important especially if the OPC UA event 
logging and management server is operating in the IoT 
cloud. It will prevent the attackers from the Internet to 
produce fake or to modify the legitimate event log 
messages, which could create a wrong status of the 
industrial automation system. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
IoT is a new technology revamp, which will provide the 
infrastructure for exchanging the information across different 
entities. For an industrial automation system, IoT is the one 
key 
enabler 
for 
facilitating 
dynamic 
business 
and 
engineering processes. We have analyzed and proposed an 
architecture which describes how the industry proven OPC 
UA technology can be used for evolving, and thus enabling 
an industrial automation system to exchange information 
with an IoT infrastructure. We have also analyzed the 
existing security model of OPC UA from an IoT’s 
perspective. Based on our security analysis, we have 
proposed and thus highlighted the suggested areas where 
security improvements are required when using OPC UA in 
the IoT’s space. The performance verification and validation 
of our proposed architecture needs to be thoroughly tested in 
a real industrial automation system. Our future research work 
shall focus towards such experimental evaluations of our 
proposed architecture. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Galloway, Hancke B, "Introduction to Industrial Control Networks," 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE , vol.15, no.2, 
pp.860,880, Second Quarter 2013  
[2] http://www.erp.com/component/content/article/324-erp-archive/4407-
erp.html [accessed May 2015]  
[3] McClellan, Michael (1997). Applying Manufacturing Execution 
Systems. Boca Raton, Fl: St. Lucie/APICS. ISBN 1574441353. 
[4] OPC UA Specification, Part-1 Overview and Concepts. Reterived 
from https://opcfoundation.org/developer-tools/specifications-unified-
architecture/part-1-overview-and-concepts/ [accessed Feb 2015] 
[5] Kevin A (22 June 2009). That Internet of Things Thing, in the real 
world things matter more than idea. Reterived from http://www.rfid-.   
journal.com/articles/view?4986 [accessed December 2014] 
[6]  Xu Li,He Wu,Shancang Li, "Internet of Things in Industries: A 
Survey," Industrial Informatics, IEEE Transactions on , vol.10, no.4, 
pp.2233,2243, Nov. 2014 doi: 10.1109/TII.2014.2300753 
[7] Kim M.,  Hwang J, ”New approach for Convergence of IT + 
pharmaceutical industry,” Information and Communication 
Technology Convergence, (ICTC),  2010 International Conference on 
, pp.569,570, 17-19 Nov. 2010 
[8] Song Bo, Xing Qian, ”On security detecting architechture of food 
industry based on Internet of Things,” Automation and Logistics 
(ICAL), 2011, IEEE International Conference on , pp.81,85, 15-16 
Aug. 2011 
[9] Tan L,Wang N, "Future internet: The Internet of Things," Advanced 
Computer Theory and Engineering (ICACTE), 2010 3rd International 
Conference on , pp.V5-376,V5-380, 20-22 Aug. 2010  
[10] Chen Y, ”Challenges and opportunities of internet of things,” Design 
Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), 2012 17th Asia and South 
Pacific, pp.383, 388, Jan. 30 2012-Feb. 2 2012 
[11] Imtiaz, J., Jasperneite, J., "Scalability of OPC-UA down to the chip 
level enables “Internet of Things”," Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 
2013 11th IEEE International Conference on , pp.500,505, 29-31 July 
2013  
[12] Copie A, Fortis T, Munteanu, V.I, ”Benchmarking cloud databases 
for the requirements of the Internet of Things,” Information 
Technology Interfaces (ITI), Proceedings of the ITI 2013 35th 
International Conference on , pp.77,82, 24-27 June 2013 
[13] Recommendations for implementing the strategic initiative 
INDUSTRIE 4.0, Acatech, April 2013. Reterived from 
http://www.acatech.de/fileadmin/user_upload/Baumstruktur_nach_W
ebsite/Acatech/root/de/Material_fuer_Sonderseiten/Industrie_4.0/Fina
l_report__Industrie_4.0_accessible.pdf 
[14] Perera C., Liu C.H., Jayawardena S., Min Chen, "A Survey on 
Internet of Things From Industrial Market Perspective," Access, 
IEEE, pp.1660,1679, 2014 doi:  0.1109/ACCESS.2015.2389854  
[15] Singh D., "Developing an architecture: Scalability, mobility, control, 
and isolation on future internet services," Advances in Computing, 
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), 2013  
[16] Ungurean I., Gaitan N., Gaitan V G., "An IoT architecture for things 
from industrial environment," Communications (COMM), 2014 10th 
International Conference on , pp.1,4, 29-31 May 2014  
[17] http://www.opcconnect.com/dotnet.php [accessed Jan 2015]  
[18] Keoh S, “Securing the Internet of Things: A Standardization 
Perspective”, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, Vol. 1, No. 3, June 
2014 
[19] Sajjad S M, Yousafy M, “Security Analysis of IEEE 802.15.4 MAC 
in the context of Internet of Things (IoT)”, Proceedings of the 2014 
Conference on Information Assurance and Cyber Security (CIACS) 
[20] https://opcfoundation.org/ [accessed Jan 2015] 
[21] OPC UA Security Standard Specifications, OPC UA Specification 
Part 2: Security Model Release. Reterived from https://opcfoundation. 
org/developer-tools/specifications-unified-architecture/part-2-
security-model [accessed Feb 2015] 
[22] RFC 2459, X.509 Certificate.Reterived from https://www.ietf.org/rfc/ 
rfc2459 [accessed Feb 2015] 
[23] RFC 5246, Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol, Version 1.2. 
Reterived from https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc5246 [accessed Feb 
2015] 
[24] Cross-site Scripting, OWASP guide to XSS attacks. Reterived from 
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Cross-site_Scripting_%28XSS%29 
[accessed Feb 2015] 
[25] Web Hacking Incident Database (WHID) 2013 statistical records for 
XSS attacks. Reterived from http://projects.webappsec.org/w/page/ 
13246995/Web-Hacking-Incident-Database#RealTimeStatistics 
[accessed Mar 2015]
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

