An Integrated TDMA-Based MAC and Routing Solution for Airborne Backbone 
Networks Using Directional Antennas 
 
Yamin Al-Mousa, William Huba and Nirmala Shenoy 
Laboratory of wireless networking and security 
Rochester Institute of Technology 
Rochester, NY, USA 
{ysavks, wgh4235, nxsvks}@rit.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Airborne backbone networks are useful in tactical 
applications to interconnect tactical sub-networks. Major 
challenge in such networks which normally comprise large 
numbers of highly mobile nodes lie in the design of medium 
access control (MAC) and routing protocols that can 
accommodate scalability and the highly dynamic topology. In 
this work, we propose an integrated solution of time division 
multiple access (TDMA) based MAC and routing protocols, 
both of which use the attributes of a clustering scheme, where 
clustering was adopted to address scalability. While the 
clustering scheme also establishes proactive routes between 
cluster clients and cluster head, the reactive routing protocol 
uses both the cluster attributes and the proactive routes within 
the cluster to address the challenges of high dynamics in the 
airborne network. The MAC is equipped with TDMA 
scheduler for operation with directional antennas used in the 
airborne nodes to provide spatial reuse. We assess the 
performance of the proposed integrated solution in terms of 
success rate and latency in packet delivery. 
Keywords-Airborne Backbone Network, Cluster formation, 
TDMA, Routing, MAC, Directional Antennas 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Backbone networks formed by airborne nodes such as 
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are of significant 
importance in tactical applications as they can be used to 
connect several tactical sub-networks which are at distance 
from one another. Such airborne nodes have significant 
processing and computation capabilities and can be equipped 
with directional antennas Though the targeted application is 
that of a backbone network, we limit our contribution to 
demonstrating the capability of the airborne backbone 
network to forward data reliably between two distant nodes 
in the backbone network, which could serve as the gateway 
points to two distant sub-networks. 
Airborne backbone networks comprise large number of 
mobile nodes at speeds ranging from 200 to 300 km/h 
making scalability and highly dynamic topology two of the 
main challenges for designing an efficient solution. The 
contribution of this work is to provide an integrated solution 
of TDMA-Based MAC and routing protocols that can 
overcome previous challenges through following features: 
 
• 
Clustering: was adopted to address scalability. We 
assume that cluster heads (CHs) are pre-assigned to 
last for entire mission duration. A cluster contains 
one CH and several cluster clients (CCs). Proactive 
routes are formed within a cluster, while routes 
across clusters are maintained reactively. 
• 
Multiple redundant proactive routes: are formed 
between a CC and its CH so that if one route is lost 
another is ready to use, thus supporting dynamic 
topology. These routes are formed using the Meshed 
Tree algorithm [1] which simplifies proactive route 
formation and maintenance thanks to its unique 
naming scheme. 
• 
Reactive routes: are maintained as a sequence of 
clusters, hence, reactive route discovery and 
maintenance is done at cluster level. This adds 
resiliency against mobility since reactive routes are 
not dependent on specific nodes, in addition to 
reducing control message flooding. Since reactive 
routes are concatenation of proactive routes which 
are continually updated with node mobility, the 
probability of stale reactive routes is low. 
• 
Hybrid time division multiple access (TDMA) 
scheduler: is adopted by the MAC and uses the 
attributes of a multi hop clustering scheme to 
schedule time slots for CCs in the cluster. The 
scheduler uses directional antennas and is aware of 
the routing mechanism and proactive routes naming 
scheme within the cluster; hence schedules slots for 
data routing from CH to CCs and CCs to CH in an 
efficient manner providing spatial reuse. 
 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we 
highlight related work in the area of cluster based routing 
and TDMA scheduling. In Section III, we provide details of 
the physical layer. An abbreviated description of the meshed 
tree clustering scheme is provided in Section IV, followed by 
the proposed solution description including the proactive, 
reactive routing protocol and the TDMA scheduler. In 
Section V, simulation details with results and performance 
analysis are presented. Section VI provides concluding 
remarks and planned future work. 
234
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we present some work related to cluster 
based routing and TDMA scheduling. Though our solution 
combines both schemes effectively, a similar approach is not 
available in the literature to the best of our knowledge. 
Hence the first part of the related work deals with cluster 
based routing. This topic has been researched extensively; 
we present only those closely related to our approach.  The 
second part of related work deals with TDMA schedulers, 
especially the ones that use directional antennas and leverage 
spatial reuse, as they are closely related to our approach. 
A. Cluster Based Routing 
Several reviews are available that compare across 
different types of routing protocols [2-6], namely proactive, 
reactive and hybrid routing protocols. Reactive and hybrid 
routing protocols are desirable when communications 
between distant nodes in a MANET are required and the 
MANET is not very dense. In reactive routing protocols a 
source node discovers and maintains several cached routes 
to a destination node. As mobility increases, route caching 
becomes ineffective as pre-discovered routes break down, 
requiring repeated route discoveries [10]. 
Partitioning the MANET through clustering and zoning 
is useful to limit control messages and also to address 
scalability. Hybrid routing protocols normally adopt zoning 
or clustering, and then use proactive routing protocols within 
the zone and reactive routing protocols to communicate with 
nodes outside of a zone. The Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) 
[11] is one such hybrid routing protocol, where each node 
has a pre-defined zone centered at itself. ZRP proposes a 
framework, whereby any proactive routing protocol can be 
adopted within the zone and any reactive routing protocol 
can be adopted to communicate outside of the zone. Multi 
path distance vector zone routing protocol (MDVZRP) [12] 
is an implementation of ZRP that uses multi path Destination 
Sequence Distance Vector (DSDV) [9] for proactive routing 
and Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) [7] for 
reactive routing. LANMAR [13] routing protocol defines 
logical groups to address scalability where by landmark 
nodes keep track of the groups. A local scope routing scheme 
based on Fisheye State Routing is used in the group. To 
forward outside the scope, packets are routed towards the 
landmark in the destination’s logical group. In Hybrid 
Cluster Routing [14] multi-hop clusters are established. 
However in this case intra-cluster uses a reactive routing 
scheme similar to AODV and Dynamic Source Routing,[8] 
while inter cluster maintenance is done proactively. 
Our Approach: is a hybrid cluster based routing 
protocol. Using the Meshed Tree algorithm proactive routes 
are formed between CCs and CHs. For routing across 
clusters a reactive routing approach at cluster level, which 
uses concatenations of proactive routes within the clusters, is 
adopted. We argue that our approach is different in adopting 
the Meshed Tree algorithm for cluster formation which uses 
a unique proactive route naming scheme. In more details 
each route is given a virtual ID (VID) which reveals current 
route topology information simplifying the task of forming 
and maintaining routes and helps in calculating efficient 
TDMA schedules. 
B. Schedulers: Time Division Multiple Access 
TDMA scheduling requires strict time synchronization 
among participating nodes [15]. In addition, if the nodes are 
mobile, periodic changes in the network topology require 
updated TDM schedules, to be computed, preferably with 
low complexity and propagated to all concerned nodes in a 
timely and an efficient manner.  
A major challenge in the design of a TDMA scheduler 
is the generation of schedules. Several algorithms directed 
towards scheduling can be noted in the literature [16]. 
Scheduling algorithms fall under two main categories 
distributed or centralized. In the centralized approach, 
scheduling is performed by a scheduler that gathers 
information about all nodes and their links to compute the 
schedule. This is a difficult task to achieve in a timely and 
resource efficient manner, especially with large numbers of 
mobile nodes. On the other hand, distributed scheduling 
requires complex algorithms with intelligence to enable 
each node to decide their schedules with minimal conflicts.  
 Our Approach uses hybrid scheduling, which is possible 
due to the cluster based approach. Within a cluster the CH is 
the scheduler that decides the transmission reception 
schedules for its CCs. However each cluster’s schedule is 
determined independently by its CH giving conflict 
consideration only to those CCs that are bordering two or 
more clusters thus making it distributed across clusters. 
Given that link assignment strategies are efficient if 
employed with directional antennas [15] and as the proposed 
clustering scheme has such link information available in a 
cluster we decided to adopt this type of assignment strategy. 
However, our approach is different in using topology 
information contained in proactive route naming scheme to 
calculate efficient TDMA schedule and maximize spatial 
reuse with the aid of directional antennas. 
III. 
THE PHYSICAL LAYER 
In this section, we describe the operational features of the 
directional antenna system used at the physical layer. All 
nodes in the airborne network can be equipped with four 
phased array antennas capable of forming two beam widths. 
One is focused with a beam angle of 10o and the other is 
defocused with a beam angle of 90o. In the focused beam 
mode the data rate is 50 Mbps and in the defocused mode the 
data rate is 1.5 Mbps. Each antenna array covers a quadrant 
and is independently steerable to focus in a particular 
direction within that quadrant in the focused beam mode.  
We assume each node is equipped with Global 
Positioning System (GPS) to provide node position. Every 
node appends its GPS location in the packets it transmits. 
Receiving (neighbor) nodes log and continuously update a 
“location” cache with the transmitting node’s location. The 
cache stores a maximum of the last three positions of any 
node. Cached location information is used to track and 
estimate the current location of neighboring nodes during 
packet transmission. The estimated location of a receiver 
node is used, by a transmitting node, to control the transmit 
235
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

power and form a directed beam to the receiver node by 
using the most appropriate of its phased array antennas.  
GPS is also used for time synchronization, and we 
assume that all nodes are synchronized to time slot 
boundaries and the beginning of new frames. However, a 
guard time is included in each time slot to offset 
synchronization errors as well as to allow for beam 
switching. 
IV. 
MESHED TREE CLUSTERS 
It is important to understand the meshed tree cluster 
formation and proactive routing within the cluster as they 
are used both by the scheduling algorithm and reactive 
routing protocol. The clustering scheme adopted in this 
work, forms multi hop clusters using the Meshed Tree 
algorithm [1], where the root of the meshed tree is at the 
CH. A single ‘meshed tree’ cluster formation is described 
with the aid of Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Cluster Formation Based on Meshed Trees 
The dotted lines connect nodes that are in communication 
range with one another at the physical layer. The cluster head 
is labeled ‘CH’. Nodes A to G are the CCs. For simplicity in 
explanation, the meshed tree formation is restricted to nodes 
that are connected to the CH, by a maximum of 3 hops. At 
each node several ‘values or IDs’ have been noted. These are 
the virtual IDs (VIDs) assigned to the CC defining branches, 
proactive routes, linking it with its CH. Assuming that the 
CH has a VID ‘1’, all its CCs have ‘1’ as a prefix in their 
VIDs. Any CC that attaches to a branch is assigned a VID, 
which will inherit the prefix from its parent node, followed 
by an integer, which indicates the child number under that 
parent. In this work we limit the number of children to nine 
and use a single digit without loss of generality. 
A. Proactive Routes in the Cluster 
In Figure 1, each branch is a sequence of VIDs that is 
assigned to CCs connecting at different points of the branch. 
The branches of the meshed tree thus provide the route to 
send and receive data and control packets between the CCs 
and the CH. The branch denoted by VIDs 14, 142 and 1421, 
connects nodes C (via VID 14), F (via VID 142) and E (via 
VID 1421) respectively to the CH.  
Consider packet forwarding based on VIDs in which the 
CH has a packet to send to node E. If the CH decided to use 
E’s VID 1421, it will include this as the destination address 
and broadcast the packet. Enroute nodes C then F will pick 
up the packet and forward to E. This is possible as the VIDs 
for nodes C and F are contained in E’s VID. The VID of a 
node thus provides a virtual path vector from the CH to 
itself. Note that the CH could have also used VIDs 143 or 
131 for node E, in which case the path taken by the packet 
would have been CH-C-E or CH-D-E respectively. Thus 
between the CH and node E there are multiple routes as 
identified by the multiple VIDs. The support for multiple 
routes through the multiple VIDs, allows for robust and 
dynamic route adaptability to topology changes in the 
cluster, as the nodes can request for new VIDs and join 
different branches as their neighbors change.  
B. Inter-cluster Reactive Routing 
Nodes bordering two or more clusters are allowed to join 
the branches originating from different CHs, and will 
accordingly inform their respective CHs about their multiple 
VIDs under the different clusters. This information will 
enable the CHs to avoid conflicts when scheduling timeslots 
for such border nodes. Also by allowing nodes to belong to 
multiple clusters, the single meshed tree cluster can be 
extended to multiple overlapping meshed tree (MMT) 
clusters to cover a wider area and address scalability.  
A node that has to discover a route to a distant node 
sends a ‘route request’ message to its CH(s). The CH then 
identifies the neighboring clusters based on updates from 
border nodes and forwards a copy of the ‘route request’ 
message to the border node, so that they can forward to the 
CH in the next cluster. The ‘route request’ message however 
has an entry for all the clusters that will be receiving the 
message, to avoid looping of the message.  Thus the route 
request is not forwarded by all nodes, but only by all clusters 
and follows a path CH-border node- CH and so on.  
When the CH of the destination node receives the route 
request, it will forward the route request directly to the 
destination node. The clusters forwarding the route request 
record the original sending node and the last cluster that the 
route request came from; this information is useful in 
forwarding the route response message when it returns. The 
destination node generates the route response and sends to its 
CH, which then forwards it back to the CH in the originating 
cluster and the source node along the same cluster path the 
route request took. Along the path back, all forwarding CHs 
will record the previous cluster and original sender of the 
route reply. The route between the sender and the destination 
node is thus initially set up as a sequence of CHs, but 
maintained as next cluster information. Mobility of nodes 
does not impact the reactively discovered route, as long as 
the CHs exist. Note that movement of CHs also does not 
impact the reactive routes. 
C. Scheduling in the Cluster 
The meshed tree cluster is formed in a distributed 
manner, where a node listens to its neighbor nodes 
advertising their VIDs, and decides to join any or all of the 
branches. Once a node decides to join a branch, it informs 
the CH, who registers the node as its CC and confirms its 
admittance to the cluster and accordingly updates a VID 
 
CH 
A 
B 
C 
D 
F 
G 
E 
1 
11 
12 
121 
111 
13 
14 
141 
142 
143 
1421 
131 
132 
236
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

table of its CCs as shown in Table 1 for the cluster in Figure 
1. Thus the ‘meshed tree’ cluster formation allows a CH to 
control the nodes it accepts; i.e., a CH can restrict admittance 
of nodes who are within a certain number of hops and not 
dmit new nodes to keep the number of CCs in the cluster 
under a certain value. This is useful to contain the scheduling 
zone of the CH. 
TABLE I.  
CLUSTER CLIENT’S VIDS LIST AT CH 
Node 
Multiple VIDs 
A 
12, 111 
B 
11, 121, 141 
C 
14 
D 
13 
E 
131, 143, 1421 
F 
142 
G 
132 
 
From the Cluster Client’s VID table, implicit topology 
information is available to the CH; for example node B has a 
VID 1421, indicates that it has a link to the node with VID 
142. The CH will use this information and its capabilities of 
controlling and communicating with the CCs to establish 
recurring time frames with a time slot scheduled for 
transmission and reception on the links between CCs and 
between CCs and CH in the cluster. As nodes, join and leave 
a cluster, the CH updates this table and announces the new 
schedule. Thus the scheduling operations are closely 
integrated with the cluster formation process. 
D. Slots and Functions 
A frame comprises of control and data slots.  In this work 
four slots are preselected for control purposes. These slots 
are used by nodes to advertise their VIDs, and other 
broadcast information; and also to listen to advertisement by 
neighbor nodes. Remaining slots are used for transferring 
data packets and other control packets between CCs and CH. 
From a node’s perspective, assigned data slots can either be 
used for reception or transmission using focused beams.   
Slots that are not assigned to be either control or data 
slots are considered temporary slots. Nodes may use such 
temp slots to transmit packets when they do not have an 
assigned data slot yet, such as during the registration process. 
When a node does not have anything to send on a temp slot, 
it will listen for any incoming transmissions. At any time 
these slots can be changed to an assigned data slot by the 
CH.  
The cluster schedule is distributed by the CH to all CCs 
in the cluster at the start of a frame with “beacon” packets. 
Each CC independently chooses the ‘best’ (in our case 
shortest, which is decided on the VID length) route to 
forward the beacon packet using meshed tree’s routing 
information. Schedules for a given frame are transmitted one 
frame ahead to allow enough time for the beacon packets to 
reach nodes that are at the maximum hops from the CH. 
E. Sample Schedule 
A sample schedule generated by the proposed scheduler 
is given in Table 2. Each column is a slot; we show only 12 
slots, which is a partial frame. In the first column are the 
node’s unique IDs, which in this case are the alphabets we 
used for identifying the CCs in Figure 1. In each column we 
mark the VID of the sending and the receiving nodes, and 
the arrow shows the direction of transmission. For example 
in slot 1 CH (VID ‘1’) sends to node A with VID ‘11’. The 
slot allocation process, proceeds by allocating slots for the 
CH to 1 hop nodes, followed by the 1 hop CCs sending to 
their 2 hop children and the 2 hop CCs sending to their 3 hop 
children and so on. However, due to the directional antennas 
used we can have simultaneous transmission between two 
pairs of distinct nodes; for example in slot 3 CH is sending to 
node D on VID 13, but node B using VID ‘11’ is sending to 
node A at VID ‘111’. A closer look at the schedule will 
reveal that the flow from the outer leaf nodes to the CH is the 
mirror of the allocation process from CH to leaf nodes i.e., 
the 1st hop children are allocated the last time slots in the 
frame. 
TABLE II.  
SAMPLE SCHEDULE PROVIDED BY CH 
slot   
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
 
38 
39 
40 
CH 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
We conducted simulations using OPNET for 20, 50 and 
75 node multi-hop networks. All nodes were randomly 
assigned 
clockwise 
and 
counter-clockwise 
circular 
trajectories, with 100 Km radius and speeds varying between 
200, 250, 300, and 350 Km/h at 20000 m altitude. The 
circular trajectories provide a stressful test as they result in 
many route breaks. 
The frames had 28 slots each for the 20 and 50 node 
scenario, and 42 slots for the 75 node scenario, because the 
meshing in the cluster, results in most nodes using up all 6 
VIDs and hence requires more slots, which is being 
optimized. Each slot had a 12.5ms duration and a guard time 
of 1.5 ms. The cluster size was maintained at 12 with a 
maximum of 3 hop distance between a CC and CH, and the 
most VIDs a node could have was set at 6. 
Nodes in the network were randomly selected to send 1 
MB file simultaneously, in 2 KB packet sizes to destination 
nodes also randomly selected. We measured overhead, 
average hops, successful packet delivery rate, as well as 
mean packet latencies, where; 
• 
Success rate was calculated as the number of packets 
delivered to the destination node successfully as a 
percentage of the number of packets that originated 
at the sender node  
1 
11 
1 
12 
11 
111 
   13 
1 
   14 
   12 
 121 
   13 
 131 
   14 
 141 
   13 
 132 
   14 
142 
   14 
 143 
142 
1421 
Control messages 
1 
11 
1 
12 
1 
13 
111 
11 
Data flow from CH to CCs in outward direction 
Data flow from CCs to CH 
237
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

• 
Overhead was calculated as the ratio of control bits 
to the sum of control and data bits during data 
delivery.  
Each simulation was run with several seeds and the 
average values were plotted in the graphs shown in Figures 
2-7. As there are no published results for such network 
scenarios to the best of our knowledge, we use the graphs to 
highlight the performance of the proposed solution.   
A. 20 Nodes Scenario 
The number of such sending nodes were varied from 4, 8 
to 16 nodes. In the case of 16 senders, all CCs were sending 
1 MByte files to all other CCs in the network, which is stress 
test case.  
From Figure 2, the success rate was around 97% with 4 
senders and dropped to 94% with all 16 senders. With 
increasing traffic in the network, one notices the reduction in 
the overhead; this is due to the inverse relationship between 
the traffic load in the network with respect to the control bits 
generated. In Figure 3, the average packet latency increased 
from 0.7 second to 3 seconds, when the traffic in the network 
increased. We recorded the average hops encountered 
between sending and receiving nodes to get an indication of 
the distance between the communicating nodes as it affects 
the success rate and overhead in the network. However in 
this case the recorded average hops was around 3.5 hops 
 
Figure 2.  Success Rate and Overhead vs. Number of Senders 
 
Figure 3.  Packet Latency and Average Hops vs. Number of Senders 
B. 50 Nodes Scenario 
In this network scenario, the number of simultaneously 
sending nodes was varied from 10, 20 to 40. There were 10 
CHs in this scenario hence with 40 sending nodes, all CCs 
were sending to all other CCs in the network.  The success 
rate was 94% with 10 senders, and dropped to around 83% 
with 40 senders as shown in Figure 4. The overhead recorded 
is around 23%, which is higher than the 20 node scenario 
and can be attributed to the increase in route discovery 
maintenance across 50 nodes. In Figure 5, the average packet 
latency was recorded as 2.5 seconds with 10 senders and 11 
seconds with 30 senders, which is reasonable to assume with 
the increased traffic in the network. The average hops 
recorded were between 6 to 7. The consistency in 
performance and the graph trends can be considered to be 
indicative of the stability of the proposed algorithms and the 
models. 
 
Figure 4.  Success Rate and Overhead vs. Number of Senders 
 
Figure 5.  Packet Latency and Average Hops vs. Number of Senders 
C. 75 Node Scenario 
In this scenario we varied the number of senders from 15, 
30 and 60 nodes. As the number of CHs was 15, in this case 
again we had all nodes sending traffic to all other destination 
nodes. The success rate shown in Figure 6 was 90% at 15 
senders, which dropped to 70% with all 60 senders. The 
overhead was recorded to vary from 27 to 30%. In Figure 7, 
An increase in average packet latency can be noticed, which 
can be attributed to the increased traffic in the network. 
D. Summary of Results 
As stated earlier, due to the uniqueness of our approach 
we are unable to provide comparison with similar work 
conducted for airborne backbone networks. Furthermore, to 
the best of our knowledge, such stressful MANET scenario 
evaluations are also not available in the literature, because of 
which we present results, based on some targeted goals. 
These being a high value of successfully delivered 
packets with some acceptable latencies, based on the traffic 
8
9
10
11
12
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
4
8
16
overhead 
success rate 
success rate %
overhead %
3.4
3.5
3.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
8
16
source to destn hops
packet latency 
avg packet latency in secs
avg hops
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
80
85
90
95
100
10
20
40
overhead
success rate
success rate %
overhead %
5
6
7
0
5
10
15
20
10
20
40
source to destn hops
packet latency
avg packet latency in secs
avg hops
238
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

in the network.  High success rate is difficult to achieve in 
such highly dynamic MANETs, especially when the number 
of mobile nodes is also high – several tens in this case. This 
is a good performance assessment if the type of data is files.  
As part of our future work, we plan to extend the work to 
real time services, as an airborne backbone network is 
expected to carry different types of traffic, which originate 
from its subnets, which could be ground troops, UAVs 
performing surveillance amongst others. This will include 
prioritization of traffic while forwarding at the MAC layer. 
Future work will also involve optimizing our slot assignment 
algorithm, evaluating for various slot sizes, varying number 
of frame sizes and cluster sizes. We also plan to investigate 
the impacts of meshing (intra-cluster and inter-cluster), 
which can be controlled by the number of VIDs and the 
criteria used by CCs to acquire a VID. 
 
Figure 6.  Success Rate and Overhead vs. Number of Senders 
 
Figure 7.  Packet Latency and Average Hops vs. Number of Senders 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We presented an integrated TDMA-Based MAC and 
routing protocol in this work, both of which were based on a 
meshed tree algorithm. The solution is unique both from the 
perspective of the TDMA scheduler and the routing protocol. 
The preliminary evaluations of this scheme show the very 
promising results that were obtained for airborne backbone 
networks. The consistent performance is also indicative of 
the stability of the proposed algorithms 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like also to thank Chukwuchebem 
Orakwue fo his effort in OPNET model Implementations.  
This work was supported partly by funding from Air 
Force Research Laboratories, Rome NY and Office of the 
Naval Research.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Shenoy, N.; Yin Pan; Narayan, D.; Ross, D.; and Lutzer, C.; "Route 
robustness of a multi-meshed tree routing scheme for Internet 
MANETs," 
Global 
Telecommunications 
Conference, 
2005. 
GLOBECOM '05. IEEE , vol.6, no., pp.6 pp.-3351, 2-2 Dec. 2005. 
[2] Qin, L. and Kunz, T., “Survey on Mobile Ad Hoc Network routing 
protocols and cross-layer design,” Technical Report, Systems and 
Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Aug. 2004  
[3] Abolhasan M., Wysocki T., and Dutkiewicz E., “A review of routing 
protocols for mobile ad hoc networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 2, 
Issue 1, pp. 1-22, ISSN 1570-8705, Jan. 2004 
[4] Lang, D., “A comprehensive overview about selected Ad hoc 
networking routing protocols,” Technical Report, Department of 
Computer Science, Technische Universitat, Munchen, Mar. 2003 
[5] Qadri N. and Liotta A. “Analysis of Pervasive Mobile Ad Hoc 
Routing 
Protocols,” 
Pervasive 
Computing, 
Computer 
Communications and Networks, ISBN 978-1-84882-598-7, Springer-
Verlag London, 2009 
[6] Meghanathan N., “Survey and Taxonomy of Unicast Routing 
Protocols for Mobile Ad Hoc Netowrks,” GRAPHHOC, vol. 1, 2009 
[7] Perkins, C.; Royer E. M.; and Das, S. R., “Ad Hoc On-Demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) routing,” IETF Mobile Ad Hoc Networks 
Working Group, IETF RFC 3561, Jul. 2003 
[8] Johnson, D.; Maltz, D.; and Jetcheva, J., “The dynamic source routing 
protocol for mobile ad hoc networks,” Internet Draft, draft-ietf-
manet-dsr-07.txt, work in progress, 2002. 
[9] Perkins, C.E. and Watson, T.J., “Highly dynamic destination 
sequenced distance vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers,” 
ACM SIGCOMM_94 Conference on Communications Architectures, 
London, UK, 1994. 
[10] Das, S.R.; Perkins, C.E.; and Royer, E.M., "Performance comparison 
of two on-demand routing protocols for ad hoc networks," INFOCOM 
2000. Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and 
Communications Societies. Proceedings. IEEE , vol.1, no., pp.3-12 
vol.1, 2000 
[11] Haas, Z.J. and Pearlman, M.R., “The Performance of Query Control 
Schemes for the Zone Routing Protocol,” ACM/IEEE Transactions on 
Networking, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 427-438, August 2001 
[12] Ibrahim, I. S.; Etorban,  A.; and King, P.J.B., “Multipath Distance 
Vector Zone Routing Protocol for Mobile ad hoc networks 
(MDVZRP),” The 9th PG Net, Liverpool John Moores University, 
UK, pp. 171-176, 23-24 June 2008 
[13] Guangyu Pei; Gerla, M.; and Hong, X., “LANMAR: Landmark 
Routing for Large Scale Wireless Ad Hoc Networks with Group 
Mobility,” in Proceedings of IEEE/ACM MobiHOC 2000, pp. 11-18, 
Aug. 2000. 
[14] Xiaoguang Niu; Zhihua Tao; Gongyi Wu; Changcheng Huang; and Li 
Cui, "Hybrid Cluster Routing: An Efficient Routing Protocol for 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks," Communications, 2006. ICC '06. IEEE 
International Conference on , vol.8, no., pp.3554-3559, June 2006 
[15] Nelson R. and Kleinrock L., “Spatial-TDMA: A collision-free 
multihop 
channel 
access 
protocol,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Communications 33 (1985) pp 934–944. 
[16] Grönkvist J.; Hansson A.; and Nilsson J., “A comparison of access 
methods for multi-hop ad hoc radio networks,” IEEE Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2000, pp. 1435–1439. 
[17] Grönkvist J., “Novel Assignment Strategies for Spatial Reuse TDMA 
in Wireless Ad hoc Networks,” Wireless Networks, Springer 
Netherlands, ISSN 1022-0038, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 255 – 265, 2006
 
25
30
35
40
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
15
30
60
overhead
success rate
success rate %
overhead %
6
7
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
15
30
60
source to destn hops
packet latency
avg packet latency in secs
avg hops
239
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

