Infrastructure Optimization in a Transmission Network
Mary Luz Mouronte
Departamento de Ingenier´ıa y Arquitecturas Telem´aticas
Universidad Polit´ecnica de Madrid
Madrid, Spain
mouronte.lopez@upm.com
Abstract—This paper presents an algorithm to optimize the
number of necessary resources in a transmission network;
this procedure could be executed by the operators during the
maintenance and fulﬁllment tasks. It allows the reduction of
the investment, improvement of the resource utilization and
achievement of the high resilience. We have developed an
experimental prototype and have executed it over different
transmission networks saving resources up to a percentage of
30%.
Keywords-Transmission network; Optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper shows a method to lower the usage of resources
in a transmission network. The algorithm achieves signiﬁ-
cant savings.
A transmission network consists of end-to-end circuits
strictly designed as ring, mesh, bus and other motifs connect-
ing equipments with different link capacities (Mbps/Gbps).
This network has several components:
• Regenerators or equipments carry out the regeneration
of the signals.
• Terminal multiplexers combine the plesionchronous and
synchronous input signals into higher bitrate signals.
They are the network elements that originate and ter-
minate the signals.
• Add-Drop
Multiplexers
(ADM)/Optical
Add-Drop
Multiplexers
(OADM)
combine
several
lower-
bandwidth streams of data into a single beam of
light. An ADM also has the capability to add lower-
bandwidth signals to an existing high-bandwidth data
stream, and at the same time can extract or drop other
low-bandwidth signals, removing them from the stream
and redirecting them to some other network path.
• Digital Cross-Connects/ Optical Cross-Connects ex-
change trafﬁc between different ﬁber routes. The
key
difference
between
the
DCC/OCC
and
the
ADM/OADM is that the DCC/OCC provides a switch-
ing function, whereas the ADM/OADM performs a
multiplexing function. The DCC/OCC moves trafﬁc
from one facility route to another.
• Cards:
– Aggregate cards provide the line interface. They
connect the ADM to the exchange via ﬁbre optical
cables.
– Tributary cards collect customer trafﬁc and pass
them, via the common cards, to the aggregate
cards. Tributary cards are used to provide interfaces
to one or more lower speed devices.
– Other types of cards.
Transmission networks are managed by means of Network
Element Managers (NEMs), SubNetwork Managers (SNMs)
and, in some cases, also by a Network Management System
(NMS).
Link connection, trails and others entities for the tansmis-
sion network are deﬁned in [1]:
• A link connection is a transport entity provided by
the client/server association. It is formed by a near-
end adaptation function, a server trail and a far-end
adaptation function between connection points.
• A trail is a transport entity in a server layer which is
responsible for the integrity of the transfer of character-
istic information from one or more client network layers
and between server layer access points. It deﬁnes the
association between access points in the same transport
network layer. It is formed by combining a near-end
trail termination function, a network connection and a
far-end trail termination function.
The proposed algorithm reduces the usage of resources in
a transmission network. The resource release is obtained by
the optimization of:
• Port usage in tributary cards.
• Occupancy rate in trails. The aim is the reduction of
the hop number in the trail from the origin to the
destination point, by increasing the occupancy rate in
link connections.
The analysis is done independently over the different
network layers. Additionally, when a protected trail
is examined by the procedure, it is veriﬁed that no
optimized trail is matched with the current backup trail.
This optimization method has been included as a software
module in a NMS, which manages different vendors (Nor-
tel, Alcatel-Lucent, Ericsson and Huawei) and technologies
(Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH), Ethernet over SDH,
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)). This fact ver-
iﬁed the operation results.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
details related works, Section III gives an overview about
the transmission network, algorithm is described in Section
IV, Section V summarizes the results of applying a prototype
on a life transmission network, and Section VI describes the
main conclusions.
II. RELATED WORKS
There are several works on optimization in a network, for
example:
In [2], refering to the traditional multicast IP network,
authors describe a method based on ant colony algorithms to
minimize unnecessary overhead while achieving the desired
throughput in a multicast scenario. In this type of network,
the intermediate nodes take care of replicating the packet to
reach multiple receivers only when necessary, so it is difﬁ-
cult for the network to achieve the maximum transmission
rate. However, not all intermediate nodes are required for
network coding operations.
In [3], authors present an algorithm with two optimization
modes in a network architecture with a three-layer IP/MPLS
over SDH over WDM: in optimization mode 1, the service
blocked in the upper layer can be transmitted to the lower
layer by its idle resources; in optimization mode 2, authors
regard the three-layer network as an integrated network and
search route for each service in the integrated network.
In [4], the author’s research addresses the problem of
Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) for survivable
networks with the objective of optimizing the needed wave-
length links and the number of optical/electrical devices.
The main differences between the aforementioned meth-
ods and the presented procedure are:
• It maximizes the tributary cards with zero occupation
rate and the server trails with minimum number of hops
for a speciﬁc occupation rate.
• It works in an multiprovider and multitechnology en-
vironment. In an operative environment, NEMs have
analysis tools which optimize subnetworks within each
manufacturer domain. However, networks are com-
posed of different technologies and vendors. They have
isolated management domains where it is not possible
to analyze and optimize with a whole network vision.
III. TRANSMISSION NETWORK
Transmission networks are increasingly demanding greater
capacity and more effective communications to support
telecommunications services.
Standards agencies deﬁne a set of International Telecom-
munication Union (ITU) recommendations. [1], [5],[6], [7],
[8], [9], [10], and [14] are designed to build telecommunica-
tion networks that allow greater ﬂexibility and interconnec-
tion capacity between different technologies and equipment
manufacturers.
ITU-T recommendations deﬁne a transport network for
different technologies. Currently, transmission networks are
set up mainly with SDH and OTH (Optical Transport Hier-
archy).
According to ITU-T deﬁnitions, transmission networks
are divided into independent layers where each layer has a
server-client relationship with the adjacent layers. Each layer
is also divided to reﬂect the internal structure and enable its
management.
On a physical level, these networks are set up by nodes
and connections between them. The nodes consist of racks
containing cards in charge of performing different tasks in
the network.
• Tributary cards: they introduce the client signal into the
network.
• Aggregate cards: they add client signals to a server
signal which is transmitted to other nodes through a
physical trail.
• Matrix: it cross-connects signals to drive their route.
This matrix can be electrical (SDH, OTH electric layer)
or optical (OTH electric layer).
• Control card: it is responsible for node control.
• Transponder: it receives client signals and adapts them
to optical signals for the Optical Transport Network
(OTN).
• Muxponder: it is a hybrid card, with tributary ports, ag-
gregate ports and electric cross-connect capacity (they
are common in OTN technology).
• Ampliﬁers, Filters: they adapt the signal to physical
transmission media.
The SDH network structure is deﬁned in the ITU-T rec-
ommendation G.783 (Characteristics of synchronous digital
hierarchy (SDH) equipment functional blocks) [1]. This doc-
ument describes its layered structure and interfaces between
different network layers.
• Physical layer SDH.
• RS: Regenerator Section layer.
• MS: Multiplex Section layer.
• HO: High Order trail layer.
• LO: Low Order trail layer.
The OTN network structure is deﬁned in the ITU-T recom-
mendation G.809/Y1331 (Interfaces for the Optical Trans-
port Network (OTN)) [14]. This document describes the
layered structure and interfaces among different network
layers.
• OTS: Optical Transmission Section.
• OMS: Optical Multiplex Section.
• OCh: Optical Channel.
• OTU: Optical channel Transport Unit. There are differ-
ent units (OTUk), where k can take values 1,2,3,4 and
represents the signal speed: 2,5 Gb/s, 10 Gb/s, 40 Gb/s,
100 Gb/s.
• ODU: Optical channel Data Unit. There are different
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

units (ODUk), where k can take values 0,1,2,3,4 and
represents the signal speed: 1,2 Gb/s, 2,5 Gb/s, 10
Gb/s, 40 Gb/s, 100Gb/s. A lower level ODU can be
multiplexed into a high level ODU using multiplexing
TDM (Time Division Multiplex).
• OPU: Optical Payload Unit. Layer for adapting the
client signal to the ODU channel payload. Like the
OTU and ODU channels, there are different OPUk
values depending on channel speed.
In their inception, networks are planned in order to
optimize resources such as nodes, cards, ports and link
connections. The aim is to reduce the infrastructure costs
taking into account the forecast trafﬁc growth due to the
emergence of new services.
Transmission networks are
constituted as interconnected islands, each island belonging
to a single vendor. Network design and planning is carried
out over these management islands without an end to end
vision over the whole network.
Network operation results in several processes which add,
modify and remove services may cause a non optimal usage
of elements such as:
• Tributary cards with low occupancy.
• Server trails with low occupancy.
• Network layers fragmentation that results in low efﬁ-
ciency trails.
The network operators need to manage the usage of
resources by means of end to end optimization mechanisms,
which will avoid the network capacity degradation. Our
algorithm, which is included as a software module within
NMS, can be a very useful tool.
IV. ALGORITHM
Our optimization procedure uses the following input infor-
mation relating to the network structure, which is obtained
from NMS:
• The trails that support other low order layer trails, the
available capacity in them and the equipments where
they end.
• Ports:
– The tributary ports that perform termination func-
tion on low order trails in SDH or WDM equip-
ments.
– Aggregated ports or line ports.
• Cards.
• Layer trails to analyze:
– Client layer trails with source and destination
points in the same node, in order to group trafﬁc
and to release resources in cards with tributary
ports.
– Server layer trails aiming to look up alternative
trails which allow reducing the hop number and
releasing resources in the transmission media and
in cards with aggregated ports.
• The algorithm also receives the occupancy rate in each
server layer, which is established by the operator.
Once the information is stored, the procedure performs
the two following analysis:
• Analysis type 1. Method for tributary card optimization
in a exchange ofﬁce: It calculates the tributary card
occupancy rate and redistributes the input ports in the
cards with low occupation in other busier cards, thus
some cards are released.
The details of tributary card optimization procedure
are outlined in Fig 1. The following parameters are
estimated:
– ORCi: Occupation rate of tributary card Ci
ORCi = TotalOfBusyPortsInCi
TotalOfPortsInCi
(1)
– M : Number of tributary cards where ORCi = 0.
– Goal to achieve or maximum M value (Max[M]).
• Analysis type 2. Method for trail optimization:
– It groups the client trails with the same origin and
destination and analyzes the server trails in each
group:
∗ The server trail with the least number of
hops between source and destination points is
searched applying the Bellman-Ford algorithm
[15], [16].
∗ If these server trails have not reached the max-
imum occupancy rate set by the operator (who
can reserve resources for future network deploy-
ments), the client trails are set-up in them. When
the maximum occupancy rate is reached, the
procedure looks up the next shortest server trail.
The process is repeated for all client trails with
the same origin and destination.
– By reducing the server trail size, it is possible to
release resources which will be available for setting
up other client trails.
The details for the server trail optimizing procedure in
each layer are outlined in Fig 2. This procedure is ap-
plied on each server layer recursively until speciﬁed by
the operator. The following parameters are estimated:
– G : Set of server trails with the same origin and
destination.
– ORj: Occupation rate of j, where j : is the server
trail j.
ORj = TotalOfBusyLinkConnectionsInj
TotalOfLinkConnectionsInj
(2)
– E : Set of server trails in G with the least number
of hops and where occupation rate is = ID, ID
is the occupation rate for server trails set by the
operator.
– Goal to achieve or maximum E value (Max[E]).
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure. 1 Procedure for tributary cards optimization.
Fig 3 shows a network situation where the algorithm can
be applied:
• Equipments: A, B, C, D, E
• Cards:
– Equipment A: 2 cards with 2 tributary ports, and
2 cards with 2 aggregated ports.
– Equipment B: 2 cards with 2 tributary ports, and
2 cards with 2 tributary ports.
– Equipment C: 2 cards with 2 tributary ports, and
2 cards with 2 aggregated ports.
– Equipment D: 2 cards with 2 tributary ports and 2
cards with 2 aggregated ports.
– Equipment E: 2 cards with 2 tributary ports and 2
Figure. 2 Procedure for server path optimization.
cards with 2 aggregated ports.
• Physical trails: A-B, A-E, B-C, B-D, B-E, C-D, C-E,
D-E
• Client trails: A-B, A-B-C,A-E-B-C, B-D, E-B-C, E-B-
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure. 3 Network situation to be optimized.
Figure. 4 Optimized network by means of our algorithm.
D
Fig 4 shows the obtained results. 3 cards are released by
grouping ports in cards (6 cards were used previously) and
3 physical trails (only one was available before) are emptied
by restoration of client trails.
V. RESULTS
An experimental prototype aimed to test and validate the
optimization improvement in a network has been prepared.
Our optimization method is developed in PL/SQL and
C++ language. These programs are included as a module
in a NMS of a Telecommunication Operator where they
interact with its inventory to obtain and update the network
information. The programs are executed in the NMS by the
operator when maintenance or fulﬁllment tasks are carried
out.
We also implemented the necessary programs to compare
with Shortest trail First (SPF) and Constrained Shortest trail
First (CSPF) algorithms.
The NMS is a uniﬁed network management solution
which provides end to end view and homogenous functions
across different vendors. Furthermore, it executes all busi-
ness processes related to the transmission network and its
services: network fullﬁlment, circuit provisioning, network
supervision and performance monitoring. This NMS man-
ages SDH, Ethernet over SDH and WDM networks.
The NMS is a system constructed around a standards
based network model, supported by an ORACLE DBMS,
with a business logic layer that allows interaction with the
core applications through a CORBA bus. The NMS works as
a centralized system, with a primary machine of 16 CPUs,
another one of 4 for the mediation with the plant and three
more for users access.
In our validation test, 30 large networks (more than
one province), 50 mid-size networks (provinces) and 125
small networks (provincial subdivisions) were evaluated.
The networks had different topologies: point-to-point links,
rings (single and dual), fully connected meshes, and the
following characteristics:
• Big size network (average values): equipments: 20,248;
circuits: 11,233; trails: 22,538; cards: 328,443; ports:
523,277 (tributary ports: 446,741; aggregate ports:
76,536).
• Medium size network (average values): equipments:
4,193; circuits: 5,274; trails: 16,064; cards: 90,343;
ports: 118,427 (tributary ports: 108,806; aggregate
ports: 10,341).
• Small size network (average values): equipments:
3,237; circuits: 1,233; trails: 1,823; cards: 11,243; ports:
15,456 (tributary ports: 9,235; aggregate ports: 6,221).
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this research, we show a method to check and improve
the element usage in the trails with an entire network
vision (multi-provider and multi-technology environment);
up to now the telecommunication operators just have tools
to optimize subnetworks within each manufacturer domain.
Besides, the algorithm obtains good results in an operative
environment.
The two previous features are the principal novelty in our
algorithm, which offers the following beneﬁts:
• Signiﬁcant resource savings by releasing cards with
tributary ports, delivering link connections and redis-
tributing trails.
• Higher quality deployment due to redistribution of
resources. Setup, modiﬁcation and removal operations
do not usually take into account the whole network
(with several vendors and technologies), so they do not
use resources that could be employed with a different
allocation.
• Resilience improvement. Minor resources to support a
speciﬁc trafﬁc demand are necessary (i.e. there is lower
error probability in the network).
REFERENCES
[1] ”ITUT Recommendation G.803: Architectures of Transport
Networks
Based
on
the
Synchronous
Digital
Hierarchy
(SDH)”. March 2000. http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.803/en,
May 2011.
[2] J. L. Yun Pan, ”Research of network coding resources op-
timization based on ant colony optimization”, International
Conference on Computer Application and System Modeling
(ICCASM 2020), IEEE Xplore, vol. 11, pp. 135-138, Novem-
ber 2010.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

[3] Z- Wei, L. San-yang and Q- I. Xiao-gang, ”Integrated resources
optimization in three-layer dynamic network”, Journal of Con-
vergence Information Technology, vol. 5, No. 6, pp. 40-46,
August 2010.
[4] K. Wang, ”Resource optimization and QoS for WDM optical
networks”, Doctoral Dissertation, University of Nebraska at
Lincoln, NB, USA, 2006.
[5] ”ITUT
Recommendation
G.805:
Generic
functional
architecture
of
transport
networks”,
March
2000.
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.805/en, May 2011.
[6] ”ITUT Recommendation G.707: Network node interface for
the synchronous digital hierarchy (SDH)”, January 2007.
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.707/en, May 2011.
[7] ”ITU-T
Recommendation
G.783:
Characteristics
of
syn-
chronous
digital
hierarchy
(SDH)
equipment
functional
blocks”. March. 2006. http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.783/en,
May 2011.
[8] ”ITUT Recommendation G.841: Types and characteristics
of SDH network protection architectures”, October 1998.
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.841/en, May 2011.
[9] ”ITUT Recommendation G.842: Interworking of SDH network
protection architectures”, April 1997. http://www.itu.int/rec/T-
REC-G.842/en, May 2011.
[10] ”ITUT Recommendation G.872: Architecture of optical trans-
port networks”, November 2001. http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-
G.872/en, May 2011.
[11] ”ITUT
Recommendation
G.709:
Interfaces
for
the
Optical
Transport
Network
(OTN)”,
December
2009.
http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.709/en, May 2011.
[12] ”ITUT Recommendation G.798: Characteristics of optical
transport network hierarchy equipment functional blocks”, Oc-
tober 2010. http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.798/en, May 2011.
[13] ”ITU-T Functional architecture of connectionless layer net-
works”, March 2003, http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.809/en,
May 2011.
[14] V. V. Georgievskii and E. G. Davydov, ”A method of con-
structing independent routes and sections of network models”,
Journal of Minning Science, vol. 11, No. 6, pp. 711-715,
November-December 1975.
[15] D.
Walden,
”The
Bellman-Ford
algorithm
and
Dis-
tributed
Bellman-Ford”,
May
2003.
http://www.walden-
family.com/public/bf-history.pdf, pp. 1-12, May 2011.
[16] D. Torrieri, ”Algorithms for ﬁnding an optimal set of short
disjoint paths in a communication network”, Military Commu-
nications Conference (MILCOM 91), IEEE Xplore, vol. 40,
pp. 1698-1702, August 1992.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

