A Worldwide Descriptive Analysis of Educational Technology Use 
 
 Ron Kovac 
Ball State University 
Muncie, USA 
e-mail: rkovac@bsu.edu.  
 
 Nikki Kisor 
Ball State University 
Muncie, USA 
e-mail: Jbeck@theascp.org 
 Kristen E. DiCerbo 
Independent Researcher 
Phoenix, USA 
e-mail: kdicerbo@cisco.com  
 
 Jason Beck 
Ball State University 
Muncie, USA 
e-mail: nkisor@theascp.org
 
 
Abstract— The use of technology in the education 
vertical has been with us for as long as educational 
curricula have.  The technology has changed, but the 
application of the tools to teaching and learning has been 
constant.  From blackboards, to overhead projectors to 
now, information and communication technologies have 
permeated the classroom to various extents.  Although 
there are many measures and studies of the use and 
effectiveness 
of 
educational 
technology 
in 
our 
educational systems, most of these have been limited 
geographically, politically and economically.  These 
limitations have hindered a broad reaching viewpoint of 
the use of the technologies and have stopped 
comparisons and contrasts between different theatres of 
our world. This study attempted to measure the use of 
educational technology worldwide within a specific 
worldwide program.  The gathered data allows 
comparisons and contrasts between use worldwide and 
within the various technological sectors present in 
today’s marketplace.  The study was conducted in Fall of 
2010 with users of the Cisco Networking Academy 
Program.  These users all follow the same curricula, 
roughly; so, the variability of programs is held relatively 
constant. Preliminary findings were that use of 
technology with each theatre of the world was relatively 
constant with some indications that lower GDP countries 
had more extensive use of “social networking” software 
tools and more consideration of flexibility and agility in 
the classroom. 
 
Keywords – Educational Technology; Technology Use; Global 
assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
     The field of education has been with mankind since our 
first discovery of fire.  Passing down the information to later 
generations was as crucial then as it is now to perpetuate the 
species, expand the political/cultural environment and 
maintain the government and language of the then existing 
region or country.  Starting with story telling, cave pictures, 
and show and tell, the educational systems has always done 
it best to improve the methods of transfer of information 
from those who know to those who want and need to know. 
    In more recent terms, the application of tools to the 
teaching/learning 
process 
has 
absorbed 
the 
name 
educational technology.  Currently, meaning some digitally 
based 
electronic 
tool, 
educational 
technology 
does 
incorporate everything from the blackboard to the movie, to 
the overhead.  Depending on the decade we live in defines 
the technology that is currently in vogue with the 
educational technology space.  The 1960s had the overhead 
projector, the 1970’s the movie projector, and the 1980’s the 
start of the personal computer revolution, and so on. 
    Attention has also always been paid to measuring the use 
and effectiveness of these tools.  How much is enough?  
How effective is it in transferring information to students? 
How does it adapt to current pedagogical styles of teachers?  
The questions are numerous and therefore the attention 
researchers pay this is high (especially in the doctoral 
program research produced worldwide).  Unfortunately, due 
to economic, time and logistic reasons most of these studies 
have been limited.  The limitations are mostly geographic 
(studying a state, or possibly country), but also include 
curricular and other limitations. 
    Using the Cisco Networking Academy Program (CNAP) 
as a base, this study surveyed the global population (broken-
down by theatres) to assess the use of current educational 
technology.  The Cisco Networking Academy Program 
(CNAP) is a program first promulgated by Cisco Systems 
Inc, in the late 1990’s to enhance the awareness of, and 
training in the Internetworking field.  Internetworking being 
the core of the current Internet with all its comingled and 
associated parts and pieces.  Starting with two beta sites in 
the United States it has grown to over 10,000 academies in 
over 160 countries of the world.  Available in many 
languages, the CNAP program is brought forward in an on-
line fashion with a heavy emphasis on hands-on learning, 
formative assessment and instructor involvement.  The 
program is also heavily supported by more traditional book 
publications, Interactive course guides and various other 
tools and techniques (Cisco.netacad.net).  
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

    The results of this survey, in its descriptive form, hold 
implications for education in general, but more specifically 
within the educational technology space. Implications can 
also be found for vendors and other service providers who 
support the initiatives of the educational movement.  The 
results of this study also hold merit for further study of 
equity in access for educational programs worldwide.  
     The organization of this paper follows with the main 
body description of the review of related literature.  
Following describes our methodology, sample population 
and results.  A conclusion, nomenclature and references 
conclude the paper.  
 
II. MAIN BODY 
 
A. Review of Literature and Background 
Classroom access to Technology 
    Studies conducted to look at classroom technology have 
focused on two areas: technology access and technology 
implementation.  From these studies, cultural and 
environmental factors determined the viability of classroom 
technology integration [2].  Other studies concluded that 
attitudes and limited skills of legislators, administrators, 
teachers, and students, detracted from classroom technology 
integration [4].         
    The integration of technology in the classroom is not 
limited to just legislatures, teachers, and students but 
external factors such as family environment. It is also not 
limited nationally as a United States problem, but a world-
wide problem.  In a study titled Factors Influencing 
Technology in Teaching: A Taiwanese Perspective, 
concerns about students’ school activities came from 
families.  One teacher in the study reported that concerns 
from families arose from not having an Internet connection 
in the home or a computer.  Therefore, time for accessing 
computers was limited to school time.  The teacher 
concluded that since time for accessing computers at school 
was scarce, most students needed to have a computer at 
home to work on assignments [5]. 
     Another report completed suggested that, “Technology 
use in classrooms is often employed for all the wrong 
reasons—such as convenience, pressure from school 
administrators, the belief that students need to be 
entertained, and so on” [3].  The authors believe that the 
technology must be facilitated in a way that students are 
using the technology and not the instructors [3]. When 
technology is used as a creative tool rather than for the 
distribution of content and information, it allows students to 
participate more willingly with tasks and to create their own 
work, rather than regurgitating the information back to the 
teacher [6, 10].   
 
It is not the Technology it is the People 
     In a recent study conducted by the Harvard Graduate 
School of Education they examined the ratio of one 
computer to one student.  According to the study “…the 
presence of 1:1 laptops did not automatically add value and 
their high financial costs underscore the need to provide 
teachers with high-quality professional development to 
ensure effective teaching” [1].  
     In a study conducted by Jing Lei, looking at the quality 
of technology versus the quantity of technology used, Lei 
came to the conclusion that it is not the quantity of the 
technology used, but the quality of using the technology 
effectively [4].  The study also examined different types of 
technologies had different outcomes. In their analysis 
general technology use was confidently related with student 
technology aptitude, while subject specific technology use 
was adversely related with student technology aptitude [4].    
    The main component in this review of literature is the 
2008 analysis and review titled A Framework for 
Addressing Challenges to Classroom Technology Use.  In 
this article, six factors were recognized that influenced 
technology application and the instructor’s ability to 
positively incorporate it into the classroom.  The six factors 
are, “(a) legislative factors, (b) district/school-level factors, 
(c) factors associated with the teacher, (d) factors associated 
with the technology-enhanced project, (e) factors associated 
with the students, and (f) factors inherent to technology 
itself” [2]. The frequent changes in policy and lack of 
research by legislatures often lead to poorly designed 
policies that discourage technology use in the classroom [2].  
Some of these same issues with legislature are true for the 
district level factors.  Teachers do not receive enough 
support resources to favor and use technology-based 
learning in the classroom [2].  Students present their own 
challenges to technology-based learning, such as lack of 
skills, limited prior experience and attitudes towards 
technology [2, 12].    
B. Methodology  
 
 1.  Participants 
     The context of this research is the Cisco Networking 
Academies (CNA; see [13]) public/private partnership 
between Cisco and over 10,000 educational institutions in 
over 160 countries.  Cisco, previously called Cisco Systems, 
is the world's largest maker of computer and data 
networking hardware and related equipment.  Cisco 
provides partnering schools with free on-line curriculum and 
on-line assessments to support local school instructors in 
teaching ICT skills in areas related to PC repair and 
maintenance as well as computer and data network design, 
configuration, and maintenance in alignment with entry-
level industry certifications.  The value of the program from 
the perspective of corporate social responsibility was 
discussed by [7], while the logical origins of the e-learning 
approach have been described by [8].   Behrens, Collison, 
and DeMark [9, 11] provide a conceptual framework for the 
many and varied aspects of the assessment ecosystem in the 
program. This research focuses on four courses in a 
sequence that prepares students with the skills required for 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

the 
Cisco 
Certified 
Network 
Associate 
(CCNA) 
certification.  
     More specifically the survey was made available to all 
English speaking programs in the full geographic scope of 
the CNAP program.  Participation was limited to those 
going through the CCNA Curricula (Both Discovery and 
Exploration) and not to the various other curricula offered.  
Participation in the survey was voluntary and therefore not 
random.  The Course Management Systems of the program 
was used for notification and dissemination of the survey 
tool This allowed easy access to the survey for all 
participants and demographic data was collected via the log 
on account information from the users.  
     The sample size and demographics show in the following 
table. 
TABLE 1 SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHICS 
 
Theatre 
Sample Size 
Pop % 
Africa 
8.1 
5 
Asia Pac 
13.1 
17 
Greater China 
2.8 
7 
CEE 
11.5 
7 
European Markets 
11.1 
19 
Japan 
0 
1 
IA and C 
23.1 
17 
ME 
11.0 
7 
Russia and CIS 
4.7 
2 
US/Can 
14.5 
17 
 
Education Level 
Sample Size 
Pop % 
Sec/High School 
14 
15 
Com/Tech College 
21 
35 
College/University 
62 
44 
Other 
3 
5 
 
3. Results 
      A survey was administered to students and instructors 
(who self selected) querying them about their use and 
presence of educational technology.  The survey was offered 
world-wide to all participants and was submitted back by 
1,064 instructors and 1,136 students.  Below is the break-
down of some of the key findings.   
     When comparing the use of technology by theatres 
several interesting facts came to light.  The United States is 
not the only dominate user of technology.  The survey first 
examined how regions perceived their Internet access speed. 
Close to 80 percent believed their Internet speed was 
moderate to fast or better.  Europe, Asia, Australia, and the 
Americas all reported above or close to this number.  The 
only regions that perceived their Internet speed to be less 
than adequate was the Middle East and Africa.  In the table 
below, the percentages for each region are listed. 
 
TABLE 2: PERCEPTION OF INTERNET SPEED (MODERATE TO 
FAST OR BETTER SPEED) 
 
Region 
Percentage 
United States 
87% 
Asia Pacific / Australia  
72% 
America's minus US 
73% 
Africa 
57% 
Europe 
86% 
Middle East 
51% 
 
     Even though the majority of the theatres report to have 
moderately fast  and higher Internet speed, most report 
using Windows XP as the operating system of choice for 
classroom computers.  Table 3 shows worldwide data 
regarding OS used.  
 
TABLE 3: OPERATING SYSETMS USE IN THE WORLD 
 
Operating 
Systems 
Percentage 
Windows XP 
68% 
Windows 7 
19% 
Linux 
4% 
Windows Vista 
5% 
Other 
2% 
Windows prior to 
XP 
1% 
Mac 
<1% 
 
     The results also produced interesting observations in 
computer to student ratios. Figure 1 shows that 88 percent 
of the world has a 1:1 computer to student ratio.   
 
FIGURE 1: COMPUTER STUDENT RATIO 
 
 
 
     Further analysis showed the refresh ratio for computer 
technology globally compared.  Based on the results listed 
below in Figure 2, very few schools have the ability to 
replace computers sooner than three years.   
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

FIGURE 2: FREQUENCY OF COMPUTER REPLACEMENT 
 
 
 
     Based on the survey results, it appears that Internet speed 
internationally is not an issue.  However, the issue seems to 
lie with acquiring newer computers and software for 
students to use.   
      The survey asked participants about how often and 
which web 2.0 technologies they used in the classroom.  
The instructor survey results are in Table 4.  The student 
survey results are located in Table 5. 
      Based on the results, students and instructors both share 
many similarities when it comes to use of web 2.0 
technologies.  The students and instructors both tend to use 
social networking the most on a daily basis.    Based on the 
responses 
received, 
reading 
blogs, 
visiting 
social 
networking sites, watching videos and listening to music 
ranked high on student and instructor web 2.0 uses.   
 
TABLE 4: INSTRUCTOR WEB 2.0 USE 
 
Web 2.0 Technologies 
Daily 
Weekly 
Monthly 
read online forums  
27 
62 
85 
visits social networking 
sites 
23 
49 
62 
read blogs 
18 
42 
62 
watch videos (YouTube) 
12 
50 
73 
listen to or download 
music 
11 
34 
54 
comment on social 
network 
9 
31 
48 
listen to podcasts 
7 
26 
51 
publish or update own 
website 
7 
25 
44 
update status social 
network 
7 
23 
43 
update blog 
5 
19 
32 
upload photos 
3 
12 
30 
upload video 
3 
9 
20 
 
TABLE 5: STUDENT WEB 2.0 USE  
 
Web 2.0 Technologies 
Daily 
Weekly 
Monthly 
visits social networking 
sites 
46 
69 
80 
read online forums  
31 
65 
84 
watch videos 
(YouTube) 
28 
64 
83 
comment on social 
network 
24 
53 
70 
listen to or download 
music 
24 
52 
73 
read blogs 
21 
49 
69 
update status social 
network 
18 
47 
67 
update blog 
11 
29 
45 
listen to podcasts 
10 
31 
54 
publish or update own 
website 
7 
22 
41 
upload photos 
7 
26 
49 
upload video 
5 
18 
36 
 
Instructors and students were asked what technology 
devices were implemented in the classroom. With an 
overwhelming 
response 
projection 
screens 
are 
predominately used to teach students during the learning 
process.  It was quite a surprise how little the other 
technology devices were applied.   
 
FIGURE 3: DEVICES USED IN THE CLASSROOM 
 
 
III. CONCLUSION 
A. Discussion 
      The purpose of this study was to assess the use of 
educational technology worldwide within the purview of the 
Cisco Network Academy Program. In addition, it provided 
the opportunity to compare and contrast use and type of 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

educational technology within various theatres of the world. 
As the results are examined, it is important to keep in mind 
that survey participants were members of the CNAP 
program, a specific curriculum within the broader 
educational realm.  
It is interesting to note, that Laptop PC and Cell phone 
rated the most frequently obtained technology for students 
worldwide.  Desktop was slightly less held with notebooks 
and tablets being much lower on the scale.  Worldwide 
comparison shows little difference.  Difference between 
student and instructor technology use showed little 
difference.   
The survey also queried participants on the access to and 
type of LMS/CMS used in their educational environment 
(Learning/Course Management System).  Results show that 
50% of users do not have access to an L/CMS.  The 
remainder use mostly open source tools.   
The survey was quite comprehensive and the limited real 
estate of the article prohibits more extensive discussion of 
the descriptive results or the analytical results.  Further 
analysis will be forthcoming.   
  
B. Limitations 
It should be noted that participants who filled out the 
survey were self-selected.  Therefore, because of the lack of 
randomness, a truly valid nature of the results cannot be 
established. In addition, the instructor and students who 
filled out the survey were only English speaking, so only 
native speakers were excluded. Results therefore cannot 
absolutely be attributed to the data obtained. Finally, we rely 
on instructors and students to accurately report their 
environment, their perceptions and their actions. It is 
unknown the extent to which instructors and students may 
mislabel their classes.  Additionally, this study only held 
participants within the CNAP program.  This may hold a 
biases view as this is a technology rich environment. 
 
C. Conclusions 
Our reporting enclosed is a first blush at a descriptive 
analysis of the use of educational technology worldwide.  
There are continued questions about the comparisons of 
theatre use and impact of educational technology.  Further 
study and more use of inferential statistics will allow a closer 
look at the data and may provide further information on 
theatre performance.  This study examined this question with 
a global sample of instructors and students. There was some 
suggestion that use of educational technology is affected by 
world theatre, and further study will attempt to group 
countries by GDP to see if that has a major effect on use of 
effectiveness of Educational technology.   
 
IV. NOMENCLATURE 
 
The context of this research is the Cisco Networking 
Academies (CNA; see [13]), a public/private partnership 
between Cisco and over 10,000 educational institutions in 
over 160 countries.  Cisco, previously called Cisco Systems, 
is the world's largest maker of computer and data networking 
hardware and related equipment.  Cisco provides partnering 
schools with free on-line curriculum and on-line assessments 
to support local school instructors in teaching ICT skills in 
areas related to PC repair and maintenance, as well as 
computer and data network design, configuration, and 
maintenance 
in 
alignment 
with 
entry-level 
industry 
certifications. This research focuses on four courses in a 
sequence that prepares students with the skills required for 
the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification. 
V. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Dunleavy, M., Dexter, S., Heinecke, W.F. Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning.  Oct 2007, Vol. 23 Issue 5, pp. 440-452. 
[2] Groff, J. and Mouza, C. (2008). A framework for addressing 
challenges to classroom technology use. AACE Journal, 16(1), 21-
46. 
[3] Herrington, Jan, Kervin, Lisa. Educational Media 
International, Sep 2007, Vol. 44, Issue 3, pp. 219-236. 
[4] Lei, Jing. British Journal of Educational Technology, 
May2010, Vol. 41 Issue 3, pp. 455-472.  
[5] Lih-Juan, Chan Lin, Jon-Chao Hong, Jeou- 
Shyan Horng, Shih-Hui Chang, and Hui-Chuan Chu. Innovations 
in Education & Teaching International, Feb2006, Vol. 43, Issue 1, 
pp. 57-68. 
 [6] Gerbic, P., Stacey, E., Anderson, B., Simpson, M., Mackey, J., 
Gunn, C. and Samarawickerma, G. (2009). Blended learning: Is 
there evidence for its effectiveness? In Same places, different 
spaces. Proceedings ascilite Auckland 2009. 
 [7] Parkinson, D., Greene, W., Kim, Y., and Marioni, J. Emerging 
Themes of Student Satisfaction in a Traditional Course and a 
Blended Distance Course. TechTrends, 47(4), 22-28. 
[8] Spooner, F., Jordan, L., Algozine, B., and Spooner, M. (1999). 
Evaluating instruction in distance learning classes. Journal of 
Educational Research, 92, pp. 132-140. 
[9] Voos, R. (2003). ‘Blended learning: What is it and where might 
it take us?’ Sloan-C View, 2(1), 2–5. 
[10] Privateer, P. M. (1999). Academic technology and the future 
of higher education: strategic paths taken and not taken’, The 
Journal of Higher Education, 70(1), 60–79.  
[11] Smith, A. and Moss, N. (2010).  Large scale delivery of Cisco 
Networking Academy Program by blended distance learning.  In:  
IARIA, 2010 Sixth International Conference on Networking and 
Services, 6-11 March 2010, Cancun, Mexico. 
[12] Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power for the behavioral sciences 
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
[13] http; cisco.com/go/netacad/ 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

