Automated Dynamic Topology Configuration 
An Innovative Approach to Online Rack Renting 
 
Vimukthi S. M. W. T. Mudiyanselage 
School of Science & Technology 
University of Northampton 
Northampton, United Kingdom 
vimukthilk@ieee.org 
Rashmi Dravid 
School of Science & Technology 
University of Northampton 
Northampton, United Kingdom 
rashmi.dravid@northampton.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— The facility to rent access-time to computer 
network hardware on the Internet has been available for a 
number of years. Provided as a service targeted at academics 
engaging in the study of Computer Networks, it has been a 
viable solution successfully filling the void created by 
numerous obstacles encountered in procuring physical 
equipment due to various factors. However, current business 
models offer limited flexibility to end users because the online 
labs are offered as a predetermined selection of devices 
prewired to a topology deemed suitable by the service 
provider; consequently the end user, although paying for this 
service, has no control over the composition or topology of the 
labs they hire. This paper introduces a new improved model 
and the underlying technological implementation, which 
features a paradigm shift in the way online labs are defined, 
configured and ultimately offered to the end user. It aspires to 
eliminate the above limitations through automated and 
dynamic configuration of the network topology, allowing the 
end user to select the composition and topology of the labs they 
hire, thus unleashing their true potential. 
Keywords-online 
rack 
rental; 
dynamic 
topology 
configuration; Layer 2 Protocol Tunneling; VLAN 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The facility to rent access-time to computer network 
hardware on the Internet (also called online rack rental) has 
been available for a number of years. Provided as a service 
targeted mainly at students, academics and professionals 
engaging in the study of Computer Networks, it has been a 
viable solution successfully filling the void created by 
various impracticalities in economics and logistics of 
procuring physical networks equipment. 
The demand on modern education systems to provision 
around-the-clock access to IT resources is conspicuous and 
the ability to meet that demand is no more a nicety but a 
necessity. Online rack rental systems are therefore an ideal 
platform to provide students with the means to configure and 
test network configurations without having to worry about 
economical or logistical confines. However, existing online 
rack rental systems suffer from some restrictions which limit 
the flexibility they offer to end users. Service providers offer 
a predetermined selection of devices prewired to a specific 
topology that they deem suitable. Therefore when renting a 
lab, the user would not only hire access-time to the devices 
but also the topology that comes with it. 
Generally, a prospective client would browse the 
available labs and select one or more that best fits their 
requirements. Consequently, a lab may not be an exact 
match of the user’s requirements; it may be comprised of 
too few or too many devices, and/or may not offer the 
topology they require. In the former case, the user could be 
paying for redundant devices, which could otherwise have 
been rented out to other users or shutdown providing a 
reduced environmental footprint. Most service providers 
offer a full or partial mesh topology on their labs where 
possible, to work around the latter [1].  
Root cause analysis conducted to find the underlying 
cause(s) for the above limitations have yielded some 
interesting results, as shown in Figure 1. It is evident that the 
limitations discussed above stem from the presence of a 
prewired topology. Therefore, if it is possible to eliminate 
the presence of a prewired topology, such a solution would 
minimize, if not eradicate, the above limitations and provide 
a better experience to both end users and the service 
provider. The authors have not come across any previous 
work which has identified these limitations with an online 
rack 
rental 
system. 
Therefore, 
this 
research 
is 
characteristically 
novel 
in 
its 
field. 
As 
a 
result, 
implementation of the fundamental technical concepts has 
been empirical in nature. 
This research paper introduces a new approach to online 
rack renting by moving the definition of a lab from one 
which is static and predetermined by the service provider, to 
dynamic composition of network devices selected by the end 
user where they only pay for what they use and are able to 
dynamically configure a topology of their choice. Users who 
hire labs from the same service provider are able to 
collaborate notwithstanding geographical boundaries, by 
networking their individual labs, provided the labs are on the 
same platform. By adapting their business model to 
accommodate an automatic, dynamically configurable lab 
platform for the provision of online rack rental systems, the 
service provider makes substantial gains as a result of 
increased revenue opportunities by retaining a more satisfied 
client base, optimum utilisation of merchandise, reduced 
electricity costs and promoting a greener business ethos. 
These lab models could be sold as service packages by 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

service providers to academic institutions through cloud 
hosting, helping institutions save on initial capital 
expenditure and recurring expenses on maintenance 
contracts. 
A. Problem Domain 
Normally, a service provider would have an assortment 
of devices similar to that given in Figure 2 (usually, although 
not essentially, on a larger scale).  Consider two users X and 
Y (see Table 1) who have different device requirements. 
User X may hire either lab, but will be unable to source both 
the routers required, unless he/she hires both labs. However, 
by doing so they would also be paying for a redundant 
switch, and as each lab is intended to be rented out 
separately, they are self-contained and do not offer 
networking between them. 
Either lab would address User Y’s requirements; 
however they would also inevitably be paying for a 
redundant router. Ultimately neither user’s requirements are 
fully met despite the service provider being in possession of 
an adequate number of devices to be able to do so. 
 
TABLE 1. EXAMPLE USER REQUIREMENTS 
User 
Device requirement 
Routers 
Switches 
X 
2 
1 
Y 
0 
1 
B.  The Proposition 
 Having identified the root cause of the problem, the 
principal research focus of this paper was on developing a 
mechanism which would enable service providers to offer 
labs independent of a prewired topology, where the end user 
would be able to dynamically configure a topology as they 
wish. A prospective solution must satisfy some fundamental 
requirements to qualify as a successful solution. It should (a) 
remain transparent to the end user; (b) not interfere with the 
devices being offered in a way which impedes their normal 
operation; (c) allow users to determine the composition of 
and dynamically alter their lab both in terms of its 
constituent devices and topology; and (d) require minimal 
involvement from the end user to setup and manage. 
 As we seek a solution where the devices being offered to 
users (hereinafter referred to as user devices) are not 
prewired to each other in the normal fashion, naturally this 
prompted us to explore various network devices which 
would be configurable by the service provider, thereby 
connecting user devices as and when required and severing 
those connections when they are not required. Our device of 
choice should meet the requirements identified above. 
Further, the authors were primarily interested in developing a 
solution which would benefit an academic audience. 
Therefore, in addition to the primary requirements, our 
solution should enable this facility to be provisioned as a 
service package to academic institutions and, where such 
institutions choose to offer online racks to its students, our 
solution should facilitate the option to provide the online labs 
as collaborative networking platforms to their students.  
In the Methodology section we will explore several 
approaches which were considered when selecting a viable 
solution, the chosen method and justification to the same. 
The Implementation section contains a detailed description 
of the technical application of the new model along with a 
comprehensive example. In this section we will also discuss 
how a new business model could evolve around the new 
technical capabilities the new model offers and its relevance 
to an academic audience. In the discussion section, we will 
evaluate our solution’s fit-for-purpose and acknowledge its 
limitations offering workarounds where possible. This paper 
concludes by identifying avenues which may lead to future 
work. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The fundamental concept proposed by this paper is to 
eliminate inter-device connections by connecting all user 
devices to a Central Device (CD). The service provider 
would then configure the CD to restrict communication 
between user devices connected to its ports by setting up and 
severing connections between them. Figure 3 helps visualise 
this concept. Two user devices would be able to 
communicate with each other only if the CD permits. By 
altering the configuration, permission can be granted or 
denied, therefore dynamic. By delegating a bespoke 
application to monitor user requirements, script and forward 
the appropriate configuration commands to the CD, the 
above process can be automated. Therefore, the end result 
Lab with 
preconfigured 
topology
User does not 
have access to 
all the devices 
they require
Lab 
composition 
inconsistent 
with user 
requirements
User pays for 
devices they 
don’t use
Service provider makes 
financial losses
Dissatisfied user
Non-energy 
efficient lab 
environment
Unused lab 
devices 
powered up
Effect
Cause
Key
User is unable 
to configure 
topology of 
their choice
Unused devices 
in lab
Client attrition
Figure 1. Root cause analysis 
Figure 2. Example setup of current online rack rental system 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

would be a system capable of automated dynamic topology 
configuration on an online rack rental platform. 
A. Physical segmentation 
Several candidates were considered for the role of CD. 
Network segmentation devices (see [2]) considered were 
bridges, hubs, switches and routers. A bridge normally has 
two ports. This makes it an ideal medium to interconnect two 
Local Area Networks, but not so much to interconnect more 
than two devices. A hub, on the other hand, has several ports, 
but by nature they forward traffic out on all ports bar the 
ingress port; this would not be suitable as we need to be able 
to 
restrict 
traffic 
between 
devices. 
A 
router 
is 
characteristically a device used to segment networks. It 
sections broadcast domains. Each network segment 
connected to a router would be a subnet on its own and 
would normally have its own IP addressing scheme. Each 
port will need to be addressed with an address from their 
respective subnet address pools. This is not merely a feature 
of a router, but also a requirement. Two interfaces on a 
router cannot have addresses on the same subnet. Therefore a 
routing protocol would need to be employed to facilitate 
inter-device communication. Invariably this would introduce 
routing table lookup delays on traffic traversing the CD. 
OSI Layer 1, 2 and 3 switches were considered. Physical 
Layer switches have been used for network testing purposes 
for a number of years. Commonly referred to as “wire-once 
infrastructure”, they replace the manual patch panel and 
allows users to program a connection from any port to any 
other port within the system using a non-blocking switching 
matrix [3]. Justification for both initial and recurring 
investment is the return on investment the device provides. 
In an industrial test environment physical layer switches 
offer an array of advanced features conducive to test lab 
automation [4], which are far beyond the requirements of an 
online rack rental system designed for students of Computer 
Networks. For a fraction of the cost, a Layer 2 or Layer 3 
switch can be obtained and maintained. On the basis that a 
switch (a) can offer complete Link layer segregation to (b) a 
relatively large number (dependent on number of available 
ports) of connected devices; (c) does not require assignment 
of an IP addressing scheme and thus (d) offers up to wire-
speed data transfer rates through its ASICs without routing 
table lookup delays, a switch was deemed the most suitable 
candidate for the role of a CD. 
User devices are added to the platform by connecting 
them to the CD. A user device can have multiple connections 
to the CD. The number of user device – CD connections is 
only limited by the number of available ports on the CD 
switch and on a particular user device. However, it is 
possible to hook up additional switches to the original CD-
switch by daisy-chaining them, as shown in Figure 3, to 
which more user devices could then be connected.  
B.  Logical segmentation 
Having physically segmented the network rack, the next 
step was to evaluate logical segmentation technologies. 
Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN)s are a commonly used 
technology in contemporary networks, which allows 
isolation of ports at Layer 2 and above on the device this 
technology is configured [5]. Inter-VLAN communication is 
denied by default. By configuring two ports on a network 
device to be on the same VLAN, we allow exclusive 
communication between them.  
Layer 2 Protocol Tunneling (L2PT) (not to be confused 
with Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol) allows Internet Service 
Providers to carry traffic from multiple customers across 
their core network while preserving VLAN and other Layer 
2 protocol information without impacting other customers; 
enabling customers to operate a consistent VLAN 
implementation across a Wide Area Network. L2PT tunnels 
Layer 2 Protocol Data Units by encapsulating them. 
Numerous, but not all, Layer 2 protocols can be tunneled. 
For instance protocols supported by Cisco Systems Inc. and 
Juniper Networks Inc. are given in [6] and [7], respectively. 
VLANs are available on both Layer 2 and 3 switches. 
However, L2PT is not available on Layer 2 switches. 
Therefore a Layer 3 switch was selected as the most suitable 
candidate for the role of CD.  
The CD should be configured by the service provider so 
that when for instance, a user requests a specific port on a 
user device connected to a specific port on the same or 
another user device, the CD allows communication 
exclusively between the two ports on the CD(s) to which the 
respective ports on the user device(s) are connected, while 
remaining transparent. To remain transparent, the CD must 
preserve and relay information at Layer 2 and above between 
the device(s). Our solution will employ L2PT to 
communicate Layer 2 protocol information between any two 
ports on the same VLAN. Each port on the CD connected to 
a user device will have L2TP configured. A unique VLAN 
ID will be assigned to each pair of ports on the CD to which 
the user device ports are connected, when communication 
should be allowed between them. By functioning in unison, 
VLAN and L2PT protocols render the CD completely 
transparent to the end user while allowing exclusive 
communication between the two devices. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The new model will consist of bespoke front-end and 
back-end applications to support its delivery. Patrons of 
Router A
CD 1
Switch A
Router B
Switch B
CD 2
Figure 3. Example setup of proposed solution 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

online rack rental systems are familiar with using a web 
interface to make and manage reservations for rack-time. 
Therefore, in the interest of user familiarity, we will retain a 
web portal as the front-end, which will feature the ability to 
select devices and the topology to be used, allowing end 
users to build a customized lab of their choice, in addition to 
making and managing reservations.  
To be a scalable model, the back-end is required to have 
some form of automation for the underlying processes. An 
application server (identified in Figure 4 as CICAE (Cisco 
IOS Command Automation Engine)) will be responsible for 
managing (a) a collection of CDs; (b) a collection of user 
devices; (c) mappings of user device port to CD port 
connections; (d) CD port VLAN pairs. The CICAE is not an 
off-the-shelf application, and was designed and developed by 
the authors on the Microsoft .NET platform, using the C# 
programming language. This application interfaces with the 
database server and web server to keep track of user requests 
and provide users access to specific devices at specific times, 
by scripting and issuing commands to the CD. The database 
server will serve as the repository for user registration/login 
details and lab reservation information. The terminal server 
provides console access to remote users. The access server is 
used to authenticate and authorise remotely connecting users. 
The border router is the gateway to and from the Internet. 
Figure 4 is a graphical representation of the complete 
solution.  
The following example gives a detailed illustration of 
how the new model may be deployed by a service provider. 
This particular implementation was successfully exhibited by 
the author for the University dissertation presentation and 
thus has been practically tested and verified to be a working 
model. Assume ACME Online Rack Rentals Limited (a 
fictitious organisation) is a provider of online rack rental 
solutions who have implemented the new model as shown in 
Figure 4. After the network rack is setup and the devices 
connected as shown, details of the user device-CD 
connections are entered on to the CICAE. Each port on the 
CD in a connection with a user device is assigned a unique 
VLAN ID. It should be unique across multiple CDs. The 
CICAE has been programmed to assign VLAN IDs 
according to the following algorithm to ensure this. 
 
VLANs 1 – 9 reserved for administration purposes 
 
Add 100 for CD 1, 200 for CD 2 and so on 
 
Add 10 for port Fa0/1, 20 for port Fa0/2 and so on 
For instance, a connection on port Fa0/16 on CD 2 would be 
assigned to VLAN 200 + 160 = 360.  
When two ports are to be mapped to each other, the 
lower of the two VLAN IDs is assigned to the other port, 
thereby allowing traffic exclusively between the interfaces 
connected to that pair of ports. When the mapping is no 
longer required, the VLAN assignment is reset according to 
the above algorithm. 
Two users based geographically distant from each other 
would like to collaborate to work on a project which 
involves configuring a networked system. Assume the users 
(User X and User Y) and their requirements are identical to 
those in Table 1. Both users would visit ACME’s web portal 
where they would register their details and make a 
reservation each for the devices they would be working on, 
specifying the date/time they wish to have access to their 
labs depending on availability. They have agreed to work on 
the devices as shown in Figure 5.  
The request would be stored on the database. At the 
Figure 4. Graphical representation of new online rack rental model 
Central Switch
Internet
Terminal 
Server
Access 
Server
Remote 
user
Web server
Database Server
Remote 
user
CICAE
Switch B
Switch A
Router A
Router B
Router C
Border 
router
Figure 5. Example setup for collaborative working 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

date/time the users had requested access, the CICAE 
application would issue commands to the CD to setup the 
topology requested. Note that the date/time for each user 
may or may not be the same if they are working on them 
separately. However, if they wish to work collaboratively, 
they would need to agree on a mutually convenient time 
when reserving the devices. 
The CD would be configured so that the ports connecting 
Switch A to Router A would be in a different VLAN to the 
ports connecting Router A to Router B and so on. User Y 
has not requested Switch B to be connected to any other 
device at this stage; however they have requested a link 
between two ports on the switch. Unique VLAN IDs would 
be worked out by the application before the commands are 
pushed through. Assume the devices are connected to the 
CD as shown in Table 2 and the given VLAN IDs have been 
worked out by the application. The following commands 
configured on a Cisco 3560 switch (used as the CD) would 
be for the connection between Router A and Router B, and 
exemplify the commands sent to the CD for all the other 
connections. 
TABLE II 
EXAMPLE SETUP OF SERVICE PROVIDER NETWORK RACK 
CD port 
User device 
User device port 
VLAN ID 
Fa0/1 
Switch A 
Fa0/24 
10 
Fa0/2 
Router A 
Fa0/0 
10 
Fa0/3 
Router A 
Fa0/1 
30 
Fa0/4 
Router B 
Fa0/0 
30 
Fa0/5 
Router B 
Fa0/1 
50 
Fa0/6 
Switch B 
Fa0/24 
60 
Fa0/7 
Switch B 
Fa0/23 
70 
Fa0/8 
Switch B 
Fa0/22 
70 
 
interface FastEthernet0/3 
description CONNECTION TO ROUTER A FA0/1 
interface FastEthernet0/4 
description CONNECTION TO ROUTER B FA0/0 
 
interface range FastEthernet0/3-0/4 
 
!Assign ports to VLAN 30 
switchport access vlan 30 
!Establish a tunnel between the ports  
switchport mode dot1q-tunnel 
 
!Specify the Layer 2 protocols to be 
tunneled 
l2protocol-tunnel cdp 
l2protocol-tunnel stp 
l2protocol-tunnel vtp 
User X would be granted console access to Switch A, 
Router A and Router B, while User Y would be granted 
console access to Switch B once they have been 
successfully authenticated. Once the users have completed 
their individual tasks and wish to conjoin their individual 
labs they indicate their intention to do so to the service 
provider. Once ACME has received corresponding requests 
from both users who also indicate, which device and port 
(note that a single device may be connected to CD via 
multiple ports) they wish to use to connect to the other 
user’s lab, the ports on the CD to which the two devices are 
connected are configured with the same VLAN IDs. In this 
example, port Fa0/6 on the CD would be assigned to VLAN 
50, thereby configuring it to be in the same VLAN as Fa0/5 
on the CD; thus allowing communication between the two 
labs. Now User X and User Y are able to network between 
their individual labs, allowing them to collaborate to 
complete the project.  
C. Adapting an existing environment on to the new model 
The proposed model fundamentally suggests how current 
rack rental systems can be improved to offer a more flexible 
and cost effective service to end users. We have also looked 
at how adopting the new model may be in the interest of the 
service provider. Service providers are able to re-configure 
labs which they currently offer on to the new model as 
follows. 
Primarily the network rack would need to be rewired to a 
hub-spoke topology as shown in Figure 4 with any CDs as 
hubs and user devices as spokes. Depending on the number 
of user devices available and how many CD-user device 
connections they wish to offer, additional CD-switches may 
need to be procured to connect all user devices. Details of the 
CDs, user devices and how they are connected to the CDs 
would then need to be added to the CICAE server via a 
graphical user interface. Most rack rental systems employ a 
webserver, database server and an AAA server of some 
flavor, all of which can be retained and reconfigured. The 
web application required for the new model offers users the 
ability to select the composition and topology of the lab. The 
same or a similar interface should be served off the 
webserver. The database would need to be restructured to 
represent the various entities such as CD, user device, CD-
user device connection, VLAN mapping etc. in addition to 
user details. The AAA server would require no additional 
configuration. Existing network configurations such as NAT, 
TABLE III. 
COST OF HIRING FIXED LABS VS. INDIVIDUAL DEVICES 
Service 
Provider 
Avg. cost per 
session per lab 
(USD) 
No. of devices 
offered in lab 
Avg. cost per 
device in lab 
(USD) 
Avg. cost for 3 
devices 
(USD) 
A 
15 
16 
0.9 
2.8 
B 
17.50 
23 
0.8 
2.4 
C 
16 
13 
1.2 
3.6 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

load-balancing, Layer 2 and Layer 3 redundancy, network 
management and firewalls will require either little or no 
changes to accommodate the new model. 
D.   The New Business Model 
Current business models are built around a fixed 
topology lab model, which primarily cater to the likes of 
CCIE (Cisco Certified Internetwork Expert) aspirants. 
Therefore, both the caliber and number of devices they offer, 
as well as the topologies they feature, are aimed at satisfying 
the requirements of advanced Cisco certification tracks. 
Naturally, the costs associated with hiring these labs are 
representative of this. Table 3 gives an indication of prices 
charged by 3 service providers in the present rack rental 
market. The pricing model is per session per lab. Sessions 
typically last from between 4 to 8 hours. The table identifies 
the cost per session per lab; the total number of devices 
offered in their CCIE Routing & Switching certification 
track labs; the average cost per device; and the cost to a user 
if the service provider were to offer individual devices and 
the user hired 3 devices. The average costs are rough 
estimates and does not take into account economics of scale 
etc., but gives a good indication of how offering the end user 
the ability to determine the composition of their lab is cost-
effective from the user’s perspective.  
By re-configuring their labs according to the new lab 
model, a service provider can reengineer their business 
model around this to offer a more customized solution to a 
much larger client base. They will be able to offer an array of 
devices to an advanced user and a single device to a client 
who requests a standalone device. The service provider may 
then adapt their pricing model to reflect this, making their 
offering more attractive to prospective clients. Moreover, 
they can boast the ability for users to collaborate as part of 
their 
service 
offering. 
This 
encourages 
peer 
recommendation. 
From the perspective of an academic institution, despite 
the increasing demand on education systems to provide 
ubiquitous learning resources to support evolving delivery 
models which cater for internationalisation and distant 
learning, it may not be feasible to offer separate conventional 
labs to students individually in the face of increasing budget 
constraints. However, where an institution wishes to provide 
its students this facility, by implementing the proposed 
solution, a tutor is not only able to allocate specific devices 
between their students to work on remotely from a single lab 
platform, but can also encourage students to collaboratively 
work on completing lab assignments. Figure 6 is a visual 
representation of the proposed business model; a flow 
diagram showing the various interactions between user, 
back-end (CICAE, database server, access server and 
terminal server) and the network rack (CD and user devices). 
IV. 
DISCUSSION & FUTURE WORK 
From the outset, we established that an improved solution 
to online rack renting should meet the following 
requirements to be considered successful. (a) It was 
important 
that 
intermediate 
devices 
should 
remain 
transparent to the end user; we have been able to achieve this 
through the use of L2PT technology. (b) It must not interfere 
with the normal operation of the user devices; all 
configurations are done on the CD, and its role is merely 
restricting traffic through the use of VLANs and relaying 
traffic between devices intra-VLAN, thus remaining 
indifferent to the state of the user device or the nature of 
traffic. (c) The new system needs to be flexible and highly 
customisable by the end user to suit their individual 
requirements; this has been achieved by eliminating inter-
Front-end
Back-end
Network Rack
 User registers
 Reserves devices
 Specifies topology
 Registration validated
 Reservation validated
 Details stored on DB
 User initiates 
individual session
 User authenticated
 User authorised
 Device and topology 
details retrieved from 
DB
 Commands generated 
to setup lab
 Commands sent to CD
 Commands 
processed by CD
 Devices connected 
according to 
specified topology
 User disconnects 
individual session
 Multiple users 
request to conjoin 
their labs
 (Session times-out)
 Commands generated 
to reset lab
 Commands sent to CD
 Commands 
processed by CD
 Devices 
disconnected
Figure 6. New business model. Dashed arrow indicates optionality; a lab is reset when the user's allocated time comes 
to an end (session times-out), or when the user initiates a request to terminate their session, whichever precedes. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

device connections and introducing a CD in its stead. End 
users are able to select the composition of their labs and 
determine its topology as they wish. (d) It should require 
minimal involvement from the end user to setup and manage; 
this model retains the web interface users are accustomed 
with to make and manage reservations for devices and 
specify the lab topology of their choice. Finally, as we are 
interested in the academic relevance of this solution, we 
resolved that (e) it must be able to serve as a collaborative 
learning tool; using an elaborate example we have looked at 
how this model achieves this objective. The proposed 
solution meets all the above requirements. 
This model is however not without some limitations. 
Firstly, the system has at present only been tested on 
Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet and Fibre Optic 
interfaces. Technical limitations dictate that VLANs cannot 
be configured on serial interfaces. However, it is possible to 
incorporate serial connections as prewired connections on a 
hybrid setup. Alternatively, future work could research the 
possibility of incorporating frame relay switches to which 
serial links from devices with serial ports could be connected 
and, by enabling the system to automatically configure frame 
relay circuits this limitation could potentially be overcome. 
Secondly, the CD will normally transition its ports into a 
“disabled” state in case certain errors are detected on them. 
Although they can be configured to return to their functional 
state automatically, this may not eliminate the reason the 
ports were disabled in the first place.  
Thirdly, shutting down an interface on a device which has 
been mapped to another device does not automatically shut 
down the interface on the other end of that mapping as the 
device interface status reflects the status of the port on the 
CD it is connected to. Physical layer switches we discussed 
in the Physical Segmentation section overcome this 
limitation by shutting down the corresponding interface 
through software intervention. Therefore, it is a capability 
which could potentially be introduced on to the CICAE, but 
has not been tested.  
A further limitation is that in a solution such as this where 
a single central device has all peripheral devices connected 
to it is implemented, a single point of failure is introduced. If 
the central device fails or becomes compromised, although 
users will still have remote access to the peripheral devices 
via the terminal server, they will no longer have connectivity 
between them. 
One of the opportunities we discussed, offered by 
introducing this model, was the ability for the service 
provider to have knowledge of which devices on their lab 
platform will not be used in upcoming sessions. The 
advantage here is that these devices can be identified and 
shutdown, saving on operating costs. Technology enabling 
remotely power-cycling devices has been available for a 
number of years. Remote Power Management (RPM) 
solutions offer just that [8]. They are deployed in industry 
primarily to enable network administrators to recover 
locked-up devices. There a number of vendors who offer 
RPM solutions and a majority of them offer the ability to 
configure via command-line. Therefore, future work could 
explore the integration of an RPM device on to the current 
model. The CICAE could be enhanced to script the 
necessary commands to power-cycle unused devices on the 
lab platform thus reducing power consumption. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper introduced a new approach to online rack 
renting. The improvements suggested in this paper build on 
the success of prevalent online rack rental systems, which 
have been rendering an indispensable service to academics 
engaging in the study of Computer Networks across the 
globe. By reengineering the way labs are defined and 
offered, we identified a number of opportunities to add value 
to both end users and service providers. We discussed how 
current business models could adapt to accommodate the 
proposed improvements and the potential opportunities the 
new model offers to academic institutions by enabling 
collaborative learning.  
Finally, we reflected on some limitations and investigated 
ways of overcoming these limitations. The authors have 
identified a number of avenues for future work and 
encourage and invite interested parties to engage. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
McGahan, B, bmcgahan@ine.com, 2011. Dynamic topology 
rack rental - pros and cons?. [E-mail] Message to V S M W 
T Mudiyanselage. Sent Oct 7 2011, 17:49. Available 
at:https://learningnetwork.cisco.com/thread/35586 [Accessed 
21 February 13]. 
[2] 
Intel Corporation, (2004) Using Segmentation to Increase 
Network 
Performance, 
http://www.intel.com/network/connectivity/resources/doc_li
brary/white_papers/30514101.pdf [Accessed 23 September 
2012]. 
[3]  T. Smith and J. Alnwick, "Wire-once infrastructure for 
optimal test lab efficiency," AUTOTESTCON, 2008 IEEE , 
vol., no., pp.421-427, 8-11 Sept. 2008 
[4] 
MRV Optical Communications Systems. 2011. Test 
Automation : Media Cross Connect™ (MCC) Chassis. 
[ONLINE] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.mrv.com/product/MRV-MCC-Chass/. [Accessed 
07 February] 
[5] 
J. E. Hom and R. Little, (2011). VLAN guide for networking 
professionals, 
http://searchnetworking.techtarget.co.uk/tutorial/VLAN-
guide-for-networking-professionals,[Accessed 21 February 
13] 
[6] 
Cisco Systems, Inc. (2004) Transparent Layer 2 Protocol 
Tunneling 
and 
PDU 
Filtering. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.cisco.com/en/US/docs/ios/12_0s/feature/guide/l2
pt.html [Accessed 21 February 13] 
[7] 
Juniper Networks, Inc.(2012) layer-2-protocol-tunneling. 
[Online]. 
Available:http://www.juniper.net/techpubs/en_US/junos12.1/
topics/reference/configuration-statement/layer2-protocol-
tunneling-edit-vlans-l2pt-ex-series.html, 
[Accessed 
21 
February 13] 
[8] 
Lantroix Inc. (2011) Remote Power Management: The Key 
to Maximizing Network and Server Uptime,California 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

