A Power-Aware Real-Time Routing Mechanism for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Mohamed Aissani, Sofiane Bouznad, Badis Djamaa, and Ibrahim Tsabet 
Research Unit in Computer Science, Ecole Militaire Polytechnique 
P.O. Box 17 EMP, Bordj-El-Bahri, Algiers, Algeria 
{maissani, bouznad.sofiane, badis.tos, utopia.ibrahim}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— To optimally manage the limited energy of nodes 
without degrading efficiency of routing protocols in delivering 
real-time packets in wireless sensor networks, we propose in 
this paper an efficient power-aware real-time routing (PRR) 
mechanism. Firstly, it increases the network fluidity and saves 
more energy of nodes by removing early in network all useless 
data packets according to their residual deadline and expected 
end-to-end delay. Secondly, it reinforces the real-time behavior 
of the used routing protocol and preserves the network 
resources by selecting from the current-node queue the most 
urgent packet to be forwarded first. Finally, it saves energy of 
nodes without degrading the protocol efficiency in delivering 
real-time flows by combining adjusted transmission power of 
current node with relay speed of the forwarding candidate 
neighbors when selecting a next forwarder for the current 
packet. PRR is simple to implement and can be easily 
integrated in any geographic routing protocol. Associated with 
the well-know real-time routing protocol SPEED by using 
TinyOS, and evaluated in its embedded simulator TOSSIM, 
PRR achieved good performance in terms of network energy 
consumption, packet loss ratio, and node energy balancing. 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; real-time routing; 
energy-aware routing; node energy balancing. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Flexibility, fault tolerance, reduced production cost, high 
capture capacity, and rapid installation are characteristics 
that enabled a wireless sensor network (WSN) to have 
multiple application domains, such as disasters detection 
and monitoring, mapping biodiversity, intelligent building, 
precision agriculture, machinery monitoring and preventive 
maintenance, environmental control, logistics and intelligent 
transportation, and medicine. However, the WSN realization 
requires satisfaction of some constraints that arise from a 
number of factors guiding the design phase, such as fault 
tolerance, scalability, cost, durability, material and topology. 
WSNs are often characterized by a dense and large scale 
deployment with limited processing, storage, transmission 
and energy resources. It is recognized that conserving 
energy is an unavoidable issue in the design of WSNs 
because it imposes strict constraints on network operations 
[1-3]. In fact, the energy consumed in sensor nodes has an 
important impact on network lifetime that has become the 
dominant performance criterion. Extending lifetime of a 
WSN is a shared objective by designers and researchers. It 
is necessary that routing algorithms use paths that save more 
energy of nodes. 
Although existing works [4-12], summarized in Section 
II, play important roles in improving network performance, 
design of energy-aware real-time routing protocols is still a 
challenging area in WSNs. To contribute in this domain, we 
propose in this paper an efficient power-aware real-time 
routing (PRR) mechanism which: 
• Increases the network fluidity and saves more energy 
of nodes by removing early in the network all useless 
packets according to their residual deadline and 
expected end-to-end delay. 
• Reinforces the real-time behavior of the used routing 
protocol and preserves the network resources by 
selecting from the current-node queue the most urgent 
packet to be forwarded first. 
• Saves energy of nodes without degrading the protocol 
efficiency in delivering real-time flows by combining 
adjusted transmission power with relay speed of the 
forwarding candidate neighbors when selecting a next 
forwarder. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
summarizes the related works. Section III describes the 
proposed PRR mechanism that aims to improve efficiency 
of real-time routing protocols based on geographic location 
of sensor nodes. Section IV evaluates and discusses 
performance of our proposal. Section V concludes the 
present paper. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Some existing real-time routing protocols don’t consider 
explicitly the limited energy of sensor nodes [4-8]. RAP [4] 
is one of the earlier real-time routing protocols for WSNs. It 
provides service differentiation in the timeliness domain by 
using velocity-monotonic classification of data packets. It 
works only when most traffic is periodic and all periods are 
known previously. Also, it is not adaptable to dynamics of a 
network. SPEED [5] is designed to be a stateless, localized 
algorithm with minimal control overhead. It achieves an 
end-to-end soft real-time communication by maintaining a 
desired delivery speed across the sensor network through a 
novel combination of feedback control and stateless non-
deterministic geographic forwarding. MMSPEED [6] 
extends SPEED to support different delivery velocities and 
levels of reliability. It provides QoS differentiation in two 
quality domains, namely, timeliness and reliability, so that 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

packets can choose the most proper combination of service 
options depending on their timeliness and reliability 
requirements. THVR [7] adopts, like SPEED, the approach 
of mapping packet deadline to a velocity, which is known as 
a good metric to delay constrained packet delivery. 
However, its routing decisions are based on two-hop 
neighborhood information to achieve lower end-to-end 
deadline miss ratio and higher energy utilization efficiency. 
DMFR [8] routes data packets in five stages: initialization, 
packet 
transmission, 
jumping 
transmission, 
jumping 
probability adjustment and transmission finish. Transition 
from transmission stage to jumping stage occurs when a 
node is congested. To reduce the packet loss ratio, each 
sensor node dynamically adjusts its jumping probabilities. 
However, some of other existing routing protocols use 
specific mechanisms to save energy of sensor nodes and/or 
to maximize the sensor network lifetime [9-12]. PATH [9] 
improves real-time routing performance by means of 
reducing the packet dropping in routing decisions. It is 
based on the concept of using two-hop neighbor information 
and power-control mechanism. The former is used for 
routing decisions and the latter is deployed to improve link 
quality as well as reducing the delay. The protocol 
dynamically adjusts transmitting power in order to reduce 
the probability of packet dropping and addresses practical 
issue like network holes, scalability and loss links in WSNs. 
EARTOR [10] is designed to route requests with specified 
end-to-end latency constraints, which strikes the elegant 
balance between the energy consumption and the end-to-end 
latency and aims to maximize the number of the requests 
realized in network. The core techniques adopted include 
the cross-layer design that incorporates the duty cycle, a 
bidding mechanism for each relay candidate that takes its 
residual energy, location information, and relay priority into 
consideration. EEOR [11] improves the sensor network 
throughput by allowing nodes that overhear the transmission 
and closer to the sink to participate in forwarding the packet, 
i.e., in forwarder list. The nodes in forwarder list are 
prioritized and the lower priority forwarder will discard the 
packet if the packet has been forwarded by a higher priority 
forwarder. One challenging problem is to select and 
prioritize forwarder list such that the energy consumptions 
by all nodes is optimized. Extensive simulations in 
simulator TOSSIM show that this protocol performs well in 
terms of energy consumption, packet loss ratio, and average 
delivery delay. TREE [12] is a routing strategy with 
guarantee of QoS for industrial wireless sensor networks by 
considering the real-time routing performance, transmission 
reliability, and energy efficiency. By using two-hop 
information, real-time data routes with lower energy cost 
and better transmission reliability are used in the proposed 
routing strategy. 
III. PROPOSED POWER-AWARE MECHANISM 
The proposed PRR mechanism routes data packets in 
three stages: useless packet remove (Section III-A), urgent 
packet selection (Section III-B) and next forwarder selection 
(Section III-C). Note that the calculus are done locally in the 
current node and the used information is either in the 
received packet to forward, such as previous hops’ delay, 
geographic location of source and destination nodes, or 
inside the current node, such as its geographic location and 
those of its neighbors. 
A. Useless packet remove 
Many real-time routing protocols [4-12] forward, often 
over long distances, packets that have no chance to reach 
their destination because of its insufficient deadline. This is 
because the packet deadline information, which in important 
in this type of applications, is not exploited by these 
protocols. To save more energy of nodes, the proposed PRR 
mechanism ensures an early removal of any useless packet 
because it will not reach its destination. Indeed, only packets 
with sufficient residual deadline to reach the sink node are 
forwarded in network. Also, PRR increases the network 
fluidity and reinforces the real-time aspects of the routing 
protocol. To do this, PRR calculates the expected end-to-
end delay allowing the current packet to reach its destination 
node, then decides whether to remove or not the current 
packet depending on both this expected end-to-end delay 
and constant threshold α related to application requirements 
in which the removal of delayed packets is performed. 
1) Expected end-to-end delay: As shown in Figure 1, 
current node   calculates the expected end-to-end delay 
, allowing current packet  to reach its destination , 
by using Formula (1). In this formula, 	 denotes the 
previous hops’ delay since source node 
 , 	  is the 
geographic distance traveled by packet  until current node 
,  is the remaining geographic distance to reach . 
  
	  	                            1 
 
 
Figure 1.  Expected end-to-end delay estimation. 
2) Packet remove decision: Having the expected end-to-
end delay  and to decide whether to remove or not 
packet , current node  applies the decision rule shown in 
Figure 2, where 	 is distance between source node 
 
and destination node ,  is the advance in distance of 
data packet   toward its destination which is given by 
	 
   
 
	 
  1 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
  2 
… 
   
  1 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Formula (2) and showen in Figure 3, and α is a constant 
parameter set in the interval [0,1] according to the 
application requirement. The value of α must be close to 0 
for energy-critical applications to maximize the network 
lifetime or close to 1 for time-critical applications to 
minimize the packet loss ratio. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The packet remove décision algorithm. 
 
The packet decision remove algorithm (Figure 2) is 
explained as follow. If  is greater than α  	 
then node  removes each delayed packet after the distance 
threshold α  	 . Otherwise,   is multiplied by 
  α  	
⁄
 to give more chance to current packet 
 to advance in network. If the result exceeds  
despite the given chance then packet  is removed to save 
the energy of nodes and to increase the network fluidity. In 
our simulations given in Section IV parameter α is set at 
0.5. Thus, each delayed packet  with an advance  
greater than 50% of the total distance 	 is immediately 
removed by current node  in order to increase fluidity of 
links and to save resources of sensor nodes. 
  
	
   
   	
 
2	
   IF  	 # 	
	                                        OTHERWISE               
+      2 
 
 
Figure 3.  Advance in distance estimation. 
B. Urgent packet selection 
Most existing real-time routing protocols use scheduling 
schemes based only on residual deadline of a data packet to 
forward [13]. However, these schemes may not be effective 
when packets are sent to different destinations; case of a 
network using several sinks. In fact, these schemes give 
forwarding priority to a packet whose deadline is the 
smallest although it is very close to its destination. In the 
example shown in Figure 4, node   has two packets to 
forward: , for destination 1 with 2 ms (milliseconds) as 
deadline and   for destination 2 with 3 ms as deadline. 
According to existing scheduling schemes based on residual 
deadline, node   will firstly forward packet ,  and then 
probably causes the removal of packet   because of its 
distance to destination 2. The proposed PRR mechanism 
provides an efficient solution to this problem because it 
performs as follows: 
• For each data packet - in the queue of current node 
, calculate the decision parameter - by Formula 
(3), where - is the expected end-to-end delay, 
obtained by Formula (1), allowing packet - to reach 
its destination . 
• Selects data packet . having the smallest decision 
parameter . by running Function (4). 
-   -  -                          3 
.  0 1  - ;  ∀-∈ 344  5          4 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Most urgent packet selection by current node . 
Then, in the PRR mechanism, the two packets , and   
(Figure 4) will probably reach their respective destination 
before their deadline expires because current node  will 
forward packet   before packet ,. Note that PRR is also 
valid for a network using one destination node (sink). 
Note that the most urgent packet selection can be done 
in two ways: a) during the packet reception by a node where 
its queue is scheduled according to Formula (3) or b) during 
the forwarding process where the most urgent packet is 
timely chosen from the queue. In way (a), PRR minimizes 
calculations but loses reliability because the queuing delay 
of packet - is not considered when estimating its -. 
But in way (b), the current-node queue is not scheduled and 
selection of the most urgent packet requires extraction of all 
packets belonging to this queue. Since PRR is designed to 
2 
 
1 
, 
2 
3 
  
 
	 
 
 
 
	 
 
IF   7 α  	  THEN 
IF   7  THEN Remove packet ; ENDIF 
ELSE 
IF  
89:
α  9;<:  7  THEN Remove ; ENDIF 
ENDIF 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

achieve lower loss ratio and to reduce energy consumption, 
way (b) has been implemented in our proposal, where a 
current node applies both the decision rule (Figure 2) and 
Function (4) on all packets in its queue in order to remove 
each delayed packet and to select the most urgent packet 
among the not delayed packets. 
C. Next forwarder selection 
Radio range adjustment has become possible in recent 
sensor nodes. The quantity of energy required to send a 
message is proportional to the transmission power used by 
the sender node [14]. Since the attenuation of the radio 
power of a wireless link is usually proportional to the square 
of the distance between the sender and the receiver, the 
proposed PRR mechanism uses this idea. Indeed, PRR 
adjusts the sender transmission power according to location 
of receiver node in order to reduce energy consumed during 
the routing process. 
A power-based algorithm tries to minimize the quantity 
of power required to route a message between source and 
destination nodes. The most commonly used energy model 
[15] calculates by using Formula (5) the energetic cost of a 
message forwarded by node 4 to node =, that are separated 
by distance >?, by. In this formula, constant parameters @ 
and A depend on the network environment: A represents the 
signal processing cost and α is the signal attenuation (@≥2). 
In our performance evaluation in Section IV, we have @=2 
and c=0. The optimal cost of a link in terms of energy 
consumption is that minimizes Formula (5); a function that 
does not consider any real-time service. 
       BCDE 4=   F
 >?
G     A           IF    >? H 0             
  0                         OTHERWISE           
+ 5 
The same definition of KL  (Forwarding candidate 
neighbors Set) introduced in SPEED (Figure 5) is used in 
our proposal, but an improved forwarding strategy has been 
proposed. In SPEED, the next forwarder of current packet  
toward destination node  is selected by current node  from 
its KL, which is constructed from its ML (Neighbors Set), 
according to a relay speed metric. Node  is a forwarding 
candidate neighbor if 
NA,  # 
NA, . In 
Figure 5, we have: ML  P ,,  , Q, R, S, T, U V  and 
KL  P,,  , QV. The relay speed provided by a neighbor 
  in KL  is given in SPEED by Formula (6), where X is 
distance between node   and destination  , XYN  is 
distance between neighbor  in KL and destination , and 
ZC[ is the estimated delay of link (, ). 
L 
X  XYN 
ZC[    ;   ∈ KL                           6 
To make SPEED energy-aware with high reliability in 
forwarding real-time flows, Formula (5) cannot be applied 
directly in PRR because our objective is to achieve lower 
packet loss ratio and higher energy utilization efficiency. To 
do this, PRR considers all neighbors in KL of current node   
to select the next forwarder of current packet  . PRR 
combines the transmission power B required in node  
to reach a neighbor  in KL, given by Formula (5), with the 
relay speed L of , given by Formula (6). Neighbor . 
with the higher decision parameter   is selected by 
node  as next forwarder. Formally, node  applies Function 
(7), where  is given by Formula (8). 
 
 MYNZC  .  ;   with ` .  0Y P  ;  ∀∈KL  V  7 
  L
B   ;   ∈KL                                 8 
 
 
Figure 5.  The sets ML and KL of a current node  in SPEED. 
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
To evaluate performance of the PRR mechanism, we 
associate it with the well-known real-time routing protocol 
SPEED [5] and the resulting protocol is called PA-SPEED 
(Power-Aware SPEED). We change in SPEED only the 
SNGF (Stateless Nondeterministic Geographic Forwarding) 
component. In the PA-SPEED protocol, when a node has to 
forward a data packet it first removes all delayed packets 
from its queue, then selects the most urgent packet among 
the not delayed packets and finally forwards the selected 
urgent packet to the neighbor realizing the best tradeoff 
between transmission power and relay speed. 
The protocols SPEED and PA-SPEED have been 
implemented in TinyOS [16] and evaluated in its embedded 
sensor network simulator TOSSIM [17]. Also, the recent 
existing routing protocol EEOR [11] has been evaluated in 
this simulator and in the same conditions. Since we are 
interested by real-time applications, we used a scenario of 
detecting events that occur randomly in a field. Once an 
event is detected, the information captured will be 
forwarded in a required deadline toward a sink which is 
usually connected to an actuator. 
Our simulation scene uses a uniform random distribution 
of sensor nodes. We perform simulations on a terrain with 
size 500×500 meters and 625 deployed sensor nodes (with 
12 neighbors per node as density). Two destination nodes 
are deployed and each one receives packets concerning 
particular event detection. At each time period, 20 randomly 
source nodes, equitably distributed on each side of the 
network, detect an event and forward corresponding 
S 
T 
R 
 
c 
d 
U 
ef 
Q 
  
 
gh 
ih 
   XYN
X 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

information to one destination node (sink). Each simulation 
runs during 230 seconds. Parameters used in our simulations 
are given in TABLE I. 
For each simulation, we set the packet deadline to 500 
ms (milliseconds), we vary the source rate from 3 to 23 pps 
(packets per second) and we measure the performance of 
SPEED [5], EEOR [11] and PA-SPEED in terms of packet 
loss ratio, energy consumed per delivered packet, and 
energy balancing factor (jk). The later represents variance 
in energy consumed by all sensors with the same initial 
energy. Formally, jk  1 
⁄
  ∑
A.  Am?n 
o	
.p,
, 
where A. is the energy consumed by sensor q and 
 is the 
number of deployed sensors, Am?n  is the average energy 
consumed by all deployed sensors. 
TABLE I.  SIMULATION PARAMETERS. 
MAC layer 
CSMA-TinyOS 
Radio layer 
CC2420 radio layer 
Propagation model 
log-normal path loss model  
Queue size 
50 packets 
Transmission channel 
WirelessChannel 
Bandwidth 
200 Kilobytes per second 
Packet size  
32 bytes 
Energy model 
PowerTOSSIMz model 
Node radio range 
40 meters 
 
The obtained simulation results, given in the figures 6-8, 
show that the PRR mechanism, used in the PA-SPEED 
protocol, is efficient in terms of delivering real-time flows 
and managing energy of sensor nodes. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Success in delivering real-time packets. 
Indeed, PA-SPEED loses less data packets (Figure 6) 
and consumes less energy of sensor nodes (Figure 7) than 
the protocols EEOR and SPEED. This is due to the PRR 
mechanism which first increases the network fluidity and 
saves energy of nodes by removing each packet having less 
chance to reach its destination according to its residual 
deadline and expected end-to-end delay, then reinforces the 
real-time behavior of the PA-SPEED protocol by selecting 
from the current-node queue the most urgent packet among 
the not delayed packets to be forwarded first, and finally 
forwards the selected urgent packet to the neighbor realizing 
the best tradeoff between transmission power of the current 
node and relay speed of the next forwarder neighbor. In 
application with high rate, the protocols EEOR and SPEED 
lose more packets because the deadline information is not 
used in their routing decisions. 
Figure 8 shows that PA-SPEED outperforms SPEED 
and EEOR in balancing energy of nodes. This performance 
is due to the PRR mechanism which uses the SPEED load 
balancing metric, i.e. relay speed given in Formula (6), 
which is based on a hop delay estimation representing the 
links’ fluidity. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Average energy consumed per delivered packet. 
 
Figure 8.  Performance in node energy balancing. 
0,0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
packet loss ratio (%)
source rate (pps)
SPEED
EEOR
PA-SPEED
0,34
0,40
0,46
0,52
0,58
0,64
0,70
0,76
0,82
0,88
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
energy consumption (j/p)
source rate (pps)
SPEED
EEOR
PA-SPEED
0
6
12
18
24
30
36
42
48
54
60
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
energy balancing factor
source rate (pps)
SPEED
EEOR
PA-SPEED
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

V. CONCLUSION 
An efficient mechanism (PRR) that aims to improve 
energy managing and to deliver maximum real-time packets 
in wireless sensor networks has been proposed in this paper. 
In this power-aware mechanism, the current node removes 
from its queue all delayed packets to increase links’ fluidity 
and to save nodes’ energy, then selects from the list of not 
delayed packets the most urgent packet according to 
residual deadline and expected end-to-end delay to satisfy 
real-time application constraints, and finally, forwards the 
selected urgent packet to the neighbor realizing the best 
tradeoff between transmission power and relay speed. 
Then, we have associated the PRR mechanism with the 
existing SPEED real-time routing protocol and the obtained 
protocol (PA-SPEED) has achieved good performance in 
terms of packet loss ratio, energy consumed per delivered 
packet, and node energy balancing. 
Since we base dropping decisions concerning delayed 
packets simply on estimated travel times towards the sink, 
our future work will consider any kind of weights, 
urgencies, fairness, or importance values of packets in order 
to have a less aggressive approach. We also plan to put our 
source codes in Imote2 sensor nodes for experimental tests 
in order to consolidate the simulation results presented in 
the present paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Akkaya and M. Younis, “A Survey on Routing Protocols for 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 3(3), pp. 325-
349, July 2005. 
[2] 
S. Ehsan, and B. Hamdaoui, “A Survey on Energy-Efficient Routing 
Techniques with QoS Assurances for Wireless Multimedia Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 14(2), 
pp. 265–278, May 2012. 
[3] 
R. Marjan, D. Behnam, A. B. Kamalrulnizam, and L. Malrey, 
“Multipath Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks: Survey and 
Research Challenges,” Sensors journal, vol. 12(1), pp. 650-685, May 
2012. 
[4] 
C. Lu, B.M. Blum, T.F. Abdelzaher, J.A. Stankovic, and T. He, 
“RAP: A Real-Time Communication Architecture for Large-Scale 
Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. IEEE Real Time Technology and 
Applications Symposium (RTAS), IEEE Press, pp. 55-66, 2002, 
doi:10.1109/RTTAS.2002.1137381. 
[5] 
T. He, J.A. Stankovic, C. Lu, and T. Abdelzaher, “A Spatiotemporal 
Communication Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks,” IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 16(10), pp. 
995-1006, 2005. 
[6] 
E. Felemban, C.G. Lee, and E. Ekici, MMSPEED: Multipath Multi-
SPEED Protocol for QoS Guarantee of Reliability and Timeliness in 
Wireless Sensor Networks, IEEE Transactions on Mobile 
Computing, vol. 5(6), pp. 738-754, 2006. 
[7] 
Y. Li, C. Shue, Y.Q. Song, Z. Wang, and T. Sun, “Enhancing Real-
Time Delivery in Wireless Sensor Networks With Two-Hop 
Information,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 5(2), 
pp. 113-122, 2009. 
[8] 
C.L. Wu, F. Xia, L. Yao, H. Zhang, and B. Liu, “Dynamical 
Jumping Real-Time Fault-Tolerant Routing Protocol for Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” Sensors Journal, vol. 10(3), pp. 2416-2437, 2010. 
[9] 
P. Rezayat, M. Mahdavi, M. Ghasemzadeh, and M. Agha Sarram, 
“A Novel Real-Time Power Aware Routing Protocol in Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” Journal of Computer Science, vol. 10(4), 300-
305, 2010. 
[10] W. Yang, W. Liang, and W. Dou, “Energy-Aware Real-Time 
Opportunistic Routing for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” Proc. IEEE 
Global Telecommunications Conference, IEEE Press, pp. 1-6, 
December 2010, doi:10.1109/GLOCOM.2010.5683491. 
[11] X. Mao, S. Tang, and X. Xu, “Energy Efficient Opportunistic 
Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks,” IEEE Transactions on 
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 22(11), pp.1934-1942 
November 2011. 
[12] L. Xue, X. Guan, Z. Liu, and B. Yang, “TREE: Routing strategy 
with guarantee of QoS for industrial wireless sensor networks,” 
International Journal of Communication Systems (IJCS), May 2012, 
doi:10.1002/dac.2376. 
[13] K. Liu, N. Abu-Ghazaleh, and K.D. Kang, “JiTS: Just-in-Time 
Scheduling for Real-Time Sensor Data Dissemination,” Proc. 4th 
IEEE Annual Int’l Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications, IEEE Press, pp. 46-50, March 2006, doi: 
10.1109/PERCOM.2006.33. 
[14] V. Shnayder, M. Hempstead, B. Chen, and G.W. Allen, M. Welsh, 
“Simulating the Power Consumption of Large-Scale Sensor Network 
Applications,” Proc. 2nd ACM Conference on Embedded 
Networked Sensor Systems (SenSys), ACM Press, pp. 188-200, 
November 2004, doi:10.1145/1031495.1031518. 
[15] V. Rodoplu and T. Meng, “Minimizing energy mobile wireless 
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas, vol. 17(1), pp. 1333–
1347, 1999. 
[16] P. Levis and D. Gay, “TinyOS programming,” Cambridge 
University Press, USA, April 2009. 
[17] P. Levis, N. Lee, M. Welsh, and D. Culler, “TOSSIM: Accurate and 
Scalable Simulation of Entire TinyOS Applications,” Proc. 1st ACM 
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, ACM Press, 
pp. 126 - 137, November 2003, doi:10.1145/958491.958506. 
 
 
 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

