Load Experiment of the vDACS Scheme to Use between Plural Organizations for 
Applications to the Small and Medium Size Scale Organization 
Kazuya Odagiri 
Sugiyama Jogakuen University 
Aichi, Japan 
e-mail: kodagiri@sugiyama-u.ac.jp,   
         kazuodagiri@yahoo.co.jp 
Naohiro Ishii 
Aichi Institute of Technology 
Aichi, Japan 
e-mail: ishii@aitech.ac.jp 
Shogo Shimizu 
Gakushuin Women’s College 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: shogo.shimizu@gakushuin.ac.jp 
Makoto Takizawa 
Hosei University  
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: makoto.takizawa@computer.org 
 Abstract- In the current Internet system, there are many 
problems using anonymity of the network communication such 
as personal information leaks and crimes using the Internet 
system. This is why TCP/IP protocol used in Internet system does 
not 
have 
the 
user 
identification 
information 
on 
the 
communication data, and it is difficult to supervise the user 
performing the above acts immediately.  As a study for solving 
the problem such as the personal information leaks, there is the 
study of Policy Based Network Management (PBNM). This is the 
scheme for managing a whole Local Area Network (LAN) 
through communication control by a user unit. In the PBNM, 
two types of schemes exist. The first is the scheme for managing 
the whole LAN by locating the communication control 
mechanisms on the path between network servers and clients. 
The second is the scheme of managing the whole LAN by locating 
the communication control mechanisms on clients. As the scheme 
to control on a client, we have studied theoretically about the 
Destination Addressing Control System (DACS) Scheme. By 
applying this DACS Scheme to Internet system management, we 
will realize the policy-based Internet system management. In this 
paper, as the progression phase for the last goal, we perform the 
load experiment of the cloud type virtual PBNM named the 
vDACS Scheme, which can be used by plural organizations, for 
applications to the small and medium size scale organization. 
Keywords- policy-based netwok management; DACS Scheme; 
NAPT 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
In the current Internet system, there are many problems 
using anonymity of the network communication such as 
personal information leaks and crimes using the Internet 
system. The news of the information leak in the big company 
is sometimes reported through the mass media. Because 
TCP/IP protocol used in Internet system does not have the 
user identification information on the communication data, it 
is difficult to supervise the user performing the above acts 
immediately. As studies and technologies for managing 
Internet system realized on TCP/IP protocol, those such as 
Domain Name System (DNS), Routing protocol, Fire Wall 
(F/W) and Network address port translation (NAPT)/network 
address translation (NAT) are listed. However, they are the 
studies for managing the specific part of the Internet system, 
and have no purpose of managing the whole Internet system.  
As a study for managing the whole Internet system for the 
purpose of controlling it by a user unit, the PBNM [2] exists. 
The PBNM is a scheme for managing a whole Local Area 
Network (LAN) through communication control by a user unit, 
and cannot be applied to the Internet system. The PBNM is 
often used in a scene of campus network management. In a 
campus network, network management is quite complicated. 
Because a computer management section manages only a 
small portion of the wide needs of the campus network, there 
are some user support problems. For example, when mail 
boxes on one server are divided and relocated to some 
different server machines, it is necessary for some users to 
update a client machine’s setups. Since most of the computer 
network users in a campus are students and they do not check 
frequently their e-mail, it is difficult to make them aware of 
the settings update. This administrative operation is executed 
by means of web pages and/or posters. For the system 
administrator, individual technical support is a stiff part of the 
network management. Because the PBNM manages a whole 
LAN, it is easy to solve this kind of problem. In addition, the 
PBNM can manage a whole LAN by making anonymous 
communication non-anonymous. As the result, it becomes 
possible to identify the user who steals personal information 
and commits a crime swiftly and easily. Therefore, by 
applying the PBNM, we will study about the policy-based 
Internet system management.  
In the existing PBNM, there are two types of schemes. The 
first is the scheme of managing the whole LAN by locating 
the communication control mechanisms on the path between 
network servers and clients. The second is the scheme of 
managing the whole LAN by locating the communication 
control mechanisms on clients. The client means a client 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

computer. It is difficult to apply a scheme for controlling on a 
network course to Internet system practically, because the 
communication control mechanism needs to be located on the 
path between network servers and clients without exception. 
Because the scheme for controlling on a client locates the 
communication control mechanisms as the software on each 
client, it becomes possible to apply the scheme for controlling 
on a client to Internet system by devising the installing 
mechanism so that users can install the software to the client 
easily.  
As the scheme to control on a client, we have studied 
theoretically about the Destination Addressing Control System 
(DACS) Scheme. As the works on the DACS Scheme, we 
showed the basic principle of the DACS Scheme, and security 
function [14]. After that, we implemented a DACS System to 
realize a concept of the DACS Scheme. By applying this 
scheme to Internet system, we will realize the policy-based 
Internet system management. Then, the Wide Area DACS 
system (wDACS system) used in one organization was 
showed as the second phase for the last goal. As the first step 
of the second phase, we showed the concept of the cloud type 
virtual PBNM, which could be used by plural organizations. 
In this paper, as the progression phase of the third phase for 
the last goal, we perform the load experiment to confirm the 
possibility of the cloud type virtual PBNM for the use in 
plural organizations. In Section II, motivation and related 
research for this study are described. In Section III, the 
existing DACS Scheme and wDACS Scheme is described. In 
Section IV, the proposed scheme and load experiment results 
are described. 
II.
MOTIVATION AND RELATED RESEARCH
In policy-based network management, there are two types 
of schemes. The scheme to control on a network course is the 
scheme described in Figure 1. The standardization of this 
scheme is performed in various organizations. In IETF, a 
framework of PBNM [2] was established. Standards about 
each element constituting this framework are as follows. As a 
model of control information stored in the server called 
Policy Repository, Policy Core Information model (PCIM) 
[3] was established. After it, PCMIe [4] was established by 
extending the PCIM. To describe them in the form of 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Policy Core 
LDAP Schema (PCLS) [5] was established. As a protocol to 
distribute the control information stored in Policy Repository 
or decision result from the PDP to the PEP, Common Open 
Policy Service (COPS) [6] was established. Based on the 
difference in distribution method, COPS usage for RSVP 
(COPS-RSVP) [7] and COPS usage for Provisioning (COPS-
PR) [8] were established. RSVP is an abbreviation for 
Resource Reservation Protocol. The COPS-RSVP is the 
method as follows. After the PEP having detected the 
communication from a user or a client application, the PDP 
makes a judgmental decision for it. The decision is sent and 
applied to the PEP, and the PEP adds the control to it. The 
COPS-PR is the method of distributing the control 
information or decision result to the PEP before accepting 
the communication.  
Figure 1. Principle in Scheme to Control on a Network Course 
Next, in DMTF, a framework of PBNM called Directory-
enabled Network (DEN) was established. Like the IETF 
framework, control information is stored in the server storing 
control information called Policy Server, which is built by 
using the directory service, such as LDAP [9], and is 
distributed to network servers and networking equipment 
such as switch and router. As the result, the whole LAN is 
managed. The model of control information used in DEN is 
called Common Information Model (CIM), the schema of the 
CIM (CIM Schema Version 2.30.0) [11] was opened. The 
CIM was extended to support the DEN [10], and was 
incorporated in the framework of DEN. 
In addition, Resource and Admission Control Subsystem 
(RACS) [12] was established in Telecoms and Internet 
converged Services and protocols for Advanced Network 
(TISPAN) of European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI), and Resource and Admission Control 
Functions 
(RACF) 
was 
established 
in 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) [13]. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 2. Essential Principle 
However, all the frameworks explained above are based on the 
principle shown in Figure 1. As problems of these 
frameworks, two points are presented as follows. Essential 
principle is described in Figure 2. Concretely, in the point 
called Policy Decision Point (PDP) judgment, such as 
permission and non-permission for communication pass is 
performed based on policy information. The judgment is 
notified and transmitted to the point called the PEP, which is 
the mechanism, such as VPN mechanism, router and Fire wall, 
which is located on the network path among hosts (servers and 
clients). Based on that judgment, the control is added for the 
communication that is going to pass by. 
Figure 3. Principle in Scheme to Control on a Client
The principle of the scheme for controlling on a client is 
described in Figure 3.By locating the communication control 
mechanisms on the clients, the whole LAN is managed. 
Because this scheme controls the network communications on 
each client, the processing load is low. However, because the 
communication control mechanisms need to be located on 
each client, the work load becomes heavy. 
When it is thought that Internet system is managed by using 
these two schemes, it is difficult to put a control unit on the 
network course practically. The communication control 
mechanism needs to be located on the path between network 
servers and clients without exception. This is why, we devised 
the scheme for controlling the network on a client. The 
scheme locates the communication controls mechanisms on 
each client. That is, the software for communication control is 
installed on each client. So, by devising the installing 
mechanism letting users install software to the client easily, it 
becomes possible to apply the scheme for controlling the 
network on a client to Internet system. As a first step for the 
last goal, we showed the Wide Area DACS system (wDACS) 
system [15]. This system manages a wide area network, which 
one organization manages. Therefore, it is impossible for 
plural organizations to use this system. Then, as the first step 
of the second phase, we showed the concept of the cloud type 
virtual PBNM, which could be used by plural organizations in 
this paper. 
III.
EXISTING DACS SCHEME AND WDACS SYSTEM
In this section, the content of the DACS Scheme, which is 
the study of the phase 1 is described. 
A Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme 
Figure 4 shows the basic principle of the network services by 
the DACS Scheme. At the timing of the (a) or (b) as shown in 
the following, the DACS rules (rules defined by the user unit) 
are distributed from the DACS Server to the DACS Client. 
(a) At the time of a user logging in the client. 
(b) At the time of a delivery indication from the system 
administrator. 
According to the distributed DACS rules, the DACS Client 
performs (1) or (2) operation as shown in the following. Then, 
communication control of the client is performed for every 
login user. 
(1) Destination information on IP Packet, which is sent from 
application program, is changed. 
(2) IP Packet from the client, which is sent from the application 
program to the outside of the client, is blocked. 
An example of the case (1) is shown in Figure 4. In Figure 4, 
the system administrator can distribute a communication of the 
login user to the specified server among servers A, B or C. 
Moreover, the case (2) is described. For example, when the 
system administrator wants to forbid an user to use MUA (Mail 
User Agent), it will be performed by blocking IP Packet with 
the specific destination information. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 4. Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme 
In order to realize the DACS Scheme, the operation is done 
by a DACS Protocol as shown in Figure 5. As shown by (1) of 
the double way arrow between DACS Server and IN block in 
Figure 5, the distribution of the DACS rules is performed on 
communication between the DACS Server and the DACS 
Client, which is arranged at the application layer. The 
application of the DACS rules to the DACS Control is shown 
by (2) in Figure 5.  
Figure 5.  Layer Setting of the DACS Scheme 
The steady communication control, such as a modification 
of the destination information or the communication blocking 
is performed at the network layer as shown by (3) in Figure 5. 
B Communication Control on Client 
The communication control on every user was given. 
However, it may be better to perform communication control 
on every client instead of every user. For example, it is the case 
where many and unspecified users use a computer room, which 
is controlled. In this section, the method of communication 
control on every client is described, and the coexistence 
method with the communication control on every user is 
considered. 
When a user logs in to a client, the IP address of the client is 
transmitted to the DACS Server from the DACS Client. Then, 
if the DACS rules corresponding to IP address, is registered 
into the DACS Server side, it is transmitted to the DACS 
Client. Then, communication control for every client can be 
realized by applying to the DACS Control. In this case, it is a 
premise that a client uses a fixed IP address. However, when 
using DHCP service, it is possible to carry out the same control 
to all the clients linked to the whole network or its subnetwork 
for example. 
Figure 6. Creating the DACS rules on the DACS Server 
When using communication control on every user and every 
client, communication control may conflict. In that case, a 
priority needs to be given. The judgment is performed in the 
DACS Server side as shown in Figure 6. Although not 
necessarily stipulated, the network policy or security policy 
exists in the organization such as a university (1). The priority 
is decided according to the policy (2). In (a), priority is given 
for the user's rule to control communication by the user unit. 
In (b), priority is given for the client's rule to control 
communication by the client unit. In (c), the user's rule is the 
same as the client's rule. As the result of comparing the 
conflict rules, one rule is determined respectively.  Those rules 
and other rules not overlapping are gathered, and the DACS 
rules are created (3). The DACS rules are transmitted to the 
DACS Client. In the DACS Client side, the DACS rules are 
applied to the DACS Control. The difference between the 
user's rule and the client's rule is not distinguished. 
C Security Mechanism of the DACS Scheme 
In this section, the security function of the DACS Scheme is 
described. The communication is tunneled and encrypted by 
use of SSH. By using the function of port forwarding of SSH, 
it is realized to tunnel and encrypt the communication between 
the network server and the DACS Client, which is installed in 
the client. Normally, to communicate from a client application 
to a network server by using the function of port forwarding of 
SSH, local host (127.0.0.1) needs to be indicated on that client 
application as a communicating server. The transparent use of 
a client, which is a characteristic of the DACS Scheme, is 
failed. The transparent use of a client means that a client can be 
used continuously without changing setups when the network 
system is updated. The function that doesn't fail the transparent 
use of a client is needed. The mechanism of that function is 
shown in Figure 7. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 7. Extend Security Function
D Application to cloud environment 
In this section, the contents of wDACS system are explained 
in Figure 8. First, as preconditions, because private IP 
addresses are assigned to all servers and clients existing in 
from LAN1 to LAN n, mechanisms of NAT/NAPT are 
necessary for the communication from each LAN to the 
outside. In this case, NAT/NAPT is located on the entrance of 
the LAN such as (1), and the private IP address is converted to 
the global IP address towards the direction of the arrow. Next, 
because the private IP addresses are set on the servers and 
clients in the LAN, other communications except those 
converted by Destination NAT cannot enter into the LAN. But, 
responses for the communications sent form the inside of the 
LAN can enter into the inside of the LAN because of the 
reverse conversion process by the NAT/NAPT.  In addition, 
communications from the outside of the LAN1 to the inside are 
performed through the conversion of the destination IP address 
by Destination NAT. Concretely, the global IP address at the 
same of the outside interface of the router is changed to the 
private IP address of each server. From here, system 
configuration of each LAN is described. First, the DACS 
Server and the authentication server are located on the DMZ on 
the LAN1 such as (4). On the entrance of the LAN1, 
NAT/NAPT and destination NAT exists such as (1) and (2). 
Because only the DACS Server and network servers are set as 
the target destination, the authentication server cannot be 
accessed from the outside of the LAN1. In the LANs form 
LAN 2 to LAN n, clients managed by the wDACS system 
exist, and NAT/NAPT is located on the entrance of each LAN 
such as (1). Then, F/W such as (3) or (5) exists behind or with 
NAT/NAPT in all LANs. 
Figure 8. Basic System Configuration of wDACS System
IV.
THE CLOUD TYPE VIRTUAL PBNM FOR THE COMMON 
USE BETWEEN PLURAL ORGANIZATIONS
In this section, after the concept and implementation of the 
proposed scheme were described, functional evaluation results 
are described. 
A. Concept of the Cloud Type Virtual PBNM for the 
Common Use Between Plural Organizations 
In Figure 9, which is described in [16], the proposed 
concept is shown. Because the existing wDACS Scheme 
realized the PBNM control with the software called the DACS 
Server and the DACS client, other mechanism was not needed. 
By this point, application to the cloud environment was easy.  
Figure 9. Concept of the Proposed Scheme 
B. Implementation of the basic function in the 
The proposed scheme in this paper realizes the common 
usage by plural organizations by adding the following 
elements to realize the common usage by plural organizations: 
user identification of the plural organizations, management of 
the policy information of the plural organizations, application 
of the PKI for code communication in the Internet, Redundant 
configuration of the DACS Server (policy information server), 
load balancing configuration of the DACS Server, installation 
function of DACS Client by way of the Internet . 
C. Cloud Type Virtual PBNM for the Common Usage 
Between Plural Organizations 
In the past study [14], the DACS Client was operated on the 
windows operation system (Windows OS). It was because 
there were many cases that the Windows OS was used for as 
the OS of the client. However, the Linux operating system 
(Linux OS) had enough functions to be used as the client 
recently, too. In addition, it was thought that the case used in 
the clients in the future came out recently. Therefore, to prove 
the possibility of the DACS Scheme on the Linux OS, the 
basic function of the DACS Client was implemented in this 
study. The basic functions of the DACS Server and DACS 
Client were implemented by JAVA language. From here, it is 
described about the order of the process in the DACS Client 
and DACS Server as follows. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure.10 Prototype System 
(Processes in the DACS Client) 
(p1) The information acquisition from Cent OS 
(p2) Transmission from the DACS Client to the DACS  
(p3) The information transmission from the DACS Client to  
(p4) The reception of the DACS rules from the DACS Server 
(p5) Application of the DACS rules of the DACS Control 
(Processes in the DACS Server) 
(p1) The information reception from the DACS Client 
(p2) Connection to the database  
(p3) Inquiry of the Database  
(p4) Transmission of the DACS rules to the DACS Client 
D. Results of the functional evaluation 
  In this section, the results of the functional evaluation for the 
implementation system are described in Figure 10.  
Figure.11 Setting Situation of the DACS rules on the DACS CL
In Figure 11, the setting situation of the DACS rules is 
described in figure 11. This DACS rules is the rule to change a 
Web server for the access. The delivery of the DACS rules is 
between the DACS SV and the DACS CL encrypted by using 
SSL. 
  By this DACS rules, the next operation was realized. When 
the user accessed the Web Server with the IP address of 
192.168.1.10, the Web Server with the IP address of 
192.168.1.12 
was 
accessed 
actually. 
As 
for 
this 
communication result, the communication log on each Web 
server was confirmed by viewing.  
V.
LOAD EXPERIMENT RESULTS
In this section, after the description of experimental 
environment, load experiment results are described. 
A.  Load experiment results to confirm the function of the 
software for realization of the Cloud Type Virtual PBNM 
for the Common Use Between Plural Organizations 
In this section, the load experiment results are described. In 
the Figure 12, the experimental environment is described. This 
environment consists of four virtual servers. In the virtual 
server 1, servers group such as the DACS Server and user 
authentication server is stored. In other virtual severs such as 
the virtual server 2, virtual server 3 and virtual server 4, the 
virtual client, which is installed the DACS Client is stored. 
The number of the virtual clients is 100.  
Figure.12 Experimental Environment 
By using this experimental environment, the load experiment 
was executed. Specifically, simultaneous accesses for the 
DACS SV from the 100 virtual clients were performed at the 
rate of one time form 15 minutes. The number of the 
simultaneous connections for the DACS SV was set to 10 on 
this occasion. The experimental results are described in Table 
1.   
                    TABLE I. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS (1)
  In this table, the practice time of the DACL CL and CPU 
consumption is described. The average of the results of the 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

measurement for ten times was 263.2 MHz. This value is 
around three times of the value shown in Table 2. 
TABLE II. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS (2) 
In the experiment of the Table 2, the Windows client is used, 
and the communications between the DACS SV and the 
DACS CL is not encrypted. In this experiment, the Linux 
client is used, and the communications between the DACS SV 
and the DACS CL is encrypted by SSL. Particularly, because 
an element of the overhead processes of the SSL is large, it is 
thought that such a result was derived.  
B.  Load experiment results for applications to the small and 
medium size scale organization 
In this section, the load experiment results are described. The 
experimental environment is described. The experimental 
environment is as previous experiment environment. In this 
experiment, simultaneous accesses for the DACS SV from the 
200 virtual clients were performed at the rate of one time form 
15 minutes. The number of the simultaneous connections for 
the DACS SV was set to 10 on this occasion. The 
experimental 
results 
are 
described 
in 
Table 
3.   
TABLE III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS (3) 
  In this table, the average of the results of the measurement 
for ten times was 265.8 MHz. This value is same as the value 
shown in Table 1. In other words, when the number of the 
client is 200, CPU consumption of the DACS SV becomes the 
constant standard by limiting the number of simultaneous 
connections to 10. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we performed the load experiment of the 
cloud type virtual PBNM, which can be used by plural 
organizations. In this experiment, the 200 virtual clients with 
Linux OS are used, and the communications between the 
DACS SV and the DACS CL are encrypted. The number of 
the simultaneous connections for the DACS SV was set to 10 
on this occasion. As the result, the average of CPU 
consumption was 265.8 MHz.  It became possible to confirm 
the fact that CPU consumption of the DACS SV becomes 
about 263~265MHz by limiting the number of simultaneous 
connections to 10. By this experiment, it was confirmed this 
proposed scheme was applicable to the network with the 200 
clients. 
As a future work, we are going to perform more load 
experiments in the form of changing the number of the virtual 
clients and the number of the simultaneous connections for the 
DACS SV to show that it is applicable in a small and medium 
size scale network with the clients of around 1000.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the research grant of KDDI 
Foundation. We express our gratitude. 
REFERENCES
[1]
V. Cerf and E. Kahin, “A Protocol for Packet Network 
Interconnection,” IEEE Trans. on Commn, vol.COM-22, May 
1974, pp.637-648. 
[2]
R. Yavatkar, D. Pendarakis, and R. Guerin, “A Framework for 
Policy-based Admission Control, ”  IETF RFC 2753, 2000.
[3]
B. Moore, E. Ellesson, J. Strassner, and A. Westerinen, “Policy 
Core Information Model -- Version 1 Specification, ”  IETF RFC 3060, 
2001. 
[4]
B. Moore., “Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) Extensions,
”  IETF 3460, 2003.
[5]
J. Strassner, B. Moore, R. Moats, and E. Ellesson, “ Policy Core 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Schema,” IETF 
RFC 3703, 2004.
[6]
D. Durham at el., “The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) 
Protocol, ” IETF RFC 2748, 2000.
[7]
S. Herzog at el., “COPS usage for RSVP,” IETF RFC 2749, 
2000.
[8]
K. Chan et al., “COPS Usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-
PR),” IETF RFC 3084, 2001.
[9]
CIM Core Model V2.5 LDAP Mapping Specification, 2002.
[10] M. Wahl, T. Howes, and S.Kille, “Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (v3),” IETF RFC 2251, 1997.
[11] CIM Schema: Version 2.30.0, 2011.
[12] ETSI ES 282 003: Telecoms and Internet converged Services 
and protocols for Advanced Network (TISPAN); Resource and 
Admission 
Control 
Subsystem 
(RACS); 
Functional 
Architecture, June 2006.
[13] ETSI ETSI ES 283 026: Telecommunications and Internet 
Converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); Resource and Admission Control; Protocol for QoS 
reservation information exchange between the Service Policy 
Decision Function (SPDF) and the Access-Resource and 
Admission Control Function (A-RACF) in the Resource and 
Protocol specification, April 2006.
[14] K. Odagiri, R. Yaegashi,M. Tadauchi, and N. Ishii, “Secure 
DACS 
Scheme, 
“Journal 
of 
Network 
and 
Computer 
Applications,” Elsevier, Vol.31, Issue 4, 2008, pp.851-861, 
November.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

