 
Development of a Low-Cost Optical System for Monitoring Plastics in Irrigation 
System Grids 
Daniel A. Basterrechea(1), Sandra Sendra(1), Lorena Parra(1,2), Jaime Lloret(1)  
(1) Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de Zonas Costeras, UniversitatPolitècnica de València. C/ Paranimf nº 
1, Grao de Gandía – Gandía, Valencia (Spain)  
(2) Instituto Madrileño de Investigación y Desarrollo Rural, Agrario y Alimentario (IMIDRA), Finca “El Encin”, A-2, 
Km 38, 2, 28800 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain 
E-mail: - dabasche@epsg.upv.es, sansenco@upv.es, loparbo@doctor.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
Abstract— The plastics incorporated into the irrigation 
channel of agricultural plots is a major problem due to the 
outline produced by these in the gratings present in these 
systems. In this article, we present a low-cost system based on 
artificial intelligence to monitor the presence of plastics in the 
gratings of agricultural irrigation channels. For this purpose, 
an experiment has been carried out using a fish tank, where a 
grid with bag sections has been placed. Different photographs 
were taken at 10 cm from the camera, with 0 g, 5 g and 10 g of 
soil added. Once the images were obtained, the Matlab 
programme was used to process them and obtain histograms of 
the red, green, and blue bands. The best results are shown in 
the image with 0 g of soil and 5 g of soil. The verification 
carried out with 0 g of turbidity shows that the % of pixel 
number of the grids are above the limit of 5%, the maximum 
value for the grids is 84.08%, being the percentage of pixel 
number of the bags below this limit with a maximum value of 
0.09%. 
Keywords—Optical system; plastic monitoring; irrigation 
system; image processing, RGB. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Plastics are synthetic materials produced by synthetic or 
semi-synthetic organic polymers [1]. More than 8.3 billion 
metric tons of plastics have been produced since the 1950s 
and the proliferation in their use has been exponential [2]. 
Plastics are inexpensive, versatile, lightweight, and durable. 
This fact makes plastic containers used to store a multitude 
of different materials, from objects to food, because they act 
as a barrier preventing contamination. Besides, they support 
the family economy and food security by minimizing post-
harvest losses, increasing shelf life and storage capacity [3]. 
The great versatility of these makes their production 
increase every day, making them one of the most important 
pollutants at the marine and terrestrial level due to their 
difficult degradation. The fact of its prevalence in these 
environments makes it become a worldwide problem. One of 
the main problems is that it prevents the proper growth of 
plants, as well as that of crops, generating agricultural 
pollution [4].  
Plastics can also be a major problem for the irrigation 
system because the accumulation of plastics in the gratings 
of agricultural irrigation canals causes runoff, reducing the 
irrigation flow. In addition to a reduction in water flow, the 
accumulation of these plastics indirectly also causes other 
materials, such as leaf debris or branches to accumulate on 
these gratings, allowing the flow to increase in one part of 
the grating, causing overflow and loss of water. This loss of 
water may be relevant, since Agriculture accounts for about 
33% of total water use in Europe, and water use is most 
intensive in southern parts of Europe, where 80% of total 
water consumption goes to crop irrigation [5]. 
The most commonly used method for the detection of 
plastics is the satellite method. This system is especially 
suitable for open surfaces with a large surface area. In this 
case, satellite images are not suitable because the irrigation 
channel of agricultural plots is a small system, which results 
in the inefficiency of this type of method. In addition, 
satellite imagery is often very expensive and not affordable 
for farmers [6]. In this paper, we propose a sensor for 
detecting the presence of plastics in the irrigation grids to 
control, detect, eliminate and prevent plastic bags, bottles, or 
other plastic waste, dumped by humans, from damaging not 
only the crops, if not our own body. The proposed system 
will be of great use to farmers, as it will provide a plastic 
detection tool to prevent outbreaks in irrigation canals. It will 
be useful to ensure optimal water flow within the system. To 
do this, a camera will be installed in the irrigation grid, 
which will be able to detect the presence of plastics and 
differentiate it from other materials. Artificial intelligence 
will be used for this, through image processing. In this way, 
this sensor will send an alert to the user of the said grid of the 
presence of plastics, so that the user can remove them, 
avoiding not only the contamination of their growing area 
but also the subsequent dumping of said plastics in more 
advanced areas of a said chain like the seas, oceans, or our 
bodies. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we explain the related work. The test bench is presented in 
Section III. Section IV shows the system proposal for our 
prototype. The results are described in Section V. Then, 
Section VI displays the verification of the experiment. 
Finally, in Section VII, we expose the main conclusion and 
future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we analyze the different methods used to 
detect the presence of plastics in aquatic environments, 
although it should be noted that so far, no detection system 
has been found in irrigation grids for agriculture. 
In 2018 Karaba et al. [7], using equipment mounted on a 
C-130 aircraft, which captured SWIR Red, Green, and Blue 
(RGB) and hyperspectral images, detect plastics in the ocean. 
However, this technique requires a large infrastructure, as 
well as being very expensive. They established that the 
absorption of ∼1215 and ∼1732 nm can be used for 
applications in the detection of ocean plastics from spectral 
information. Secondly, Biermann et al. in 2020 [8] 
demonstrated that floating macroplastics are detectable in 
optical data acquired by the sentinel-2 satellites of the 
European Space Agency (ESA). In addition, these could be 
distinguished from natural materials like algae. On the other 
hand, they detected patches of materials on oceanic surfaces, 
which employing the Floating Debris Index (FDI). Taking 
advantage of this way, the spectral information to 
differentiate the macroplastics. The classification was carried 
out with 86% precision. Recently, Iri et al. [9] in 2021, have 
developed 
an 
optical 
system 
capable 
of 
detecting 
microplastics in water. The developed sensor is based on a 
low-cost system based on a spectrophotometer. The system 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

they use is capable of detecting microplastics below 0.015 p / 
v. 
In 2020, a methodology was carried out to provide a 
rapid and cost-effective characterization and quantification 
of the transport of floating macroplastics in the Rhine river 
by Vriend [10]. This study is based on visual observation, 
combined with passive sampling to arrive at an estimate of 
the transport of macroplastics as well as the most abundant 
types of plastics in this river. In this way, they studied the 
advantages and disadvantages of current sampling systems 
and established a new perspective for new monitoring 
systems. In the same year, Van Lieshout et al. [11], presented 
a method for the detection of plastics. This system is based 
on an automated system monitoring that detects said 
contamination. They installed cameras on bridges along the 
river, and from the images taken and through deep learning; 
they were able to estimate the plastic density. Its system is 
capable of distinguishing plastics from environmental 
elements. 
Studies on the hyperspectral reflectance of virgin plastics 
degraded by nature and submerged in water at different 
concentrations and depths of suspended sediments have been 
carried out by Moshtaghi et al. in 2021 [12]. Besides, more 
analysis has been carried out on the different types of 
existing polymers to had better understand the effect of water 
absorption. The results show the importance of using spectral 
wavebands in both the visible and Short-Wave Infrared 
(SWIR) spectra for debris detection, especially when plastics 
are damp or slightly submerged, which is often the case in 
environments natural aquatic. 
Although some of these systems are based on optical 
systems, at the moment no system has been found that is 
established in a fixed point, and that sends alarms simply and 
easily to the farmer himself. In addition, the systems found 
are often expensive systems that require sophisticated 
devices such as airplanes, satellites, among others. It is for 
this reason that the sensor that we have developed, in 
addition to being cheap, easy to use, and allows monitoring 
in real-time what is happening at a specific point. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
Because the presence of plastics or objects in the 
irrigation channels of pipes can cause important problems 
and damages in systems, it is important to determine if some 
element is hindering the normal flow of water. To do that, we 
propose the use of a camera and an intelligent algorithm to 
periodically analyse the status of the grid. This section 
describes the decision algorithm used to detect if plastic is 
present in our grid.  
A. System description. 
In order to detect if plastic or object is blocking or 
hindering the flow of water through a grid, we propose the 
use of a camera to take pictures of this grid when water is 
being used. As Figure 1 shows, the camera is inside the water 
channel. The system also includes a turbidity sensor [13]. 
After taking a picture, the image is wirelessly transmitted to 
a node that will be in charge of processing the received 
image. Although there are several techniques for data 
computing, our system performs a local computation (edge 
computing). In this sense, the replies required to solve the 
problem of plastic presence in the grid are faster than 
techniques such as fog computing or cloud computing.  
When plastic is detected, the node creates an alarm and 
sends it to the server application. The server is in charge of 
warning the users or farmers through a Graphic User 
Interface (GUI) previously installed in the farmer’s 
Smartphone. The farmer can stop the irrigation process and 
remove the plastic from the grid. 
On the other hand, the whole process is stored in a 
database join with other possible parameters monitored in the 
crop. The images are also stored in the database with the 
results of processing them. With that, we are creating a 
database to permit the system to learn from previous 
experiences for generating more accurate decisions in further 
situations. 
Data Base
Application
Server
Node
(Edge computing)
INTERNET
Grid
Camera
Ethernet
/3G/4G
Access 
Point
3G/4G
Smartphone of 
farmer (GUI)
Turbidity sensor
 
Figure 1. Proposed system. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Start
End
Water in 
the
channel?
Measure water
turbidity
Yes
No
Take Picture
Plastics in 
the grid
Is
turbidity
Low?
Calcule 
Histogram
Extract Red 
Histogram
Is
turbidity
medium?
Extract Green 
Histogram
91<Value<190
109<Value<136
Extract Green 
Histogram
109<Value<163
Yes
Yes
No
No
No Plastics
in the grid
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
 
Figure 2. Decision Algorithm 
B. Decision algorithm. 
In order to be able to detect the presence of plastics in the 
grid, it is important to recognize the grid shape from the 
plastics that do not usually present the same shape. It is 
possible to apply complex AI-based algorithms to firstly 
detect the shape of the grid and subtracts it from the obtained 
image. In our case, we will distinguish the grid by analyzing 
its RGB components from the RGB components of plastics. 
Figure 2 displays the decision algorithm that we propose.  
When the irrigation process is started, the system checks 
if there is water in the channel. After that, the level of 
turbidity is measured. According to the turbidity level, the 
thresholds for detecting plastics on grids will change. The 
next step is to take the picture and calculate its RGB 
histogram. When low turbidity is detected, the red histogram 
is considered. In this case, the biggest contributions in pixels 
should be concentrated between 91 and 190. When a medium 
turbidity level is detected, the green histogram is analysed. In 
this case, the biggest contributions in pixels should be 
concentrated between 109 and 136. Finally, if high turbidity 
is detected, we have also considered the green turbidity. In 
this case, the biggest contributions in pixels should be 
concentrated between 109 and 163. Inside these ranges, the 
system will inform on the presence of plastics. In any other 
case, the system will tag the measures as non-plastic in the 
grid. 
IV. 
TEST BENCH 
In this section, we present the materials used for the 
experiment. Besides, the methodology used for data 
collection is described. 
A. Materials 
For the experiment, a rectangular glass fish tank with 
dimensions of 24.5 cm high, 26 cm wide, and 50 cm long 
were used. A white plastic grid 23 cm high and 25 cm wide 
was used to simulate the presence of a grid. Two pieces of 
plastic supermarket bags were placed on the grid to represent 
the plastic waste that humans throw into the environment. 
Soil with a composition of 4.3 % sand, 67.3% silt, and 28.4 
% clay was used as a turbidity-enhancing compound. In 
order to stabilize the light input in the tank and to obtain a 
homogeneous light distribution, a tank light was used. In 
addition, a Xiaomi Red Mi Note 6 Pro mobile phone with a 
20-megapixel sensor camera was used to capture the images 
required for the subsequent study.  
Finally, a black blanket was placed on top of the tank to 
limit the entry of external light and thus reduce interference 
to a minimum. Figure 3 displays the experimental setup. The 
grid used and the arrangement of the two pieces of plastic 
used can be seen. The grid is located at 10 cm distances from 
the fish tank glass on the horizontal axis. Besides, the 
homogeneity of the light distribution can be observed by 
placing a fish tank lamp on top of the tank. 
 
Figure 3. Experimental tank. 
B. Methodology 
The implementation of the experiment has two phases. 
The first is based on the experiment itself, where the 
necessary images are taken. The second is the processing and 
analysis of these images in order to obtain the different 
histograms of these images and to be able to differentiate 
between the grid and the plastic bag in different conditions. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

For the first phase of the experiment, images are taken of 
a grid with two pieces of a plastic bag at different distances 
and with different turbidity. To do this, we start by filling the 
tank with 37 L of tap water at a height of 18.5 cm to 6 cm 
from the top edge of the tank. Then we introduce the grid 
with the plastic bags. The images are always taken from a 
fixed point, from the side of the tank. In addition, each round 
of images is captured while a black blanket to block outside 
light permanently covers the tank. Photographs are taken by 
placing the grid at 10cm from the camera. This is repeated in 
triplicate, with 0 g of soil, 5 g of soil and 10 g of soil to 
increase turbidity. 
Once the images have been obtained, we start with the 
second phase. In this part, the images obtained are processed 
and analysed. For this, we use the Matlab software [14] with 
which we can acquire different histograms in red, green, and 
blue. Figure 4 presents pseudocode used in the programming 
process of the images, obtaining the histograms of different 
colours, as well as the tables with their respective data.  
To obtain the necessary information, we choose 3 bag 
sections and another 3 pieces of the grid from each image 
and we introduce them into the software. Matlab generates 
three histograms in red, green, and blue for each section of 
the image entered, with their respective data. Once these 
histograms are obtained, we put them together to obtain the 
different ranges of pixel values for bag and grid, in order to 
differentiate between them. Figure 5 presents the image 
where the grid is 20 cm from the camera. Image a) displayed 
picture without soil and b) image represents water with 10 g 
of soil to increase the turbidity. It can be seen how the 
pockets begin to diffuse and start to look like part of the grid. 
V. RESULTS 
In this section, the results obtained after treating the 
images with the Matlab software are presented. The different 
histograms for each image are evaluated to verify the ranges 
of pixel values for the bag or grid. 
A. The image at 10 cm from the camera 
Figure 6 displays the histograms obtained from the image 
captured at 10 cm from the camera, without turbidity. 
Section a) represents the blue histogram, b) the green 
histogram and c) the red histogram. Besides, each of them 
shows the graphical representation of three pieces of the bag 
(in reddish colours) and three pieces of grids (in bluish 
colours). It can be seen that in the three histograms, it is easy 
to differentiate in which pixels and values the grid or bag is 
located. The most representative graph is c) where we can 
find the presence of grid between pixel values from 1 to 90 
and from 91 to 190 for the presence of pockets. The 
maximum pixel percentage for grids is 4 % and 5.3 % for the 
bag. The results show a noticeable difference between the 
grid and the plastic bags, as the pixel values are different in 
the different pixel ranges. These results show that in non-
turbidity conditions, the system is able to differentiate 
between the two objects. 
B. Imagen at 10 cm from the camera with 5 g of soil. 
In the case of Figure 7, it represents the values obtained 
for the blue, green, and red band of the image at 10 cm from 
the camera with 5 g of soil added to the water. Section a) 
represents the blue histogram, b) the green histogram and c) 
the red histogram. In addition, each of them shows the 
graphical representation of three pieces of the bag (in red 
colours) and three pieces of grids (in blue colours). It can be 
seen that in the three histograms, it is hard to differentiate in 
which pixels and values the grid or bag is located. In this, 
case the best section is the b) with the green band. We can 
observe that parts of grids 2 and 3 can be distinguished from 
the presence of bags. The presence of the grid is located 
between the values 55 to 105, with a maximum pixel 
percentage of 3%. The results show that the system is able to 
differentiate some pieces of bag. This is because the 
turbidity, together with the dark edges of the tank, could 
have caused interference in differentiating between the 
objects. 
C. Imagen at 10 cm from the camera with 10 g of soil. 
Figure 8 represents the values obtained for the blue, 
green, and red band of the image at 10 cm from the camera 
with 10 g of soil added to the water. Section a) represents the 
blue histogram, b) the green histogram and c) the red 
histogram. In addition, each of them shows the graphical 
representation of three pieces of the bag (in red colours) and 
three pieces of grids (in blue colours). It can be seen that in 
the three histograms, it is hard to differentiate in which pixels 
and values the grid or bag is located. In this, case the best 
section is the b) with the green band. We can observe that 
parts of grids 2 and 3 can be distinguished from the presence 
of bags. The presence of the grid is located between the 
values 109 to 163, with a maximum pixel percentage of 
12.5%.The results show that at higher turbidity the system 
starts to have difficulties in differentiating between different 
objects. In addition, the reflections produced by the tank used 
produce more interference. 
         
 
 
Figure 4. Pseudocode used to get RGB histograms. 
Figure 5. a) Grid 20 cm from the camera; b) Grid 20 cm from the camera 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

with 10 g of soil added to the water; 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. a) Histogram of the blue band at 10 cm; b) Histogram of the 
green band at 10cm; c) Histogram of the red band at 10cm. 
Figure 7.  a) Histogram of the blue band at 10 cm with 5 g of soil; b) 
Histogram of the green band at 10cm with 5 g of soil; c) Histogram of the 
red band at 10cm with 5 g of soil. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. a) Histogram of the blue band at 10 cm with 10 g of soil; b) 
Histogram of the green band at 10cm with 10 g of soil; c) Histogram of the 
red band at 10cm with 10 g of soil. 
Figure 9. a) Analysis of image at 10cm with 0g of soil; b) Verification 
Analysis of image at 10cm with 0g of soil. 
 
VI. VERIFICATION 
To determine the effectiveness of the developed system, 
we conducted a verification. For this purpose, the image at a 
distance of 10 cm without added soil is used. New sections 
of the image are taken and their values are obtained. Figure 9 
shows the differences between the grid and the bag. Section 
a) represents the values taken in the experiment, where it can 
be seen that the percentage of pixels above the 5% limit are 
considered part of the grid and below the bag. Graph a) 
displays that the grids show a maximum pixel % of 74.8% in 
grid 2, and a maximum pixel % of bags of 0.02%.  In 
addition, section b) represents the verification performed, 
taking other different pieces of grid and bag. This graph 
shows a maximum pixel % of 84.08% in grid 2 and a 
maximum pixel % of bags of 0.09%. 
The results demonstrate the similarity of the data, 
showing the presence of grating above 5 % of the number of 
pixels. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The presence of plastics in the agricultural irrigation 
system represents a major problem due to the possible 
outlines produced in the grids of the same, producing a 
decrease in the irrigation flow, as well as the need for control 
in situ for its solution. 
In this paper, we propose a system to monitor the 
presence of plastics in the gratings used in irrigation channels 
for agriculture. We have determined that it is possible to 
differentiate between bags and the grid up to 5g of added 
soil. It has additionally been found that at higher turbidity the 
results are not optimal due to the dark edges and reflections 
possibly produced by the fish tank. The proposed system is 
based on the application of artificial intelligence, being of 
great help, in this case, to be able to differentiate and learn 
about the presence or absence of plastics in the grid. 
In future work, we want to test at different distances. We 
will extend the number of objects to be detected. In addition, 
we will use leaves and other types of waste to perform the 
experiment, to provide to our system more information about 
the different objects that could be presents in irrigation 
channel grids.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Manzoor, M.. Sharma, I. R. Sofi, and A. A. Dar, “Plastic Waste 
Environmental and Human Health Impacts”, Handbook of Research 
on Environmental and Human Health Impacts of Plastic Pollution, 
IGI Global,  pp. 29-37, 2020. 
[2] R. Geyer, J. R. Jambeck, and K. L. Law, “Production, use, and fate of 
all plastics ever made”, vol.3, no 7, pp. e1700782, July 2017, doi:  
10.1126/sciadv.1700782. 
[3] J. Yates et al. “A systematic scoping review of environmental, food 
security, and health impacts of food system plastics”,Nature Food, vol 
2, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
80-87, 
February 
2021, 
doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-021-00221-z. 
[4] D. Zhang et al., “Plastic pollution in croplands threatens long‐term 
food security”, Global change biology, vol. 26, no.6, pp. 3356-3367, 
April 2020, doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15043. 
[5] S. M. Markland, D. Ingram, K. E. Kniel, and M. Sharma, “Water for 
agriculture: the convergence of sustainability and safety”, Preharvest 
food 
safety, 
pp. 
143-157, 
April 
2018, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1128/9781555819644.ch8. 
[6] K. Topouzelis, A. Papakonstantinou, and S. P. Garaba, “Detection of 
floating plastics from satellite and unmanned aerial systems (Plastic 
Litter Project 2018)”, International Journal of Applied Earth 
Observation and Geoinformation, vol. 79, pp. 175-183, July 2019, 
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jag.2019.03.011. 
[7] S. P. Garaba et al., “Sensing ocean plastics with an airborne 
hyperspectral shortwave infrared imager”, Environmental science & 
technology, vol. 52, no 20, pp. 11699-11707, 2018, doi:  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02855. 
[8] L. Biermann, D. Clewley, V. Martinez-Vicente, and  K. Topouzelis, 
“Finding plastic patches in coastal waters using optical satellite data”, 
Scientific reports, vol. 10, no 1, pp. 1-10, April 2020, doi:  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-62298-z. 
[9] A. H. Iri et al., “Optical detection of microplastics in water”, 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, pp. 1-7, January 
2021, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-12358-2. 
[10] P. Vriend, C. et al. “Rapid assessment of floating macroplastic 
transport in the Rhine”, Frontiers in Marine Science, vol.7, pp.10, 
January 2020, doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00010. 
[11] C. van Lieshout, K. van Oeveren, T. van Emmerik, and E. Postma, 
“Automated river plastic monitoring using deep learning and 
cameras”, Earth and space science, vol. 7, no 8, pp. e2019EA000960, 
July 2020, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2019EA000960. 
[12] M. Moshtaghi, E. Knaeps, S. Sterckx, S. Garaba and D. Meire, 
“Spectral reflectance of marine macroplastics in the VNIR and SWIR 
measured in a controlled environment”, Scientific Reports, vol. 11, no 
1, pp.1-12, March 2021, doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-
84867-6. 
[13] S. Sendra, L. Parra, V. Ortuño, J. Lloret, and U. P. De Valencia, “A 
low cost turbidity sensor development”, Proceedings of the Seventh 
International Conference on Sensor Technologies and Applications 
(SENSORCOMM 2013), Spain 2013, pp. 25-31. 
[14] MatLab. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html. [Retrieved: May, 
2021] 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

