Computer-aided Knowledge Extraction and Management for Decision Supporting 
Processes 
 
Lidia Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
Cryptography and Cognitive Informatics Research 
Group 
Krakow, Poland 
e-mail: logiela@agh.edu.pl 
Marek R. Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
Cryptography and Cognitive Informatics Research 
Group 
Krakow, Poland 
e-mail: mogiela@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract—This publication presents the essence of the process 
of obtaining knowledge for the purpose of managing data in 
strategic decision-taking processes. A method of analysing 
selected datasets will be described by reference to the semantic 
analysis and interpretation of data. A new class of systems 
supporting strategic information management processes –
Understanding Based Management Financial Leverage Ratios 
Support Systems (UBMFLRSS) – has been chosen for the 
analysis. These systems are designed for cognitively analysing 
financial leverage ratios (financial debt ratios) and reasoning 
about sources financing the company's assets and the 
proportion of external capital based on analyses of short-term 
and long-term liabilities, as well as about the effectiveness of 
expenditure and the interest paid. Based on the semantic 
analysis of the value of leverage ratios, it is possible to assess 
the current standing of the enterprise and its future situation 
by indicating the direction of change that should be made. 
Keywords-cognitive financial systems; knowledge extraction; 
data mining; semantic interpretation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The authors of this paper have been developing cognitive 
systems for the semantic analysis of various data for many 
years. These have been discussed, among others, in the 
following publications [5], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. 
Cognitive data analysis systems have been divided into 
various classes according to the type of data they analyse [3], 
[10]. Thus, the following classes of systems were developed: 
decision-making, image data analysis, signal data analysis, 
personal data analysis, automatic control and management 
process support [5], [10], [11].  
The subject of this paper is to discuss the class of systems 
supporting strategic information management processes [2], 
[4], [13].  
The class of cognitive data analysis systems which 
support management processes has been split into four main 
subclasses. The essence of this split is the interpretation of 
groups of financial ratios which influence (which bring 
about) the current standing of the enterprise.  
Four main system classes have been distinguished in the 
group of systems supporting financial data management 
processes [10]:  
• 
Cognitive 
Understanding 
Based 
Management 
Liquidity Ratios Support Systems (UBMLRSS) – 
systems for analysing enterprise liquidity ratios, 
which reason about the amount and the solvency of 
the working capital of the company as well as about 
the company's current operations; 
• 
Cognitive 
Understanding 
Based 
Management 
Activity Ratios Support Systems (UBMARSS) – 
systems for analysing turnover ratios, which reason 
about how fast assets rotate and how productive they 
are; 
• 
Cognitive 
Understanding 
Based 
Management 
Profitability Ratios Support Systems (UBMPRSS) – 
systems for analysing profitability ratios, which 
reason about the financial efficiency of the business 
of a given unit based on the relationship between the 
financial results, the sales of goods and services and 
the cost of sales, and also 
• 
Cognitive 
Understanding 
Based 
Management 
Financial 
Leverage 
Ratios 
Support 
Systems 
(UBMFLRSS) – systems for analysing financial 
leverage ratios (financial debt ratios), which reason 
about the sources financing the company's assets and 
the proportion of external capital by analysing short-
term and long-term liabilities; they also reason about 
the effectiveness of expenditure and the interest paid.  
 
The classes of systems for analysing enterprise liquidity 
ratios, turnover ratios and profitability ratios have already 
been analysed and discussed, among others, in publications 
[9], [10]. 
The class of systems for analysing debt ratios has not 
been discussed yet and this is why it is the main subject of 
this publication. This is an innovative solution that supports 
cognitive data analysis processes of financial leverage ratios 
and processes for supporting enterprise financial figure 
management based on an analysis of debt ratios. 
The purpose of this study is to present algorithms for 
semantic data analysis in the group of UBMFLRSS systems 
which are used to support strategic decision-taking in 
management processes. 
Semantic analysis processes are used to interpret various 
sets of data/information, but this publication will only 
discuss semantic analysis processes dedicated to supporting 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

information management processes. The semantic analysis 
conducted using UBMFLRSS systems allows the current 
standing of the enterprise to be identified and also shows 
what decisions should be taken in the future to improve the 
current situation or maintain it (if the standing of the 
enterprise is very good). This kind of analysis should be 
conducted not only for a selected enterprise, but should also 
identify the impact of the external environment. This is why 
systems for the semantic analysis of data used for analysis 
and supporting enterprise management, concentrate their 
action around [9]: 
• 
Analysis of the internal situation of the company; 
• 
Analysis of the external situation of the company; 
• 
Predicting the future situation; 
• 
Improving decision-making processes; 
• 
Support strategic decision-making; 
• 
Support enterprise management processes; 
• 
Support enterprise management processes in the 
global aspects. 
 
This situation is shown in Figure 1.
 
Figure 1.  The enterprise management processes in the global aspects.
The analysed datasets and the standing of the enterprise 
can be cognitively analysed by assessing various datasets. 
This publication describes an analysis of ratios used to assess 
the level of debt of a given enterprise. 
In Section 2, we will present three sub-classes of 
UBMFLRSS systems as examples of intelligent enterprise 
debt analysis systems – the UBMFLRSS-G(td-ld) systems, the 
UBMFLRSS-G(td-ls) systems, and the UBMFLRSS-G(dsc-ic) 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

systems. Section 3 concludes the paper with a summary of 
the conducted research. 
II. 
UBMFLRSS AS AN EXAMPLE OF ENTERPRISE DEBT 
ANALYSIS SYSTEMS 
Enterprise debt applies to a situation in which the 
enterprise uses any form of financial support and not just 
exclusively its own capital. It applies to any situation in 
which the enterprise users external capital. In this situation, 
the enterprise is indebted. 
The assessment of the enterprise debt situation is aimed 
at determining the extent to which the enterprise finances 
itself with its own funds and to which it is financed with 
funds coming from outside. In this context, it is possible to 
assess the proportion of own capital to external capital in 
financing the enterprise. The most important element in 
assessing the debt situation is to determine the impact of 
external capital on enterprise operations and the degree to 
which the financial independence of the enterprise is at risk 
[1]. This type of assessment also results in identifying the 
costs of using external capital and the cost-effectiveness of 
this solution. 
The values of the following debt ratios can be analysed: 
• 
Debt level ratios; 
• 
The company’s ability to service its debt. 
 
The following ratios are distinguished in the group of 
ratios identifying the debt level [1]: 
• 
Total debt ratio; 
• 
Long-term debt; 
• 
Debt to equity; 
• 
Long-term debt to equity; 
• 
Liability structure; 
• 
Long-term liability coverage with net fixed assets; 
• 
Interest coverage. 
 
The following ratios are distinguished in the group of 
ratios identifying the ability of the enterprise to service its 
debt: 
• 
Debt service coverage; 
• 
Interest coverage; 
• 
Debt service coverage with the cash surplus. 
 
Semantic data analysis systems are used to assess the 
current situation of the enterprise based on the semantic 
interpretation of a selected group of ratio data [7], [9].  
In cognitive financial systems, the following may be 
analysed [9], [10]: 
• 
The financial situation of enterprise – financial 
ratios; 
• 
The economic situation of enterprise; 
• 
The surroundings of enterprise; 
• 
The situation and condition of: 
o 
customers,  
o 
providers, 
o 
others companies, 
• 
And the influence of the environment of the 
company.  
 
In cognitive systems for the semantic analysis of data, 
namely debt ratios, it is possible to determine: 
• 
The degree to which enterprise operations are 
financed with its own funds; 
• 
The degree to which enterprise operations are 
financed with external funds – the enterprise's debt; 
• 
The proportion of own capital to external capital in 
corporate finance; 
• 
The debt situation – by determining the impact of 
external capital on enterprise operations and the 
degree to which the financial independence of the 
enterprise is at risk; 
• 
The costs and profitability of using external capital 
for enterprise operations. 
 
Computer-aided 
cognitive 
enterprise 
management 
systems analyse various types of financial ratios. Based on 
the situation of the enterprise, the next part of analysis is the 
selection of type financial ratios that will be important and 
analysed [10]. 
After this, a proper class of cognitive financial systems 
should be selected, based on the type of analysed indicators 
[1].  
In this systems, it is necessary to define a formal 
grammar to analysed selected data and indicators for the 
semantic features of data sets [5], [6], [8], [11], [12], [13], 
[14].  
The next part of analysis and computer-aided enterprises 
management [7] is the evaluation of the enterprise situation, 
based on the important financial ratios. This analysis is 
especially important for [10]: 
• 
Describing the present situation of the enterprise; 
• 
Supporting enterprise management processes; 
• 
Understanding of the current state of companies; 
• 
Understanding of the causes of the current situation 
of the company; 
• 
Describing the future situation of the enterprise.  
 
The process of data mining in computer-aided enterprises 
management systems is shown in Figure 2. 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 2.  The process of data mining in computer-aided enterprise management systems.
This paper will discuss UBMFLRSS systems designed 
for the semantic analysis of enterprise debt. 
In the financial cognitive UBMFLRSS systems, 
supporting enterprises management, authors proposed a 
sequential grammar [9], [10], [11] as a formal definition.  
In this paper, the semantic analysis procedures will be 
adopted for enterprise management and strategic-decision 
making tasks using cognitive information systems – example 
UBMFLRSS. 
 
A. The UBMFLRSS-G(td-ld) Systems 
The following ratios have been adopted to analyse 
enterprise standing in UBMFLRSS systems as described 
after interpreting selected corporate debt ratios: 
• 
total debt ratio, 
• 
long-term debt ratio. 
 
In UBMFLRSS-G(td-ld) systems for the semantic analysis 
of the debt value, the following symbols have been 
introduced: 
• 
vtd – the value of the total debt ratio, 
• 
vld – the value of the long-term debt ratio. 
 
A formal grammar definition in these systems has the 
following form: 
G(td-ld) = (VN(td-ld), VT(td-ld), P(td-ld), S(td-ld)) 
(1) 
where: 
VN(td-ld) = {DEBT1, 
HIGH_DEBT1, 
OPTIMAL_DEBT1, 
LOW_DEBT1} – the set of non-terminal symbols, 
VT(td-ld) = {a, b, c}– the set of terminal symbols,  
where:  
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

a ∈ [0; 0,57), b ∈ [0,57; 0,67], c ∈ (0,67; 1] 
S(td-ld) ∈ VN(td-ld),  
S(td-ld) = DEBT1, 
P(td-ld) – set of productions: 
1. DEBT1 →HIGH_DEBT1 | 
OPTIMAL_DEBT1 | LOW_DEBT1 |  
2. HIGH_DEBT1 → BC | CB | CC 
3. OPTIMAL_DEBT1 → BB 
4. LOW_DEBT1 → AA | AB | AC | CA | CB 
5. A → a 
6. B → b 
7. C → c. 
 
B. The UBMFLRSS-G(td-ls) Systems 
The second example of UBMFLRSS systems for the 
semantic analysis of data described by interpreting selected 
enterprise debt ratios was created for analysing the following 
ratios: 
• 
total debt ratio, 
• 
liability structure. 
 
In UBMFLRSS-G(td-ls) systems for the semantic analysis 
of the debt value, the following symbols have been 
introduced: 
• 
vtd – the value of the total debt ratio, 
• 
vls – the value of the liability structure ratio. 
 
A formal grammar definition in these systems has the 
following form: 
G(td-ls) = (VN(td-ls), VT(td-ls), P(td-ls), S(td-ls)) 
(2) 
where: 
VN(td-ls) = {DEBT2, 
HIGH_DEBT2, 
OPTIMAL_DEBT2, 
LOW_DEBT2} – the set of non-terminal symbols, 
VT(td-ls) = {a, b, c}– the set of terminal symbols,  
where:  
a ∈ [0; 0,57), b ∈ [0,57; 0,67], c ∈ (0,67; 1] 
S(td-ls) ∈ VN(td-ls),  
S(td-ls) = DEBT2, 
P(td-ls) – set of productions: 
1. DEBT2 →HIGH_DEBT2 | OPTIMAL_DEBT2 | 
LOW_DEBT2 |  
2. HIGH_DEBT2 → CC 
3. OPTIMAL_DEBT2→ BB | BC | CB 
4. LOW_DEBT2 → AA | AB | AC | BA | CA  
5. A → a 
6. B → b 
7. C → c. 
 
C. The UBMFLRSS-G(dsc-ic) Systems 
The third example of UBMFLRSS systems for the 
semantic analysis of data described by interpreting selected 
enterprise debt ratios designed for assessing the enterprise 
ability to service its debts was created for analysing the 
following ratios: 
• 
debt service coverage, 
• 
interest coverage. 
 
In UBMFLRSS-G(dsc-ic) systems for the semantic analysis 
of the company's ability to service its debt, the following 
symbols have been introduced: 
• 
vdsc – the value of the debt service coverage ratio, 
• 
vic – the value of the interest coverage ratio. 
 
A formal grammar definition in these systems has the 
following form: 
G(dsc-ic) = (VN(dsc-ic), VT(dsc-ic), P(dsc-ic), S(dsc-ic)) 
(3) 
where: 
VN(dsc-ic) = {DEBT_SERVICE1, 
HIGH_DEBTSERVICE1, 
MEDIUM_DEBTSERVICE1, LOW_DEBTSERVICE1} 
– the set of non-terminal symbols, 
VT(dsc-ic) = {a, b, c}– the set of terminal symbols,  
where:  
a ∈ [0; 1), b ∈ [1; 1,5], c ∈ (1,5; 2,5] 
S(dsc-ic) ∈ VN(dsc-ic),  
S(dsc-ic) = DEBT_SERVICE1, 
P(dsc-ic) – set of productions: 
1. DEBT_SERVICE1 →HIGT_DEBTSERVICE1 | 
MEDIUM_DEBTSERVICE1 |LOW_DEBTSERVICE1 
2. HIGH_DEBTSERVICE1 → CC  
3. MEDIUM_DEBTSERVICE1 → BB | BC | CB  
4. LOW_ DEBTSERVICE1 → AA | AB | BA | AC | CA 
5. A → a 
6. B → b 
7. C → c. 
 
The three examples of systems for the semantic analysis 
of financial data presented above are designed for assessing 
the debt level of an enterprise and the ability of this 
enterprise to service its debt.  
Three independent linguistic formalisms in the form of 
sequential grammars, each for a separate subclass of 
UBMFLRSS, have been proposed for the semantic analysis 
of financial data.  
The semantic analysis conducted in UBMFLRSS allows 
the debt situation of the enterprise to be assessed and 
indicates its possible consequences. In this sense, it can be 
used to support information management. What is supported 
in the described case is the management of financial figures 
describing the debt situation of the enterprise.  
Examples of cognitive data analysis systems illustrate 
systems that support decision making based on extracted 
knowledge elements. In UBMFLRSS systems for the 
semantic analysis of data, the knowledge means information 
about the financial standing, and particularly the debt of the 
enterprise as well as its ability to service the debt contracted. 
Extracting knowledge elements in UBMFLRSS systems is 
fund components of information sets, which components will 
be used directly to assess the situation of the enterprise. 
Extracting significant features that undergo the semantic 
analysis process helps to more effectively manage the 
information held and adds the elements of the semantic 
interpretation of financial information to the processes of 
managing this information. 
An example of the operation of a UBMFLRSS system is 
shown in Figure 3. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 3.  Example of UBMFLRSS-G(td-ld) cognitive financial systems. 
The example of the UBMFLRSS system presented here 
is used to analyse ratio data, namely selected groups of debt 
ratios: the total debt ratio and the long term debt ratio.  
Based on this semantic analysis, the system interprets the 
situation of the enterprise as good from the perspective of its 
debt level. The semantic interpretation is to determine the 
optimal level of debt understood as a favourable proportion 
of external capital used to finance the company's assets and 
its operations, as well as a dominant share of long term 
liabilities in the total debt of the enterprise. 
Based on the analysis of selected financial ratios the 
situation of the company is described. The example of 
cognitive analysis of financial ratios shows how the two 
selected ratios shape the situation of the enterprise. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Cognitive data analysis systems are used for semantic 
analysis which consists in extracting semantic information 
from analysed datasets and interpreting this information. 
Thus, 
cognitive 
analysis 
processes 
ensure 
that 
data/information will be analysed with regards to its 
meaning. Linguistic formalisms in the form of definitions of 
formal grammars (sequential, tree or graph) are used to 
describe the analysed data sets. Financial information 
management systems are an example of cognitive data 
analysis systems. In this class of systems, linguistic 
formalisms in the form of sequential grammars have been 
proposed for the formal description of the analysed data.  
The analysis of ratio data in cognitive systems was 
proposed for the purpose of improving processes of strategic 
(financial) information management. This improvement is 
possible because linguistic formalisms are used in the 
process of analysing financial data. This not only allows the 
analysed financial values to be interpreted, but it also helps 
assess the situation of the enterprise and indicates the 
possible directions of its change if necessary or it shows that 
there is no need to implement any remedial action. In this 
publication, we proposed a new approach to the semantic 
analysis of financial data. Evaluation of the effectiveness of 
the proposed solutions will be the subject of future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the National Science 
Centre, Republic of Poland, under project number DEC-
2012/05/B/HS4/03625. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Bernstein, J. Wild, “Analysis of Financial Statements”, McGraw-
Hill, New York, 2000. 
[2] S. Buchanan, D. McMenemy, „Digital service analysis and design: 
The role of process modelling”, International Journal of Information 
Management, vol. 32(3), 2012, pp. 251–256. 
[3] H. Cohen, C. Lefebvre (Eds.), “Handbook of Categorization in 
Cognitive Science,” Elsevier, The Netherlands, 2005. 
[4] S. Grossberg, “Adaptive Resonance Theory: How a brain learns to 
consciously attend, learn, and recognize a changing world”, Neural 
Networks, vol. 37, 2012, pp. 1-47. 
[5] T. Hachaj, M.R. Ogiela, “Framework for cognitive analysis of 
dynamic perfusion computed tomography with visualization of large 
volumetric data”, Journal of Electronic Imaging, vol. 21(4), 2012, 
paper No: 043017, doi: 10.1117/1.JEI.21.4.043017 
[6] A. Kornai, “Mathematical Linguistics,” Springer Verlag, Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2008. 
[7] K.C. Laudon, J.P. Laudon, “Management Information Systems – 
Managing the Digital Firm,” Seventh Edition, Prentice-Hall 
International: Inc., 2002. 
[8] L. Ogiela, “Syntactic Approach to Cognitive Interpretation of 
Medical Patterns,” in: C. Xiong at all (Eds.), Intelligent Robotics and 
Applications, First International Conference, ICIRA 2008, Wuhan, 
China, 15-17 October 2008, LNAI 5314, Springer-Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 456-462. 
[9] L. Ogiela, “Towards Cognitive Economy”, Soft Copmputing, vol. 18 
(9), 2014, pp. 1675-1683 
[10] L. Ogiela, “Data management in cognitive financial systems,” 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 33, 2013, pp. 
263-270. 
[11] L. Ogiela, M.R. Ogiela, “Semantic Analysis Processes in Advanced 
Pattern Understanding Systems”, in: T.H. Kim at all (Eds.), Advanced 
Computer Science and Information Technology, 3rd International 
Conference on Advanced Science and Technology AST 2011, Jeju 
Island, South Korea, 15-17 Jun 2011, Communications in Computer 
and Information Science, vol. 195, 2011, pp. 26-30. 
[12] M.R. Ogiela, U. Ogiela, “The use of mathematical linguistic methods 
in creating secret sharing threshold algorithms”, Computers & 
Mathematics with Applications, vol. 60(2), 2010, pp. 267-271. 
[13] P. 
TalebiFard, 
V. C. M. 
Leung, 
“Context-Aware 
Mobility 
Management in Heterogeneous Network Environments”, Journal of 
Wireless Mobile Networks, Ubiquitous Computing, and Dependable 
Applications, vol. 2(2), 2011, pp. 19-32. 
[14] S.C. Zhu, D. Mumford, “A stochastic grammar of images,” 
Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision, vol. 2(4), 
2006, pp. 259-362. 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

