A Performance Study of Conventional and Bare PC Webmail Servers 
           Patrick Appiah-Kubi                         Ramesh K. Karne                   Alexander L. Wijesinha 
       Department of Computer and              Department of Computer and           Department of Computer and 
              Information Sciences                           Information Sciences                        Information Sciences 
               Towson University                               Towson University                           Towson University 
      Towson, MD 21252, U.S.A.                  Towson, MD 21252, U.S.A.            Towson, MD 21252, U.S.A. 
         appiahkubi@towson.edu                           rkarne@towson.edu                      awijesinha@towson.edu  
 
 
Abstract-In this paper, we compare the performance of 
several Webmail servers and a bare PC Webmail server 
running without an operating system. The conventional 
Webmail servers used in the study are Icewarp, 
MailTraq and Hexamail running on Windows, and 
Atmail and Afterlogic running on Linux. Server 
performance is compared with respect to the typical 
email transactions (login, compose, and read), CPU 
utilization, 
and 
throughput. 
Performance 
under 
increased loads is measured by using a stress tool, and 
experiments are conducted in both LAN and WAN 
environments. The results indicate that bare PC 
Webmail 
server 
performance 
is 
consistent 
and 
predictable, whereas conventional Webmail server 
performance varies considerably depending on message 
size, server load and transaction.   
 
Keywords – Operating Systems; Bare Machine 
Computing; Webmail servers; Performance; Email.                                     
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Web-based email or Webmail enables users to 
access email from any computer located anywhere 
using a Web browser such as Internet Explorer, 
Firefox or Google Chrome. Although popular 
Webmail systems such as gmail provide useful 
services, they are not designed for high performance 
or security. While there are some email/Webmail 
servers and systems that are designed for high-
performance and/or security, they require an 
operating system (OS) to run. The performance of 
such systems is limited by the capabilities of the 
underlying OS and they are also susceptible to 
attacks that exploit the vulnerabilities of this OS.   
In contrast, bare PC or bare machine servers and 
applications do not use an OS. Each application 
contains only essential functionality and has its own 
interfaces to the hardware. This eliminates OS 
overhead and enables the system to be optimized for 
performance by fully exploiting the capabilities of the 
underlying hardware. Moreover, bare PC applications 
are immune to conventional attacks that target a 
specific OS such as Linux or Windows. Many bare 
PC applications have been developed including Web 
servers, 
email 
servers 
and 
Webmail 
servers. 
Performance studies of bare PC applications serve to 
verify that the application provides the desired 
performance benefits and that it outperforms its OS-
based counterparts when running on compatible 
systems. In this paper, we compare the performance 
of a bare PC Webmail server with several OS-based 
Webmail servers. The rest of this paper is organized 
as follows. Section II discusses related work and 
Section III provides a brief overview of the bare PC 
Webmail server. Section IV contains the performance 
results and Section V concludes the paper.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Atmail [2], MailTraq [17], Axigen [3], Afterlogic 
[1], Squirrelmail [23], Facemail [7], Adaptive Email 
[4], Petmail [21], Icewarp [12], Roundcube [22], 
Emailman [8], WinWebmail [24], and Hexamail [11] 
are just a few of the numerous Webmail systems in 
existence today. Some of these systems are designed 
for high performance, while others such as Webex [6] 
are designed for high reliability and availability. An 
email architecture to address problems associated 
with 
scalability 
and 
dependability 
due 
to 
conventional design approaches is proposed in [15]. 
There appear to be no studies that evaluate the 
performance of Webmail systems or servers. 
Techniques to improve performance of the Open 
Webmail system are discussed in [5]. In [13], an 
email server architecture, which is based on a spam 
workload and optimized with respect to concurrency, 
I/O and IP address lookups, is shown to significantly 
improve performance and throughput. The design and 
implementation of an email pseudonym server 
providing anonymity to reduce server threats and 
capable of reducing risks due to OS-based 
vulnerabilities is presented in [18]. The notion of 
semantic email is discussed in [19].  
An email server that runs on a bare PC is the focus 
of [9] and [10]. However, the server does not support 
Webmail. Many bare PC applications including Web 
servers [16] and VoIP clients [14] have been 
previously developed. In [20], the design and 
implementation of a bare PC Webmail server are 
described and some preliminary performance results 
are presented.  The present paper differs from earlier 
work in that it compares the performance of a bare 
PC Webmail server and several OS-based Webmail 
280
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

servers in both routed LAN and WAN environments, 
and also under stress conditions. 
 
III. 
THE BARE PC WEBMAIL SERVER 
Only a brief overview of bare PC Webmail server 
internals 
is 
given 
here 
as 
its 
design 
and 
implementation were discussed in detail in [20]. 
Since bare PC applications run directly on the 
hardware without the support of an OS, they are self-
supporting. The Webmail server includes lean 
implementations of the HTTP/TCP/IP/SMTP/POP3 
protocols (that are intertwined with the server 
application), and an Ethernet driver.  
CPU task and memory management and the 
concurrent processing of requests from multiple 
clients are done by the application itself, which is 
written in C++ except for some low-level assembly 
code. There are only 4 task types in the Webmail 
server application: The Main task, consisting of a 
loop that runs whenever no other task is running; the 
Rcv task that receives incoming packets and is used 
for Ethernet, IP, and TCP processing; and multiple 
Get and Post tasks that manage the processing of 
client requests. A given request or packet is 
processed as a single thread of execution. Once 
activated, a task runs to completion unless it has to 
wait for an ack or a timeout. Delay and Resume lists 
are used to efficiently manage the suspension and 
resumption of tasks. Get/Post are modeled using state 
transitions. 
The application is initially booted from a USB 
flash drive and does not use a hard disk. The USB is 
also used for persistent storage of email messages 
and user information, but a separate server could be 
used for auxiliary storage in the future. The Webmail 
server currently runs on an ordinary PC (not a server 
machine). The main data structure used by the 
Webmail server (and all bare PC applications) is the 
TCB (Transmission Control Block) table that 
contains entries to enable the management of 
concurrent 
requests, 
associated 
data, 
and 
TCP/application state information. Get/Post tasks are 
placed in the Resume list when requests arrive and 
their active status is indicated by a flag in the TCB 
table. The Webmail server application includes a lean 
PHP parser that interprets client Get/Post data.  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
A. LAN Setup 
For the LAN studies, a dedicated test network 
consisting of 
five Ethernet switches (S1-S5) 
interconnected linearly by four Linux routers (R1-
R4) was set up. The client (C) and Webmail server 
(WMS) were connected to the ends of the network so 
that messages between the client and Webmail server 
are routed along the following path:  
C--S1--R1--S2--R2--S3--R3--S4--R4--S5--WMS 
All switches were gigabit switches except for the 
100Mbps switch (S1) used to connect the client to the 
network. The clients ran Windows XP and the OS-
based Webmail servers ran Windows XP or Linux 
(CentOS). All machines were Dell Optiplex GX520s. 
OS-based Webmail server details are as follows: 
Afterlogic MailSuite Pro (Linux), MailTraq Server 
(XP), Atmail Server 6.20.3 (Linux), Icewarp Server 
10.2.1 (XP), and Hexamail Server 4.0.1.002 (XP).   
B. LAN Results 
Fig. 1 below is derived from the Wireshark 
timestamps for each message in the sequence of 
messages exchanged during a login Get request. The 
difference in timestamps for a pair of consecutive 
messages such as (Get, Ack) or (Data, 200_OK) 
gives the delay between the pair. As expected, the 
performance for all servers during the initial TCP 
handshake is the same. There is a rise between the 
client Get request and the server Ack due to the 
server delay in processing the request. All servers 
show little variation in processing time for 
subsequent message pairs. 
 
Figure 1. Login Get request message times 
 
Similarly, Fig. 2 compares the processing time for 
a login Post request. The (Post, Ack) behavior for all 
servers except for Hexamail and MailTraq is the 
same. The (Ack, 302_Found) delay is visible for all 
servers except MailTraq. The bare PC server 
processing times for both Get and Post requests are 
minimal. Since different servers may do the work to 
process the requests during different steps, only the 
overall processing time should be compared. Fig. 3 
shows the processing time for compose with varying 
message sizes. The varying behavior of the servers 
reflects the combination of TCP, HTTP and the mail 
server application. Hexamail has stable behavior for 
large message sizes, while Icewarp shows the most 
variation. The bare PC server has the highest 
processing delay for a message of 10,000 bytes, but 
shows a general reduction for larger sizes except for a 
281
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

small rise at 20,000 bytes. Fig. 4 shows the 
processing time for receiving an inbox with 6 
messages. While all servers complete processing in 
about 1.1 milliseconds on the average, the bare PC 
server requires less than 0.1 ms. 
 
 
Figure 2. Login Post request message times 
 
 
Figure 3. Processing time for compose (varying message sizes) 
 
 
Figure 4. Processing time for an Inbox request (6 messages) 
 
Fig. 5 shows the processing time to retrieve 
messages of sizes 1000-120,000 bytes. Once a 
message is retrieved into an inbox, it takes less time 
to process and transmit the message to the client. 
Processing time for the bare PC is minimal, and it has 
the smallest increase in processing time. Among the 
OS-based servers, Icewarp followed by Afterlogic 
have the lowest processing times (except for a 1000-
byte message), while Icewarp and Hexamail have the 
smallest increase in processing time (the latter 
actually has the highest processing time). Fig. 6 
shows the throughput measured during compose for 
increasing message sizes. The bare PC server 
throughput is highest and approximately twice the 
throughput of the best OS-based server Afterlogic. 
The low throughput of Icewarp reflects its large 
processing time in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 5. Processing time for read (varying message sizes) 
 
 
Figure 6. Throughput for compose (varying message sizes) 
 
Further performance tests were conducted on the 
Webmail servers using the Web stress tool [25]. The 
tool was used to increase the number of users from 1 
to 10 and determine the resulting impact on 
performance. Each test was run for 10 minutes and 
each user makes 100 requests/s. Fig. 7 illustrates the 
variation of server CPU utilization over time for a 
maximum of 10 users. The average CPU utilization 
of the Linux-based Afterlogic and Atmail servers and 
the bare PC server is less than 4%, while that of the 
Windows-based Mailtraq, Icewarp and Hexamail 
servers is between 8-12%. It is evident that more 
CPU processing is required by the Windows-based 
servers when processing concurrent requests. The 
figure also indicates that the CPU utilization of the 
bare PC server shows some slight initial variability 
compared to that of the Atmail server.  
Fig. 8 shows the variation of server bandwidth over 
of time for 10 users. It can be seen that the bandwidth 
of all servers is relatively stable after the initial 
increase during the first 5 seconds. However, while 
there is little difference between the bandwidth of the 
OS-based servers (average < 60 kbps, maximum 
<700 kbps), the bandwidth of the bare PC server is 
significantly higher (average and maximum exceed 
100 kbps and  12 Mbps respectively).  
282
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 7. CPU utilization for 10 users 
 
Figure 8. Bandwidth variation for 10 users 
 
Figure 9 above is the average time (delay) to 
complete a Post request for a varying number of 
users. Even two users cause the delay to increase 
significantly compared to one user, but the delay 
stabilizes for three or more users. The bare PC has 
the least delay, while the Windows-based servers 
have the highest delay in this case. It can be seen that 
the delays for the bare PC server and Linux-based 
servers differ by almost 100 ms.  
Fig. 10 shows the amount of time a user waits for 
the server to establish a connection in the presence of 
multiple users. The Linux and bare PC servers 
perform much better than the Windows servers, but 
the performance advantage of the bare PC server 
compared to the Linux servers is reduced since the 
performance of the latter improves significantly when 
there are 6-10 users. Figs. 11 and 12 show 
respectively the Webmail server processing times for 
a read request and the throughput for a compose 
request with and without stress. To create stress, the 
tool is used to generate 100 concurrent requests/s 
from 10 users and an additional client is used to 
generate the read or compose request involving an 
email 
message 
of 
120,000 
bytes. 
Although 
performance degrades under stress for all servers as 
expected, the bare PC server’s performance with and 
without stress is significantly better than the 
performance of the OS-based servers. However, no 
simple relationship exists between throughput and 
processing time for the OS-based servers (for 
example, Icewarp and Mailtraq have the lowest 
throughput, but respectively low and high times). 
 
Figure 9. Post request completion time  
 
 
Figure 10. User wait time (increasing number of users) 
 
 
Figure 11. Message read time (120000-byte message) 
 
 
Figure 12. Throughput for compose (120000-byte message) 
C.  WAN Setup 
For the WAN tests, an Internet connection was 
established between each Webmail server and a client 
PC located approximately 50 miles away with about 
30 hops between the two destinations. To ensure 
consistency, 
tests 
were 
performed 
during 
a 
contiguous time and repeated several times to ensure 
that the results were stable and independent of 
varying network conditions. As before, a Wireshark 
283
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

packet analyzer was used to capture the data. The 
machines used were the same as for the LAN studies.  
D. WAN Results 
Figs. 13 and 14 are derived from the Wireshark 
timestamps for each message in the sequence of 
messages exchanged over the WAN during a login 
Get or Post request (they correspond to Figs. 1 and 2 
for the LAN tests). As before, the difference between 
cumulative processing times for a pair of consecutive 
messages such as Get-Ack for Get or Post-Ack for 
Post gives the delay between the pair. It can be seen 
that these delays for Get and Post requests are 
significantly less for the bare PC server than for the 
OS-based servers.  
A closer examination of Figs. 13 and 14 reveals 
that the Get and Post delays for the OS-based servers 
vary considerably across message pairs. For example 
in Fig. 13, MailTraq has the highest Get-to-Ack time, 
Atmail has the highest Ack-to-Data time, and 
Icewarp has the highest Data-to-200_OK time. 
However, Atmail has the lowest Get-to-Ack and 
Data-to-200_OK times among the OS-based servers. 
Similarly, compared to the Windows servers, 
Afterlogic has lower Get-to-Ack and Data-to-
200_OK times, but a higher Ack-to-Data time. In 
case of a login Post request (Fig. 14), it can be seen 
that MailTraq and Atmail have respectively the 
highest and lowest (next to the bare PC) Post-to-Ack 
time, whereas Atmail has the highest and MailTraq 
has the lowest (next to the bare PC and Icewarp) 
Ack-to-302_Found time. 
 
 
Figure 13. Processing time for login Get request 
 
 
Figure 14. Processing time for login Post request 
 
 
Figure 15. Processing time for compose (varying message sizes) 
 
Figs. 15 shows the processing time over the WAN 
for compose, with message sizes varying from 1000 
to 120,000 bytes. Processing time increases in an 
approximately linear manner as the message size 
increases. This was not the case for the corresponding 
LAN result in Fig. 3. However, it can be seen that the 
processing time for all servers increases at a higher 
rate for message sizes from 40,000-120,000 bytes.  
Fig. 16 shows the processing time over the WAN 
for receiving an inbox containing 6 messages. The 
bare PC receives the inbox in 0.392 milliseconds, 
while the other servers require an average time of 
about 230 milliseconds. Fig. 17 shows the processing 
time on the WAN for reading individual emails of 
varying message sizes. The processing time for the 
bare PC server is stable up to 40,000 bytes and 
increases slowly thereafter for larger messages. The 
processing times on the other servers are stable up to 
20,000 bytes, but rise sharply to 1400 milliseconds. 
 
Figure 16. Processing time for an Inbox request (6 messages) 
 
 
Figure 17. Processing time for read (varying message sizes) 
 
284
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 18. Average throughput (varying message sizes) 
 
The throughput for varying message sizes was also 
captured during the Internet test and compared in Fig. 
18. The average throughput for all servers is about 
1.28 times better than the throughput of the Atmail 
server, whose performance in general on the previous 
tests was better than the other OS-based servers.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We conducted a performance study of six Webmail 
servers including a bare PC server with no operating 
system. Server processing times, CPU utilization and 
throughput in LAN and WAN environments and 
under stress conditions were compared with respect 
to common email transactions. The results show that 
performance of the OS-based servers is variable and 
no single server performs consistently better than the 
others on all tests. There appears to be no simple 
relation between LAN and WAN results even for the 
case of a single server. With a few rare exceptions, 
only a small drop in performance was seen under 
stress conditions. However, a detailed study under 
real workloads and conditions would be needed to 
determine the ability of servers to handle stress. As 
expected, the bare PC server performs significantly 
better on all tests with a few minor exceptions. This 
suggests that some of its novel design features could 
serve as a baseline for designing secure high-
performance Webmail servers in the future. 
                        REFERENCES 
[1] Afterlogic Webmail Server, www.afterlogic.com 
Retrived on May 20th, 2010 
[2] Atmail-Linux Webmail Server, www.atmail.com  
Retrived on October 5th, 2009. 
[3] Axigen Email Sevrer, www.axigen.com Retrived on 
January 23th, 2009.C. Yeh and C. Mao, Adaptive e-
mail intention finding mechanism based on e-mail 
words social networks.  Workshop on Large Scale 
Attack Defense, 2007.  
[4] C. Tung and S. Tsai, Tuning Webmail performance-
The design and implementation  of Open Webmail. 
National Cheng Kung University, 
www.openWebmail.org  Retrived on May 20th, 2010. 
[5] Cisco WebEx Mail: High availability design for your 
most mission critical application. 
www.ciscowebexmail.com. Retrived on May 20th, 
2010. 
[6] E. Lieberman and R.C. Miller, Facemail: showing 
faces of recipients to prevent misdirected email. 3rd 
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security, 2007. 
[7] Emailman Webmail Server, www.emailman.com  
Retrived on May 21th, 2010. 
[8] G. Ford, R. Karne, A. L. Wijesinha, and P. Appiah-
Kubi, The design and implementation of a bare PC 
email server, 33rd Annual IEEE International 
Computer Software and Applications Conference 
(COMPSAC), 2009. 
[9] G. Ford, R. Karne, A. L. Wijesinha, and P. Appiah-
Kubi, The performance of a bare machine email 
server, 21st International Symposium on Computer 
Architecture and High Performance Computing 
(SBAC-PAD), 2009. 
[10] Hexamail Webmail Server, www.hexamail.com 
Retrived on June 10th, 2010. 
[11] IceWarp Mail Server, www.icewarp.com Retrived on 
May 20th, 2010 
[12] A. Pathak, S. A. R. Jafri, and Y. C. Hu, The case for 
high-performance 
spam-Aware 
mail 
server 
architecture. 29th IEEE International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems, pp. 155-164, July 
2009.  
[13] G. H. Khaksari, A. L. Wijesinha, R. K. Karne, L. He, 
and S. Girumala. A peer-to-peer bare PC VoIP 
application. IEEE Consumer and Communications and 
Networking Conference, Las Vegas, Nevada, January 
2007.  
[14] E. Kageyama, C. Maziero, and A. Santin, A pull-based 
email architecture. ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil, 2008, pp. 468-
472. 
[15] L. He, R. Karne, and A. L. Wijesinha, "The design and 
performance of a bare PC Web server", International 
Journal of Computers and Their Applications, vol. 15, 
June 2008, pp. 100-112. 
[16] Mailtraq email server-the complete email server, 
www.mailtraq.com Retrived on June 10th, 2010. 
[17] D. Mazieres and M. F. Kaashoek, The design, 
implementation 
and 
operation 
of 
an 
email 
pseuodonym server. 5th Conference on Computer and 
Communications Security, 1998, pp. 27-36. 
[18] L. McDowell, O. Etzioni, A. Halevy, and H. Levy, 
Semantic email. 13th International Conference on 
World Wide Web, New York, NY, USA, 2004, pp. 
244 – 254. 
[19] P. Appiah-Kubi, R.K. Karne, and A. L. Wijesinha, 
The design and Performance of a bare PC Webmail 
Server. 12th IEEE International Symposium of 
Advances on High Performance Computing and 
Networking. September 2010. 
[20] Petmail Webmail Server, www.petmail.lothar.com 
Retrived on June 12th, 2010 
[21] RoundCube Webmail Server, www.roundcube.com 
Retrived on November 30th, 2010 
[22] SquirrelMail Webmail, www.squirrelmail.com 
Retrived on November 30th, 2010 
[23] WinWebmail Server, www.winWebmail.net Retrived 
on October 20th, 2010 
[24] Web Stress Tool 7, www.paessler.com Retrived on 
May 20th, 2010 
 
285
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

