Building Interactive Multi-User In-Class Learning Modules For Computer Networking 
Oleg Sotnikov, Ammar Musheer and Shahram Shah Heydari 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Oshawa, Canada 
{oleg.sot@gmail.com, musheer.ammar@gmail.com, shahram.heydari@uoit.ca }
Abstract—The new multiuser capability in Cisco Packet 
Tracer tool has provided great potential for developing 
interactive multiuser activities that can be completed by 
Cisco Academy students in the classroom.  This approach 
will not only greatly enhance students’ interest in the 
technical topics, but will also allow the instructor to create 
group activities where student progress can be monitored 
and tracked easily on the instructor side.  In this research we 
focus on primary design principles for creating such 
interactive activities.  We present a general architecture for 
a library of interactive modules we developed for CCNA 
exploration 1-4 topics.  We provide solutions for a number of 
technical problems that must be resolved for multiuser 
access, such as scalable addressing, VLAN handling, 
individual student monitoring, and offline exporting.  We 
also provide testing results to evaluate the performance of 
packet trace in an interactive multiuser environment. 
Keywords-component; blended learning; packet tracer; 
multiuser; simulation; teaching;  ccna; cisco; networking; 
academy; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
Introductory computer networking education (e.g. 
Cisco CCNA level) focuses on teaching students both the 
theory and the practical knowledge about networking 
technology that has rarely been covered at their prior 
educational levels (high school). Students often have to 
bring themselves up to speed quickly on a large amount of 
content that includes the entire OSI model and TCP/IP 
protocol suite, several routing and switching protocols, 
local and wide area networks etc. The sheer volume of 
technical details in this case can quickly result in a dry 
and non-interactive environment that can impede student 
learning process.  Lab components often improve the 
dryness of the material by giving students practical 
examples to reinforce theory.  However, more can be 
gained by increasing the level of interaction during lecture 
times and in the classroom.  This can be achieved by 
implementing short in-class activities that encourage 
students to collaborate with their peers throughout the 
learning process. Interactive learning is becoming more 
prominent and show great potential in teaching IT 
concepts.[1,2]  Likewise, e-learning tools are used with 
great benefit to teach CCNA Discovery and Exploration 
curriculum of the Cisco Networking Academy.[3] One 
such tool is Packet Tracer (PT), which provides a network 
simulation environment with sufficient details of IOS for 
CCNA levels [4].   
The objective of this work is to use the recently added 
multiuser feature in Packet Tracer to create in-class 
interactive learning activities that would enhance 
students’ understanding of complex networking concepts. 
The multiuser feature in Packet Tracer allows students to 
work in an environment that is affected by their peers and 
is under control of the instructor.  Despite some 
technological problems, PT multi-user activities can make 
networking more interesting to learn and lead to greater 
student engagement. 
B. Related Work 
The Multiuser functionality was added to Packet Tracer 
in August 2008.  However, at the time of writing this 
paper Cisco has not yet developed any curriculum 
activities that feature multiuser operation, leaving it up to 
individual academies. In 2010 the Open University of UK 
reported 
on 
implementation 
of 
PT’s 
multiuser 
functionality into their blended distance learning CCNA 
courses.[5]  Their results offer an extensive guide to the 
multiuser architecture as well as the implementation of 
multiuser over the WAN, and the inherent problems.  We 
build on their work by implementing our multiuser 
architecture in a traditional classroom through a LAN.  
This method bypasses the majority of the technical 
limitations in [5] and gives students more interaction with 
the class. 
Basic technical specifications of the Packet Tracer 
Messaging 
Protocol 
(PTMP) 
and 
Inter-Process 
Communication is available in [5,6], and while many 
proprietary details were not available or could not be 
made 
public, 
 
the 
available 
information 
helped 
understanding the communication between two hosts 
running a Packet Tracer multiuser connection.    
  The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II we describe our objectives and design 
specifications for interactive learning modules. In Section 
III we discuss some technical challenges in creating 
interactive learning modules and present our solutions to 
overcome these challenges. This section also includes 
some performance results. Some performance results are 
presented in Section IV. Section V includes our 
conclusions as well as future plans. 
II. 
LEARNING MODULE SPECIFICATIONS 
The problem of engaging students in the process of 
learning networking is normally solved by using a 
blended learning approach that Packet Tracer is already 
326
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

part of.  However, current Packet Tracer activities are 
highly scripted, having little interactivity and class 
participation.  Multiuser activities allow Packet Tracer to 
be used in a more dynamic way, allowing the instructor to 
affect student’s Packet Tracer environment in real-time.  
Having multiuser activities as part of networking course 
would fill a gap of short, interactive and extensible 
activities that can be used to promote student participation 
in lectures.  The activities must be simple and require 
minimal configuration by the students, and they should be 
used in-class and be marked through student participation.  
The result of this project included 40 multiuser activities 
and two games covering the entire CCNA curriculum.  
The design of the activities closely followed the 
framework described in this paper.  The activities are 
currently being integrated into the two introductory 
networking courses at UOIT that cover the CCNA 
curriculum.  
A. Architechture 
Significant differences between standard and multiuser 
CCNA activities create a whole different set of factors 
that have to be taken into account in the latter case.  The 
main task is minimizing the disadvantages and limitations 
of the multiuser feature and maximizing the advantages it 
offers in interactivity and real-time communication.  We 
achieve this objective by creating a thin client-server 
environment in which most of the complexity and 
configurations are on the instructor side.  The fact that 
UOIT is a laptop-based university in which all students 
use pre-configured university-issued laptop in the 
classroom, greatly facilitated the implementation and use 
of this model.  
The instructor-side module is responsible for providing 
Figure 1: Example of an Instructor-Side Module 
Figure 2: Example of a Student-Side Module 
327
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

the hub part of a hub-and-spoke topology.  The students 
can then start a multi-user PT activity on their respective 
laptops and establish connections to the instructor side of 
the activity.  This usually involves two PT activity files: 
the instructor file, and the student file.  Student-specific 
configurations or modifications must be kept to minimum. 
Figures 1 and 2 display examples of the instructor and 
student side modules, respectively. 
The instructor should also be able to save the student’s 
progress at any point and inspect it on his/her own time. 
This approach is ideal for completing an activity in the 
classroom and marking it later.  Depending on who the 
instructor file is released to, the activities are open for 
modification and can feature any new content that gets 
added to PT in the future.  In general, a laptop per student 
is required.  The requirements for the instructor computer 
depends on the number of students that are expected to 
connect and will be discussed later in this paper.   
B. Multi-user activities specifications 
To retain student attention, multi-user activities were 
designed to be completed in 10-20 minutes.  The activities 
would be presented in the middle of the lecture and allow 
the instructor to demonstrate a particular networking 
concept interactively with the students.  The activities 
assume that the students have limited hands-on experience 
and are mainly used to demonstrate the networking 
concept.  In general, the activities follow these 
requirements: 
1) Minimal configuration or pre-configured for the 
student 
2) Student tracking through offline saving 
3) Allow group work 
4) Task variety between activities 
The major limitation to this architecture is that PT’s 
simulation mode cannot be used as easily during a 
multiuser connection.  Therefore this architecture  pushes 
the focus of the activities to the real-time interaction 
between the instructor and student networks.   
C. Modifying and extending activities 
Creating and editing router and switch configurations 
in text files is considerably easier and more manageable 
than working within PT.  To create or extend the 
functionality of a certain activity, it is easiest to first export 
all configurations of each device into text, and edit the 
configurations using a text editor. Finally you can either 
erase the configuration in the old topology and load the 
new configurations, or simply load the new configuration 
overtop of the old one.  One must be aware that certain 
configuration options (VTP) are not saved in the run 
configuration and must be configured each time.  Knowing 
how to effectively use the “find and replace” function 
featuring RegExp (or similar extended options) is key to 
creating new activities in a timely manner. Figure 3 shows 
an example. 
The intent of multiuser is not to replace hands-on 
portions of networking.  Instead it is meant to increase 
student engagement during lectures.  As such in multiuser 
activities the learning curve to get started and the amount 
of tedious configuration should be minimized.  This can 
be done by putting commonly accessed devices, such as 
servers and core devices, on the instructor side.  To 
minimize configuration, the student side has devices that 
are preconfigured, allowing the instructor to limit the 
focus to a particular topic discussed in class.  Minimal 
configuration from the student is necessary to differentiate 
the students and allow the networks to communicate. 
As we shall explain in the next section, student devices 
can be assigned addresses in a unique network depending 
on the how VLANs are configured.  This feature allows 
students to configure routing protocols between each 
other.  Alternatively, students can be split up into groups 
on different VLANs, and assigning them addresses 
accordingly.  
 
Figure 3: Editing Activities 
D. Student Evaluation and Monitoring 
PT’s activity wizard offers an extensible script-based 
evaluation system that examines the parameters of each 
device in the student network.  In our work students were 
evaluated based on their participation in the multiuser 
activities. The TCP traffic between PT instances is 
unencrypted and information such as hostnames can be 
found by capturing that traffic.  Additionally, the instructor 
side can poll the student network and generate an offline 
copy of the whole network.  This offline saving capability 
allows he instructor to the save the state of the network at 
that particular time and view the commands that each 
student entered on their respective activity.  
III. 
COMMON ROADBLOCKS  
In designing multiuser PT activities several good 
practices were developed.  The main principle is 
maximizing the advantages gained by having interactive 
activities.  Configuring multi-user activities can be split 
into three layers.  Layer 1 is the physical and data 
connection between hosts running the PT instances.  
Layer 2 is the data connections between switches and 
328
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

relates to MAC addressing and VLAN assignment within 
the PT environment.  Layer 3 is responsible for the rest of 
the connectivity between PT environment such as IP 
addressing and routing. 
A. Layer 1 Issues 
Documentation on how to setup multi-user connections 
between packet tracer instances is readily available [5].  
Connections between instances are done by matching IP 
address, port, cloud name, and password parameters 
between instances.  PT offline saving accounts for the 
most tolling activity on computer and network resources. 
Remote student computers are polled at the same time 
resulting in bursts of traffic that is well handled over the 
LAN but may result in problems in a WAN 
implementations like that of Open University of UK.  
Traffic encryption is optional and useful information can 
be gathered by collecting the traffic data in Wireshark.   
B. Layer 2 Issues 
As mentioned in the previous section, in most activities 
students start out with an identical student-side file of the 
network.  This presents a problem because all students 
now share the same MAC addresses within the PT 
environment.  One way to work around duplicate MAC 
addresses is by using NAT (Network address translation), 
but this effectively cuts off inter-student communication.  
Multiple VLAN’s on the other hand maintain inter-student 
communication when configuring routing protocols.  
Duplicate MAC addresses can still interfere with various 
protocols on the instructor-side.  STP (Spanning tree 
protocol) must be properly configured on the switches 
within PT.  The switchport connections in Figure 1 can be 
inadvertently blocked off by STP due to the adjacent port 
MAC addresses being identical.  The switches on the 
instructor side should be configured with a very low STP 
priority to guarantee that they become the root and no 
ports gets blocked.   
When designing activities that teach VLAN concepts.  
Problems can be encountered on the instructor side if past 
configurations with different VLAN schemes are 
reintroduced to the instructor network.  It is recommended 
to save the start configuration, erase the vlan.dat and 
restart all the routers simultaneously to avoid VLAN/VTP 
problem when reconfiguring VLANs.  Despite the 
additional complexity on the instructor side, in most 
activities no other changes have to be made on the student 
side. 
C. Layer 3 Issues 
DHCP is primarily responsible for achieving layer 3 
connectivity with minimal configuration from the students.  
Prior to developing addressing schemes, layer 2 should be 
problem free.  While DHCP servers can be set up on 
routers, for classless networks the DHCP has to be setup 
on a separate server as shown in Fig.  1.  Although DHCP 
is not intended to provide IP addresses to devices that with 
identical MAC address, if layer 2 is problem free, the only 
DHCP problems encountered can be solved by issuing 
DHCP release/renew commands.  
D. Scalability, Security and other Limitations 
The scalability of the hub and spoke topology in use is 
limited.  During 60 user activities, the hub computer will 
be responsible for any bottleneck encountered.  It may be 
necessary to split the class into two 30 student groups that 
will connect to different hub computers (instructor 
laptops).  The hub computers can also optionally be 
connected to each other, providing connectivity in a more 
scalable manner than a single hub computer.   
Accountability between authenticated users is very 
limited and productive use of PT would require mutual 
trust between the users.  Although, offline saving and 
capturing a Wireshark trace provide limited logging 
capability. While specific task evaluations can be 
automated using Packet Tracer's Activity Wizard, we 
were not able to find a practical method to account for 
every detailed student action in the multiuser network 
unless the PT traffic captured by Wireshark can be 
reverse-engineered.  
Denial of service is possible because students can 
configure a Layer 2 loop between switches in PT which 
can affect the instructor side.  Although technological 
solutions may be written and added onto the PT platform 
by using the included extensions interface.  Due to lack of 
documentation and added complexity these resources 
were not considered when implementing module 
activities. However, if the activities are only used for 
participation and have a very small academic weight 
assigned to them, the risk for abuse is much lower than if 
the activities were worth a significant portion of the 
course grade.   
Using multiuser mode restricts access to the simulation 
mode, which is available when PT is used offline.  This 
problem restricts students’ access to a very useful tool that 
visualizes many theoretical components of networking.  In 
simulation mode the student can choose to view the level 
of information that makes them comfortable in 
understanding a topic.  Although it may be possible to use 
simulation mode on a multiuser network, its integration 
may not be practical for application in a classroom.  
Moreover, since students learn at different paces, as 
activities get longer the gap between the fast and slow 
learners widens.  As such, in our implementation we have 
limited the activities to 10-20min in length. 
329
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Lack of commands is probably the most common 
limitation that will be encountered in designing multiuser 
activities.  The level of commands is acceptable for a 
CCNA level at the student side.  However to facilitate the 
large interconnected network, it often requires a CCNP 
level of commands on the instructor side.  The level of 
complexity on the instructor side is also much higher than 
the student side, making troubleshooting more difficult.  
For example for a 60-student class activity: the instructor 
network makes use of about 60 VLANs that are used to 
assign different network addresses to each student.  VTP 
will propagate VLANs when they don’t have to be, and 
PT is limited in that you cannot turn on VTP pruning, nor 
turn off VTP.  This often results in needless complexity in 
the way STP operates (PT by default uses PV-STP), and 
has on occasion unnecessarily blocked ports and caused 
loss of connectivity. 
E. Exporting 
PT is limited to interact only with devices that are 
simulated in the PT environment; external syslog servers 
cannot receive logs.  Text, such as router configurations is 
the most easily exportable information, but not all devices 
have text interfaces.  For example, DHCP servers that 
address all the VLANs can only be configured through a 
GUI.  As such it can be more practical to build on prior 
versions of the instructor file rather than create a new one. 
Unlike GNS/Dynagen and other network simulators, PT 
cannot generate a network from a text file, nor export a 
network into any other format.  The simplest way to save 
the work of a student is by using the offline saving feature 
on the instructor side. 
IV. 
SCALABILITY TESTING 
A. Methodology 
A single prototype activity file was used for all the 
student connections, and a single instructor file was used 
that would accepts all the connections.  Statistics about 
resource consumption were recorded by observing CPU, 
memory, and network usage as more and more students 
were connected to the instructor’s simulated network.  The 
hub was based on a school Lenovo T61p laptop (Core 2 
Duo T8300 2.4GHz, 2GB RAM).  The method of 
gathering the system information has its limitations in 
precision but portrays an accurate picture of the increase in 
system resources as the number of student rises.   
B. Results 
Several times the instructor file became unresponsive 
and testing had to be restarted.  The growth for memory 
resource was very scalable to the amount of students.  
However, CPU usage and loading times grew at a greater 
rate 
C. Discussion 
In most cases for the instructor using more than 1 hub 
would greatly reduce the practicality of multiuser 
activities.  As such, multiuser activities remain most 
practical in classes that have less than 60 students.  
Likewise, if classes are small, the requirements for 
reliability can be lower, as technological problems can be 
easily managed by the instructor. 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of users connected to instructor hub
Figure 4: Packet Tracer scalability with 1 hub
Ave. cpu load %
offline copy save time
offline cpu usage %
offline copy load time
330
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Networking courses that cover CCNA material suffer 
from having to cover a large amount of theory to students 
that may have little networking experience.  In class 
lectures can be improved by using interactive activities 
that foster student participation.  Multiuser achieves 
greater class interaction by allowing students to form what 
is essentially one large network supervised by the 
instructor.  Unfortunately there is no library of multiuser 
activities provided by cisco, and the development rests 
with individual academies.  UOIT research has generated 
40 activities and 2 educational game activities to cover the 
CCNA material and provide greater class participation.  
The activities are implemented as short in-class exercises 
maximizing the benefit of real-time communication 
between student networks and working around multiuser 
limitations.  Multiuser does not replace normal PT 
activities or lab time, and should not be used to 
significantly evaluate students.   
Although PT multi-user activities experience some 
limitation when used over a WAN[5], as the tool matures 
multi-user activities may provide an additional level of 
interactivity for distance-learning.  The multiuser 
architecture does not take account the capabilities of 
simulation 
mode 
and 
focuses 
on 
the 
real-time 
communication advantages offered.  Simulation mode can 
offer greater understanding for students but is not fully 
integrated into multiuser. 
Future work on the multiuser feature would have the 
most impact by improving the quality and user experience 
offered by multiuser activities.  Other academies may seek 
to modify the instructions in order to change the difficulty 
of some activities.  Student feedback is critical to 
effectively improving activities and bringing them up to 
the standard of activities offered by Cisco.  In the 
meantime it is up to the instructor judgment to adjust the 
difficulty or instructions on the spot. 
Various multiuser architectures may be attempted.  In 
contrast to hub and spoke topology in use, ad-hoc PT 
connections are low resource and can make use of the 
simulation mode of PT.  The problem with ad-hoc 
connection is that the instructor is not present to assist 
students and it is difficult to account for the activities 
completed.  This may offer a different learning experience 
to the student.  However user input would be needed for a 
successful implementation.  The activity wizard provided 
by PT can be used to create more locked down activities 
for the student and may address certain security 
limitations.  The challenge with using the activity wizard 
lies with the increased development time and the 
requirement to account and restrict/facilitate all the 
student actions that may occur in the activity. 
CCNP level multiuser activities are possible as long as 
the activities are limited in the depth of the topic they 
attempt to cover.  These activities would increase the 
complexity of the instructor network and be highly 
dependent on PT limited amount of commands. 
Compared to regular PT activities, by being connected 
to the same network, multiuser allows students to 
collaborate and work towards a common goal.  This 
allows the creation of activities that have before been 
impractical to implements, such as group troubleshooting, 
capture the flag, and relay race games.  Under the right 
conditions PT multiuser activities can be used as another 
to aid in teaching networking and maintain student 
interest. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported through a 2010 Teaching 
Innovation Funding (TIF) grant from the office of the 
Associate Provost, Academic of the University of Ontario 
Institute of Technology. Packet Tracer is a product of 
Cisco Networks and is provided free of charge to Cisco 
Networking Academy students and instructors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D.D.  Burdescu, M.C.  Mihaescu, C.M.  Ionascu and B.  Logofatu, 
"Support system for e-Learning environment based on learning 
activities and processes," in Research Challenges in Information 
Science (RCIS), 2010 Fourth International Conference on, pp.  37-
42, 2010. 
[2] 
Maiga Chang and Kinshuk, "Web-Based Multiplayer Online Role 
Playing 
Game 
(MORPG) 
for 
Assessing 
Students' 
Java 
Programming Knowledge and Skills," in Digital Game and 
Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning (DIGITEL), 2010 Third IEEE 
International Conference on, pp.  103-107, 2010. 
[3] 
F.  Jakab, M.  Bucko, I.  Sivy, L.  Madarasz and P.  Cicak, "The 
system of career promotion of networking professionals based on 
industrial certificates," in Intelligent Engineering Systems, 2009.  
INES 2009.  International Conference on, pp.  221-226, 2009. 
[4] 
Packet Tracer Reference Guide and Tutorials, Cisco Networking 
Academy, 2010. 
[5] 
A.  Smith and C.  Bluck, "Multiuser Collaborative Practical 
Learning Using Packet Tracer," in Networking and Services 
(ICNS), 2010 Sixth International Conference on, pp.  356-362, 
2010. 
[6] 
Packet 
Tracer 
Messaging 
Protocol 
(PTMP) 
Specification 
Document, Cisco Networks, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
331
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

