Investigation of Visible Light Communication Transceiver Performance for Short-
Range Wireless Data Interfaces 
 
    Hongseok Shin, Sungbum Park, Kyungwoo Lee, 
Daekwang Jung, Youngmin Lee 
     DMC R&D Center,  
Samsung Electronics Corp., 
      Maetan 3 Dong 416, Suwon, S. Korea 
hongseok.shin@samsung.com 
Seoksu Song, Jinwoo Park 
School of Electrical Engineering,  
Korea University 
Anam-dong, Seungbuk-gu, Seoul, S. Korea  
jwpark@korea.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract — We investigate the performance of a visible light 
communication (VLC) transceiver for bi-directional high-
speed and short-range wireless data interfaces. The proposed 
VLC transceivers with optical antenna structure are 
implemented with edge-emitting laser diode and silicon photo 
diode, which is primarily designated to operate in a full duplex 
mode at 120 Mbit/s. The shielding method that is employed to 
reduce the light cross coupling effect inside the VLC 
transceiver is proposed and experimentally investigated. The 
influence of the tilt degree between two transceivers without 
optical antenna and with optical antenna is investigated. Their 
bit error rate performance is examined experimentally with 
respect to the transmission distance, the coverage range and 
the tilt degree.  
Keywords - Visible light Communication; Free-space optical 
communications;  optical wireless 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The various communication technologies have been 
advanced to process the immense amount of data 
information at a very high speed. Among them, recently, 
visible light communication (VLC) technology is attracting 
much attention as short range communication means of high 
speed. This technology uses light-emitting diodes (LEDs) 
emitting light with the wavelength interval of 380-700 nm to 
carry information. The VLC technology is a novel kind of 
optical wireless communication technology with high 
potentially which can play a supplementary role of wireless 
communication which is available at any time and any place. 
As supplementary system, VLC has many advantages 
compared to RF-based wireless communications [1]; (1) It 
can potentially use existing local power line infrastructure 
for wireless communication as a backbone, (2) The 
bandwidth which can use is virtually unlimited, (3) The 
security is very outstanding, that is, it is difficult for an 
intruder to pick up the signal from outside due to 
characteristic of light, (4) Transmitters and receivers using 
LEDs are cheap and there is no need for expensive radio 
frequency units, (5) Visible light radiations are free of any 
health concerns, (6) Furthermore, no interference with RF 
based systems exists, so that the use in airplanes or hospitals 
is uncritical. Currently, the VLC based on these advantages 
has been mainly investigated into various applications, such 
as ubiquitous communication system, intelligent transport 
communication 
system 
and 
illuminating 
light 
communication system [2], [3]. 
We have paid attention to use VLC technology in the 
high speed and short range communication as a peripheral 
interface of hand-held devices such as mobile phones, 
notebook computers, digital cameras and so on. Since users 
can actively align communication links by observing the 
visible beam spot, VLC transceiver does not necessarily 
demand a wide coverage, implying that its power 
consumption can be potentially lower than other invisible 
options. Another key issue to investigate feasibility of 
wireless 
optical 
connectivity 
technology 
is 
channel 
efficiency. Full duplex operation can significantly increase 
the efficiency of communication channel, but the self 
reflection 
of 
transceiver 
degrades 
the 
transmission 
performance. It is also difficult for users to align VLC 
transceivers to be faced each other for a long time due to the 
characteristic of portable equipment. Based on those 
observations, we investigated a wireless optical transceiver 
especially focusing on the high speed and short range visible 
communications. 
In 
this 
letter, 
we 
demonstrate 
a 
practicability of VLC transceiver experimentally, which was 
designed to operate at 120 Mbit/s in the full duplex mode 
with expectation to be used as a peripheral interface of hand-
held devices. 
 
II. 
THE PROPOSED VLC TRANSCEIVER 
We tried to develop a VLC transceiver in a small 
package by gathering optical and electronic technologies and 
components currently available in a commercial market. The 
optical part of VLC transmitter consisted of three devices; a 
light source, collimation lens and a diffuser. For the 
compatibility with physical line speed of Ultra Fast Infrared 
and for competing with the matured RF-based connectivity 
technologies such as WiFi or UWB, the VLC bandwidth was 
set to 120 Mbit/s. It is known unfortunately that the LEDs for 
ambient artificial illumination or message signboard 
typically have the modulation limit of about 10 Mbit/s [4]. 
The resonant-cavity LEDs (RCLEDs) for plastic fiber 
communications have wide modulation bandwidth but do not 
have enough power to provide sufficient visibility. Edge 
emitted LDs in visible wavelength, on the other hand, have 
213
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

higher optical output power and show the better visibility 
compared to RCLEDs. In these regards, we adopted edge 
emitting LDs for the high speed short range visible light 
source. A diffuser was placed in front of LD to avoid the eye 
safety regulation strictly applied to laser sources [5]. The 
center wavelength of edge emitted LD was 635 nm and the 
full width half maximum spectral width was about 5 nm. The 
beam divergence of the red edge emitted LD was also 
engineered to be less than 10°by placing a diffuser and 
collimation lens in front of the metal can package. The beam 
spot was visible at the distance of up to 1.2 m in a typical 
office environment. The proposed VLC system uses on-off 
keying modulation. The measured optical power after a 
diffuser was about 1.5 mW. 
 
   
 
Figure 1.  Drawing and picture of the designed optical antenna. 
We investigated two types of VLC receiver, which utilize 
two methods of concentrating incoming light at the photo 
diode (PD). In the first method, a convex lens is to 
concentrate light which is available in the market. The size 
of the convex lens was chosen based on the beam divergence 
and the transmission distance, noting that a convex lens with 
bigger diameter has in general the smaller angle of field of 
view (FOV). In the designed VLC receiver, a convex lens 
with 7-mm diameter was used in front of PD. The second 
method uses an optical antenna as shown in Fig. 1, which 
was particularly designed for VLC receiver applications. 
Since optical antenna generally requires a more exact 
alignment, the optical antenna needs to be designed for a 
wider FOV. The measured FOV of our optical antenna is 
about ±10°. In addition, the surface of inside of the VLC 
receiver is coated for full reflection to help concentrating the 
incoming light. The ambient light is a noise source to the 
VLC optical receiver. The major source of ambient light 
inside building is indoor lightings. The power spectrum of 
the photo detector output in the presence of fluorescent light 
extends up to 100 kHz [6]. An electrical high-pass filter with 
300 kHz cutoff-frequency was equipped right after a photo 
diode to reduce the influence of ambient light. No additional 
optical filter was used in the proposed VLC receiver. 
 
III. 
THE PERFORMANCE EXAMINATIONS 
Fig. 2 is a schematic of the experimental setup to 
examine the designed VLC transceivers. VLC transceiver 1 
was connected to a pulse pattern generator (PPG), PPG1 
which generated a 27-1 pseudorandom binary sequence 
(PRBS) at 120 Mbit/s. Another transceiver, VLC transceiver 
2, was connected to an error detector, so that two VLC 
transceivers face each other as shown in Fig. 2. Transceiver 2 
moved along X axis and Y axis while measuring the 
performance of the VLC transceiver. The bit error rates 
(BERs) were measured varying the transmission distance of 
X cm and the coverage range of Y cm. The distance and 
coverage are varied from 5 cm to 130 cm and from -10 cm to 
+10 cm, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Experimental setup for performance measurements. 
 
We designed the VLC transmitters to have the beam 
profile which can provide the uniform optical power 
distribution over the entire shining circle, so that the BERs at 
a distance were almost same within a coverage range. It 
should be also noted that a clear boundary of the shining 
circle is observed, which is beneficial to clear visibility of 
the spot. One of the major reasons that limit the usage of full 
duplex mode in optical link is the cross coupling of light. 
There may be some tricky cases for the optical link 
applications where detrimental light scattering is serious and 
a receiver can be blinded by the light of its own transmitter. 
We carried out the measurements with and without the 
presence of the cross coupling light. In Fig. 2, Transceiver 2 
is arranged to transmit a PRBS signal by turning on PPG2, 
which generates a cross coupling light interference to 
Transceiver 1 under investigation.  
 
 
(a)                                                  (b) 
Figure 3.  The BER performance of a transceiver at 120 Mbit/s over the  
                visible link as a function of transmission distance and coverage 
        (a) without cross coupling light (b) with cross coupling light. 
Fig. 3 is the comparison of the BER performance of the 
proposed VLC transceivers without and with cross coupling 
light. Fig. 3 (a) shows that VLC system without cross 
coupling light can provide BERs lower than 10−8 at the 
distance of about 110 cm and within the coverage of about 
17.5 cm. But, Fig. 3(b) reveals that with cross coupling light 
the distance and the coverage for successful communications 
were reduced to about 70 cm and about 11 cm respectively. 
Note 
that 
the 
divergence 
angles 
for 
successful 
214
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

communications were not affected by the cross coupling 
light. 
A metal shield between LD and PD was utilized to block 
the scattered or reflected light as shown in Fig. 4(b). 
    
 
 
 
(b) 
(a)                                        (b) 
Figure 4.  Pictures of VLC transceivers  
       (a) without a shield (b) with a shield.  
 
Fig. 5 shows the BER performance improvement 
achieved by reducing the influence of cross coupling light, 
extending the transmission distance and coverage range up to 
about 100 cm and about 15 cm respectively. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The BER performance of a transceiver with a shield  in the 
presence of cross coupling light. 
  
The tilting effect of the VLC transceiver was investigated 
because it is generally difficult for users to locate or to 
maintain the VLC transceivers facing each other exactly in 
many practical applications. While VLC transceiver 2 was 
tilted by 8° intentionally in Fig. 2, the BER performance was 
measured to obtain the Fig. 6. It was found out that the VLC 
transceiver equipped with an optical antenna experiences 
greater reduction in the transmission distance for successful 
communications with the tilting angle, but reveals better 
coverage range characteristics, in comparison with the VLC 
transceiver with a convex lens. 
 
Figure 6.  The BER performance of transceiver at 0 and 8 degree tilt                        
(a) with a convex lens (b) with an optical antenna. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We demonstrate the feasibility of the visible light 
transceiver for the high speed and short-range peripheral 
wireless interface applications of hand held devices. The 
proposed VLC design approach features What-You-See-Is-
What-You-Send security by employing visible lights as 
communication media. This paper proved the practicability 
of a 120 Mbit/s VLC transceiver using an edge emitted LD 
and a silicon PD, by presenting the BER performance 
measurements with respect to the transmission distance and 
the coverage range. VLC system without cross coupling light 
can provide BERs lower than 10-8 at the distance of about 
110 cm and within the coverage of about 17.5 cm. But, the 
distance and the coverage for successful communications 
were reduced with cross coupling light to about 70 cm and 
about 11 cm respectively. A metal shield between LD and 
PD reduced the influence of cross coupling light and 
extended the transmission distance and coverage range up to 
about 100 cm and about 15 cm respectively. It was found out 
that the VLC transceiver equipped with an optical antenna 
experiences greater reduction in the transmission distance to 
about 50 cm for successful communications, but reveals 
better coverage range characteristics with the tilting angle of 
8 degree, in comparison with the VLC transceiver with a 
convex lens. It may need to be further investigated for 
improvement in the transmission distance and the coverage 
range. 
 
   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MKE/KEIT[KI001822, Research on Ubiquitous Mobility 
Management Methods for Higher Service Availability] and 
partly by the BLS project from the Seoul Metropolitan 
City[WR080951, Seoul R&BD Program]. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
W. C. Kim, C. S. Bae, S. Y. Jeon, S. Y. Pyun, and D. H. Cho, 
“Efficient resource allocation for rapid link recovery and visibility in 
visible light local area networks,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer 
Electronics, 2010, pp. 5240-531. 
(a) 
215
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

[2] 
I. E. Lee, M. L. Sim, F. W. L. Kung, “Performance enhancement of 
outdoor visible light communication system using selective 
combining receiver,” IET. Optoelectronics, 2009, pp. 30-39. 
[3] 
A. M. Street, P. N. Stavrinou, D. C. Obrien, and D. J. Edwards, 
“Indoor optical wireless systems—A review,” Opt. Quantum 
Electron., vol. 29, pp. 349–378, (1997). 
[4] 
S.-B. Park, D.K. Jung, H.S. Shin, D.J. Shin, Y.-J. Hyun, K. Lee, and 
Y.J. Oh, “Information Broadcasting System based on Visible Light 
Signboard,” Proc. Wireless and Optical Communications 2007, pp. 
311-313, Montreal, Canada, (2007). 
[5] 
D. J. T. Heatley, D. R. Wisely, I. Neild, and P. Cochrane, “Optical 
wireless: The story so far,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 36, 
pp. 72-82, (1998). 
[6] 
J.R. Barry, J.M. Kahn, E.A. Lee and D.G. Messerchmitt, “High-speed 
nondirective optical communication for wireless networks,” IEEE 
Network Mag. 5 44-54 (1991). 
 
 
 
216
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

