A Routing Method for Cooperative Forwarding
in Multiple Wireless Sensor Networks
Junko Nagata, Kazuhiko Kinoshita, Koso Murakami
Department of Information Networking,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology,
Osaka University, Japan
Email: {nagata.junko,kazuhiko,murakami}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
Yosuke Tanigawa, Hideki Tode
Department of Computer Science and Intelligent Systems,
Graduate School of Engineering,
Osaka Prefecture University, Japan
Email: {tanigawa,tode}@cs.osakafu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, the number of applications of
wireless sensor networks (WSNs) has been increasing. Multiple
WSNs can be constructed within the same geographic area. We
propose a routing method for cooperative forwarding in such
multiple WSNs that will extend their lifetime. For multiple
WSNs, each sink location will differ from the others, and some
nodes around a sink in one WSN may be far from a sink in
another WSN. We focus on this issue in the proposed method,
with a node that is far from a sink in its own network and
near to a sink in another network being able to forward packets
from a node in another WSN to the corresponding sink.
Keywords-multiple sensor network; cooperative forwarding;
load balancing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are composed of tiny
battery-powered sensor nodes that have limited storage and
radio capabilities [1], [2]. Therefore, for WSNs to remain
operational for a long time, much attention has to be paid
to energy consumption in the nodes.
In a typical WSN, sensor nodes acquire and send data
to a processing center called the sink. Because all data are
forwarded to a sink, nodes around the sink tend to transmit
many more packets than the others [3]. In this case, the
energy of such nodes will exhaust earlier than that of other
nodes, causing an “energy hole” to appear around the sink.
No more data can be delivered to the sink after the hole
appears. Consequently, the energy remaining in the rest of
the network is wasted, and the network lifetime is shorter
than it could be [4].
In some applications, a WSN may comprise several thou-
sand sensor nodes within an extended area (e.g., agriculture
and environmental monitoring). In these cases, the diameter
of the WSN may be some kilometers. To enable networks
to be scalable, a WSN is typically subdivided into clusters
and the data collected by cluster heads are sent to a sink.
Clustering also supports data aggregation. This is a method
by which data from multiple sensors are combined to
eliminate redundant information and transmission, thereby
reducing energy consumption [5].
From another point of view, WSNs can be classiﬁed into
two types, namely homogeneous and heterogeneous sensor
networks. In a homogeneous WSN, all nodes have the same
capabilities. In recent years, however, heterogeneous WSNs
have attracted much attention. These have a small number
of “high-end” sensor nodes, with a wider range of radio
communication capabilities and/or a larger battery compared
with the “normal” nodes. A clustering method to achieve
effective use of these high-end nodes has been proposed
[6]. However, a clustering method alone is not sufﬁcient
to prolong the network lifetime for a heterogeneous WSN,
and a clustering and multi-hop hybrid routing method has
therefore been proposed [7].
In recent years, multiple WSNs have been constructed
within the same geographic area [8], [9]. For such cases,
researchers have been investigating cooperation between the
WSNs. Some routing protocols for multiple WSNs have
been proposed [10], [12], [11], [13].
In this paper, we propose a routing method for cooperative
forwarding to prolong network lifetime by reducing the load
on nodes around sinks in a multiple-WSN environment.
By reducing the load around a sink, we aim to overcome
the problem of some nodes becoming “bottlenecks”. Our
method decides how much other WSNs with different sink
locations can help such “heavy-load” situations.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We
ﬁrst introduce some related work in Section II. In Section I
II, we propose a routing method for cooperative forwarding
to reduce the load around a sink. In Section IV, we evaluate
the performance of the proposed method. Finally, Section
V concludes this paper and indicates directions for future
work.
II. RELATED WORK
In recent years, the number of applications of WSNs
has been increasing, with multiple WSNs attracting much
attention. For such environments, some protocols have been
proposed, as follows.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

The Virtual Sensor Network (VSN) is an emerging concept
for supporting multipurpose, collaborative and resource-
efﬁcient WSNs by enabling, for example, dynamic variations
to the subsets of sensors and users [10]. A VSN is formed
as a logical network of cooperative nodes. For cases where
applications overlap geographically, transmitting data for
applications among a variety of devices enables the nodes
to reduce redundant paths. Nodes are classiﬁed into an
appropriate VSN based on the phenomena they are track-
ing (e.g., container tracking or corrosion-rate monitoring).
It is expected that VSNs will provide protocols for the
construction methods, maintenance and usage of subsets of
sensors, providing a way to communicate efﬁciently between
intermediate nodes or other VSNs.
Poorter et al. [11] propose to construct an overlay network
for different WSNs. However, this protocol has the problem
that differences in operating policies and radio communica-
tions are not considered.
Steffan et al. [12] focus on a general concept for the
creation and maintenance of network-wide node subsets and
describe a ﬂexible and modular architecture that meets the
requirements of multipurpose WSNs. However, the creation
of these subsets is not very scalable. Most applications
specify their own purpose and construct independent WSNs,
but it is not necessary to offer acceptable cost performance
and coverage.
Instead of many-to-one routing, many-to-many routing
is proposed in [13]. This merges paths with simultaneous
trafﬁc, thereby minimizing the number of nodes involved in
many-to-many routing and balancing their forwarding load.
However, this proposal has the problem that the nodes along
the merged paths have a heavier load and consume more
energy.
Elhawary et al. [14] model a cooperative transmission link
in wireless networks in terms of a transmitter cluster and a
receiver cluster. They propose a cooperative communication
protocol for the establishment of these clusters and for the
cooperative transmission of data. The nodes calculate the
link cost between these paths and select the most efﬁcient
path. This enables the nodes to reduce their energy con-
sumption, but the nodes in a cluster need to be synchronized
and each node has the increased overhead of forming many
paths.
Taking another point of view, we propose to achieve load
balancing by cooperative forwarding in multiple WSNs.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Concept
It is assumed that there are n WSNs in the same area.
These WSNs have different applications. In addition, their
start and ﬁnish times may differ, depending on each net-
work’s requirements.
As shown in Figure 1, the locations of the sinks in
multiple WSNs are separated. Some nodes around a sink in
Heavy-loaded 
around a sink of Net1
Net1
Net2
Far from  
a sink of Net2
Far from  
a sink of Net1
Heavy-loaded 
around a sink of Net2
Figure 1.
Heavy-load node around a sink
one WSN may therefore be far from a sink in another WSN.
We focus on this fact in the proposed method, whereby a
node that is far from a sink in its own network, but near
a sink in another network, can forward a packet from a
node in another WSN to the corresponding sink. In this
paper, we call the former network the home network and the
latter network the visitor network. The method achieves load
balancing between a heavy-load node in a home network
and a light-load node in a visitor network. As a result, the
lifetime of both networks can be extended.
Speciﬁcally, each network constructs a path along which a
node can’t forward a packet from a node in another WSN in
advance. It is based on the well-known Ad hoc On-Demand
Distance Vector (AODV) protocol [15]), making it easy to
implement. In addition, some nodes construct routes to the
sinks of visitor networks.
B. Node Function
As described above, the proposed method enables a node
that is far from a sink in its home network, but near a sink
in a visitor network, and can forward a packet from a node
in the visitor network.
Each node has a routing table that includes not only an
entry for a sink in its home network but also an entry for a
sink in the visitor network. When a node overhears a data
packet from its visitor network, it decides whether to receive
and forward it or to ignore it. This procedure is explained
later in more detail.
C. Routing Table Creation
This subsection explains how to create the routing table.
Initially, each node sends an AODV-based route request
packet to create an entry in its routing table for a sink in
its home network. After this creation process, each node
broadcasts an additional route request packet named B-REQ
to the sinks of all visitor networks. (Nodes on the path from
the node to the sink will create an entry in their routing table
to the sink.)
In addition, as a metric to decide the next hop, minEnergy
is also notiﬁed. This refers to the minimum residual energy
of nodes along the path to the sink.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

D. Cooperative Routing Method
In the proposed method, when a node sends its sensing
data, it attaches the value of its residual energy in a header
ﬁeld of the packet. When a node relays a packet, it compares
the residual energy of the node itself and that recorded in
the packet, and the recorded value is replaced by smaller
one. As a result, the minimum energy along the path from
its source node is recorded. According to this procedure, a
node can record a value of minimum energy along the paths
every networks and select the path for the maximum value
of this energy.
Figure 2 demonstrates how the proposed method works.
After node P has the created path in its home network
(Sink1), it broadcasts a B-REQ to the visitor networks Net2
and Net3. When node Q and node R receive this B-REQ,
they write their network ID in the header of the B-REQ and
transmit it to their sink. After this procedure, the routes from
node P to the sink via Net2 and Net3 are created, as shown
in Tables I and II, respectively.
・・・・
・・・・
・・・
・・・
P
Net1
Net3
Net2
Q
R
S
Far from sinks of 
Net 2 and Net 3
An area around a sink
in Network 1
B-REQ
T
U
Sink2
Sink3
Sink1
Figure 2.
Multiple WSNs
Table I
NODE P’S ROUTING TABLE
Relay network
Destination
Next hop
minEnergy
1
Sink1
S
30
2
Sink1
Q
45
3
Sink1
R
65
Table II
NODE Q’S ROUTING TABLE
Relay network
Destination
Next hop
minEnergy
2
Sink2
U
55
2
Sink1
T
40
When node P receives a data packet for Sink1, it selects a
suitable route from the entries in its routing table as shown
in Table I. In this case, node P selects node R, which has
the maximum value for minEnergy, as the next-hop node.
As we described below, the proposed method tries to ex-
tend the lifetime of each network by cooperative forwarding.
However, it may result in a case where a network shortens
its lifetime by the burden of forwarding for visitor networks.
To avoid such a situation, in the proposed method, a node
which has less residual energy does not relay packets from
visitor networks.
Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a value of cooperation threshold
in each network as a metric to decide whether to forward
packets from visitor networks or not. For this metric, each
sink broadcasts the minimum value of residual energy
among all the nodes in its home network to the nodes in its
home network. When a node acquires the value, it compares
with its own residual energy. If its own residual energy is
smaller, it refuses to forward packets from visitor networks
and applies itself to relay packets in its home network.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We evaluated the performance of the proposed method
by simulation experiments using QualNet4.5.1 [16]. We
simulated two WSNs (Network 1 and Network 2) as follows.
Each WSN had 49 nodes based on a grid topology, as shown
in Figure 3. The sensing ﬁeld was a 60 m × 60 m square.
The maximum range of radio transmission for each node
was 15 m. One sink was located at the top left corner and
another was at the bottom right corner. Each node sent data
packets asynchronously, at intervals of 5 s.
For a comparison method, we simulated two WSNs coex-
isting in the same area, but with each WSN communicating
independently (i.e., there was no cooperation and no shar-
ing).
10m
・・・
・・・
・・・
・・・
Figure 3.
Simulation model
Figures 4 and 5 show the packet receiving rate of the sinks
in Network 1 and Network 2, respectively. The receiving rate
means the percentage of the packets which the sinks have
successfully received for all sent packets by sensor nodes.
It was observed every 400 seconds. The horizontal axis is
elapsed time.
These ﬁgures show that the proposed method extends the
lifetime of both Network 1 and Network 2. It indicates that
the proposed method achieves good load balancing, with
both networks beneﬁtting.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 2500
 3000
 3500
 4000
Receiving Rate [%]
Elapsed Time [s]
Proposed
No Cooperation
Figure 4.
Receiving rate (Network 1)
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
 2500
 3000
 3500
 4000
Receiving Rate [%]
Elapsed Time [s]
Proposed
No Cooperation
Figure 5.
Receiving rate (Network 2)
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we focused on the situation where multiple
WSNs operate simultaneously in the same area, and aimed to
extend the lifetime of all WSNs by introducing cooperation
between them.
To achieve this, we proposed a cooperative forwarding
method. This enables a node near a sink in a visitor network
to forward a packet from a node in the visitor network to
achieve load balancing.
Simulation results showed that the proposed method can
extend the lifetime of all WSNs working in the same area.
This study still has work in progress, and we recognize
the following problems.
The method for choosing the next hop is too simple.
We should at least take the number of hops to the sink
into account. The simulation model is elementary, and we
continue to evaluate the proposed method in a wider variety
of situations.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam and E. Cayirci, “A
survey on sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
Vol. 40, No. 8, pp. 102–114, Aug. 2002.
[2] J. Yick, B. Mukherjee and D. Ghosal, “Wireless sensor network
survey,” Computer Networks 52, pp. 2292–2330, Apr. 2008.
[3] M. Perillo, Z. Cheng and W. Heinzelman, “On the problem
of unbalanced load distribution in wireless sensor networks,”
Proceedings of the IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops on Wireless
Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, pp. 74–79, Dec. 2004.
[4] X. Wu, G. Chen and S. Das, “Avoiding Energy Holes in Wire-
less Sensor Networks with Nonuniform Node Distribution,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, Vol.
19, No. 5, pp. 710–720, May 2008.
[5] A. A. Abbasi and M. Younis, “A survey on clustering algo-
rithms for wireless sensor networks,” Computer Communica-
tions, Vol. 30, No. 14–15, pp. 2826–2841, 2007.
[6] S. Priyankara, K. Kinoshita, H. Tode and K. Murakami, “A
Clustering Method for Wireless Sensor Networks with Het-
erogeneous Node Types,” IEICE Transactions on Communica-
tions, Vol. E94-B, No. 8, pp. 2254–2264, Aug. 2011.
[7] S. Priyankara, K. Kinoshita, H. Tode and K. Murakami,
“A Clustering/multi-hop Hybrid Routing Method for Wireless
Sensor Networks with Heterogeneous Node Types,” Proceed-
ings of the IEEE GLOBECOM Workshops on Heterogeneous
Multi-hop Wireless and Mobile Networks, pp. 207–212, Dec.
2010.
[8] “e-Sense project”, http://www.ist-e-sense.org/ (Jan 2012, date
last accessed).
[9] “U-City project”, http://ucta.or.kr/en/ucity/concept.php (Jan
2012, date last accessed).
[10] A. P. Jayasumana, Q. Han and T. H. Illangasekare, “Virtual
sensor networks – a resource efﬁcient approach for concurrent
applications,” Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Technology (ITNG’07), pp. 111–115, 2007.
[11] E. Poorter, B. Latre, I. Moerman and P. Demeester, “Symbi-
otic Networks: Towards a New Level of Cooperation Between
Wireless Networks,” International Journal of Wireless Personal
Communications, pp. 479–495, Jun. 2008.
[12] J. Steffan, L. Fiege, M. Cilia and A. Buchmann, “To-
wards Multi-Purpose Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proceedings
of the International Conference on Sensor Networks (IEEE
SENET’05), 2005.
[13] L. Mottola and G. P. Picco, “MUSTER: Adaptive Energy-
Aware Multi-Sink Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, Vol. 10, pp. 1694–
1709, 2010.
[14] M. Elhawary and Z. J. Haas, “Energy-Efﬁcient Protocol for
Cooperative Networks,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Network-
ing, Vol. 19, No. 2, Apr. 2011.
[15] C.
E.
Perkins,
E.
M.
Royer
and
S.
R.
Das,
“Ad
Hoc
On
Demand
Distance
Vector
(AODV)
Routing,”
http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-manet-aodv-07.txt,
Nov. 2000.
[16] QualNet Simulator version 4.5.1, Scalable Network Technolo-
gies, http://www.scalable-networks.com (Jan 2012, date last
accessed).
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

