Security Analysis on Social Media Networks via
STRIDE Model
Kamal Raj Sharma, Wei-Yang Chiu and Weizhi Meng
SPTAGE Lab, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Technical University of Denmark, Denmark
Email: {weich, weme}@dtu.dk
Abstract—Security associated threats are often increased for
online social media during a pandemic, such as COVID-19, along
with changes in a work environment. For example, employees in
many companies and organizations have started to work from
home due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Such working style has
increased many remote activities and further relied on email for
communication, thus creating an ideal condition for email fraud
schemes. Motivated by this observation, the main purpose of this
work is to evaluate the privacy policy of online social media and
identify potential security associated problems. First, we perform
a risk analysis of online social media networks such as Facebook,
Twitter and LinkedIn by using the STRIDE model. This aims to
ﬁnd threats and vulnerabilities in the online social media. Then in
this analysis, the phishing attack was found to be a main threat in
online social media, which is a social engineering attack, where
users are convinced through some fake messages or emails to
extract their personal credentials.
Index Terms—Network Security, STRIDE Model, Social Media
Network, Security Analysis, COVID-19 Pandemic
I. INTRODUCTION
Social media is an Internet-based form of communication.
Millions of people around the world are using social media
to share information and communicate with each other [13].
By using social media, people get to have conversations, share
information and create web content personally, professionally
or at a company level. There are many forms of social media
popularly used currently including blogs, micro-blogs, wikis,
social networking sites, photo-sharing sites, instant messaging,
video-sharing sites, Meta-virtual worlds, Facebook, Twitter,
LinkedIn, Viber, WhatsApp and more [14]. Social networking
media, especially in recent years, has been used in different
application domains, such as Government, Business, Dating,
Education, Finance, medical and health, and social and po-
litical application. According to the Statista (German online
portal for statistic), 2958, 2000, 2000, 556 million users are
active users in Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and Twitter,
respectively, in January 2023 [1] and 734.7 million users are
active in LinkedIn by the year of 2022 [2].
Social media can be divided into two categories: Web-based
social network application and Mobile-based social network
application.
• Web-based Social Network Applications:
– Facebook: This is a popular social networking site,
alowing people to connect with network of friends,
business houses and organizations. Users can log in
using both a browser or a mobile application.
– LinkedIn: This is a business related social media
platform mainly used for professional networking. It
is an ideal site to post personal updates, job postings,
academic programs, events and projects. Users can
log in using web browser.
– Twitter: This micro-blogging site allows users to post
updates. Business houses and individuals expecting
to engage with their followers at a high frequency
rate should consider using Twitter. Users can log in
using both a browser and a mobile application.
• Mobile-based Social Network Applications.
– Viber: Free and secure calls and messages to anyone,
anywhere. Used in mobile application.
– WhatsApp: Free and secure call and messages. Avail-
able in smartphones, or a web browser.
– Telegram: A famous cloud-based instant messaging
application with completely free services.
Motivation. However, using too many social networking
sites for conveying messages could dilute the entire social me-
dia strategy resulting in the ineffectiveness of entire planning
and effort. So it becomes obvious that users have to be aware
about which social media sites ﬁt into their requirements and
communication strategy. For example, it is better to choose
social media sites that can be relevant to individual users. It
is also easy to connect with others in social media by making
new friends, creating new jobs or sharing new information
whether it is for business or personal reasons [20]. However,
there is a high risk of leaking private information and misusing
the personal information because the bad actors can utilize
those information for their own gain. Below are some motive
examples about the risk:
• Post information and update status: Sensitive infor-
mation may be revealed. It allows users to update status
anyone, anywhere at any time.
• Friends’ Requests: Carelessness in accepting friends’ re-
quests may result in adding ‘enemies’ instead of ‘friends’
who have more access to users’ information.
• Upload photos and videos: It allows everyone to view
photos and videos that are sensitive to either a user or an
organization.
• Third party applications and links to external sites:
While operating the applications or clicking on the links,
malware may infect users’ computing platforms.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Contributions. Though there are many studied investigating
the risk of social media networks, to our knowledge, STRIDE
model has not been used to analyze most social media appli-
cations. Also, due to the spread of COVID-19, there might be
a change in the security landscape. Motivated by these, our
work aims to bring in light how threats are increasing in the
use of social media and most importantly how the attackers
make most use of pandemic like the COVID-19 to spread the
malicious contents through phishing attacks. In order to reach
the aforementioned conclusion, a risk analysis on social media
was performed, which results in phishing attack being the main
threat in online social media that is in increment with the ever
growing use of social media.
The remaining parts are structured as follows. Section II
introduces related research on risk/security analysis on social
media networks. In Section III, we explain our security anal-
ysis outcomes based on Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn via
STRIDE Model. Section IV discusses the form of phishing
attack under COVID-19 situation and provides relevant coun-
termeasures. Section V concludes our work.
II. RELATED WORK
Risk in online social networks (OSNs) has received much
attention from around 2010/2011. For instance, Tang et al. [23]
introduced an early work that identiﬁed the privacy risks due
to the lack of symmetric conﬁgurations in most of the OSNs,
and designed a inference attack that can be used to infer users’
private information, even users already made their friend list
private. Creese et al. [10] ﬁgured out one key question about
unchecked publishing and sharing of content and information
in OSNs, and introduced a model to understand the potential
risks faced should all of existing tools and methods be acces-
sible to a malicious entity. The model enables easy and direct
capture of the data extraction methods through the encoding
of a data-reachability matrix.
Yang et al. [22] then ﬁgured out that users usually group
their friends into social circles but the circles are not formed
with privacy policies. They introduced a utility-based trade-
off framework that models users’ concerns and incentives of
sharing, and made a trade-off between these two. Chan and
Saqib [24] showed that online social circles such as ‘Facebook
friends’ are akin to collectivistic communities by offering users
a ‘cushion’ that mitigates ﬁnancial loss, which increases users’
ﬁnancial risk-taking, consistent with the cushion hypothesis.
Laleh et al. [9] introduced a risk measure, called local risk
factor, with the key idea that the malicious users in OSNs may
show some common features on the topology of their social
graphs, which are different from those of legitimate users.
Aktypi et al. [5] examined the potential exposure of users’
identity that is caused by information that they share online
and personal data that are stored by their trackers. They
then developed a tool to model online information shared by
individuals and elaborated on how they might be exposed to
the unwanted leakage. van Schaik et al. [21] focused on the
security- and privacy settings of Facebook, and found there is
a need for non-aggregated analysis and practical implications
TABLE I
THREATS USED IN STRIDE MODEL.
Threat
Properties
Spooﬁng
Authenticity
Tampering
Integrity
Repudiation
Accountability/non-repudiation
Information Disclosure
Conﬁdentiality
Denial of Service
Availability
emphasise interventions to promote safe online social-network
use. Han et al. [16] found that OSN users try to hide some
information for privacy, but the hidden information is likely to
be predicted by various powerful inference attacks. Then they
proposed a general Framework for Private Attribute Disclosure
estimation (F-PAD), which can estimate the disclosure risk for
individuals in terms of disclosure probability and risk level.
Chen et al. [7] focused on inference attack defence, and
formulated the social network data sharing problem through an
optimization-based approach. Then they proposed two privacy-
preserving social network data-sharing methods to counter the
inference attack. One is called the efﬁciency-based privacy-
preserving disclosure algorithm (EPPD), and the other is to
convert the original problem into a multi-dimensional knap-
sack problem (d-KP) using greedy heuristics. Fu and Yao [20]
introduced an effective and reasonable privacy risk scoring
method. It takes into account the granularity of the shared
proﬁle items, combines sensitivity and visibility, and generates
a privacy risk score for each user.
There are many previous studies on this topic, but to the
best of our knowledge, the STRIDE model [11] has not been
widely used for risk analysis on OSNs. This indeed motivates
our work, especially under COVID-19 situation, there could
be some new attack vectors.
III. SECURITY ANALYSIS WITH STRIDE MODEL
The rapid increase of online social media may also bring
new types of threats that spill over from the Internet world to
everyday life [7]. For example, it has become very easy for
an intruder to exploit social media for malicious purposes, but
organizations and governments ﬁnd it difﬁcult to accurately
detect, identify, predict and prevent the malicious exploitation
of social media. In this section, we aim to perform a STRIDE
model-based risk analysis on popular social media networks
such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn.
A. STRIDE Model
The STRIDE model was designed by Praerit and Loren at
Microsoft, which can be used to threat modelling of software,
hardware and network systems [11]. It provides a mnemonic
for security threats as shown in Table I.
Spooﬁng is the process of manipulating data look like it has
come from different sources. The main goal of spooﬁng is to
cover the attacker tracks by misleading the server using a fake
address. Examples include E-mail spooﬁng, MAC spooﬁng
and IP address spooﬁng.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Denial of service is an attack in which the attacker attempts
to make the victim unavailable to its legitimate users, through
a temporary or indeﬁnite interruption of provided services.
Tampering in STRIDE models means any improper modi-
ﬁcation of information. Repudiation is the ability to deny the
participation in the communication or part of it. For example,
the attacker can log into the system that does not have a log or
tracing program running, so there is no evidence to decide who
does what. Non-repudiation is to ensure that this repudiation
does not occur.
Information Disclosure means to spying the information
by attackers rather than his/her direct intention. For example,
when a web server has a crash, there will be an error message
utilized by administrators to discover the problem, but it may
also give the attacker a chance to compromise the server.
For the properties of Information Security, STRIDE model
mainly considers the followings:
• Conﬁdentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on
information access and disclosure, including means for
protecting personal privacy and proprietary information.
• Integrity: Guarding data against improper modiﬁcation
or destruction of information.
• Availability: Ensuring the timely and reliable use of and
access to information.
• Authenticity: The property of being genuine and being
able to be veriﬁed and trusted.
• Accountability/Non-repudiation: The goal that gener-
ates the requirement for actions of an entity to be traced
uniquely to that entity.
Below are the assets and objects that are critical for online
social media.
• Hardware: Personal computer, mobile phone, data store
server, etc.
• Software: Web browsing, mobile application, etc.
• Data: User information at the server.
During the security analysis, a number of threats have been
identiﬁed, which we need to protect against to ensure that the
security goals of the system are achieved.
To assess and determine the risk levels of different threats,
risks are modeled with probabilities and impacts. In this work,
both probability and impact are deﬁned in three levels (low,
medium, high).
• Low: A successful attack does not affect the functionality
of a system.
• Medium: Requires active action, but does not render the
system unable to function indeﬁnitely.
• High: Irreversible or fatal damage to the system.
We show how to categorize an attack in different probability
levels as follows:
• Low: The resources required for the attack outweigh the
gain even if the attack is successful.
• Medium: The resources required for the attack are com-
parable to the gain of a successful attack.
• High: The gain from a successful attack should outweigh
the resources needed to perform the attack.
B. Security Analysis of Facebook
Facebook introduced a privacy policy in 2009 for the ﬁrst
time, where users could select a personal privacy setting for
their personal data. However, the default option was selected
to be “Everyone”, so many users accepted the default setting
without being aware of the risks. This allowed much of the
data to become publicly available.
After receiving feedback and criticisms about privacy con-
cern, Facebook proposed a new privacy setting in 2010. There
were different levels of privacy setting options on the page
including Everyone, Friends of Friends, Friends Only for each
data category. However, it was not sufﬁcient to prevent privacy
for users. Facebook did not possess strong privacy till 2011,
where people could not reach some users’ personal data and
proﬁles without being friends.
Table II provides the threat model of Facebook. In most of
the cases, attackers make use of the Facebook infrastructure to
gather and expose the personal information of users and their
friends. In doing so the attackers are able to make them go
to malicious links, advertisements by generating fake proﬁles.
Some of such common attacks in Facebook are shown below:
• Compromised Account Attacks: A compromised ac-
count is the condition of an account in which legitimate
users lose complete or partial control over the login cre-
dentials [12]. Accounts can be compromised in different
ways, e.g., by using a phishing scam to gather user login
credentials, by utilizing cross-site scripting, and adopting
bots to harvest login credentials. Compromised accounts
can be very powerful means to spread out the malicious
contents that can deteriorate the relationship established
by the legitimate user in the past, and to communicate
the malicious contents rapidly and effectively.
• Sybil Attacks: Malicious users create several fake iden-
tities, called Sybil, for inﬂuencing their identity within a
target network [15]. After that, such malicious users send
a friend request to rest of the users of that network. When
one accepts the friend request, the malicious users will
forward the malware and spam. Normally, Sybil attacks
are found to be of two ways on Facebook. Attackers gen-
erate several fake identities to create legitimate accounts
to spread malware and spam to friends in their friend list
or form more social links to distribute malware and spam.
• Socware Attacks: For such attack type, contenders create
malware, also known as socware, in the form of events,
applications or pages capable of having links to malicious
contents. False gift vouchers, coupons, and gifts are used
as stimulants to attract victims, and then cheat them into
installing or accepting the malware [8]. Once the malware
has been installed in the system, attackers can easily
gather personal information stored by the users. On top
of that, the malware is posted on the user’s wall, which
will also spread on their friend’s proﬁle.
• Identity Clone Attacks: Malicious users, sometimes,
create similar proﬁles pretending to be the victims and
outspread malicious content into their network. To make
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

TABLE II
THREAT MODEL OF FACEBOOK.
Threat
Violated Property
Deﬁnition
Example
Spooﬁng
Authentication
Pretending to be someone else
Make fake Facebook account
Tampering
Integrity
Modify post on user’s timeline
Delete/change post and message of others
Repudiation
Non-repudiation
Claim the real user
Multiple accounts and proﬁle
Information Disclosure
Conﬁdentiality
Unauthorized party gain access to Info
Malicious links, e.g., phishing URL
Denial of Service
Availability
Service unavailable to user
Overﬂow system, shutting down system
TABLE III
THREAT MODEL OF TWITTER.
Threat
Violated Property
Deﬁnition
Example
Spooﬁng
Authentication
Pretending to be someone else
Make fake Twitter account
Tampering
Integrity
Retweet false news
Promote false news
Repudiation
Non-repudiation
Claim the real user
Multiple accounts and proﬁle
Information Disclosure
Conﬁdentiality
Unauthorized party gain access to Info
An unauthorized person composes and
sends tweets via text messages from a
phone number associated with account
Denial of Service
Availability
Service unavailable to user
Overﬂow system, shutting down system
TABLE IV
THREAT MODEL OF LINKEDIN.
Threat
Violated Property
Deﬁnition
Example
Spooﬁng
Authentication
Pretending to be someone else
Fake job offer by using fake proﬁle
Tampering
Integrity
Target potential victim
Convince users to open an email
Repudiation
Non-repudiation
Claim the real user
Multiple accounts and proﬁle
Information Disclosure
Conﬁdentiality
Unauthorized party gain access to Info
Malicious links, e.g., phishing
Denial of Service
Availability
Service unavailable to user
Overﬂow system, shutting down system
it possible, the malicious users normally ﬁrst attempt to
get a victim’s personal information, such as occupation,
name, and friends list. After collecting the information,
attackers can copy the victim’s proﬁle and sends friend
request to the victim’s friends
• Creepers Attacks: Creepers are actual users who use
online social media network functionalities in a wrong
way [8]. For example, they would send a friend request
to many unknown users and post spammy letters on their
walls. Such attacks are mainly used for advertisements.
• Cyberbullying attacks: Cyberbullying is one of the most
known and popular attacks in social network. This type
of attacks can harass victims by posting sexual remarks,
threat, repeated hurtful messages and irrelevant and dis-
gusting contents. Besides, they can plant rumours about
victims by posting awkward and embarrassing videos and
/ or photos online. According to a research study [6], 12%
of the parents complained that their children have been
cyber bullied.
• Clickjacking Attacks: For such attack type, it is also
known as user interface (UI) redressing, where an adver-
sary will trick users to click on some actionable contents,
which are actually different from what they intend to click
on. Afterwards, they can collect the personal information
from these users and send spam messages and malicious
links on their wall [17].
C. Security Analysis of Twitter
The popularity of Twitter has changed the way that users
interact with technology. Generally, the users share their data
with social network sites in a transparent way. Twitter is one of
the famous public platforms, which provides developers with
Application Programming Interface but with limited use for
multiple reasons such as data volume, user privacy expectation,
and Twitter business interests, since the platform will share
some private information with advertisers such as how users
interact with ads and which ones attract their attention. Sharing
data is very crucial for the Twitter company because it has been
proved that Twitter users interact with ads that advertisement
companies post. As a result, these companies will pay Twitter
and help it operate a free service.
Table III shows the threat model of Twitter. It is found that
Twitter may suffer from various attacks but can also be used
to intrude many users.
• Short-URLs: Due to the strict limitation on tweet length,
users will use short-Universal Resource Locators (URLs)
in tweets instead of standard URLs. The short URLs are
indeed ordinary URLs that are encoded into URLs with
the least characters, which thus best suit in tweets [18],
[19]. A normal user has very limited knowledge of the
target of the short URLs, and such users can easily be
exploited and manipulated to download and / or spread
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

malicious software without their knowledge. We have
been experiencing plenty of such attacks in the recent
times, as short URLs have increased in number along
with the explosion of short messaging for mobile users.
Attackers are able to exploit human shortcomings in vari-
ous ways with the use of shortened URLs. Making it more
difﬁcult to understand and analyse, busy users do not take
time to look into the link of the short-versioned URLs,
therefore, the underlying URLs are more probable to be
clicked. As many phishing emails are targeted to elicit
quick emotional response from the recipients warning
on negative consequences, an exhausted employee may
hastily click on such links. Shortened URLs also beneﬁt
from the fact that several employees may not normally
be aware of how a shortened URL looks like.
• Compromise and control a user account: In addition
to sending direct messages to the users, attackers can use
a compromised account to tweet to the followers. The
probability of followers and the other users linked to the
followers clicking on such ill-motivated links, in this case,
is greater than the case of tweeting to the direct user, due
to the fact that there is already a signiﬁcant degree of
trust between the users and their followers.
• Clickjacking: Clickjacking method is a very common
and widely implemented attack among the advanced self-
propagating attacks. The chance of clicking on a link is
more likely by a follower of a user than by any other non-
followers. In such attack, tweet retweets itself whenever
a user of Twitter clicks on the link.
• Indirect attack: The clickjacking attack is remodelled to
travel beyond Twitter. When the Twitter users are surﬁng
in other public websites that allow users to enter links to
other websites such as news sites or blogs. These sites
provide a malicious short-URLs, and clicking on the links
would result in a clickjacking attack when such a victim
also has a Twitter handle.
D. Security Analysis of LinkedIn
Privacy is a great concern for LinkedIn, and that is why
they have stressed upon it many times. Their main aim is to
make transparency about the data they are collecting from the
users. The privacy policy is applied on the users, who are
using their service or product. LinkedIn provides their users
an option to make a choice about the data collection, use and
sharing as described in the privacy policy. The data collected
by LinkedIn starts from creating a proﬁle or an account, which
includes user name, email address or mobile phone number
and a password. If users would like to have a premium service,
then they have to provide payment and billing information.
After the registration phase, the user moves into proﬁle setting.
A user can ﬁll in the information regarding his / her education,
experience, skills and proﬁle summary.
Table IV shows the threat model of LinkedIn. It is the same
that many attacks are threatening the security and privacy of
LinkedIn users.
• Illegitimate Contact Requests: Similar to other online
social media platforms, the act of connecting with another
LinkedIn user also leaves enough space for malicious
activities. As a matter of fact, one of the most common
tactics on LinkedIn is when a user gets a fake connection
request from another member. Such requests may take on
one of several different forms. In many cases, scammers
may mostly claim that they are romantically interested at
the recipients.
• Fake Job Offers: Users, sometimes, receive a LinkedIn
message from claiming to be a job recruiter. The spammer
then details a high-paying job and convinces the users that
the duties can be performed from anywhere with Internet
access. Such an offer lures a number of users as it sounds
too good to be true.
• Phishing: The most customary type of phishing scam in-
volves convincing people into opening emails or clicking
on a link / url that appears to have been sent from a
legitimate business or creditable source. LinkedIn hook
has been found to have been used by more than half of
social media phishing emails. LinkedIn has become the
most trusted medium to target potential victims with more
than half of all social media phishing emails using the
Microsoftowned platform as a hook. KnowBe4’s tests [3]
revealed that LinkedIn had been used in 56% of the
top phishing emails more than all other combined social
media networks. The way such scam works is that one
receives an email from someone that they might not
know in person but is a business associate that they are
connected to through LinkedIn. This kind of email would,
at the ﬁrst glance, look rather innocuous. Such emails use
professional language, and one would be asked to click
on a link that would direct them to a website, and the
URL being used here would seem more or less legitimate,
thereby, making one even less suspicious in the whole
phishing process.
IV. DISCUSSION ON PHISHING
According to the Infosecurity Magazine [4], email phishing
attacks have spiked by over 600% since the end of February
2020, as many organisations and companies started working
from home because of the COVID-19 restrictions. This work-
ing environment increased remote activities and the reliance
on email for communication, thus, creating perfect conditions
for email fraud schemes.
Criminals are taking advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic
to launch phishing attacks. Below are some typical ways:
• Zoom Users Become Targets: This is an emerging type
of phishing attack, in which intruder will send fake Zoom
video-conferencing meeting notiﬁcations. This attack is
designed to steal usernames and passwords from victims’
Zoom accounts. Phishers can use these credentials to log
into corporate video conferencing accounts, and try to
collect passwords afterwards.
• To use Covid-19 in business Email for Compromised
Account Attacks: In such attack, the phisher will send an
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

email to the person who has access to ﬁnance information
of the organization. The phisher pretended to be a real
supplier and requested for past due invoices including the
information due to the Covid-19 in new account.
• Fake registration process: Victim may get an instant
message with a link to claim for an ofﬁcial registration for
the immediate withdraw of money from the Government.
Thus, the phisher collects a victim’s information via fake
registration process.
Countermeasures. Phishing prevention can be reached by
providing an extra layer of security in the login process. The
extra layer could be a two-factor authentication scheme, which
is a process to conﬁrm the user’s identity before he or she is
granted to access an account.
For example, two-factor authentication can be performed via
Short Message Service (SMS). When the user enters username
and password, a veriﬁcation code will be delivered to the other
device. User can be granted access for login when he or she
enters the veriﬁcation code successfully. This method has been
widely adopted in current market. However, this solution is not
very usable in some cases, i.e., it requires an extra device from
the user and causes extra cost to implement.
User awareness can help in educating the users by which
they are able to identify phishing attempts. The big success
of phishing attacks is mostly due to the negligence of users.
To help reduce the phishing attacks, the awareness campaign
program is very useful and important. Currently, there is no
sufﬁcient education and awareness campaign against phishing
attacks. There are some anti-phishing methodologies such as
games and security awareness tools in the server to familiarize
threats like phishing attacks and identify malicious URLs and
other phishing scams. The embedded server training program
technique is used to teach users by sending a mock phishing
email and asking them to open the attached emails or URL.
Once the user opens the phishing contained email, they will
ﬁnd that the email contains fake information. In this way, the
mock phishing awareness campaign increases the end user’s
knowledge to protect against phishing attacks.
V. CONCLUSION
Cyber criminals are now taking advantage of social media
networks to collect personal information because users make
a lot of private information public such as location, job, email,
contact number and more. In this work, we provided a security
analysis using STRIDE model on three major social media
networks, such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. We found
that phishing attack has a high probability of risk in online
social media or using an online social media for launching
attacks as compared with other potential attacks. Especially,
criminals have taken advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic to
design particular phishing attacks, i.e., the information about
COVID-19 is included for convincing the user to click on
designed URL. In the end, we also provided and discussed
potential countermeasures to identify phishing content. This
work aims to highlight the risk and issues in current social
media networks and stimulate more defensive studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work was funded by the European Union
H2020 DataVaults project with GA Number 871755.
REFERENCES
[1] Most popular social networks worldwide as of January 2023, ranked
by number of monthly active users. https://www.statista.com/statistics/
272014/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-users/
[2] Forecast of the number of LinkedIn users in the World from 2019
to 2028. (accessed on 1 Jan 2023) https://www.statista.com/forecasts/
1147197/linkedin-users-in-the-world
[3] Knowbe4 ﬁndings: LinkedIn Accounts for More than Half of Social
Media Phishing Emails in Q2 2019. https://www.knowbe4.com/press/
linkedin-accounts-for-more-than-half-of-social-media-phishing-emails
-in-q2-2019-according-to-knowbe4-ﬁndings
[4] Covid-19 drives a phishing emails in a higher numbers under a month.
(accessed on 1 Jan 2023) https://www.infosecurity-magazine.com/news/
covid19-drive-phishing-emails-667/
[5] A. Aktypi, J.R.C. Nurse, and M. Goldsmith, “Unwinding Ariadne’s
Identity Thread: Privacy Risks with Fitness Trackers and Online Social
Networks,” in Proc. MPS@CCS, pp. 1-11, 2017.
[6] D. Bunga and O.S. Hiariej, “Cyberbullying on Children in Victimology
Perspective,” Sociological Jurisprudence Journal 2(2), pp. 1-6, 2019.
[7] J. Chen, J. He, L. Cai, and J. Pan, “Disclose More and Risk Less:
Privacy Preserving Online Social Network Data Sharing,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable Secur. Comput. 17(6), pp. 1173-1187, 2020.
[8] O. Coban, A. Inan, and S.A. Ozel, “Privacy Risk Analysis for Facebook
Users,” in Proc. SIU, pp. 1-4, 2020.
[9] N. Laleh, B. Carminati, and E. Ferrari, “Graph Based Local Risk
Estimation in Large Scale Online Social Networks,” in Proc. SmartCity,
pp. 528-535, 2015.
[10] S. Creese, M. Goldsmith, J.R.C. Nurse, and E. Phillips, “A Data-
Reachability Model for Elucidating Privacy and Security Risks Related
to the Use of Online Social Networks,” in Proc. TrustCom, pp. 1124-
1131, 2012.
[11] A.E.W. Eldewahi, A. Hassan, K. Elbadawi, and B.I.A. Barry, “The
Analysis of MATE Attack in SDN Based on STRIDE Model,” in Proc.
EIDWT, pp. 901-910, 2018.
[12] M. Egele, G. Stringhini, C. Kruegel, and G. Vigna, “Towards Detecting
Compromised Accounts on Social Networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secur. Comput. 14(4), pp. 447-460, 2017.
[13] N.A. Ghani, S. Hamid, I.A.T. Hashem, and E. Ahmed, “Social media
big data analytics: A survey,” Comput. Hum. Behav. 101: 417-428, 2019.
[14] W. Meng, W. Li, L. Jiang, and J. Zhou, “SocialAuth: Designing Touch
Behavioral Smartphone User Authentication based on Social Networking
Applications,” in Proc. IFIP SEC, pp. 180-193, 2019.
[15] Y. Sun and L. Yin, “A Security Routing Mechanism against Sybil
Attacks in Mobile Social Networks,” in Proc. APWeb Workshophs, pp.
325-332, 2014.
[16] X. Han, H. Huang, and L. Wang, “F-PAD: Private Attribute Disclosure
Risk Estimation in Online Social Networks,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
Secur. Comput. 16(6), pp. 1054-1069, 2019.
[17] U.U. Rehman, W.A. Khan, N.A. Saqib, and M. Kaleem, “On Detection
and Prevention of Clickjacking Attack for OSNs,” in Proc. FIT, pp.
160-165, 2013.
[18] N. Gupta, A. Aggarwal, and P. Kumaraguru, “bit.ly/malicious: Deep dive
into short URL based e-crime detection,” in Proc. eCrime, 14-24, 2014.
[19] D. Wang, S.B. Navathe, L. Liu, D. Irani, A. Tamersoy, and C. Pu, “Click
trafﬁc analysis of short URL spam on Twitter,” in Proc. CollaborateCom,
pp. 250-259, 2013.
[20] S. Fu and Z. Yao, “Privacy risk estimation of online social networks,”
in Proc. NaNA, pp. 1-8, 2022.
[21] P. van Schaik, J. Jansen, J.A. Onibokun, L.J. Camp, and P. Kusev,
“Security and privacy in online social networking: Risk perceptions and
precautionary behaviour,” Comput. Hum. Behav. 78, pp. 283-297, 2018.
[22] M. Yang, Y. Yu, A.K. Bandara, and B. Nuseibeh, “Adaptive Sharing for
Online Social Networks: A Trade-off Between Privacy Risk and Social
Beneﬁt,” in Proc. TrustCom, pp. 45-52, 2014.
[23] C. Tang et al., “Need for Symmetry: Addressing Privacy Risks in Online
Social Networks,” in Proc. AINA, pp. 534-541, 2011.
[24] E.Y. Chan and N.U. Saqib, “Online social networking increases ﬁnancial
risk-taking,” Comput. Hum. Behav. 51, pp. 224-231, 2015.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-052-0
ICNS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

