Impact of Gaming during Channel Zapping on 
Quality of Experience
Robert E. Kooij1,2  
1TNO (Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific 
Research) 
Delft, the Netherlands 
robert.kooij@ tno.nl 
2Fac. of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and 
Computer Science  
University of Technology Delft 
 Delft, the Netherlands 
Michiel Geijer                                                   
Earth Sciences, Faculty of Geosciences 
Utrecht University 
Utrecht, the Netherlands             
michielgeijer@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper belongs to a research program 
started in 2006, dealing with Quality of Experience (QoE) 
aspects of channel zapping. The program, which has relevance 
for the broader topics Quality of Service and Next Generation 
Networks, started with quantifying the QoE expressed as a so-
called Mean Opinion Score (MOS) for situations when a black 
screen is visible during channel zapping. Based upon the 
observation that the QoE is (possibly) increased by showing 
information while the user waits for the target channel to 
appear, the program continued with assessing the QoE in case 
advertisements are shown during channel switching. In this 
paper, we quantify the impact on QoE when offering users an 
interactive game during channel zapping. Our subjective 
experiment shows that for zapping times greater than 2.25 
seconds, offering games during zapping instead of the usual 
black screen, leads to a better QoE. For zapping times larger 
then about 3 seconds, the MOS for the ‘game’ scenario is 
larger than 3.5, indicating the onset to acceptable quality. For 
zapping times below 1 second, the MOS for the ‘game’ 
scenario is very low, indicating that it is a bad idea to show 
games in case of such short zapping times. The scenario where 
during 
zapping 
advertisements 
are 
shown 
is 
always 
outperformed by either the ‘black screen’ or ‘game’ scenario. 
For small zapping times, the ease of play is much too low. 
For instance, for a zapping time of 1 second, only 18% of the 
test subjects managed to play the game in time. For zapping 
times of 3 seconds the ease of play becomes higher than 80%. 
At zapping times of 5 seconds, the game score is as high as 
82%. 
 
Keywords - Channel Zapping; Quality of Experience; Mean 
Opinion Score; IPTV; gaming. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper belongs to a series of papers, the first of which 
was published in 2006 [1], that all deal with Quality of 
Experience (QoE) aspects of channel zapping. In the highly 
competitive market of Triple Play (i.e., the commercial 
bundling of voice, video and data on a common IP based 
network infrastructure), Service Providers, which are 
offering high quality IPTV services, need to address the QoE 
requirements of IPTV.  QoE takes into account how well a 
service meets customers goals and expectations rather than 
focusing only on the network performance.  
One of the key elements of QoE of IPTV is how quickly 
users can change between TV channels, which is called 
channel zapping. The zapping time is the total duration from 
the time that a viewer presses the channel change button, to 
the point the picture of the new channel is displayed, along 
with 
the 
corresponding 
audio. 
Minimum 
quality 
requirements for many aspects related to IPTV have been 
specified by both the ITU [2] and the DSL Forum [3]. 
However, 
in 
the 
ITU 
document 
there 
are 
no 
recommendations at all related to zapping times, while in the 
DSL forum document it is recommended to limit zapping 
time to an arbitrary maximum of 2 seconds. Additionally it is 
noticed in the document that providers should strive for 
zapping times in the order of 1 second.  
Because these quality requirements are rather vague 
Kooij et al. [1] started a research program in order to get 
insight in the relation between QoE and zapping time. In [1], 
a number of subjective tests was described, in which, during 
channel zapping, a black screen, which contained the number 
of the target channel, was visible. The QoE was expressed as 
a so-called Mean Opinion Score (MOS). The test subjects 
(21 in total) could select one of the following five opinion 
scores, motivated by the ITU-T ACR (Absolute Category 
Rating) scale, see [4]: 5: Excellent zapping quality, 4: Good 
zapping quality, 3: Fair zapping quality, 2: Poor zapping 
quality, 1: Bad zapping quality. 
 
The main result of [1] is an explicit relation between the 
user perceived QoE and the zapping time. From this relation 
it was deduced that in order to guarantee a MOS of at least 
3.5, which is considered the lower bound for acceptable 
quality of service (see [4]), we need to ascertain that the 
zapping time is less than 430 ms. Note that for MOS = 3.5 
the average user will detect a slight degradation of the 
quality of the considered service.  The requirement on the 
zapping time mentioned above is currently not met in any 
implementation of IPTV (see, for instance, [5] and [6]).  
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

In [7], new subjective experiments were described where 
the zapping took place under different conditions. These 
experiments included ‘lean backward’ zapping, that is, 
zapping while sitting on a sofa with a remote control. The 
subjects are more forgiving in this case and the requirement 
for acceptable QoE could be relaxed to 670 ms. In addition, 
[7] reports on subjective experiments where the zapping 
times were varying. It is found that the MOS rating 
decreased if zapping delay times were varying.  
The research program on QoE and zapping continued 
based on the observation that in order to increase the QoE of 
channel zapping, two approaches are possible. In the first 
approach, the actual zapping time is reduced. An example of 
this method is given by Degrande et al. [8]. They suggest to 
retain the most recent video part in a circular buffer and 
display this video until the incoming channel is ready.  
 
In the second approach, the QoE is (possibly) increased 
by showing information while the user waits for the target 
channel to appear. The displayed information could be about 
the target channel, personalized content or advertisements 
(see also [9]). Subjective tests following the second approach 
have been described in [10]. The main conclusion of [10] 
was that by showing advertisements during channel zapping, 
instead of the usual black screen, users rated the experience 
higher, at least for realistic values of the zapping time.  
 
Kooij et al. [5] extended the results of [10] in the 
following way: the number of persons that participated in the 
subjective experiments was increased from 12 to 30, the 
measurements were added that provide insight about zapping 
times for today’s digital television services, and a completely 
new section was added about how the finding of this 
research could be used to design a system for optimal 
zapping experience. This system for optimal zapping 
experience has two patents pending. 
 
The aim of this paper is to assess the QoE of channel 
zapping when, during zapping, the user is offered interactive 
content in the form of a game, instead of the usual black 
screen. To our knowledge, this paper is the first ever that 
deals with interactive content during zapping.    
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, the possible effect of gaming on IPTV perceived quality is 
analyzed and various factors that contribute to the results are 
listed. In Section III the experiment performed to quantify 
the user perception is described. In Section IV, the results 
obtained from the subjective tests are presented. Finally, 
conclusions are given in Section V. 
 
II. 
QUALITY OF  EXPERIENCE AND GAMING 
 
Using content such as advertisements or gaming during 
IPTV channel zapping is an approach that tries to increase 
the QoE while the service quality or zapping time remains 
unchanged. Obviously, not all people would be happy to see 
advertisements during zapping. People are probably more 
open to gaming during zapping because through a game 
educational or entertaining content can be presented. 
Although the business driver for advertisements seems of 
high impoprtance we anticipate that gaming during zapping 
can also boost the QoE, in two different ways. 
 
a) 
Users playing games during channel zapping, will 
not be bored with the longer zapping times. Hence the QoE 
of the users for the channels with games could increase with 
respect to the black screens. This is actually what we have 
measured in the conducted subjective experiment.  
b) 
The second consequence is that the providers might 
earn money from these games, through a similar business 
case as apps for smart phones. Therefore, they can lower the 
price of the service. Obviously, a lower price is one of the 
factors that can boost the QoE. 
 
It should be noted that the effect of games (if they were 
implemented) on QoE is not just straightforward. Rather, it 
depends on various factors, which could affect the QoE 
positively or negatively.  
a) 
The type of game: A particular user could like some 
sort of game and dislike other type of games. 
b) 
The difficulty of the game, in relation to the length 
of the zapping time. For example, if the zapping time is very 
short, then it is probably not even possible to play the game, 
hence a game in this scenario could be quite annoying. On 
the other hand, if the zapping time is very long and the game 
is too simple, users may not be challenged enough to 
appreciate the game.  
c) 
Obviously, the game that is offered to the user 
should not be exactly the same all the time. Probably it is 
best to offer different variations of the same game to the 
users. 
 
Some of the factors above could positively affect the user 
perception. However, the implementation complexity also 
increases if all these issues are to be properly addressed. The 
best approach to use these games is to select a game 
randomly from a set of  pre-rendered games stored in the 
Set-top Box (STB) when the user zaps to a different channel. 
It is recommended to use games that the user likes. Using 
pre-rendered games is important because the zap screen can 
then be displayed immediately. 
 
III. 
THE EXPERIMENT  
A. Design of the experiment 
For the TV channel zapping experiment, a HTML page 
containing two frames is implemented. Through the lower 
frame the user can switch between 5 different TV channels. 
The TV channels are implemented as Flash files in the upper 
frame of the HTML page. The TV channels contain the 
following content: a dancing girl, a cartoon, three men in a 
suit, a room service scene and a dancing man.  
Figure 1 shows the HTML page with the dancing girl 
channel being on. Although the Flash files contain audio, 
sound is switched off during the experiments. Audio might 
be added to the experiment but the synchronization problem 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

will be another cause for quality degradation. So, to assess 
the quality experienced for zapping times, we felt it is better 
to make the experiments with no sound, because otherwise 
the test subjects opinions might be biased by the 
synchronization quality. The videos within the upper frame 
are displayed in a screen of size of 550x400 pixels.  
 
 
 
Figure 1: HTML page used in the experiment 
In the experiments reported in [1] and [10], seven 
zapping times between 0 and 5 second were implemented in 
arrays in the javascript code. These zapping times were 0, 
0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 seconds. Moreover, a random 
ordering of these zapping times was implemented for each of 
the test subjects that participated in the subjective 
experiments. The number of test subjects in [1] was 21 while 
12 test subjects participated in [10]. Additional subjective 
experiments with 18 test subjects, including also the zapping 
times 3 and 4 seconds, were reported in [5].  
When the user zaps to a new channel, the page sleeps for 
a time corresponding to the implemented zapping time 
before the requested channel is displayed. During this time, 
either a black screen is shown [1], [7], or an advertisement 
[5], [10]. This paper assesses the impact of having an 
interactive game on display during channel zapping. The 
game consists of a traffic situation where the user has to 
determine whether or not it is allowed to follow the direction 
that is indicated by the arrow. The perspective of the user is 
that of the driver of the car in the bottom of the picture (see 
Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2: Example of a game situation 
The chain of events is depicted in Figure 3. All games 
situations are depicted through pictures of size 400x400 
pixels.   
 
Original channel
Game during zapping
Target channel
 
Figure 3. Showing a game during zapping 
For the experiment the zapping times were 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4 
and 5 seconds. We left out some of the original zapping 
times used in [1] and [10], in order to keep the length of the 
test sufficiently short, thus preventing fatigue of the test 
objects, and because zapping times of 0.1 and 0.2 seconds 
are presumably too short for interactive gaming.  
B. The actual experiment 
In this subsection, we describe the details of the 
subjective experiment. The test subjects consist of a total of 
21 people at TNO in Delft, the Netherlands and at the second 
author’s house in Breda, the Netherlands. The test subjects 
vary in age (17 – 57 years), gender (14 male, 7 female) and 
experience. According to [4] at least 15 observers should 
participate in subjective testing of multimedia services. They 
should not be directly involved in quality assessment as part 
of their work and should not be experienced assessors. These 
conditions are met for the group of test subjects.  
To view the channels a laptop (Core i3, 4GB RAM, 
windows XP, 1600x900 pixels screen resolution) is used as a 
TV set. The experiment that we have conducted is of ‘lean 
backward zapping’ type. That means the user will sit back in 
a chair and use the remote control to zap between the 
channels. A Sony Ericsson w660i with the Bluetooth Human 
Interface Devices (HID) protocol implemented on it, is used 
as a remote control device. The mobile phone is depicted in 
Figure 4.  
OK to drive 
the car
not OK to 
drive the car
 
Figure 4: Sony Ericsson w660i used as remote control 
 
Through the HID protocol, pressing the buttons 1 to 5 on 
the phone realize a channel switch to the corresponding 
channel on the HTML page. In order to play the game that is 
shown during zapping, the user needs to press the upper right 
button of the phone when he/she thinks it is allowable to 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

drive the car in the indicated direction. If he/she thinks it is 
NOT permitted to drive the car, the upper left button needs to 
be pressed (see also Figure 4). After the test subject has 
presses one of the two buttons, visual feedback is given by 
displaying either a “check symbol” (correct answer) or a 
“cross symbol” (incorrect answer) on top of the depicted 
traffic situation (see Figure 5). 
 
    
  (a) correct                                          (b) incorrect  
Figure 5: Feedback on user input 
  
The experiment contains two parts, the training and the 
actual experiment. The training part is intended to familiarize 
the subject with the test environment. The training starts with 
a situation requiring immediate zapping, that is, a situation 
corresponding to MOS = 5. The test subject can switch 
between channels by pressing the buttons numbered 1 to 5 
on the mobile phone.  
In the second part of the training, the test subject is 
offered a situation with very long zapping time (i.e., 5 
seconds), where during zapping a black screen is shown. 
This situation corresponds with MOS = 1. 
In the third part of the training, the test subject is offered 
the traffic game during zapping. The aim of the game is to 
determine for each offered traffic situation whether the car 
can drive in the indicated direction or not. 
 
After the test subject has switched channels a number of 
times (approximately ten times) he/she then presses the 
“stats” button (see Figure 1) to reveal the score of the games 
played by the test subject.  An alert box then appears, 
containing the statistics of the gameplay (see Figure 6). 
Note that it is possible that the number of zaps is larger 
than the sum of “number of correct answers” and “number of 
wrong answers”, namely when the test subject was too late to 
press one of the answer buttons during zapping. 
At this point, the test subject is ready to start the actual 
experiment. Below we show the literal text that is presented 
to the test subjects, who first had to do the ‘black screen’ 
scenario, and then the ‘game’ scenario. 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Statistics of the gameplay 
 
Black screen 
 
1. In this paper form, fill in your name, age, your 
experience with gaming and SMS and the date 
2. Write down in this paper form the Scenario (for “black 
screen”) you are in. You can see this in the URL in the 
Firefox browser 
3. Select “Zapping Time 1” in the drop-down list on the 
left-bottom of the screen. Experience the zapping time, 
by pressing on the buttons numbered from 1 to 5. Try to 
do a total of about 10 zaps.  
4. Write down your MOS value on the table shown on the 
form.  
5. Then, select “Zapping Time 2” in the drop-down list, 
repeat steps 3 and 4, until you have assessed all 6 
Zapping Times. 
 
Game 
 
6. Write down in the paper form the Scenario (for the 
game) you are in. You can see this in the URL in the 
Firefox browser 
7. Select “Zapping Time 1” in the drop-down list on the 
left-bottom of the screen. Experience the zapping time, 
by pressing on the buttons numbered from 1 to 5. Also 
try  to play, during the zapping, the game. Try to do a 
total of about 10 zaps. When that is done press the 
“stats” button. 
8. Write down your MOS value in the table shown on the 
form. Also write down the statistics from the alert-box.  
9. Then, select “Zapping Time 2” in the drop-down list, 
repeat steps 3 and 4, until you have assessed all 6 
Zapping Times. 
10. If you want to, you can write general comments in the 
box on the bottom of the form. 
 
The order of the six zapping times (0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
seconds) was randomized into four different orders (denoted 
by A, B, C and D). Each test subject was offered a different 
order for the ‘black screen’ scenario and the ‘game’ scenario.  
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. MOS results 
The results obtained for each zapping time are analyzed 
and averaged over the number of test subjects to obtain the 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

MOS for each zapping time. This is done for both the ‘black 
screen’ and the ‘game’ scenario, that is, the case where, 
respectively, during zapping a black screen is shown and the 
case where the game is shown. The obtained MOS scores, 
together with their 95% confidence intervals, are shown in 
Figure 7.  
QoE of Zapping (95% Confidence Interval)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Zapping Time (sec)
MOS
Black screen
Game
 
Figure 7: MOS for “black screen’ and ‘game’ 
 
The following important insights can be obtained from 
Figure 7: 
 
• 
The MOS for ‘game’ exceeds the MOS for ‘black 
screen’ for zapping times greater than about 2.25 seconds. 
This implies that the users prefer ‘game’ only when the 
zapping time is sufficiently large.  
• 
For zapping times larger then about 3 seconds the 
MOS for ‘game’ is larger than 3.5, indicating the onset to 
acceptable quality. 
• 
For zapping times below 1 second the MOS for 
‘game’ is very low, indicating that it is a bad idea to show 
games in case of such short zapping times. 
 
B. Comparison with previous results 
The ‘black screen’ experiment was conducted before, see 
[1]. The authors of [1] suggested the following model for the 
relation between zapping time (in seconds) and QoE 
(expressed in MOS), for the ‘black screen’ case: 
 
(
)
.2 65 5, }}
.1 02 ln
max{ ,1 min{
+
⋅
−
=
ZappingTime
MOS
. (1) 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Zapping Time (sec)
MOS
subjective data
model from [1]
 
Figure 8. Comparing our ‘black screen’ results with the model from [1] 
It is clear from Figure 8 that our new subjective data is 
much more optimistic than that predicted by model (1), 
especially for zapping times smaller than 4 seconds. We can 
think of three possible explanations for this. First, the 
experiment reported in [1] was ‘lean forward’, while our 
experiment was ‘lean backward’. It is known from [7] that 
this leads to higher MOS scores. Secondly, the zapping times 
offered to the test subjects in [1] were on a logarithmic scale 
(0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5 seconds) while for our experiment we 
basically used a linear scale. This possibly might lead to a 
bias in the form of lower MOS scores for small zapping 
times. Finally, the tests described in [1] were conducted in 
2006, while our tests took place in 2011. People may have 
become more accustomed to zapping times in the order of 1 
to 3 seconds in the last five years.  
In [5] and [10], we have also assessed the QoE for 
zapping in case advertisements were shown during channel 
switching. These experiments, using the same zapping times 
as in our experiment, took place in 2009, therefore we feel 
we can compare the results from [5] and [10] with our new 
results, see Figure 9. Note that the performance evaluation of 
the advertisement scenario did not take the reduction of 
user’s cost into account.    
QoE of Zapping
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
Zapping Time (sec)
MOS
Game
Black screen
Advertisement
 
Figure 9: MOS for “black screen’, ‘game’ and ‘advertisement’ 
 
We conclude from Figure 9 that the ‘advertisement’ 
scenario never performs better than both the ‘black screen’ 
and the ‘game’ scenario at the same time. Note that it was 
anticipated in [5] that there could be a regime for which the 
advertisement scenario would be preferred but this is not 
reflected in Figure 9.   
 
C. Results on ease of play and game score 
As explained in Section III.B, we have also assessed the 
ease of play and the scores of the game played during 
channel zapping. The ease of play is quantified as follows. 
For each test subject we know, for a given zapping time, the 
total number of zaps (Z) and the number of correct (C) and 
the number of incorrect answers (I). The ease of play for this 
test subject and zapping time is defined as (C+I)/Z*100%. 
The overall ease of play for this zapping time is obtained by 
averaging this quantity over all 21 test subjects. In a similar 
way the overall game score is obtained by averaging the 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

quantity C/Z*100% over all 21 test subjects. The results are 
depicted in Figure 10.  
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
Zapping Time (sec)
game score
ease of play
 
Figure 10: Ease of play and game score 
 
It is clear that for small zapping times the ease of play is 
much too low. For instance, for a zapping time of 1 second, 
only 18% managed to play the game in time. Around  
zapping times of 3 seconds the ease of play becomes higher 
than 80%. The game score curve shows an s-shape with the 
inflection point around 2.5 seconds. At zapping times of 5 
seconds the game score is as high as 82%. It is interesting to 
notice that the percentage of incorrect answers remains more 
or less constant at 18% for zapping times larger than 2 
seconds.  
D. Discussion on user comments 
In addition to evaluating the MOS and keeping their 
gaming scores, users were asked to comment on the 
subjective experiments. The following are the main 
comments of the users. 
a) 
More than 50% of the test subjects made comments 
on the positions of the “correct” and “incorrect” buttons on 
the mobile phone. As on most mobile phones the upper left 
button is green and the upper right is red, indicating some 
positive action (e.g., making a call) or negative action (e.g., 
terminating a call), they might have found it more intuitive if 
the “correct” and “incorrect” buttons would have been placed 
the other way around. A few test subjects remarked that the 
buttons on the mobile phone are too small to make the 
gameplay enjoyable. 
b) 
A number of test subjects mentioned that for small 
zapping times it becomes impossible to play the game, which 
leads to irritation. Some suggest that it is better in these cases 
to show a black screen instead of the game. Of course this is 
completely in line with the system for optimal zapping 
experience we have suggested in [5]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
From our conducted subjective experiment, it is found 
that for zapping times greater than 2.25 seconds, offering 
games during zapping instead of the usual black screen leads 
to a better QoE. For zapping times larger then about 3 
seconds, the MOS for the ‘game’ scenario is larger than 3.5, 
indicating the onset to acceptable quality. For zapping times 
below 1 second the MOS for the ‘game’ scenario is very 
low, indicating that it is a bad idea to show games in case of 
such short zapping times. The scenario where during zapping 
advertisements are shown, is always outperformed by 
showing either the ‘black screen’ or ‘game’ scenario. 
For small zapping times the ease of play is much too low. 
For instance for a zapping time of 1 second, only 18% of the 
test subjects managed to play the game in time. Around  
zapping times of 3 seconds the ease of play becomes higher 
than 80%. The game score curve shows an s-shape with the 
inflection point around 2.5 seconds. At zapping times of 5 
seconds the game score is as high as 82%. 
The results obtained in this paper are useful when 
implementing a system for optimal zapping experience, 
which is described in [5]. In the near future we want to 
implement the system in a field trial and conduct further 
subjective experiments with the system, taking into account 
longer time scales, i.e., we will assess QoE after a period of, 
for instance, 3 months. Finally, we suggest that the system 
might be adapted to function as a broader ‘System for 
Optimal Waiting Experience’. Hopefully this inspires others 
to improve the quality of experience in our day-to-day 
activities. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R.E. Kooij, O.K. Ahmed and K. Brunnström,  “Perceived Quality of 
Channel  Zapping”, Proc. of the fifth IASTED International 
Conference, Comm. Systems and Networks, Aug. 28-30, 2006, Palma 
de Mallorca, Spain, pp. 155-158. 
[2] ITU Focus group on IPTV, “Quality of Experience requirements for 
IPTV”, FG IPTV-DOC-0118, July 2007. 
[3] DSL Forum, “Triple Play Services Quality of Experience (QoE) 
Requirements 
and 
Mechanisms”, 
Technical 
Report 
TR-126, 
December 2006. 
[4] ITU-T Rec. P.910, “Subjective video quality assessment methods for 
multimedia applications”,  April 2008. 
[5] R.E. Kooij, V.B. Klos, B.E. Godana, F.P. Nicolai and O.K. Ahmed, 
“Optimising the Quality of Experience during Channel Zapping”, 
International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol 
2, no. 2&3, pp. 204-213, December 2009. 
[6] F.M.V. Ramos, J. Crowcroft, R. J. Gibbens, P. Rodriguez and I.H. 
White, “Reducing channel change delay in IPTV by predictive pre-
joining of TV channels”, Signal Processing: Image Communication, 
Volume 26, Issue 7, Pages 400-412, August 2011. 
[7] R.E. Kooij, F. Nicolai, O.K. Ahmed and K. Brunnström , “Model 
validation of channel zapping quality”, Proc. of Human Vision and 
Electronic Imaging Conf., Jan. 19-22, 2009. 
[8] N. Degrande, K.   Laevens, D.   De Vleeschauwer and  R.  Sharpe, 
“Increasing the user perceived quality for IPTV services”,   IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Vol. 46, Issue 2, Feb. 2008, pp. 94-100. 
[9] Bigband Networks, “Methods and apparatus for using delay time 
during switching events to display previously stored information 
elements”, US Patents 7237251, March 2000. 
[10] B.E. Godana, R.E. Kooij and O.K. Ahmed, “Impact of 
Advertisements during Channel Zapping on Quality of Experience”, 
Proc. of  The Fifth International Conference on Networking and 
Services, ICNS 2009, Valencia, Spain April 20-25, 2009.  
 
 
 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

