Optimizing Multicast Content Delivery over Novel Mobile Networks 
 
Tien-Thinh Nguyen 
Department of Mobile Communications 
EURECOM 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
E-mail: Tien-Thinh.Nguyen@eurecom.fr 
Christian Bonnet 
Department of Mobile Communications 
EURECOM 
Sophia Antipolis, France 
E-mail: Christian.Bonnet@eurecom.fr
 
 
Abstract—The rapid growth in mobile traffic leads to the 
current evolution trend of mobile networks towards a flat 
architecture. However, the centralized mobility management 
protocols (e.g. MIPv6, PMIPv6) are not optimized for the flat 
architecture due to their limitations e.g. complex tunnel 
management, scalability issue, etc. Hence, a novel mobility 
management has been proposed for the flat architecture, called 
distributed mobility management (DMM). IP multicast, an 
effective mechanism for traffic delivery, can be enabled in 
DMM by deploying MLD Proxy function at mobile access 
routers (MARs) with the upstream interface being configured 
to the multicast infrastructure (before mobility) or to the 
tunnel towards the mobile node’s mobility anchor (after 
mobility) (namely tunnel-based approach). In case of mobility, 
the utilization of the tunnel may result in the tunnel 
convergence problem when the multiple instances of the same 
multicast traffic converges to a MAR due to the multiple 
tunnels established with several mobility anchors (leading to 
the redundant traffic at the MARs). Compared to PMIPv6, the 
tunnel convergence problem may become much more severe, 
especially in highly mobile regime. In this paper, we propose 
some mechanisms to greatly reduce the amount of redundant 
traffic at the MARs with a minor increase of service disruption 
time compared to the tunnel-based approach.    
Keywords-Future Internet; IP multicast; multicast mobility; 
tunnel convergence problem; handover delay; Distributed 
Mobility Management.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The explosion of wireless devices like smartphones, 
tablets makes a dramatic increase in mobile traffic [1]. How 
to manage a large number of mobile terminals as well as a 
huge mobile traffic increase becomes a major challenge to 
network operators. Also, the evolution of wireless 
application and services lead to new requirements such as 
seamless 
mobility 
across 
the 
heterogeneous 
access 
technologies (session continuity, application transparency), 
consistent quality of experience and stringent delay 
constrains.  
With the evolution of wireless technology, heterogeneous 
networks provide the possibility for great capacity increase at 
a low cost. However, only increasing capacity is unable to 
address the network challenge as well as to meet the new 
service requirements. In this context, several strategies have 
been proposed for efficiently delivering the traffic such as 
traffic offloading e.g. Local IP Access (LIPA), Selected IP 
Traffic Offload (SIPTO) [2] and Content Delivery Networks 
(CDNs) mechanisms [3]. They reflect the current evolution 
trend of mobile networks - shift to a flat IP architecture to 
lower costs, reduce system latency, and decouple radio 
access and core network evolution [4].  
Still, the current IP mobility management protocols like 
Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [5], Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) [6] 
do not work perfectly with such a flat architecture due to 
their limitations e.g. complex tunnel management, poor 
performance (like non-optimal route, tunneling overhead) 
and scalability issue [4][7]). Thus, a novel approach, called 
distributed mobility management (DMM) [8][9], has been 
proposed to cope with the flat architecture and overcome the 
limitations of centralized mobility management. The idea is 
that the mobility anchors are placed closer to the user; the 
control and data plane are distributed among the network 
entities. 
In 
addition, 
mobility 
service 
is 
provided 
dynamically to the terminal/service that really needs to 
simplify the network and lower the cost. As a result, the 
DMM concept enables networks to be scaled up cost-
effectively as data increases. DMM is currently a quite hot 
topic in the IETF and 3GPP.  
In the future, multimedia will be indeed a main service as 
well as a major challenge of the networks [1]. Thus, how to 
efficiently distribute this type of traffic becomes one of the 
key questions. In this context, IP multicast which provides an 
effective mechanism for video delivery plays a very 
important role.  
Regarding the multicast over DMM environments, 
multicast mobility support can be enabled by deploying 
Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) Proxy function [10] at 
mobile access routers (MARs). When an MN starts a 
multicast session at the current MAR, it receives the 
multicast traffic from the multicast infrastructure via the 
current MAR. In case of mobility, the traffic will be 
forwarded via the tunnel from the previous to the current 
MAR. This resembles the tunnel-based approach in PMIPv6 
[11]. This scheme can be applied for both multicast source 
and listener in DMM. However, in this paper, we mainly 
focus on the multicast listener support. 
Although this simple scheme can bring multicast listener 
support into DMM environments, there are some issues e.g. 
tunnel convergence problem and sub-optimal routing, among 
others [12]. Since the objective of DMM is moving the 
mobility anchors from the core to the edge of the networks, 
the number of mobility anchors in a DMM domain 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

(anchoring MAR) will be much more than that in a PMIPv6 
domain (LMAs - in the core network). Thus, the tunnel 
convergence problem may get more serious than that in 
PMIPv6 especially in highly mobile regime. This problem 
can be eliminated by using the native multicast infrastructure 
for delivering multicast traffic (direct routing approach). 
However due to the delay related to multicast join process; it 
may cause significant service disruption (large handover 
delay and number of packet loss) during handover.  
In this paper, we propose two mechanisms which are able 
to reduce the impact of tunnel convergence problem 
(redundant traffic at MARs) with an acceptable service 
disruption time. The first proposal is a trade-off between 
direct routing and tunnel-based approach. The DMM domain 
is divided into “virtual multicast domains” (m-domains) in 
which the MARs are configured to the same upstream 
multicast router (MR). When an MN moves between MARs 
in the same m-domain, the direct routing takes place; while 
the tunnel-based approach is applied for handovers between 
MARs in different m-domains. As a result, it can 
significantly reduce the utilization of mobility tunnel for 
delivering multicast traffic, and reduce redundant traffic at 
MARs accordingly, with a minor increase of service 
disruption time compared to the tunnel-based approach. The 
second proposal uses a single multicast mobility anchor 
(MMA) for all attached listeners in a DMM domain, similar 
to [13]. This solution eliminates the redundant traffic but 
may cause a noticeable service disruption during handover 
when considering a large domain.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related work on the mobility management and 
multicast mobility. In section III, the solutions including 
different approaches are introduced. Section IV provides 
performance analysis in terms of redundant traffic and 
service disruption time. Section V shows numerical results 
taking into account the impact of different factors. 
Eventually, section VI concludes the paper and provides 
perspectives for the future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) 
Due to the lack of DMM standard, in this paper, a generic 
approach considers that a DMM domain consists of the 
MARs which implement the functionality of a plain access 
router, a mobile access gateway (MAG), and a local mobility 
anchor (LMA) [9][14]. In a DMM domain, an MN gets a 
different set of IP addresses when changing its point of 
attachment. In case of mobility, the MN’s flows are anchored 
(if necessary) at the MAR in which the using MN’s prefix is 
allocated. Hence, the packets can be redirected via the tunnel 
from the previous to the current MAR. Distributed mobility 
management can be applied fully where both data and 
control plans are distributed; or partially where the central 
mobility anchor is still present, but for control plane only. 
B. Multicast Mobility 
Multicast support for mobile listener can be enabled 
within a PMIPv6 domain by deploying MLD Proxy function 
at MAGs while LMA provides multicast router or MLD 
Proxy function. In this scenario, the upstream interface of an 
MLD Proxy instance at MAG is configured to the tunnel 
towards the corresponding mobile node’s LMA (called 
tunnel-based solution) [11]. The presence of the tunnel raises 
the issues of tunneling overhead, non-optimal route and 
tunnel convergence problem. Another possibility for 
multicast support is the direct routing approach [13] that 
takes advantage of the native multicast infrastructure for 
delivering 
multicast 
traffic, 
thus 
avoiding 
tunnel 
convergence problem. Yet, this approach may require the 
multicast tree reconstruction during handover, which may 
result in a significant service disruption.  
Regarding multicast in DMM environments, there is no 
detailed solution for multicast support, since the DMM is 
still in its infancy. In [15], the authors provide different use 
cases for IP multicast support as well as mention about the 
issues when IP multicast is applied in DMM paradigm. Two 
scenarios are considered regarding the multicast functionality 
deployed in the MAR: MLD Proxy or multicast router.   
In the first scenario, the direct routing approach is used 
for new multicast sessions while the tunnel-based is used for 
the sessions after mobility (handoff sessions). When an MN 
initiates a multicast session at the current MAR, the multicast 
traffic will be delivered from the multicast infrastructure to 
the MAR. Thus, the upstream interface of an MLD Proxy 
instance at MAR is configured towards the multicast 
infrastructure. Once the MN moves to a new MAR (nMAR), 
an MLD Proxy instance at the nMAR adds the downstream 
interface to the MN and configures its upstream interface to 
the bi-directional tunnel towards the previous MAR 
(pMAR). Then, the multicast traffic is routed from the 
pMAR to the nMAR. It is noted that the tunnel can be 
dynamically created or pre-established for sharing between 
MNs as similar as in PMIPv6 [6].      
Nevertheless, this scheme does not address any specific 
optimizations and performances issues such as tunnel 
convergence, sub-optimal routing, and service disruption. In 
particular, the tunnel convergence problem becomes a severe 
issue since the number of mobility anchors in a DMM 
domain is supposed to be increased. Also, tunneling 
encapsulations impact the overall network performance and 
incur delays in multicast packet delivery [14]. 
In the second scenario, the multicast router function is 
deployed at all MARs that allows them to select the 
upstream multicast router based on multicast routing 
information and/or network management criteria. Thus, the 
tunnel convergence problem and sub-optimal routing are 
avoided. However, due to its implementation or operational 
costs, operators may not want to support multicast routing on 
MAR. For that reason, in this paper we focus on the case 
where MAR acts as an MLD Proxy.  
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE SOLUTIONS 
As described in the previous section, in DMM 
environments, the tunnel convergence problem becomes 
more severe compared to that in PMIPv6 especially in highly 
mobile environment. In this paper, we propose two solutions 
to address this problem taking into account the service 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

disruption time. Both solutions are considered in two 
schemes: fully and partially distributed.  
 
Optimizing multicast content delivery solution (in 
short OMCD): Similar to PMIPv6, there are two 
possible approaches for multicast mobility support in 
DMM environments: direct routing and tunnel-
based. The direct routing can helps avoid the 
limitations of the tunnel-based approach (e.g. tunnel 
convergence problem, tunnel overhead and sub-
optimal routing) but can cause significant service 
disruption time. Thus, we propose a hybrid solution: 
direct routing for handoffs inside an m-domain, 
tunnel-based for handoffs between m-domains. This 
solution can bring some benefits like reducing tunnel 
convergence 
problem 
and 
tunnel 
overhead 
(compared 
to 
tunnel-based 
approach); 
and 
decreasing service disruption time (compared to 
direct routing approach).   
 
Multicast Mobility Anchor in DMM (MMA-DMM): 
A network entity called multicast mobility anchor 
(MMA) is introduced to provide multicast service 
access to all attached listeners in a DMM domain, 
similar to [13]. This simple method helps to avoid 
the tunnel convergence problem but may result in a 
significant service disruption during handover.   
A. Optimizing multicast content delivery (OMCD) 
The DMM domain is divided into m-domains in which 
the MARs have the same upper MR. When an MN moves 
between MARs in the same m-domain, the direct routing 
approach is applied. Otherwise, the tunnel-based takes place 
(for handoff between m-domains). It should be noted that the 
using of the mobility tunnel for delivering multicast traffic is 
temporary and it is kept till the new MAR starts receiving 
packets from the multicast infrastructure.  
The decision to apply which approaches will be based on 
the comparison between the addresses of the upstream 
multicast router (UMRA) of the MARs (pMAR, nMAR). In 
partially distributed scheme, the decision will be made by a 
Multicast Mobility Control (MMC) which acts as a mobility 
signaling relay [9]. The address of multicast upstream router 
of all MARs needs to be stored at MMC. It can be done by a 
static configuration or during Proxy Binding Update (PBU) / 
Proxy 
Binding 
Acknowledgement 
(PBA) 
messages 
exchanging between MARs and MMC (PBU/PBA need to 
be extended to convey the address of the MAR’s upstream 
MR). In fully distributed scheme, the nMAR which deploys 
an enhanced function called Mobility Decision Function 
(MDF) can make the decision.   
The solution is described in Fig 1. In this figure, MAR1 
and MAR2 belong to the m-domain 1 (with the common 
upstream multicast router MR1); while MAR3 and MAR4 
belong to the m-domain 2 (MR2’s m-domain). A listener 
(MN1) subscribes to a multicast channel (S, G) at MAR1 and 
latter moves from MAR1 to other MARs. The operations of 
the solution are briefly described as follows: 
 
Step1: When the MN1 starts a multicast session at 
MAR1, the multicast traffic is routed directly from 
the native multicast infrastructure to MAR1 
 
Figure 1. Demonstration of OMCD solution. 
(following the route S-MR1-MAR1-MN1). 
 
Step2: The MN1 moves to MAR2 (handoff inside an 
m-domain). Thus, direct routing scheme is applied. 
The MAR2 configures its upstream interface to the 
common MR in its m-domain (MR1) and receives 
the multicast traffic from this MR (S-MR1-MAR2-
MN1).  
 
Step 3: Then, the MN1 moves to MAR3 which 
belongs to the m-domain 2. First, MAR3 configures 
its upstream interface to MAR2 and receives 
multicast traffic for (S, G) from MAR2 (S-MR1-
MAR2-MAR3-MN1). Then, MAR3 sends an 
aggregated MLD Report to its default MR (MR2) to 
get the traffic from the multicast infrastructure (S-
MR2-MAR3-MN1). Once MAR3 receives multicast 
packet from MR2, it sends a MLD report to MAR2 
to discontinue receiving multicast traffic from the 
tunnel between them (MAR2-MAR3). These 
operations of MAR3 can be done by using a MLD 
Proxy with multiple upstream interfaces [16].  
 
Step 4: Again, when the MN moves inside an m-
domain from MAR3 to MAR4, the direct routing 
scheme takes place to deliver the multicast traffic 
from the native multicast infrastructure to MAR4 (S-
MR2-MAR4-MN1).      
1) Partially distributed scheme 
Once an MN attaches to a MAR, it acquires an IP address 
issued from the prefix (Pref1) which is allocated by the 
current MAR. It then can use this address to initiate new 
multicast sessions. The current MAR will receive multicast 
traffic from the multicast infrastructure then forwards them 
to the MN as described in the previous section.  
When the MN moves to a new MAR (nMAR), the 
nMAR allocates a new prefix (Pref2) for the MN and sends a 
PBU to the MMC (see Fig. 2, Fig. 3). After checking its 
database, the MMC forwards it to the previous MAR 
(pMAR) which then replies by a PBA. After checking the 
UMRAs of pMAR and nMAR, the MMC send a PBA to the 
nMAR which consists of pMAR’s address and an addition 
(M) flag. The flag M is set to 1 if two UMRAs are the same,  
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 2. Handover inside an m-domain (partially distributed scheme). 
 
Figure 3. Handover between m-domains (partially distributed scheme). 
otherwise 0. Then a tunnel is established between two MARs 
to route the unicast traffic from/to MN1 using Pref1. 
For multicast service, after obtaining the MN multicast 
subscription information by using a regular MLD 
Query/Report procedure, and checking the M flag, the 
nMAR will decide to configure its upstream interface 
towards the pMAR or the multicast infrastructure. If the flag 
M is equal to 1, the nMAR then sends an aggregated MLD 
Report to the upper MR, otherwise to the pMAR (M=0), in 
order to subscribe to the necessary multicast groups on 
behalf of the MN. In case two MARs belong to different m-
domains (M=0), the nMAR also sends an aggregated MLD 
Report to the MR in the multicast infrastructure to get 
multicast traffic from this MR (direct routing approach). 
Thus, the using of the tunnel between the nMAR and the 
previous one is temporary and it will be kept till the nMAR 
starts 
receiving 
packet 
from 
the 
native 
multicast 
infrastructure. Upon receiving multicast packets, the nMAR 
will check the sequence number of the packet from the 
tunnel. If there is any missing packet, it will wait till the 
packet is forwarded from the pMAR. It then requests to leave 
the multicast groups from the pMAR.   
2) Fully distributed scheme 
In fully distributed scheme, it is supposed that the nMAR 
knows the address of the previous one. There are several 
methods to get this address such as using a layer 2 handover 
infrastructure (e.g. IEEE 802.21), or using a distributed 
LMA-discovery mechanism. The exact process to get this 
address is out of scope of this paper.  
Similar to partially distributed scheme, when an MN 
initiates a new multicast session, the multicast traffic is 
transmitted from the native multicast infrastructure to the 
MN (direct routing approach). When the MN moves to a new 
MAR (nMAR), the nMAR sends a PBU message to the 
previous one (pMAR). The pMAR then replies by a PBA 
that contains its UMRA. Upon receiving the PBA and 
checking its UMRA, the nMAR will make a decision to 
configure its upstream interface to the tunnel towards the 
pMAR; or towards the multicast infrastructure (MR2) as 
described in the previous section (see Fig. 4, Fig .5).    
B. Multicast Mobility Anchor in DMM (MMA-DMM) 
Serving as a mobility anchor for multicast traffic for all 
MARs in a DMM domain, the MMA can act as an additional 
MLD Proxy or a multicast router [13]. In this scenario, an 
MLD Proxy instance is deployed at each MAR with the 
upstream interface being configured to the MMA. The 
operations for both partially and fully distributed scheme are 
the same, and as follows.  
When an MN starts a new multicast session, the current 
MAR sends an aggregated MLD Report to the MMA which 
then subscribes to the multicast group (if necessary) and 
forwards multicast traffic to the MAR. When the MN moves 
to nMAR, the similar processes are executed allowing the 
nMAR to receive multicast traffic from the MMA.  
Since the MARs only receives the multicast traffic from 
the MMA, the tunnel convergence problem is avoided. 
However, the requirement of DMM for the distributed 
deployment (traffic does not need to traverse central 
deployed mobility anchors) cannot be respected [17]. Again, 
it raises the problem of single point of failure and sub-
optimal routing. These problems can be slightly reduced by 
deploying several MMAs in which each MMA serves one or 
several multicast channels.  
 
Figure 4. Handover inside an m-domain (fully distributed scheme). 
 
Figure 5. Handover between m-domains (fully distributed scheme). 
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
A. Comparison of Tunnel convergence problem 
To measure the solutions proposed, it is assumed that an 
MN starts at least one new multicast session when it moves 
to a new MAR.  
If the direct routing approach is used for both new and 
handoff sessions, the multicast traffic is always routed from 
the multicast infrastructure to the MAR. As a result, the 
tunnel convergence problem is eliminated. Similarly, the 
MMA-DMM solution also helps to avoid the tunnel 
convergence problem. In this section, we compare the 
number of tunnels established for multicast traffic between 
one MAR to the others or to the multicast infrastructure for 
the same multicast group (namely Nt) in case of tunnel-based 
approach (TB) and OMCD solution via the ratio between 
them (ϴ). ϴ is calculated as ϴ = Nt (OMCD) / Nt (TB). Thus ϴ 
can be used to illustrate how efficient OMCD is, compared 
to tunnel-based solution in terms of reducing number of 
redundant traffic (tunnel convergence problem).  
If the tunnel-based approach is used for handoff 
sessions, each time the MN moves to a new MAR, a new 
mobility tunnel will be established between this MAR and 
the previous one to redirect the multicast traffic to the 
current location of the MN. Consequently, the number of 
tunnels established (multicast tunnel) is proportional to the 
number of handoffs between MARs (proportion is α). Also, 
the number of multicast tunnels established in OMCD 
solution is proportional to the number of “virtual handoffs” 
between m-domains. Let ETB, EOMCD denote the expected 
number of handoffs between MARs and between m-
domains, respectively. Each m-domain coverage area is 
supposed to be circular with n subnets (n MARs). Let m 
denote the number of MARs in the DMM domain. Then we 
have: 
 
Nt (TB) = α ETB / m,  
(1) 
 
Nt (OMCD) = α EOMCD / m.   
(2) 
According to the [18], EOMCD = ETB / √n. Then we 
obtain: 
 
ϴ = 1 / √n.  
(3) 
B. Comparison of Service disruption time 
A service disruption time analysis has been done in [19] 
taking into account the different schemes (fully and partially 
distributed; reactive and proactive handover). However, 
only tunnel-based approach is considered. In this section, 
three approaches - tunnel-based (TB), MMA-DMM and 
OMCD are considered for both partially distributed (PD) 
and fully distributed scheme (FD).  
Fig. 6 shows a reference topology for performance 
analysis. The delay between the entities is defined as 
follows: 
 
twl: the delay between the MN and access router 
(AR) (wireless connection).  
 
tam: the delay between the AR and MAR. 
 
tmm: the delay between two MARs. 
 
tmc: the delay between the MAR and MMC. 
 
tma: the delay between the MAR and MMA. 
 
Figure 6. Reference topology for performance analysis. 
 
tmr: the delay between the MAR and its upstream 
multicast router. 
Similar to [19] the service disruption time is studied 
based on a well-known factor, called session-to-mobility 
ratio (SMR) that represents the relative ratio of session 
arrival rate to the user mobility rate. It is assumed that the 
subnet residence time (MAR subnet) and multicast session 
duration follow an exponential distribution with parameter η 
and μ, respectively. Hence, SMR is defined as ρ = η / μ [18]. 
Since each m-domain coverage area is supposed to be 
circular with n subnets (n MARs), the handoff probability 
between MARs in the same m-domain and between MARs 
in different m-domains are defined as ρMAR = 1 / (1+ρ) and 
ρMR = 1 / (1+ρ√n), respectively as in the literature [18]. 
The average service disruption time for handoff between 
MARs is calculated as T = D * ρMAR where D is the service 
disruption time. Let tL2 denote the Layer 2 handover delay. 
Assuming that the delay associated with the processing of 
the messages in the network entities (e.g. time for PBU 
processing and updating binding cache in pMAR) is 
included in the total value of each variable. Then the service 
disruption time is given detailed as: 
 
DTB-PD = tL2 + 3tam + 3twl + 4tmc + 2tmm,  
(4) 
 
DTB-FD = tL2 + 3tam + 3twl + 4tmm,  
(5) 
 
DMMA-PD = tL2 + 3tam + 3twl + 4tmc + 2tma,   
(6) 
 
DMMA-FD = tL2 + 3tam +3twl + 2tmm + 2tma.   
(7) 
In the direct routing approach (DR), the nMAR’s 
upstream MR needs to join and get multicast traffic from a 
multicast router in the multicast infrastructure that already 
had multicast forwarding states for this group (called 
common multicast router or CMR). Thus, an additional delay 
is taken into account: 2tmi. The service disruption time in the 
direct routing approach is calculated as follows: 
 
DDR-PD = tL2 +3tam + 3twl + 4tmc + 2tmr + 2tmi,  
(8) 
 
DDR-FD = tL2 + 3tam + 3twl + 2tmm + 2tmr + 2tmi.  
(9) 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

When the MN performs handoffs inside an m-domain, 
the MR of this m-domain has already subscribed to the 
multicast group (the MR and CMR located at the same 
entity), thus tmi = 0. We obtain the value of delay for direct 
routing approach when the MN moves inside an m-domain 
in case of partially and fully distributed scheme, called D*
DR-
PD, D*
DR-FD respectively.  
Since in OMCD solution, the direct routing approach is 
applied when an MN performs handoffs inside an m-domain 
while tunnel-based takes place for inter m-domain handover. 
Thus, the average service disruption time is calculated as: 
 
TOMCD-PD = (ρMAR – ρMR) D*
DR-PD + ρMR DTB-PD,   (10) 
 
TOMCD-FD = (ρMAR – ρMR) D*
DR-FD + ρMR DTB-FD.  (11) 
C. Comparison of End-to-End delay 
In the direct routing approach, the end-to-end delay is 
calculated as De (DR) = tS, MAR + tMAR, MN. The delay between 
MN and MARs are supposed to be the same (tMN, pMAR = tMN, 
nMAR). If the tunnel-based approach is used, after handover, 
there is an additional delay compared to the direct routing 
approach: tS,pMAR – tS,nMAR + tpMAR, nMAR. With a large delay 
between two MARs (tunnel delay), the end-to-end delay is 
significantly increased. In average, the end-to-end delay of 
the tunnel-based approach is increased tMAR-MAR that is the 
average delay between two MARs compared to that of the 
direct routing.  
In the MMA-DMM solution, the end-to-end delay 
depends on the position of MMA. In a significant large 
domain, it may be much higher than that of the direct routing 
approach. For the OMCD solution, the using the tunnel 
pMAR-nMAR is temporary, thus, in average, the end-to-end 
delay is almost the same as in the direct routing approach. 
V. 
NUMERICAL RESULTS 
This section presents the numerical results based on the 
analysis given in the previous section. The default parameter 
values for the analysis are introduced in TABLE I, in which 
some parameters are taken from [19]. 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS FOR PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
Parameters 
Values 
Parameters 
Values 
Parameters 
Values 
tL2 
100ms 
twl 
5ms 
tam 
2ms 
tmm 
2ms 
tmc 
3ms 
tmr 
5ms 
tma 
20ms 
tmi 
0ms 
n 
32 
Fig. 7 shows how efficient OMCD is in comparison with 
the tunnel-based solution in terms of reducing number of 
redundant traffic at MARs (tunnel convergence problem). 
As n increases, the amount of redundant traffic decreases. 
When all MARs in a DMM domain belong to only one m-
domain (n = m), there is no redundant traffic at MARs 
(OMCD becomes MMA-DMM solution).  
The average service disruption time as a function of 
SMR (ρ) is illustrated in Fig. 8, when the number of MARs  
 
 
Figure 7. Ratio between number of redundant traffic in the OMCD solution 
and in the tunnel-based approach (ϴ).  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
TB_PD
TB FD
MMA PD
MMA FD
OMCD_PD
OMCD_FD
Average service disruption time (ms)
Session to mobility (ρ)
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
 
Figure 8. Average service disruption time as a function of SMR (ρ). 
in an m-domain is fixed to 32. The service disruption time 
of MMA-DMM solution is definitely higher than that of the 
others. Although the service disruption time of OMCD 
solution is a bit higher than that of tunnel-based approach, 
the difference between them is negligible. 
Now, the service disruption is considered when the 
number of MARs in an m-domain (n) is varied. Since the 
delay between two nodes depends on the bandwidth, the 
propagation delay and the distance between them, for 
simplicity, we suppose that the delay is proportional to the 
distance (proportion is τ). It is assumed that the architecture 
of an m-domain is hierarchically formed as a binary tree 
with a dmr-layer [20]. Therefore, tmr is calculated as tmr = τ 
log2 (n). It is noted that when n is equal to number of MARs 
in the network (n = m), OMCD becomes MMA-DMM 
solution. Fig .9 describes the average service disruption time 
as a function of number of MARs in an m-domain when ρ = 
0.1 and τ = 2. The average service disruption time in the 
OMCD solution is slightly increased when the number of 
MARs is increased as a result of the trade-off with the 
decreased of the redundant multicast traffic.  
Regarding the tunnel delay impact, the value for tmm is 
varied over a range from 0.1 to 30ms. In Fig .10, we can see 
how the different solutions are dependent on the mobility  
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 9. Average service disruption time as a function of n. 
 
Figure 10. Tunnel delay effect. 
tunnel. As tmm increases, the average service disruption time 
for all approaches (except MMA_PD) increases. It is worth 
noting that if the tunnel delay is larger than a specific value, 
the OMCD becomes better than the tunnel-based solution. 
The MMA-DMM becomes the best solution in terms of 
service disruption time if the tunnel delay continues 
increasing. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed two solutions to address the 
tunnel convergence problem as a result of multicast listener 
mobility over DMM environments. The first solution helps 
to greatly reduce the number of redundant traffic caused by 
the tunnel convergence problem with a minor increase of 
service disruption time compared to the tunnel-based 
approach. The second one uses a network entity (or several) 
serving multicast service for all attached listeners in a DMM 
domain. It is an easy way to solve the tunnel convergence 
problem but may cause a significant service disruption.  
In the future, the multicast source mobility will be 
considered in DMM environments. Also, the simulations 
will be made based on the Network Simulator NS-3 and a 
DMM implementation (extended version of OAI PMIP 
[21]) to better evaluate the performance of different 
approaches.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Community Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7-ICT-2009-5) under grant agreement n. 
258053 (MEDIEVAL project). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Cisco White Paper, "Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global 
Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2011-2016", February 
2012. 
[2] 3GPP TR 23.829, "Local IP Access and Selected IP Traffic 
Offload (LIPA-SIPTO)", Release 10, Mars 2011. 
[3] R. Costa, T. Melia, D. Munaretto, and M. Zorzi, "When 
Mobile Networks Meet Content Delivery Networks: 
Challenges and Opportunities", MobiArch, August 2012. 
[4] H. Chan. Yokota, J. Xie, P. Seite, and D. Liu, "Distributed 
and Dynamic Mobility Management in Mobile Internet: 
Current Approaches and Issues", Journal of Communications, 
Vol.6, No.1, February 2011. 
[5] C. Perkins, D. Johnson, and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support in 
IPv6", RFC 3775, July 2011. 
[6] S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and 
B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008. 
[7] H. Chan (Ed.), "Problem Statement for Distributed and 
Dynamic Mobility Management", IETF-Draft (work-in-
progress), October 2011.  
[8] H. Yokota, "Use case scenarios for Distributed Mobility 
Management", IETF-Draft (work-in-progress), September 
2010. 
[9] CJ. Bernardos, A. de la Oliva, F. Giust, T. Melia, and R. 
Costa, "A PMIPv6-based solution for Distributed Mobility 
Management", IETF Draft (work-in-progress), March 2012. 
[10] B. Fenner, H. He, B. Haberman, and H. Sandick, "Internet 
Group Management Protocol (IGMP) /Multicast Listener 
Discovery (MLD)-Based Multicast Forwarding (IGMP/MLD 
Proxying)", RFC 4605, August 2006. 
[11] T. Schmidt, M. Waehlisch, and S. Krishnan, "Base 
Deployment for Multicast Listener Support in PMIPv6 
Domains", RFC 6224, April 2011.  
[12] I. Romdhani, M. Kellil, H. Lach, A. Bouabdallah, and H. 
Bettahar, "IP Mobile Multicast: Challenges and Solutions", 
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 
18-41, 2004. 
[13] JC. Zuniga, LM. Contreras, CJ. Bernardos, S. Jeon, and Y. 
Kim, "Multicast Mobility Routing Optimizations for Proxy 
Mobile IPv6", IETF Draft (work-in-progress), March 2012.  
[14] P. Seite and P. Bertin, "Distributed Mobility Anchoring", 
IETF Draft (work-in-progress), July 2012. 
[15] S. Figueiredo, S. Jeon, and R. L. Aguiar, "IP Multicast Use 
Case Analysis for PMIPv6.based Distributed Mobility 
Management", July 16, 2012. 
[16] H. Asaeda and S. Jeon, "Multiple Upstream Interfaces 
Support for IGMP/MLD Proxy", IETF Draft (work-in-
progress), October 2012. 
[17] H. Chan (Ed.), "Requirements for Distributed Mobility 
Management", IETF Draft (work-in-progress), September 
2012. 
[18] C. Makaya and S. Pierre, "An Analytical Framework for 
Performance Evaluation of IPv6-Based Mobility Management 
Protocols", IEEE Transaction on Wireless Communications, 
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 972-983, March 2008. 
[19] S. Figueiredo, S. Jeon, and R. Aguiar, "Use-cases Analysis for 
Multicast Listener Support in Network-based Distributed 
Mobility Management", PIMRC, September 2012. 
[20] Y. Min-hua, Y. Lv-yun, L.Yu, and Z. Hui-min, "The 
implementation of Multicast in Mobile IP", WCNC, March 
2003. 
[21] OAI PMIP, http://www.openairinterface.org/openairinterface-
proxy-mobile-ipv6-oai-pmipv6.  
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

