Toward a semantic based signage digital system:
Mediactif
Caroline Collet
PERTIMM
Asni`eres, France
Email: caroline.collet@pertimm.com
Corinne Berland
ESIEE-Paris
ISYS Department
Noisy le Grand, France
Email: corinne.berland@esiee.fr
Samuel Ben Hamou
Thierry Simonnet
ESIEE-Paris
R&D Department
Noisy le Grand, France
Email: {samuel.benhamou, thierry.simonnet}@esiee.fr
Abstract—Digital signage systems distribute all kinds of infor-
mation to speciﬁc locations, including retail stores, public areas
and transportations. Thanks to the massive adoption of displays
and wide application of wireless networks, digital signage can
deliver targeted messages designed to accurately reach the passing
audience and eventually inﬂuence customers. The aim of the
MEDIACTIF project is to develop a new digital signage concept,
using both human trafﬁc modelling and compartmental behavior
based on interests. The major issue we are facing as of now is
that crowd motion has extensively been studied on particuliar test
cases, on both macroscopic and microscopic levels, but it is lacking
considerable social and personal inputs, which are signiﬁcant for
each site and scenario.
Keywords–digital signage; real-time; network; sensors.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The MEDIACTIF Project [1] has been started a year ago
to propose solutions to different problems:
•
Reducing the stress of fair visitors or airports clients
by reducing crowd congestions and increasing the
pedestrian ﬂows.
•
Giving relevant information to users and the opera-
tions team in real time.
•
Offering a centralized system that may adapt signage
to any situation.
•
Increase security levels with adaptive signage (redirect
pedestrians easily in case of emergency situations)
•
Reducing global waste of both printed signage ma-
terials, but also aiming at a massive drop in the
consumption of high toxicity materials like inks.
Partners on this project have different ﬁelds of expertise and
some of them are facing day to day issues regarding their ﬁxed
or dynamic signage impact over people behaviors. They would
like to efﬁciently inform clients or simply redirect them to a
speciﬁc location.
The MEDIACTIF Project aims not only to display different
contents on screens, but also to integrate multiple sensors in
the processing loop. This would allow for signage adaptation
depending, for example, on:
•
crowd densities
•
personal preferences
•
commercial factors of interest
•
speciﬁc or recurrent events
•
previously computed models and statistics
These models should be driven by the analysis of previous
sessions (when available) and will be enhanced with the
sensors live input. To reach this aim, Mediactif system uses
different kinds of sensors, a model engine and semantic tools.
II.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
MEDIACTIF will be an adaptive and centralized system.
All relevant data will ﬁrst be collected by a speciﬁc module
and will serve to compute crowd models. These will be used
for crowd trafﬁc prediction. They will act as the base module
for all corporate models like airports and event organizers. It
should also allow mobile services (free or not) for visitors via
apps or web services. According to the state of the art regula-
tions, it has to follow network standards to pilot existing digital
signage systems and to communicate with its own devices. The
back-ofﬁce architecture is organized around communication,
events and sensors management. For a fair, or for an airport
terminal, it is possible to deﬁne basic events or rules (holidays,
week-end, plane arrivals and departures) and associate, to each
of them, ﬁxed plans to anticipate crowd variations. Using key
sensors values, it is possible to manage adaptive modes (last
minute gate changes, system failure, human weaknesses, etc.).
One of the key rules will be to immediately handle a crowd
increase, but awaiting stabilization for a decrease.
III.
SENSORS
Sensors, in MEDIACTIF, are to give relevant information
concerning crowd observation. When dealing with human
sensing, we can enumerate ﬁve different objectives: presence
detection, counting, location, tracking an identiﬁcation [2]. In
the case of non instrumented people, for presence detection,
simple binary sensors can be used : e.g., passive infrared (PIR),
pressure sensitive tiles, electric ﬁeld sensors and vibration sen-
sors. Among the limitations of these sensors, we can highlight
for the PIR sensor the fact that it can’t detect an immobile
person. Pressure sensitive tiles can’t enable the distinction of
two close persons (50 cm)[3] and vibration sensors are very
sensitive to noise. Other non instrumented sensors, based on
signal propagation, can also be used for our project: radio
signals, acoustic wave, laser. More precisely, Radar, sonar and
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

ladar are used, according to either the attenuation of the signal
or the propagation time of the signal, to reconstruct an image.
Ultra-wide Band (UWB) can be used for detection and local-
ization [4], and in the case of radio propagation, the measure
of the doppler effect is a mean to obtain movement detection.
Camera is, of course, an appropriate solution for detection,
identiﬁcation, tracking, counting and people queue estimation,
with appropriate signal processing algorithms [5][6]. For our
project, the instrumented approaches we can use are either a
device to device approach, with speciﬁc application developed
on mobile phones, or the scanning of radio signals in the
environment, such as WIFI signal [7]. In the case of device
to device approach, the localization can be as precise as
20 cm with time of arrival (TOA) and time difference of
arrival (TDOA) principles [8]. In the context of MEDIACTIF,
the choose of the sensors will depend on the possibility to
use instrumented or non instrumented systems. The more
appropriate instrumented solution is the use of localization
based on TOA/TDOA, coupled with area sensing. If we have
to choose non instrumented solutions, the best solution would
be the use of camera, coupled with dopplers sensors. In term
of price, the solution with the lowest cost is the use of binary
sensors.
IV.
CROWD ANALYSIS AND MODELS
The major issue in handling pedestrians is to deﬁne
accurate models valid for a wide range of topologies and
ﬂow densities. Models should also be realistic, robust against
incomplete data, and of course computationally manageable.
Pedestrian dynamics share some similarities with ﬂuids, and
it is not surprising that the ﬁrst models of crowds were
inspired by hydrodynamics or kinetics of gases. The main
idea is to consider that the movements of a pedestrian in
the crowd are similar to movements of a particle in a gas.
Based on this assumption, it is possible to make use of tools
from Newtonian mechanics to describe the behavior of a
pedestrian by means of attractive and repulsive forces. The
pedestrian is attracted toward a destination point, but at the
same time repulsed by other pedestrians. Henderson found as
early as 1971, from measurements of motion in crowds, a good
agreement of the velocity distribution functions with Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution [9]. Social forces have been introduced
by Helbing in a microscopic model [10] based on the idea that
pedestrians have different perceptions about intimate/personal
and social space, which leads to repulsive forces between
persons. Cellular automata [11], [12], [13], [14] are another
important class of models that are discrete in space and time.
Most of these models represent pedestrians by particles that
can move to one of the neighboring cells based on transition
probabilities which are determined by the desired direction of
motion, interactions with other pedestrians, and interactions
with the infrastructure (walls, doors, etc.).
A. Rejected models
However, unlike Newtonian particles, persons have a free
will and may want to avoid jams by giving up their preferred
path when approaching a crowded area to ﬁnd a new path. To
take into account such strategies, microscopic models are to
be extended well above the present state of the art. Stochastic
behavioral rules may lead to potential realistic representations
of complex systems like pedestrian crowds, however, parame-
terization and calibration of such models may remain elusive.
The aim of the MEDIACTIF project is to have an enhanced
digital signage system. This implies that all signage could be
updated depending on crowd behavior, external events... The
key point is modeling the crowd behavior, using some key
rules. That’s why some models are not relevant for the project
purposes:
•
Particle mechanics based models : all pedestrians
interact between themselves as particles. This model
subset uses a collection of global rules. The problem is
that pedestrians are not particles. To describe precisely
the movements of a pedestrian with Newtonian forces,
one usually needs pretty sophisticated equations of
motion, which are hard to calibrate. Moreover, the
movements of pedestrians during computer simula-
tions look pretty artiﬁcial and sometimes obviously
not realistic. It is impossible to direct individual enti-
ties when necessary.
•
Fluid mechanics based models : at the beginning of
’70s, Henderson worked on a ﬂuid mechanics based
modelization [15]. It was a global crowd modelization,
with one set of rules for all particles.
•
Cellular automaton models : the simpliest way of cel-
lular automation is the deterministic model of Fukui-
Ishibash.
•
Predator-Prey models : crowd behavior could be mod-
elized using Lotka-Volterra equation [16].
•
Epidemiological models : some crowd events could
uses this kind of rules. But, if it can be used for
disease dissimination using communication means
(plane, train, road etc.) it is far less useful for a
commercial center or a fair.
In fact, any global equation based models doesn’t ﬁt because
it is mandatory to distribute some comportemental rules to a
set of pedestrian (like family, businessman, elderly people...).
And then we decided to select an agent based model [17].
B. Tools
MEDIACTIF project implements 3 main functional ele-
ments needed for a crowd characterization : crowd analysis
from sensors, model deﬁnition and use for prediction, and off-
line simulation.
C. Crowd Analysis
The ﬁrst step to determine crowd behavior is to analyze
its comportment in typical situations. Criteria choice is the
most important thing to reﬁne. In fact, these criteria must be
the same for analysis but also for the model deﬁnition and of
course for simulation.
To handle digital signage impact, it is necessary to consider
the vision ﬁeld of each pedestrian. If provided information is
walking time to a speciﬁc place (20 minutes by the left way, 5
by the right one), its possible impact is only on pedestrians that
have this information in line of sight. Depending on sensors, it
is necessary to exploit every solution in Vision, Learning and
Pattern Recognition to select crowd-scene key behaviors.
Some Smart Cities projects try to implement these kind
of functionalites. For example, the Inria Project Lab City-
Lab@Inria is currently under creation and studies information
and communications technology (ICT) solutions to promote
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 1. Vision Field Model
social and environmental sustainability and facilitate the tran-
sition to Smart Cities. Another example, CNR-ISTI in Italy:
HIIS Lab develops a framework for improving the multi-device
user experience in Smart Cities. This framework proposes a so-
lution that extends existing Service Front Ends for Smart Cities
and supports multi-device interaction by exploiting personal
devices and public displays. It can be used to easily obtain
interactive multi-device applications for different domains and
in different contexts in Smart Cities including single or multi-
user applications, indoor or outdoor environments and mobile
and stationary devices. ([18][19])
D. Multi-agent Model
There are different kind of models, with their own al-
gorithms [20] [21]. To manage the crowd as a group of
individuals with their own interests, their own objectives,
their physical characteristics, only the multi-agent models,
individual-based, can match the needs of the project, with
very diverse characteristics (airports, trade shows, fairs ...). A
good model should be able to predict the emergence of known
collective crowd behavior, such as lane formation or crowd
turbulence.
The proposed theoretical model is based on a fairly simple
concept [22]. The ﬁrst step is to mathematically describe the
visual information that a pedestrian can see in a crowd and
how a pedestrian behaves in a crowd. For this, it is necessary
to deﬁne the limits of the visual ﬁeld and calculate the distance
before colliding with other individuals and obstacles (see
Figure 1).
The next step is to set two simple rules to adjust the
trajectory of the pedestrian, especially its speed and direction
based on the previously calculated visual information.
•
The ﬁrst one is to choose a direction of travel that
minimizes coverage of vision without deviating too
much from the point of destination.
•
The second one is to set walking speed to maintain a
safe distance to the nearest obstacle or individual.
These rules are called heuristics - a term describing cognitive
science quick decisions that people do not think too much
about their behavior.
The last step is to realistically reproduce a moving crowd
in congestion situations, the movement rules are combined
with the physical forces that occur during unintentional body
contact.
E. Simulation
Crowd simulation is necessary to setup properly sensors
and displays to provide an efﬁcient sytem based on dynamic
signage. Modelling is the basic tool for simulation. Numer-
ical simulations of the model previously described is able
to generate a large variety of collective behaviors, such as
the spontaneous separation of opposite ﬂows of pedestrians
in bidirectional trafﬁc. The model can also predict typical
situation as bottleneck or congestion due to, e.g., a right angle
corridor. The results are promising and seem far better than
other simulators we evaluated. The evaluated tools integrate
behavioral functions. They simulate an average behavior if an
peculiar event occurs. But none of them integrates a behavior
action when a signage change (for example : going left instead
of going right if a congestion accurs):
•
Anylogic [23]: used by many airports. AnyLogic pro-
vides complex solutions to plan, manage, and opti-
mize pedestrian ﬂows in public buildings like airports,
railway stations, shopping malls, and stadiums. The
software can evaluate the capacity of buildings and
certain objects, ﬁnd and avoid pedestrian bottlenecks,
optimize business processes at service points, carry out
evacuation planning, assess shopping area customer
trafﬁc, evaluate parking, roadway, and public trans-
portation accessibility. But it is difﬁcult to integrate
vision in a model.
•
SimWalk [24]: integrate some tools for external events
like baggage, interconnection but no vision parameters
nor signage simulation.
•
Pedestrian dynamics [25]: Adaptation to dynamically
changing (local) conditions. As in reality the situation
can change during the simulation.
•
Mass Motion [26]: This system is highly scalable for
large crowds and for simulations scenarios that cover
multiple days.
•
CAST Pedestrian [27]: airport facilities solution but
simulation doesn’t handle external events.
•
MATSim + Via [28]: The mobility data provided by
Senozon, or the results of MATSim simulations in
general, can be very large and do not give much away
in the raw format. The analysis tool allows to easily
extract important characteristics of the data in a short
time. It is useful to extract main characteristic of a
ﬂow but is less relevant for crowd.
•
Pedsim [29]: this simulator is in fact a library to
create a speciﬁc simulation tool. There are many ”odd”
comportment especially for right angle congestion .
•
PETrack : pedestrian trajectory extracting tool using a
video stream.
•
JuPedSim : Jlich Pedestrian Simulator is an open
source framework for simulating pedestrian dynamics.
Several well-known models from the literature are
implemented. It provides researchers and students
preparing their projects an appropriate environment to
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

model and simulate pedestrian dynamics. This product
is at an early stage and tests don’t give better result
the particle or ﬂuid models.
To evaluate and predict behavior when using MEDIACTIF
system, it is necessary to develop a simulator that handle
characteristics of dynamic signage. Otherwise, there will be
a simulation and prediction tool that will not give relevant
results; as if for a crowd of rabbits using grass resource of a
ﬁeld, simulation use goat comportment parameters.There will
be no chance to have results that are valid, consistent or usable.
V.
SEMANTICS
A. Related works
1) Semantic inside signage digital systems: The display
of contents adapted to users recently became a very attrac-
tive research ﬁeld especially for business purposes. With the
democratization of mobile phones and a continuous trend
towards big data, particularly oriented on users preferences
and inclinations, it is now easy to display personalized content
[30]. One of the current objectives nowadays is to suggest
places [31][32] or offers [33] best suited to each user. With
the smartphone applications ecosystems, it is now relatively
easy to get users’ information and then use state of the
art methods like collaborative ﬁltering [32] or model based
recommendation methods [31].
The challenge now is to propose the same recommendation
efﬁciently on common displays in generic areas while over
the years 2000, researchers focused only on screens in speciﬁc
contexts like for instance ofﬁces [34] or inside sport halls [35],
etc.
Another difﬁculty arises in taking into account groups and
not only single users as primary targets: past recommendation
algorithms were well adapted to single users but are falling
short for groups. [34], [36] and [35] attempted to solve this
shortcoming using very simple methods like averaging each
users’ scores.
Thus, making precise recommendations to a group of users
still proves to be quite challenging. Moreover, attempting to
make these on regular displays and not only on mobiles is
adding an extra layer of complexity since it becomes more
complicated to obtain individual inputs, not even accounting
for the actual up difﬁculty to keep abreast of the content to
display [37]. Search engines, are not only good alternatives
to data mining methods since they remove sparsity issues, but
also allow us to easily add, update and delete content in real
time with little to no impact on the searches. Therefore, in this
project, we attempted to use a search engine inside a digital
signage system to drive content suggestions for single users as
well as groups.
2) Pedestrian navigation on display screens: The MEDI-
ACTIF project aims partly at helping pedestrians to navigate
correctly both indoor (inside buildings [38], for demonstra-
tions, conferences...) and outdoor (in towns, subways [39]...)
[40]. Usually, mobile phone applications are used for this
particular job. The obvious advantage is that we are able to
get information such as a destination by simply asking a user,
and then to compute the most appropriate path for him to get
there. It is still slightly basic and user centric, thus implicating
multiple display screens seems like a natural evolution. When
a user passes in front of a display, his mobile phone can share
his destination with the display. Then the display can show an
updated map with proper redirections calculated in real time
[41] and corresponding to the present geographical location
[42]. Some researchers are even trying to mix the previous
methods of collaborative ﬁltering in order to guide users to
their destinations and potential Points of Interest (POI) [43].
This is precisely what we are focusing on in the MEDI-
ACTIF project : to allow for some people ﬂow regulations.
B. Pertimm
Pertimm is providing a search engine to major e-commerce
customers. The idea here is to integrate Pertimm’s search
engine inside the global system in order to not only regulate
people ﬂows but also to suggest activities corresponding to
people desires and of course, having the possibility to select
points of interest suited to both a group of person as well as
single users. Therefore, the development is following a three
steps approach: We will ﬁrst create a basic system of search
recommendation only based on simple queries in order to
integrate Pertimm inside the system. Then, we will expand the
functionalities with content based recommendations. Finally,
we will upgrade the previous solution in order to create a
system based on collaborative ﬁltering for multiple users.
1) First step : basic search.: To enable the system to
use the search engine as a basic search, it is necessary to
ﬁrst use devices that enable users to make search requests.
Indeed, with absolutely no knowledge about the user, it is
not possible for us to generate any appropriate request/answer.
Thus it is necessary to let the user drive the system. This
is actually how most digital signage systems currently work.
Let us picture a user in a mall, looking for a particular shop
on a store locator device (usually some big table/screen). He
has the ability to make keyword requests about shops to look
for either by brand, categories, interests... Using MEDIACTIF,
we would not want to rely only on this particular vision. The
idea is to make automatically pre-recorded requests to display
suitable contents on screens even if the user has not shown
any particular interest so far.
Explanation of the ﬁrst experiment (vestiaires)
2) Second step : content based recommendation.: Content
based recommendation is a method that only uses past users
interests in order to propose new points of interest[44][45].
The idea is to extract characteristics of ones’ history in order to
match characteristics of the new suggestions. On this particular
part, Points of Interest (POI) have to be described usually with
natural language and keywords (that can be ﬁgures). Then,
selecting them usually involves a keyword matching algorithm,
sometimes combined with a frequency method.
To allow this, we then need to know users previous
interests. Thus, we plan to make users ﬁll a form at a particular
time (e.g., when they buy their tickets for an exposition). Each
interest on the form will then be indexed and the suggestions
will arise from a confrontation with the global points of interest
index (stands, restaurants...with their description).
When one user needs a suggestion, we will look for a
relevant characteristic inside all his interests and we will query
the search engine to ﬁnd one or multiple matching POIs.
Though it is perfectly suited to mobile phones, with regular
display screens, people will be rarely standing alone in front of
it. Therefore, the search engine has to deal with several users.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

The idea is to consider these users as a single one. We plan
to look for their main shared interest characteristics and use it
as a query token.
With this kind of recommendation, we would eventually
suggest to foreign people a typical french restaurant in the
area if most of them like french cuisine. The major drawback
here is that we need users to be compliant and ﬁll in a form.
3) Third step : collaborative ﬁltering.: The objective is
to suppress any user implication inside the system by imple-
menting pure collaborative ﬁltering. Collaborative ﬁltering is
currently the most used recommendation method. It works by
saving every users points of interests inside a matrix [46][47]
and creating similarity matrices by comparing each user one
by one. Once a score of similarity is computed, suggestions to
one user coming from other similar users can be given.
We plan on using Pertimm search engine to simulate
this process: we will index every user with its POIs and
then use search engine methods like catalogs to generate
recommendations. Using a search engine will allow us to avoid
the calculations and storage of big matrices.
Still to obtain users POIs, we need to be able to follow
them and store their behaviors. We plan to do so with a phone
application, storing queries and locations.
For the group perspective, we will create a dummy user
with POIs driven from the majority of the users as will
suggestions be. As a result, we will be able to combine
collaborative ﬁltering with previous content based method to
obtain recommendation [48][49].
VI.
CONCLUSION
The MEDIACTIF Project is at its very early stages of
development. Surely some critical points must be solved ﬁrst.
Models must be setup to take care of the different usage
scenarios considered so far (fairs, airports, etc.). We must
handle people behaviors depending on tangible parameters
(time, events, etc.) but also on unquantiﬁable parameters like
personal interests. Another point to solve is indoor localization.
A multimodal approach is planned using physical sensors and
networking (Wi-Fi) though we are also looking at other options
based on mesh networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
ESIEE-Paris works in close cooperation with !nstantan
(project leader), A´eroports de Paris, VIPARIS, Scilab Enter-
prises, INNES, PERTIMM, B2B EN-TRADE. Some research
leading to these results has received funds from the French
Governement (DGCIS), Conseil R´egional d’ˆıle de France and
Conseil G´en´eral de Seine Saint-Denis for the FUI 16 program.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Mediactif Project,” ”http://mediactif.esiee.fr/”, 2014, [Online; accessed
28-Fev-2015].
[2]
T. Teixeira, G. Dublon, and A. Savvides, “A survey of human-sensing:
Methods for detecting presence, count, location, track, and identity,” in
ENALAB technical report, 2010.
[3]
T. Murakita, T. Ikeda, and H. Ishiguro, “Human tracking using ﬂoor
sensors based on the markov chain monte carlo method,” in Proceedings
of the 17th International Conference on.
ICPR 2004, 2004, pp. 917–
920.
[4]
R. Zetik, S. Crabbe, J. Krajnak, P. Peyerl, J. Sachs, and R. Thom¨a,
“Detection and localization of persons behind obstacles using m-
sequence through-the-wall radar,” vol. 6201, 2006, pp. 62 010I–62 010I–
12.
[5]
V. Parameswaran, V. Shet, and V. Ramesh, “Design and validation of
a system for people queue statistics estimation,” in Video Analytics
for Business Intelligence, ser. Studies in Computational Intelligence,
C. Shan, F. Porikli, T. Xiang, and S. Gong, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 409, pp. 355–373.
[6]
M. Isard and A. Blake, “Condensation: conditional density propagation
for visual tracking,” in International journal of computer vision.
ICPR
2004, 1998, pp. 5–28.
[7]
Z. Junyang, W.-C. Yeung, and J.-Y. Ng, “Enhancing indoor positioning
accuracy by utilizing signals from both the mobile phone network and
the wireless local area network,” in Advanced Information Networking
and Applications, 2008. AINA 2008. 22nd International Conference on,
2008, pp. 138,145.
[8]
A. Smith, H. Balakrishnan, M. Goraczko, and N. Priyantha, “Tracking
moving devices with the cricket location system,” in In Proceedings of
the 2nd ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applica-
tions, and Services (MobiSys04.
ACM Press, 2004, pp. 190–202.
[9]
L. Henderson, “The statistics of crowd uids,” vol. 229.
Nature, 1971,
pp. 381–383.
[10]
D. Helbing and P. Molnar, “Social force model for pedestrian dynam-
ics,” vol. 51.
Phys. Rev E, 1995, pp. 4282–4286.
[11]
V. Blue and J. Adler, “Cellular automata microsimulation of bi-
directional pedestrian ows,” vol. 1678. Transportation Research Board,
1999, pp. 135–141.
[12]
M. Fukui and Y. Ishibashi, “Jamming transition in cellular automaton
models for pedestrians on passageway,” vol. 68. Journal of the Physical
Society of Japan, 1999, pp. 3738–3739.
[13]
——, “Self-organized phase transitions in cellular automaton models
for pedestrians,” vol. 68.
Journal of the Physical Society of Japan,
1999, pp. 2861–2863.
[14]
P. G. Gipps and B. Marksj´’o, “A micro-simulation model for pedestrian
ows,” vol. 27.
Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 1985, pp.
95–105.
[15]
L. Henderson, “A micro-simulation model for pedestrian ows,” vol. 8.
Transportation Research, 1974, pp. 509–515.
[16]
S. Kim, C. Hoffmann, and J. M. Lee, “An experimental in rule-based
crowd behavior for intelligent games.” in AISS, vol. 2, no. 3, 2010, pp.
32–39.
[17]
H. Van Dyke Parunak, R. Savit, and R. L. Riolo, “Agent-based modeling
vs. equation-based modeling: A case study and users guide,” in Multi-
agent systems and agent-based simulation. Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
1998, pp. 10–25.
[18]
J. M¨uller, F. Alt, A. Schmidt, and D. Michelis, “Requirements and
design space for interactive public displays,” in ACM Multimedia, 2010,
pp. 1285–1294.
[19]
S. Hosio and et al., “Supporting distributed private and public user
interfaces in urban environments,” in proc. of HotMobile, 2010, pp.
25–30.
[20]
V. D. Phung, A. Drogoul, and N. D. Nguyen, “mod`eles dynamique
de populations: impl´ementation des mod`eles math´ematiques et infor-
matique dans gama.”
Institut de la Francophonie pour l´Informatique
Hanoi, 2009.
[21]
A. Drogoul, C. T. Quang, and E. Amouroux, “Agent-based simulation:
deﬁnition, applications and perspectives,” 2008.
[22]
M. Moussad, D. Helbing, and G. Theraulaz, “How simple rules deter-
mine pedestrian behavior and crowd disasters,” in Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 108, no. 17, 2011, pp. 6884–6888.
[23]
“Anylogic,” ”http://www.anylogic.fr/”, 2014, [Online; accessed 28-Fev-
2015].
[24]
“Simwalk,” ”http://www.simwalk.com/”, 2014, [Online; accessed 28-
Fev-2015].
[25]
“Pedestrian Dynamics,” ”http://www.pedestrian-dynamics.com/”, 2014,
[Online; accessed 28-Fev-2015].
[26]
“Mass Motion,” ”http://www.oasys-software.com/”, 2014, [Online; ac-
cessed 28-Fev-2015].
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

[27]
“CAST Pedestrian,” ”http://www.airport-consultants.com/”, 2014, [On-
line; accessed 28-Fev-2015].
[28]
“MATSim + Via,” ”http://www.senozon.com/, 2014, [Online; accessed
28-Fev-2015].
[29]
“Pedsim,” ”http://pedsim.silmaril.org/, 2014, [Online; accessed 28-Fev-
2015].
[30]
J. M¨uller, A. Kr¨uger, and T. Kuﬂik, “Maximizing the utility of situated
public displays.” in User Modeling, C. Conati, K. F. McCoy, and
G. Paliouras, Eds., vol. 4511.
Springer, 2007, pp. 395–399.
[31]
M.-H. Park, J.-H. Hong, and S.-B. Cho, “Location-based recommenda-
tion system using bayesian user’s preference model in mobile devices.”
in UIC, J. Indulska, J. Ma, L. T. Yang, T. Ungerer, and J. Cao, Eds.,
vol. 4611.
Springer, 2007, pp. 1130–1139.
[32]
T. Horozov, N. Narasimhan, and V. Vasudevan, “Using location for
personalized poi recommendations in mobile environments.” in SAINT.
IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 124–129.
[33]
S. Yuan and Y. W. Tsao, “A recommendation mechanism for contex-
tualized mobile advertising,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 24, no. 4, 2003,
pp. 399–414.
[34]
J. F. McCarthy, T. J. Costa, and E. S. Liongosari, “Unicast, outcast
& groupcast: Three steps toward ubiquitous, peripheral displays.” in
Ubicomp, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, G. D. Abowd,
B. Brumitt, and S. A. Shafer, Eds., vol. 2201.
Springer, 2001, pp.
332–345.
[35]
J. F. McCarthy and T. D. Anagnost, “Musicfx: an arbiter of group
preferences for computer supported collaborative workouts.” in CSCW,
W. A. Kellogg and S. Whittaker, Eds.
ACM, 2000, p. 348.
[36]
T. R. Payne, E. David, N. R. Jennings, and M. Shariﬁ, “Auction
mechanisms for efﬁcient advertisement selection on public displays,”
in EUMAS, B. Dunin-Keplicz, A. Omicini, and J. A. Padget, Eds., vol.
223.
CEUR-WS.org, 2006.
[37]
F. R. S. G. Ribeiro and R. Jos, “Timeliness for dynamic source selection
in situated public displays.” in WEBIST.
INSTICC Press, 2009, pp.
667–672.
[38]
F. Lyardet, D. W. Szeto, and E. Aitenbichler, “Context-aware indoor
navigation,” in Ambient Intelligence.
Springer, 2008, pp. 290–307.
[39]
M. Arikawa, S. Konomi, and K. Ohnishi, “Navitime: Supporting pedes-
trian navigation in the real world,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE, vol. 6,
no. 3, 2007, pp. 21–29.
[40]
M. Kourogi, N. Sakata, T. Okuma, and T. Kurata, “Indoor/outdoor
pedestrian navigation with an embedded gps/rﬁd/self-contained sensor
system,” in Advances in Artiﬁcial Reality and Tele-Existence. Springer,
2006, pp. 1310–1321.
[41]
E. Rukzio, M. M¨uller, and R. Hardy, “Design, implementation and
evaluation of a novel public display for pedestrian navigation: the
rotating compass,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2009, pp. 113–122.
[42]
J. M¨uller, M. Jentsch, C. Kray, and A. Kr¨uger, “Exploring factors that
inﬂuence the combined use of mobile devices and public displays for
pedestrian navigation,” in Proceedings of the 5th Nordic conference
on Human-computer interaction: building bridges.
ACM, 2008, pp.
308–317.
[43]
H. Huang and G. Gartner, “Using context-aware collaborative ﬁltering
for poi recommendations in mobile guides.” in Advances in Location-
Based Services.
Springer, 2012, pp. 131–148.
[44]
M. Balabanovi´c and Y. Shoham, “Fab: content-based, collaborative
recommendation,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 40, no. 3, 1997,
pp. 66–72.
[45]
C. Basu, H. Hirsh, W. Cohen et al., “Recommendation as classiﬁcation:
Using social and content-based information in recommendation,” in
AAAI/IAAI, 1998, pp. 714–720.
[46]
D. Billsus and M. J. Pazzani, “Learning collaborative information
ﬁlters.” in ICML, vol. 98, 1998, pp. 46–54.
[47]
B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Item-based collabo-
rative ﬁltering recommendation algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on World Wide Web.
ACM, 2001, pp. 285–
295.
[48]
P. Melville, R. J. Mooney, and R. Nagarajan, “Content-boosted collab-
orative ﬁltering for improved recommendations,” in AAAI/IAAI, 2002,
pp. 187–192.
[49]
I. Soboroff and C. Nicholas, “Combining content and collaboration in
text ﬁltering,” in Proceedings of the IJCAI, vol. 99, 1999, pp. 86–91.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

