 
 
Flexible Design of a Light-Architecture Content Streaming System with Dual 
Adaptation
Eugen Borcoci, Cristian Cernat, Radu Iorga 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
cristian.cernat@elcom.pub.ro 
radu.iorga@elcom.pub.ro  
 
 
 
Jordi Mongay Batalla 
 National Institute of Telecommunications 
Warsaw, Poland 
email:jordim@interfree.it 
Daniel Negru 
 LaBRI Lab, University of Bordeaux  
Bordeaux, France 
email:daniel.negru@labri.fr 
 
Abstract —Real time content delivery is a high popularity 
service 
in 
Internet. 
In 
contrast 
with 
some 
complex 
architectures like Content Delivery Networks, Content 
Oriented Networks, this paper considers a light architecture, 
working on top of the current networking technologies. It 
enhances the (video) content delivery via Internet, based on 
multi-criteria content server initial selection and then in-
session media adaptation and/or server handover, all the above 
in a unified solution. This in-progress work explores different 
design variants, illustrating the solution flexibility. 
Keywords — content delivery; multi-criteria decision 
algorithms; server and path selection; media adaptation, 
monitoring, Future Internet; content-aware networking. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The content-related services are more and more present 
in the current and Future Internet, leading to recent 
significant developments [1]. Dedicated infrastructure like 
Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) improve the services 
quality [2], by distributing the content replica to cache 
servers, located close to groups of users; they are largely 
used in the real world. Content/Information Oriented/Centric 
Networking (CON/ICN/CCN) approaches [3][4], decouple 
names from location, introduce content-based routing, in-
network caching, etc. However, all the above need complex 
architectures, high CAPEX and significant modifications in 
Service/Content Providers and Network Providers/Operators 
systems. 
As an alternative, Service Providers (SP) might deliver 
services in over-the-top (OTT) style, over the current best 
effort Internet as a cheaper solution. An OTT SP could be a 
separate entity from the traditional Internet Service Provider 
(ISP). Also combined solutions exist, with OTT SPs using 
the CDN Providers infrastructure to improve the quality of 
delivery. The OTT solutions approach to improve the 
quality, when transport problems appear in the network, are 
frequently based on usage of adaptive solutions for media 
streams and or servers, in order to maintain acceptable 
quality at receiver side. 
A light architecture (OTT-like), for content streaming 
systems is proposed by the European DISEDAN Chist-Era 
project [5], (service and user-based DIstributed SElection of 
content streaming source and Dual AdaptatioN, 2014-2015). 
The business actors involved are: Service Provider (an 
entity/actor which deliver content services and  owns or not a 
transportation network); End Users (EU) which consumes 
the content; a Content Provider(CP) could exist, owning 
Content Servers(CS). DISEDAN does not deal with CP /SP 
contractual relationships; we assume that servers are owned 
by the SP. An effective solution is constructed for the multi-
criteria hard problem of best content source (server) 
selection, considering user context, servers’ availability and 
requested content. A novel concept is introduced based on: 
(1) two-step server selection mechanism (at SP and at EU) 
using algorithms that consider context- and content-
awareness and (2) dual adaptation mechanism, consisting in 
media flow adaptation and/or content source adaptation (by 
streaming server switching) if quality degradation is 
observed during the media session. Such an OTT-like 
solution is attractive since it avoids the complexity of 
CON/ICN or CDN. 
This work is mainly dedicated to analyze the design 
decisions variants. Details on server/path selection, 
optimization algorithms and adaptation process combined 
with server switching are treated in other works [13[[14]..   
The system can be flexibly implemented in several    
variants, depending on the complexity/constraints envisaged 
and the EUs and SPs requirements. We explore different 
design decisions and trade-offs, versus the cost and 
implementation complexity. This work is preliminary; 
currently, the system is under its implementation. 
Section II is a short overview of related work. Section III 
outlines the overall architecture. Section IV contains the 
paper main contributions, analyzing various design decisions 
and implementation-related implications. Section V contains 
conclusions and future work outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Adaptation techniques enhance the quality of streaming 
media at the consumer side when the transfer conditions 
deteriorate. It also support efficient network resource 
utilization, device-independent universal media access and 
optimized Quality of Experience (QoE). Many Service 
providers apply it, to solve the network variations [6]. 
Adaptation may act on Media (flow) [6][7][8], and/or on 
Content server. The latter means in-session new server 
selection and switching (handover), depending on the 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
consumer device capabilities, consumer location and/or 
network state [9][10].  
Recent solutions for media adaptation use the HTTP 
protocol, minimizing server processing power and being 
video codec agnostic [11]. Relevant examples are: Adobe 
Dynamic 
Streaming, 
Apple’s 
HTTP 
Adaptive 
Live 
Streaming and Microsoft’s IIS Smooth Streaming and open 
HTTP-based protocols like Dynamic Adaptive Streaming 
over HTTP (DASH) [8]. The DASH continuously select, on-
the-fly, the highest possible video representation quality that 
ensures smooth playout in the current downloading 
conditions. The DISEDAN novelty [5], conists in  “dual 
adaptation” by combining in a single solution the initial 
server selection (result of cooperation between SP and EU) 
and in-session dual adaptation,. 
The initial server selection is based on optimization 
algorithms like Multi-Criteria Decision Algorithms (MCDA) 
[12] modified to be applied to DISEDAN context [13]14], or 
Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimization algorithm [15]. In 
these works several scenarios are proposed, analyzed and 
evaluated. In particular, the availability of different static 
and/or dynamic input parameters for optimization algorithms 
is considered. Therefore several designs are possible, 
different in terms of performance and complexity. It is the 
objective of this paper to analyze these variants, seen as 
design / implementation decisions. 
 
III. 
DISEDAN SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN 
GUIDELINES 
While 
considering 
the 
above 
general 
concepts, 
assumptions and requirements should be identified, to 
provide inputs for the system design. 
A. General framework and  assumptions  
The main business entities/ actors have been mentioned 
above: SP, EU, CS. The connectivity between CSs and EU 
Terminals (EUT) are assured by traditional Internet Services 
Providers (ISP) / Network Providers (NP) - operators. Due to 
its OTT-style, DISEDAN does not consider SP - ISP/NPs 
relationships in its management architecture. Some Service 
Level 
Agreements 
(SLAs) 
might 
exist, 
related 
to 
connectivity services, but they are not directly visible at our 
system level. The DISEDAN solution is also applicable to 
other business models, e.g., involving CPs, CDN providers, 
etc. The relationships between SP and such entities could 
exist, but their realization is out of scope of this study.  
The system works on top of current TCP/IP mono and/or 
multi-domain network environment. The EUTs might not 
have explicit knowledge about the managed/non-managed 
characteristics of the connectivity services. Network level 
resources reservation, or in-network connectivity services 
differentiation are not mandatory supposed (but not 
forbidden). This shows the system flexibility: it can work in 
OTT style, or over a managed connectivity services. 
Therefore, the SP cannot offer strong QoS guarantees to 
EUs. Consequently, DISEDAN does not manage (but does 
not exclude) possible EUs/SPs SLA relationships. However, 
it is assumed that a Media Description Server exists, 
managed by SP, to which EUT will directly interact. 
The media streaming operations are independent on 
networking technology. The client-side streaming system, 
acts 
as 
a 
standalone 
application, 
(no 
mandatory 
modifications for SP); however, SP should provide some 
basic information to EUT, to help its initial server selection. 
The decision about dual adaptation are taken mainly locally 
at EUT, thus avoiding complex EUT-SP signaling. 
 In a general case, several CSs exist (containing replicas 
of media objects), known by SP (geo-location, availability, 
access conditions for users), among which the SP and/or 
EUTs can operate servers selection and/or switching. No 
restriction is imposed either on the geo-localization of EUTs 
or of CSs. Note that the proposed system does not consider 
how to solve network failures , except attempts to perform 
media flow DASH adaptation or CS switching. The terminal 
devices are supposed to have all the required subsystems and 
peripherals for video/ audio display and device control. 
B. End User Requirements 
These requirements are expressed as EU needs, and are 
related to user scenarios - when selecting and consuming 
media content related services. 
• The system should admit the usual user profiles. EU 
should be able to identify itself and login into the 
system through a controlled environment. 
• The EU should be able to select among several SPs 
and among content items, servers and classes of 
quality – in the limits offered by the selected  SP.   
• The DISEDAN system should allow to EU:  initial 
(optionally automatic or manual) server selection; in-
session dual adaptation will be automatically applied, 
to maximize the Quality of Experience (QoE). 
• The EU should receive information from SP (on 
servers and possibly on network) to help him in 
selection. The EU should also have the possibility to 
finally decide on server selection/switching or amount 
of adaptation actions initiated and/or performed.  
• The EUT should be still able to work by using only 
minimal information on server and network (e.g., 
server capacity or download bandwidth from the 
server) delivered by the SP. The selection is basically 
locally taken, thus avoiding the in-session signaling 
between user and SP.  
• The EU should have the possibility to be informed 
about of QoE level delivered by the system. 
• The client SW installed on the EUT should have 
maximum independence from the operating system 
running on the terminal. 
C. Service Provider Requirements 
These requirements are expressed as SP business and 
technical needs. The DISEDAN system: 
• Should allow SP to develop multimedia content-based 
services, e.g., live streamed IPTV services, Video on 
Demand (VoD) and its derivatives (e.g. streamed 
VoD, downloaded / pushed content). 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
• Must allow SP to filter the control information 
delivered to the EUs, but should not impose major 
architectural modification in the SP Management and 
Control (M&C) architecture. 
• Should allow SP to apply different policies in its 
server selection (e.g. to maximize CS utilization).  
• Should be able to use the SP static/dynamic 
(monitored) information on servers and network paths 
status and availability, in mono or multi-domain 
contexts. 
• Must not restrict the networking technologies (QoS 
capable or not) used by SP.   
• Must support the SP-EU cooperation for dual 
adaptation purposes. 
• Should offer to the SP the minimal capabilities to 
manage the Content Severs (if no distinct Content 
Provider business entity exists). 
D. General System Requirements 
These are results from the previous requirements for: 
User and Service Provider. The DISEDAN system: 
• Must work in the traditional TCP/IP mono and multi-
domain, in OTT style, on top of arbitrary network 
technology; the EUTs or CSs can be placed 
everywhere. 
• Should provide a simple management with minimal 
architectural modifications at SP side and EUT. 
• Must optimize multi-criteria content source selection, 
and then dynamic dual adaptation, considering user 
context, servers availability, network conditions and 
distribution mode. It will apply: a. two-step server 
selection (at SP and EU) based on context/content- 
aware algorithms; b. dual adaptation, (media 
adaptation  and/or server switching).  
• At EU side, a standalone client application exists. No 
mandatory modifications at SP M&C side are 
required; 
however 
SP 
M&C 
should 
provide 
information to EUT, to help it in initial server 
selection. 
• Should provide flexible possibilities to assign/balance 
the decision power between  SP/EU, regarding sever 
selection/switching and dynamic adaptation. 
Other specific EUT, SP and CS system requirements 
have been derived from the general ones but they are not 
detailed here. 
E. General Architecture   
Figure 1 shows the general architecture. The Service 
Provider entity includes the following functional modules: 
• MD File generator – dynamically generates Media 
Description (MD) XML file, containing media 
segments information (video resolution, bit rates 
etc.), ranked list of recommended CSs and possibly  - 
CSs current state information and even information 
on network state (if applicable). 
• CS Selection (step 1) algorithm - it exploits MCDA 
or EMO, to rank the CSs and media representations, 
aiming to optimize servers’ load and to maximize the 
system utilization.  
• Monitoring module – collects information from 
Content Servers and estimates their current states.  
The End User Terminal entity includes the modules: 
• 
DASH – parses the MD file received from SP and 
handles the download of media segments from 
Content Servers. 
• 
Content Source Selection and Adaptation engine –
implements the dual adaptation mechanism. 
• 
Selection (step 2) algorithm. It can also exploit 
MCDA, EMO, or other algorithms to select the 
best CS from the list recommended by SP. 
• 
Monitoring module – monitors the local network 
conditions and –possibly- the server condtions. 
• 
Media Player – playbacks the media segments.  
The Content Server entity includes the modules: 
• 
Streaming module – sends media segments 
requested by End Users. 
• 
Monitoring probe – monitors CS performance 
(CPU utilization, network interfaces utilization, 
etc.). In a complex implementation of the CS, the 
monitoring probe could be replaced by a more 
capable monitoring module, to supervise both the 
active 
sessions 
and 
some 
connectivity 
characteristics to different groups of users. 
The following (macro) functional steps are:  
1. The EUT issues a media file request to SP. 
2.The SP analyzes the status of the CSs and runs the 
selection algorithm (optionally the SP could make first, a 
current probing of the CSs). 
3. The SP returns a candidate CS list to EUT. 
4. The EUT performs the final CS selection and starts 
asking segments from the selected CS. 
5. During media session, the EUT measures the quality 
and evaluates the context. It applies DASH adaptation or 
if necessary, CS switching is decided. 
When the user requests a Multimedia content, the SP 
sends an xml file containing Media Description (MD). This 
file is updated (from the static xml file) for each user request 
by considering the user profile, the SP policies for this user’s 
class and other information at the SP side (e.g., state of the 
servers and possibly network-related information). The list of 
candidate CSs and other information is written inside the xml 
file. Also caching server url addresses can be added. The list 
may be optionally ordered, following some desired metrics. 
When the user’s application receives the MD file, it performs 
the final CS selection and possibly the network path. This 
decision can be based on user context or, one  can simply 
select the first CS in the ordered list. The CS selection 
achieves multi-objective optimization. After final selection, 
the EUT starts to ask segments from the selected CS. During 
the receipt of consecutive chunks, the user’s application can 
automatically change the rate of the content stream (DASH 
actions) or, if still problems exist, it can switch the CS.  
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
End User  Terminal 
Selection 
algorithm 
DASH 
Streaming 
module 
Content source selection  
and Adaptation engine 
Monitoring 
Monitoring 
 probe 
Media  
Description 
generator 
Content Server 1 
Service  
Provider 
Selection  
algorithm 
Monitoring 
Media 
Player 
MD file  
Request 
MD file 
Data Segment 
Request 
Data Segment 
 
Status 
Network 
 
Content Server k 
Content Server 
switching 
Media adaptation 
 
Figure 1.  DISEDAN general architecture; DASH - Dynamic Adaptive Streaming over HTTP 
The EUT performs measurements on the parameters of 
download process. If EUT detects deterioration of 
downloading rate, it can use SP information about alternate 
CSs and/or it can start probing CSs. After probing, the EUT 
decides on media or server adaptation. 
IV. 
DESIGN DECISION VARIANTS  
The 
DISEDAN 
architecture 
is 
flexible. 
Several 
variants/versions of designs can be considered, i.e., basic 
ones or more complex, essentially depending on the roles of 
the business entities and their capabilities, interactions and 
also on SP and EU policies.  
A. Monitoring procedures 
The types and amount of static and dynamic monitoring 
data collected by various entities have a significant impact 
on the solutions. Consequently, the MCDA/EMO algorithms 
will have different sets of input parameters. Apart from static 
information available at SP, three types of monitoring 
contexts and possible policies can be identified.  
Proactive monitoring: data are continuously collected (at 
SP level and possibly at EUT level); they guide the initial CS 
selection, when some new content requests arrive. At SP, 
this means supervision of different CSs, maybe network 
paths and user communities, depending on its policies. 
SP/CS cooperation on this purpose is envisaged. Such data 
can be used to construct a history and updated status of the 
environment envisaged by the SP. The CSs could be 
involved in proactive monitoring, provided they are capable 
to probe the connectivity characteristics towards different 
groups of users (indicated by the SP).  
At EU side, in some more complex scenarios, the EUT 
can construct history, e.g., dedicated to its favorite content 
connections, or focused on network context. 
Session-time (Real-time) monitoring: the data are 
measured on the media flow, basically at EUT. In more 
complex DISEDAN variants, the SP and/or some CSs can be 
involved in such  monitoring, at least in being aware of  
results (note that no SLA concerning mutual obligations of 
SP/EUs, related to QoE exist) for: all active users or subsets; 
all monitored data or summaries of them; full or summary 
monitored values. 
Opportunity related monitoring: these are measurements 
essentially performed by the EUT, to test the opportunity of 
switching the CS that delivers the content to EU.  
B. Possible Roles of the Business Actors  
The DISEDAN project outlines a set of optional Provider 
side modifications (w.r.t. useful information and metrics 
provided by SP to the client) that can further optimize server 
selection. The design can be backwards-compatible, ensuring 
that each modified client or  SP can cooperate  with the other 
side, if the latter is using existing content distribution 
solutions. Consequently, we propose a range of solutions 
regarding the SP, CS, EUT roles, i.e., several variants 
(named “use cases”) and  listed below.  
The Tables I, II, III illustrate different design choices, 
listed in increasing order of complexity and consequently of 
performances, for SP, CS and EUT. Note that, although the 
Monitoring subsystems could be included generally in the 
architectural Management Plane, the Mon@SP, Mon@CS or 
Mon@EUT are specified in the tables in a distinct way, in 
order to emphasize the dynamic character of the data 
collected. Depending on the specific requirements and 
constraints, 
different 
variants 
can 
be 
selected 
as 
design/implementation choices of the DISEDAN system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented an analysis of design decisions for 
implementation variants of a novel and flexible light-
architecture content delivery system, working on top of the 
current Internet networks. The system involves a Service 
Provider, End Users and Content Servers owned by the SP. 
The novelty consists in including in a single solution of 
initial content server selection, (based on collaboration SP -
EU, and multi-criteria optimization algorithms like MCDA, 
EMO, etc.) and session-time DASH adaptation and/or 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
intelligent server switching, if the quality of the flow is 
degraded at the End User. Several versions of designs, are 
proposed illustrating the system flexibility and comments are 
given  on the associated complexity.  
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
SP-RELATED DESIGN VERSIONS  
 
 
Information known about: 
Obtained 
from 
Type 
Monitoring 
system  involved 
Remarks on SP role 
SP-V1 
CS list and locations 
Mgmt@SP 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
Content files mapping on servers 
Mgmt@SP 
Quasi-
Static/dynamic 
No 
 
CS status (current load) 
CSs 
Dynamic 
Yes 
 
User groups 
Mgmt@SP 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
Active users 
EUs 
Dynamic 
No/yes 
SP solves the user requests. 
SP is involved in initial server selection, or 
during session (to help switching decision 
at EUT) , based only on ordered list of 
servers, depending on their load. 
(minimum complexity) 
SP-V2 
Idem as SP-V1, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Potential user groups 
Mgmt@SP 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
Basic connectivity paths static 
characteristics  (at overlay level)  
from different CSs to different 
groups of users 
Mgmt@SP/ 
CSs 
Quasi-static 
No 
Idem as in SP-V1 but more qualified 
assistance in selection of the initial 
(server-path). 
Problem: how can a given user invoke 
usage of a selected path if multiple paths 
are available. 
SP-V3 
Idem as SP-V2, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Current loads of the paths  
(bandwidth availability) 
CSs 
Dynamic 
Yes 
Idem as in SP-V2 but more assistance in 
selection of the initial (server-path), given 
the paths current load information. 
SP-V4 
Idem as SP-V3, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Other dynamic  paths 
characteristics (delay, loss, jitter, 
etc.) 
CSs 
Dynamic 
Yes 
Idem as in SP-V3 but more assistance in 
selection of the initial (server-path). 
SP-V5 
Idem as SP-V4, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Policy Information 
Mgmt@SP 
Static 
No 
Idem as in SP-V4, but more flexibility 
from business point of view. 
SP-V6 
Idem as SP-V5, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Historical and prediction data on 
servers and paths utilization 
Mgmt@SP 
+ Mon@SP 
Dynamic 
Yes 
Idem as in SP-V5, plus more powerful set 
of knowledge on system history. 
( maximum complexity) 
 
TABLE II.  
CONTENT SERVER –RELATED  DESIGN VERSIONS 
 
 
Information known about: 
Obtained from 
Type 
Mon@CS 
involved 
Remarks on CS role 
CS-V1 
EU authorization data 
Mgmt@SP 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
EU requests 
EUTs 
Dynamic 
Yes 
 
CS status (current load) 
Mgmt@CS 
Dynamic 
Yes 
 
Active users 
EUs 
Dynamic 
Yes 
CS solves the user content requests. 
CS status info is delivered to SP. 
CS info on active users can be also 
delivered to SP. 
 
CS-V2 
Idem as CS-V1, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Potential user groups 
SP 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
Basic connectivity paths static 
characteristics  (evaluated at 
overlay level)  from different 
CSs to different groups of users 
Mon@CSs 
Quasi-static 
Yes 
Idem as in CS-V1 but more assistance in 
offering (via SP) additional information 
for  selection of the initial (server-path). 
 
CS-V3 
Idem as CS-V2, plus below 
items  
 
 
 
 
Active User groups 
Mgmt@CS 
Dynamic 
Yes 
 
Connectivity paths dynamic 
characteristics  (evaluated at 
overlay level)  from different 
CSs to different groups of users 
Mon@CS 
Dynamic 
Yes 
These data can be help  SP for more 
efficient management  of EU connections. 
If multiple paths are available,  the CSs 
should have some source routing 
capabilities in order to force the stream to 
follow a given path. 
 
 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
TABLE III.  
END USER TERMINAL –RELATED  DESIGN VERSIONS 
 
 
Information known about: 
Obtained 
from 
Type 
Mon@EUT 
involved 
Remarks on EUT role 
EUT-V1 
EUT local static context 
  
Mgmt@EUT 
Quasi-static 
No 
 
MD file 
SP 
Dynamic 
No 
 
QoE quality during session 
Mon@EUT 
Dynamic 
Yes 
 
CS accessibility (basic probing) 
Mon@EUT 
Dynamic 
Yes 
EUT issues   content requests to SP.  
For server selection it uses the MD file sent by 
SP and its static context information. 
For dual adaptation it uses the monitored data 
and basic probing information. 
EUT-V2 
Idem as EUT-V1, plus items 
below 
 
 
 
 
EUT local dynamic context 
 
Mon@EUT 
Dynamic  
Yes 
 
CS accessibility (advanced 
probing) 
Mon@EUT  
Dynamic  
Yes 
EUT issues   content requests to SP.  
For server selection it uses the MD file sent by 
SP and its static context information. 
For dual adaptation it uses the monitored data 
and probing information. 
EUT-V3 
Idem as EUT-V2, plus items 
below 
 
 
 
 
 
Local Policy information 
Mgmt@EUT 
Static 
No 
Possible local policy data are used in server 
selection and dual adaptation. 
EUT-V4 
Idem as EUT-V3, plus items 
below 
 
 
 
 
 
Historical and prediction data on 
servers and paths utilization 
Mgmt@EUT 
Mon@EUT 
Dynamic 
Yes 
Possible history and prediction  data are used in 
server selection and dual adaptation. 
 
A main DISEDAN adavantage consists in avoiding to 
develop complex M&C planes and signaling, while still 
offering sufficient QoE (due to adaptation capabilities ) to the 
end users, in a cheap and fast implementable OTT-style  
solution. 
Simulations have been performed, including large scale 
network environment, to prove the capabilities of the 
proposed architecture. Partial results assessing the validity of 
the solution and performance of the algorithms are already 
reported in [13][14]. Ongoing work is currently performed, 
to implement the described system (in the DISEDAN 
project). Performance of the implemented system, obtained 
for different use cases, will be reported in some future 
papers. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been partially supported by the Research 
Project DISEDAN, No.3-CHIST-ERA C3N, 2014- 2015. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Pan, S. Paul, and R. Jain, “A survey of the research on 
future 
internet 
architectures”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, , pp. 26-36,  July 2011. 
[2] P. A. Khan and B. Rajkumar. “A Taxonomy and Survey of 
Content Delivery Networks”. Department of Computer 
Science and Software Engineering, University of Melbourne. 
Australia : 
s.n., 
2008. 
www.cloudbus.org/reports/CDN-
Taxonomy.pdf . 
[3] ***, “Information-Centric Networking-3”, Dagstuhl Seminar, 
July 13-16 2014, Available from: 
http://www.dagstuhl.de/en/program/calendar/semhp/?seminar
=14291 
[4] V. Jacobson, et al., “Networking Named Content,” 
CoNEXT ’09, New York, NY, pp. 1–12, 2009, 
[5] http://wp2.tele.pw.edu.pl/disedan/publications  
[6] T. Dreier, "Netﬂix sees cost savings in MPEG DASH 
adoption," 15 December 2011. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.streamingmedia.com/Articles/ReadArticle.aspx?A
rticleID=79409. [Accessed October 2014]. 
[7] S. Wenger, Y. Wang, T. Schierl and A. Eleftheriadis, "RTP 
Payload Format for Scalable Video Coding," IETF RFC 6190, 
2011. 
[8] ISO/IEC 23009-1, "Information technology -- Dynamic 
adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH) -- Part 1: Media 
presentation description and segment formats," ISO/IEC, 
Geneva, 2014.  
[9] M. Kawarasaki, K. Ooto, T. Nakanishi and H. Suzuki, 
"Metadata driven seamless content handover in ubiquitous 
environment," in Proceedings of the 2004 International 
Symposium on Applications and the Internet SAINT'04, 
Tokyo, 2004.  
[10] S. Park and S. Jeong, "Mobile IPTV: Approaches, Challenges, 
Standards and QoS Support," IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 
13, no. 3, p. 23–31, 2009.  
[11] L. De Cicco, S. Mascolo and V. Palmisano, "Feedback 
control for adaptive live video streaming," in MMSys '11 
Proceedings of the second annual ACM conference on 
Multimedia systems, San Jose, California, 2011.  
[12] J. Figueira, S. Greco, and M. Ehrgott, “Multiple Criteria 
Decision Analysis: state of the art surveys”, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 2005. 
[13] A. Beben, J. M. Batalla, W. Chai, and J. Sliwinski, “Multi-
criteria decision algorithms for efficient content delivery in 
content networks”, Annals of Telecommunications,  vol. 68, 
Issue 3, pp. 153-165, Springer, 2013, 
[14] E.Borcoci, M.Vochin, M.Constantinescu, J. M. Batalla, 
D.Negru, “On Server and Path Selection Algorithms and 
Policies in a light Content-Aware Networking Architecture”, 
ICSNC 
2014 
Conference, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2015/ICSNC15.html  
[15] E. Zitzler and L. Thiele, “Multiobjective evolutionary 
algorithms: A comparative case study and the strength pareto 
approach”. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 
No. 3(4),pp. 257-271, November 1999. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

