Routing optimization in the transmission network 
Mary Luz Mouronte, María Luisa Vargas, Paloma Martínez 
Optical Network Provisioning 
Ericsson 
Madrid, Spain 
mary.luz.mouronte.lopez@ericsson.com.
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a method to optimize the route 
lookup in a multivendor data transmission network built on 
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) and Wavelength Division 
Multiplexing (WDM) technologies. The optimization is carried 
out in terms of time reduction, thereby having a wide field of 
application in network operation: restoring service after a 
failure, traffic redistribution scenarios, etc. 
The algorithm encompasses different aspects such as: number of 
routes to lookup, network structure, technological characteristics 
of routes, and situation of elements, all of them related to 
technical objectives. It also aims at integrating other features 
embodying other objectives apart from the aforementioned 
technical ones. 
Keywords-component; route lookup optimization; SDH, WDM; 
transmission network features; transmission network elements; 
boundary conditions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The method to select a suitable path into a network for 
sending traffic is called routing. This process is carried out in 
different networks, particularly in data networks (data packet 
routing) and telephone networks (phone calls routed through 
numbering plans). 
In data networks, the routing information is included into 
the final address codification. Routing tables are used at each 
node, and they contain adjacent node addresses, so it is not 
necessary to know the whole network topology. 
Small networks can use manually configured routing tables, 
but when networks increase their size, manual management is 
unfeasible. This problem is intended to be resolved through 
automatic routing table creation. The process is based on the 
information included in the routing protocols, which allow the 
network to work in an autonomous way. 
There are different kinds of algorithms to automatically 
populate the routing tables: 
• 
Distance vector algorithms, based on the Bellman-Ford 
method [1]: each node assigns a cost to the distance to 
the known destine, and transmits it to the adjacent 
nodes. Each receptor builds its tables based on the 
received and stored information. If there is a node 
failure, the information is rebuilt in each one of the 
surviving nodes.  
• 
Link state algorithm: each node shares its link 
information so all the nodes build a network map. This 
map is modified according to the link state. The route 
is obtained by means of basic short path algorithms, 
which assign cost to each link (Dijkstra algorithm, for 
example). 
• 
Path vector protocol: a special class of distance vector 
algorithms, useful in very big networks. 
All these algorithms (special mention to [2], [3], [4], and 
[5]) require features which make possible to establish a 
hierarchy among routes, such as bandwidth, delay, hop number 
and so on. 
In telephone networks, routing tables are previously 
calculated in a centralized way. The main parameters for their 
elaboration are the network topology; the numbering plan and 
the traffic data analysis (see [6]). 
Due to geographical and hierarchical structures, which are 
the base of the numbering plans, almost all telephone calls are 
routed using only the first numbers (prefix). The tables are 
designed specifically for each switchboard, so the maximum 
number analysis is defined for the geographical zone managed 
by the switchboard. 
There is no dynamic route selection when there is a failure 
within the network. All the alternative routes are selected at the 
same time than the main ones. 
As we can see in all the previous cases, the techniques used 
in each network are based on their specific characteristics, 
which are not useful in the data transmission network: 
• 
In data networks, the routing table design, regardless of 
the selected method, is based on parameters that make 
possible to assign a cost to every links. In transmission 
networks, there is no measurable parameter that can be 
used to prioritize the paths. The only specific 
requirement at this point is to avoid loops in the final 
route when the algorithm selects a path in a node 
among different possibilities. In other words, an 
already visited node at the end of a possible path 
discards that path. 
• 
In telephone networks, the routing table design is 
static, based on the network structure and the 
information included in the telephone numbers, with 
no dynamic selection. In transmission networks, there 
are static paths too, but if the network fails, the new 
path is selected dynamically. In this situation, there is 
no more static information than the network topology, 
so there is no hierarchy that can be used to select a 
118
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

path. All the routes with available bandwidth have the 
same priority; there are no criteria to discard. 
There are some recent studies aimed at route lookup in 
transmission networks, as it is a key point in the deployment of 
the future high capacity networks, all-based in optical links. 
There are some novel approaches to this problem, as it is 
developed in [9], applied to power networks but useful for 
optical networks too. There are some works too for calculating 
routes after deployment, in a general way as it is mentioned in 
[10] or oriented to a specific kind of traffic, such as the one 
analyzed in [11]. 
However, almost all of these works are focused on static 
calculation or pre-calculated routes, while our work is focused 
on real-time lookup without pre-evaluated routes. They are 
oriented to isolated networks (in terms of technology), not 
mixed ones, each island with different restrictions and 
conditions. 
After the evaluation of all these points, the first step in the 
work will be the selection of the characteristics of the data 
transmission network that will facilitate the optimum route 
selection in a dynamic way according to network status. 
Subsequently, the work will describe the modifications in 
traditional algorithms to use all the selected features in the 
lookup. 
II. 
DATA TRANSMISISION NETWORK 
CHARACTERISTICS 
The procurement of a customer service between two points 
in the transmission network requires a route selection and 
setting between them, usually involving various nodes 
(equipments) aside from the access equipments. In normal 
service procurement, the route selection and setting is carried 
out at the circuit-provisioning step. 
However, an additional situation requires a route selection. 
If there is a network failure, it will be necessary to turn aside 
the traffic in order to ensure the service. In that case, there is no 
previous selected route, so a new one must be selected and set 
at that moment. What is more, main concerns must be: the 
speed, a minimized traffic lost, and network status, to avoid 
failed equipments or connections. 
The algorithms for data networks outlined before are very 
generic, and no efficient in particular ones, as it is showed by 
the modifications in the telephone network routing. 
This work describes the adjustments of the previous 
algorithms to the data network characteristics, so a best 
efficiency can be achieved. The bandwidth required for a route 
within the data transmission network is translated into a signal 
type, and the viable route is defined through the relationship 
between different paths according to this signal type. The work 
takes into account different features, which at the end define 
the network in terms of signal types: 
• 
Hierarchy: The network is hierarchically organized 
according to an increasing bandwidth. Paths with a 
specific signal type (i.e., a required bandwidth) are 
joined into another one with a higher one.  
• 
Safeguard: At some hierarchic levels, there are path 
groups defining structures for traffic safeguard. These 
path groups must be taken into account for the route 
definition (e.g., path rings). 
• 
Technology: Data transmission networks include a 
wide range of technologies. Within them, there are 
easier ways to switch routes (e.g., if the lambda 
switching can be remotely done in an optical network, 
this routing will be faster and more efficient than if it is 
necessary to make the switch in the equipment), 
directly affecting the delay in traffic restoration. 
• 
Network deployment: The network capacity changes 
dynamically, so the information about the network 
topology must be properly updated for an efficient 
route lookup. The network can mainly change in three 
different 
ways: 
deployment 
(i.e. 
adding 
new 
equipments or paths resulting in an increased 
capacity); 
network 
variations 
due 
to 
failures, 
(decreasing capacity) or path redesign (changing 
relationships) and finally service provisioning, which 
decreases the network capacity. 
III. 
ALGORITHM 
This section describes the information included in the 
algorithm in order to use the specific selected features of the 
data transmission network to obtain optimized results. The 
algorithm is applicable to a multivendor transmission network. 
The features outlined in the previous section are thoroughly 
explained below: 
• 
Location (buildings): sites where the network 
equipment is placed. 
• 
Transmission equipments within each location. 
• 
Ports/points in each equipment: the equipment usually 
consists of a variable number of cards (depending of 
the equipment configuration) and each card includes a 
number of ports (depending on the card configuration). 
All of these are physical elements, but there is a logical 
element that must be taken into account, the 
termination point [7]. A physical port can be logically 
divided in different points, related to a specific signal 
type. A path can finish in a port or a point depending 
on its signal type, so the algorithm must differentiate 
and consider both of them.  
• 
Links (paths) connecting equipments: The information 
handled by the algorithm is their free capability in 
terms of the number of paths and signal type of each 
one. This free capability can be modified according to 
the rules defined by the final points in the equipments, 
because there are specific configurations related to the 
equipment type and the network definition itself [7]. 
• 
Protection rings in the network: In a data transmission 
network, there are protection structures that ensure the 
traffic in some specific points, usually in big capability 
links. In these structures, there are usually two 
branches: one of them works in a normal way, and the 
119
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

other is free (safeguard) until a failure turns up. At that 
moment, an automatic switch is performed and the 
traffic begins to flow through the free branch, keeping 
the service on. These structures are called “rings” and, 
in this work, they are described in terms of the 
equipments and links belonging to them. 
All the necessary information in the algorithm must be 
updated dynamically, according to the variations carried out in 
the network topology mentioned before. These variations are 
translated on the assembly and disassembly of locations, 
equipments, ports, links and rings; configuration changes that 
modify the path that can be included into a link; and service 
procurement modifications (they entail link use, so the link 
capability is modified). 
All the above information is related to the network 
structure. Nevertheless, there is additional information, 
regarding to the route itself which must be handled by the 
algorithm, so the lookup is optimized. The additional 
information is translated into the input parameters that the 
algorithm must receive, so it can obtain a route with the desired 
conditions: 
• 
The signal type and number of routes the algorithm 
must lookup. 
• 
The termination points or ports that are the ends of 
the desired route. As it is mentioned above, the route 
must use one or the other in both ends depending on 
the signal type. 
• 
Required route features: These features can be 
expressed in terms of capability (a full link or only the 
needed bandwidth); possibility of network operations 
(links already have the desired capability or it can be 
achieved through configuration modifications); end 
situation (they must be in the same equipments or it is 
enough if they are in the same locations) and 
maximum number of links. The end situation must be 
taken into account because in certain conditions and 
technologies, it is not possible to reach the equipments 
and some hardware modifications are required. The 
maximum number of links is needed because 
sometimes the network is heavily messed [8] and the 
number of possibilities is dramatically increased, so 
this condition is a termination one. 
• 
Boundary conditions as a route lookup limitation. 
These conditions include elements which must or must 
not be used (equipments or links) and rings where the 
route must be included. The first condition allows to 
avoid failed equipments or links, as well as to use other 
ones according to service requirements. The last one is 
necessary because, in some cases, the initial protection 
schemes must be kept. 
• 
Resource special features. There are certain network 
conditions that can be useful to restrict the lookup, so it 
will be optimized. Usually they are related to the 
network status: to use failed resources if there is not 
other available route; to use temporary resources 
deployed only for a single scenario or another similar 
one. However, there is a special case related to network 
nature: to use only a specific kind of network (SDH or 
WDM, for example). This is necessary because, in 
some cases, there is no chance to send staff to 
manually switch routes, and the obtained route must 
allow automatic and remote operation. 
The way the adapted algorithm works to find a route is 
outlined below. 
The first step is to select the end equipment and the 
required resources according to all the input data. The next task 
is the lookup itself. There are three mutually exclusive lookups, 
depending on input data: 
• 
Lookup into a ring. 
• 
Lookup among locations. 
• 
Lookup among equipments. 
The first kind of lookup is the lookup into a ring. In this 
case, the first step is to get the equipments that constitute the 
ring. Next, the algorithm tries to locate a route defined only 
through links that belong to the ring (between those 
equipments). 
For this lookup to get a valid route, it is necessary that the 
end equipments are included in the ring too. Although this 
condition could make think that it is not a very useful lookup, it 
can be valid if we are trying to restore the service in a specific 
point, and we define the set of links into the ring as the route 
that needs to be modified. 
The algorithm can be formalized according to the next 
pseudocode: 
GET EQUIPMENTS IN THE RING 
IF (EqOri AND EqDes) IN THE RING 
SET EqIni = EqOri 
SET EqAnt = EqOri 
SET Route = () 
LOOKUP: 
GET LINK RING (EqIni, Link1, 
EqDes1, Link2, EqDes2) 
IF (EqDes1 = EqDes) THEN 
  ADD (Link1, Route) 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE IF (EqDes2 = EqDes) THEN 
ADD (Link2, Route) 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE IF UltEqu (EqDes1, EqDes2) 
THEN 
EXIT (NO_ROUTE) 
ELSE 
AsignEqu (EqAnt, EqIni, EqDes1, 
EqDes) 
GOTO LOOKUP 
END IF 
 
The second type is the lookup among locations. This 
lookup is used, as mentioned before, when there is no certainty 
of obtaining a valid route totally defined through a sequence of 
120
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

links and equipments, but we think that there is a sequence of 
locations and links, so in this case the network modifications 
are minor ones.  
The lookup begins at the initial location. From that point, 
links are selected and the end location of each one is explored 
in the same way. When the lookup arrives to a location where 
there is no available link or the route length reaches the 
maximum number of links and it is not the end location, it goes 
back until the last one where there are other available links and 
tries to go to a different location. 
In this case, the first and last locations are obtained through 
the end equipments, but the rest of the locations are obtained 
through the name of the links, not the equipments where the 
links end. The link selection takes into account the actual 
capability or the possibilities, which can be achieved through 
some network configurations, according to the input 
parameters. It also takes into account the special resource 
features: in a normal way, only permanent and working 
resources are selected, and there is no network restriction. 
These conditions change if there is any special feature, so the 
selection is widened (failed and temporary resources) or 
restricted (only a special network). 
The algorithm can be formalized according to the next 
pseudocode: 
GET_Loc_Equ (EqOri, LocOri) 
GET_Loc_Equ (EqDes, LocDes) 
SET Route = () 
 
LOOKUP_LOC (LocOri, LocDes, Route, Res) ⇒ 
SET LocIni = LocOri 
LOOKUP: 
SET Res = NOK 
FOR Link IN GET_LINK_AVAI (LocIni, 
ContCond, EspFeat) 
GET_Loc_Link (Link, LocIni, LocEnd) 
IF (LocEnd = LocDes) THEN 
ADD (Link, Route) 
SET Res = OK 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE IF (Long (Route) = NumMax – 1) 
THEN 
Next (Link) 
ELSE 
LOOKUP_LOC (LocIni, LocDes, Route, 
Res) 
IF (Res = OK) THEN 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE 
NEXT (Link) 
END 
END 
END 
EXIT (Res) 
 
The last kind of lookup is the most useful of them, the 
lookup among equipments. In this case, the route ends are the 
equipments themselves, not the locations, and the links must 
connect directly these equipments.  
The lookup begins at the initial equipment. From that point, 
links are selected and the end equipment of each one is 
explored in the same way. When the lookup arrives to an 
equipment where there is no available link or the route length 
reaches the maximum number of links and it is not the end 
equipment, it goes back until the last one with available links 
and tries to go to a different one. The link selection has the 
same considerations described in the previous point. 
The algorithm can be formalized according to the next 
pseudocode: 
SET Route = () 
 
LOOKUP_EQU (EquOri, EquDes, Route, Res) ⇒ 
SET EquIni = EquOri 
LOOKUP: 
SET Res = NOK 
FOR Link IN GET_LINK_AVAI (EquIni, 
ContCond, EspFeat) 
GET_Equ_Link (Link, EquIni, EquEnd) 
IF (EquEnd = EquDes) THEN 
ADD (Link, Route) 
SET Res = OK 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE IF (Long (Route) = NumMax – 1) 
THEN 
Next (Link) 
ELSE 
LOOKUP_LOC (EquIni, EquDes, Route, 
Res) 
IF (Res = OK) THEN 
EXIT (OK) 
ELSE 
NEXT (Link) 
END 
END 
END 
EXIT (Res) 
 
The last step, after any type of lookup obtains results, is the 
boundary check, so the routes that do not fill the boundaries are 
discarded. This check does not include the condition related to 
ring use because it is translated into a type of lookup. 
The algorithm receives the number of routes that must 
select, but time is an important matter that has to be considered, 
because the lookup is useful only if it obtains routes in a 
reasonable period. Therefore, there is a general timer, and 
when it ends the algorithms gives as an output all the routes 
selected until that moment, although the number is smaller than 
the required one. 
121
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 1.  Topologic network view for a practical lookup 
As the last step, we are going to explain the algorithm work 
with an example. In Fig. 1, we have a simplified network 
topology, where we can describe the expected behavior in each 
one of the lookups explained before.  
In this topology, we have all the basic elements for the 
algorithm: 
• 
Locations (Loc) and equipments (Eq), used for the 
route lookup. 
• 
Rings (ESS), which define the protection schemes into 
the network. 
• 
Links between the equipments. 
The desired route will begin at Eq. 1 and will finish at Eq. 
2. For a simplified explanation, we are supposing that all the 
resources are permanent and there is no failure into the network 
(the failed point will be outside this network). We are not 
describing the network type either, although the results are 
obtained mainly in an optical network, so we can consider that 
the ring is an optical ring. 
The results obtained according to the different kinds of 
lookup will be: 
• 
Lookup into a ring: In this topology, there would be no 
route between Eq. 1 and Eq. 2. The lookup should be 
between two equipments included into the ring: Eq A, 
Eq B, Eq C, Eq D, to obtain a valid result. 
• 
Lookup among locations: in this case, the valid route 
would be between any equipment included in Loc 1 
(Eq 1 and Eq 1’) and any equipment included in Loc 2 
(Eq 2 and Eq 2’), so there are two possible routes: 
crossing the ESS 1 or through equipments Eq F, Eq G 
and Eq H. 
• 
Lookup among equipments: in this case, the only valid 
route would be between equipments Eq 1 and Eq 2, 
crossing the ring 1. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The method has been applied over a huge network (more 
than 50,000 equipments) and to a wide range of cases varying 
the aforementioned parameters (route features and resource 
state). It has been verified that even the worst results in terms 
of lookup time mean a significant improvement compared to 
the non-optimized lookup. Telecommunication operators could 
efficiently solve most situations by means of this procedure. 
The method has been applied over a huge network (more 
than 50,000 Equipments) and to a wide range of cases, defined 
by different signal types. In any signal type, we have varied: 
• 
The route features; 
• 
The boundary conditions and 
• 
The resource special features. 
It has been verified that even the worst results in terms of 
lookup time mean a significant improvement compared to the 
non-optimized lookup.  
Each test has been defined following the process below: 
• 
An origin and destination for the desired route are 
selected. 
• 
A non-optimized lookup is carried out over the 
network. 
• 
A signal type (route features) for the desired route is 
selected. 
• 
An optimized lookup (taking into account only the 
route features) is processed. 
• 
A set of variations is applied to all the boundary 
conditions for each origin and destination, showing 
different outcomes according to these variations. 
• 
Start and finish time are stored for each lookup. 
In Table 1, a summary of the results is shown to quantify 
the improvement. These results are obtained with six links as 
the maximum route length using as a 100-percent reference the 
time consumption for the non-optimized lookup, quantifying 
each result as a fraction of that time. 
TABLE I.  
RESULT SUMMARY 
Cases 
Result 
Maximum 
63,46% 
Minimum 
28,13% 
Average 
52,63% 
 
According to the input conditions, the lookup has been 
applied into the optical networks and through different 
networks. Results show that with different networks involved, 
the algorithm does not adapt so well to network features, but it 
improves the result too. 
When the route length increases the improvement decreases 
very fast, and the lookup time is almost the same than in a 
general case, because in both of them, it grows exponentially, 
and the lookup is no useful in a practical way. 
V. 
CONCLUSSIONS 
The results show that taking into account not only 
geographical considerations as locations, but also data 
transmission network features, basically route continuity 
122
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

through equipments, the lookup times are significantly minor 
than the original ones. 
The explained lookup, using the algorithm with the 
proposed restrictions, is efficient if the route length is 
moderated. This supposition is reasonable in many scenarios 
within the telecommunication operators’ transmission network. 
When the necessary route length increases over the average 
(around six hops), the lookup time tends to pair the time it 
would be obtained if the lookup used an algorithm without 
restrictions. 
As mentioned before, after the lookup obtains a route there 
is a validation where the algorithm checks if the route fulfills 
the special network features and boundary conditions. This step 
offers a good point to introduce new considerations into the 
algorithms, so that the route optimization can embody other 
objectives apart from the technical ones (for instance: 
economic costs or energy consumption). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. R. Ford Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson (1962). “Flows in networks”. 
Princeton University Press. 
[2] 
D. Medhi and K. Ramasamy (2007). “Network routing: algorithms, 
protocols, and architectures”. Morgan Kaufmann. 
[3] 
J. Doyle and J. Carroll (2005). “Routing TCP/IP”, Included in: Volume I, 
Second Ed. Cisco Press. 
[4] 
N. Spring, R. Mahajan, and T. Anderson (2003). “Quantifying the 
causes of path inflation”. Included in: Proc. SIGCOMM 2003. 
[5] 
Gerald Ash (1997). “Dynamic routing in telecommunication networks”. 
McGraw-Hill. 
[6] 
M., A. Wainwright (2003). “Small road network”. Included in: I. 
Kennedy, Teletraffic Lecture Notes, School of Electrical and Information 
Engineering, University of the Witwatersrand, 2003. 
[7] 
Recommendation G.709/Y.1331: Interfaces for the optical transport 
network (OTN). ITU. 
[8] 
M.L. Mouronte, R.M. Benito, J.P. Cárdenas, A. Santiago, V. Feliú, P. 
van Wijngaarden, and. L.G. Moyano (2009). “Complexity in spanish 
optical fiber and SDH transport networks”. Included in: Computer 
Physics Communications, Volume 180, Issue 4, April 2009. 
[9] 
N. Leeprechanon, P. Limsakul, and S. Pothiya (2010). “Optimal 
Transmission Expansion Planning Using Ant Colony Optimization”. 
Included in: Journal of Sustainable Energy & Environment 1 (2010). 
[10] S. Bohacek, J. Hespanha, J. Lee, C. Lim, and K. Obraczka (2007). 
"Game Theoretic Stochastic Routing for Fault Tolerance and Security in 
Computer Networks". Included in: IEEE Transactions on Parallel and 
Distributed Systems, Vol. 18, Issue 9, September 2007. 
[11] C. Fang,  C. Feng, and  X. Chen (2010). “A heuristic algorithm for 
minimum cost multicast routing in OTN network”. Included in: IEEE 
Xplore May 2010. 
 
123
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

