Security Issues in Cooperative MAC Protocols
Ki Hong Kim
The Attached Institute of ETRI
Daejeon, Korea
e-mail: hong0612@ensec.re.kr
Abstract—A lot of cooperative media access control (MAC)
protocols have been proposed to support cooperative communi-
cations in wireless networks in the last few years. In this paper,
the security vulnerabilities in some cooperative MAC protocols
(e.g., COSMIC, VC-MAC, BTAC, and cooperative MAC for
IEEE 802.11g) are analyzed. Channel-assisted authentication
approach is also discussed to verify entities in cooperative MAC
protocols. These analytical results should be signiﬁcantly useful
in the design of efﬁcient authentication solutions for secure,
cooperative MAC protocols.
Keywords–Cooperative MAC protocols; vulnerability; authen-
tication; physical layer security.
I. INTRODUCTION
A cooperative wireless network (CWN) is an emerging
communication mechanism that takes advantages of spatial
diversity among neighboring relay nodes, to achieve gains in
performance and improved reliability. CWNs have attracted
much attention within the last decade. In CWNs, when the
source sends data to the destination, some nodes serve as
relays by forwarding replicas of the source data to the des-
tination. The destination receives multiple sets of data from
the source and the relays, and then combines them. There
are three major methods for forwarding from relay. First,
for the amplify-and-forward (AF) method, after receiving a
noisy version of the original data, the relay ampliﬁes and
retransmits noisy data to the destination. Second, for the
decode-and-forward (DF) method, the relay decodes data
from the source and then retransmits the decoded data to
the destination. Finally, in the compress-and-forward (CF)
method, the relay forwards incremental redundancy of the
original data to the destination. The destination receives
multiple data sets from the source and multiple relays; then it
combines them to achieve gains in performance and quality
[1][2].
Due to the rapid growth and evolution of CWNs, much
research has been done to propose a cooperative MAC proto-
col that supports cooperative communication in wireless net-
works such as wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and vehic-
ular networks. In other work, a new carrier-sense, multiple-
access, collision-avoidance (CSMA/CA)-based MAC proto-
col, called the cooperative MAC protocol for WSN with
minimal control message (COSMIC), was proposed to sup-
port cooperative relaying with minimum overhead [3]. The
vehicular cooperative MAC (VC-MAC) was designed for
gateway downloading in vehicular networks [4]. It lever-
ages the advantages of both cooperative communication and
spatial re-usability, maximizing system throughput. A busy-
tone-based cooperative MAC protocol (BTAC) for wireless
local area networks (WLANs) has also been proposed [5].
An efﬁcient cooperative MAC protocol based on IEEE
802.11g was proposed [6], which can be extended to
802.11n. Easy comparison has been made possible by an
analytical model of the power consumption of the various
MAC protocols [7].
CWNs are vulnerable to security attacks due to the open
broadcast nature of the wireless channel and the use of co-
operative transmission involving multiple transmitters. There
have been a number of studies regarding security issues,
including attacks and vulnerabilities, in the cooperative
MAC protocols. One study introduced the case study of
security attacks based on control-packet vulnerabilities in
Synergy MAC [8], while another addressed the potential
security issues and vulnerabilities that arise in CoopMAC
[9]. The security vulnerabilities found in trafﬁc adaptive-
cooperative, wireless sensor-MAC (CWS-MAC) have been
identiﬁed and analyzed [10]. Coordinated denial-of-service
(DoS) attacks against data packets on IEEE 802.22 have
been studied from the perspective of malicious nodes [11].
A detection scheme to mitigate malicious relay behavior in
a cooperative environment has been proposed [12][13][14].
Similarly, the selﬁsh-behavior attack/detection model and the
attack strategies of smart selﬁsh nodes have been analyzed
[15]. A secure, cooperative-data-downloading framework for
paid services in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) has
also been proposed [16].
In spite of all the work mentioned above, security vul-
nerabilities in many cooperative MAC protocols have not
yet been analyzed (i.e., COSMIC, VC-MAC, BTAC, and
cooperative MAC for IEEE 802.11g). In this paper, some
security attacks against COSMIC, VC-MAC, BTAC, and
cooperative MAC for IEEE 802.11g are disclosed, and
security vulnerabilities that arise in them due to attacks, are
then analyzed. The emerging, channel-assisted authentica-
tion mechanism using physical layer characteristics is also
discussed to verify entities in cooperative MAC protocols.
To my knowledge, this is the ﬁrst comprehensive case study
of security issues caused by possible security attacks on
COSMIC, VC-MAC, BTAC, and cooperative MAC for IEEE
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

G
F
8
5
5
Figure 1.
Example of Security Attack in Cooperative Wireless Networks.
802.11g.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, a brief description of some cooperative MAC
protocols is provided. In Section III, some possible security
attacks are disclosed and then the security vulnerabilities
caused by these attacks are analyzed. In Section IV, channel-
assisted authentication mechanism is discussed to authen-
ticate entities in cooperative MAC protocols. Finally, in
Section V, conclusions are presented along with plans for
future work.
II. COOPERATIVE MAC PROTOCOLS
Cooperative wireless communication is an innovative
communication scheme that takes advantage of the open
broadcast nature of the wireless medium, and its spatial
diversity, to improve channel capacity, reliability, robustness,
delay, and coverage. It is known to be essential for making
ubiquitous communication connectivity a reality. Multiple
protocols in the MAC layer have been suggested to utilize
the concept of cooperative transmission.
COSMIC is a cooperative MAC protocol for WSN with
minimal control packets. It uses only one control packet,
request-for-relay (RFR), for relay selection. In COSMIC,
the relay selection is decided using both the channel-state
information (CSI) and the remaining energy. COSMIC is
able to increase network lifetime by about 25% and the
delivery ratio by 5 times [3].
VC-MAC is a cooperative MAC protocol for vehicular
networks. It is composed of four stages, namely, the gateway
broadcast period, information exchange period, relay set
selection period, and data forwarding period. VC-MAC
exploits the concept of cooperative communication and takes
advantages of the broadcast nature of the wireless medium to
maximize throughput. This protocol also leverages spatial di-
versity and user diversity to overcome the unreliability under
many broadcast scenarios. VC-MAC signiﬁcantly increases
system throughput compared with existing strategies [4].
BTAC is a cooperative MAC that increases throughput in
multi-rate WLANs. A busy tone signal of only one-time-slot
length is used to improve the throughput performance and
reduce relay. It is known to improve throughput performance
by at least 35% and reduce system delay, compared to the
G
5
8
F
8UhU
FS8UhU
:S8UhU
F:F
57?
F:F
57?
Figure 2.
Security Vulnerability in COSMIC.
IEEE 802.11b MAC protocol. BTAC is compatible with
IEEE WLAN [5].
To increase performance and reduce energy consumption
in previous versions of cooperative MAC for IEEE 802.11b,
a new cooperative MAC protocol for IEEE 802.11g (being
extended to 802.11n) was proposed. It can support ten
different transmission rates (1, 2, 6, 9, 12, 18, 24, 36,
48, and 54 Mbps) and can efﬁciently reduce the time for
selecting better relays, by partitioning the relays with similar
transmission rates, into the same groups [6].
III. SECURITY VULNERABILITY IN COOPERATIVE MAC
PROTOCOLS
Cooperative MAC protocols suffer from vulnerability to
various security attacks due to the open broadcast nature of
the wireless channel and the use of cooperative communi-
cation with multiple relays [8][9].
For example, in Fig. 1, let us assume that the attacker
is closer to source than to the relay, or that it is between
source and relay. In this environment, attacker can disguise
itself as relay to allow its illegal packet to get to source and
destination. There is no suitable countermeasure to prevent
this attack, nor any way to authenticate legitimate relay.
Therefore, the result is disruption of the normal cooperative
transmission between source and destination.
Attackers are focused on network performance, which
means they want to disturb the communication between
source and destination. They would exploit the weakness in
the cooperative procedure, especially in the control packet
exchange, and disguise themselves as legitimate relays to
disturb the network operation, and to degrade the wireless
channel quality. Security attacks based on control packets
can be classiﬁed into two categories: faked request-to-send
(RTS) attacks and faked clear-to-send (CTS) attacks. The
former generates a false RTS packet in order to achieve
virtual jamming of source, while the latter generates a false
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

;K
5
8%
F
8UhU
8&
8UhU
:SF=
:SF=
8=
8=
:SFFHG
:SFFHG
F7HG
F7HG
:S8UhU
:S8UhU
F=
8=
FFHG
F7HG
8UhU
Figure 3.
Security Vulnerability in VC-MAC.
CTS packet in order to disguise attacker as legitimate relay
or destination.
A. Security Vulnerability in COSMIC
Fig. 2 shows a destination attack caused by faked data
(F Data) from attacker. In this case, attacker deliberately
transmits its F Data to destination, informing it that attacker
is a legitimate relay.
As shown in Fig. 2, in COSMIC, source sends data to
destination, which receives the data. Neighbors, relay and
attacker overhear it. If destination is able to decode the data,
it sends an acknowledgment (ACK) to source. In this case,
no relaying is needed. However, if destination is not able to
decode the data, a cooperative relaying is engaged.
When destination doesn’t successfully receive data from
source, it sends a request-for-reply (RFR) to relay to express
its need for a relaying. Destination then waits for the data
(R Data) from relay. The R Data is the relayed copy of the
data. Since attacker is close to relay, it is able to receive
the RFR. After receiving the RFR from destination, attacker
sends its faked data (F Data) to destination. Finally, destina-
tion sends an ACK to attacker to notify that it successfully
received the data. This blocks the transmission of R Data
from relay. Consequently, cooperative communication be-
tween source and destination is not established.
B. Security Vulnerability in VC-MAC
Fig. 3 illustrates a security attack using faked relay
information (F RI) from an attacker in the VC-MAC.
In the VC-MAC, after the gateway, which is deployed
along the roadside, senses the channel is idle, it sends data
G
5
8
F
AFHG
AFHG
:S6igmHcbY
:S6igmHcbY
6igmHcbY
6igmHcbY
A7HG
A7HG
A7HG
8UhU
8UhU
57?
8UhU
Figure 4.
Security Vulnerability in BTAC.
directly with no handshaking procedure. After the broadcast
of the gateway, relay and attacker, which both received the
data, become potential relays. Attacker sends faked relay
information (F RI) to two destinations (Destinations 1 and
2) before the transmission of relay information (RI) from
relay. Attacker then waits for destination information (DI)
from destinations 1 and 2. Since the authentication (or
integrity) mechanism is not applied to the control packets
exchanged between relay, and destinations 1 and 2, the legal
RI from relay may be rejected by destinations 1 and 2 due to
illegal previous F RI received from attacker. This means that
because destinations 1 and 2 have already received RI from
attacker, they reject additional RI from relay. Once attacker
receives two sets of DI, it transmits a faked relay request-
to-send (F RRTS). After receiving the relay clear-to-send
(RCTS), attacker makes a faked data (F Data) transmission
to destinations 1 and 2. As a result, normal cooperation
between relay and destination 1 or 2 cannot be guaranteed.
C. Security Vulnerability in BTAC
The potential security attack in BTAC is also shown in
Fig. 4. An attacker sends a faked busy tone (F BusyTone)
to inform the source and destination that it is an intended
helper to forward the data received from source.
Source sends modiﬁed RTS (MRTS) to relay and desti-
nation. Attacker near relay or destination comes to know
of this. The F BusyTone is sent from attacker to source
and destination. This means that attacker is an intended
legitimate relay for forwarding data. Accordingly, since the
authentication (or integrity) mechanism is not applied to
F BusyTone, the legal busy tone (BusyTone) from relay is
denied by source and destination due to the previous illegal
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

G
5
8
F
FHG
FFHG
8UhU
7HG
5FHG
57?
8UhU
8UhU
:S8UhU
57?
Figure 5.
Security Vulnerability in Cooperative MAC for IEEE 802.11g
or 802.11n.
F BusyTone received from attacker. Then, destination sends
its modiﬁed CTS (MCTS) to attacker and source. Source
sends data to attacker, not to relay. Finally, attacker denies
cooperative communication service to source by simply
dropping the data it receives from source, or forwarding
faked data to destination. Due to this false data transmission
from source to attacker, cooperative communication between
source and destination via relay is not established.
D. Security Vulnerability in Cooperative MAC for IEEE
802.11g or 802.11n
Fig. 5 shows a security vulnerability caused by the illegal
RTS packet (ARTS) from attacker in cooperative MAC for
IEEE 802.11g.
When source ﬁnds a free channel and it can send data to
destination, it will send an RTS to destination and wait for
CTS from destination. Since attacker, as well as relay, can
overhear both RTS and CTS, attacker can communicate with
both source and destination so that it can serve as a legiti-
mate helper candidate between source and destination. Just
after overhearing both RTS and CTS, attacker calculates the
data rates from itself to source and destination. Attacker then
replies ARTS to tell source that it can help with transmission.
This means that attacker is an intended legitimate relay
forwarding data. Since source receives illegal RTS (ARTS)
from attacker, it rejects the legal RTS (RRTS) from relay.
Then, source sends data to attacker, not relay. If attacker
receives data from source, it simply drops the data received
or forwards faked data (F Data) to destination. It may also
spoof an acknowledgment (ACK), causing destination to
wrongly conclude a successful cooperative transmission via
relay.
5`]WY
9jY
6cV
FYW]dfcWU`
Figure 6.
Example of Security Community with Alice (Legitimate), Bob
(Legitimate), and Eve (Illegitimate).
IV. CHANNEL-ASSISTED AUTHENTICATION
MECHANISM
In order to prevent the security attacks inherent in coop-
erative MAC protocols and verify entities more efﬁciently,
a channel-assisted authentication mechanism using physical
layer properties of wireless channel is discussed. The follow-
ing four main characteristics of wireless channel can allow
the wireless channel to be used as a means to authenticate
the legitimate entity [17][18].
• The impulse response for time-variant wireless channel
decorrelates quite rapidly in space.
• Wireless channel also changes in time, which results
in a natural refresh for a channel-assisted security
mechanism.
• The wireless channel is reciprocal in space.
• The time variation is slow enough so that the channel
response can be accurately estimated within the channel
coherent time.
In the typical environment shown in Fig. 6, three entities
(Alice, Bob, and Eve) are potentially located in spatially
separated positions. Alice and Bob are the two legitimate
entities, and Eve is the illegitimate entity. Alice is the
transmitter that initiates communication and sends data,
while Bob is the intended receiver. Eve is an attacker that
injects false signals into the channel in the hope of spooﬁng
Alice. The main security goal is to provide authentication
service between Alice and Bob. The legitimate receiver
(Bob) should have to distinguish between legitimate signals
from legitimate transmitter (Alice) and illegitimate signals
from attacker (Eve).
As depicted in Fig. 6, let us suppose that Alice transmits
data to Bob at a sufﬁcient rate to ensure temporal coherence
between successive data sets. In addition, while trying to
impersonate Alice, Eve wishes to convince Bob that she is
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Alice. To provide authentication between Alice and Bob,
Bob ﬁrst uses the received signal from Alice to estimate
the channel response. He then compares this signal with a
previous signal version of the Alice-Bob channel. If the two
channel responses are close to each other, Bob concludes
that the source of the data is the same as that of the pre-
viously transmitted data. Otherwise, Bob concludes that the
transmitter is not Alice [18][19]. Using this uniqueness of
the Alice-Bob wireless channel, it is possible to distinguish
between legitimate transmitter (Alice) and illegitimate one
(Eve). It is caused by the fact that the wireless channel
decorrelates in space, so the Alice-Bob channel is totally
uncorrelated with the Alice-Eve and Bob-Eve channels if
Eve is more than an order of a wavelength away from Alice
and Bob.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Security is the principal issue that must be resolved in
order for the potential of CWNs to be fully exploited. This
work provides a comprehensive analysis of the security
issues caused by attackers for cooperative MAC protocols
such as COSMIC, VC-MAC, BTAC, and cooperative MAC
for IEEE 802.11g. Security vulnerabilities are analyzed at
each handshaking stage, while attacking control packets
are being exchanged among nodes (source, destination, and
relay). It also discusses that a channel-assisted authentication
mechanism is applicable to enhance and supplement conven-
tional cryptographic authentication mechanism for coopera-
tive MAC protocols. These results should be signiﬁcantly
useful in the design of efﬁcient authentication mechanisms
for secure, cooperative MAC protocols.
In the future, the author plans to design and implement a
lightweight, low-power authentication (or integrity) mecha-
nism using physical layer properties suitable for CWNs. The
plan is then to examine the effects of the proposed mecha-
nism on security cost, power consumption, and transmission
performance.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Nosratinia, T. E. Hunter, and A. Hedayat, “Cooperative
Communication in Wireless Networks,” IEEE Communica-
tion Magazine, vol. 42, October 2004, pp. 74-80.
[2] A. Bletsas, A. Khisti, D. P. Reed, and A. Lippman, “A Simple
Cooperative Diversity Method Based on Network Path Selec-
tion,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 24, March 2006, pp. 659-672.
[3] A. B. Nacef, S.-M. Senouci, G.-D. Yacine, and A.-L. Beylot,
“COSMIC: A Cooperative MAC Protocol for WSN with
Minimal Control Messages,” IFIP International Conference
on New Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS 2011),
February 2011, pp. 1-5.
[4] J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and W. Jia, “VC-MAC: A Cooperative
MAC Protocol in Vehicular Networks,” IEEE Trans. on
Vehicular Technologies, vol. 58, March 2009, pp. 1561-1571.
[5] S. Sayed and Y. Yang, “BTAC: A Busy Tone Based Coop-
erative MAC Protocol for Wireless Local Area Networks,”
International Conference on Communication and Networking
in China (ChinaCom 2008), August 2008, pp. 403-409.
[6] J.-P. Sheu, J.-T. Chang, C. Ma, and C.-P. Leong, “A Coop-
erative MAC Protocol Based on 802.11 in Wireless Ad hoc
Networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC 2013), April 2013, pp. 416-421.
[7] J. Rousselot, A. El-Hoiydi, and J.-D. Decotignie, “Low
Power Medium Access Control Protocols for Wireless Sensor
Networks,” European Wireless Conference (EW 2008), June
2008, pp. 1-5.
[8] K. H. Kim, “Security Attack based on Control Packet Vul-
nerability in Cooperative Wireless Networks,” IARIA Interna-
tional Conference on Networking and Services (ICNS 2013),
March 2013, pp. 123-128.
[9] K. H. Kim, “Analysis of Security Vulnerability in Cooperative
Communication Networks,” IARIA International Conference
on Networking and Services (ICNS 2011), April 2011, pp.
80-84.
[10] T. O. Walker III, M. Tummala, and J. McEachen, “Secu-
rity Vulnerabilities in Hybrid Flow-speciﬁc Trafﬁc-adaptive
Medium Access Control,” Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences (HICSS 2012), January 2012, pp. 5649-
5658.
[11] Y. Tan, S. Sengupta, and K. P. Subbalakshmi, “Analysis of
Coordinated Denial-of-Service Attacks in IEEE 802.22 Net-
works,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 29, April 2011, pp. 890-902.
[12] Y. Mao and M. Wu, “Tracing Malicious Relays in Coopera-
tive Wireless Communications,” IEEE Trans. on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 2, June 2007, pp. 198-207.
[13] S. Dehnie, H. T. Sencar, and N. Memon, “Detecting Malicious
Behavior in Cooperative Diversity,” Conference on Informa-
tion Sciences and Systems (CISS 2007), March 2007, pp.
895-899.
[14] S. Dehnie and S. Tomasin, “Detection of Selﬁsh Nodes in
Networks Using CoopMAC Protocol with ARQ,” IEEE Trans.
on Wireless Communications, vol. 9, July 2010, pp. 2328-
2337.
[15] H. Li, M. Xu, and Y. Li, “The Research of Frame and Key
Technologies for Intrusion Detection System in IEEE 802-11-
based Wireless Mesh Networks,” International Conference on
Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems (CISIS
2008), March 2008, pp. 455-460.
[16] Y. Hao, J. Tang, and Y. Cheng, “Secure Cooperative Data
Downloading in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications/Supplement, vol. 31,
September 2013, pp. 523-537.
[17] S. Mathur, A. Reznik, Y. Chunxuan, and R. Mukherjee,
“Exploiting the Physical Layer for Enhanced Security,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 17, October 2010, pp. 63-70.
[18] L. Xiao, L. J. Greenstein, N. B. Mandayam, and W. Trappe,
“Using the Physical Layer for Wireless Authentication in
Time-Variant Channels,” IEEE Trans. on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 7, July 2008, pp. 2571-2579.
[19] K.
Zeng,
K.
Govindan,
and
P.
Mohapatra,
“Non-
Cryptographic Authentication and Identiﬁcation in Wireless
Networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, October
2010, pp. 56-62.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

