On Business Models for Vehicle-to-Everything Systems Based on 5G Slicing 
 
Eugen Borcoci, Marius Vochin, Serban Georgica Obreja 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest - UPB 
Bucharest, Romania 
Emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, marius.vochin@upb.ro, serban@radio.pub.ro  
 
 
Abstract—Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) and Internet of 
Vehicles are complex multi-actor systems offering to vehicles 
capabilities to exchange data with other entities (vehicles, 
infrastructure, grid, pedestrians, etc.)  The V2X services aim 
to improve the transport, safety and comfort on the roads and 
also to help autonomous driving. The 5G technology can 
provide a powerful support for V2X, in multi-tenant, multi-
domain, multi-operator and end-to-end contexts. Particularly, 
the 5G slicing technology is able to construct dedicated slices, 
to serve V2X needs. The complexity of the V2X systems and 
the multitude of visions led to proposal of many variants of 
V2X business models and ecosystems, comprising several 
cooperating actors. The business models are important, given 
that they essentially determines the requirements and 
architectures; for V2X systems and is still an open research 
topic. This work in progress attempts to analyze some relevant 
business models for 5G slicing and discuss how they can be 
adapted for rich V2X environment. The paper can help the 
reader to understand what are the possible stakeholders sets 
in the V2X complex environment, their interactions and to 
define the architecture followed by the design of a particular 
V2X system. 
 
Keywords—Vehicle-to-Everthing; 2X; 5G slicing; Business 
models; 
Stakeholders; 
Management 
and 
Orchestration; 
Software Defined Networking; Network Function Virtualization; 
Service management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) communications and 
services include many use cases in single or multi-tenancy, 
multi-operator and multi-domain contexts. Consequently, 
different sets of service requirements exist, e.g., from 
enhanced real-time navigation systems on board, to a self-
automated car, or a video streaming played on the in-
vehicle infotainment system.  
The basic vehicular communications have covered 
essentially 
vehicle-to-vehicle 
(V2V) 
and 
vehicle-to-
road/infrastructure (V2R/V2I) communications. Recently, 
extended models and services are included in the V2X 
umbrella, like: vehicle-to-pedestrian (V2P) - direct 
communication, vehicle-to-vulnerable road user (VRU), 
vehicle-to-network (V2N) - including cellular networks and 
Internet, Vehicle to sensors (V2S), vehicle-to-power grid 
(V2G)  and vehicle-to-home (V2H).  
V2X allows vehicles to directly communicate with each 
other, to roadside infrastructure, and to other road users for 
the benefit of better road safety, traffic efficiency, smart 
mobility, 
environmental 
sustainability, 
and 
driver 
convenience. V2X contributes to fully autonomous driving 
development through its unique non-line-of-sight sensing 
capability which allows vehicles to detect potential hazards, 
traffic, and road conditions from longer distances. Typical 
use cases and services/applications for V2X comprise: 
active road safety applications (including autonomous 
driving); 
warnings, 
notifications, 
assistance; 
traffic 
efficiency and management applications; infotainment 
applications. Therefore, IoV extends the traditional basic 
functions like vehicles driving and safety to novel target 
domains such as enhanced traffic management, automobile 
production, repair and vehicle insurance, road infrastructure 
construction and repair, logistics and transportation, etc.  
Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is an extension of the V2X, 
aiming to create a   global network of vehicles – enabled by 
various Wireless Access Technologies (WAT) [1][2]. It 
involves the Internet and includes heterogeneous access 
networks. IoV can be seen as a special use case of Internet 
of Things (IoT); however, IoV contains intelligent 
“terminals” such as vehicles (maybe some of them - 
autonomous). The complexity of the V2X/IoV claims for a 
strong support infrastructure. The 5G slicing technology is 
considered to be an appropriate candidate. 
The 5G mobile network technologies offer powerful 
features, in terms of capacity, speed, flexibility and services, 
to answer the increasing demand and challenges addressed 
to communication systems and Internet [3]-[5]. 5G can 
provide specific types of services to simultaneously satisfy 
various customer/tenant demands in a multi-x fashion (the 
notation –x stands for: tenant, domain, operator and 
provider). 
The 5G network slicing concept (based on virtualization 
and softwarization) enables programmability and modularity 
for network resources provisioning, adapted to different 
vertical service requirements (in terms of bandwidth, 
latency, mobility, etc.) [6]-[9]. In a general view, a Network 
Slice (NSL) is a managed logical group of subsets of 
resources, organized as virtual dedicated networks, isolated 
from each other (w.r.t. performance and security), but 
sharing the same infrastructure. The NSLs functionalities are 
implemented 
by 
Physical/Virtual 
network 
functions 
(PNFs/VNFs), chained in graphs, in order to compose 
services dedicated to different sets of users. The slices are 
programmable and have the ability to expose their 
capabilities to the users. The actual run-time execution 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

entities are instantiated slices, whose life cycles are 
controlled by the management and control entities belonging 
to the Management, Orchestration and Control Plane 
(MO&C). The Network Function Virtualization (NFV)[10]-
[13] and Software Defined Networks (SDN) technologies 
can cooperate [14] to manage, orchestrate  and control the 
5G sliced environment, in a flexible and programmable way. 
The 3GPP [4][5] has defined three fundamental categories 
of 5G slice scenarios: Massive machine type communication 
(mMTC); Ultra reliability low latency communication 
(URLLC); Enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB). 
The 5G slicing is considered to be a strong candidate to 
fulfill the requirements of V2X systems. Several studies and 
projects deal with development of V2X systems based on 
5G sliced infrastructure; some examples are [15]-[19]. The 
dedicated 5G slices can provide the required capabilities for 
multiple tenants, while working over a 5G shared 
infrastructure.  However, it is recognized [15][16], that the 
heterogeneous and complex features of V2X services neither 
allow the straightforward mapping of them onto basic  
reference slice types – like eMBB, URLLC and mMTC 
services, nor the mapping into a  single V2X slice. 
Additional customization is necessary in order to create 
V2X dedicated slices. 
 
The V2X/IoV systems are highly complex, involving 
several technical and organizational entities which 
cooperate in a business ecosystem. Generally, a business 
ecosystem is a network of organizations/stakeholders such 
as 
suppliers, 
distributors, 
customers, 
competitors, 
government agencies, etc., involved in the delivery of a 
specific product or service through both competition and 
cooperation. The entities/stakeholders/actors interact with 
each other, in order to achieve together the goals of the 
system. An equivalent term is Business Model (BM) to 
define the set of stakeholders and their interactions. 
In a V2X ecosystem new actors are involved, besides 
traditional Internet and network/service providers or 
operators. These new actors could be road authorities, 
municipalities, regulators and vehicle manufacturers 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM).  
The development of the 5G complex sliced systems 
supposes to initially define the BMs, which essentially 
determines the roles and responsibilities of the entities and 
then the system requirements and architecture. This need is 
equally true for V2X systems and today it is still an open 
research topic. Concerning V2X BMs, it is recognized (see 
5G PPP Automotive Working Group, Business Feasibility 
Study for 5G V2X Deployment [22]) that there is still some 
lack of insights into the required rollout conditions, roles of 
different stakeholders, investments, business models and 
expected profit from Connected and Automated Mobility 
(CAM) services. On the other side, the general BMs for 5G 
sliced networks should be adapted and refined in order to 
well serve the V2X system’s needs. 
Considering the above reasons, this work in progress 
attempts to analyze some relevant BMs for 5G slicing and 
discuss how they can be adapted for V2X environment. 
Due to space limitation, this text cannot afford to offer 
detailed explanations about the BMs presented; the 
objective is to identify the major points of similarity of 
different BMs for 5G slicing, then 5G-V2X approaches and 
to study their possible mapping. The paper contribution is 
mainly an overview and comparison of different solutions.  
The paper structure is described below. Section II 
outlines the stakeholder roles in 5G slicing, given that such 
definitions determine essentially the overall system 
architecture.  Section III refines the general BMs to be 
adapted to 5G V2X communications and services. Section 
IV performs an analysis of some factors that lead to different 
V2X-5G 
business 
models. 
Section 
VI 
summarizes 
conclusions and future work.  
II. BUSINESS MODEL AND  STAKEHOLDER ROLES IN 5G 
SLICING 
The objective of this section is to present a few relevant 
BMs proposed for 5G sliced systems and to identify the 
main roles of actors, in order to prepare their customization 
for V2X case in the next section. The layered architecture of 
the 5G slicing strongly depends on the stakeholder roles 
defined by the BM. Different BMs have been proposed, 
aiming to support multi-tenant, multi-domain end-to-end 
(E2E) and multi-operator capabilities in various contexts. 
Several examples are summarized below. 
A. 
Example 1 
A basic model (see A. Galis, [7]) defines four main 
roles:  
End User (EU): consumes (part of) the services supplied 
by the slice tenant, without providing them to other business 
actors. 
Slice Tenant (SLT): is the generic user of a specific slice, 
including network/cloud/data centers, which can host 
customized services. A SLT can request from a Network 
Slice Provider (NSLP) to create a new slice instance 
dedicated to support some SLT specific services.  The SLT 
can lease virtual resources from one or more NSLPs in the 
form of a virtual network, where the tenant can realize, 
manage and then provide Network Services (NS) to its 
individual end users. A NS is a composition of Network 
Functions (NFs), defined in terms of the individual NFs and 
the mechanism used to connect them. A single tenant may 
define and run one or several slices in its domain. 
Network Slice Provider (NSLP): can be typically a 
telecommunication service provider (owner or tenant of the 
infrastructures from which network slices are constructed). 
The NSLP can construct multi-tenant, multi-domain slices, 
on top of infrastructures offered by one or several InPs.  
Infrastructure Provider (InP): owns and manages the 
physical infrastructure (network/cloud/data centre). It could 
lease its infrastructure (as it is) to a slice provider, or it can 
itself construct slices (the BM is flexible) and then lease the 
infrastructure in network slicing fashion.  
Note that the scope of the above model is limited; it is  
operational only, i.e.,  it does not detail all external  entities 
of the overall ecosystem, which may have strong impact on 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

the 
operational 
model, 
e.g., 
Standards 
Developing 
Organizations (SDOs), policy makers, etc. 
An important feature of the above BM is its recursive 
capability (see Ordonez et al., [8]); a tenant can at its turn, to 
offer parts of its sliced resources to other tenants, and so on. 
B. 
Example 2 
A recent document of the 5G-PPP Architecture 
Working Group [4] describes a more refined BM:  
Service Customer (SC): uses services offered by a 
Service Provider (SP). The vertical industries are 
considered as typical examples of SCs.  
Service Provider (SP): it has a generic role, comprising 
three possible sub-roles, depending on the service offered to 
the SC: Communication SP offers traditional telecom 
services; Digital SP offers digital services (e.g., enhanced 
mobile broadband and IoT to various verticals); Network 
Slice as a Service (NSLaaS) Provider offers a NSL and its 
services. The SPs have to design, build and operate high-
level services, using aggregated network services.  
Network Operator (NOP): orchestrates resources, 
potentially offered by multiple virtualized infrastructure 
providers (VISP). The NOP uses aggregated virtualized 
infrastructure services to design, build, and operate network 
services that are offered to SPs.  
Virtualization 
Infrastructure 
SP 
(VISP): 
offers 
virtualized infrastructure services and designs, builds, and 
operates virtualization infrastructure(s) (i.e., networking 
and computing resources). Sometimes, a VISP offers access 
to a variety of resources by aggregating multiple 
technology domains and making them accessible through a 
single Application Programming Interface (API).  
Data Center SP (DCSP): designs, builds, operates and 
offers data center services. A DCSP differs from a VISP by 
offering “raw” resources (i.e., host servers) in rather 
centralized locations and simple services for consumption 
of these raw resources.  
The hierarchy of this model (in the top-down sense of a 
layered architecture) is: SC, SP, NOP, VISP, DCSP. Note 
that in practice, a single organization can play one or more 
roles of the above list. 
Several recent Public Private Partnership (PPP) Phase 
I/II collaborative research are running, having as objectives 
5G technologies (see several examples in [A. Galis, [7]). 
Some of them extended the list of role definitions, to allow 
various possible customer-provider relationships between 
verticals, operators, and other stakeholders.  
C. 
Example 3 
The 5G-MoNArch European project [20] proposes an 
ecosystem model for 5G slicing. The Mobile network 
operators (MNOs) will change from a vertically integrated 
model, where they own the spectrum, antenna and core 
network sites and equipment, to a layered model where 
each layer might be managed or implemented by a different 
stakeholder. A stakeholder is defined in [20] as an 
individual, entity or organisation that affects how the 
overall system operates. The MoNArch stakeholder roles 
[20] are: 
End User: the ultimate entity which uses the services 
provides by a Tenant or the MSP. 
Tenant: purchases and utilizes a network slice and its 
associated services offered by a Mobile Service Provider 
(MSP). Tenant examples are: Mobile Virtual Network 
Operator (MVNO), enterprise or any entity that requires 
telecommunications services for its business operations. 
Mobile Service Provider (MSP):  is the main entity 
which 
provides 
mobile 
internet 
connectivity 
and 
telecommunication services to its users. To this aim, the 
MSP constructs network slices and their function chains to 
compose services. Examples of slices can be eMBB or 
mMTC. The MSP set of tasks are: design, building offering 
and operation of  its services.  
Infrastructure Provider (InP): owns and manages the 
network infrastructure (antennas, base stations, remote 
radio heads, data centers, etc.), and offers it to the MSP, in 
the form of Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). 
In practice a larger organizational entiy could exist, i.e., 
Mobile Network Operator (MNO) which operates and owns 
the mobile network, combining the roles of MSP and InP. 
The Monarch model further refines the roles of some 
entities which can exist, as distinct actors: 
Virtualisation Infrastructure Service Provider (VISP) 
may exist, as an intermediate actor between InP and MSP. 
It designs, builds and operates a virtualization infrastructure 
on top of the InP services, and offers its infrastructure 
service to the MSP. 
At a lower logical level, an NFV Infrastructure (NFVI) 
supplier may exist, to provide a NFV infrastructure to its 
customers, i.e., to the VISP and/or directly to the MSP.  
 
TABLE I.  BUSINESS MODELS FOR 5G SLICING  
Relevant business models examples 
Basic Model [7] 
5G-PPP [4] 
MoNArch project [20] 
End User 
(EU)  
 
Service 
Customer (SC)  
End User 
Tenant 
Slice 
Tenant (SLT) 
Service 
Provider (SP) 
(offers slices) 
Mobile Service Provider 
(MSP) - can belong to MNO 
Network 
SliceProvider 
(NSLP) 
Network 
Operator (NOP) 
(offers ggregated 
services) 
Virtualisation 
Infrastructure 
Service 
Provider 
(VISP) – can 
belong to 
MNO 
VNF 
supplier 
(it can be 
a separate 
entity) 
 
 
Infrastructure  
Provider (InP) 
 
Hardware 
supplier 
 
NFV Infrastructure 
(NFVI) supplier 
Virtualization 
Infrastructure SP 
(VISP) 
Infrastructure Provider 
(InP) 
 
Hardware supplier 
Data Center SP 
(DCSP) 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

A VNF supplier may also exist to offer virtualized 
software (SW) components to the MSP. 
The last but not least is the Hardware (HW) supplier 
which offers hardware to the InPs (server, antenna, cables, 
etc.). 
D. 
Example 4 
The document 3GPP TR22.830 [21] defines a 5G 
business model. It is shown that 5G opens the door to new 
BM roles for 3rd parties, allowing them more control of 
system capabilities.  5G Three role models are envisaged in 
5G for stakeholders: a. The MNO owns and manages both 
the access and core network; b. An MNO owns and manages 
the core network, the access network is shared among 
multiple operators (i.e., RAN sharing); c. Only part of the 
network is owned and/or managed by the MNO, with other 
parts being owned and/or managed by a 3rd party. 
Note that the above different models cannot be exactly 
on-to-one mapped, given the different contexts and visions 
and also the degree of splitting into sub-modules. However, 
a general equivalence can be observed (see TABLE 1). 
Here, we consider the basic model the most orthogonal one. 
III. BUSINESS MODELS FOR 5G V2X 
The 
key 
technology 
enablers 
for 
5G 
V2X 
communication and services are currently studied and 
understood in the wireless industry and standardization of 
3GPP Release 16 V2X is in its final phase [22]. Apart from 
traditional vehicular services, it is forecasted that advanced 
CAM services (e.g., high-definition (HD) maps support, 
highway chauffeur, tele-operated driving, platooning, fully 
autonomous driving, extended sensors, etc.) will be enabled 
through next-generation 5G V2X starting with 3GPP 
Release 16. This section will provide two examples of 
BMs/ecosystems for 5G V2X. 
The 5G PPP Automotive Working Group [23] has 
defined a general 5G V2X BM, capturing not only 
operational features but also business relationships. It 
identified the following key stakeholder categories involved 
in the deployment of 5G V2X technologies: 5G industry 
(network 
operators, 
network 
and 
devices 
vendors), 
automotive industry, Standards Developing Organizations 
(SDOs), road infrastructure operators, policy makers and 
users. The interactions between them are shown in Figure 1.  
5G industry: include any general business activity or 
commercial enterprise developing or using 5G or providing 
5G-related services, e.g., MNOs, Telecom vendors, Cloud 
providers, device providers, software developers, etc.  
Automotive Industry (AutoIn): includes car Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEMs) (e.g., car manufacturers), 
component manufacturers, Tier 1 suppliers, CAM service 
providers,  HD map providers and other automotive-specific 
technology providers (it can also include other services such 
as the logistic sectors). This category brings the automotive 
expertise and services (including mobility services) to 
customers (business and consumers).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The main stakeholders and relationships in the context of 5G 
V2X deployment [23] 
Standard Development Organizations (SDO): 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), European Tele-
communications 
Standards 
Institute 
(ETSI), 
Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF), Internet Research Task 
Force (IRTF), Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) and 5G-related alliances such as Next 
Generation Mobile Networks (NGMN), Industrial Internet 
Consortium (IIC), 5G Automotive Association (5GAA) and  
Automotive Edge Computing Consortium (AECC). For 
safety-related 5G applications (e.g. Advanced Driver 
Assistance Systems - ADAS and autonomous driving), 
pertinent standards developing organizations such as 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) may be 
also relevant players.  
Road Infrastructure Operators (RIO): national or 
regional entities (public/private) performing deployment, 
operation and maintenance of physical road infrastructure. 
They may   also manage road traffic operations, own or 
operate the toll system, etc.  
Policy Makers (PM): provide the highest authorities and 
regulate the relationships within the whole stakeholder 
ecosystem, including 5G industry, automotive industry, 
SDOs and users. They are international or national 
government authorities or organizations defining the legal 
framework and policies, such as road and transport 
authorities or telecom regulators. The ITU as well as 
national spectrum regulators belong to this category.  
Users: drivers, vehicle owners, passengers or 
pedestrian. 
The detailed description of the interactions between the 
stakeholders is given in the 5G PPP Automotive Working 
Group document [23]. Shortly, the interactions are: 
R1 (Users- PMs): to provide to the users the authority 
regulation to be followed (e.g., for environmental, safety and 
financial aspects).  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

R2 (Users - Automotive Industry):  to collect feedback 
from users in order to define the requirements and features of 
the new products, functionalities and services.  
R3 (PMs– AutoIn): PMs define the regulation framework 
to be followed by AutoIn, while the latter provides feedback 
to the PMs to support definitions and improvement of 
regulations. 
R4 (Users - 5G Industry): Users buy products and 
services from the 5G Industry. The latter collects feedback 
used as inputs to define the network requirements, in terms 
of Quality of Experience (QoE), and user needs for services 
and new applications. 
R5 (AutoIn - 5G Industry): for inter – cooperation, 
allowing design a 5G V2X technology to meet the system 
and component level needs. The AutoIn defines the network 
requirements for their products and services; the 5G Industry 
should 
fulfill 
the 
functionality 
and 
performance 
requirements. 
R6 (PMs - 5G Industry): PMs define the regulations that 
the 5G Industry must follow. The latter gives feedback to the 
PMs to influence the definition of new regulations. 
R7 (PMs -SDO): SDOs have to consider regulatory 
conditions in standards development (e.g., ETSI work is 
regulated by the of the EU Commission). 
R8 (SDO - 5G Industry): The SDOs define the standards 
to be implemented in the 5G deployments. E.g., for 
autonomous driving applications ultrareliable low latency 
are needed, based on safety standards. 
R9 (5G Industry - RIO): RIO may participate in the 
deployment of 5G V2X and provide or facilitate licenses or 
other infrastructure requirements that are under their 
responsibility (PMs are also involved here). RIO may define 
network requirements for the 5G Industry. The 5G Industry 
shall offer communication services to the RIO based on 
commercial agreements. However, it is expected that 5G 
network providers will own and operate most or parts of the 
network infrastructure.  A subset of actors out of the general 
model will cooperate within the operational BM, i.e.: 5G 
Industry, Automotive industry, users, and possibly - road 
infrastructure operators. However, the policy makers, SDOs 
and road infrastructure operators strongly influence the 
requirements and also the architecture of the V2X systems, 
as presented above in interaction description. 
Usually, 5G network providers will own and operate 
most or parts of the network infrastructure. This entity can 
be split into RAN infrastructure provider (offering the 
physical infrastructure, e.g., antenna sites and the hardware 
equipment) and cloud infrastructure provider (it owns and 
manages local and central data centers providing the virtual 
resources, such as computing, storage and networking). In 
practice, the roles of 5G network providers can be taken by 
the MNOs, but is possible that Road Infrastructure 
Operators deploys or operate (parts of) the 5G V2X 
network, directly providing the necessary coverage for 
CAM services to the users. 
The network deployment investment can be done by a 
single actor, called network operator (e.g., a traditional 
MNO). However, the model in Figure 1 is general, in the 
sense that potentially any actor (e.g., a road operator) could 
invest in network deployment.  
The project 5GCAR [24]-[26] identifies a BM similar to 
that developed by 5G PPP Automotive Working Group. In 
the operational scenarios the following actors can interact: 
5G Industry, Automotive industry, Road Infrastructure 
Operators and users. Those stakeholders may assume 
different roles identified in the application of the network 
slicing feature:  
Tenant entity: rents and leverages 5G connectivity. Note 
that Road operator, OEMs or other organization may also 
have this role.  
Mobile Service Provider (MSP): provides to different 
tenants 5G, dedicated slices for customized services.  
The 5G infrastructure providers (5GInP): can be 
divided into cloud and RAN providers; they offer the 
elements needed for the MSP to implement the slices.  
Non-V2X (supplementary) service provider: can provide 
passenger targeted services such as enhanced infotainment, 
mobile office, etc. 
The other entities presented in the general BM 
(Figure1), i.e., Policy makers, SDOs, influence indirectly 
the system requirements and specifications of the 
operational BM. It can be seen that the general basic 5G 
slicing operational BM (see Example 1) can be mapped 
approximately one-to-one onto the V2X operational BM. 
IV. THE HETEROGENEITY OF 5G V2X BUSINESS MODELS  
This section will summarize the factors leading to   
heterogeneity in the area of 5G V2X BMs and also affecting 
the particular architectures. Note that, given the topics 
complexity, this analysis cannot be exhaustive; some aspects 
are not touched, or only briefly mentioned. 
A major factor which leads to many variants of BMs is 
the multitude of real-life players which can be active 
(directly or indirectly) in the 5G V2X system assembly and 
also the variety of V2X applications/services. Actors 
providing key services for the automotive sector can be split 
in two categories: service providers of enabling platforms, 
which manage the data and allow services to be built on top 
of the data; connectivity providers, which construct and 
manage connectivity facilities  over cellular networks. Inside 
each category several types of actors can be included.  
A non-exhaustive list of actors comprises:  
Connectivity Players 
(MNOs, 
Transport 
Services 
Providers, (TSPs), ICT Solution & Cloud Platform 
Providers, Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)); 
Automotive OEMs (Cars, Trucks);  
Suppliers (Tier 1 & 2 (System Integrators), Wireless 
Module Vendors, Chipset Vendors, Software/Solutions, 
Middleware, Over the Top Services Providers (OTT), 
Connectivity/ Bluetooth, Databases, etc.);  
Application 
platforms 
(Software 
- 
based, 
Fleet/ 
Commercial, Autonomous Driving, Smartphone Platforms); 
Business Users (Public Transport, Company Fleets, Freight, 
Car Rental, Taxi Fleets, Delivery systems, Emergency 
Response systems);  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Consumers (End user consumers, Families, Small Office 
Home Office (SoHo);  
Application types (Mobility as a Service, Maps & 
NavigationTelematics / Tracking, Communications Safety 
& Maintenance, Media & Entertainment, Productivity).  
Besides the above, additional stakeholders can play 
specific roles:   Insurance, Dealers, Auto Repair, Regulatory 
Bodies, Local Authorities (Government, Law Enforcement, 
Smart City, Road Operators), Location-based commerce 
players, Security infrastructure and services providers. 
The forecasts estimate that new actors will enter the auto 
industry (increase more than 45% by 2030, [27]). Therefore, 
in order to create a clear and stable ecosystem, the actors’ 
roles/activities 
and 
interactions, 
should 
be 
defined. 
Cooperation is necessary: telecom operators will provide 
their infrastructure and licensed spectrum; the automotive 
suppliers will create the chips and sensors compatible with 
the technology. So, the typical value chain is transformed 
into a complex ecosystem; actors will share a part of 
knowledge and resources. The competition will exist and 
influence the ecosystem structure. From the above reasons, 
some relationships between possible actors are still uncertain 
today.  
In [26][27], several variants of 5G V2X ecosystems are 
defined. In each one, a single actor provides the platform, 
e.g.: MNO, OEM, Automotive Supplier (AS), etc.  
Interactions between some of actors are established based on 
Service Level Agreements (SLA). 
There are also other lower level technical factors, 
determining the heterogeneity of 5G V2X BMs and 
architectures for slicing solutions. The management, 
orchestration and control subsystem is directly involved 
within these aspects. Some examples of such factors are 
given below. 
The services deployment is inherently heterogeneous, 
depending on applications to be supported. An example is 
the traffic locality property (at the edge of the network/slice 
or crossing the core part). An orchestrator should be aware 
of such traffic properties and, if necessary, deploy the 
corresponding network functions at the mobile edge. The 
orchestrator needs to have enough topology information of 
slices in order to be able to install appropriate functions at 
right places. The type of vehicular applications and services 
will determine the degree of pushing to the edge some 
functions. 
The classical principle of vertical separation of services 
in 
network-related 
(i.e., 
connectivity–oriented) 
and 
application-level services (e.g., caching, video transcoding, 
content-oriented, web server, etc.) could be preserved or not. 
The separation will require, respectively one orchestrator vs. 
separate network/service orchestrators. One can speak about 
segregated 
or 
integrated 
orchestration, 
respectively. 
Concerning slicing, one can define some slices offering 
essentially connectivity services and other dedicated to high-
level applications. The clear separation of areas of 
responsibility over resources could be an advantage for 
operational stability (e.g., a segregated RAN orchestrator 
could still maintain basic RAN services even if an 
application-oriented orchestrator fails). On the other hand, 
the integrated orchestration could be attractive, in particular 
for operators, if both kinds of services could be orchestrated 
in the same fashion (and possibly even with the same 
orchestration infrastructure). These two options also 
determine heterogeneity at M&O architectural level. 
Segregated orchestrators lead to a more complex overall 
architecture. One must assign areas of responsibilities from 
a resource perspective (which orchestrator controls - what 
resources); one should identify services pertaining to each 
orchestrator. The split of service is also a problem, i.e., the   
service description should define the “network” and 
“application-facing” parts of the service. Aligning the 
control decisions taken by these two kinds of orchestrators 
in a consistent way is also not trivial. In an integrated 
orchestration approach, all these problems disappear. 
However, an integrated orchestrator might be very complex 
if required to treat substantially different services (one-size-
fits-all orchestration approach is rather not the best choice).  
An integrated orchestrator is a more challenging piece of 
software (from both dependability and performance 
perspectives) but would result in a simpler overall 
architecture. Considering the above rationale, we defend the 
idea that from the slicing point of view, a segregate 
orchestrator is a better choice. However, in practice, both 
approaches have been pursued in different projects. 
Currently, a final verdict commonly agreed, on segregated 
versus integrated orchestration is not yet available. 
Apparently, there is no need to standardize this option, as 
long as both of them could be realized inside a meta-
architecture. So, for the time being, we can state that M&O 
heterogeneity, from this point of view, will last. 
Another 
architectural 
choice 
is 
on 
“flat” 
or 
“hierarchical” orchestration. In the flat solution, a single 
instance of a particular orchestrator type is in charge of all 
assigned resources. In the hierarchical solution, there are 
multiple orchestrators (a “hierarchical” model is needed, 
when orchestrators know to talk to each other). Note that a 
hierarchical orchestrator is not necessarily a segregated one, 
because all hierarchy members could deal with the same 
type of services. 
Multi-tenant, multi-domain, multi-operator context of 
the planned 5G V2X system will influence the BM, making 
necessary to split the responsibilities among actors, for both 
categories: high level services and connectivity ones. Multi-
domain scenarios create new problems [28] (e.g., in the case 
of a multi-domain “federated” slice). In a flat model, each 
orchestrator of a domain is actually multi-orchestration 
capable, i.e., it can discuss/negotiate with other domains’ 
orchestrators. In the hierarchical model, a higher-level 
orchestrator could exist, in charge of harmonizing multiple 
organizations cooperation. However, several issues are not 
fully solved today: which entity would run that multi-
domain orchestrator, trust issues, preservation of domains 
independency, assuring the fairness, etc.  
Relationship of the M&O system and the 5GT V2X 
slicing system is another factor of BM architectural 
variability, depending on what the definition of a slice is. A 
largely agreed solution is to have a general orchestrator 
(configured offline), capable to trigger the construction of a 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

new slice and then to install in this new slice its own 
dedicated orchestrator (before the slice run-time). To still 
assure the basic services outside any slice (e.g., packet 
forwarding at network level) one can construct an additional 
special orchestrator installed outside of all slices. Currently, 
many combinations have been proposed, and there is still no 
consensus on such matters. The convergence of solutions 
will be determined probably by the adoption of a more 
unique definition of a slice – which could assure better inter-
operability.  
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This is an overview-type paper; it analyzed several 
business models/ecosystems for 5G slicing and then those 
for V2X and discuss how the 5G BM can be adapted for 
V2X environment. It has been shown that a large variety of 
proposals exist in various studies, standards and projects, 
given the multitude of V2X use cases and the rich set of 
business actors that could be potentially involved. Some 
major factors determining the heterogeneity of the BMs 
proposals have been identified in Section IV. 
Considering the above analysis, and to conclude this 
preliminary study, we propose the steps to be followed to 
start a 5G V2X system development in slicing approach. 
First, the V2X set of high level of services (seen from 
the end user perspectives) to be implemented should be 
defined among the rich possible ones (see Section IV).  
The identification of the set of involved actors and a first 
assignment of their roles (especially from business/services 
point of view) is a major step. Here, some actors would 
provide only indirect actions (Policy Makers, SDOs, local 
regulators, etc.). Other actors will participate at operational 
phases (MNOs, OEMs, Service providers - e.g., OTT, 
Infrastructure providers, etc.) at run-time. 
The 
multi-domain, 
multi-tenant, 
multi-operator 
characteristics of the 5G V2X system should be selected. 
Definition of interactions between the actors will complete 
the high-level description of the 5G V2X BM/ecosystem. 
The following steps will refine the BM and go to the 
requirement identification and architectural definition.  The 
main connectivity and processing/storage technologies 
should be identified. The regulations, standards, etc., to be 
enforced have to be identified; they will define but also limit 
the system capabilities and scope. System requirements 
identification will follow, considering requirements coming 
from all actors involved in BM. 
The 5G V2X slicing solution (for RAN, core and 
transport part of the network) should be selected. Here, the 
refinement of the BM is possible (see Table 1). Then, the 
system architecture (general and layered - functional) has to 
be defined, allowing further technical refinement of the 
system design. 
 Future work can go further to consider more deeply the 
multi-x aspects, related to the business models and impact of 
the BM upon the system management orchestration and 
control for 5G V2X dedicated slices. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work has been partially funded by the Operational 
Program Human Capital of the Ministry of European Funds 
through the Financial Agreement 51675/09.07.2019, SMIS 
code 125125. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. K. Priyan and G. Usha Devi, "A survey on internet of 
vehicles: 
applications, 
technologies, 
challenges 
and 
opportunities", Int. J. Advanced Intelligence Paradigms, Vol. 
12, Nos. 1/2, 2019. 
[2] 
C. Renato Storck and F. Duarte-Figueiredo, “A 5G V2X 
Ecosystem Providing Internet of Vehicles”, Sensors 2019, 
19,550, 
doi: 
10.3390/s19030550, 
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors, [retrieved January, 2020]. 
[3] 
N. Panwar, S. Sharma, A. K. Singh ‘A Survey on 5G: The 
Next Generation of Mobile Communication’ Elsevier 
Physical 
Communication, 
4 
Nov 
2015,  
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.01643v1.pdf  
[4] 
5G-PPP Architecture Working Group, “View on 5G 
Architecture”, 
Version 
3.0, 
June, 
2019, 
https://5g-
ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/5G-PPP-5G-
Architecture-White-Paper_v3.0_PublicConsultation.pdf, 
[retrieved June,  2019]. 
[5] 
3GPP TS 23.501 V15.2.0 (2018-06), System Architecture 
for the 5G System; Stage 2, (Release 15)  
[6] 
X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi, and M. K. Marina, 
“Network Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, May 2017, pp. 94-100. 
[7] 
A. Galis, “Network Slicing- A holistic architectural 
approach, orchestration and management with applicability 
in 
mobile 
and 
fixed 
networks 
and 
clouds”, 
http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10051374/, [retrieved July, 2019]. 
[8] 
J. Ordonez-Lucena et al., “Network Slicing for 5G with 
SDN/NFV: Concepts, Architectures and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 2017, pp. 80-87, Citation 
information: DOI 10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600935. 
[9] 
I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. 
Flinck, “Network Slicing & Softwarization: A Survey on 
Principles, Enabling Technologies & Solutions”, IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, March 2018, pp. 
2429-2453.  
[10] ETSI GS NFV 002, “NFV Architectural Framework”, 
V1.2.1, December 2014. 
[11] ETSI GS NFV-IFA 009, “Network Functions Virtualisation 
(NFV); 
Management 
and 
Orchestration; 
Report 
on 
Architectural Options”, Technical Report, V1.1.1, July 2016.  
[12] ETSI GR NFV-IFA 028, “Network Functions Virtualisation 
(NFV) Release 3; Management and Orchestration; Report 
on architecture options to support multiple administrative 
domains”, Technical Report, V3.1.1, January, 2018. 
[13] ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012, Release 3 “NFV Evolution and 
Ecosystem; Report on Network Slicing Support with ETSI 
NFV Architecture Framework”, Technical Report, V3.1.1, 
December, 2017. 
[14] ONF TR-526, “Applying SDN Architecture to 5G Slicing”, 
April 
2016, 
https://www.opennetworking.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/10/Applying_SDN_Architecture_to_5
G_Slicing_TR-526.pdf, [retrieved December, 2019].  
[15] A. 
Molinaro 
and 
C. 
Campolo, 
“5G 
for 
V2X 
Communications”, 
https://www.5gitaly.eu/2018/wp-
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

content/uploads/2019/01/5G-Italy-White-eBook-5G-for-
V2X-Communications.pdf, [retrieved December, 2019]. 
[16] S. A. Ali Shah, E. Ahmed, M. Imran, and S. Zeadally, "5G 
for Vehicular Communications", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, January 2018, pp.111-117. 
[17] K. Katsaros and M. Dianati, "A Conceptual 5G Vehicular 
Networking 
Architecture“, 
October 
2017,  
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309149571,   DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-34208-5_22, [retrieved December 2019]. 
[18] C. Campolo, A. Molinaro, A. Iera, and F. Menichella, "5G 
Network Slicing for Vehicle-to-Everything Services", IEEE 
Wireless Communications, Volume: 24 Issue: 6, DOI: 
10.1109/MWC.2017.160040, [retrieved December, 2019]. 
[19] Friedhelm Ramme, ITS, Transport & Automotive, Ericsson 
5G: "From Concepts to Reality“ Technology Roadmaps 
https://5gaa.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Final-
Presentation-MWC19-Friedhelm-Ramme-ERICSSON.pdf, 
[retrieved January, 2020].   
[20] H2020-ICT-2016-2, Monarch Project, 5G Mobile Network 
Architecture for diverse services, use cases and applications 
in 5G and beyond, Deliverable D2.2,  "Initial overall 
architecture and concepts for enabling innovations", 
https://5g-monarch.eu/deliverables/ 2018,[retrieved June, 
2019]. 
[21]   3GPP TR 22.830 V16.1.0, TS Group Services and System 
Aspects, "Feasibility Study on Business Role Models for 
Network 
Slicing", 
(Release 
16), 
2018 
https://itectec.com/archive/3gpp-specification-tr-22-830/ 
[retrieved May, 2020]. 
[22] https://www.3gpp.org/release-16. 
[23] 5G PPP Automotive Working Group, “Business Feasibility 
Study 
for 
5G 
V2X 
Deployment”, 
https://bscw.5g-
ppp.eu/pub/bscw.cgi/d293672/5G%20PPP%20Automotive
%20WG_White%20Paper_Feb2019.pdf, [retrieved, January, 
2020]. 
[24] 5GCAR White Paper : Executive Summary, Version: v1.0, 
2019-12-10, 
https://5gcar.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/12/5GCAR-Executive-Summary-
White-Paper.pdf, [retrieved, January 2020]. 
[25] 5GCAR, Fifth Generation Communication Automotive 
Research and innovation Deliverable D1.2  5GCAR Mid-
Project Report, v1.0  2018-05-31, https://5gcar.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/5GCAR_D1.2_v1.0.pdf, [retrieved, 
January, 2020].  
[26] 5GCAR, Fifth Generation Communication Automotive 
Research and innovation Deliverable D2.2 “Intermediate 
Report on V2X Business Models and Spectrum”, v2.0, 
2019-02-28,https://5gcar.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/5GCAR_D2.2_v1.0.pdf, [retrieved, 
January, 2020]. 
[27] B. Martínez de Aragón, J. Alonso-Zarateand, and A. Laya, 
"How 
connectivity 
is 
transforming 
the 
automotive 
ecosystem". Internet Technology Letters. 2018;1:e14. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/itl2.14 [retrieved, January, 2020]. 
[28] Katsalis, N. Nikaein, and A. Edmonds, "Multi-Domain 
Orchestration 
for 
NFV: 
Challenges 
and 
Research 
Directions", 2016 15th Int'l Conf. on Ubiquitous Computing 
and Communications and International Symposium on 
Cyberspace and Security (IUCC-CSS), pp. 189–195, DOI: 
10.1109/IUCC-CSS.2016.034, 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828601, 
[retrieved 
July, 2019]. 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-786-3
ICNS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

