Theoretical Suggestion of Policy-based Wide Area Network  
Management System 
 
Kazuya Odagiri               
Yamaguchi University       
Tokyo, Japan         
 odagiri@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp  
kazuodagiri@yahoo.co.jp 
 
Shogo Shimizu 
Gakushuin Women's College 
Tokyo, Japan 
shimizu-syogo@aiit.ac.jp 
Naohiro Ishii 
Aichi Institute of Technology 
Aichi, Japan 
ishii@aitech.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract— In the current Internet-based systems, there are 
many 
problems 
using 
anonymity 
of 
the 
network 
communication such as personal information leak and crimes 
using the Internet systems. This is because the TCP/IP protocol 
used in Internet systems does not have the user identification 
information on the communication data, and it is difficult to 
supervise the user performing the above acts immediately.  As 
a solution for solving the above problem, there is the approach 
of Policy-based Network Management (PBNM). This is the 
scheme for managing a whole Local Area Network (LAN) 
through communication control of every user. In this PBNM, 
two types of schemes exist. The first is the scheme for 
managing the whole LAN by locating the communication 
control mechanisms on the course between network servers 
and clients. The second is the scheme of managing the whole 
LAN by locating the communication control mechanisms on 
clients. As the second scheme, we have been studied 
theoretically about the Destination Addressing Control System 
(DACS) Scheme. By applying this DACS Scheme to Internet 
system management, we realize the policy-based Internet 
system management. Though the Wide Area DACS system 
(wDACS system) part-I, it was shown that it has problems 
because the processes of data transmission and reception are 
not encrypted. In this paper, we show the DACS system part-II 
with the encrypting mechanism theoretically. 
Keywords-policy-based netwok management; DACS Scheme; 
NAPT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the current Internet systems, there are many problems 
using anonymity of the network communication, such as 
personal information leak and crimes using the Internet 
systems. The news of the information leak in the big 
company is sometimes reported through the mass media. 
Because TCP/IP protocol used in Internet systems does not 
have 
the 
user 
identification 
information 
on 
the 
communication data, it is difficult to supervise the user 
performing the above acts immediately. Many solutions and 
technologies for managing Internet systems based on 
TCP/IP protocol have been emerged, namely, Domain 
Name System (DNS) [3], Routing protocols, firewall (F/W) 
[7], and Network Address Port Translation (NAPT) [8] / 
Network Address Translation (NAT) [9]. However, they are 
for managing the specific part of the Internet systems, and 
have no purpose of solving our target problems.  
PBNM might be a solution for solving these problems. 
However, it is a scheme for managing a whole LAN through 
communication control of every user, and cannot be applied 
to the Internet systems. It is often used in a scene of campus 
network management. In a campus network, network 
management is quite complicated. Because a network 
administrative department manages only a small portion of 
the wide needs of the campus network, there are some user 
support problems. For example, when mail boxes on one 
server are divided and relocated to some different server 
machines, it is necessary for some users to update a client 
machine’s setups. Most of computer network users in a 
campus are students. Because they do not check frequently 
their e-mail, it is hard work to make them aware of the 
settings update. This administrative operation is executed by 
means of web pages and/or posters. For the system 
administrator, it is difficult to support every student in terms 
of time and workload. Because the PBNM manages a whole 
LAN, it is easy to solve this kind of problem. In addition, 
for the problem such as personal information leak, the 
PBNM can manage a whole LAN by making anonymous 
communication non-anonymous. As the result, it becomes 
possible to identify the user who steals personal information 
and commits a crime swiftly and easily. Therefore, by 
applying the PBNM, we study about the policy-based 
Internet system management.  
 In the existing PBNM, there are two types of schemes. 
The first is the scheme of managing the whole LAN by 
locating the communication control mechanisms on the 
course between network servers and clients. The second is 
the scheme of managing the whole LAN by locating the 
communication control mechanisms on clients. It is difficult 
to practically apply the first scheme to Internet system 
management, 
because 
the 
communication 
control 
mechanism needs to be located on the course between 
network servers and clients necessarily. Because the second 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

scheme locates the communication control mechanisms as 
the software on each client, it becomes possible to apply the 
second scheme to Internet system management by devising 
the installing mechanism so that users can install the 
software to the client easily.  
As the second scheme, we have been studied, 
theoretically, about the Destination Addressing Control 
System (DACS) Scheme. As the works on the DACS 
Scheme, we showed the basic principle of the DACS 
Scheme [28], and security function [29]. After that, we 
implemented a DACS system to realize a concept of the 
DACS Scheme [30]. By applying this DACS Scheme to 
Internet systems, we realize the policy-based Internet 
system management. As a first step, we studied wide area 
DACS system part-I [31] realized by applying the DACS 
Scheme to a wide area network. It has problems that 
processes of the data transmission and reception are not 
encrypted. In this paper, we show the encrypting mechanism, 
which is suitable for the wDACS system. 
In Section II, motivation and related research are 
described. Existing DACS Scheme are described in Section 
III. Then, in Section IV, after describing the wDACS system 
part- I, wDACS system part- II are suggested theoretically. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND RELATED RESERACH 
In the current Internet systems, problems using 
anonymity of the network communication, such as personal 
information leak and crimes using the Internet systems 
occur. Because the TCP/IP protocol used in Internet systems 
does not have the user identification information on the 
communication data, it is difficult to supervise the user 
performing the above acts immediately.  
Many solutions and technologies for Internet systems 
management using TCP/IP [1][2] have been proposed and 
are in use: 
 
(1) DNS [3] 
(2) Routing protocols: 
(2-a) Interior Gateway Protocols (IGP), such as Routing 
Information Protocol (RIP) [4] and Open Shortest 
Path First (OSPF) [5] 
(2-b) Exterior Gateway Protocols (EGP), such as 
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [6] 
(3) F/W [7] 
(4) NAT [8] / NAPT [9]  
(5) Load balancing [10][11] 
(6) Virtual Private Network (VPN) [12][13] 
(7) Public Key Infrastructure（PKI) [14] 
(8) Server virtualization [15] 
 
However, they are for managing the specific aspect of the 
Internet systems, but have no purpose of solving our target 
problems. 
In the following, we are focusing on policy-based 
thinking, to study the policy-based Internet system 
management. 
 
 
Figure 1. Principle in the first scheme. 
 
In PBNM, there are two types of schemes. The first 
scheme is described in Figure 1. This scheme is 
standardized in various organizations. In IETF, a framework 
of PBNM [16] was established. Standards about each 
element constituting this framework are as follows. As a 
model of control information stored in the server called 
Policy Repository, Policy Core Information model (PCIM) 
[17] was established. After it, PCMIe [18] was established 
by extending the PCIM. To describe them in the form of 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), Policy 
Core LDAP Schema (PCLS) [19] was established. As a 
protocol to distribute the control information stored in 
Policy Repository or decision result from the Policy 
Decision Point (PDP) to the Policy Enforcement Point 
(PEP), Common Open Policy Service (COPS) [20] was 
established. PDP is the point which performs the judgment 
about the communication control, and PEP is the point 
which performs the communication control based on the 
judgment. Based on the difference in distribution method, 
COPS usage for RSVP (COPS-RSVP) [21] and COPS 
usage for Provisioning (COPS-PR) [22] were established. 
RSVP is an abbreviation for Resource Reservation Protocol. 
The COPS-RSVP is the method as follows. After the PEP 
detected the communication from a user or a client 
application, the PDP makes a judgmental decision for it. 
The decision is sent and applied to the PEP, and the PEP 
adds the control to it. The COPS-PR is the method of 
distributing the control information or decision result to the 
PEP before accepting the communication.  
Next, in the Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF), 
a framework of PBNM called Directory-enabled Network 
(DEN) was established. Like the IETF framework, control 
information is stored in the server called Policy Server 
which is built by using the directory service, such as LDAP 
[23], and is distributed to network servers and networking 
equipment such as switch and router. As the result, the 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

whole LAN is managed. The model of control information 
used in DEN is called Common Information Model (CIM); 
the schema of CIM (CIM Schema Version 2.30.0) [25] was 
published. CIM was extended to support DEN [24], and was 
incorporated in the framework of DEN. 
In addition, Resource and Admission Control Subsystem 
(RACS) [26] was established in Telecoms and Internet 
converged Services and protocols for Advanced Network 
(TISPAN) of European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI), and Resource and Admission Control 
Functions (RACF) [27] was established in International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T). 
However, all the frameworks explained above are based on 
the principle shown in Figure 1. As problems of these 
frameworks, two points are presented as follows.  
Essential principle is described in Figure 2. To be concrete, 
in the PDP, judgment such as permission and non-
permission for communication pass is performed based on 
policy information. The judgment is notified and transmitted 
to the point called the PEP. Based on that judgment, the 
control is added for the communication that is going to pass 
by. 
 
Figure 2. Essential Principle. 
 
The principle of the second scheme is described in Figure 
3 [28][29][30][31]. By locating the communication control 
mechanisms on the clients, the whole LAN is managed. 
Because this scheme controls the network communications 
on each client, the processing load is low. However, because 
the communication control mechanisms need to be located 
on each client, the workload becomes heavy.  
We aim at realizing the PBNM management of an Internet 
system by applying these two schemes. However, it was 
difficult to apply the first scheme to Internet system 
management 
practically. 
In 
the 
first 
scheme, 
the 
communication control mechanism needs to be located on 
the course between network servers and clients, necessarily. 
As the result, the mechanism is operated from outside. It is 
more likely to violate the network and security policy of 
each organization.   
 
Figure 3. Principle in second scheme. 
 
On the other hand, the second scheme locates the 
communication controls mechanisms on each client. The 
software for communication control is installed on each 
client. Therefore, by devising the installing mechanism 
letting users install software to the client easily, it becomes 
possible to apply the second scheme to Internet system 
management. As a first step, we showed the wDACS system 
part-I [31]. This system manages a wide area network which 
one organization manages. However, this system has a 
problem, namely, user authentication processes and 
transmission and reception processes of control information 
called DACS rules are not encrypted.  
III. 
EXISTING DACS SCHEME 
In this section, the content of the DACS Scheme is 
described. 
 
A Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme 
Figure 4 shows the basic principle of the network 
services by the DACS Scheme. At the processing of the (a) 
or (b), as shown in the following, the DACS rules (rules 
defined by the user unit) are distributed from the DACS 
Server to the DACS Client. 
(a) Processing of a user logging in the client. 
(b) Processing of a delivery indication from the system  
administrator. 
According to the distributed DACS rules, the DACS 
Client performs (1) or (2) operation. Then, communication 
control of the client is performed for every user used for 
login. 
(1) Destination information on IP Packet, which is sent from 
application program, is changed. 
(2) IP Packet from the client, which is sent from the 
application program to the outside of the client, is blocked. 
An example of the case (1) is shown in Figure 4. In 
Figure 4, the system administrator can distribute a 
communication of the user used for login to the specified 
server among servers A, B or C. Moreover, the case (2) is 
described. For example, when the system administrator 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

wants to forbid an user to use Mail User Agent (MUA), it is 
performed by blocking IP Packet with the specific 
destination information. 
 
Figure 4.  Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme. 
 
In order to realize the DACS Scheme, the operation is 
done by a DACS Protocol, as shown in Figure 5. As shown 
by (1) in Figure 5, the distribution of the DACS rules is 
performed on communication between the DACS Server 
and the DACS Client, which is arranged at the application 
layer. The application of the DACS rules to the DACS 
Control is shown by (2) in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Operation of the DACS Protocol. 
 
The steady communication control, such as a 
modification of the destination information or the 
communication blocking is performed at the network layer, 
as shown by (3) in Figure 5. 
B Communication Control on Client 
The communication control of every user was given. 
However, it may be better to perform communication control 
every client instead of every user. For example, it is the case 
where many and unspecified users use a computer room, 
which is controlled. In this section, the method of 
communication control every client is described, and the 
coexistence method with the communication control of every 
user is considered. 
When a user logs in to a client, the IP address of the 
client is transmitted to the DACS Server from the DACS 
Client. Then, if the DACS rules corresponding to IP address, 
is registered into the DACS Server side, it is transmitted to 
the DACS Client. Then, communication control for every 
client can be realized by applying to the DACS Control. In 
this case, it is a premise that a client uses a fixed IP address. 
However, when using DHCP service, it is possible to carry 
out the same control to all the clients linked to the whole 
network or its subnetwork, for example. 
 
 
Figure 6. Creating the DACS rules on the DACS Server. 
 
When using the communication control of every user 
and every client, communication control may conflict. In 
that case, a priority needs to be given. The judgment is 
performed in the DACS Server side as shown in Figure 6. 
Although not necessarily stipulated, the network policy or 
security policy exists in the organization, such as a 
university (1). The priority is decided according to the 
policy (2). In (a), priority is given for the user's rule to 
control communication by the user unit. In (b), priority is 
given for the client's rule to control communication by the 
client unit. In (c), the user's rule is the same as the client's 
rule. As the result of comparing the conflict rules, one rule 
is determined, respectively. Those rules and other rules not 
overlapping are gathered, and the DACS rules are created 
(3). The DACS rules are transmitted to the DACS Client. In 
the DACS Client side, the DACS rules are applied to the 
DACS Control. The difference between the user's rule and 
the client's rule is not distinguished. 
C Security Mechanism of the DACS Scheme 
In this section, the security function of the DACS 
Scheme is described. The communication is tunneled and 
encrypted by use of Secure Shell (SSH) [32]. By using the 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

function of port forwarding of SSH, it is realized to tunnel 
and encrypt the communication between the network server 
and the DACS Client, which the DACS Client is installed in. 
Normally, to communicate from a client application to a 
network server by using the function of port forwarding of 
SSH, the local host (127.0.0.1) needs to be indicated on that 
client application as a communicating server. The transparent 
use of a client as the virtue of the DACS Scheme is lost. The 
transparent use of a client means that a client can be used 
continuously without changing setups when the network 
system is updated. The function that does not fail the 
transparent use of a client is needed. The mechanism of that 
function is shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Extend Security Function. 
 
The changed point on network server side is shown as 
follows, in comparison with the existing DACS Scheme. 
SSH Server is located and activated, and communication, 
except, SSH is blocked. In Figure 7, the DACS rules are sent 
from the DACS Server to the DACS Client (a). On the 
DACS Client that accepts the DACS rules, the DACS rules 
are applied to the DACS Control in the DACS Client (b). 
These processes are same as the existing DACS Scheme. 
After functional extension, as shown in (c) of Figure 7, the 
DACS rules are applied to the DACS SControl. 
Communication control is performed in the DACS SControl 
with the function of SSH. By adding the extended function, 
selecting the tunneled and encrypted or not tunneled and 
encrypted communication is done for each network service. 
When communication is not tunneled and encrypted, 
communication control is performed by the DACS Control, 
as shown in (d) of Figure 7. When communication is 
tunneled and encrypted, destination of the communication is 
changed by the DACS Control to localhost, as shown in 
Figure 7. In Figure 7, the communication to localhost is 
shown with the arrows from (e) to the direction of (f). After 
that, by the DACS SControl which is used for the VPN 
communication, the communicating server is changed to the 
network server and tunneled and encrypted communication 
is sent as, shown in (g) of Figure 7, which are realized by the 
function of port forwarding of SSH. In the DACS rules 
applied to the DACS Control, localhost is indicated as the 
destination of communication. As the functional extension 
explained in the above, the function of tunneling and 
encrypting communication is realized in the state of being 
suitable for the DACS Scheme, that is, with the transparent 
use of a client. Distinguishing the control in the case of 
tunneling and encrypting or not tunneling and encrypting by 
a user unit is realized by changing the content of the DACS 
rules applied to the DACS Control and the DACS SControl. 
By tunneling and encrypting the communication for one 
network service from all users, and blocking the not tunneled 
and decrypted communication for that network service, the 
function of preventing the communication for one network 
service from the client, which DACS Client is not installed 
in, is realized. Moreover, the communication to the network 
server from the client on which DACS Client is not installed 
in is permitted; each user can select whether the 
communication is tunneled and encrypted or not. 
D Technical Points in Implementaion of DACS System 
(a) Communications between the DACS Server and the 
DACS Client 
The Communications between the DACS Server and the 
DACS Client such as sending and accepting the DACS rules 
were realized by the communications through a socket in 
TCP/IP. 
 
(b) Communication control on the client computer 
In this study, the DACS Client working on windows XP 
was implemented. The functions of the destination NAT and 
packet filtering required as a part of the DACS Control were 
implemented by using Winsock2 SPI of Microsoft. As it is 
described in Figure 8, Winsock2 SPI is a new layer which is 
created between the existing Winsock API and the layer 
under it.  
To be concrete, though connect() is performed when the 
client application accesses the server, the processes of 
destination NAT for the communication from the client 
application are built in WSP connect() which is called in 
connect(). In addition, though accept() is performed on the 
client when the communication to the client is accepted, the 
function of packet filtering is implemented in WSPaccept() 
which is called in accept(). 
 
 
Figure 8. Winsock2 SPI. 
 
(c) VPN communication 
The client software for the VPN communication, that is, 
the DACS SControl was realized by using the port forward 
function of the Putty. When the communication from the 
client is supported by the VPN communication, first, the 
destination of this communication is changed to the 
localhost. After that, the putty accepts the communication, 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

and sends the VPN communication by using the port 
forward function. 
IV. 
WDACS SYSTEM 
In this section, the content of wDACS system is explained. 
First, we show contents of the wDACS system part-I, and 
describe solving method of technical problem in the wDACS 
system part-I. Therefore, the necessary mechanism of the 
wDACS system part-II is described. 
A System Configuration of wDACS system part-I 
The system configuration of the wDACS system part-I is 
described in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. Basic System Configuration of wDACS system part-I. 
 
First, as preconditions, because private IP addresses are 
assigned to all servers and clients existing in from LAN1 to 
LAN n, mechanisms of NAT/NAPT are necessary for the 
communication from each LAN to the outside. In this case, 
NAT/NAPT is located on the entrance of the LAN such as 
(1), and the private IP address is converted to the global IP 
address towards the direction of the arrow. 
Next, because the private IP addresses are set on the 
servers and clients in the LAN, other communications 
except those converted by Destination NAT cannot enter 
into the LAN. But, responses for the communications sent 
form the inside of the LAN can enter into the inside of the 
LAN because of the reverse conversion process by the 
NAT/NAPT.  
In addition, communications from the outside of the 
LAN1 to the inside are performed through the conversion of 
the destination IP address by Destination NAT. To be 
concrete, the global IP address at the same of the outside 
interface of the router is changed to the private IP address of 
each server.  
From here, system configuration of each LAN is 
described. First, the DACS Server and the authentication 
server are located on the DMZ on the LAN1 such as (4). On 
the entrance of the LAN1, NAT/NAPT and destination NAT 
exists such as (1) and (2). Because only the DACS Server 
and network servers are set as the target destination, the 
authentication server cannot be accessed from the outside of 
the LAN1. In the LANs from LAN 2 to LAN n, clients 
managed by the wDACS system exist, and NAT/NAPT is 
located on the entrance of each LAN such as (1). Then, F/W, 
such as (3) or (5), exists behind or with NAT/NAPT in all 
LANs. 
B Key ExchangeMechanism  for wDACS system part-II 
As the additional mechanism for the wDACS system 
part-II, the mechanism in Figure 10 is newly introduced.  
 
 
Figure 10. Mechanism of Key Exchange. 
 
This is a periodical key exchange mechanism which is 
necessary for encrypted communications between the 
network servers and the client computers. This mechanism 
is incorporated at the last part of the initialization process of 
the DACS Client. The preconditions are as follows. 
 
(a)  The communications between the DACS Client and the 
Web Server are encrypted by the https. 
(b) The communications between the Server Machine 
moving the Web Server and network servers are 
encrypted by SSH. 
(y) This mechanism is located on the Server Machine 
which is separated physically with DACS Sever for the 
management of a large-scale network with many clients. 
 
Next, the processing of this mechanism is described. First, 
the key request is performed from the DACS Client (1). The 
program on the Web Server receives the request, and creates 
two kinds of keys which are a public key and a private key 
(2). Then, the program sends the private key to the client (3). 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

The public key stored in the home directory on the Server 
Machine is copied and stored on the network server by 
mirroring through SSH. To be concrete, network commands 
such as rsync and rdiff-backup are used. The mirroring 
process is performed just before the transmission of the 
private key. 
 
C Encrypted Communication Mechanism  for wDACS 
system part-II 
   In this section, two functions to realize the encrypted 
communication are described. 
 
(1) Function of encrypted communications in user 
authentication processes 
 
  In 
this 
section, 
the 
function 
of 
the 
encrypted 
communications in user authentication processes, which is 
suitable for the wDACS system, is described. The content of 
the function is shown in Figure 11.  
 
Figure 11. Function of user authentication processes. 
 
First, authentication request is performed form the DACS 
Client to the program on the Web Server (1). The Program 
performs inquiry to the LDAP Server which stores user 
accounts (user name, pass word) (2). As the result, if 
authentication is not permitted, the results are notified to the 
DACS Client (3-a). The DACS Client stops performing 
subsequent processing. If authentication is permitted, the 
results are notified to the DACS Server (3-b). The DACS 
Server performs the processing described in next section. 
 
(2) Function of encrypted communications  
 
Figure 12. Function of transmission and reception processes for control 
information. 
   In 
this 
section, 
the 
function 
of 
the 
encrypted 
communications in the DACS rule’s transmission and 
reception processes, which is suitable for the wDACS 
system, is described.  
First, as a part of process (1) in Figure 11, the IP address 
of the client where the DACS Client is installed is notified 
with user name and password to the program on the Web 
Server. This process is described as process (x) in Figure 12, 
which is shown by a dotted arrow.  
Next, based on them, the program performs a request of 
the DACS rules to the DACS Server (1).  The DACS rules 
are extracted from the database of the DACS Server, and 
sent to the program on the Web Server (2). The program 
receives them, and sends to the DACS Client. 
 
   Specific to these two functions is the use of HTTPS. 
Because this wDACS system needs to be extended for 
Internet management, we chose HTTPS used widely in the 
world of the Internet. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we showed the policy-based wide area 
network management system called wDACS system part-II. 
This system was realized by the extension of the policy-
based network management system called wDACS system 
part-I which manages the WAN for one organization. The 
wDACS system part-I had two problems. First problem was 
unencrypted 
communication 
of 
user 
authentication 
processes. 
The 
second 
problem 
is 
unencrypted 
communication of transmission and reception processes of 
the DACS rules. To solve these two problems, additional 
two mechanisms were described in this paper. By these two 
mechanisms, it became possible to perform the encrypted 
communications using HTTPS in anticipation of expansion 
to Internet management. As a future study, the wDACS 
system part-II will be implemented to manage the WAN and 
evaluations will be performed.  
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. Cerf and E. Kahn, "A Protocol for Packet Network 
Interconnection," IEEE Trans. on Commn, vol. COM-22, pp. 
637-648, May 1974. 
[2] B. M. Leiner, R. Core, J. Postel, and D. Milis, "The DARPA 
Internet Protocol Suite," IEEE Commun.Magazine, vol. 23 pp. 
29-34 March 1985. 
[3] P. Mockapetris and K. J. Dunlap. "Development of the 
domain name system," SIGCOMM'88, 1988. 
[4] http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2453 [retrieved: 2, 2014] 
[5] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2328.txt [retrieved: 2, 2014] 
[6] http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4271 [retrieved: 2, 2014] 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

[7] A. X. Liu and M. G. Gouda, "Diverse Firewall Design,"  
IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 19,  
Issue. 9, pp. 1237-1251, Sept. 2008. 
[8] http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1631 [retrieved: 2, 2014] 
[9] M. S. Ferdous, F. Chowdhury, and J. C. Acharjee, "An 
Extended Algorithm to Enhance the Performance of the 
Current 
NAPT," 
Int. 
Conf. 
on 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICICT '07), pp. 315-318, March 
2007. 
[10] S. K. Das, D. J. Harvey, and  R. Biswas, “Parallel processing 
of adaptive meshes with load balancing,” IEEE Tran.on 
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 1269-
1280, Dec 2002. 
[11] J. Aweya, M. Ouellette, D. Y. Montuno, B. Doray, and K.  
Felske, “An adaptive load balancing scheme for web servers,” 
Int.,J.of Network Management., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 3-39, 
Jan/Feb 2002. 
[12] C. Metz, “The latest in virtual private networks: part I,” IEEE 
Internet Computing, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 87-91, 2003. 
[13] C. Metz, “The latest in VPNs: part II,” IEEE Internet 
Computing, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 60-65, 2004. 
[14] R. Perlman, "An overview of PKI trust models," IEEE 
Network, vol. 13,  issue 6,  pp. 38-43, Nov/Dec 1999. 
[15] A. Singh, M. Korupolu, and D. Mohapatra, "Server-storage 
virtualization: Integration and load balancing in data centers," 
Int. Conf. for High Performance Computing, Networking, 
Storage and Analysis, pp. 1-12, Nov. 2008. 
[16] R. Yavatkar et al., "A Framework for Policy-based Admission 
Control," IETF RFC 2753, 2000. 
[17] B. Moore et al., "Policy Core Information Model -- Version 1 
Specification," IETF RFC 3060, 2001. 
[18] B. Moore, "Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) 
Extensions," IETF 3460, 2003. 
[19] J. Strassner et al., " Policy Core Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP) Schema," IETF RFC 3703, 2004. 
[20] D. Durham et al., "The COPS (Common Open Policy 
Service) Protocol, " IETF RFC 2748, 2000. 
[21] S. Herzog et al., "COPS usage for RSVP", IETF RFC 2749, 
2000. 
[22] K. Chan et al., "COPS Usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-
PR), " IETF RFC 3084, 2001. 
[23] CIM Core Model V2.5 LDAP Mapping Specification, 2002. 
[24] M. Wahl et al., "Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (v3)," 
IETF RFC 2251, 1997. 
[25] CIM Schema: Version 2.30.0, 2011. 
[26] ETSI ES 282 003: Telecoms and Internet converged Services 
and protocols for Advanced Network (TISPAN); Resource 
and Admission Control Subsystem (RACS); Functional 
Architecture,  June 2006. 
[27] ETSI ES 283 026: Telecommunications and Internet 
Converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); Resource and Admission Control; Protocol for 
QoS reservation information exchange between the Service 
Policy Decision Function (SPDF) and the Access-Resource 
and Admission Control Function (A-RACF) in the Resource 
and Protocol specifica-tion",  April 2006. 
[28] K. Odagiri ， R. Yaegashi ， M. Tadauchi, and N.Ishii, 
"Efficient Network  
Management System with DACS 
Scheme : Management with communication control, " Int. J. 
of Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 
30-36, January, 2006. 
[29] K. Odagiri，R. Yaegashi，M. Tadauchi, and N.Ishii, "Secure 
DACS Scheme," Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications," Elsevier, vol. 31, Issue 4, pp. 851-861, 
November 2008. 
[30] K. Odagiri, S. Shimizu, R. Yaegashi, M. Takizawa, and N. 
Ishii, "DACS System Implementation Method to Realize the 
Next 
Generation 
Policy-based 
Network 
Management 
Scheme," Proc. of Int. Conf. on Advanced Information 
Networking and Applications (AINA 2010), Perth, Australia,  
Japan, IEEE Computer Society,  pp. 348-354, May 2010. 
[31] K. Odagiri, S. Shimizu, M. Takizawa, N. Ishii, "Theoretical 
Suggestion of Policy-Based Wide Area Network Management 
System (wDACS system part-I)," International Journal of 
Networked and Distributed Computing (IJNDC), vol. 1, no.4, 
pp. 260-269,   2013. 
[32] http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4251 [retrieved: 2, 2014] 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

