From IPv4 to IPv6 – Data Security in the Transition Phase 
 
Tomasz Bilski 
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
Tomasz.Bilski@put.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract—IPv4 is a foundation of Internet communication. 
Designed many years ago the protocol is inadequate in modern 
networks. New sixth version is replacing the older one. It is 
often repeated that IPv6 was designated to solve some security 
problems. This statement is true only to some extent. IPv6 
deployment for the future infrastructure IPv6DFI (especially 
in the transition phase) will have large impact, not always 
positive on many aspects of Internet services: network 
performance, data security, economy. As number of IPv6 
networks grow, new threat awareness and understanding 
become more important. The paper attempts to present 
comprehensive survey on IPv6 security and to identify many 
issues of data security in the transition from IPv4 to IPv6 
phase. 
Keywords: IPv4; IPv6; Internet security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Internet evolution from IPv4 to IPv6 is the biggest 
transformation in Internet infrastructure since its beginning. 
The process is (and will be for many years) very complex 
and resources (human, money) consuming. It must be 
expected that the transformation will have huge impact on 
many aspects of Internet services: network performance, data 
security, economy. In general, security issues in IPv6 are not 
better or worse than in IPv4, they are just different. There are 
risks related to all security features: confidentiality, integrity 
and availability. For many years we will live in a dual 
IPv4/IPv6 environment. The security issues could become 
complex to deal with in terms of implementation and 
configuration. In dual-stack architecture used in transition 
phase the problems resulting from IPv6 introduction may 
have unforeseen effects on IPv4 processing, affecting not 
only new services but also old services (based on IPv4). 
The IP transition phase is an important research area of 
many teams (e.g., 6net [1], IPv6fix [2] in Japan, USGv6 [3]  
in the USA). There are some resources on different aspects 
of IPv6 security (e.g., [4] [5] [6]). Complete list of new 
threats and risks related to IPv6 is very long and it is very 
probable that we do not know all threats and risks. In the 
paper we try to present comprehensive survey on IP security 
issues with emphasis on the security in IPv4 to IPv6 
transition phase.  
Section II presents some remarks on solutions to the 
transition period problems. Main part of the paper (Section 
III) is dedicated to several issues related to security of IPv6 
deployment and transition phase. General conclusions are 
given in the last part of the paper.  
The research project is scheduled for years 2010-2013 
and supported by scientific grant from the Polish Ministry of 
Education and Science. 
II. 
FROM IPV4 TO IPV6 
IPv6 had been proposed at IETF as the next generation of 
IP at early in the 1990’s. IP transformation is long-term and 
complex process. Changes in software (operating systems, 
applications) as well as in hardware are needed on different 
TCP/IP layers. The process is not limited to IP version 
exchange. Many supplementary protocols, such as ICMP 
(Internet Control Message Protocol), DNS (Domain Name 
System), BGP (Border Gateway Protocol), OSPF (Open 
Shortest Path First), RIP (Routing Information Protocol) 
need to be modified or upgraded.  
Unfortunately there is no single, commonly adopted 
solution to the IP transformation problem. We could not 
switch from IPv4 to IPv6 in one single point in time. We 
have to maintain existing IPv4 networks and slowly 
introduce IPv6 networks. So the two networks have to 
coexist and cooperate for most likely long time. It is 
expected that the phase will last for many years. Some 
reports (e.g., [7]) suggest the phase will reach 2025 year, 
with cost estimated in USA at $25 billion. And even in 2025 
IPv6 global penetration will not achieve 100%. We have just 
started and so far some plans of IPv6 adoptions did not 
materialize. For example, according to Action Plan, 
published in 2008 for EU, Europe should widely implement 
IPv6 by 2010. It was predicted that by 2010 at least 25% of 
users will be able to connect to the IPv6 Internet and to 
access their most important content and service providers 
without noticing a major difference compared to IPv4 [8]. 
RIPE Survey [9] from mid 2009 leads to conclusion that 
achieving this 25% market penetration will be very difficult. 
There are many obstacles: cost, IT staff preparation (and also 
some form of human inertia), software implementations 
availability and maturity. The dangers of transition phase 
arise from many general reasons among them: a lack of 
information and a lack of documented operational 
experience, on which network administrators can draw. One 
of the important concerns in adopting IPv6 is security. 
Operators and enterprises are reluctant to deploy technology 
that may compromise security and eventually cause 
significant financial loss.  
Most transition alternatives are a combination of dual-
stack or dual-layer environments and packet tunnelling. 
Dual-stack means that both versions are running on the 
66
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

network device [10]. IPv4 and IPv6 datagrams are 
transmitted over the same network links. Operating system 
and application decide, which version is used. Tunnelling 
means IPv6 datagrams are encapsulated in data field of IPv4 
datagram or vice versa. Such tunnels may be configured 
automatically or manually between hosts, routers and 
networks. The transformation started, new IPv6 networks 
are working. It may be assumed that some users do not 
know their systems use IPv6 (e.g., MS Windows Vista 
default configuration has IPv6 turned on [11]). 
III. 
SECURITY ISSUES 
There are many security issues related to IPv6 
deployment and transition phase. The security issues related 
to IP transformation phase may be divided into 2 groups. 
First group of security problems is associated with IPv6 
features and implementations, such as cryptography tools, 
addressing scheme, security model, host mobility, software 
bugs. The second group is related to particular methods for 
IPv4/IPv6 cooperation. Security (especially resources 
availability) in a broad sense is affected by performance. 
Poor network performance could lead to availability threats. 
In order to boost performance security regulations may be 
loosen by administrators.  
A. General Remarks 
IPv6 was designed to improve data security. It introduced 
obligatory implementation (but its use is not required) of 
IPsec security mechanisms: AH (Authentication Header), 
ESP (Encapsulating Security Payload), IKE (Internet Key 
Exchange) Protocol. In general this makes protection (for 
higher layer protocols and applications) easier and more cost 
effective. The mechanisms are used to satisfy the 
requirements of access control, connectionless integrity, data 
origin authentication, confidentiality and protection against 
replay attacks [12]. It must be added that not all network 
devices are equipped with IPsec. For example, some printers, 
faxes, scanners do not use IPsec. 
Furthermore such IPv6 features of the protocol as 
simplified header, greater number of available addresses 
have also impact on security. Simplified header makes 
routers more resistive to DoS attacks – packets are processed 
more rapidly. Greater number of addresses makes exhaustive 
host scanning (reconnaissance attack) of a typical /64 subnet 
unpractical. 
IPsec is available for IPv4 but only as an option. 
Furthermore, IPsec means whole datagram protection so it is 
not attuned to work with NAT (Network Address 
Translation) used concurrently with IPv4. IPsec protects the 
whole datagram, so any modification of the header (NAT 
modifies addresses and port numbers) violates the security of 
the datagram. In the transition phase NAT is still used in 
some dual-stack solutions (e.g., [13]). Only in full IPv6 
deployment phase NAT is not needed and full end-to-end IP 
security is deployable without those issues. 
Common methods for preventing unwanted traffic from 
the Internet are firewalls and IPSes (Intrusion Prevention 
System). The security is based on the assumption that all the 
traffic is inspected at the edge of protected network. The 
problem is not all of the security devices and software are 
currently IPv6-capable (e.g., IPS may detect the traffic 
associated with common attacks and malicious behavior for 
IPv4 and at the same time might not be able to detect similar 
traffic when it is sent over IPv6) – in the consequence IPv6 
may be used as a backdoor to the protected network. 
IP transformation phase takes place at the moment of 
very dynamic Internet growth. Some forecasts estimate IP 
traffic will increase at a compound annual growth rate of 
40% in 2008-2013 [14]. As a result current firewall systems 
that perform security screening through a common 
checkpoint will be increasingly degraded due to increasing 
number of datagrams to process. 
IPv6 was designed to protect data. Unreasonably, its 
deployment may sometimes lead to decreasing security level, 
especially in the transformation period. The operating system 
vendors long ago started to support IPv6 in their products. 
Nevertheless interoperability and compatibility tests (e.g., 
[15]) of IPv6 implementations show some implementation 
problems. The problem occurs in network security systems 
that deal only with IPv4 datagrams. Operating system 
implementing both IP versions may use IPv6 without user 
explicit configuration – IPv6 datagrams are not screened and 
the protocol may be used to form a backdoor [6]. For 
example, Teredo, an IPv6 tunnelling tool developed by 
Microsoft is enabled by default in the Microsoft Windows 
Vista.  
B. Cryptography Strength 
IPsec uses various cryptographic techniques and tools: 
symmetric and asymmetric encryption algorithms, hash 
functions, pseudorandom number generators, key exchange 
protocols. For a given transmission process cryptography 
tools are negotiated with a use of IKE. It is assumed that the 
ultimate set of optionally available tools is changing. At the 
same time, in order to ensure interoperability, all IPv6 
devices (and IPv4 with IPsec implementations) are required 
to employ some mandatory algorithms. The first problem is 
the requirements should be met in all devices, without regard 
to their processing power. This leads to some compromises 
in the algorithms strength. As for now according to [16] set 
of mandatory algorithms contains: AES-CBC with 128-bit 
keys, Triple DES-CBC and HMAC-SHA1-96.  
Another problem is the existing algorithms and their 
implementations are continuously attacked (and sometimes 
broken) and will be attacked and broken in the future. This is 
more probable due to long period of IPv6 deployment. 
Strong algorithm may become weak. Well known examples 
are DES and MD5, included in the IPsec mandatory list in 
1998 [17] but removed from the list in 2005 [18].  SHA1 
hash function, which is mandatory at this moment is also 
known to have some weaknesses [19] and is a possible 
candidate for removal from the mandatory list. 
Prospective replacement of the broken algorithms in all 
network devices will be very painful and resource 
consuming task. In some cases (e.g., devices with hardware 
implementations of cryptographic mechanisms) the task may 
be impossible to complete. It may be assumed that, in 
67
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

outcome older, broken cryptography will be used for data 
protection. 
C. End-to-End Security Model 
There are two fundamental security models for 
communication protection: end-to-end and network-based. In 
end-to-end security model the end hosts provide the security 
services necessary to protect transmitted data. This model is 
used in banking applications. Network-based security refers 
to the practice of hardening the elements of a network to 
protect other devices. Both models have advantages and 
weaknesses. The two models may be integrated. Hybrid 
solutions can be used in the transition period. 
IPv6 is integrated with IPsec transport mode dedicated to 
end-to-end security model. Switching on IPsec does not 
solve all security problems. First of all, it may not be 
assumed that communication endpoints can be trusted. 
Internal threats to data security occur more often than 
external. If an endpoint is not trusted then entire end-to-end 
security system could not be trusted to [20]. 
Additional weakness of the solution is caused by the fact 
that data are secured at the source and devices located inside 
the communication channel (gateways, firewalls, …) are not 
able to scrupulously analyze the traffic. For example, if 
inbound datagram is encrypted with ESP then it is possible 
to check IP address in a header but it is not possible to check 
if data field contains malicious load. For a firewall it is not 
possible to provide DoS (Denial of Service) prevention 
based on the expected TCP protocol behaviour – TCP 
segments inside IP data fields are encrypted so firewall could 
not check for example, the settings of particular TCP flags. 
In the same way outbound transmission analysis is also 
affected. DLP (Data Leakage Protection) is network sniffer, 
installed on gateway, looking for outbound transmission with 
predefined sensitive data that should not be transferred 
outside protected zone. DLP is called also Extrusion 
Prevention System. DLP systems could not perform their 
functions since they could not identify sensitive data in 
encrypted outbound datagrams.  
There is a problem with fragmentation – since datagram 
defragmentation may be done only at the destination host 
firewall is not able to reassemble the datagram and 
eventually sanitize it. 
Another problem is related to users’ negligence. In the 
case of end-to-end security, users (not administrators) are 
responsible for data security. If users do not understand the 
security mechanisms they will not use them appropriately. 
For example, web browsers may display a warning about 
invalid server certificates, but users can override the warning 
and still make vulnerable connection. 
A solution to the problem is proposed in the form of 
distributed firewall [21] [22]. The architecture consists of 
two firewalls: one at the network perimeter and the other 
integrated with end host. Firewall at the network perimeter 
performs general datagram filtering (e.g., based on source IP 
address) while host-based firewall inspects datagram more 
precisely. Only the end-host is able to decrypt datagram in 
order to check it thoroughly. The solution has negative 
impact on performance. 
Additional problems are related to NAT and Quality of 
Service enforcement. Full end-to-end security is possible if 
NAT is not used, but some dual-stack solutions to the 
transformation phase use NAT for address conversion. 
Furthermore end-to-end security model makes QoS policy 
enforcement impossible. 
D. ICMPv6 Issues 
For a new version of IP a new version of ICMP  is 
needed. The old version of ICMP dedicated to IPv4 may not 
be used with IPv6. ICMPv6 is more functional than its 
predecessor. It also replaces ARP (Address Resolution 
Protocol) – NDP (Neighbor Discovery Protocol) is a part of 
ICMPv6. Without secure network configuration ICMPv6 
may lead to many new threats, for example, covert channel, 
NDP cache poisoning (similar to ARP cache poisoning) or 
DoS. 
The functions added to ICMPv6 are the source of 
problems for firewall configuration. ICMP messages (used 
with IPv4) could be dropped by firewall without disturbing 
normal network operation.  In the case of ICMPv6 firewall 
needs to allow some messages through the firewall and also 
messages 
to 
and 
from 
the 
firewall. 
Without 
the 
authorizations IPv6 procedures (e.g., neighbor discovery or 
stateless address configuration) could not work properly. As 
a result covert channel between firewall protected LAN and 
intruder may be established – for example, malicious IPv4 
datagrams (in normal case rejected by firewall) could be 
hidden inside ICMPv6 messages (which are not rejected by 
firewall). 
NDP is a new function added to TCP/IP stack for host 
IPv6 address autoconfiguration and address resolution. It has 
been shown [23] that NDP messages may be used to execute 
an attack on router resulting in network congestion and 
degradation of QoS. 
Another DoS attack may be launched with a use of 
multicast transmission. IPv6 specifications forbid the 
generation of ICMPv6 datagrams in response to messages to 
global multicast addresses. But there are two exceptions (the 
datagram too big message and the parameter problem 
message). The attack uses these exceptions – error messages 
are returned as the responses when unprocessable (e.g., 
greater than Maximum Transmission Unit) datagrams are 
sent to multicast addresses. If datagram source address is 
spoofed (replaced with victim address) then many datagrams 
from multicast group are sent to a victim [5]. 
E. Host Authentication vs. User Anonymity 
IPv6 addressing scheme is very complicated. There are 
many different types of addresses and many methods for 
address generation.  For ease of configuration a 64-bit part 
identifying a particular host in the network may come from 
the interface identifier (e.g., Ethernet MAC address extended 
to 64 EUI (Extended Unique Identifier)). This ease of 
configuration leads to privacy problems. All communications 
of the given user can be linked together using constant 
interface identifier very easily. On the margin it may be 
added that IP addresses attributed to Internet users are 
personal data and are protected by EU Directives 95/46 and 
68
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

97/66 [24]. In order to prevent such threats to privacy 
another method (pseudorandom) for address generation was 
established. 
Among various methods for address acquirement we 
have stateless address autoconfiguration with pseudorandom 
host identifier selection [25]. The purpose is to change the 
interface identifier (and public address) from time to time. 
This way it is much harder for any eavesdropper to correlate 
Internet transactions to a specific network subject and the 
user anonymity is better protected. It must be added that 
a global routing prefix (usually /48), added to pseudorandom 
host identifier, is fixed for hosts in a given network and some 
privacy concerns remain. 
Full anonymity protection is almost impossible. An 
attacker, who is on path, may be able to draw some 
conclusions with a use of: the payload contents of the 
transmitted datagrams and the characteristics of the 
datagrams such as datagram size and timing. Use of 
pseudorandom addresses will not prevent such payload-
based correlation. 
The same change in the address used for privacy 
protection could make it harder for a security administrator 
to define an address-based firewall policy access rule.  
Another problem is that such node behaviour with relatively 
high rate of address changes may be interpreted as DDoS 
(Distributed DoS), like SYN flood, attack and the 
transmission from the node may be blocked by firewall [5].  
Address autoconfiguration has one more weakness. First 
24 bits of MAC (Medium Access Control) addresses used in 
the process are related to specific vendor equipment. An 
attacker may scan network in order to discover specific 
vendor device reachability and facilitating an attack on 
known, specific for the given device security weaknesses.  
Here we see typical development scenario: new feature in 
the protocol (address autoconfiguration) leads to a new 
security problem (threat to privacy), solution to the problem 
(pseudorandom address generation) leads to another 
difficulty (false DDoS alert).  
Privacy 
is 
important 
feature 
of 
communication. 
Nevertheless it must be added that the feature may be used 
also to hide the source of illegal and nasty activities.  
F. Software Bugs in IPv6 Implementations 
Software implementing IPv6 is relatively new, less 
mature and has not been tested thoroughly. So far many bugs 
have been found in the software developed by all the major 
vendors of IT. It is very probable that numerous bugs will be 
found in the future. A question is if the bugs will be patched 
quickly? If not so, many new attack methods will emerge. 
Furthermore it may not be excluded that essential security 
features may be missing from early releases of software.  
For example, Symantec discovered IPv6-related flaw in 
Vista. Fortunately it was patched by Microsoft (MS07-038 
security update from July 2007). The flaw was related to 
Teredo tunnelling interface, which did not properly handled 
certain traffic, allowing to bypass firewall filtering and to 
obtain sensitive information with a use of IPv6 transmission. 
Similar problems occur in other operating systems. For 
example, bug number 6797796 in Solaris 10 may be used to 
execute DoS attack [26]. Old JUNOS (Juniper router 
operating system) versions (before May 2006) had a security 
bug, which could lead to router crash [27]. 
G. Mobile IP 
Both Mobile IP and the increase of moveable IP devices 
will mean they will be in uncontrollable networks. In Mobile 
IP environment mobile host is reachable with a use of host 
routing protocol – normal route to a host is modified for a 
given recipient host. The method changes the way 
a datagram is sent to a host. In the effect it may be expected 
some forms of attacks will use the feature [28]. 
In the mobile IP environment new security threats will 
materialize in networks designated for use by foreign, 
visiting hosts. Such a network will have to loosen firewall 
rules. Mobile host needs to transmit some IP and ICMP 
packets (e.g., binding updates, datagrams with optional 
routing headers) necessary to maintain associations with 
home agent and other hosts. Firewall should be open for 
these datagrams – obviously this leads to a security risk.  
Mobile IPv6 devices are often equipped with scarce 
resources and have low processing power. The resources and 
processing power may be not enough to protect the device: 
to filter incoming datagrams, to automatically update 
software (especially implementations of cryptography 
algorithms), to resist DoS attacks. Of course this problem is 
common and not related to a particular IP version but IPv6 
users may mistakenly believe they are better protected. 
H. Security of the Interoperability Methods 
There are several means to operate in IPv4+IPv6 
environment. The methods enable to transfer datagrams 
between hosts located in two generations of networks: IPv4 
and IPv6. For example, datagram between hosts belonging to 
two separated IPv6 networks (islands) may be transferred 
(tunnelled) across IPv4 network – IPv6 datagram is 
encapsulated in data field of IPv4 datagram. In the future, as 
IPv6 deployment will spread and IPv4 use will diminish, the 
roles of IP versions will change. IPv4 datagrams will be 
encapsulated in data fields of IPv6 datagrams – new types of 
problems will emerge. 
Some security problems are independent of tunnelling 
method, others are related to a particular tunnelling 
procedure. In the case of tunnelled datagrams devices 
enforcing security may inspect only the outer layer of the 
datagrams, which may be prepared by intruder to avoid 
filtering while malicious contents of the datagram remain 
unnoticed. If such datagrams reach a tunnel end-point inside 
the protected network they are decapsulated and from there 
can potentially be very harmful since within a network itself, 
defence levels are usually much lower. 
It is obvious that in the case of tunnelling unencrypted 
IPv6 datagrams in IPv4 network all IPv4 security concerns 
influence data security. And this problem is regardless of 
tunnelling method.  
There are many tunnelling/interoperability methods, for 
example: 6to4, Teredo, ISATAP and tunnel broker. Each 
method has individual impact on data security.  
69
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

1) Teredo 
Teredo uses UDP to tunnel IPv6 datagrams through IPv4 
network. IPv6 datagrams are put into UDP segments, which 
are sent to the destination system via IPv4. Teredo requires 
a lot of datagram-sanity checks, which can prevent 
a number of attacks. The program also includes some decent 
anti-spoofing mechanisms. Nevertheless Teredo tunnelling 
may lead to new threats.  
In Teredo architecture encapsulation/decapsulation is 
performed by end host. Any of internal (inside LAN 
protected by firewall) network's Teredo-enabled systems that 
can receive UDP datagrams can then act as an endpoint for 
IPv6 tunnels. It is much difficult to secure all such endpoints 
instead of a single firewall at the network boundary. In the 
case of a single firewall it is relatively easy for network 
administrator to control the traffic. But if malicious 
datagrams are hidden in Teredo tunnel then firewall is not 
able to discern them and block. Of course firewall could 
entirely block Teredo traffic (UDP predefined destination 
port 3544) but attack may be carried with a use of another 
UDP port. An attacker can send arbitrary IPv6 datagrams to 
a Teredo-enabled machine inside LAN. The machine may 
route the datagrams (with source routing mechanism of 
IPv6) to other host [29]. The problem is particularly related 
to MS Windows Vista, which in default configuration has 
both IPv6 and Teredo turned on [11]. 
2) 6to4 
6to4 dual-stack is used to connect IPv6 networks across 
an IPv4 network. Unique 2002::/16 prefix is reserved for 
6to4 systems. Network address with 2002::/prefix has IPv4 
address 32 bits embedded immediately after the prefix. The 
IPv4 address indicates 6to4 router located between IPv6 and 
IPv4 network. All nodes inside IPv6 network have 
addresses with 48 bits prefix (2002 and 32 bits of IPv4 
router address). If a 6to4 router receives an IPv6 datagram 
with 2002::/16 prefix then it sends it through IPv4 network, 
inside IPv4 datagram with IPv4 receiver address taken from 
32 next (after 16 bits prefix) bits of IPv6 address. 
It is assumed that IPv4 traffic from every address is 
accepted and decapsulated by 6to4 routers. The routers can 
be tricked to send spoofed datagrams anywhere. Anyone can 
send tunnelled spoofed traffic to a 6to4 router, and the router 
will believe that it is coming from a legal relay. There is no 
simple way to prevent such attacks, and longer-term 
solutions are needed in both IPv6 and IPv4 networks [30]. 
In addition it is suggested that 6to4 routers can be abused 
to carry DoS attack [31]. 
3) ISATAP 
ISATAP is Intra-site Automatic Tunnel Addressing 
Protocol. ISATAP uses unusual form of IPv6 addresses. 
Address is made of 64-bit network prefix and interface 
identifier. Network prefix is received from ISATAP router 
while interface identifier contains an embedded IPv4 address 
(last 32 bits of IPv6 address). The IPv4 address is used in 
IPv4 headers when IPv6 traffic is tunnelled across an IPv4 
network.  
Risks related to ISATAP are similar to those related to 
6to4.  
4) Tunnel broker 
Tunnel broker is based on third party servers (tunnel 
broker servers, tunnel servers) distributed in Internet. 
Tunnel broker provides tunnels for IPv6 datagrams in IPv4 
networks. User/client has to register with the broker system, 
which sets up a tunnel to one of its tunnel servers. Client 
gets configuration settings from the broker and uses tunnel 
servers for communication. The problem is related to the 
requirement that all traffic passes through third party 
servers. Service availability as well as confidentiality are 
threatened. Exemplary DoS attack may be performed by 
malicious user demanding to establish such number of 
tunnels that exhausts the resources available in tunnel server 
[32]. 
I. 
Performance Issues 
IPv6 was developed to improve network performance. 
There are many features that aim to fulfill this requirement: 
simplified header, better addressing scheme, ability to 
transfer very large datagrams, ban on fragmentation in 
routers. However, there are some issues of IPv6 with 
negative impact on performance. This indirectly may 
influence data security. 
IPv6 allows transferring very large datagrams (up to 
gigabytes). On the other hand in the case of IPv6 tunneling in 
IPv4 network, the IPv6 path MTU for the destination is 
typically 20 bytes less than the IPv4 path MTU for the 
destination. IPv6 headers have fewer fields but are longer 
due to longer addresses. Minimum length of IPv4 header is 
20 bytes while minimum length of IPv6 header is 40 bytes. 
This makes additional load to all the nodes (including 
routers, firewalls, bridges) in the communication channel. Of 
course these longer IP addresses are transferred not only in 
IPv6 headers but also in messages of many higher layers 
protocols (e.g., DNS, ICMP, BGP, OSPF) increasing 
network load. 
In the transition phase routing may be done with two 
separate protocols and doubling the amount of processing in 
routers. This may lead to router’s CPU overload and increase 
in routes convergence time. 
It is obvious that the longer IP header the more time-
consuming packet filtering process in firewalls. The question 
is if this will not force network administrator to switching off 
filtering in order to boost performance? 
Dual-stack 
systems 
use 
tunneling 
for 
datagram 
transmission in heterogeneous environment. Datagram 
processing on hosts or routers sitting on tunnel ends adds 
extra time to total datagram delays. In the case of tunnel 
broker solution further delay is related to datagram 
transmission from source host to tunnel server, which may 
be topologically remote. For example, if hosts in Europe use 
American tunnel broker then transmission parameters 
(Round Trip Time, jitter, throughput, packet loss ratio) 
between two IPv6 hosts in Europe will be downgraded by 
intercontinental links. 
70
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Another 
set 
of 
problems 
is 
related 
to 
DNS. 
A performance problem is coupled with fallback process. In 
the IP transformation phase name servers will store two 
types of address resource records: A for IPv4 and AAAA for 
IPv6. It is assumed that no explicit information on address 
preference will be given to a client. The application may 
receive both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses for the same domain 
name. The application will have to try respectively addresses 
received from name server until the connection is successful. 
It is assumed that IPv6 addresses will be used initially. But if 
end system has no global IPv6 connectivity then the attempt 
to connect will be unsuccessful and host will switch to IPv4 
address (this is known as fallback process). Due to TCP 
characteristics the fallback process may last up to about 
190 s [33] – the effects on service access time are obvious. 
Increased number of AAAA queries sent to name servers is 
another source of performance deterioration.  From IP 
transition point of view DNS is extraordinary service. Name 
servers and resolvers should be the first to be fully dual-stack 
capable. 
In 
dual-stack 
architecture 
the 
IPv6 
datagrams 
performance deterioration resulting from IPv6 processing 
may potentially have harmful unforeseen effects on IPv4 
processing, affecting availability of services based on both 
protocols. 
IPv6 allows to classify datagrams in order to diversify 
their processing by network devices. Some users (legal as 
well as hackers) may abuse the function and wrongly classify 
all sent datagrams as highest-priority. To enforce appropriate 
QoS policy the network device (e.g., gateway) needs to 
inspect headers and data fields of the datagrams. If the 
datagrams are encrypted such inspection (and QoS policy 
enforcement) will be impossible. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Some general conclusions may be drown from IP 
evolution. The change is rather inevitable. New functions of 
IPv6 and ICMPv6 lead to new threats. IP transition period 
has (and will have for many years) great impact on Internet 
security, performance and economy.  
Since all popular tunnelling methods (Teredo, 6to4, 
ISATAP, tunnel broker) use IPv4 networks, the security 
concerns related to IPv4 are still relevant. In popular dual-
stack architecture the problems resulting from IPv6 
introduction may potentially have unforeseen effects on IPv4 
processing, affecting both services. There are many security 
issues related to IPv6 deployment. Complete list of new 
threats and risks related to IPv6 is very long. It is probable 
that the list will grow longer in the future. In general the 
security issues related to IP transition phase may be divided 
into 3 classes:  
• 
related to IPv6 internal features, 
• 
related to IPv6 implementations, 
• 
related to IPv4 to IPv6 transition mechanisms. 
A variety of risks and threats are results of the problems. 
In the previous sections we have described examples of 
threats from several categories: 
• 
DoS attacks, 
• 
covert channels through firewalls, 
• 
privacy problems, 
• 
extra complexity of management/security tasks, 
• 
bugs in immature software, 
• 
performance deterioration. 
In the time of full IPv6 deployment IPv6 will be more 
than 30 years old. It is very unlikely that the protocol will be 
appropriate for Internet in for example, years 2020-2030.  
Finally, it must be said that many attacks are targeted at 
the application layer. Since the attacks are unrelated to a 
particular IP version IPv6 deployment will not change the 
security level of the application layer. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 6net 
Large-Scale 
International 
IPv6 
Pilot 
Network, 
6NET 
Consortium, 2008, http://www.6net.org, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[2] IPv6 
Fix 
Official 
Homepage, 
WIDE 
Project, 
2007, 
http://v6fix.net/index.html, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[3] USGv6 Testing Program, NIST, 2010, 
http://www.antd.nist.gov/usgv6/testing.html, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[4] S. Convery and D. Miller, IPv6 and IPv4 Threat Comparison and Best 
Practice Evaluation, 2004, Cisco Systems, 
http://www.cisco.com/security_services/ciag/documents/v6-v4-
threats.pdf, (last access 30.11.2010). 
[5] E. Davies, S. Krishnan, and P. Savola, IPv6 Transition/Coexistence 
Security Considerations, RFC 4942, IETF, 2007. 
[6] S. Hogg and E. Vyncke, IPv6 Security, Addison Wesley, 2008. 
[7] M.P. Gallaher and B. Rowe, IPv6 Economic Impact Assessment, 
NIST, October, 2005. 
[8] Advancing the Internet. Action Plan for the deployment of Internet 
Protocol version 6 (IPv6) in Europe, Commission of the European 
Communities, Brussels, 2008, 
http://www.ipv6.eu/admin/bildbank/uploads/Documents/Commision/
COM_.pdf, (last access 30.11.2010). 
[9] M. Botterman, Towards IPv6 Deployment, RIPE 59 Lisbon, 2009, 
http://ripe59.ripe.net/presentations/botterman-towards-v6-
deployment.pdf, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[10] E. Nordmark, Basic Transition Mechanisms for IPv6 Hosts and 
Routers, RFC 4213, IETF, 2005. 
[11] J. Hoagland, The Teredo Protocol: Tunneling Past Network Security 
and Other Security Implications, Symantec, 
http://www.symantec.com/avcenter/reference/Teredo_Security.pdf, 
2007 (last acess 30.11.2010). 
[12] E. Kent et al., Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol, RFC 
4301, IETF, December 2005. 
[13] A. Durand, Dual-stack lite broadband deployments post IPv4 
exhaustion, Internet-draft, IETF, 2009. 
[14] Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2008-
2013, Cisco, San Jose, 2009. 
[15] TAHI Project. Test and Verification for IPv6, http://www.tahi.org, 
(last access 7.03.2011). 
[16] V. Manral, Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation Requirements 
for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and Authentication Header 
(AH), RFC 4835, IETF, 2007. 
[17] S. Kent and R. Atkinson,  IP Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP), 
RFC 2406, IETF, 1998. 
[18] D. Eastlake, Cryptographic Algorithm Implementation Requirements 
for Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) and Authentication Header 
(AH), RFC 4305, IETF, 2005. 
[19] V. Rijmen and E. Oswald, Update on SHA-1, Cryptology ePrint 
Archive Report 2005/010, http://eprint.iacr.org/2005/010, 2005 (last 
access 30.11.2010). 
71
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

[20] M.H. Behringer, Why End-to-End Security is Necessary But Not 
Sufficient, Internet Protocol Journal, Cisco vol. 12. No. 2, Sep. 2009, 
pp. 20-26. 
[21] S. Ioannidis, A. Keromytis, S. Bellovin, and J. Smith, Implementing a 
Distributed Firewall, Proceedings of Computer and Communications 
Security (CCS), November 2000. 
[22] M. Kaeo, IPv6 Security Technology Paper, North American IPv6 
Task 
Force 
(NAv6TF) 
Technology 
Report, 
NAv6TF, 
http://www.ipv6forum.com/dl/white/NAv6TF_Security_Report.pdf, 
2006 (last access 30.11.2010). 
[23] G. An and J. Nah, Effective Control of Abnormal Neighbor 
Discovery Congestion on IPv6 Local Area Network, LNCS, Volume 
4159/2006, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 966-976. 
[24] Opinion 2/2002 on the use of unique identifiers in telecommunication 
terminal equipments: the example of IPv6, Data Protection Working 
Party, European Commission,  
http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2002/wp58
_en.pdf, 2002 (last access 30.11.2010). 
[25] T. Narten, R. Draves and S. Krishnan, Privacy Extensions for 
Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6, RFC 4941, IETF, 2007. 
[26] Bug ID 6797926, Oracle Corporation, 2011, 
http://bugs.opensolaris.org/bugdatabase/view_bug.do?bug_id=67979
26, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[27] Juniper Security Advisory, UNIRAS, 2006, http://archive.cert.uni-
stuttgart.de/uniras/2006/07/msg00013.html, (last access 7.03.2011). 
[28] A. Mankin, Threat Models introduced by Mobile IPv6 and 
Requirements for Security in Mobile IPv6, Internet-Draft draft-team-
mobileip-mipv6-sec-reqts-00, July 2001. 
[29] P. Savola, Security of IPv6 Routing Header and Home Address 
Options, Internet draft, IETF, 2001. 
[30] F. Ali, IP spoofing, Internet Protocol Journal, Cisco, volume 10, no 4, 
Dec. 2007, pp. 2-9. 
[31] P. Savola and C. Patel, Security Considerations for 6to4, RFC 3964, 
IETF, 2004. 
[32] A. Durand, P. Fasano, I. Guardini, and D. Lento, IPv6 Tunnel Broker, 
RFC 3053, IETF, 2001. 
[33] T. Fujisaki et. al., Operational Problems in IPv6: Fallback and DNS 
issues, http://www.nttv6.net/~fujisaki/fallback.pdf, 2006 (last access 
30.11.2010). 
 
72
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

