MCAST: Mobility-aware Channel-Availability based
Channel Selection Technique
Md. Arafatur Rahman and Mohammad Moshee Uddin
Faculty of Computer Systems and Software Engineering
University Malaysia Pahang
Gambang, Malaysia
Email: arafatur@ump.edu.my, mdmoshi@yahoo.com
Roberto Savoia
Istituto di Cibernetica ”E. Caianiello”
Naples, Italy
Email: roberto.savoia@ino.it
Abstract—A key issue in cognitive radio networks is the design
of a channel selection technique that guarantees to utilize the
highest available channel in presence of the dynamic activity
of primary users. Usually, the channel selection techniques that
operate in this kind of network are based on the channel-
availability probability. In the static primary user’s scenario,
this probability can be a priori known or simply estimated from
the channel occupancy history. However, in the mobile primary
user’s scenario, this probability dynamically varies in time due
to the changes of the primary user’s position. In order to exploit
the dynamic variation of the channel availability, in this paper
we design a novel Mobility-aware Channel-Availability based
channel Selection Technique (MCAST) that ensures the selection
of the channel with the highest channel availability probability
in a given temporal interval. The simulation results highlight the
beneﬁts of the proposed technique in presence of primary user’s
mobility. Moreover, we evaluate the effectiveness of MCAST in
a scenario of practical interest by adopting this technique in a
recently proposed routing metric designed for this network.
Index Terms—Cognitive Radio, PU Mobility, Channel Avail-
ability Probability.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs), the channel selection
techniques are usually based on the knowledge of the Channel-
Availability Probability (CAP), i.e., the probability that the
channel is available for the unlicensed users, referred to as
Cognitive Users (CUs), without causing interference against
the licensed users, referred to as Primary Users (PUs). In
fact, this knowledge enables the CU to select the channel
with the highest availability. Usually, the CAP coincides with
the probability that at a certain time the PU is inactive, and
can be a priori known or simply estimated from the channel
occupancy history [1]. However, this assumption is valid when
the PU is static.
On the other hand, in the mobile PU scenario, the CAP
dynamically varies in time due to the changes of the PU
position. For instance, if at a certain time the CU is outside the
protection range (i.e., it is deﬁned as the maximum distance
between the PU and the CU at which the CU transmission does
not interfere the PU communication on an arbitrary channel.
It is determined by the PU transmission range and by the
CU interference range [2]) of an arbitrary PU, then the CAP
is independent from whether the PU is inactive or not. Due
to the PU mobility, after a certain interval of time, the CU
might be inside the protection range of the PU, then the CAP
depends on the probability that the PU is inactive. Since the
best performance is guaranteed by the channel with the highest
CAP assumed at a given time, a fundamental key issue in
CRNs is the design of a channel selection technique that
ensures the selection of the best channel by exploiting the
dynamic variation of the channel availability caused by the
PU mobility.
Basically, most of the works in literature consider the static
PU scenario where the CAP does not vary in time. In [3],
Jha et al. propose an opportunistic multi-channel Medium
Access Control (MAC) with QoS provisioning for distributed
CRNs, where CUs use the previous channel scanning results
to select those channels with the highest CAP. In [4], Xue
et al. propose an opportunistic periodic MAC protocol where
the CUs cooperate each wit other to share the channel-
availability information. In [1], Chowdhury et al. propose a
routing metric that aims to minimize the interference caused
by the CUs against the static PUs. In [5], Calefﬁ et al. propose
an optimal routing metric for CRNs where the channel is
selected based on channel occupancy history. Finally, there
are some other channel selection strategies that have been
proposed in literature by using the assumption of static PU
activity [6][7][8].
However, the design of a channel selection technique that
accounts for the CAP in presence of PU mobility has not yet
been addressed in literature. Cacciapuoti et al. [2] addressed
the concept of CAP in mobile scenario. For this reason,
we design a novel Mobility-aware Channel-Availability based
channel Selection Technique (MCAST) that ensures the selec-
tion of the channel with the highest CAP in a given temporal
period.
Speciﬁcally, the contribution of this work can be sum-
marized as follows. First, we derive the channel-availability
estimation method in presence of PU mobility. Then, we
prove that the proposed channel selection technique takes
advantage of the dynamic variation of channel-availability
caused by the PU mobility and, consequently, outperforms the
traditional method which is only based on the PU temporal
activity. The simulation results highlight the beneﬁts of the
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

Fig. 1: CAP in presence of static PU.
proposed technique. Moreover, we evaluate the effectiveness
of MCAST in a scenario of practical interest by adopting this
technique in a recently proposed routing metric, referred to as
Optimal Primary-aware routE quAlity (OPERA) [5], designed
for CRNs.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce the problem statement. In Section III, we discuss
about the network model, while in Section IV, we describe
the channel-availability estimation process. We describe the
proposed MCAST in Section V, while the performances
are evaluated through simulations in Section VI. Finally, in
Section VII, we conclude the paper.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we describe how the CAP in static PU
scenario differs from the Mobile PU scenario and then, we
present our proposal to overcome the adverse effects of PU
mobility.
A. Static PU Scenario
In the static PU scenario, the geographic location of each
PU is ﬁxed, as shown in Figure. 1. In this case, the channel
selection strategy, referred to as static method, considers
PU inactive probability, denoted as P m
off, for selecting the
channel with the highest CAP [3][4][5]. This probability can
be a priori known or simply estimated based on the channel
occupancy history [1]:
P m
off =
αm
αm + βm
(1)
where
1
αm and
1
βm are the average on and off times for the
m-th channel, respectively. The on time refers to the period
where the m-th channel is occupied by the PU, while the off
time indicates the channel is free for CU transmission.
B. Mobile PU Scenario
On the other hand, in the mobile PU scenario, the geo-
graphic location of each PU is not ﬁxed and the channel
availability dynamically varies in time. In fact, in Figure. 2 (a),
the transmission of the i-th CU, denoted as ui, does not affect
the PU receiver at time t, since ui is outside the protection
range of the l-th PU transmitter, denoted as vl. However, vl
is moving toward ui at time t, then after a certain interval of
time, in Figure. 2 (b), the transmission of ui might affect the
PU receiver at time instant t′, since ui is inside the protection
range of vl. Therefore, the CAP varies in the interval [t, t′].
Fig. 2: CAP in presence of mobile PU.
Fig. 3: Static method fails in selecting the channel with highest
CAP between a and b. It selects channel a, although channel
b is the highest one.
In this scenario, if the CU selects the channel according
to the static method, it will not achieve the channel with the
highest CAP. We discuss this issue with an example. As shown
in Figure. 3, there are two PUs, denoted as vl and vn, which
are communicating on channel a and b, respectively. Due to
the PU mobility, in a certain interval of time [t0, t0 + ∆], the
CAP depends on two factors: i) The PU inactive probabilities,
i.e., P m
off; ii) The probability that the CU transmission does
not affect the PU while it is active, i.e., P m
na. The static method
selects the best channel considering only the ﬁrst factor. Since
P a
off is greater than P b
off, the best channel with the highest
CAP according to the static method is channel a, since P a
off >
P b
off. However, in presence of PU mobility, the selection of
channel a does not assume the best choice in terms of channel
availability. According to the procedure which considers both
factors, referred to as mobility-aware method, the channel
with the highest CAP is channel b, since in this method the
CAP a = P a
off + (1 − P a
off)P a
na = 0.6 + 0.4 × 0 = 0.6 is less
than CAP b = P b
off +(1−P b
off)P b
na = 0.4+0.6×0.7 = 0.82.
As a result, at a certain time t0, the mobility-aware method
achieves the best channel in presence of PU mobility selecting
it with the highest CAP for the next interval of time [t0, t0+∆].
From the above example, it is evident the need for designing
a proper channel selection technique that ensures the selection
of the best channel by exploiting the dynamic variation of the
CAP caused by the PU mobility.
C. Proposed Method
The proposed channel selection technique is based on the
channel-availability estimation method in order to estimate the
channel-availability for a given interval of time. The method
is described as follows.
• Firstly, it estimates the distance between PU and CU
at time instant t where t belongs to the next temporal
interval (See Section IV-A);
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

• Based on the estimated distance, it estimates the CAP for
each channel at time t ;
• Then, it estimates the average CAP for each channel in
the next temporal interval;
• Finally, MCAST selects the channel based on the highest
average CAP for the next temporal interval.
The proposed channel selection technique is designed for
mobile PU scenario with the objective to overcome adverse
effects of PU mobility.
III. NETWORK MODEL
In this section, we describe the PU and CU network model.
A. PU Network Model
The PUs move according to the Random WayPoint Mobility
(RWPM) model [9] inside a square network region A. Each
PU randomly chooses a destination point in A according to
a uniform distribution, and it moves towards this destination
with a velocity modeled as a random variable uniformly
distributed in [vmin, vmax] m/s and, statistically independent
of the destination point. During each PU movement period,
it is assumed that the PU does not change its direction and
velocity. The PU trafﬁc on the m-th channel is modeled as
a two-state birth-death process [10]. Moreover, we consider
two different PU spectrum occupancy models [11]. In the
ﬁrst model called Single PU for Channel (SPC), the PUs
roam within the network region using different channels. In
the second model called Multiple PUs for Channel (MPC),
different mobile PUs can use the same channel.
B. CU Network Model
The CUs are assumed static (it is straightforward to prove
that the derived expressions hold also if we assume mobile CR
users and static PUs), where ui(t) denotes the position of the
i-th CU that is constant in time. Each CU obtains its location
information once during the network initialization, (the CU can
obtain its location either directly through dedicated positioning
systems such as Global Positioning System (GPS) or indirectly
through location estimation algorithms) whereas it can update
the PU position every τ seconds, referred to as PU position
updating interval. It is reasonable to assume that the CU
cannot access the PU location in each time instant t, since
the PU location is time-variant and it is obtained through
either location estimation algorithms [12][13][14] or dedicate
databases.
IV. CHANNEL-AVAILABILITY ESTIMATION
Since the CU does not know the effective PU position
during τ, a distance estimation method should be derived to
estimate the channel availability during this temporal interval,
with the aim to select the channel with the highest CAP. Thus,
in this section we single-out the distance estimation procedure
(Section. IV-A) and the estimated CAP expression in both
Single PU for Channel (Section. IV-B) and Multiple PUs for
Channel (Section. IV-C) scenarios. Finally, we discuss the
trade-off that exists between the PU position updating interval
Fig. 4: Distance Estimation Procedure.
τ and the distance estimation error (Section. IV-D). The CAP
estimation process of [2] is adopted in this paper. For the
details about CAP estimation, we refer the reader to [2].
A. Distance Estimation Procedure
The distance estimation procedure is depicted in Figure. 4
where the i-th CU and the l-th PU are denoted with ui and
vl, respectively, and Ril denotes the protection range. The PU
vl is mobile and its position at a generic time instant t is
denoted, for simplicity of notation, as vl(t), and the distance
between ui and vl is denoted as dil(t). At the time instant t0,
the CU can calculate several parameters related to the previous
interval [t0−τ, t0], such as dil(t0−τ) and dil(t0), the traveled
distance of vl during the interval [t0 −τ, t0] denoted as s, the
estimated movement direction of vl toward ui at time (t0 −τ)
denoted as ˜θi,l(t0−τ). Based on these information, along with
the estimated traveled distance of vl during the interval [t0, t]
denoted as s′(t), ui can estimate the distance ˜dil(t) when t
belongs to the next temporal period [t0, t0 + τ].
B. CAP estimation in Single PU for Channel (SPC) scenario
In this subsection, we derive (Theorem 1) the estimation
˜p m
il (t) of the CAP when t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)] in SPC scenario
under the following assumptions: i) The CU knows the PU
position at the actual time instant t0 and at the previous time
instant t0 − τ; ii) The PU does not change its direction and
velocity during the interval [t0 − τ, t0 + τ] (this assumption
is reasonable beacuse of the PU mobility model). Since the
proof of Theorem 1 requires an intermediate result, we ﬁrst
present it in Lemma 1.
Lemma 1. The estimated distance ˜dil(t) between the i-th CU
and the l-th PU at time instant t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)] is given by:
˜dil(t) =
q
a2 + b2 − 2ab cos(˜θil(t0 − τ))
(2)
where a = (s + s′(t)) is the distance traveled by the l-th PU
during the temporal intervals [t0 − τ, t] and ˜θil(t0 − τ) is the
estimated movement direction of the l-th PU towards the i-th
CU at the time instant (t0 − τ).
Proof. We refer the reader to [2], for the proof of Lemma 1.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

By means of Lemma 1, we can now derive the expression
of the estimated CAP ˜p m
il (t) when t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)] in the
SPC scenario.
Theorem 1. The estimated CAP ˜p m
il (t) at time t ∈ [t0, (t0+τ)]
assume the following expression:
˜p m
il (t) =
(
1
if ˜dil(t) > Ril
P m
off
otherwise
∀ t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)] (3)
Proof. From the Lemma 1, we can estimate distance at time
t. Utilizing ˜dil(t), the theorem can proof directly.
Remark. The estimated CAP ˜p m
il (t) depends on the estimated
distance ˜dil(t). Since it is assumed that the l-th PU does not
change the velocity and direction during the interval [t0 −
τ, t0 + τ], the estimation procedure will encounter an error
that depends on the PU mobility parameters and the temporal
period τ. The trade-off is discussed in the subsection IV-D.
C. CAP estimation in Multiple PUs for Channel (MPC) sce-
nario
In this subsection, we derive (Theorem 2) the expression
of the estimated CAP when t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)] in the MPC
scenario, under the same assumptions of the Theorem 1.
Theorem 2. If a number N of PUs, which are the elements of a
primary user set V m, use the same channel m simultaneously,
then the estimated CAP ˜p m
iV (t) at time t ∈ [t0, (t0+τ)] assume
the following expression:
˜p m
iV (t) =
(
1
if ˜dil(t) > Ril
∀ l ∈ V m
P m
off
otherwise
∀ t ∈ [t0, (t0 + τ)]
(4)
Proof. It is similar to the Theorem 1.
Remark. When the i-th CU is outside the protection range of
all the N PUs belong to V m then the CAP is equal to one,
otherwise it depends on the PU inactive probability. Since the
probability that the i-th CU is inside the protection range of
the arbitrary PU increases when N increases, then the CAP
in the MPC scenario is lower than the SPC scenario.
D. Trade-off between the PU position updating interval τ and
distance estimation error
It is worth noticing that the larger is τ, the smaller is the
updating rate of the PU position, i.e., the lower is the network
overhead and energy consumption. However, the estimation of
the distance for the next temporal period becomes less accu-
rate. We explain this concept with an example, as shown in
Figure. 5. Here, the non-dashed line is the exact PU movement
pattern, and vl(t) and ˜vl(t) represent the exact and estimated
PU position at time t, respectively. Since the distance at time
t is estimated assuming that the PU does not change its
velocity and direction during the interval [(t0 − τ), (t0 + τ)],
the estimation procedure will encounter an error when the PU
changes these parameters during this interval. In particular,
when τ increases, the error increases as well, and it has an
impact on the accuracy of the estimation model which can be
Fig. 5: PU movement pattern.
assessed in terms of Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). The
RMSE increases with the increasing value of τ. In particular,
the RMSE increases when the network size decreases, since
the smaller is the network size, the greater is the frequency
that the PU change its direction, in according to the random
waypoint mobility model [2]. In Section. VI, we will assess
the impact of τ on the estimation of the CAP.
V. MOBILITY-AWARE CHANNEL-AVAILABILITY BASED
CHANNEL SELECTION TECHNIQUE
In this section, we discuss about proposed Mobility-
aware Channel-Availability based channel Selection Tech-
nique. Based on the estimation model derived in the previous
section, the CU selects the best channel in both the SPC
(Theorem 3) and MPC (Theorem 4) scenarios with the highest
value of the estimated CAP averaged over the next temporal
period [t0, t0 + τ].
Theorem 3. The expression of the MCAST in SPC scenario
is the following:
m
SPC
opt = arg max
m
˜q m
il (t0, τ) = 1
τ
Z t0+τ
t0
˜p m
il (t)dt
(5)
where ˜q m
il (t0, τ) denotes the estimated CAP averaged on
[t0, t0 + τ] in the SPC scenario, that depends on the time
instant t0 and the period τ.
Proof. It follows by accounting for Theorem 1.
Theorem 4. The expression of the MCAST in MPC scenario
is the following:
m
MPC
opt = arg max
m
˜q m
iV (t0, τ) = 1
τ
Z t0+τ
t0
˜p m
iV (t)dt
(6)
where ˜q m
iV (t0, τ) denotes the estimated CAP averaged on
[t0, t0 + τ] in the MPC scenario, that depends on the time
instant t0 and the period τ.
Proof. It follows by accounting for Theorem 2.
Remark. The value of ˜q m
il (t0, τ) and ˜q m
iV (t0, τ) equal to one
when the estimated distance during [t0, t0 + τ] is always
greater then the protection range, it is equal to P m
off when
the estimated distance is always less than or equal to the
protection range during [t0, t0 + τ], while it is comprised
between one and P m
off in the intermediate case.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

By exploiting the dynamic variation of the channel avail-
ability caused by the PU mobility, the proposed technique
is able to outperform the static method that considers only
the PU temporal activity. The simulation results in Section.
VI highlight the beneﬁts of using the proposed technique for
selecting a channel in presence of PU mobility.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, ﬁrst we evaluate via numerical experiments
the performance of the proposed channel selection technique
(MCAST). Then we prove its effectiveness by adopting
MCAST in a routing metric, recently proposed in literature,
referred to as OPERA [5].
A. Performance evaluation
Figure. 6 (a-d) shows the performance comparison between
the mobility-aware method (MCAST) and the static method in
terms of maximum CAP (CAPmax), i.e., every τ seconds we
consider the maximum CAP achievable from the best selected
channel among the others, then we average it over the total
number of periods considered in the simulation.
Experiment 1: It is plotted the exact and the estimated
CAPmax in the SPC scenario, along with the CAPmax corre-
sponding to the static method, versus the normalized PU pro-
tection range where Ril = {500m, 600m, 700m, ..., 1400m}.
The adopted simulation set is deﬁned as follows: the CU
transmission range is Ti = 100m, CU interference range is
Ii = 200m, the PU transmission range is Tl = 300m, the
number of channels is M = 5, the PU inactive probability
vector is {0.6, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5, 0.4}, the PU spectrum occupancy
model is SPC, i.e., each channel is used by a single PU.
The PUs move in a square region of side a = 2000m
according to the RWPM model, where the minimum velocity is
vmin = 5m/sec and maximum velocity is vmax = 10m/sec.
In Figure. 6 (a), we note that there is a very good agreement
between the estimated and exact CAPmax when τ = 10s. The
CAPmax decreases in both methods when the PU protection
range increases, and achieves the minimum value (given by
the static method) when the normalized PU protection range
is equal to one. This is reasonable because the greater is the
protection range, the lower is the percentage of time in which
the PUs are outside the protection range. For the static method,
the CAPmax is always 0.6 since it selects the channel according
to the maximum PU inactive probability P m
off.
In Figure. 6 (b), we note that the average error of the
estimated CAPmax increases by increasing τ. This is because in
the estimation model we assume that the PU does not change
its velocity and direction during the interval [(t0−τ), (t0+τ)].
This error have an impact on the performance evaluation that
means a trade-off between the effectiveness for the spectrum
utilization and network overhead caused by the updating PU
position mechanism.
Experiment 2: In this experiment, we consider the MPC
scenario, i.e., each channel is used by multiple PUs, as shown
in Figure. 6 (c, d). The adopted simulation set is the same
deﬁned in experiment 1, but we consider two PUs for each
channel. We compare the CAPmax in the SPC and MPC
scenarios. Speciﬁcally, we note that the CAPmax in the MPC
scenario is lower than the SPC scenario. This is reasonable
because, according to Theorem 2, the probability that the CU
is inside the protection range of the PU increases when there
are more PUs for each channel. The same considerations about
the estimation model drawn for the SPC scenario are valid for
the MPC scenario.
B. Effectiveness
In this subsection, we evaluate the effectiveness of MCAST
in a scenario of practical interest. Speciﬁcally, we adopt
MCAST in a recently proposed routing metric designed for
CRNs, referred to as OPERA, and analyze the network per-
formance in terms of packet delay [5].
The network topology is shown in Figure. 6 (e) and it is
similar to the one used in [1], with 64 CUs spread in a square
region of side 1000m. The CU transmission standard is IEEE
802.11g, the packet length is L = 1500 bytes, the expected link
throughput is ¯ψ = 54Mbps, the transmission range of CU is
equal to 200m, the transmission range of PU is equal to 166m
and the number of channels is M = 2. Unlike the experiment
in [1], we assume that the PUs are mobile and they are moving
according to the RWPM.
Experiment 3: The experiment shows two different routes
with the same source and destination, where the routes singled
out by OPERA and OPERA with mobility-aware method
(OPERA-MA), as shown in Figure. 6 (e). In the case of
OPERA, where the static channel selection method is utilized,
the delay is 0.57s. On the other hand, in the case of OPERA-
MA we observe that the delay is signiﬁcantly decreased to
0.34s, as it counteracts the adverse effect of PU mobility.
Experiment 4: In this experiment, we report the packet
delay versus the distance between source and destination
nodes for both the cases, as shown in Figure. 6 (f). First, we
observe that the delay computed by both OPERA and OPERA-
MA increases with the distance. This result is reasonable,
because the longer is the path, the more is the number of PUs
affecting it. However, we observe that OPERA-MA exhibits
a signiﬁcant improvement compared to OPERA when the
distance increases, since more favorable paths are available
by accounting for PU mobility.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel mobility-aware channel-
availability based channel selection technique for CRNs that
ensures the selection of the channel with the highest CAP
in a given temporal period. In fact, this technique takes
advantage of the dynamic variation of channel-availability
caused by the PU mobility and consequently outperforms
the static method which is only based on the PU temporal
activity. The numerical experiments corroborate the theoretical
results. Moreover, we evaluate the effectiveness of MCAST in
a scenario of practical interest by adopting this technique in
a recently proposed routing metric designed for CRNs. The
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

(a) Experiment 1: τ = 10s.
(b) Experiment 1: τ = 30s.
(c) Experiment 2: τ = 10s.
;
(d) Experiment 2: τ = 30s.
(e) Experiment 3
(f) Experiment 4
Fig. 6: (a, b) Maximum CAP vs normalized PU protection range in SPC scenario; (c, d) Maximum CAP vs normalized
PU protection range in both SPC vs MPC scenario; (e) Two different routes and the respective delays between the same
pair source-destination, the routes singled out by OPERA and OPERA-MA; (f) Delay vs. CU pair distance for OPERA and
OPERA-MA.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

future research development foresee the design of a MAC
protocol based on the proposed channel selection method.
REFERENCES
[1] K. R. Chowdhury and I. F. Akyildiz, ”CRP: a routing protocol for
cognitive radio ad hoc networks”. IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in
Communications (JSAC), Volume 29, Issue 4, 2011, pp. 794-804.
[2] A. S. Cacciapuoti, M. Calefﬁ, L. Paura, and Md. Arafatur Rahman,
”Channel availability for mobile cognitive radio networks”. Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, Volume 47, 2014, pp. 131-136.
[3] S. C. Jha, U. Phuyal, M. M. Rashid, and V. K. Bhargava, ”Design of
OMC-MAC: An Opportunistic Multi-Channel MAC with QoS Provision-
ing for Distributed Cognitive Radio Networks”. IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, Volume 10, 2011, pp. 3414-3425.
[4] D. Xue, E. Ekici, and X. Wang, ”Opportunistic Periodic MAC Protocol
for Cognitive Radio Networks”. IEEE Globecom, 2010, pp. 1-6.
[5] M. Calefﬁ, I. F. Akyildiz, and L. Paura, ”Opera: Optimal routing metric
for cognitive radio ad hoc networks”. IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, Volume 11, Issue 8, 2012, pp. 2884-2894.
[6] S. Yangand, F. Yuguang, and Z. Yanchao ”Stochastic Channel Selection in
Cognitive Radio Networks”. IEEE Globecom 2007, 2007, pp. 4878-4882.
[7] H. N. Pham, J Xiang, Y. Zhang, and T. Skeie, ”QoS-Aware Channel
Selection in Cognitive Radio Networks: A Game-Theoretic Approach”.
IEEE Globecom, 2008, pp. 1-7.
[8] Y. Yong, S. R. Ngoga, D. Erman, and A. Popescu, ”Competition-
based channel selection for cognitive radio networks”. IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference 2012, 2012, pp. 1432-1437.
[9] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, ”A survey of mobility models
for ad hoc network research”. Wireless Communications and Mobile
Computing, Volume 2, 2002, pp. 483-502.
[10] Y. Chen, Q. Zhao, and A. Swami, ”Joint design and separation principle
for opportunistic spectrum access”. IEEE Asilomar Conference on Signals
Systems and Computers, 2006, pp. 696-700.
[11] A. S. Cacciapuoti, I. F. Akyildiz, and L. Paura, ”Primary-User Mobility
Impact on Spectrum Sensing in Cognitive Radio Networks”. Proc. of
IEEE Symposium on Personal, Indoor, Mobile and Radio Communica-
tions (PIMRC 2011), Toronto, Canada, 2011, pp. 451-456.
[12] A. W. Min, X. Zhang, and K. G. Shin, ”Detection of Small-Scale
Primary Users in Cognitive Radio Networks”. IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, Volume 29, 2011, pp. 349-361.
[13] L. Xiao, L. J. Greenstein, and N. B. Mandayam, ”Sensor-assisted
localization in cellular systems”. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun, Volume
6, 2007, pp. 4244-4248.
[14] S. Liu, Y. Chen, W. Trappe, and L. J. Greenstein, ”Non-interactive local-
ization of cognitive radios based on dynamic signal strength mapping”.
IEEE/IFIP WONS, 2009, pp. 85-92.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-404-6
ICNS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Networking and Services

