Collaborative Wireless Access to Mitigate Roaming Costs 
Carlos Ballester Lafuente, Jean-Marc Seigneur, Thibaud Lyon 
Institute of Services Science 
University of Geneva 
Geneva, Switzerland 
{carlos.ballester, jean-marc.seigneur, thibaud.lyon}@unige.ch
 
Abstract— Environments such as ski slopes are highly dynamic, 
as users are constantly moving at high speeds and in different 
directions, and also many users are foreign tourists, not locals, 
thus having to roam if they want to access the Web. 
Unfortunately, this introduces costs that discourage the 
roaming users to connect. In order to solve this issue, a 
collaborative wireless access service has been designed and 
implemented on Android. Simply put, locals to the environment 
become hotspots on-the-fly thanks to our application, which 
works on all recent Android smartphones, without requiring to 
root the smartphone, which shares their mobile data access with 
the foreigners for the period of time that they are in range whilst 
legally protecting the sharer from any potential illegal use of the 
foreigner, e.g., illegal download of copyrighted music through 
peer-to-peer. We have validated our service with agent-based 
simulation results, users feedback through an online survey 
supported by an EU Future Internet testbed and real 
performance tests on the ski slopes regarding client-to-hotspot 
connection times, distance and energy consumption. 
Keywords - Crowd augmented; Wi-Fi; Smart Ski; mobility; 
wireless access; simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) and Juniper Research [1], the number of subscribers 
using mobile Internet services is going to rise from the current 
577 million to an impressive 1.7 billion users by 2013, 
accounting for almost the 50% of the world’s Internet usage. 
This previous fact and the emergence and fast growth of 
applications such as social networking, user generated 
content, location services, collaborative tools, augmented 
human and augmented reality applications etc., has fueled the 
user’s need for permanent connectivity wherever she/he is, 
and under any circumstances. 
While in regular day-to-day environments this need can be 
fulfilled with regular wireless access provided via hotspots 
(wireless access points) or mobile data transmission 
technologies, highly dynamic and changing environments 
have different requirements that might not be fulfilled with 
regular hotspots [10]. Also, situations on which the user is on 
roaming (does not have access to his mobile operator because 
of being in a different country or out of the area of network 
coverage), might deter the user to connect through such 
previous mentioned mobile technologies, as the cost can be 
very high. 
TEstbed for Future Internet Services (TEFIS) [2] is a 
large-scale integrating project, which will support Future 
Internet of Services Research by offering a single access point 
to 
different 
testing 
and 
experimental 
facilities 
for 
communities of software and business developers to test, 
experiment, and collaboratively elaborate knowledge. As a 
part of TEFIS, the Smart Ski Resort experiment run in Megève 
during 2011/2012 and 2012/2013 winters aims to launch the 
next generation of intelligent ski resorts providing them with 
mobile applications and with the resources to create a 
sustainable development. For our testing purposes, we have 
used the Smart Ski Resort experiment to obtain the 
performance results shown later in Section V.  
Environments such as ski slopes are highly dynamic, as 
users are constantly moving at high speeds and in different 
directions, and also many users are not locals, thus having to 
roam in order to be able to connect through mobile data. These 
two previous reasons make connectivity through regular 
means to be difficult to attain, thus impeding the use of such 
smart mobile applications, augmented reality applications, or 
the mere upload of data and statistics for user tracking or 
measuring purposes. 
In order to solve such a challenge, we have envisioned a 
crowd augmented wireless access [9]. Simply put, locals to the 
environment become hotspots on the fly, sharing their mobile 
data access with a foreigner for the (rather short or not) period 
of time that they might be in range. In this way, all the foreign 
skiers in the slopes, and more broadly speaking foreigners in 
general, are still able to upload fundamental data and statistics 
and even use applications on places where normally they 
would not be able to get connectivity through their own means 
or would be too expensive to do so. All of this, without having 
to deploy real fixed wireless access points and signal 
amplifiers, and not limiting the area of coverage, as the access 
points are carried by the local people, which might be static or 
on the move. In this paper, we present the technical feasibility 
and performance results of our collaborative wireless access 
service, which also legally protects the sharer from any 
potential illegal use of the connection done by the foreigner, 
e.g., illegal download of copyrighted music through peer-to-
peer. However, the description of how we legally enforce the 
protection of the sharer is beyond the scope of this paper. 
The rest of the document is organized as follows. First, 
Section II presents the related work and then Section III 
describes the simulation experiment and presents the results 
obtained from it. After, Section IV presents the user survey 
feedback regarding several aspects on roaming, costs, and risk 
awareness. Next, Section V shows quantitative assessment in 
terms of performance of the Android application tested in real 
scenarios, both a dynamic one, in the ski slopes, and static one, 
in a cafeteria. It also presents performance results regarding 
battery consumption and CPU usage. Finally, Section VI 
concludes the paper. 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are several applications and projects that aim as well 
to enable and to make easier the task of sharing a mobile data 
access through Wi-Fi in order to solve similar challenges as 
the ones we want to tackle. 
Air Mobs [3] is an application that enables users to share 
their excess data with users who might be running up against 
their monthly limits. Essentially, one user agrees to let their 
mobile device act as a tethering hub that will send data from 
their LTE smartphone over Wi-Fi to any users nearby. In 
exchange, the central hub user gets a “data credit” that gives 
them access to other users’ data in the future. Put another way, 
the new app creates a sort of “cap-and-trade” market for 
mobile data that helps users exceed the hard limits set on their 
consumption by rationing data with one another based on their 
needs at given times. Compared to our solution, it does not 
provide any sort of protection for the sharer against any risk 
that might arise from the sharing and it does not provide a 
WPA2 secured connection. 
 The Open Garden application [4] application enables 
users to access the most appropriate connection without 
configuring their devices or jumping through hoops. It also 
enables users to access Internet as cheaply as possible. Users 
can find the fastest connection and most powerful signal 
without checking every available network, and can move 
between networks seamlessly. Open Garden provides a way 
to access more data at faster speeds in more locations. 
Consumers actually become part of the network, sharing 
connections when and where they provide the best possible 
access. Compared to our solution, it does not provide any sort 
of protection for the sharer against any risk that might arise 
from the sharing and it does not provide a WPA2 secured 
connection. 
The User-Centric Local Loop (ULOOP) [5] FP7 European 
project brings in a fresh approach to user-centricity by 
exploring user-provided networking aspects in a way that 
expands the reach of a multi-access backbone. ULOOP 
addresses the user as a key component of networking services 
in future Internet architectures. Building upon current 
(commercial) examples ULOOP explores not only the 
adequate technical sustainability of user-centric models, but 
also legislation implications and the potential of community-
driven services and how these new aspects may give rise to 
novel business models both from a user and from an access 
perspective. The aim of ULOOP if to seamlessly expand the 
backbone of the network through the end users’ devices, 
extending the area of coverage while offloading the often 
saturated provider networks [11]. From a preliminary 
assessment, we believe that the project functionality is not yet 
mature enough and fully developed, and that they do not 
provide legal protection for the sharer as well. 
 
 
 
III. 
SIMULATION 
This section presents the simulation experiment in order to 
preliminarily evaluate the feasibility of the real application 
and the results obtained from running the simulation. 
A. Simulation Experiment 
The experiment shows the simulation of a ski slope, with 
local skiers which have connectivity through 2G, 3G, etc. and 
foreign skiers which in principle do not have connectivity of 
any kind. The simulation has been carried out using Any 
Logic’s [6] agent based simulation capabilities, assigning real 
values and proportions to the scenario.  
When the simulation is started, an introduction screen that 
depicts the scenario and asks for the skier concentration rate 
is shown. The concentration rate defines how busy the ski 
slopes are, and thus influences the availability of connectivity 
for foreign skiers. It ranges from 1 (not busy), which will 
deploy zero to one skier, either foreign or local, for each ski 
lift arrival, to 4 (very busy), which will always deploy four 
skiers (maximum ski lift capacity) per ski lift arrival. The 
foreign-to-local skier’s ratio is 30%-to-70%, in order to reflect 
the real statistics of Megève ski resort. 
The ski lifts are modeled with a discrete-event approach, 
having the appropriate inter-arrival time and speed. Every 
time one ski lift arrives to its “sink element”, 3 skiers are 
deployed according to the concentration rate, as explained 
previously. We have chosen 3 as the concentration rate as it 
reflects a moderately full ski resort, which is the case we want 
to analyze. When the skiers are deployed, they are assigned an 
initial random speed, which ranges from the slowest to the 
highest average speed of a regular downhill skier, which 
ranges from 25 to 40 km/h, and a final destination at the end 
of the slope. In order to make the simulation more realistic, 
the trajectory between the deployment point to the end point 
is not set as a straight line but as a sinusoidal function which 
imitates the real movement of a skier. The ski slope’s length 
is set to 800m and the width to 80m, as it is a good estimate 
of the length of a typical ski slope according to Megève 
Tourism board and Megève ski lifts’ company. 
Foreign skiers’ terminals scan for access points, and when 
they are in range of one (or many) of them, they try 
establishing a connection as depicted in the process of Figure 
1. The range of the portable access points has been set to 40 
meters in the simulation, as it is the typical average value of 
that of a mobile device such as an Android or an iPhone 
terminal, and besides it has been confirmed through real 
experimentation cases as explained afterwards in Section V.A.  
The aim of the simulation is to measure how effective a 
solution of this kind can prove to be in a highly dynamic 
environment such a ski slope, as if it is working in such an 
environment, it will also work in a more static environment 
such as a bar or a local shop. In order to study the feasibility 
of our approach, we measure for each foreign skier his or her 
connectivity duration time and their connectivity status, be it 
“connectivity setup” or “connected”. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
Figure 1.  Foreign skier state chart and events. 
Once connected, the foreign skier proceeds to transmit for 
the duration of the connection (assuming regular 3G/HSDPA 
rates), and when she or he is disconnected the process starts 
over again until the skier reaches the end of the slope and goes 
into a ski lift. This full simulation process is depicted in Figure 
2, where local skiers are represented by blue avatars 
surrounded by a green circle which displays their portable 
hotspot range (as previously said set to 40m), foreign skiers as 
red avatars, and the connectivity status between them is 
represented by dashed lines, yellow in the case of a connection 
setup ongoing and green in the case of an already established 
connection. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Main simulation screen. 
Connectivity setup time has been set up to 50 seconds, as 
it is what we expect our application to perform like. The 
following section presents the results derived from the 
simulation. 
B. Simulation Results 
In order to study the feasibility of a real application on the 
ski slopes, we have measured during simulation experiments 
3 sets of different data. For all the graphs, the X axis represents 
the simulation time: 
• 
Global amount of foreign and local skiers in the ski 
slope at any given time of the simulation. 
• 
Amount of foreign skiers in “connection setup” state 
vs. the amount of foreign skiers in “connected” state 
at any given time of the simulation. 
• 
The maximum amount of time a skier has been 
connected at any given point of the simulation time 
and the global average time a skier is in “connected” 
status. 
The first graph, depicted in Figure 3, shows the statistics 
for the global amount of local and foreign skiers present in the 
simulation slope at any given point of the simulation time, 
being the X-axis the time and the Y-axis the amount of skiers. 
As can be seen in the graph, the amount of local skiers ranges 
in average from 30 to 40 while the amount of foreign skiers 
ranges from roughly 10 to 20. This gives a ratio of 
approximately 67% of local skiers and 33% of foreign skiers, 
which adequately reflects the real ratio between French local 
skiers and foreign skiers in Megève ski resort according to 
Megève Tourism board. As can be inferred from this numbers, 
the total amount of skiers in the slope at any given point of 
time ranges from 50 to 60, which is a realistic measure for 
what a moderately busy ski slope would look. 
 
Figure 3.  Amount of local and foreign skiers in the slope at any given 
point of the simulation time. 
The second graph in Figure 4 shows the amount of foreign 
skiers that are setting up a connection with a local skier versus 
the amount of foreign skiers that are already connected and 
thus, transmitting data, being the X-axis the simulation time 
and the Y-axis the amount of skiers in each of the two states. 
As can be seen in the graph, from the 10 to 20 foreign skiers 
present in the slope at any time, around a 20%-25% have an 
established connection, while 70%-75% are into “connection 
setup” state. The remaining percentage accounts for those who 
have no local skier to try to connect to. This data correlates 
properly both with the total amount of foreign skiers present 
in the slope at the given simulation time and with the expected 
results of the simulation, as the connection setup phase takes 
50 seconds, thus allowing only skiers that have been for at 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

least those 50 seconds in the slope to have an established 
connection. 
 
Figure 4.  Amount of foreign skiers in connection setup and connected 
states at any given point of the simulation time. 
Finally, the third graph in Figure 5 shows the maximum 
amount of time (in seconds) a skier has been already 
connected in a given point of time, and the global average of 
the time (in seconds) skiers in general are in a connected state, 
being the X-axis the simulation time and the Y-axis the 
amount of seconds of achieved connectivity. We can see in 
the graph that in average, skiers are connected during 10 
seconds to a local skier, reaching maximum connection times 
of over 20 seconds. This fits into the expected results, as the 
speed of a foreign skier is in the 25 to 40 km/h range as 
previously said before, which makes an average speed of 32.5 
km/h (9 m/s). Taking into account that the length of the slope 
is 800m, we can establish that it takes nearly 88 seconds to 
complete the full length of the slope. 
A perfect descent would imply that the foreign skier is in 
“connection setup” state for 50 seconds, having 38 extra 
seconds to be in a connected status, but taking into account 
that the trajectories and speeds of the skiers in the slopes are 
not uniform, that connectivity setup can start later in time than 
when the skier first reaches the slope and that the connectivity 
setup phase can be broken if the foreign skier goes out of the 
area of coverage of the local skier’s hotspot, we assume that 
the results obtained in the simulation adjust to the reality of 
the situation well, deeming them as valid. 
 
Figure 5.  Average connected time for any foreign skier during the 
simulation time. 
All in all, the results obtained in the simulation phase 
imply that such an application is feasible, as foreign skiers 
have enough time to at least do some light data exchange, as 
the average 3G/4G connection averages real data rates from 
200Kbps to 1Mbps [7], in order to for example update slope 
maps  and status in real time, which can take approximately 
the order of 0.98 to 2.86Mb with a decent zoom level [8] and 
upload meaningful statistics of an order of a couple of hundred 
Kbs about speed, distance and such to a server when using a 
Smart Ski Resort application which offers this capabilities, all 
without having to take care to connect manually or use their 
smartphone actively. 
Also, these results imply that in a static situation, such a 
local cafeteria, restaurant or shop, connectivity would be 
obtained without any significant problem, as the situation is 
much less demanding than that of a ski slope. 
IV. 
USER SURVEYS FEEDBACK 
In order to estimate the need and awareness of users 
regarding Wi-Fi sharing and to determine which mobile 
platform would be the best to deploy our application, we 
carried out three sets of surveys with the real users in Megève 
ski resort thanks to Megève Tourism board. The first one 
aimed at determining the best mobile platform, both taking 
into account the amount of users and technological constraints 
inherent to the platform itself, the second one to better 
understand the needs, requirements and risk awareness of the 
users regarding Wi-Fi sharing and the third survey, that was 
carried out on a marketing database of users who are interested 
in computer programming in order to cover a broader 
audience than Megève users, gave more insight regarding that 
risk awareness of Wi-Fi sharing. 
A. First User Survey 
In this user survey, we wanted to determine which mobile 
platform in regards of popularity in Megève ski resort would 
better suit our needs, while providing the least possible 
technological constraints, such as API extension, access to 
system functions and the like. 
The survey was carried out was open from the 1st of 
February to the 5th of March 2012 in the ski resort of Mègeve, 
and involved the participation of 3458 users, from which 
58.7% were female and 41.3% were male, filling out an online 
questionnaire as can be seen in Figure 6. We worked in 
collaboration with Megève Tourism board to distribute the 
online form to as many tourists and locals as possible through 
its different communication channels adapting the form to 
each channel: a standard Web form on Megève main Web site, 
a Facebook form app on Megève Facebook page and a mobile 
Web version of the form for Megève mobile users. Following 
TEFIS living lab methodology [2], we motivated the users to 
fill the form by adding a prize draws. They could win a week-
end for 2 persons in a 5-star hotel in Megève including a ski 
pass as well as ski gears. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 6.  Amount of users filling the survey per date. 
From those 3458 users, the age distribution was as 
depicted in Figure 7 and their preferred mobile OS can be 
found in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 7.  Distribution of users based on their age. 
 
Figure 8.  Number of users per mobile operating system. 
Where “Autre” means other mobile operating system and 
“Je ne sais pas” means that the user did not know which 
mobile operating system she or he was using. 
After obtaining these results, and looking carefully to the 
two most used mobile OSes, namely iPhone (iOS) and 
Android, we decided that due to the technological constraints 
which iOS imposes, such as the impossibility to access low-
level system functionality and stricter rules in order to place 
applications in the Apple Store, we would target Android as 
the mobile operating system of choice. 
B. Second User Survey 
The second survey, carried out during January 2013 and 
still online, is aimed at determining the awareness of the users 
regarding Wi-Fi sharing in general, roaming costs and the 
risks derived from sharing wireless connections. 
Even though the survey contains to the date only the 
answers of 22 users, it already provides a valuable insight in 
these matters. The survey is divided into different sets of 
questions, each set related to one topic. Following, we present 
the results gotten so far from the survey. 
1) General questions 
This set of questions is of general purpose, to determine 
several main characteristics of the users taking the survey. The 
questions contained in this section are as follow: 
1. What country do you come from?  
2. How old are you?  
3. Which mobile phone operating system do you use? 
4. Would you like that we inform you by email if we 
have a proposal to lower your costs to access the 
Internet when you are abroad? 
 
5. What is your email address? 
We have plotted in a two charts the answers of questions 
3 and 4 as they are the only relevant ones for this paper’s 
purpose. Those can be seen in Figures 9 and 10. 
 
Figure 9.  Number of users having filled the form per mobile operating 
system. 
 
Figure 10.  Amount of users interested on updates on our proposal. 
2) Roaming cost questions 
The goal of these questions is to determine whether the 
users know the cost associated with roaming and their 
willingness to still access the Internet even at a cost. The 
questions contained in this section are as follow: 
6. How much do you pay on average for accessing the 
Web, email and social networks from your phone 
when abroad during your holidays or a trip? 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mobile OS
Android
iPhone
Windows
Other
0
5
10
15
20
Question 4
Yes
No
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

7. Would you like to access the Web, email and social 
networks from your mobile phone when abroad? 
8. How much is the maximum that you would like to 
pay per day to access the Web, email and social 
networks when abroad? 
 
9. Do you have a special option in your mobile monthly 
subscription that allows you to access the Web, email 
and social networks when abroad? 
10. How much data can you access with your mobile 
phone subscription with that extra access to the Web, 
email and social networks when abroad? 
11. How much do you pay in your mobile phone 
subscription for that extra access to the Web, email 
and social networks when abroad? 
For question number 6, 5 out of 22 users estimated that 
they pay less than 5 euros to use mobile data when abroad, 
four said that they pay between 6 and 15 euros, two stated 
between 15 and 25 euros, two from 25 to 50 euros, and one 
from 50 to 100 euros. Six users answered that they were too 
afraid of the cost so they were not using data when roaming at 
all, and two stated that they did not know how much they were 
paying. 
For question 7, 21 out of 22 users said they would like to 
be able to use mobile data while abroad, and regarding 
question 8, the answers ranged in between 0 to 15 euros in 
order to access the Internet while abroad being the average 5 
euros per day. 
Regarding question number 9, seven users stated that they 
had an especial option in order to be able to use mobile data 
when abroad, twelve did not have any special option and three 
did not know. From those people with the special option, three 
of them could use from 16 to 50 MB of data per month while 
abroad, two from 5 to 16 MB, one from 1 to 5 MB and one 
did not know how much data while roaming the special option 
allowed for. Finally from those seven users with the special 
option, four had to pay less than 10 euros for it and three in 
between 10 to 20 euros. 
3) Wi-Fi sharing questions 
The goal of these questions is to determine whether the 
user knows how much they pay for their data access and if 
they incur into any extra cost when sharing their mobile data 
access through a portable hotspot in their own country and 
also to know the willingness of the user regarding sharing their 
data access. The questions contained in this section are as 
follow: 
12. Do you know how much you pay to be able to access 
the Internet in your home country with your current 
telecom operator subscription? 
 
13. Do you know much data per month you can access 
in your home country with your current telecom 
operator subscription? 
 
14. According to your telecom operator mobile phone 
contract, are you allowed to share your mobile phone 
data access with your other devices? 
15. Do you know what happens if you go over your 
monthly data access quota with your current telecom 
operator subscription? 
 
16. Have you already shared your Wi-Fi access in order 
to let someone else access the Internet? 
17. Would you mind sharing your mobile phone access 
to the Web through its Wi-Fi connection with 
someone else? 
For question number 12, the most common answer 
amongst users was from 31 to 50 euros per month with 8 out 
of 22 users, followed by five users paying in between 16 to 30 
euros, four users paying below 15 euros per month, one paying 
from 76 to 100 euros and four not knowing how much they 
were paying per month. 
Answer to question 13 ranged from below 20 MB per 
month up to 3 GB per month, being the average around 1 GB 
of data per month. For question 14, eight users were allowed 
to share their mobile data access with other devices, six were 
not allowed by their operator and eight did not know whether 
they could share it or not. 
Question 15 most common answer was that the user had 
to pay if going over the monthly data quota with 8 out of 22 
users answering that, six users had decreased speed after 
passing the monthly quota, three had their data closed until the 
beginning of the next month and five did not know what 
happened. 
For question number 16, fourteen users had already shared 
their Wi-Fi access and eight had not, and finally for question 
17 eighteen out of the twenty-two users taking the survey 
stated that they would not mind to share their mobile phone 
data access through Wi-Fi with either family, friends or 
colleagues, and four would not share it with anybody. 
4) Wi-Fi sharing risks 
The goal of these last set of questions is to determine 
whether the user is aware of the risks associated with sharing 
her or his own data connection through a portable hotspot, 
whether she or he would be willing to share it if there were no 
associated risks and up to which percentage of their data 
allowance they would be willing to share free of risk. The 
questions contained in this section are as follow: 
18. Did you know that you take risks when you share 
your Wi-Fi access with someone else because she/he 
could carry out illegal actions such as illegal 
download of copyrighted music? 
 
19. Due to those risks to share your Wi-Fi connection, 
would you decide not sharing your Wi-Fi 
connection? 
 
20. If a new way of sharing your Wi-Fi access without 
the risk for you to be responsible for the illegal 
actions that the person might do through the 
connection, would you share your mobile phone Wi-
Fi connection? 
 
21. How much percentage of your monthly mobile data 
access would you be prepared to share if there is no 
legal risk for you and it contributes to the tourism 
quality of service of your region? 
 
22. How much percentage of your mobile monthly data 
access would you be prepared to share if there is no 
legal risk for you and you are in return paid more 
than what your data access costs? 
For question number 18, nineteen out of the twenty-two 
users stated that they know they take risks when sharing their 
Wi-Fi access, while three answered no. Regarding question 
19, twelve users said that due to those risks they would 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

consider not sharing their Wi-Fi connection while ten would 
still share it. 
In question 20, fourteen users would share their Wi-Fi 
connection if they would not be legally responsible for any 
illegal action performed by the person they would share with, 
while eight still would not share it.  
Finally, for question 21 users would be willing to share 
from a 10% to a 90% of their monthly data access and in 
average a 35.75% if it would contribute to the tourism quality 
of their region, and in question 22 users would be willing to 
share from a 10% to a 100% of their monthly data access and 
in average a 45% if they would be paid more than what their 
data access costs. 
C. Third User Survey 
During summer 2012, we created a short survey and sent 
it to a list of users who are subscribed to a marketing database 
and who are interested in computer programming and speak 
English or French. 1767 users answered, which is quite a large 
number of answers. We asked them the following question 
“Do you know that a Wi-Fi hotspot public access point name 
can be easily impersonated and that it can be a security risk 
for you?” They could reply one of the following answers 
“Yes; No; I don’t care” and optionally add a textual comment. 
5 of them used that comment option and answered: yes with 
the following comment “but it is possible to secure the link”; 
yes with the following comment “VERY COMMON AND IT 
CAN CAUSE HAVOC!!!!!” yes with the following comment 
“Obvious: P”; yes with the following comment “Honeypot :-
)”; no with the following comment “Yes, now I know :P”. 
Among the English speaking people, 540 replied “yes”, 185 
replied “no” and 1017 replied “I don’t care”. The image below 
on Figure 11 indicates the percentages for each answer type. 
 
Figure 11.  Answers for question 4. 
Although these users are interested in computer 
programming, it is surprising to see that 58.4% of 1743 
English-speaking users did not care really care about this issue 
and that 10.6% did not know it. Concerning the comment on 
securing the connection, few users would know how to really 
secure their connection. Furthermore, the fact that many of 
them answered that they do not care, leaves us to think that 
they would not take the time to secure it if it is not automated, 
which is not the case today with current Wi-Fi connections. It 
is the reason that we decided that our Android application 
would automatically share the Wi-Fi connection with 
encryption (such as the one provided by WPA2) enabled by 
default. 
V. 
FEEDBACK FROM APPLICATION REAL TESTING 
In this section we present the performance results obtained 
when testing the real Android application both in the ski 
slopes and in a cafeteria, plus some preliminary tests about 
Android portable hotspot connectivity range. 
As said above at the end of Section IV.C, we have chosen 
to protect the connection between the foreign skier Android 
phone and the local skier Android phone sharing its 
connection 
through 
Wi-Fi 
with 
WPA2 
security.  
Unfortunately, it is longer than a normal non-encrypted client-
to-hotspot connection but we needed to know how much 
longer it would take and if it was still compatible to share 
while moving and skiing on the ski slopes. 
Once a stable prototype of the application was achieved, 
we proceeded to test it under real conditions. In order to do 
this, we performed tests in Megève ski resort located in 
France, both at the slopes while skiing and in a cafeteria, while 
not moving at all. 
A. Client and Hotspot Measurement Results 
In order to determine the required parameters for both the 
simulation and the real application, we have carried out a few 
simple tests to determine the range of a portable hotspot such 
as the one present in Android phones. Table I shows the results 
from these first tests. 
TABLE I.  
PRELIMINARY CLIENT-TO-HOTSPOT DISTANCES AND 
SIGNAL STRENGTH. 
Distance to AP 
(m) 
RSSI 
5 
-29 
10 
-57 
15 
-57 
20 
-57 
25 
-57 
30 
-57 
35 
-57 
40 
-57 
45 
-65 
50 
-62 
55 
-57 
75 
-70 
100 
-74 
 
As shown in the table, we have tested how the signal 
strength of the portable hotspot evolves for a set of distances, 
ranging from 5 to 100 meters, being lower values a better 
signal strength. As can be seen, the coverage area of such a 
device goes well up to 100 meters, even though the signal 
strength is already too low in order to achieve a meaningful 
and reliable data transmission. Thus, according to this results, 
we have considered for both the simulation experiment and 
the real application tests a range of 40 meters maximum, as 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

we think it is a realistic approach on what the capabilities of a 
portable hotspot are. 
B. Ski Slope Test Results 
In order to perform the tests in the ski slopes, we first 
divided them into two sets of tests, carried out in two 
consecutive days. The results of the first day of testing can be 
seen in Table II, while the results from Table III correspond 
to the second day of testing.  
In the first day of testing, we focused more actively in 
testing the overall performance and response of the 
application than in performing intensive data consuming 
operations (heavy download, HD video streaming, etc.), 
which was left for the second testing day. As can be seen in 
Table II we underestimated slightly the connection setup time 
in the simulation, being sometimes higher than the previously 
50 seconds used. Nevertheless, we obtained good results 
while skiing inside the appropriate distance which the hotspot 
covers, achieving connections lasting up to 5 minutes and a 
good amount of data download and upload. 
The short lived connections present in the table account 
for the cases where either the connection setup phase broke 
due to surpassing the adequate distance in between the skiers 
or due to the local skier not having mobile data connectivity 
at the moment, or due to automated sharing protection 
mechanisms not being established properly during the setup 
phase, or due to HSDPA to 3G failover or vice versa. 
TABLE II.  
UPLOAD, DOWNLOAD, CONNECTION SETUP TIME AND 
CONNECTED TIME IN THE SKI SLOPES, 1ST DAY. 
Data upload 
(Bytes) 
Data 
download 
(Bytes) 
Connection 
Setup 
Connected 
Time 
634744 
3719567 
1 min, 6 sec 
5 min, 18 sec 
0 
10171 
1 min, 24 sec 
0 min, 6 sec 
641559 
11364516 
0 min, 40 sec 
5 min, 59 sec 
0 
0 
0 min, 55 sec 
0 min, 0 sec 
203325 
2287543 
1 min, 40 sec 
0 min, 59 sec 
6338 
24506 
0 min, 50 sec 
0 min, 55 sec 
144730 
1151956 
0 min, 50 sec 
2 min, 49 sec 
889 
13057 
0 min, 54 sec 
0 min, 37 sec 
1131749 
39404562 
0 min, 50 sec 
4 min, 57 sec 
0 
3099 
0 min, 40 sec 
0 min, 19 sec 
0 
0 
1 min, 5 sec 
0 min, 6 sec 
10580 
28864 
0 min, 42 sec 
1 min, 9 sec 
0 
72 
1 min, 14 sec 
0 min, 6 sec 
80058 
1470702 
0 min, 49 sec 
0 min, 47 sec 
210412 
6311026 
0 min, 44 sec 
0 min, 55 sec 
 
 
 
 
 
We dedicated the second day of testing to perform more 
controlled and more data intensive experiments, trying to stay 
at all times inside the appropriate range to the local skier while 
performing data consuming tasks such as HD streaming and 
the like. We aimed to maintain long lived connections (as long 
lived as can be while in a ski slope and a ski lift) to see how 
the application would perform, even though we still got some 
short or non-existent connections due to the facts previously 
mentioned previously in the first testing day. The results can 
be seen in Table 3. 
TABLE III.  
UPLOAD, DOWNLOAD, CONNECTION SETUP TIME AND 
CONNECTED TIME IN THE SKI SLOPES, 2ND DAY. 
Data upload 
(Bytes) 
Data download 
(Bytes) 
Connection 
Setup 
Connected 
Time 
0 
11215 
0 min, 41 
0 min, 6 sec 
713780 
24391110 
0 min, 47 sec 
7 min, 56 sec 
3161848 
102125792 
1 min, 18 sec 
13 min, 18 sec 
1234 
9215 
0 min, 45 
0 min, 8 sec 
644697 
22112428 
0 min, 44 sec 
6 min, 39 sec 
0 
0 
0 min, 56 sec 
0 min, 0 sec 
148083 
1547139 
1 min, 32 sec 
29 min, 18 sec 
 
As shown in the table, we successfully achieved to 
maintain quite long connections (up to almost 30 minutes), 
while skiing and in the ski lifts. Also, it was possible to upload 
and download a good amount of data without further problem 
while being connected, streaming HD video and browsing 
internet. 
C. Cafeteria Test Results 
To finalize the set of tests, we carried out a session in a 
less dynamic place than the ski slopes. We tested the 
application in less demanding and more static conditions by 
performing some tests inside a cafeteria of the ski resort while 
not moving any of the terminals at all. The results of these last 
set of tests can be seen in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
UPLOAD, DOWNLOAD, CONNECTION SETUP TIME AND 
CONNECTED TIME IN A CAFETERIA. 
Data 
upload 
(Bytes) 
Data 
download 
(Bytes) 
Connection 
Setup 
Connected 
Time 
551012 
2611660 
0 min, 46 sec 
11 min, 40 sec 
590794 
2528282 
0 min, 46 sec 
8 min, 27 sec 
0 
5460 
0 min, 53 sec 
0 min, 2 sec 
468920 
1916792 
0 min, 47 sec 
4 min, 25 sec 
1227882 
4608589 
0 min, 52 sec 
6 min, 16 sec 
0 
3465 
0 min, 59 sec 
0 min, 0 sec 
1321702 
3829081 
1 min, 30 sec 
21 min, 27 sec 
1118089 
3206335 
0 min, 57 sec 
55 min, 30 sec 
265781 
1844596 
0 min, 48 sec 
19 min, 7 sec 
 
As displayed in the table, we were able to achieve long 
lived connections, up to 55 minutes without it breaking, and 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

successfully doing light browsing and casual social network 
and app use. Again, some of the shorter or broken connections 
account for the cases where either the local phone lost 
connectivity or switched from one type of network to another, 
deeming impossible to perform the appropriate steps in order 
to protect the user sharing her or his mobile connection, or to 
establish a connection at all. 
D. Battery and CPU Usage Results 
In order to assess the performance of the application 
regarding battery consumption and CPU usage, we measured 
those values using the built-in functionality to monitor per 
application battery and CPU usage that can be found in any 
Android phone. High battery consumption values could deter 
users from adopting our application in the future, and thus 
were of a high concern for us. 
 
Figure 12.  Percentage of battery consumed by the Android application 
service. 
 
and just in a keep awake status are also inside acceptable 
values. This said, the battery usage level could and should be 
improved not to impact the overall user experience and this is 
one of the points we will work in following versions of the 
application. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have presented a complete simulation and 
real testing results for an Android application to achieve 
collaborative wireless access to mitigate roaming costs while 
protecting the sharer. 
Both the simulation and the real testing results plus the 
data acquired from the surveys are encouraging and prove the 
feasibility and need of such an application. In terms of 
connection ranges, hotspots perform well up to 50m range, 
and regarding connection establishment times and data 
upload, our results show that the times and amount of data are 
enough to make the system reasonably useful. Finally, 
regarding battery and CPU consumption results are inside 
acceptable ranges for the app to be usable. 
Future work will involve improving the application in 
order to solve some of the drawbacks found from the testing 
sessions, such as better detection of actual connectivity 
failure, ensuring that the local phone switching from and to 
different networks does not introduce false positives, better 
battery use performance and a desktop client. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Chard, “Mobile Web 2.0 - Leveraging 'Location, IM, Social Web & 
Search' 2008-2013”, Juniper Research, Mobile Content and 
Applications, May 2008.  
[2] The TEFIS Project, http://www.tefisproject.eu/, 2013. 
[3] Air Mobs, http://eeiiaa.com/blog/?p=785, 2013. 
[4] Open Garden, http://opengarden.com/, 2013. 
[5] ULOOP Project, http://www.uloop.eu, 2013. 
[6] AnyLogic 
Simulation 
Framework, 
http://www.anylogic.com/overview/, 2013. 
[7] http://www.pcpro.co.uk/features/379402/mobile-data-how-much-do-
you-need, 2013. 
[8] http://www.microimages.com/documentation/TechGuides/76google
MapsStruc.pdf, 2013. 
[9] Carlos Ballester, Jean-Marc Seigneur, "Crowd Augmented Wireless 
Access", Augmented Human 2012, 08-09 March 2012, Megeve, 
France. 
[10] Sánchez, Ricardo, Joseph Evans, and Gary Minden. "Networking on 
the battlefield: Challenges in highly dynamic multi-hop wireless 
networks." Military Communications Conference Proceedings, 1999. 
MILCOM 1999. IEEE. Vol. 2. IEEE, 1999. 
[11] Mendes, Paulo. "Cooperative Networking in ULOOP." EU FP7 IST 
ULOOP project (grant number 257418) white paper (2012).
Figure 13.  CPU statistics for the Android application. 
As can be seen in Figure 12 and Figure 13, the battery 
usage during the testing sessions falls inside an acceptable 
range, accounting for the 23% of the total battery use, while 
the CPU usage both while performing active operations 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

