5G Mobile Communication Systems: Innovation, Convergence and Ubiquitous
Connectivity
Abdulrahman Yarali
Institute of Engineering
Murray State University
Murray, USA
e-mail: ayarali@murraystate.edu
Masoud Fateh, Nasrin Razmi
CITNA, Department of Electrical Engineering,
Isfahan University of Technology
Isfahan, Iran
e-mail: masoudfateh@gmail.com,
Nasrin.razmi@yahoo.com
Abstract— Wireless technology is one industry which has
seen exponential growth in data and capacity in the past
decade and it still continues to grow in demand. One big
challenge the mobile phones and wireless networks will
face in the future is that of supporting mobile traffic
efficiently
for
different
phones
requirements
from
diverse applications. More advanced phones will be
manufactured and will be expected to properly function.
Already we are seeing 4GLTE implementation and some
developments of the 5G network that is presumed to be
faster and more efficient than their predecessors, but the
process of standard and technology ratification
is still
in its infancy stage. This survey paper focuses on the
requirements of 5G network infrastructure and the user
experiences and economic benefits that will come along
with this new generation of mobile communication
network. The core discussion of this paper will be
centered on the main features and technological and
economic characteristic of 5G mobile systems.
Keywords-Mobility; Connectivity; Quality; energy efficiency;
IoT; small innovations.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Just
as
other
global
organization,
the
recent
advancement in technology has posed a great advantage and
opportunity
for
the
mobile
and
telecommunication
company. One of the greatest revolution and response from
the telecommunication industry is the implementation of
network sharing strategies that have evolved from the first
to the fourth generation. Even though the fourth generation
(4G) telecommunication system is undergoing deployment
worldwide, individuals are eyeing the development of the
5G telecommunication system, which will lead to greater
opportunities
from
the
increased
efficiency
and
effectiveness in network access perspective. From a clear
comparison of the changes in evolution between the 1G
technology and the recent 4G technology, it is clear that the
changes have highly improved in speed, and reliability. The
1G technology provided access at 100 Kilobytes per second
(Kbps), the 2G technology improved the speed to 270 Kbps,
and the 3G came into play with an access speed of 389
Kbps, whereas the recently most used 4G network increased
access to 250 Mbps [1][2]. With this trend, the 5G network
technology is expected to provide a great revolution in the
telecommunication network access with an access speed of
approximately 10 Gbps (Gigabytes per second). This
increased speed is based on the recent advancement in
telecommunication technology and the urge for businesses
to improve their services through enhances communication
and telecommunication services [3].
Explosive growth of technology influences consumer
behavior. It is estimated that by 2020, almost 80% of the
global population will be utilizing mobile technology and
over 60% will be using smartphones or tablets. Predictions
are that there will be over 50 billion devices on the global
network, out of which, mobile devices being the primarily
access point for internet connection. With arrival of new 5G
system, internet access will be fast and readily accessible;
customers will have connections always available to them.
Currently, there are over 2.7 million smart phones on the
various networks, and this number will increase greatly by
the time 5G will go live [4].
Businesses will have to be able to transition from
existing offered products and available distribution models
to a better way in order to deliver goods and services that
customers want. Simpler products are always preferred – it
lets consumers make informed choices. It is vital for
businesses to recognize the importance of the customer
relations, starting with the initial sale and continuing over
the lifetime of the contract. It is vital to get customer
insights and tailor the services to the individual customer
rather than a group of customers.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

Even with the recent efficiency status of the 4G
technology,
businesses
have
continued
to
look
for
alternatives
in
regards
to
reliable
and
efficient
telecommunication
networks.
Latest
developments
in
technology have increased the amount of consumers that are
globally connected with networks; they are acutely aware of
latest technological trends and attuned to changes. Brands
that will respond best to what these customers require now
are most will be most likely to succeed; these demands will
have to be met in the real time. When businesses will have
an understanding of customer needs and wants, it will help
with profit margin growth across the organizations.
If current systems make tracking of individual
customers difficult, 5G systems will make it much easier.
By creating custom tailored services and products based on
the individual customer, it will allow businesses increase
customer satisfaction and it will lead to customer loyalty.
Businesses will be able to pinpoint their customers uniquely
and will reward their loyalty. One of the ways to provide
loyal customers with a unique option is a personalized
pricing. Offered price and the discount will be based on the
past history. By utilizing social media (such as Twitter,
Facebook, etc.,), businesses will be able to understand what
kind of persons their customers are. 5G will be able to
analyze customers in real time and businesses will be able to
anticipate their customers’ future buying plan. Keeping
existing customer base is one of the main goals for any
service provider; a 2% customer retention increase is
equivalent to reducing the cost by 10% [5][6]. By retaining
an
existing
customer
instead
of
acquiring
new
one
businesses can have a larger profit growth – by making an
existing customer spend just 10% more on goods and
services will produce more profit than to get a 10% growth
in new customers. Businesses will be able to deliver
solutions that will fulfill the needs of the customer better
and offer personalized customer service. Instead of sending
bulk/spam messages and emails with general information,
more customized messages will be sent to the customers and
that will allow better conversion rates and sales increase.
Businesses
should
be
able to
respond
promptly and
efficiently to changing market, new customer requests and
new regulations.
5G will allow a fully connected network society
with unlimited access to information and data sharing
anytime to anywhere to anyone. With various environments
available,
communication
will
increase
exponentially.
Businesses should create new services and new experiences
based
on
all
the
different
ways
of
interaction
and
connectivity available on the systems. 5G technology will
allow
brands
to
hop
across
customers’
different
environments using device-to-device discovery. World will
become
a
connected
place,
the
boundaries
between
developed and developing nations will dissipate.
II.
MOTIVATIONS AND KEY DRIVERS OF 5G
The 5G network targets various uses including real
time gaming, manufacturing or medicine and even extend to
wearable technologies. For instance, in the field of medicine
operations could be performed by robots which are
monitored from a remote access area by a surgeon that he or
she is specialized in carrying out similar type of operations
A.
When will the next higher generation (5G) of
wireless network be deployed?
Considering
the
statistics
presented
by
the
telecommunication
network
regarding the time period
between the deployment of one generation to the other, it is
clear that the period presents a sequential matrix whereby a
period of five to six years lies between a given network
generation deployment and the other. However, the 5G
wireless network is expected to break the sequence and take
a longer period due to the increased requirements for
efficiency. Although the deployment of the 4G network is
still on its final stages, operators, leading research teams,
and handset developers have launched R&D initiative to
develop the 5G network and to ensure that it is fully
functional for commercialization by the year 2020.
The ongoing status of the 5G network for the mobile
systems are on the very early stages as they underlie the
changes and user response in regards to the efficiency and
effectiveness of the 4G network. Most of the technological
changes to be considered in the formation of the 5G network
will be derived from the utilization of the 4G network,
which will then be transformed to the 5G network in order
to formulate a more concrete system that will be defined by
increased efficiency and a positive impact to the operators
and mobile industry [8]. The only issue that will lead to
delayed deployment is its demanding requirements and
intense check over to ensure that it meets all the user
demands and transforms the globe to a technological
standpoint. With this, the 5G network will not only
transform the world by 2020 to a high efficient network
connected
globe,
but
also
to
a
community
that
communicates and shares ideas in an efficient and effective
manner.
B.
Proposed solutions to key technologies to be
considered
As indicated earlier, the development of the 5G
technology will mainly lie on the changes and alterations
considered after the development of the 4G network.
Solutions will mainly rely on end user response and their
perception of the efficiency and reliability of the 4G
network.
Additionally,
the
changes
in
technological
advancement and consumer demands will highly influence
the formation of the 5G network. A clear analysis of the
recent development statistics produced by the United
Nations indicate that the world will have transformed
completely to a technological globe by the year 2020
whereby all nations will be united through a suitable
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

communication network. With this, one of the main
proposed solutions would be to enhance reliability and
efficiency in order to foster the development of a suitable
communication
network.
Most
organization
perceives
communication as the greatest managerial communication
tool towards enhanced performance and productivity. The
greatest urge for businesspersons is to have access to a
reliable network that fosters appropriate management from
appropriate communication.
Additionally, unlike the recent prototype of the 4G
network, which does not enhance coverage, increased
connectivity,
and
call
frequency
thus
leading
to
underperformance, the 5G network will be expected to
provide a permanent solution to these problems [9]. The
deployment of the 5G network should coincide with the
organizational system and become a part of the productivity
enhancement strategies for any given organization. With
this, the high-speed 5G technology will be expected to
present a paradigm movement in the overall design of the
mobile industry in order to revolutionize the entire system
to encourage enhanced latency, flow, and the scalability
requirements, which will be suitable to meet the overarching
demands such as the trillion device connection and the
augmented
reality.
With
appropriate
provision
and
permanent solution to these problems, the 5G technology
will have taken over the business world and transformed it
fully to a community defined by enhance performance and
productivity.
C.
Is 5G wireless mobile network an evolution or a
revolution?
Through the considerations put forth as well as the
expectation by the year 2020 when the 5G network will be
deployed, it is clear that the invention will completely
change the world to a single entity characterized by
increased efficiency and reliability. With this, the worldwide
transformation will define the 5G network as a revolution
rather than a mere evolution. The development of the 5G
network technology is expected to provide appropriate
benefits that will surpass the expectation of the previous
generation
of
network
technology.
Telecommunication
industries are already doing away with the term World Wide
Web (WWW) and coining into the term World Wide
Wireless Web (WWWW), which will define the increased
utilization as well as reliability in the efficiency of the 5G
wireless network [1].
From an earlier analysis, it is clear that the 5G
wireless network will transform the functioning of the entire
globe to include the increased use of wireless network. The
5G network will easily carry over 1000 times of mobile data
compared to the recent 4G prototype. This therefore
indicates an increased reliance and a massive capability for
increased
communication,
which
will
cater
for
all
individual’s need to access and transfer data in a quasi-
instantaneous, and sensationalize in their own choice. Then
5G network will also have a direct impact on security
deployment, formation of electric transportation systems,
ambient policing, and worldwide access to information.
With this, the 5G network will change the entire world to a
community of both similarity and togetherness, which will
give the invention a revolutionary status.
D.
Business opportunities from the deployment of the
5G network
The deployment of the 5G network will present great
business opportunities for both the service providers and the
virtual mobile network operators. With the increased agility
and reliance on high-speed network, the world will have
fully transformed to a technological world with great need
for internet connection and network availability. Most
organizations will require the installation of network for
office
use
and
downloading
of
business
materials.
Additionally, online businesses such as transaction and
selling of video games and movies will present a great
opportunity to the service providers and virtual mobile
network operators. Additionally, security systems, tracking
devices,
ambient
policing,
internet
cars,
healthcare
monitors, and appliances will need to transform from
manual operationalization to a digital platform, which will
be highly dependent on high speed network for increased
efficiency and accuracy. With this, the service providers
will have an increased business opportunity, as they will
need to install mobile networks to the respective field.
Additionally, most individuals will require high-speed
network on their mobile phones in order have access to
emails, games, and online transactions. This will provide an
opportunity for the virtual mobile network operator to install
5G network to the respective individuals [10]. With the
increased access to communication and online interactions,
consumers will have a direct access to the service providers
and virtual mobile network operators. As communication is
a great managerial tool, the consumers will easily voice
their concern for further actions, which will increase
performance and productivity of the respective network
provider. With this, the deployment of the 5G network will
pose a great opportunity for increased business functionality
and operation efficiency.
The recent technological advancements call for major
consideration in the telecommunication industry in order to
enhance efficiency and reliability in the general network and
communication provision. Deployment of the 5G network
will be considered after the complete deployment of the 4G
network, as it will be a result of enhancement based on
changes required and consumer reaction to the development
of the 4G network. From an analysis of the changes that will
be presented by the 5G network, it is clear that the invention
will be a complete revolution, as it will totally transform the
world
to
a
network
dependent
globe.
Additionally,
deployment of the 5G network will unionize the world to a
single entity defined by similarity and togetherness. With
the increased dependence, the 5G network will also present
great business opportunities, as it will lead to increased
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

utilization in major fields such as office management,
ambient
policing, security,
formation of technological
transport systems, and healthcare monitoring. With a clear
consideration of communication efficiency and reliability, it
is clear that the 5G network will provide a great platform for
increased performance and productivity for the service
providers and the virtual mobile network providers.
III.
5G REQUIREMENTS FRAMEWORK AND RESEARCH
DIRECTION
The development of 5G technology will be helpful
for executing long projects within no time and it will
increase the reliability of the global networks because
everyone will be connected with high speed internet.
Following are the main key points which can be concluded
from the research work:
1)
It will be helpful in browsing, downloading and
uploading data files from any place to anywhere.
2)
Network energy usage will be reduced which will
in turn increase the battery life of the device.
3)
It will increase the users’ density over the unit area
many times which will help the users to use high
bandwidth for a longer period of time.
4)
5G Technology will also be helpful and beneficial
for the Internet to things, Machine to Machine
Communication
and
Device
to
Device
Communication. It will increase the object oriented
works and data management.
5)
Through the deployment of 5G technology, the
users will develop frameworks to utilize machine-
machine system of communication..
6)
RF-EHN is a promising way for future 5G wireless
networks.
In a nutshell, 5G technology should be developed
as early as possible because of increasing technological
usage of the servers and machines.
A.
Vision
Any innovation is a product of a vision. The
innovation of the 5G Technology is driven by three different
visions [11]:
•
High
efficiency:
The
efficiency
of
the
5G
Technology is taken as a main parameter and the
innovation and design are taken forward with focus on
areas
like
demand
based
networks,
data
rate
management, etc.
•
High Speed: The innovation with focus on speeds
concentrates on areas like coverage, clustering of data
cells, wide area mobility, dynamic spectrum, etc.
•
Converged networks: The use of a joint wireless
and fiber operated networks enables the new 5G
Technology to be able to employ millimeter wave
bands. This would facilitate the support of very high
bandwidths. This path of vision makes the emerging 5G
Technology to be characterized as more of a Wi-Fi
service than a mobile service
B.
Goals
The main goals of the innovation of 5G technology
can
be
broadly
classified
in
to
Flexibility
and
Reliability[12].
•
Flexibility: 5G technology should be employable in
diverse applications and services. All the needs and
services required should be embedded into a single
operation point. 5G service owned by a person should
facilitate all the services and needs required. 5G should
not be entitled as “Services” but as a “Service” which is
an embodiment of all the services in one entity of
service.
•
Reliability: 5G is, hopefully, going to be providing the
most reliable set of services the world has ever seen.
Security has been taken as a prominent factor in the
design of 5G services. Increase of reliability will
eventually be a factor in the increase of efficiency, but
an unlikely increase in prices too. The specific goals
that are indicated in the deployment
of the 5G
technology services are:
•
High data rates owing to faster modulation and
some new innovation technologies
•
Fast response times by node reduction and
more intelligent components
•
Whole
new
and
diverse
services
using
automation, cloud and tactile internet
C.
Inference to the customers
With reference to the customers, the meaning of
5G in layman’s words can be indicated as the ability to
download a full length HD movie to a phone in just a few
seconds or the services that facilitate video chats in such a
way that it may feel like the person on the other side can be
touched. This is not an exaggeration, but the factual vision
of the network sector. The simple goals that need to be
attained by the 5G technology, according to the customers
are [13]:
•
Faster speeds for data
•
Ultra-low latency which refers to the time it takes
to send a packet of data between two devices
•
Connected
devices
(cars,
home
appliances,
accessories, etc.) making everything flexible
•
Backward compatibility with the devices that are
already owned
•
Reasonable costs for the 5G services
D.
Services
One of the main aspects that is needed a great deal
of look up is the requirements for the 5G network, which
can affect many other parameters like cost, compatibility,
feasibility, standardization, etc. These requirements are
subject to the forecasted services that are expected to be
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

fulfilled by the 5G network. Some of the services that 5G
technology is needed to provide are[11]:
•
Pervasive Video and high quality content
•
Tactile Internet and Broad cast Services
•
E – Health Services and 50 + MBPS data rate
everywhere
•
Internet of things and Real time data analytics
•
Mobile Broad band and Smart Societies
•
Smart Grids and Freight tracking
•
Public safety
E.
Characteristics forecast
The
5G
network
will
be
characterized
by
its
increased power, strength, efficient, and speed, which are
promising features that will take the mobile industry to the
next level. With the presence of the 5G network, the mobile
industry will be considered as the main key to the Internet of
Things. This name is given to the act whereby every activity
will be tied to the internet and mobile network. The mobile
industry will lead to development of billions of sensors,
door
locks,
smartwatches,
and
health
monitors.
Additionally, the mobile industry will be characterized with
an increased scalability, flow, and latency in order to meet
all its overarching demands. A consideration of these factors
gives a clear look at the opportunity and efficiency that will
be presented to the mobile industry by the development of
the 5G network in the year 2020 and beyond. From a look at
the recent occurrence after the deployment of the 3G and 4G
network, It is clear that by the year 2020, the 5G network
will present the
with new realities, increased speed,
gratification, efficiency, and lightning-fast response. The
following s is some of the expected characteristics of 5G
networks.
•
Ultra-high capacity and Massive MIMO
•
Multi hop transmission and New spectrum
•
Wide area coverage and Full duplex
•
Ultra-dense networks and NFV SDN
•
Security and New Waveforms
•
Energy Efficient
•
Real time inter Machine communication
•
Application Awareness and Zero Latency
•
Strategy based traffic management
The following graphical representations depict the
implementation of a single 5G wireless antenna to
facilitate diverse applications and services.
F.
Need
Demand on 5G is far more complicated and
comprehensive than the previous generations of mobile
communication. There is a conflict and tension between
factors
such
as
high
performance
requirement
and
availability, cost, and efficiency when it comes to only one
technology for 5g systems deployment. In order to provide
services with variety of requirements there need to be more
than one technology implementation for 5G to meet user
experiences in terms of availability, speed, reliability and
cost. Some of the predominant needs for a new generation
technology in spite of already existing 4G and LTE are;
•
Growing data demand – It is estimated that the data
needs are intended to increase to 12 times per month
compared to the data used now.
•
Development of Device technologies – The upgrades
and developments in technologies of the devices
(Android, IOS) lead to an increased need of coverage,
data rates, low latency, etc.
•
Increased use of networks – Unlike the olden days, the
use of the network services has been increasing
exponentially from more than a decade. This was the
main reason that leads to such a heavy innovation in the
devices and network industry, which is a main point of
motivation for the 5G technology.
•
With respect to the 4G technology, the backlogs that
provided a motivation for 5G innovation are
I.
Limited
connectivity
to
specific
carriers
and
geographic regions
II.
Limited backward compatibility
III.
Limited network coverage
IV.
Use of multiple transmitters and antenna leading to
poor battery life
G.
Technology
The radio access for the 5G Technology will be
energized from the already existing technologies like the
LTE, HSPA, Wi-Fi and GSM as well as the new radio
access technologies which are called as RAT. A successful
5g
deployment
requires
a
comprehensive
designing,
simulating, emulating, calibrating and validating for a new
solution.
The employment of millimeter waves (Carrier,
BW, MU-MIMO) is going to be the prime supporting aspect
for increased speeds, wide area coverage, and reliability.
Millimeter waves also support very flexible long distant
communication. This will also result in use of very less
radio base stations. Millimeter waves are expected to
revolutionize the latency times. It is needed that the 5G
Technology provide less than 1ms latency from one end to
the
other.
The
power
requirements,
bandwidth
standardizations
and
the
commercialization
of
the
millimeter waves are expected to be before the year
2020[14].
Use of bandwidths that are very unlikely to be used
by other broadcast technologies (3 MHz – 300 MHZ)
resulting in higher speeds and capacity
The multiplexing used for the 5G transmission is
under speculation. The evaluation of the 5G networks using
CDMA, OFDM with respect to data rate and latency is
being studied.
OFDM has always been the most preferred modulation
technique right from the time of its acceptance in 4G
enhanced mobile broadband accesses. In 5G as we know we
need low latency, high data rates and wide channel
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

bandwidth
along
with
low
complexity
per
bit.
This
modulation technique is very much suitable to these
specifications. OFDM has a scalable symbol duration and
subcarrier spacing with low complexity receiver for wider
bandwidth.
This
also
runs
efficiently
with
special
multiplexing
and
multi
user
data
SDMA.
OFDM
implementations
make
way
for
more
number
of
transmissions and reception filtering based on link and
adjacent channel requirements. Also RSMA waveforms
have better uplink for short data bursts needed for low
power
internet
of
things
devices.
This
supports
asynchronous and synchronous contention based access
[15].
Advanced technologies that could recognize the
surrounding objects and more number of sensors are to be
used. Also, real time rendering and hologram technologies
that can revive a real image in real time in an all angle (360
degree) view are to be employed. MMT which is an
acronym for MPEG Media Transport is a processing
technology used to decrease the latency. With the help of
MVC which is an acronym for Multi View Video Encoding
high efficiency in 3D transmission can be achieved.
For
agility of network and cost reduction efficient control of the
networks based on software and virtualization are done
through an orchestration that is integrated. Finally, big data
is used for the 5G technologies to compare the required
existing data to the whole unstructured data in real time for
Traffic analysis to equip the network with intelligence for
feedback
and
decision
making.
Also,
self-organized
networks are also the intelligent networks that detect
anomalies and take the help of big data to organize a
solution.
H.
Deployment
It is common expectation that the deployment of
the 5G services will be prevalent in 2020. This particular
year was foretold taking many surveys into consideration.
The factors that led to the forecast of the year 2020 for the
deployment of 5G Technology are [16]:
1.
Higher number of connected devices:
It is expected that the number of connected devices
using the 5G Technology should be 50 to 500 billion and
depending on the present surveys it would take at least 4 to
5 years to reach the expected number from the present
number (2 billion). The 5G Technology should be deployed
into the practical commercial network gradually with
respect to the geographical areas and then completely
marketed to connect all the 5G enabled devices.
2.
Energy efficiency:
The energy drain is likely to be very high with the 5G
services with reference to the heavy data rates and
connectivity. The use of lithium ion battery devices made a
heavy impact on the battery life for the high end devices,
but is analyzed to be less efficient in 5G enabled devices.
This factor becomes more unsolvable for low power
devices. Hence, the research for new, high battery capacity
components is also expected to come to a result by 2020.
The Increase in the use of applications on mobile
computing and also user needs like portable cell phones and
devices will increase the need for the mobile wireless
networks in the upcoming years. Cell Phone users will
assume more bandwidth and fewer amounts of delays in the
cell phone network. All these expectations and assumptions
will increase in the infrastructures of mobile industries
which will eventually lead to the discharge or emission of
carbon dioxide. We can say that by 2020, 181 Megatons of
carbon dioxide are emitted by mobile networks, which is
almost equal to triple [17].
High energy performance and minimizing the energy
usage is the basic requirement of 5G. It reduces the
ownership cost and extends the network connectivity to
almost everywhere and also the network access is very
bearable and
very resource efficient
way. The
main
technology to finish the ultra-lean model and separation of
user’s data on the radio interference, 5G is very costly when
compared to other data plans. Its functioning model is
different from 3G and 4G. It really plays an important role
in the energy saving while the data is transmitted. The
device does not transmit the data unless and until a user data
transfer is going on. The main two design principles of this
technology are; a) being active only when the transmission
is required and b) being active only where the transmission
is required.
IV.
CONCLUSION
While telecommunication developers have created
four generations of mobile technology, a variety of mobile
technologies will be included in the 5G technology.
Therefore, the 5G will be released in a couple of years, and
it will comprise various features such as an increase in
efficiency. Establishing the 5G of mobile technology will
inevitably provide higher and higher data rate. Even more, it
will meet the customers’ demands since it is reliable for
communication, and the capability of 5G will resist the
future challenges in mobile communication.
REFERENCES
[1]
Bhalla, Mudit Ratana, and Anand Vardhan Bhalla. "Generations of
mobile wireless technology: A survey." International Journal of
Computer Applications 5.4 (2010).
[2]
Yarali,
A.,
“The
Future
Connectivity
and
Technological
Advancement in Higher Generation of Telecommunication Systems”,
4G and Beyond: The Convergence of Networks, Devices and
Services, Nova Inc. Publisher, 2015.
[3]
Wang, Li-Chun, and Suresh Rangapillai. "A survey on green 5G
cellular
networks."
Signal
Processing
and
Communications
(SPCOM), 2012 International Conference on. IEEE, 2012.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

[4]
Yarali, A., Barrow, K., “The Road Towards Densified and HetNet
Gigabit Wireless Networks”, 4G and Beyond: The Convergence of
Networks, Devices and Services, Nova Inc. Publisher, 2015.
[5]
https://5g-ppp.eu/
The
5G
Infrastructure
Public
Private
Partnership, 2015
[6]
White paper, Ericsson, “5G Energy Performance”, Uen 284 23-3265,
April2015
[7]
Bangerter, B., Talwar, S., Arefi, R., & Stewart, K. (2014). Networks
and devices for the 5G era. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 52(2),
90-96.
[8]
Sharma, Pankaj. "Evolution of mobile wireless communication
networks-1G to 5G as well as future prospective of next generation
communication network." International Journal of Computer Science
and Mobile Computing 2.8 (2013): 47-53.
[9]
Li, Xichun, et al. "The future of mobile wireless communication
networks." Communication Software and Networks, 2009. ICCSN'09.
International Conference on. IEEE, 2009.
[10] Osseiran, Afif, et al. "Scenarios for 5G mobile and wireless
communications: the vision of the METIS project." Communications
Magazine, IEEE 52.5 (2014): 26-35.
[11] "What is 5g, 5g visions," GSM History: History of GSM,
Mobile Networks, Vintage Mobiles. 20 November 2015.
[12] Toni
Janevski
(10–13
January
2009). "5G
Mobile
Phone
Concept". Consumer Communications and Networking Conference,
2009 6th IEEE [1-4244-2308-2]. Facility of Electrical Engineering &
Information Technology, University Sv. Kiril i Metodij. Retrieved
20 November 2015.
[13] Xichun Li; Abudulla Gani; Rosli Salleh; Omar Zakaria (February
2009). "The Future of Mobile Wireless Communication Networks"
International Conference on Communication Software and Networks.
Retrieved 20 November 2015.
[14] Hoydis; S. Ten Brink; M. Debbah (February 2013)."Massive MIMO
in the UL/DL of Cellular Networks: How Many Antennas Do We
Need?" IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 31,
no. 2. Bell Labs, Alcatel-Lucent. pp. 160–171. Retrieved 20
November 2015.
[15] Akhtar,
Shakil
(August
2008).
Pagani,
Margherita,
ed.2G-5G
Networks: Evolution of Technologies, Standards, and Deployment
(Second ed.). Hershey, Pennsylvania, United States: IGI Global.
pp. 522–532. Retrieved 20 November 2015.
[16] Zeadally, Sherali, Samee Ullah Khan, and Naveen Chilamkurti.
"Energy-efficient Networking: Past, Present, and Future." (n.d.): n.
pag. Sameekhan.org. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011,
31
May
2011.
Web.
20
Nov.
2015.
<http://sameekhan.org/pub/Z_K_2011_SUPE.pdf>.
[17] Moon, Sangwoo, and Yung Yi. "Energy-Efficient User Association in
Cellular Networks: A Population Game Approach." YouTube. Sogang
University,
25
Aug.
2015.
Web.
21
Nov.
2015.
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jc2HXP5qwsY>.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

