Secure Heterogeneous Cloud Platform for Scientific Computing 
To ensure the dynamism of modern business requires scalable and reconfigurable systems, however, the 
transformation of isolated and static corporate IT- resources is problematic. 
Vladimir Zaborovsky, Alexey Lukashin 
Department of Telematics 
Saint-Petersburg State Polytechnical University 
Saint-Petersburg, Russia 
vlad@neva.ru lukash@neva.ru  
 
 
Abstract— New technical systems and facilities are now using 
more accurate models that require high performance and large 
amounts of data to be processed. All these add new constraints 
on the effectiveness of configuration, scalability, and reliability 
of services. Data protection computation is used at various 
stages of the life cycle. In response to such demands, it is 
necessary to develop applications that can achieve high 
performance in heterogeneous computing infrastructure. Its 
components can function as in the modes of virtualization, and 
in the form of clusters, optimized for parallel calculations. 
Supercomputer Center «Polytechnic» is being created within 
the national research university, especially designed for high 
performance, scalability, heterogeneity and security resources 
for industrial applications and research. This paper proposes 
the way to use cloud services for hybrid high performance 
computing 
resources 
management 
and 
describes 
the 
implementation 
of 
hybrid 
cloud 
using 
heterogeneous 
computing resources, OpenStack platform, and stealth 
firewalls. 
Keywords-Cloud 
computing; 
security; 
heterogeneous 
platforms; firewalls; OpenStack 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud providers, such as Amazon, Rackspace, Heroku, 
and Google may provide different services on the models of 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS) or Software as a Service (SaaS), whose integration 
into a specific environment of industrial development is 
carried out by highly qualified engineers and IT- specialists. 
So far, actual challenge is to develop cloud services for 
scientific computing and computer aided engineering. These 
services have to provide human resources as well as 
computing environment. Existing engineering centers are 
being built today on a specially designed software and 
hardware platforms, which limits their performance and 
flexibility, or on the IaaS model that also does not allow you 
to efficiently solve a variety of engineering problems. 
The center for Supercomputing Applications Platform 
"Polytechnic" was designed to solve a wide range of 
engineering tasks. It uses four types of systems combined to 
take into account the characteristics of different types of 
applications: system with globally addressable memory; 
hybrid cluster based on CPU and gpGPU; reconfigurable 
flow-computers; and cloud that span the computing systems 
in a single environment for shared storage of data and 
services to control access to resources. The use of such a 
heterogeneous computing environment has the following 
advantages: 
 
computing environment allows expanding the range 
of information services that allows to quickly and 
cost-effectively 
implement 
multidisciplinary 
projects; 
 
virtualization and heterogeneity provide scaling 
resources 
to 
ensure 
high 
performance 
of 
computation at all stages of the implementation of 
engineering projects; 
 
cloud 
architecture 
implements 
automatic 
configuration of hardware and software components, 
versioning of applications and monitoring the 
integrity of the computing environment; 
 
network services provide benefits of network centric 
approach in the implementation of complex 
engineering projects by geographically and logically 
distributed development teams and specialists; 
 
stealth security system implements a common policy 
in the field of information security. 
There are different proposals and implementations for 
organizing scientific computing services using cloud services 
[1] [2]. In this paper we propose using IaaS OpenStack 
platform and security services for organizing heterogeneous 
engineering center. 
Heterogeneous cloud platform is the basis of computing 
infrastructure 
for 
engineering 
centers; 
the 
principal 
difference from the classic data centers is to provide remote 
access not only for computing resources or applications, but 
also intelligent services that are implemented by teams of 
specialists in different areas working in outsourcing within 
the chosen corporate information security policy. Using the 
resources of modern cloud-based engineering centers it is 
possible to create equivalent social networks that bring 
together professionals and experts to perform multi-
disciplinary engineering project including computations, 
verification of test results based on the use of different 
materials, virtual prototyping and data visualization of 
computation. The above-listed problems from the point of 
view at the computational algorithms can be combined into 
technological chains, which form a network of operations. 
Their implementation is provided within a heterogeneous 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

cloud. The components of the platform (Figure 1), based on 
the OpenStack, include: IaaS cloud class segment, 
computing infrastructure within the cluster, the specialized 
high-performance hybrid system based on reconfigurable 
computing nodes. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II covers 
security aspects of cloud platform. Section III covers 
methodology 
and 
technology 
overview 
of 
creating 
computation segments in cloud environment. The paper 
concludes with Section IV and presents future work on 
Section V. 
II. 
ENSURING SECURITY 
Virtualization has changed the approach of deploying, 
managing, and using enterprise resources by providing new 
opportunities 
for 
consolidation 
and 
scalability 
of 
computational resources available to applications; however, 
this led to the emergence of new threats posed by the 
complexity and dynamic nature of the process of providing 
resources. These threats can lead to the formation of a 
cascade process of security violations, which are powerless 
to traditional data protection systems. The existing 
approaches like “Scan and Patch” do not work in a cloud 
environment — network scanners cannot track changes of 
resources configuration in real time. These approaches do 
not accurately identify the change in level of risk and take 
steps to block dynamically emerging threats. 
To solve the problem of controlling access in the cloud, it 
is required to continuously monitor resources that cannot be 
provided without the automatically generating rules for 
filtering and firewall log files analysis. Information security 
management products in a dynamic cloud environment 
should include mechanisms that provide: total control over 
processes for deploying virtual machines; proactive scanning 
virtual machines for the presence of vulnerabilities and 
configuration errors; tracking the migration of virtual 
machines and system configuration to control access to 
resources. Therefore, within the center of the "Polytechnic" a 
series of measures are set out to improve information 
security resources, namely: 
 
Enhanced Control of virtual machines. Virtual 
machines as active components of the service are 
activated in the cloud application random moments, 
and Administrator cannot enter and exit virtual 
machine out of operation, until the security scanner 
checks the configuration and evaluate security risks. 
 
Automatic detection and scanning. Information 
security services are based on discovery of 
 
Figure 1.  Functional scheme of a cloud platforn with heterogeneous computing resources. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

vulnerabilities in the computing environment. This 
discovery is based on the current virtual machine 
configurations and on reports of potential threats that 
come from trusted sources, such as antivirus update 
servers. 
 
Migration of virtual machines. Proactive application 
migration is an effective method to control security. 
In addition, computing center has the access control 
service for the cloud services protection. Its main features are 
support of dynamic infrastructure, scalability, and the ability 
to support security policies without reference to the 
composition of resources. The service is built on the 
technology of stealth traffic filtering and software defined 
networks (SDN) and provides the reconfiguration of access 
isolation system in accordance with the current state of the 
environment (in detail, the question of access control in 
cloud environments considered in [3] and [4]). Static 
platform segments applied the principle of "rent" under 
which the filter rules to access segments are formed only by 
users and services running at any given time. On the 
platforms of this type, there are rare situations when user 
needs a single virtual machine. Therefore, cloud services 
support the dynamic creation of secure networks with a set of 
preconfigured virtual machines. Secured networks are 
connected to the firewalls which are integrated with the 
distributed SDN switch Open vSwitch and OpenStack 
Neutron networking service. 
Firewalls which protect the dynamically generated cloud 
networks 
are 
created 
during 
computing 
segment 
initialization. An important feature of the firewall is its 
ability to function in the address less mode [5]. It allows 
implementing invisible protection of a cloud, and security 
system integration will not require the reconfiguration of a 
cloud network subsystem. The firewall acts as a virtual 
machine. The firewall of a network segment filters network 
traffic based on the rules that created the access policy 
service. Access policy in a cloud computing environment is 
based on the Role Based Access Control (RBAC) model of 
Secured cloud network
Firewall
Distributed cloud switch (Open vSwitch) managed by OpenStack Neutron
Network of data center for engineering computing
Cloud Controller
Orchestration 
service
Configuration 
service (Chef)
Task scheduler
Firewall
Security service
Input data and computation 
task type and metadata
Cloud computing storage (Swift)
Loading of computation results
Results of a computation
 
Figure 2.  Components of cloud platform and general workflow. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

access control. This policy can be represented as a set of 
following attributes:  
 
user IDs, that are involved in the management of virtual 
machines and information services;  
 
privileges that are described in the form of permitted 
information services (privileges set rules for user access 
to services, it is possible to change the privileges for the 
user in the specified virtual machine filtering rules for 
your firewall, which allow access to a network service);  
 
set of roles that can be assigned to users; 
 
user sessions in a computing environments based on the 
network connections between subjects and objects.  
Access policy is translated to firewall filtering rules 
according to computing environment state. This state can be 
represented by a set of IP addresses of computing resources, 
with assigned user labels. Label represents user which is 
responsible for computing resource. When a state of a 
computing environment changes, then it is necessary to 
generate a new set of filtering rules and reconfigure 
firewalls. For that, a method of the dynamic configuration 
rules is developed, which consist of substitution of the 
network address lookup in user-owners privileges for each 
virtual machine. This approach formed the rules of access to 
the services of the computational resource and of computing 
resource to services of other users. 
It is required at least one virtual firewall in each 
virtualization server and one general bare-metal firewall for 
protecting cloud services from external threats. In a cloud-
based system there is a dedicated management network 
separated from virtual machines, so this network is used for 
the information exchange between the components of the 
access control system and cloud services (Figure 2). 
OpenStack cloud platform is implemented by using service 
bus for communication between its components. Service bus 
is based on Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) 
technology and RabbitMQ service [6]. Access control 
security service was integrated with OpenStack bus by 
subscribing its software components to events of OpenStack 
Compute service, which is managing the lifecycle of virtual 
machines, and OpenStack Neutron service, which is 
managing the lifecycle of cloud networks. When security 
service receives an event that a new virtual machine is 
starting, it generates and distributes filtering rules for the 
firewalls and generates rules for the virtual switch using 
OpenFlow technology which redirects traffic from virtual 
machine to the firewall. Firewall-based approach allows 
controlling traffic between instances which are connected to 
one virtual switch but belong to different users or security 
groups. 
The proposed security service requires additional 
resources in the cloud. Traffic filtering costs make up about 
10% of the virtualization server's resources [4]. 
III. 
PROTECTED SEGMENTS FOR ENGINEERING 
APPLICATIONS 
For tasks which require heterogeneous computing 
resources, it is necessary to automate creation of the 
protected segments. We describe heterogeneous computing 
system as a set of logical computing resources. Such a 
segment must be applied to the specified security policy to 
permit the possibility of access to computing resources for 
the owner, but forbid access to these resources to other users. 
When the task is complete, the results must be loaded into 
the data warehouse, and the computing resources are freed. 
At the same time, it is essential to guarantee access to 
computing resources in simultaneous execution of multiple 
tasks. 
We used OpenStack for creating groups of virtual 
machines in a cloud environment service. This service 
supports description of configurations in an Amazon Cloud 
Formation format that ensures compatibility with public 
services such as Amazon AWS. This service allows creating 
groups of virtual machines according to pattern, virtual 
networks, cloud-based routers and other components. The 
images of virtual machines contain a basic set of services. 
Any other application specific packages are installed using 
the automation services provided by Opscode Chef tool [7] 
that 
provides 
automated 
deployment 
of 
software 
configurations in virtual machines and bare-metal servers. 
When new computation segment is being created the security 
system spawns and configures virtual firewall which is 
filtering access to newly created network which serves 
computation. Dynamic network creation is supported by 
OpenStack Neutron services and distributed virtual switch 
Open vSwitch. After computing and receiving the results, the 
segment is removed, the cloud resources are released, and 
the results are uploaded to cloud storage and become 
available to the other consumers of the service. Every 
operation is automated: there are not any steps which need to 
involve human operations. 
Reconfigurable segments of the cloud allow solving a 
wide range of scientific and technical tasks, among them: 
tasks that operate on large data sets based on the MapReduce 
technology; Bioinformatics tasks, including processing of 
genetic information in distributed systems; tasks of class 
CAD/CAE; calculation jobs not requiring high-speed 
networks. Tasks that cannot be solved in the cloud virtual 
machines (for example, requiring quick access to globally 
SMP cluster
Hybrid CPU-GPU 
Cluster
FPGA 
Firewall
Security 
service
Access rules
 
Figure 3.  Reconfiguration of hybrid supercomputer center using 
firewalls. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

addressable memory and massively-parallel or streaming 
computations) are transferred to the dedicated hybrid clusters 
for high performance computing, computing infrastructure 
platform and equipped with an internal high speed 
communication bus, nodes-accelerators based on FPGA and 
GPU. Firewalls provide protection from unauthorized access 
to computing resources in a time of challenge and 
consolidation of heterogeneous segments (cloud and high-
performance) computing resources into a single computation 
network, which components can communicate with each 
other, using the allowed protocols. 
Built this way, infrastructure allows dynamically creating 
secure computing segments and thus provides an opportunity 
to organize a simultaneous solution of various tasks on a 
single set of hardware resources (Figure 3). The proposed 
solution implements reconfigurable federated cloud with one 
interface and multiple computation segments. A similar 
approach was used for organizing mobile cloud for 
intelligent transport systems and presented in [8]. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed approach of organizing engineering center 
which is based on cloud services enables ability to 
reconfigure computing resources for different computation 
tasks. Integrated security services allow sharing computing 
resources 
between 
different 
users 
and 
clients. 
Reconfiguration of computing resources by using cloud 
firewalls is not a standard approach. It requires additional 
resources and makes platform more complex. From other 
side, it provides opportunity of reconfiguration of resources 
on network level. Stealth technology allows leaving applied 
software without modification. Dynamic computation 
segments creation service allows to effectively using IaaS 
resources on demand. 
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
The next step in our project is to integrate heterogeneous 
virtual machines in cloud platform. We are working on 
adding GPGPU devices like NVidia k20x and FPGA devices 
to virtual machines by using PCI pass-through capabilities in 
modern hypervisors like XEN and KVM. Recently released 
OpenStack Havana has support of PCI pass-through to 
virtual machines so we started evaluating how it works with 
heterogeneous compute devices. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Horat, E. Quevedo, A. Quesada-Arencibia, ”A hybrid 
cloud computing approach for intelligent processing and 
storage of scientific data”, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8111 LNCS  
(PART 1), 2013,  pp. 182 – 188 
[2] J. Yimu, K. Zizhuo, P. Q. Yu, S. Yanpeng, K. Jiangbang, 
H. Wei, “A cloud computing service architecture of a parallel 
algorithm oriented to scientific computing with CUDA and 
monte carlo”, Cybernetics and Information Technologies 13 
(SPECIALISSUE), 2013, pp. 153 – 166 
[3] V. S. Zaborovsky, A. A. Lukashin, S. V. Kupreenko, and 
V. A. Mulukha, “Dynamic Access Control in Cloud Services. 
International 
Transactions 
on 
Systems 
Science 
and 
Applications”, ISSN 1751-1461, Vol. 7, No. 3/4, December 
2011, pp. 264-277 
[4] A. A. Lukashin and V. S. Zaborovsky. “Dynamic Access 
Control Using Virtual Multicore Firewalls”, The Fourth 
International Conference on Evolving Internet INTERNET 
2012, ISBN: 978-1-61208-204-2, June 24-29 2012, Venice, 
Italy, pp. 37-43. 
[5] A. Lukashin, V. Zaborovsky, S. Kupreenko, “Access isolation 
mechanism based on virtual connection management in cloud 
systems: How to secure cloud system using high perfomance 
virtual firewalls”, ICEIS 2011 - Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems  
3 ISAS, 2011, pp. 371 – 375. 
[6] S. Vinoski, “Advanced Message Queuing Protocol”, Internet 
Computing, IEEE, Volume: 10 , Issue: 6, 2006, pp. 87-89, doi 
10.1109/MIC.2006.116. 
[7] D. Spinellis, “Don't Install Software by Hand”, Software, 
IEEE, Volume: 29 , Issue: 4, 2012, pp. 86-87, doi 
10.1109/MS.2012.85. 
[8] V. .S. Zaborovskiy, 
A. A. Lukashin, 
S. G. Popov, 
A. V. Vostrov, 
“Adage 
mobile 
services 
for 
ITS 
infrastructure”, 2013 13th International Conference on ITS 
Telecommunications, ITST 2013, 2013, pp. 127 - 132   
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

