An Analysis of Impact of IPv6 on QoS in LTE Networks 
 
Tao Zheng, Daqing Gu 
Orange Labs Beijing 
France Telecom Group 
Beijing, China 
e-mail: {tao.zheng; daqing.gu}@orange.com 
 
 
Abstract - As a network evolution goal, IPv6 will be deployed in 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) networks, including access network, 
core network, mobile carrier IP network and service-related 
networks. IPv6 introduction in LTE will affect he Quality of 
Service (QoS) mechanism. In this paper, the impact of IPv6 on 
LTE’s end-to-end QoS is analyzed in some related aspects and 
some actions are proposed to improve the QoS according to the 
analysis results. In addition, some IPv6 transition solutions might 
affect QoS mechanisms in LTE are analyzed to reduce the 
negative impacts while IPv6 introduction. 
Keywords-LTE; QoS; TFT; PCC; flow label 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the LTE evolution and the rapid development of 
mobile Internet and multimedia services, QoS, especially 
Internet Protocol (IP) QoS is becoming more and more 
important in mobile networks. IPv6 introduction in LTE 
network can impact on QoS of mobile services.  
There are negative and positive impacts of IPv6. Negative 
impacts include more overhead, tunneling and translation 
caused by transition solutions, etc.. Positive impacts include the 
potential application of the IPv6 Flow Label field ‎[1], no NAT 
required for forwarding IPv6 traffic, etc.. 
LTE defines a class-based QoS concept, which reduces the 
implementing 
complexity 
while 
still allowing 
enough 
differentiation of traffic handling by mobile operators. Carrier 
bearers can be classified into two categories based on the QoS 
they provide: Minimum Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR) bearers 
and Non-GBR bearers. Fig. 1 shows the QoS architecture in 
LTE ‎[2]. 
 
Figure 1.  QoS architecture in LTE 
The LTE’s end-to-end QoS service consists of the external 
bearer service and the Evolved Packet System (EPS) bearer 
service. The former is used to carry out services between the 
LTE core network and external network nodes; and the latter is 
further subdivided into the EPS Radio Bearer service and the 
S1 Bearer service (EPS Access Bearer service) and the S5/S8 
Bearer Service (Core Network Bearer Service).  
The Radio Bearer service is used to transport the EPS 
bearer service data units between the eNodeB and the User 
Equipment (UE) according to the requested QoS. Moreover, it 
supports IP header compression and user plane encryption 
functions, and provides mapping and multiplexing information 
for UEs.  
The S1 Bearer service implements the transport of EPS 
bearer service data units between the Serving GateWay (S-GW) 
and the eNodeB according to the requested QoS, and provides 
QoS guarantees for end-to-end IP traffic flows, while 
multiplexing multiple Service Data Flows (SDFs) onto the 
same EPS bearer. 
The S5/S8 Bearer service controls and utilizes the backbone 
network in order to provide the transport of EPS bearer service 
date units among EPS Core network nodes. 
Similar to the QoS mechanism adopted in Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS), Traffic Flow Template 
(TFT) ‎[3] mechanism is used to provide QoS guarantee in LTE. 
The TFTs contain packet filter information that allows the UE 
and Public Data Network Gateway (P-GW) to identify the 
packets belonging to a certain IP packet flow aggregate. Fig. 
2‎[1] describes the TFT architecture in LTE. The UE and the P-
GW or Serving Gateway (S-GW) use packet filters to map IP 
traffic onto the different bearers. The TFTs are typically 
created when a new EPS bearer is established, and they can be 
modified during the lifetime of the EPS bearer.  
 
Figure 2.  TFT reference network architecture 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Policy and charging control (PCC) ‎[4] is another QoS 
related mechanism that provides operators with advanced tools 
for service-aware QoS and charging control. Different services 
have very different requirements of QoS, which are needed for 
the packet transport. PCC enables a centralized control to 
ensure that the service sessions are provided with the 
appropriate transport, for example, in terms of bandwidth and 
QoS treatment. The PCC architecture enables control of the 
media plane for both the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) and 
non-IMS services. Furthermore, PCC also provides the means 
to control charging on a per-service basis. The reference 
network architecture for PCC in EPS is shown in Fig. 3.  
In the LTE IP carrier network, Differentiated Services 
(Diffserv) mechanisms or the Resource Reservation Protocol 
(RSVP) protocol still can be used for QoS policy enforcement 
and resource reservation purposes now. Multiple Protocol 
Label Switching Virtual Private Network/Traffic Engineering 
(MPLS VPN/TE) also can be used to provide QoS in IP carrier 
network.  
From the above introduction, we can conclude that the 
current QoS mechanism used in LTE network is based on 
bearers (in access and core mobile networks) and Diffserv or 
RSVP techniques (in IP carrier network). With the deployment 
of LTE and the explosion of IP-based services, such as Voice 
over IP (VoIP), Video on demand (VoD), etc., QoS becomes 
very important. After IPv6 introduction in LTE, some new 
scenarios are proposed and the QoS mechanisms will face new 
challenges. It’s necessary to analyze the impact of IPv6 on QoS 
in LTE networks and take some actions. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
introduce end-to-end QoS Model in LTE networks. In Section 
3, impacts and actions of IPv6 on end-to-end QoS Model are 
provided. In Section 4, impact of IPv6 transition solutions on 
QoS mechanisms are analyzed. Finally, Section 5 summarizes 
the conclusions. 
 
Figure 3.  PCC reference network architecture 
II. 
END-TO-END QOS MODEL 
The critical factors determining QoS in mobile networks 
are: 
 
Radio network performance 
 
Network capacity 
 
Network design--delay in the system and sufficient 
capacity available end to end 
 
Application and service characteristics 
The end-user performance is affected by every protocol 
layer and network element in the connection path, from one UE 
to other UE or server in the remote end of the network. As 
shown in Fig. 4 (only the user plane is considered), it is useful 
to analyze and estimate the end-user experience following a 
bottom-up approach, starting from the lower levels of the layer 
architecture and considering a cumulative degradation of the 
performance based on the effects of the different layers and 
their interactions. The ideal throughput provided by layer one 
(physical layer) is considered initially as the starting point, and 
then the performance degradation introduced by each of the 
upper layers in the protocol stack is estimated. 
Compared with IPv4, IPv6 has some differences that may 
affect the QoS, such as: 
 
Packet header--the nominal IPv6 header is twice the 
size of the IPv4 header. 
 
Additional system messages, such as Neighbor 
Advertisement, 
Neighbor 
Solicitation, 
Router 
Solicitation, Router Advertisement, and Redirect. 
 
Network Address Translator (NAT)--Due to lack of 
public IPv4 addresses, NATs are deployed in some 
IPv4 core network; IPv6 eliminates the primary need 
for NATs, but translation or tunnel will be needed in a 
hybrid IPv4/IPv6 network without full dual-stack 
deployment.   
Next section will discuss the impact of IPv6 on in the end-
to-end QoS model showed in Fig. 4. 
III. 
IMPACT ON END-TO-END QOS MODEL  
In this section, we analyzed the impact of IPv6 on end-to-
end QoS following the path from an UE to another UE or a 
server according to the models showed in Fig. 1 and Fig. 4. 
A. UE Local Bearer Service 
UE local bearer service is determined by the signaling and 
data processes embedded in the UE. So the processing capacity 
of the UE will affect the QoS. 
In IPv6, there are some additional system messages and 
data processing compared to IPv4. For example, the interface 
identifier (IID) part of the IPv6 address assigned to the cellular 
interface of the UE may be changed periodically and 
randomly‎[5]‎ hence making it more difficult to identify the 
terminal, please see next section “PDCP Layer” for details. 
Changing the IID of an IPv6 address randomly requires more 
processing capacity and resources in the UE. 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

End-to-End QoS
IP
Application
IP
IP
PDCP
PDCP
Relay
Relay
GTP-U
GTP-U
GTP-U
UDP/IP
UDP/IP
UDP/IP
UDP/IP
RLC
RLC
MAC
L1
MAC
L1
L2
L1
L2
L1
L2
L1
L2
L1
L2
L1
GTP-U
Application
L2
L1
IP
Application
PDCP
RLC
MAC
L1
UE
UE
P-GW
S-GW
E-NodeB
Server
 
Figure 4.  Layers affecting end-to-end QoS 
During the transition period, the Packet Data Protocol (PDP) 
bearer will be dual-stack (one IPv4v6 bearer or two individual 
IPv4 and IPv6 bearers) or IPv6-only. If the UE sets up dual-
stack bearers, more resources are required than for a single-
stack bearer. 
B. Radio Bearer Service 
In the radio bearer service, the LTE Layer 2 user-plane 
protocol stack is composed of three layers as shown in Fig. 4, 
Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP) layer, Radio Link 
Control (RLC) layer and Medium Access Control (MAC) layer. 
In these layers, an important design feature is that all the 
Protocol Data Units (PDUs) and Service Data Unit (SDUs) are 
byte-aligned which means that the lengths of the PDUs and 
SDUs are multiples of 8 bits. This is to facilitate handling by 
microprocessors, which are normally defined to handle packets 
in units of bytes. This implies that sometimes unused padding 
bits are needed, and thus the cost of design for efficient 
processing is that a small amount of potentially-available 
capacity is wasted. 
The size of an IPv6 packet nominal header is twice the size 
of an IPv4 packet header. So the padding is likely to be 
different and then the potentially-available capacity is different 
too. There may be negative and positive impacts on the QoS of 
the radio bearer service when IPv6 is deployed. 
1) PDCP Layer 
One of the main functions of PDCP is header compression 
using the RObust Header Compression (ROHC) ‎[6] protocol 
defined by the IETF. In LTE, header compression is very 
important because there is no support for the transport of voice 
services via the Circuit-Switched (CS) domain. The different 
packet header between IPv4 and IPv6 will impact the overhead 
of packets, especially for small packet services, such as VoIP. 
The main principle of header compression is to avoid 
sending fields which do not change between consecutive 
packets. ROHC is able to reduce a Real Time Protocol (RTP)/ 
User Datagram Protocol (UDP)/IPv6 header from 60 bytes to 3 
or 4 bytes. This means that the 12.2 kbps AMR speech bit rate 
would be increased to 14.6 kbps with IPv6. 
During the IPv6 address allocation process, The P-GW 
allocates a globally unique /64 IPv6 prefix via Router 
Advertisement to a given UE ‎[5]. After the UE has received the 
Router Advertisement message, it constructs a full IPv6 
address via IPv6 Stateless Address autoconfiguration. To 
ensure that the link-local address generated by the UE does not 
collide with the link-local address of the PDN GW, the PDN 
GW shall provide an IID to the UE and the UE shall use this to 
configure its link-local address. For stateless address 
autoconfiguration however, the UE can choose any interface 
identifier to generate IPv6 addresses, other than link-local, 
without involving the network.  
If the same IID is used in multiple contexts, it becomes 
possible for that the identifier to be used to correlate seemingly 
unrelated activity. For example, a network sniffer placed 
strategically on a link across which all traffic to/from a 
particular host crosses could keep track of which destinations a 
node communicated with and at what times.  
Due to privacy consideration, the UE may change its IID 
which is part of IPv6 address periodically and randomly. That 
means the IPv6 address of UE will be changed periodically and 
should be sent to network when ROHC applied. Then the 
relative overhead in ROHC will be higher when the IID 
changed. So for VoIP or Machine to Machine (M2M) services 
with small Maximum Transmission Units (MTUs) and 
belonging to closed services whose security can be guaranteed, 
a non-changing IID is suggested to be used for the sake of 
lower overhead. 
2) RLC Layer 
The main functions of the RLC layer are segmentation and 
reassembly of upper layer packets in order to adapt them to the 
size which can actually be transmitted over the radio interface. 
For radio bearers which need error-free transmission, the RLC 
layer also performs retransmission to recover from packet 
losses. 
The functions of the RLC layer are performed by "RLC 
entities". An RLC entity is configured in one of three data 
transmission 
modes: 
Transparent 
Mode 
(TM), 
Unacknowledged Mode (UM) and Acknowledged Mode (AM). 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

In AM, special functions are defined to support retransmission. 
When UM or AM is used, the choice between the two modes is 
made by the eNodeB during the RRC radio bearer setup 
procedure, based on the QoS requirements of the EPS bearer. 
Compared with IPv4, IPv6 have some Internet Control 
Message Protocol version 6 (ICMPv6) messages, such as 
Neighbor Discovery, Auto-configuration, Multicast Listener 
Discovery, and Path MTU Discovery. These messages should 
be transmitted on a separate Radio Access Bearer using AM 
RLC mode for error-free transmission. 
3) MAC Layer 
This layer performs multiplexing of data from different 
radio bearers. Therefore there is only one MAC entity per UE. 
By deciding the amount of data that can be transmitted from 
each radio bearer and instructing the RLC layer as to the size of 
packets to provide, the MAC layer aims to achieve the 
negotiated QoS for each radio bearer.  
In MAC layer, there are no difference between transmitting 
IPv4 packets and IPv6 packets. 
C. S1 Bearer Service 
According to LTE layer architecture defined by 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), the Radio Access 
Network (RAN) access bearer service between the RAN and 
the core network in user plane is transmitted by IP protocols.  
The LTE radio network is connected to the Evolved Packet 
Core (EPC) through the S1 interface. The S1 interface is 
divided into two parts: 
 
S1-MME carries signaling messages between the base 
station and the Mobility Management Entity (MME). 
 
S1-U carries user data between the base station and the 
S-GW. 
There are two IP headers separated by GTP Tunnel Header 
and which correspond to the transport layer and the end-user IP 
packet respectively. If the transport layer is still IPv4 and the 
EPS bearer is IPv6, the overhead of IP header in S1-U is 1.5 
times the overhead of the IPv4 header. If the transport layer and 
EPS bearer are both IPv6, the overhead of the IPv6 header in 
S1-U is twice the overhead of the IPv4 header. The available 
bandwidth at the S1-U interface will consequently be affected 
when IPv6 is introduced in the RAN access bearer. 
Due to the greater size of the IPv6 packet header, the 
bandwidth between the RAN and the Core network (S1-U 
interface) should be dimensioned accordingly so as to limit the 
risk of congestion occurrences. 
D. Core Network 
For the General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) architecture, 
until Release 9, two PDP types are defined, namely IPv4 and 
IPv6. This means that an UE can only request one type of IP 
address per PDP context. With the introduction of the EPC 
system in Release 8, a new PDP type has been introduced 
called IPv4v6, and which enables the UEs to use a single Dual-
stack bearer. This PDP type is available starting from Rel-9 for 
GPRS. 
During the transition period, if the UE is dual-stack enabled, 
two individual IPv4 and IPv6 bearers (case where the UE 
doesn't support the IPv4v6 PDP type) or one IPv4v6 bearer 
may be set up in the S-GW and P-GW. For the S-GW and P-
GW, the maximum number of simultaneous bearers that can be 
supported at any given time is a performance criterion. If some 
UEs set up two individual IPv4 and IPv6 bearers, the capacity 
of the S-GW and P-GW will be affected. 
E. Backbone Bearer Service 
The architecture of EPS bearer transport for GTP Tunnels 
in the backbone bearer is similar to that of S1 bearer. 
Obviously the problems are the same as in the S1 bearer when 
IPv6 is introduced.  
Due to the greater size of the IPv6 packet header, the 
bandwidth of the core network should be dimensioned 
accordingly so as to limit the risk of congestion occurrences. 
F. External Bearer Service 
The external bearer service is related with external 
networks. There maybe several ways to transmit IPv6 traffic in 
external networks: 
 
If the external network is IPv6-capable or dual stack, 
no impacts. 
 
If the external network remains IPv4 and is MPLS-
capable, the ideal solution is 6PE (IPv6 over 
MPLS)/6VPE (IPv6 over MPLS VPN). The 6PE 
approach allows existing IP/MPLS networks to carry 
the IPv6 packets using MPLS labels; hence only the PE 
devices need to support the IPv6 protocol and 
addressing. In 6PE/6VPE, the QoS of IPv6 traffic is 
guaranteed by MPLS. 
 
The IPv6 traffic can be transmitted in tunnels, if the 
external network is IPv4-only. Tunneling allows for 
the transport of the encapsulated data unit across the 
encapsulating‎protocol’s‎transport‎network.‎Typically,‎
when employed as part of an IPv6 transition 
mechanism, the existing IPv4 transport infrastructure is 
used to encapsulate IPv6 packets, thereby using the 
existing IPv4 infrastructure to provide basic IPv6 
connectivity. 
The overhead of the encapsulation scheme should be 
considered to dimension the bandwidth used by external 
bearers. And the time to establish and activate the tunnels will 
influence the delay related to the forwarding of IPv6 traffic. 
If the opposite end-points is of a different IP version or 
addresses need to be translated due to the deployment of a 
transition solution, a translation node is needed somewhere in 
the forwarding path. Address translation (usually with 
Application-Level Gateway (ALG)) is harmful to QoS, but is 
necessary for some transition solutions. 
G. Impacts and Actions 
Through the above analysis about impact of IPv6 
integration on QoS, some parts in mobile network can be 
affected after IPv6 deployed. Fig. 5 shows the impacts on QoS 
for different parts of mobile networks. 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

UE
P-GW
RAN
Core Network
GW/NAT/...
UE/ App Server
S-GW
MME
End-to-End QoS
External  Network
1
5
7
8
Backbone bearer 
network
6
PDCP
RLC
MAC
2
3
4
 
Figure 5.  Localization of the impacts of IPv6 integration on QoS in LTE 
Impact #1: Compared with IPv4, IPv6 and dual-stack need 
more processing capacity and resources in the UE. 
Impact #2: When IPv6 applied to PDUs and SDUs of L2 
layers, the different unused padding bits will affect the 
potentially-available capacity and the QoS of radio bearer 
services when IPv6 is deployed. 
Impact #3: The overhead in ROHC will be higher when the 
UE's IID changes. So for VoIP or M2M services with small 
MTUs and belonging to closed services whose security can be 
guaranteed, a non-changing IID is suggested to be used for the 
sake of lower overhead. 
Impact #4: Some ICMPv6 messages should be transmitted 
on a separate RAB using AM RLC mode for error-free 
transmission.  
Impact #5: Due to longer length of packet header and 
additional system messages, the bandwidth between the RAN 
and the Core should be augmented to avoid congestion when 
IPv6 is introduced. 
Impact #6: Due to longer length of packet header and 
additional system messages, the bandwidth of the core network 
should be augmented to avoid congestion when IPv6 is 
introduced. 
Impact #7: The overhead of tunnels should be considered in 
the bandwidth of external bearers. The processing time of start 
and end points of tunnels will also influence the delay of IPv6 
traffic. 
Impact #8: Address translation (usually with ALG) is 
harmful to QoS, but is a necessity in some transition solutions. 
The following table shows the QoS characteristics effected 
by above 8 impacts. 
TABLE I.  
QOS CHARACTERISTICS AFFECTED BY IMPACTS FROM IPV6 
INTRODUCTION 
Impacts 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Throughput/Bandwidth 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
Packet Loss Rate 
 
 
 
√ 
 
 
 
 
Delay(Latency) 
√ 
√ 
√ 
 
 
 
√ 
√ 
By analyzing the impacts listed above, four actions are 
proposed for better QoS: 
Action #1: Improve the capacity and processing power of 
devices. Apply to Impacts #1; 
Action #2: Optimize related parameters and increase 
resource utilization rate. Apply to Impacts #2; 
Action #3: Increase bandwidth of networks. Apply to 
Impacts #2, #5, #6, and #7; 
Action #4: Minimize the number of translating or tunneling 
on end-to-end path. Apply to Impacts #7, #8. 
IV. 
IMPACT OF TRANSITION SOLUTIONS AND FLOW LABEL 
Several transition solutions have been proposed to solve 
IPv4 public address exhaustion and to introduce IPv6 in mobile 
networks. These solutions employ translation and tunneling 
techniques and introduce some functional elements to network, 
which impacts on the QoS mechanisms, such as TFT, PCC. 
A. Impact on TFT 
When IPv6 is introduced in mobile network, the direct 
impact on TFT mechanism is that the filter information may 
contain the IPv6 attributes: IPv6 Next Header, Traffic class and 
Flow Label. That means that TFT should support IPv6 filter 
attribute 
combinations. 
For 
example, 
the 
new 
filter 
combination: Remote address and subnet mask, IPv6 traffic 
class and flow label. Compared with the other two 
combinations, this one gives us a fine-grained filter to tell 
different QoS flows by using IPv6 Flow Label instead of port 
range or IPSec Security Parameter Index (SPI) attributes. 
Because the TFT mechanism works between UE and P-GW, 
the TFT mechanism will be impacted when a translation or a 
tunnel function is required in the UE for a transition solution. 
For tunnel-based solutions, the TFT filter attributes will be 
taken from the tunnel IP header instead of the internal IP 
header. So there should have some mechanisms to map the 
internal filter attributes to external filter attributes of tunnel, 
e.g., by copying the IPv6 Flow Label. For translation-based 
solutions, the filter attributes for the original IP packet should 
be translated to the new IP packet to ensure integrity of filters.  
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Transition solutions can be cataloged two classes: 
 
Impact 
on 
TFT: 
Bump-in-the-Host 
(BIH) 
‎[7] 
(translation in UE), Address Plus Port (A+P) ‎[8] and 
Dual-Stack Lite (DS-Lite) ‎[9] (tunnel between UE and 
Carrier Grade NAT (CGN), except for GTP 
encapsulation) 
 
No impact: Gateway-Initiated Dual-Stack Lite (GI-DS-
Lite) ‎[10], NAT64/DNS64 ‎[11]‎[12], Per-Interface 
NAT ‎[13], Overlapping clusters, v4 on demand 
B. Impact on PCC 
The PCC rules should support IPv6 IP Connectivity Access 
Network (CAN) sessions and service data flow filters. When 
the PCC architecture is used and a Policy and Charging Rules 
Function (PCRF) function is added, this function and the 
corresponding Gx interface must also support IPv6-enabled 
PCC rules. The Rx interface and the Application function 
should take into account IPv6 flows and addresses. 
There are two aspects PCC mechanisms impacted by 
transition solutions: 
Some transition solutions, such as GI-DS-Lite, overlapping 
clusters, Per-Interface NAT and NAT64, etc., introduce a 
translation function (NAT/CGN) between the P-GW and the 
service platforms if UEs access IPv4 services. In this case, an 
impact on Rx interface between the PCRF and the Application 
Function (AF) in the PCC architecture will need to be 
addressed, because the UE's address information exchanged on 
Rx interface stays the payload of packets. So the NAT/CGN 
should include an ALG which understand the protocol on the 
Rx Interface. 
Another problem is that multiple customers share the same 
public IPv4 address (for most of transition solutions) or even 
the same private IPv4 address (for DS-Lite, GI-DS-Lite and 
Per-Interface NAT). In the PCC mechanism, the PCC rules 
including QoS parameters will be bound with IP CAN sessions. 
Shared IPv4 address blocks the binding process between an AF 
session and an IP Can session. Other identifications, such as 
IPv6 tunnel address or tunnel ID, are required to help to find 
the right bearer. 
C. Impact of Flow Label 
IPv6 has introduced a field named Flow Label to identify 
and mark a flow. General rules for the Flow Label field have 
been documented in ‎[14], but how to apply this field in real-
world network is still an open issue. 
Under the current LTE architecture, the traffic is 
encapsulated in GTP tunnel and transported based upon the 
EPC bearer. The IPv6 Flow Label can be used to replace bearer 
identification to improve the current QoS mechanisms in 
mobile networks. In current mobile networks, the QoS 
granularity is based upon the bearer characteristics as defined 
by the PCC and TFT QoS mechanisms. The fine granularity of 
QoS can be implemented with the help of Flow Label ‎[1].  
In addition, the IPv6 Flow Label can be used for QoS 
provision in the IP backbone network carrying mobile 
networks. At present, the IP network can use Diffserv 
mechanisms or the RSVP protocol for QoS policy enforcement 
and resource reservation purposes. Such QoS policy and RSVP 
design is usually engineered in advance (e.g. configuring the 
actions to be performed by a router that supports the Expedited 
Forwarding Per-Hop Behavior). If the IP backbone network is 
IPv6-capable, it can perceive the bearers in mobile networks by 
a mapping mechanism between the bearer identification and 
the IPv6 Flow Label, and then provide QoS guarantee by 
combining Flow Label with other technology such as Diffserv. 
This QoS policy can be adjusted by changing the mapping 
between the bearer ID and the IPv6 Flow Label according to 
the mobile services type and traffic. When congestion is 
occurring, it is possible to drop the packets in same bearers for 
minimizing the affected bearers with the help of Flow Label. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we provided an in-depth analysis of the end-
to-end QoS impacts by IPv6 introduction in LTE networks and 
provide recommendations about the QoS impacts and 
improvement by the IPv6 introduction in mobile networks. 
Negative impacts should be reduced for the sake of QoS 
improvement by adopting appropriate actions as mentioned in 
section III. Positive impacts should be taken into account to 
improve QoS. In the future work, we consider researching on 
impacts of Mobile IPv6 in mobile networks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Zheng, L. Wang, and D. Gu, A flow label based QoS scheme for end-
to-end mobile services, Proc. The Eighth International Conference on 
Networking and Services (ICNS 2012), March 2012, pp. 169-174. 
[2] D. Flore, LTE RAN architecture aspects, 3GPP IMT-Advanced 
Evaluation, December 2009. 
[3] 3GPP TS 23.401, General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements 
for Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) 
access, September 2012. 
[4] 3GPP TS 23.203, Policy and charging control architecture, September 
2012. 
[5] T. Narten, R. Draves, and S. Krishnan, Privacy Extensions for Stateless 
Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6, IETF RFC 4941, September 2007. 
[6] K. Sandlund and G. Pelletier The RObust Header Compression (ROHC) 
framework, IETF RFC 5795, March 2010. 
[7] B. Huang, H. Deng, and T. Savolainen, Dual-Stack hosts using "Bump-
in-the-Host" (BIH), IETF RFC 6535, February 2012. 
[8] R. Bush, The Address plus Port (A+P) approach to the IPv4 address 
shortage, IETF RFC 6346, August 2011. 
[9] A. Durand, R. Droms, J. Woodyatt, and Y. Lee, Dual-Stack Lite 
broadband deployments following IPv4 exhaustion, IETF RFC 6333, 
August 2011. 
[10] F. Brockners, S. Gundavelli, S. Speicher, and D. Ward, Gateway-
Initiated Dual-Stack Lite deployment, IETF RFC 6674, July 2012. 
[11] X. Li, C. Bao, and F. Baker, IP/ICMP translation algorithm, IETF RFC 
6145, April 2011. 
[12] M. Bagnulo, A. Sullivan, P. Matthews, and I. van Beijnum, DNS64: 
DNS extensions for network address translation from IPv6 clients to 
IPv4 servers, IETF RFC 6147, April 2011. 
[13] J. Arkko, L. Eggert, and M. Townsley, Scalable operation of address 
translators with Per-Interface bindings, IETF RFC 6619, June 2012. 
[14] J. Rajahalme, A. Conta, B. Carpenter, and S. Deering, IPv6 flow label 
specification, IETF RFC 3697, March 2004. 
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

