Network Simulation and Remote Laboratory Systems for Students with Vision 
Impairment 
 
Iain Murray 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
Curtin University 
Perth, Australia 
i.murray@curtin.edu.au 
Alan Ng 
Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering 
Curtin University 
Perth, Australia 
alan.ng@student.curtin.edu.au
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes further developments in 
laboratory and simulation tools for use in the Cisco Academy 
for the Vision Impaired (CAVI) program. Due to the 
geographic distribution of vision impaired students it is 
necessary to offer the normally “hands on” aspects of the Cisco 
Academy Program in a remote, virtual or simulated manner. 
Two major issues currently faced in delivering this program is 
that of the inaccessibility of Packet Tracer and scheduling 
equipment access to the Remote Bundles.  
Keywords-component; 
Remote 
laboratories, 
network 
simulaltion, assistive technology, blind, vision impairment 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Cisco Academy for the Vision Impaired (CAVI) is a 
learning environment that modifies the “standard” Cisco 
Networking Program in a manner that is suitable for people 
with significant vision impairment. Students at CAVI 
acquire 
skills 
in 
computer 
networking 
design 
and 
administration through a variety of tailored facilities, such as 
a laboratory of network equipment that can be accessed 
remotely via the Internet.  
Disabilities inhibit many from obtaining gainful 
employment and the building of skills in IT enables those 
with a vision disability to be better equipped to take on 
employment in the IT industry.  With an unemployment rate 
of more than 60% in Australia, the vision impaired battle to 
compete for employment with those who are sighted [2]. 
Technology has become an integral part of the business 
world with little being achieved without some use of 
information and communication technologies. In many cases 
organizations use technology to gain a competitive 
advantage, hence the need for IT skills is paramount for 
employment in today’s business world. Education courses in 
introductory skills in computing are offered by many 
disability support organizations to their members, however 
very few advance beyond the basics of how to use email, 
Word, and how to search the Internet. A scan of the literature 
on accessible e-learning environments results in little in the 
way of new developments.  
People who are blind rely on computers and the Internet 
for information essential to their lives, availability of goods 
and services, directions to get from one location to another, 
pay bills and do their banking, communications with other 
people, 
transferring 
information 
and 
documents 
to 
businesses, family and friends.  The ability to set up their 
own home computers and networks is a great advantage to 
them. With advanced IT skills they can also troubleshoot 
problems and fix their own systems when they fail. They 
can also do this for their employer, making IT help desk and 
network administration a relevant employment role for 
people with vision impairments. 
E-learning environments suitable for remote delivery of 
accessible IT curriculum have been a long time emerging. 
The needs of those with vision disabilities are specialized, 
requiring assistive technologies to access the information 
technology and curriculum. Research and reporting of 
advances in this area have not been forthcoming, with 
pockets of work on accessible teaching methods and 
curriculum, but little spans the digital divide between 
sighted and vision impaired students in the area of 
information 
technology 
and 
network 
administration 
education. Employing an e-learning environment consisting 
of a virtual classroom, remote laboratories and curriculum 
fully accessible to the vision impaired, the Cisco Academy 
for the Vision Impaired (CAVI) delivers advanced IT 
network education to students situated around the world. 
Students access the learning system via the Internet, 
enabling those in remote locations to work through the 
courses at their own pace and within their own time zones. 
This paper describes the remote e-learning environment 
designed for the delivery of advanced IT networking to 
vision impaired students so that others may benefit from the 
low-cost and effective design.  
The paper first describes the development of an 
accessible external application to connect with Packet 
Tracer.  
Secondly, users of the remote laboratory face the 
problem of not knowing ahead of time whether the 
equipment is going to be occupied or not. Therefore, a 
mechanism for scheduling laboratory usage is required. This 
mechanism must also be accessible and usable by vision 
impaired students. This paper presents a prototype booking 
system that fulfills these requirements. This booking system 
was designed with assistive technologies in mind, and 
implemented as a web-based application 
332
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
II. 
THE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
The CAVI accessible e-learning environment was 
established to deliver advanced IT networking courses to 
vision impaired students situated in different parts of the 
world. The presentation of Cisco curricular were also 
redesigned to ensure the teaching and learning materials 
were accessible, however the environment structure can be 
applied to any learning environment that has accessible 
educational 
materials. 
The 
curriculum 
presented 
is 
comprised of the Discovery, Exploration (previously CCNA 
courses) and IT Essentials that form part of the Cisco 
Networking Academy Program. “Networking Academy 
utilizes a blended learning model that combines face-to-face 
teaching with engaging online content and hands-on learning 
activities to help students prepare for industry-standard 
certifications, entry-level and advanced careers, and higher 
education in engineering, computer science, information 
systems, and related fields.”[4]. Details on the modifications 
to the various curricular may be found in [5].  
The CAVI e-learning environment is illustrated in Figure 
1 and comprises: 
1. a local classroom where local vision impaired 
students can attend and where lectures and tutorials 
are broadcast for the virtual classroom, 
2. support academies situated at other remote locations 
providing local vision impaired tutors, 
3. direct access via the Internet for remote learners at 
home, 
4. a curriculum server housing the Cisco e-learning 
materials and  a file and applications server housing 
the course management system plus additional 
accessible teaching materials and applications, 
5. a local laboratory where local students can carry out 
their laboratory exercises, 
6. a virtual classroom consisting of a voice server, 
webserver, and podcast server, 
7. a remote laboratory where students can configure the 
network equipment and test their configurations. 
Vision impaired instructors deliver the lectures and 
tutorials in the local classroom and these are broadcast to the 
support academies and remote students. Vision impaired 
tutors provide a one-on-one capacity with students to further 
explain and walk through concepts and exercises. The 
lectures and tutorials are recorded and the audio files are 
stored for later access by the students on demand. The virtual 
classroom enables the students to interact with the instructors 
and other students during the broadcasts. The virtual 
classroom also provides the opportunity for lectures and 
tutorials to be delivered by lecturers in remote locations, as 
the physical location of the teaching staff is flexible. 
Assessing assignments can also take place electronically. 
Students can complete and submit their work electronically, 
and lecturers in any location can grade the students’ work. 
One-on-one communication between instructors, tutors and 
remote students is carried out via Skype. 
The above components allow the vision impaired 
students to login and hear broadcast lectures and tutorials, 
and then work through the accessible curriculum at their own 
pace. The curriculum and applications enable the students to 
design network architectures, then implement and test these 
in the remote laboratory which is a real networked 
environment. 
The Cisco courses require students to design and build IT 
networks, and trouble-shoot these networks. This means the 
vision impaired students must have access to network 
equipment and/or simulation software so that they may 
configure and test configurations, hence the need for an 
accessible remote laboratory facility and simulation 
software. 
 
Figure 1.  CAVI Teaching environment 
 
Figure 2.  Remote Laboratory “bundles” utilised in the CAVI program. 
III. 
AN ACCESSIBLE INTERFACE TO PACKET TRACER 
iNetSim [3] was an early prototype application that 
allowed vision impaired students to run basic network 
configuration simulations. Whist this prototype was 
successful in its aim of illustrating that network simulators 
may be made fully accessible if accessibility is built into the 
design stage of application development, maintaining and 
building a separate simulator for use by the vision impaired 
is not feasible. Any such application would lag development 
Internet 
Virtual Internet 
(Eagle Server) 
POD 1 
POD 2 
POD 3 
Booking and 
Authentication 
Server 
333
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

and features of commercial, well resourced projects such as 
Packet Tracer. It was therefore decided to develop an 
external application to connect to Packet Tracer utilizing the 
newly released APIs and multi user features. Initial 
development has aimed at examining the flexibility and 
ability of the framework underlying the Packet Tracer 
application development environment. The information 
obtained was then used to decide on the feasibility of an 
external application for vision impaired people, allowing 
them to use and manipulate the Packet Tracer software 
package to carry on networking simulation, particularly 
where the CCNA curriculum is concerned. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example iNetSim Scenario 
As may be seen when comparing the iNetSim interface 
(Figure 3) and that of the new prototype, some modification 
to the layout have been made in particular the reduction in 
the number of tables used in the connection and devices 
configuration areas. This is intended to increase the 
navigation speed when using a screen reader. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Example screen captures of the external application 
communication with a running instance of Packet Tracer 
IV. 
REMOTE LABORATORY BOOKING SYSTEM 
A. Available Booking Systems 
As stated earlier, users of the remote laboratory face the 
problem of not knowing ahead of time whether the 
equipment is going to be occupied or not and therefore an 
accessible booking system is required. 
One possible booking system is contained within the 
Netlab appliance by Network Development Group (NDG). 
While it is tailored towards remote laboratory setups such as 
the one within CAVI, there are areas where this particular 
system falls short of CAVI’s needs. Firstly, NDG prices the 
initial purchase of its Netlab Academy Edition appliance at 
$6795 USD [6]. Armstrong and Murray [7] also note how 
the cost of the appliance prevented its use within the CAVI 
remote laboratory, but perhaps more importantly, they 
describe how the Java based applications in Netlab, 
including the booking system, are not accessible by screen 
reader software. Figure 5 below shows a screenshot of 
Netlab’s booking system interface.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Netlab scheduler interface (NDG 2010) 
!"#"$ % & ' "
"
!"#$%#$&'()"*'%
%
%
"
()'" *+%,)-.%/" 01'+" 234'+5%.'" -1" 6%7'" 8," 95" 4)+''" 6%-3" %44+-:84'1;" ()'<" %+'" =9+>" %+'%?"
7'@-.'"1'/'.4-93"6'38"%37"4)'"499/:%+1;"A+-'5/<?"4)'"=9+>"%+'%"9..8,<"6914"95"4)'"%+'%"95"
4)'"*02?"=)-.)"%/19",+9@-7'"'%1-'+")%37/-3&"95"7'@-.'"9:B'.41"%37".933'.4-93",+'@'34-3&"
4)'"3''7"95"1.+9//-3&"%+9837"4)'"@-'=;"()-1"&-@'1"%"./'%+"@-'="95"4)'"49,9/9&<"49"4)'"81'+;""
%
%
 
Figure 2: Netlab scheduler interface (NDG 2010) 
Even if a screen reader was able to interpret this Netlab Scheduler interface, it would still be of 
low accessibility to the vision impaired user. The screen reader would attempt to read every 
number within the monthly calendar aloud. With respect to the guidelines considered in Section 
2.2, the links within the monthly calendar are not meaningful on their own, and it is likely that a 
screen reader would ignore the colours associated with the selected date and the current date. 
Finally, while the interface may look relatively simple to a sighted user, this may not be the case 
f
th i
i i
i
i d
t
t
334
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

Even if a screen reader was able to interpret this Netlab 
Scheduler interface, it would still be of low usability to the 
vision impaired user. The screen reader would attempt to 
read every number within the monthly calendar aloud. The 
links within the monthly calendar are not meaningful on their 
own, and it is likely that a screen reader would ignore the 
colours associated with the selected date and the current date. 
Finally, while the interface may look relatively simple to a 
sighted user, this may not be the case for their vision 
impaired counterparts. 
The Meeting Room Booking System (MRBS) and 
WebCalendar are two open source booking systems, and are 
geared towards more general purpose applications. They are 
free to use, but they also suffer from accessibility problems, 
similar to the ones that affected Netlab. Both systems are 
built using PHP, meaning that these systems generate HTML 
pages that are translatable by a screen reader. Like the Netlab 
scheduler, these open source systems also display monthly 
calendars which add unnecessary verbosity, and use links 
that cannot stand alone. Figure 6 below shows a screenshot 
of MRBS. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Screenshot of MRBS (MRBS Development Team 2010) 
It can be seen that MRBS employs colours in an entirely 
inaccessible fashion. From the home page of this system, a 
user of a screen reader would not be able to easily 
distinguish when a particular reservation starts or finishes, 
since this information is solely conveyed through the use of 
colour. The times listed to the left of the daily schedule, and 
the listings to the bottom of the home page would also be 
read aloud by the screen reader, which further reduces the 
simplicity and accessibility of this system. 
 
B. Implementation  
All the interfaces of the booking system (see Figure 7) 
use no more than these three colours: black, white, and red. 
The use of red is exclusively for the indication of error 
conditions, such as a missing username or missing password 
for the user login page. Users who are completely blind are 
still notified of any errors since their screen reader should be 
able to translate the textual error messages. 
The titles of each page are designed to fully identify the 
purpose of each interface, and unambiguously distinguish 
these pages from any other websites the user may be 
browsing simultaneously. If the login interface here was 
simply entitled “Login”, then a vision impaired user may not 
be able to tell if this was a login page for the CAVI booking 
system, or, for example, a login page for their online 
discussion board. The link to the administration interface 
does not appear to users who do not have the necessary 
privileges. This link is close to the top of the page in order to 
enable quick identification by vision impaired instructors, 
and hence save them from having to listen to the rest of the 
page in the instance where they only want to manage the 
booking system. 
The two message lines that subsequently follow are 
placeholders for any notifications or error messages that are 
to be output to the user. When a user first logs in, these 
message lines are initially empty. In a manner similar to the 
user login interface, any error messages here are also printed 
in red. Furthermore, their location near the top of the page 
also allows a vision impaired user to speedily ascertain the 
results of their actions. 
The values of the user bookings table are populated 
dynamically from the database. If a user has no bookings for 
the future, then the table does not appear. Information 
regarding a user future bookings and the selected day’s open 
timeslots was not arbitrarily placed above the drop boxes for 
a new booking. As a screen reader goes through the page, it 
will read out the open timeslots and the future bookings first, 
which will in turn give the vision impaired user an idea of 
when to (or when not to) book before they encounter and use 
the drop boxes for their next booking. This can increase the 
interface’s usability. If the arrangement was reversed, then a 
user could hastily select drop box options to start with, only 
to change their choices soon after when they later discover 
through their screen reader that their timeslot was actually 
not available. 
 
 
7 
 
Figure 3: Screenshot of MRBS (MRBS Development Team 2010) 
It can be seen that MRBS employs colours in an entirely inaccessible fashion. From the home 
page of this system, a user of a screen reader would not be able to easily distinguish when a 
particular reservation starts or finishes, since this information is solely conveyed through the use 
of colour. The times listed to the left of the daily schedule, and the listings to the bottom of the 
home page would also be read aloud by the screen reader, which further reduces the simplicity 
and accessibility of this system. 
 
 
335
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

 
Figure 7.  The booking interface 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A. Packet Tracer Accessibility 
Although the developments described are in their early 
stages of implementation several significant milestones have 
been achieved. A functional and fully accessible external 
application to communicate with Packet Tracer has been 
implemented. At this point only basic functionality has been 
included it is only a matter of coding additional calls to the 
Packet Tracer APIs to further increase usability. 
Ideally, resources would be allocated to the developers of 
Packet Tracer to modify the user interface so that there is no 
longer the need for an external application. This project has 
shown that network simulators may be designed to be 
accessible to people with vision impairment without 
reducing the appeal and usability for sighted students. 
 
B. Remote Laboratory Booking System 
The accessible booking system has met its design 
specifications but still requires further development and 
refining. The achievements so far include: 
• 
The design of an equipment booking system for the 
CAVI remote laboratory. This design encompassed 
aspects of its user interfaces, system architecture, 
and user processing. 
• 
The development and implementation of the booking 
system as an accessible application that can be 
hosted on a web server. 
• 
Research into the methods of integrating the booking 
system 
into 
the 
CAVI 
remote 
laboratory 
environment. 
• 
The design, development, and implementation of 
this prototype booking system can serve to prove the 
feasibility of a complete laboratory front-end system. 
The work also demonstrates that such a system can 
be accessible to the vision impaired, and can be 
realised at an economical cost. 
The developed booking system only constitutes a core 
component of the CAVI remote laboratory’s front-end 
system. In order to refine and improve the current system, 
several courses of action can be pursued in the future. 
Firstly, the booking system should be ported to a free and 
open-source implementation. Although the development 
tools employed during the project are available without 
monetary cost, the current implementation does bias itself 
towards a Windows-based web server. This is due to the use 
of ASP.NET and C#, which are both Microsoft technologies 
[8][9]. This can be attained by converting the interface 
pages’ markup and programming logic into PHP. MySQL 
can also be used to host the booking system’s database in the 
future. Alternatively, a Linux-based web server can execute 
ASP.NET pages and C# code using the Mono platform and 
the mod_mono Apache module [10]. 
The user authorisation mechanisms should also be 
incorporated into the booking system, but a method of 
relaying generated passwords to the booking system server 
will have to be devised. User accounting functions may be of 
use. To be more precise, student users may be tracked to see 
whether they actually use the laboratory equipment at their 
chosen booking time. 
If the management console switch was to be retained 
when integrating the booking system server, then a 
customised Telnet client could be written and embedded into 
one of the system’s web interfaces. This can free the user 
from having to Telnet into the booking system server, and 
could in turn obviate the need to run a Telnet daemon on the 
server. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the 
Association for the Blind (WA) and Fundi Software whose 
financial and in kind support make the Cisco Academy for 
the Vision Impaired possible.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Murray, I and Armstrong H, Remote Laboratory Access for Students 
with Vision Impairment, The International Journal on Advances in 
Life Sciences, Vol 1, no 2-3, 2009 pp77-89 
[2] 
Vision Australia, 2007. Employment Report 2007. Vision Australia, 
Available 
http://www.visionaustralia.org/info.aspx?page=1651, 
retrieved 5 May 2011 
 
11 
 
Figure 5: The booking interface 
On the following page is a screenshot of the administration interface. 
If a user cleanses the database of any old bookings, then the status label placeholder is replaced 
E\DPHVVDJHLQGLFDWLQJWKHQXPEHURIUHFRUGVGHOHWHG7RPDLQWDLQFRQVLVWHQF\WKHLQWHUIDFH¶V
navigation link is placed at the top of the page, after the title. 
Like the booking interface, the main components of this page were placed by design. If the 
elements associated with deleting old bookings were placed at the bottom of the page, then a user 
with a screen reader would have to read through an indeterminate and possibly large amount of 
bookings before they would encounter the functionality for deleting old bookings. After purging 
 
56 
 
To make a booking, first choose a date, time, and location in the five drop-down lists near the 
bottom of the page. Then click the nearby ³Make Booking´ button. Three outcomes can result 
from this action. 
x If your booking was made successfully, then a message will appear to confirm your new 
booking. This message is printed just below the ³Click Here to Logout´ link near the top 
of the page. 
x If you chose an invalid date and time, then error messages will appear instead. 
x If your chosen date, time and location were already booked out, then a message will 
appear to tell you about this situation. The next available booking time will also be 
suggested. 
Alternatively, after choosing a date and location, you can click on the ³Find Open Timeslots For 
This Day & Pod´ button instead. As a result, a list of available booking times will be displayed 
just below the ³Click Here to Logout´ link. Note that no bookings are made through this action. 
Also be sure to select a valid date. 
Remember to logout when you have finished. 
336
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

[3] 
J. Hope, B. vonKonsky, I. Murray, L. C. Chew and B. Farrugia, A 
Cisco Education Tool Accessible to the Vision Impaired, ASSETS06, 
Portland, Oregon USA, October 23-25, 2006, pp235-236  
[4] 
Cisco. 
2010. 
Cisco 
Systems, 
available 
http://www.cisco.com/web/learning/netacad/get_involved/BecomeAn
Academy.html, retrieved 2nd July 2010 
[5] 
Armstrong, H. and Murray, I., Remote and Local Delivery of Cisco 
Education for the vision Impaired, Proceedings of ITICSE 2007, June 
23–27, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom. 
[6] 
NDG. 2010. NDG NETLAB+ Remote Lab Solutions Pricing 
Summary. 
http://www.netdevgroup.com/ordering/pricing.html 
retrieved 5 May 2011. 
[7] 
Armstrong, H., and I. Murray. Spanning the Digital Divide: A 
Remote IT Learning Environment for the Vision Impaired. Freiburg, 
Germany. IADIS Multi Conference on Computer Science and 
Information Systems, July 26-31, 2010:  
[8] 
Hanselman, S., What is ASP.NET? Streaming video. What is 
ASP.NET?: 
The 
Official 
Microsoft 
ASP.NET 
Site. 
http://www.asp.net/general/videos/what-is-asp-net retrieved 5 May 
2011 
[9] 
Burnt Jet. 2010. Burnt Jet - Glossary of Terms for Programming. 
http://burntjet.co.uk/programs/help/glossary.php, retrieved 5 May 
2011 
[10] Mono. 
2010. 
Main 
Page 
– 
Mono. 
http://www.mono-
project.com/Main_Page, retrieved 5 May 2011 
 
 
337
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

