An Architecture for Risk Analysis in Cloud
 
Paulo F. Silva1,2, Carlos B. Westphall1, Carla M. Westphall1, Mauro M. Mattos2, Daniel Ricardo dos Santos1 
 
1Networks and Management Laboratory 
Post-Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil 
{westphal, carlamw, danielricardo.santos}@inf.ufsc.br,  
 
2Development and Transfer Technology Laboratory 
Regional University of Blumenau, Blumenau, Brazil 
{paulofernando, mattos}@furb.br  
 
 
Abstract - Cloud computing offers benefits in terms of availability 
and cost, but it transfers the responsibility of information 
security management to the cloud service provider. Thus, the 
consumer looses control over the security of their information 
and services. This factor has prevented the migration to cloud 
computing in many businesses. This paper proposes a model 
where the cloud consumer can perform risk analysis on providers 
before and after contracting the service. The proposed model 
establishes the responsibilities of three actors: Consumer, 
Provider and Security Labs. The inclusion of the Security Labs 
provides more credibility to risk analysis making the results 
more consistent for the consumer. 
Keywords-cloud computing; information security; risk analysis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing brings several challenges for the 
scientific community of information security. The major 
challenges are data privacy of users, protection against external 
and internal threats, identity management, virtualization 
management, governance and regulatory compliance, Service 
Level Agreement (SLA) management, and trust gaps [1]-[4]. 
A strategy to meet the challenges of information security in 
cloud computing is based on risk analysis [5]. Several papers 
have worked on risk analysis on cloud computing [6]-[12], 
focusing on specific techniques for identifying and assessing 
risks.  
Current solutions for risk analysis in cloud computing do 
not specify the agents involved and their responsibilities during 
the implementation of risk analysis. This uncertainty creates 
deficiencies in risk analysis, as: 
• 
Deficiency in scope occurs when the selection of 
security requirements is performed by the Cloud 
Service Provider (CSP) or an agent without sufficient 
knowledge. Detrimental to their own environment, thus 
skewing the results of the risk analysis. An agent that 
is not knowledgeable enough may specify wrong or 
insufficient requirements, thus creating an incorrect 
risk analysis; 
• 
Deficiency in adhesion to Cloud Consumer (CC) 
occurs when the agent responsible for defining impacts 
ignores the technological environment and business 
nature of the CC. In this case, the specification can 
disregard the impact scenarios relevant to the CC or 
overestimate scenarios that are not relevant, thus 
creating an incorrect risk assessment; 
• 
Deficiency of reliable results occurs when the 
quantification of the probabilities and impacts is 
performed by an agent who is interested in minimizing 
the results of the risk analysis. For example, if the 
analysis is performed solely by CSP, he can soften the 
requirements 
and 
evaluation 
of 
impacts, 
thus 
generating a satisfactory result for the CC. However, 
such results are incorrect. 
The deficiencies outlined above can generate a lack of trust 
on the part of CCs in relation to risk assessments, as in current 
models where CSPs are performing their own risk analysis, 
without the participation of CCs or any other external agent. 
This paper proposes a model of shared responsibilities for 
risk analysis in cloud computing environments. The proposed 
model aims to define the agents involved in the risk analysis, 
their responsibilities, language for specifying risks and a 
protocol for communication among agents. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 
discusses related works. The proposed model is presented in 
Section 3. Section 4 discusses the results. The conclusion and 
future works are presented on Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Architectures for risk analysis in cloud computing are 
presented in many solutions.  
Hale and Gamble [7] show an architecture called 
SecAgreement which enables the management of security 
metrics between CSPs and CCs. A SLA for risk management 
in the cloud is presented by Morin et al. [8]. Ristov et al. [9] 
discusses the analysis of risk in cloud computing environments 
based on ISO 27001 and proposes a model for assessing 
security in cloud computing.  
Chen et al. [10] present an architecture that defines levels 
of security from the risk of each service offered by CSP. Zech 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

et al. [11] portray a model for security testing in cloud 
computing environments based on a risk analysis of these 
environments. Wang et al. [12] explore the risk analysis in the 
cloud using techniques based on intrusion attack-defense trees 
and graphs. 
The related works presented above discuss risk analysis of 
requirements or specific scenarios on cloud computing, but 
they do not address the definition of the agents involved and 
their interactions during the risk analysis. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed architecture defines the sharing of 
responsibilities between three agents during the risk analysis. 
Information Security Labs (ISL) is an agent that represents a 
public or private entity, which specializes in information 
security, e.g., an academic or private laboratory. The CC is an 
agent that represents the entity that is hosting their information 
assets in the cloud. The CSP is an agent that represents the 
entity being analyzed. 
The three agents defined by the proposed architecture 
divide the responsibilities of running a risk analysis, according 
to the concepts defined by ISO 27005 [5]. In this context, 
threats exploit vulnerabilities to generate impacts on 
information assets. 
A risk analysis works with many variables. The variables 
used in the proposed architecture are: (i) DE – Degree of 
Exposure, defines how the cloud environment is exposed to 
certain external or internal threat, (ii) DD – Degree of 
Disability, defines the extent to which the cloud environment is 
vulnerable to a particular security requirement, (iii) P – 
Probability, defines the probability of an incident occurrence, 
i.e., a threat exploiting a vulnerability (iv) I – Impact, defines 
the potential loss in the event of a security incident, (v) DR – 
Degree of Risk, defines the degree of risk for a given scenario 
of a security incident.  
The risk analysis of the proposed model is organized in two 
well-defined phases: risk specification and risk assessment. 
The risk specification phase defines threats, vulnerabilities 
and information assets that will compose the risk analysis. At 
this stage it is also defined how to quantify the threats, 
vulnerabilities and assets specified. 
The risk assessment stage comprises the quantification of 
the variables DE, DD and I, for threats, vulnerabilities and 
information assets, respectively. In this phase the quantification 
of variables of P and DR for each incident scenario is also 
performed (a combination of threat, vulnerability and asset 
information). 
Figure 1 illustrates the flow of interactions between 
components of the architecture and the ISL, CSP and CC 
agents in the risk specification phase. Initially each agent must 
register with their respective registry component (Fig. 1 a, b, 
c). After their registration, the ISL is responsible for identifying 
threats and vulnerabilities in cloud computing environments. 
Then, the ISL specifies how to quantify threats and 
vulnerabilities. 
The architecture provides a language for the specification 
of risk, the RDL – Risk Definition Language. This language is 
used by ISL to specify threats and vulnerabilities. The RDL is 
specified in XML and contains information such as: risk ID; 
ISL ID; threat and \ or vulnerability ID and reference to a 
WSRA – Web Service Risk Analyzer. The WSRA is a Web 
Service specified by ISL to quantify the Degree of Disability 
(DD) and Degree of Exposure (DE). 
After developing its RDLs and WSRAs, the ISL exports the 
records for the RDLs repository (Fig. 1-d) and publishes 
WSRAs. 
 
Figure 1.  Risk specification phase. 
The responsibility of the CSP on the specification phase of 
risk consists in importing RDLs and implementation of calls to 
WSRAs (Fig. 1-e). 
ISL is responsible for the correct identification of threats 
and vulnerabilities. CSP is responsible for the correct execution 
of the quantification of threats and vulnerability. The CC agent 
is responsible for the identification of information assets and 
the quantification of impact, as this is the most fitting agent to 
express the cost of an information security incident. 
In order to perform the identification of an information 
asset and quantifying an impact on this asset a CC must import 
the RDLs (Fig. 1f) and extend them including information on 
information assets and their impacts. 
The method of quantification of impacts may be static or 
dynamic. In the static method the CC determines a fixed value 
for the impact and in the dynamic method the CC specifies a 
Web Service to quantify the impact. After specifying their 
information assets and their impacts, the CC exports the 
extension to the RDL Extensions Repository (Fig. 1g). 
Figure 2 illustrates the flow of interactions between the 
components of the proposed architecture and the ISL, CSP and 
CC agents during risk assessment. 
The Risk Analysis component coordinates the interaction 
between external agents and other internal components of the 
proposed architecture. The RDL Repository and RDL 
Extensions Repository components store records of threats and 
vulnerabilities of ISLs and information assets of the CC, 
respectively. The RA Processor component is responsible for 
establishing the relationships between information assets, 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

threats and vulnerabilities, as well as performing the 
calculation of risk. 
The CC, ISL and CSP agents present the components 
Impacts Evaluation, Evaluation WSRA and CSP Proxy, 
respectively. Impacts Evaluation is a component that contains 
the Web Services for dynamic definition of impacts or tables 
for static impacts. Evaluation WSRA is a component that 
contains the Web Services assessment of threats or 
vulnerabilities identified by an ISL. CSP is a proxy component 
deployed in CSP to perform the call of the WSRAs. 
The risk assessment begins with the CC informing the CSP 
to be analyzed (Fig. 2a). Then the Risk Analysis component 
queries the RDL repository (Fig. 2b) and performs a call of the 
CSP Proxy component passing the information about each risk 
(Fig. 2c). 
 
Figure 2.  Risk assessment phase. 
Based on each RDL received, the CSP performs a call of 
the WSRA (Fig. 2d). The WSRA is run by ISL and returns the 
quantification of the threat (DE - Degree of Exposure) or 
vulnerability (DD - Degree of Disability). Then, the 
quantification of the threat or vulnerability is returned to the 
Risk Analysis component (Fig. 2c) and stored. The steps "b", 
"c" and "d" in Fig. 2 are executed for each RDL in RDL 
Repository. 
The quantification of impacts as defined by the CC starts 
after the quantification of all threats and vulnerabilities. The 
Risk Analysis component queries the RDL Extensions 
Repository (Fig. 2e) and performs a call of the Evaluation 
Impacts component for the quantification of the impact (I - 
Impact) (Fig. 2f). 
After obtaining the quantification of all impacts the Risk 
Analysis component is able to perform the calculation of the 
probability and risk. Therefore, all records showing the 
quantification of threats, vulnerabilities and impacts are sent to 
the RA Processor component (Fig. 2g). 
The RA Processor component sets the valid relationships 
between information assets, threats and vulnerabilities, and 
performs the calculation of the probability (P - Probability) and 
of the risk (DR – Degree of Risk) through the variables DD, 
DE and I previously quantified. 
After calculation of risk analysis the result is returned in 
XML for Risk Analysis component (Fig. 2g), and transferred to 
CC (Fig. 2h).  
 
Figure 3.  Risk Analysis result. 
The XML resulting from the risk analysis (Fig. 3) contains 
the ID of the CC and CSP agents, and a list of security 
requirements that were defined by ISLs. Each requirement 
contains its ID and the ID of the ISL that created it. The 
resulting XML still contains the probability (P) and the degree 
of risk (DR) which was calculated for each requirement and the 
results of variables, DE, DD and I. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
With the information from the risk analysis, the CC may 
decide to allocate or not their information assets in a particular 
CSP. 
The proposed model aims to reduce the three main 
deficiencies presented by current models of risk analysis in the 
cloud: deficiency in scope, deficiency in adhesion and 
deficiency of reliable results. 
The reduction in adhesion deficiency occurs when the 
proposed model includes the CC as a key agent in the process 
of risk analysis. The CC agent has an important role in risk 
analysis, defining information assets and quantifying impacts 
on these assets. 
The CC is the most suitable agent for the definition of 
impacts. It is the agent which best understands the relevance of 
each information asset within its area of expertise. CSP and 
ISL agents are not able to identify or quantify the impacts on 
information assets. They are not experts in the business of CC. 
The proposed model acts to reduce the deficiency in scope 
by adding the ISL agent. ISL is an agent specializing in 
information security. It is the entity best suited to define 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

security requirements, threats and vulnerabilities (specification 
of the RDLs), as well as to define how to qualify such threats 
and vulnerabilities (specification of the WSRAs). 
The proposed model acts on the deficiency of reliable 
results because in our model the CSP has more restricted 
responsibilities than in traditionally models presented by 
related works. 
Traditionally, the CSP is responsible for defining security 
requirements and the tests that are applied to evaluate the risk 
of their own environment. In this scenario, the risk assessment 
can be smoothed by CSP. The inclusion of the ISL agent 
removes responsibilities which are traditionally assigned to the 
CSP, such as the identification and quantification of threats and 
vulnerabilities, thus making the result of the risk analysis more 
reliable. 
The proposed model allows multiple ISLs defining RDLs 
and WSRAs jointly (Fig. 1). Thus, the definitions of risk can 
come from different sources and can be constantly updated in a 
dynamic and collaborative way, forming a large and 
independent base of risk definition for cloud. 
The way WSRAs are specified is also a feature that impacts 
the improvement of scope. The use of Web Services to specify 
safety requirements allows them to be platform independent. It 
also allows the use of a wide variety of techniques for 
quantifying the threats and vulnerabilities because the only 
limit is set by the programming language chosen for 
implementation of WSRA. 
Related works of risk analysis in the cloud do not consider 
the role of the CC agent on risk analysis. These works usually 
focus on the vulnerability assessment by the CSP, without 
considering the impact it will have on the vulnerability of the 
different information assets of the CC. The proposed model 
assigns 
the 
responsibilities 
of 
the 
identification 
and 
quantification of impact to the CC. Thus, the performing of risk 
analysis is shared among different agents, so the responsibility 
for quantifying the variables of risk analysis is not centered on 
a specific agent. 
The CSP is the agent that will be analyzed; therefore it is 
not able to set any of the variables of the risk analysis, as this 
could make the results of risk analysis incorrect. The role of 
CSP is only to inform the data requested by ISL, so ISL itself 
performs the quantification of each requirement of information 
security. 
A CC can perform analysis on multiple CSPs before 
deciding to purchase a cloud service. It is also possible to 
perform periodic reviews of its current provider and compare 
them with other providers in the market, choosing to change 
CSP or not. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a model of shared responsibilities for 
risk analysis in cloud computing environments. In addition to 
the traditional CC and CSP agents the model adds the ISL 
agent, which is responsible for identifying and specifying the 
security requirements. 
The model presented in this paper is an initiative to allow 
the CC to perform the risk analysis on its current or future CSP. 
Also, this risk analysis is broad, current, unbiased and reliable. 
The characteristics presented in this article aim at 
generating a more reliable risk analysis for CC, so that it can 
choose its CSP based on more solid information. 
Several papers on cloud computing indicate the lack of trust 
from CC to CSP as a relevant factor in avoiding the purchase 
of cloud computing services. A risk analysis can act to reduce 
or eliminate this suspicion and boost the acquisition of cloud 
computing services. 
The presented model performs a free and reliable risk 
analysis because the analysis is not centered in the CSP. The 
identification and quantification of threats and vulnerabilities 
are carried out collaboratively by several laboratories. Safety 
and impact on information assets are quantified by the CC. 
The risk analysis of the proposed model is broad because 
the security requirements are defined by specialized 
laboratories and the CC itself defines and quantifies their 
information assets. It is dynamic because the various ISLs can 
modify their security requirements for considering new 
vulnerabilities in future risk analysis. 
This work opens possibilities for the development of future 
research. There is a need for research on the reliability of the 
data reported between CSP and ISL during risk analysis. The 
RDL - Risk Definition Language can be further explored in 
specific jobs. Further research should be done on the inferences 
on the results of risk analysis. These inferences can help all 
stakeholders in understanding the causes of incidents and their 
solutions. Finally, there is the need to extend this work so that 
the proposed model can also suggest the controls or 
countermeasures to the CSPs. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. Srinivasan, K. Sarukesi, P. Rodrigues, M. S. Manoj, and 
P. Revathy, “State-of-the-art cloud computing security 
taxonomies: a classification of security challenges in the present 
cloud computing environment”. ICACCI '12: Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Advances in Computing, 
Communications and Informatics. August 2012. 
[2] H. Yu, N. Powell, D. Stembridge, and X. Yuan, “Cloud 
computing and security challenges”. ACM-SE '12: Proceedings 
of the 50th Annual Southeast Regional Conference. March 2012. 
[3] K. Ren, C. Wang, and Q. Wang, "Security Challenges for the 
Public Cloud," Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 69-
73, Jan.-Feb. 2012 doi: 10.1109/MIC.2012.14. 
[4] B. Grobauer, T. Walloschek, and E. Stocker, "Understanding 
Cloud Computing Vulnerabilities," Security & Privacy, IEEE , 
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 50-57, March-April 2011 doi: 10.1109/ 
MSP.2010.115. 
[5] ISO/IEC 27005:2011, Information Security Risk Management. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.iso.org. 
[6] J. Zhang, D. Sun, and D. Zhai, "A research on the indicator 
system of Cloud Computing Security Risk Assessment," 
Quality, Reliability, Risk, Maintenance, and Safety Engineering 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

(ICQR2MSE), 2012 International Conference on , pp. 121-123, 
15-18 June 2012 doi: 10.1109/ ICQR2MSE. 2012.6246200. 
[7] M. L. Hale, and R. Gamble,  "SecAgreement: Advancing 
Security Risk Calculations in Cloud Services," Services 
(SERVICES), 2012 IEEE Eighth World Congress on , pp. 133-
140, 24-29 June 2012 doi: 10.1109/ SERVICES.2012.31. 
[8] J. Morin, J. Aubert, and B. Gateau, "Towards Cloud Computing 
SLA Risk Management: Issues and Challenges," System Science 
(HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on , pp. 
5509-5514, 4-7 Jan. 2012 doi: 10.1109/ HICSS.2012.602. 
[9] S. Ristov, M. Gusev, and M. Kostoska, "A new methodology for 
security evaluation in cloud computing," MIPRO, 2012 
Proceedings of the 35th International Convention , pp. 1484-
1489, 21-25 May 2012. 
[10] J. Chen, Y, Wang, and X. Wang, "On-Demand Security 
Architecture for Cloud Computing," Computer, IEEE, vol. 45, 
no. 7, pp. 73-78, July 2012 doi: 10.1109/MC.2012.120. 
[11] P. Zech, M. Felderer, and R. Breu, "Towards a Model Based 
Security Testing Approach of Cloud Computing Environments," 
Software Security and Reliability Companion (SERE-C), 2012 
IEEE Sixth International Conference on , pp. 47-56, 20-22 June 
2012 doi: 10.1109/SERE-C.2012.11. 
[12] P. Wang, W. Lin, P. Kuo, H. Lin, and T. C. Wang, "Threat risk 
analysis for cloud security based on Attack-Defense Trees", 
Computing Technology and Information Management (ICCM), 
2012 8th International Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 106-111, 24-
26 April 2012. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

