Improving the Quality of Life of Dependent and Disabled People through Home 
Automation and Tele-assistance 
 
Carlos Rivas Costa, Miguel Gomez Carballa, Luis E. Anido Rifon, Sonia Valladares Rodriguez, Manuel J. 
Fernandez Iglesias 
Telematics Engineering Department 
University of Vigo 
Vigo, Spain 
{carlosrivas, miguelgomez, lanido, soniavr, manolo}@det.uvigo.es 
 
 
 
Abstract— Lack of mobility in certain groups of dependents 
forces them to spend a lot of time at home. In many cases, this 
limitation makes these people to stay most of the time in a 
specific room in their houses such as the bedroom or living 
room, where the only means of entertainment and information 
gathering is the TV set. Most of present-day households have a 
personal computer, but the digital divide and lack of 
adaptation produces certain rejection in this population group. 
This paper discusses a proposal that leverages the familiar TV 
set to be used as the user interface for a complete tele-
assistance system and control centre of home automation 
devices. For this, the system makes use of a Home Theatre 
Personal Computer (HTPC) connected to the TV and offers 
the features like the monitoring and remote monitoring of a 
wide range of vital signs, intelligent adaptation of services and 
interfaces according to the level and type of disability, and 
centralized control of home automation devices installed at 
home. 
Keywords— e-Health; HTPC; TV; teleassistance; home 
automation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In industrialized countries, care provision to dependent 
individuals is becoming a priority. The increase in the quality 
of life fosters an increase in life expectancy, and therefore 
their longevity [1]. As a consequence, it is a major challenge 
for industrialized countries to maintain the quality of life of 
these groups, and to adapt health policies to the new 
population demographics. 
One of the aspects that is getting special attention to 
tackle this problem is the application of new technologies 
adapted to improve the quality of life of these groups. 
Systems and platforms proliferate in the quest for novel 
technological solutions are numerous, in most cases 
providing services for the care and the improvement of the 
quality of life of these individuals [2], [3]. 
While all of these platforms have advantages and benefits 
for the target population’s everyday lives, in many cases 
users are sceptical or even reject new technological systems, 
mainly because they feel unprepared for understanding their 
behaviour, and therefore to adequately interact with them. 
This paper introduces an open source platform that 
provides a complete tele-assistance and home automation 
control system of through a simple and familiar user 
interface as the TV set. Relying on this interface allows 
target user groups, especially the elderly, to overcome their 
initial reluctance to use new technologies. TV becomes the 
user interface, and through it all interaction between the user 
and the platform takes place. 
To provide the needed interactivity on a TV-based 
platform we rely on a home theatre PC (HTPC). Thanks to 
its PC architecture, the platform has the required modularity 
and processing power to provide the services implemented. 
Besides, the PC architecture facilitates the integration of new 
communication interfaces to support the communication 
with home automation devices or devices intended to 
monitor biomedical parameters. 
Among the services offered by this platform are medical 
services, such as the monitoring of vital signs, rehabilitation 
games, educational videos providing information on a wide 
range of diseases or disabilities and videos with 
rehabilitation exercises; social services such as medication 
reminders and alarms and access to social networks like 
Facebook or Twitter; and home automation services, through 
which any home automation device may be controlled from 
the TV set. 
The heterogeneity of this proposal’s target population 
and the particular needs of individual users require paying 
special attention to user interfaces. Our platform’s user 
interfaces are automatically and transparently tailored to the 
specific needs of the individual accessing the system. To 
achieve this, the platform implements an automatic 
adaptation layer for the user interfaces and services offered, 
which simplifies the usage and control of the system by 
taking into account the particular characteristics and needs of 
the user. 
Along the rest of the paper we will discuss the most 
relevant elements of the proposed solution. Section II briefly 
introduces the general aspects of the platform. Then, Section 
III describes the medical parameter’s monitoring system, and 
Section IV discusses the home automation control system. 
Finally, we will outline the main conclusions drawn from 
this research in Section V. 
II. 
TELE-ASSISTANCE PLATFORM 
As stated above, the main objective of this proposal is to 
create a platform for tele-assistance and home automation 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

control through a familiar device as the home TV. Thus, the 
television will become the control centre of all remote 
assistance services provided, and of all home automation 
devices in the user's home. 
The use of television as a user interface minimizes the 
initial rejection to the use of new technologies by some 
groups of dependent individuals. Rendering information and 
services through a familiar and easy to use device as the TV 
set, simplifies learning and therefore access to services and 
information. For example, most users are accustomed to 
interact with the TV via the classical TV remote. Therefore, 
the TV remote no longer becomes a new device but a 
familiar one, which fosters an early adaptation to the new 
platform, and the perception of new services as extensions of 
the functionality of the TV instead of perceiving them as new 
services they have to learn to use.  
The design and architecture of the TV set is corresponds 
to a completely passive device, in which the user is a mere 
spectator of the contents displayed by the screen. To provide 
the TV with the required interaction capabilities, our 
proposal is based on an HTPC connected to the TV, which 
will provide the necessary interaction features, a high degree 
of modularity, and support for interconnecting additional 
peripheral devices, both wired and wireless. Through this 
low cost PC, users can access the full potential offered by 
state-of-the-art Internet services, applications and platforms 
just by changing the TV channel. The final system is fully 
modular and extensible, and supports the adaptation and 
integration of the functionalities offered according to the 
type and degree of dependence of final users. 
The need to adapt the platform to different user needs, 
doesn’t affect graphical interfaces. This platform goes a step 
further, and based on the ability of HTPC for integrating 
different communication protocols, we defined new adapted 
control mechanisms. The appearance on the market of 
devices that integrate gyroscopes and accelerometers that can 
detect movements, as like Nintendo’s WiiMote [5] offers 
new possibilities for motion-based user interaction. This 
remote control device can be connected to the HTPC via the 
common Bluetooth. Therefore, besides the classic control 
through push buttons, control can be performed via the 
detection of movements performed by the user. This form of 
adaptive control, allows on the one hand a reduction in the 
number of buttons required in the remote control and 
therefore in control complexity. On the other hand, users 
who have some limitations [6] in the use of conventional 
remote controls can access and interact with the platform 
through motion detection. 
The simplicity of the interconnection with external 
devices also enables the incorporation of a broad range of 
vital sign measurement devices. Besides, the HTPC’s PC 
architecture 
supports 
the 
development 
of 
specific 
communication interfaces to virtually all monitoring devices 
currently on the market. Thus, the proposed platform 
becomes an extensible system that can be easily adapted to 
incorporate new measurement and patient monitoring 
solutions, together with other systems such as smart card 
readers, home automation systems, etc. 
All data collected in the HTPC are sent over an Internet 
connection to the control centre. The platform is designed 
around a client-server Service Oriented Architecture (SOA, 
[11]). The platform makes use of distributed network 
services both to transmit and receive information. Storing 
data remotely allows users to access their accounts from any 
deployed home platform. There is no need to manually 
customize client platforms, but the platform automatically 
personalizes interfaces and services once the user is 
identified. 
Besides, having data stored remotely presents some 
advantages, but also requires special attention to protect the 
transmission of information. Many of the transmitted data 
will be of medical nature, and therefore very sensitive to the 
data protection laws in many countries (e.g., Spain's Data 
Protection Act). All sensitive data will be transmitted via an 
SSL-encrypted secure communications channel from the 
client computer and the central server. 
From the users’ point of view, the management and 
transmission of information is a completely transparent 
process. A software module based on the XBMC media 
centre [10] will be responsible for performing each of the 
required actions on behalf of the user. XBMC is licensed 
under GNU / GPL, and has been modified to add new 
functionality to the native functionality of a media centre, 
which is focused on multimedia playback and graphic event 
management.  
Among the new features are the management of the 
specific communications services developed for this 
platform. For this, we relay on the standard Extensible 
Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP), which has been 
integrated within the platform. A central messaging server 
based on OpenFire performs the routing tasks for the 
information transmitted by each of the services to their 
intended recipient. The integration of the XMPP protocol for 
the exchange of information supports the enrichment of the 
messages transmitted and their customization for each of the 
services implemented. The XMPP protocol relies on the 
exchange of XML files. These XML files follow a common 
base structure that can be easily extended with new labels to 
represent any messaging requirement. Thus, services may 
add new fields with the required information to the messages 
conveyed, where only the corresponding service is able to 
capture and understand the information transmitted. 
XMPP’s presence control support enables the platform to 
be continuously aware of the state of each user. When users 
access the system or simply change their state, an associated 
event is collected by the communications server and 
transmitted to all users or services that are authorized to 
detect changes in their status. For example, with this 
functionality a service may detect when a given user is 
accessing a specific service, and therefore it will be able to 
establish a synchronization mechanism to send the required 
information. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT OF BIOMEDICAL PARAMETERS 
Tele-monitoring care systems are among the ones most 
benefiting of technological progress. Monitoring has become 
a basic functionality in a tele-assistance platform, and many 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

state-of-the-art tele-assistance platforms include functionality 
for 
monitoring 
and 
measuring 
several 
biomedical 
parameters. 
The application of information and communication 
technologies to home monitoring provides a great capacity 
for gathering and transmitting information, which in turn 
enables a more complete and continuous monitoring of 
patient evolution, and therefore enhances the ability of health 
professionals to perform a better analysis and diagnosis of 
patients’ situations. 
 
Fig. 1: Remote blood pressure control 
 
The flexibility and extensibility provided by the HTPC 
architecture allows the integration of the vast majority of 
devices for the measurement and analysis of biomedical 
parameters in the market, and even the integration of any 
custom-made device. In our case, the HTPC serves as a 
communications gateway between measurement sensors and 
the data centre (cf. Fig. 1).  Besides, the availability of both 
wired and wireless communication interfaces facilitates the 
adaptation to almost any sensor available. 
 
A. Measuring Biomedical Parameters 
All measurements are made at patients’ premises to be 
automatically sent to the data centre through the residential 
gateway. To perform a measurement, the platform 
implements two modes, namely on-demand and remote 
warning. 
By operating on-demand, the system acts as a passive 
device where users take the initiative to carry out a particular 
action. For example, for a blood pressure measurement 
performed under this mode of operation, users will navigate 
through the service menus to select blood pressure 
monitoring. Once the sphygmomanometer takes the 
measurement, values are transmitted to the wireless 
communication gateway. The residential gateway performs 
some error checking and connects to the biomedical 
parameters’ storage server to transmit the measurement 
results. 
The transmission of the blood pressure measurement 
taken at the patient's home is performed via the SOAP 
protocol. An instantiation of a Tomcat Web server performs 
all necessary operations related to authentication and 
communication with the residential gateway. As this service 
manages personal and medical data, users have to 
authenticate at the residential gateway to access the blood 
pressure measurement service. Two authentication modes 
have been implemented respectively based on a username 
and password pair, and on a smart card. Smart card 
authentication no longer requires users to remember complex 
passwords, as authentication is performed through the 
credentials stored in the personal smart card inserted into a 
smart card reader. 
When the user inserts the smart card into the reader, the 
residential gateway reads the credentials stored in the card 
and establishes a communication through a Web Service 
with central user management server. The server will check 
the authenticity of the credentials submitted and will 
generate a session token, which will be returned to the 
residential gateway. From this moment on, this session token 
will be used for all transfers made from the patient's home to 
the medical data servers. In this case, the duration of the 
session is determined by the state of the smart card reader. If 
the reader detects the card removal or the disconnection of 
the reader, it will automatically disconnect the user and 
therefore deny any access to services handling private 
information such as biomedical parameters’ measurement 
services. 
 
 
Fig. 2: PA analysis 
 
In the remote warning mode, the platform notifies the 
user and executes the appropriate actions on the user’s 
behalf. A message on the TV screen warns the user about a 
pending measurement of some biomedical parameter. The 
user just acknowledges the message by pressing an OK 
button on the interface to run the corresponding service. 
After the measurement, the process continues in the same 
way as in the case of an on-demand measurement. 
Obviously, this operation mode is valid only for users who 
are already authenticated by the platform. 
Figure 2 below illustrates a blood pressure analysis 
performed at the patient’s premises. 
 
B. Access to remotely stored data 
All biomedical data are stored remotely in the data centre 
to be accessed by authorized medical staff. Medical staff 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

may use any Web browser to access the information of any 
of their patients (cf. Fig. 3). When doctors access the web 
platform they are prompted for a username and password. 
Once they are authenticated, a list with all their patients is 
displayed. Using this web tool, doctors may access the 
historical measurements performed by any of their patients, 
which in turn improves the diagnosis and treatment 
processes. 
 
Fig. 3: Access to patients’ information 
 
Once the data have been analysed by the medical staff, 
they may schedule new measurements or update the 
instructions given to patients. They may also schedule new 
remote-mode measurements, which will be notified to 
patients the next time they are authenticated on the platform. 
 
IV. 
HOME AUTOMATION SYSTEM 
In recent years we are experiencing and ever increasing 
impact of home automation on our lives. This is a 
particularly interesting field for dependent people, as many 
tasks they cannot perform, may be performed when assisted 
by home automation devices installed at home. A task as 
simple as turning on and off of the lights can be a very 
difficult task to be performed by a person with certain 
physical disabilities, or even impossible for a bedridden 
person. Thus, home automation has great development 
potential for these population groups. 
In many occasions, the simplicity of certain tasks when 
performed through home automation devices contrasts with 
the excessive complexity of the controls of these devices, 
and the need to have different controls to cover all brands of 
home devices installed in a home. 
Although 
we 
can 
find 
in 
the 
market 
several 
communication protocols and control systems for home 
automation, manufacturers use to provide their own custom 
solutions, so that the integration in a single installation of 
devices from different manufacturers becomes a difficult 
task in many cases. To overcome this situation, the platform 
discussed in this paper acts as a middleware for different 
home automation systems installed in the user's home. For 
this, the residential gateway integrates into a single device all 
the communication protocols needed to interact with 
products from different vendors. As discussed above, the use 
of a HTPC as the hardware platform provides the required 
flexibility to integrate all those different wired and wireless 
communication interfaces (Fig. 4). 
 
Fig. 4: Home automation architecture 
 
By selecting the appropriate interface, information can be 
routed to each specific home automation device, and the TV 
set becomes the control centre of the complete home 
automation infrastructure. Users may send commands to 
perform the desired actions through their customized 
graphical user interface, which will be automatically and 
transparently routed to one or several physical devices. We 
describe below the operating mode of a particular home 
automation protocol, namely the Busing protocol. This 
example can be extrapolated to other home automation 
protocols installed at the user's premises. 
A. Busing Protocol 
This is a proprietary home automation communication 
protocol. The Busing system uses a four-wire bus for 
transmitting information among devices. Each home 
automation device is connected to the bus, having a unique 
identification number. Commands are transmitted to a data 
bus together with a unique identifier representing the 
destination device. Then, the destination device will capture 
the transmitted information and execute the action associated 
with the command. All information sent to the bus is packed 
into data frames, and these frames are transmitted by a 
specific device called ETHBus. This device has an Ethernet 
interface and a proprietary Busing interface, so the ETHBus 
behaves as an Ethernet-Busing bridge. 
The proposed tele-assistance and home automation 
platform connects to the home automation network through 
an ETHBus connected to the HTPC’s Ethernet interface. 
Users’ TV screen interactions are translated into Busing 
commands to the appropriate devices and sent to the home 
automation bus for execution. When an order is executed or 
the home automation system detects a change (e.g., the 
presence of a person in a surveyed area) it sends that 
information to the bus to be detected by the ETHBUS, which 
will convert the data package into an Ethernet frame to be 
sent to the HTPC. Eventually, this information will be 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

conditioned to be presented to the user as a notification or 
alarm displayed on the TV screen.  
The control of electrical and electronic devices is 
performed via a 6E6S device. This device consists of 6 on-
off relays. Each of these relays may control an electric 
appliance, and they may be enabled and disabled manually 
or automatically.  
Manual activation is performed through each of the six 
input gates in the 6E6S device. These terminals may be 
connected to on-off buttons or switches that the user may 
operate manually. Automatic activation and deactivation is 
performed through the transmission of Busing commands as 
discussed above. 
Although this device may present a very basic 
functionality, it is one of the most used devices in present-
day smart home installations. Simple on/off actuations may 
cover a broad range of electrical and mechanical operations, 
such as opening and closing motorized window blinds, 
switching lights on an off, opening and closing windows, 
doors and gates, etc. 
In addition to sending commands to smart home 
infrastructure, the platform also has the ability to receive and 
process data sent by other devices such as motion detectors. 
These devices are placed in the user's home to detect 
movement in any room. They use infrared beams to detect 
notify presence in their range of detection, and when the 
remote assistance platform detects motion in any of the areas 
of the house where motion detection is installed, a 
notification is displayed on the TV. While these devices are 
typically used for motion detection in certain areas of the 
house, such as the front door, they may also be combined 
with advanced algorithms to detect specific user behaviours, 
and therefore to detect abnormal situations that may occur at 
home, or even the lack of activity. 
As with other platform services, user access to home 
automation control requires authentication. Once the user has 
been identified, the user interface displays all installed 
automated systems in the house making transparent their 
types and models. Thus, home automation systems are 
integrated and centralized at the TV set (cf. Fig. 4). 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Industrialized countries are facing demanding situations 
in relation to care providing to dependent and disabled 
individuals. Population ageing and the inversion of the 
population pyramid are leading many governments to rethink 
their current welfare systems. More and more resources are 
needed to fund the required welfare policies aimed at these 
groups of people. This is one of the reasons why tele-
assistance and the introduction of ICT at home are seen as a 
promising way to tackle a problem that is relevant at a 
greater or lesser extent to all industrialized countries. 
This paper proposes a low cost and open I tele-assistance 
solution based on the HTPC hardware architecture connected 
to the TV. This approach allows an easy integration of novel 
tele-assistance system and the centralization in a single 
device of all home control and remote assistance systems 
installed in the user's premises. 
The fact that a large number of dependent and disabled 
people spend much of their time alone at home makes the 
TV set to become their only method of entertainment, and 
therefore the only option to interact with other people. The 
ubiquity of the TV leads us to think about this appliance as a 
perfect medium to access not only to conventional television 
programmes, but also to a service portfolio that may 
dramatically increase their life quality. 
Our system aims to facilitate typical tele-assistance 
services such as the monitoring of different biometrical 
parameters, and the user-friendly control of home 
automation 
devices. 
The 
possibility 
to 
integrate 
a 
comprehensive home automation system in a totally 
transparent way makes this to be seen as a simple and easy to 
use solution, avoiding the initial rejection attitude common 
in certain groups of dependent people, especially our elders. 
Using the TV as the unifying centre for ICT services as 
well as reducing the initial rejection to new technologies, 
also influences deployment costs. Virtually all households in 
industrialized countries have at least one TV set, so the 
acquisition costs will be dramatically reduced. On the other 
hand, the HTPC’s modular architecture and its peripheral 
interconnection capabilities make this platform easy to 
extend and adaptable to the needs of each individual user. 
Finally, we would like to note that the open nature of 
most of this platform’s components facilitates the integration 
of third-party developments to increase the functionalities 
provided. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed under the support of: (1) 
the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the 
Galician Regional Government under projects “Improving 
the quality of life of people in situations of dependency or 
disabilities through the implementation of Home–Telecare 
system” (10SEC012E) and "RedPlir" (CN 2012/319); and 
(2) the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under 
grant “Methodologies, Architectures and Standards for 
adaptive 
and 
accessible 
e-learning 
(Adapt2Learn)” 
(TIN2010-21735-C02-01). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
(2010) World Health Organization. [Online] Available: http://who.int 
[retrieved: 11, 2012]. 
[2] 
O. Onyimadu, F. Harding, J Briggs,”Designing a telecare product for 
eledery”, 5th International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare, Newbury , May 2011, pp. 336 – 339 
[3] 
(2012) 
Philips 
Motiva 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://www.healthcare.philips.com/es_es/products/telehealth/Products
/motiva.wpd [retrieved: 11, 2012] 
[4] 
A. Tesanovic, G.Manev, M. Pechenizkiy, E. Vasilyeva, "eHealth 
personalization in the next generation RPM systems", 2009 22nd 
IEEE International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical 
Systems, pp.1-8, Aug. 2009, doi:10.1109/CBMS.2009.5255383 
[5] 
F. Iacopetti, L. Fanucci, R. Roncella, D. Giusti, A. Scebba, "Game 
Console Controller Interface for People with Disability", International 
Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems, 
2008, pp.757-762 
[6] 
Y.-J. Chen, "Using real-time acceleration data for exercise movement 
training with a decision tree approach", 2009 International 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Conference 
on 
Machine 
Learning 
and 
Cybernetics", 
doi:10.1109/ICMLC.2009.5212632, July 2009, pp. 3005-3010. 
[7] 
(2012) OpenTV [Online] Available: http://opentv.com/ [retrieved: 11, 
2012] 
[8] 
(2012) MHP [Online] Available www.mhp.org/ [retrieved: 11, 2012] 
[9] 
E.J.W. Van Someren, "Actigraphic monitoring of movement and rest-
activity rhythms in aging, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's 
disease", IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 5, 
pp.394-398, doi:10.1109/86.650297 
[10] (2012)The XBMC website. [Online]. Available:http://www.xbmc.org 
[retrieved: 11, 2012] 
[11] L. White et al., “Understanding interoperable systems: Challenges for 
de maintance of SOA applications”, Conference on system science 
(HICSS), Hawaii, january 2012, pp. 2199 – 2206 
[12] B. Xuefu, and Y. Ming, “Design and implementation of web instant 
Message System based on XMPP”, 3rd International conference on 
software engineering and service science (ICSESS), Dalian, June 
2012, pp. 83-84. 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

