Technical Points in the Implementation of the Support System for Operation and 
Management of DACS System 
 
 
Kazuya Odagiri 
Yamaguchi University 
Yamaguchi, Japan 
odagiri@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp 
kazuodagiri@yahoo.co.jp 
 
Shogo Shimizu 
Gakushuin Women's College 
Tokyo, Japan 
shogo.shimizu@gakushuin.ac.jp 
 
Naohiro Ishii 
Aichi Institute of Technology 
Aichi, Japan 
nishii@acm.org 
 
Abstract—As the work for managing a whole LAN effectively 
without limited purposes, there are works of Policy-based 
network management (PBNM). The existing PBNM is defined 
in some organizations including the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF). However, it has structural problems. For 
example, it is necessary to add and exchange the mechanism 
called the PEP located between network servers and clients. 
That is, it is needed to exchange the network system 
configuration. To improve the problems, we have been 
studying next generation PBNM called Destination Addressing 
Control system (DACS) Scheme. The DACS Scheme controls 
the whole LAN through communication control by the client 
software as PEP which locates on a client computer. We have 
been directly studied the essential part to realize the DACS 
Scheme. That is, we have not been examined the support 
system for operation and management of DACS system. In this 
paper, technical points in the implementation of the support 
system are examined.  
Keywords-policy-based network manageme; support system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In enterprise computer networks, because network 
policies and security policies are well defined and are 
observed forcibly, network management is relatively easy. 
On the other hand, in campus-like computer networks, 
network management is quite complicated. Because a 
computer management section manages only a part of the 
campus network, there are some user support problems. For 
example, when mail boxes on one server are divided and 
relocated to some different servers by a system change, it is 
necessary for some users to update client’s setups. Most of 
users in campus computer networks are students. Because 
students do not check frequently their e-mail, it is hard work 
to make all students aware of necessity of settings update. 
As the result, because some users inquire for the cause that 
they cannot connect to a mail server, a system administrator 
must cope with it. For the system administrator, individual 
user support is a stiff part of the network management.  
As the works on network management, various kind of 
works such as the server load distribution technology 
[1][2][3], VPN (Virtual Private Network) [4][5] are listed. 
However, these works are performed forward the different 
goal, and don’t have the purpose of effective management 
for a whole LAN. As the work for managing the whole 
network, works on Opengate [6][7] are listed. This is a kind 
of 
Policy-based 
network 
management 
(PBNM). 
Frameworks of PBNM are defined in various organizations 
such as Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and 
Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF). However, the 
PBNM has some structural problems. First problem is 
communication concentration on a communication control 
mechanism called PEP (Policy Enforcement Point). Second 
problem is the necessity of the network updating at the time 
of introducing the PBNM into LAN. Moreover, third 
problem is that it is often difficult for the PBNM to improve 
the user support problems in campus-like computer 
networks explained above. 
To improve these problems of the PBNM, we showed a 
next generation PBNM. We call it Destination Addressing 
Control system (DACS) Scheme. As the works of DACS 
Scheme, we showed the basic principle of the DACS 
Scheme 20], and security function [21]. In addition, we 
showed new user support realized by use of the DACS 
Scheme [22]. Then, the DACS system to realize the DACS 
Scheme was implemented [23]. We have been directly 
studied the essential part to realize the DACS Scheme, and 
have not been examined the support system for operation 
and management of DACS system. In this paper, technical 
points in the implementation of the support system are 
examined. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

shows past works of the network management including the 
existing PBNM. In Section III, we describe the mechanisms 
and effectiveness of the DACS scheme. In Section IV, 
technical points in the implementation of the support system 
for operation and management of DACS system are shown.  
II. 
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORKS 
As the works on existing network management, various 
works such as authentication [24][25], the server load 
distribution technology [1][2][3], VPN [4][5] and quarantine 
network [26] are listed. However, these works are 
performed forward the different goal. Realization of 
effective management for a whole LAN is not a purpose. 
These works are performed for the specific purpose, and 
don’t have the purpose of managing a whole LAN. As the 
work for managing a whole LAN, there is the work of 
Opengate [6][7], which controls Web accesses from LAN to 
internet. This work is a kind of PBNM. In PBNM, the whole 
LAN is managed through various kinds of communication 
controls such as access control and Quality of Service 
(QOS) control, communication encryption. The principle of 
PBNM is described in Figure 1. To be concrete, in the point 
called PDP (Policy Decision Point), judgment such as 
permission and non-permission for communication pass is 
performed based on policy information. The judgment is 
notified and transmitted to the point called the PEP which is 
the mechanism such as VPN mechanism, router and firewall 
located on the network path between servers and clients. 
Based on that judgment, the control is added for the 
communication that is going to pass by. 
 
 
Figure 1. PBNM in IETF 
 
The PBNM’s standardization is performed in various 
organizations. In IETF, a framework of PBNM [8] was 
established. Standards about each element constituting this 
framework are as follows. As a model of control 
information stored in the server storing control information 
called Policy Repository, Policy Core Information model 
(PCIM) [9] was established. After it, PCMIe [10] was 
established by extending the PCIM. To describing them in 
the form of Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), 
Policy Core LDAP Schema (PCLS) [11] was established. 
As a protocol to distribute the control information stored in 
Policy Repository or decision result from the PDP to the 
PEP, Common Open Policy Service (COPS) [12] was 
established. Based on the difference in distribution method, 
COPS usage for RSVP (COPS-RSVP) [13] and COPS 
usage for Provisioning (COPS-PR) [14] were established. 
RSVP is an abbreviation for Resource Reservation Protocol. 
The COPS-RSVP is the method as follows. After the PEP 
having detected the communication from a user or a client 
application, the PDP makes a judgmental decision for it. 
The decision is sent and applied to the PEP, and the PEP 
adds the control to it. The COPS-PR is the method of 
distributing the control information or decision result to the 
PEP before accepting the communication.  
Next, in DMTF, a framework of PBNM called 
Directory-enabled Network (DEN) was established. Like the 
IETF framework, control information is stored in the server 
storing control information called Policy Server which is 
built by using the directory service such as LDAP [15], and 
is distributed to network servers and networking equipment 
such as switch and router. As the result, the whole LAN is 
managed. The model of control information used in DEN is 
called Common Information Model (CIM), the schema of 
the CIM（CIM Schema Version 2.30.0）[17] was opened. 
The CIM was extended to support the DEN [16], and was 
incorporated in the framework of DEN. 
In addition, Resource and Admission Control Subsystem 
(RACS) [18] was established in Telecoms and Internet 
converged Services and protocols for Advanced Network 
(TISPAN) of European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI), and Resource and Admission Control 
Functions (RACF) [19] was established in International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T). 
However, all the frameworks explained above are based 
on the principle shown in Figure 1. As problems of these 
frameworks, two points are presented as follows. 
 
(1) Communications sent 
from 
many clients are 
controlled by the PEP located on the network path. 
Processing load on the PEP becomes very heavy. 
(2)  The PEP needs to be located between network servers 
and clients. Depending on the network system 
configuration, updating for adding the PEP is needed. 
 
To improve these problems of the PBNM, we have been 
proposed a next generation PBNM called the DACS Scheme. 
However, the DACS Scheme has some troublesome points 
in doing operation and management practically. The points 
are described as follows. 
 
(Point 1)  
Because the tool which easily performs registration and 
deletion of DACS rules does not exist, it is necessary for the 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

network administrator to register it with a database using an 
SQL language directly. 
(Point 2)  
When the network administrator grasps the IP address of 
the client which the user who logged in uses, it is necessary 
to refer to the table with the information in the direct 
database. 
(Point3) 
The tool to easily send a message to the client-side does 
not exist. Though the possibility of sending the message was 
confirmed by the functional experiment [22], the tool which 
each network administrator can use was not implemented.  
III. 
EXISTING DACS SCHEME 
A. Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme 
 
 
Figure 2.  Basic Principle of the DACS Scheme 
 
Figure 2 shows the basic principle of the network services 
by the DACS Scheme. At the timing of the (a) or (b) as 
shown in the following, the DACS rules (rules defined by the 
user unit) are distributed from the DACS Server to the 
DACS Client. 
(a) At the time of a user logging in the client. 
(b) At the time of a delivery indication from the system 
     administrator. 
According to the distributed DACS rules, the DACS Client 
performs (1) or (2) operation as shown in the following. 
Then, communication control of the client is performed for 
every login user. 
(1) Destination information on IP Packet, which is sent 
from application program, is changed. 
(2) IP Packet from the client, which is sent from the 
application program to the outside of the client, is 
blocked. 
An example of the case (1) is shown in Figure 2. In Figure 
2, the system administrator can distribute a communication 
of the login user to the specified server among servers A, B 
or C. Moreover, the case (2) is described. For example, when 
the system administrator wants to forbid an user to use MUA 
(Mail User Agent), it will be performed by blocking IP 
Packet with the specific destination information. 
In order to realize the DACS Scheme, the operation is 
done by a DACS Protocol as shown in Figure 3. As shown 
by (1) in Figure 3, the distribution of the DACS rules is 
performed on communication between the DACS Server 
and the DACS Client, which is arranged at the application 
layer. The application of the DACS rules to the DACS 
Control is shown by (2) in Figure 3. The steady 
communication control, such as a modification of the 
destination information or the communication blocking is 
performed at the network layer as shown by (3) in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Layer Setting of the DACS Scheme 
B. Communication Control on Client 
The communication control on every user was given. 
However, it may be better to perform communication control 
on every client instead of every user. For example, it is the 
case where many and unspecified users use a computer room, 
which is controlled. In this section, the method of 
communication control on every client is described, and the 
coexistence method with the communication control on 
every user is considered. 
 
Figure 4. Creating the DACS rules on the DACS Server 
 
When a user logs in to a client, the IP address of the 
client is transmitted to the DACS Server from the DACS 
Client. Then, if the DACS rules corresponding to IP address, 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

is registered into the DACS Server side, it is transmitted to 
the DACS Client. Then, communication control for every 
client can be realized by applying to the DACS Control. In 
this case, it is a premise that a client uses a fixed IP address. 
However, when using DHCP service, it is possible to carry 
out the same control to all the clients linked to the whole 
network or its subnetwork for example. 
When using communication control on every user and 
every client, communication control may conflict. In that 
case, a priority needs to be given. The judgment is performed 
in the DACS Server side as shown in Figure 4. Although not 
necessarily stipulated, the network policy or security policy 
exists in the organization such as a university (1). The 
priority is decided according to the policy (2). In (a), priority 
is given for the user's rule to control communication by the 
user unit. In (b), priority is given for the client's rule to 
control communication by the client unit. In (c), the user's 
rule is the same as the client's rule. As the result of 
comparing the conflict rules, one rule is determined 
respectively.  Those rules and other rules not overlapping are 
gathered, and the DACS rules are created (3). The DACS 
rules are transmitted to the DACS Client. In the DACS 
Client side, the DACS rules are applied to the DACS Control. 
The difference between the user's rule and the client's rule is 
not distinguished. 
 
C. Security Mechanism of the DACS Scheme 
 
 
Figure 5. Extend Security Function 
 
In Figure 5, the DACS rules are sent from the DACS 
Server to the DACS Client (a). By the DACS Client that 
accepts the DACS rules, the DACS rules are applied to the 
DACS Control in the DACS Client (b). The movement to 
here is same as the existing DACS Scheme. After functional 
extension, as shown in (c) of Figure 5 the DACS rules are 
applied to the DACS SControl. Communication control is 
performed in the DACS SControl with the function of SSH. 
By adding the extended function, selecting the tunneled and 
encrypted or not tunneled and encrypted communication is 
done for each network service. When communication is not 
tunneled and encrypted, communication control is performed 
by the DACS Control as shown in (d) of Figure 5. When 
communication is tunneled and encrypted, destination of the 
communication is changed by the DACS Control to localhost 
as shown in (e) of Figure 5. After that, by the DACS STCL, 
the communicating server is changed to the network server 
and tunneled and encrypted communication is sent as shown 
in (g) of Figure 5, which are realized by the function of port 
forwarding of SSH. In the DACS rules applied to the DACS 
Control, localhost is indicated as the destination of 
communication.  
D. Specifications of DACS System 
Technical points for implementation of the DACS 
Scheme are described form (a) to (c). 
  
(a) Communications between the DACS Server and the 
DACS Client 
The Communications between the DACS Server and the 
DACS Client such as sending and accepting the DACS rules 
were realized by the communications through a socket in 
TCP/IP. 
(b) Communication control on the client computer 
In this study, the DACS Client working on windows XP 
was implemented. The functions of the destination NAT and 
packet filtering required as a part of the DACS Control were 
implemented by using Winsock2 SPI of Microsoft. As it is 
described in Figure 6 Winsock2 SPI is a new layer which is 
created between the existing Winsock API and the layer 
under it.  
 
Figure 6. Winsock2 SPI 
 
To be concrete, though connect() is performed when the 
client application accesses the server, the processes of 
destination NAT for the communication from the client 
application are built in WSP connect() which is called in 
connect(). In addition, though accept() is performed on the 
client when the communication to the client is accepted, the 
function of packet filtering is implemented in WSPaccept() 
which is called in accept(). 
 
(c) VPN communication 
The client software for the VPN communication, that is, 
the DACS SControl was realized by using the port forward 
function of the Putty. When the communication from the 
client is supported by the VPN communication, first, the 
destination of this communication is changed to the 
localhost. After that, the putty accepts the communication, 
and sends the VPN communication by using the port 
forward function. 
IV. 
TECHNICAL POINTS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT 
In this section, to overcome three troublesome points, the 
support system for operation and management in DACS 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

system is shown. The functions the support system must 
have are as follows. 
 
(1) Function the network administrator register, change and 
delete the DACS rules to DACS Server. 
 
Figure 7. Function of DACS rule’s registration 
 
Figure 7 shows the function of registering the DACS 
rules. Process (1) is the request process of User 
Authentication. After the network administrator inputs a 
user name and pass word into the demand interface of them, 
they are sent to the program on the Web Server which is 
implemented in this research. After it, the inquiry 
processing for user authentication is performed between the 
program and a LDAP Server which has the information of 
user account (2). After the authentication is authenticated, 
registration interface is displayed on the Web Browser on 
the client (3). When the system administrator inputs the 
registration information for DACS rules, it is sent to the 
data base of the DACS Server through the program on the 
Web Server. In other functions of changing and deleting the 
DACS rules, the processes from (a) to (c) in Figure 7 are 
same processes. Only the process (4) replaces changing 
processing or deleting processing. 
The reason of implementation based on http (or https) 
protocol is why the DASC system will be extended to the 
direction of Internet management. Therefore, the Web 
system is more convenient than C/S system. 
 
(2) Function to grasp the correspondence relationship of 
the user name that logged in the client and the IP 
address of it 
 
Figure 8. Function of extracting the correspondence relationship of 
user name and IP address 
Figure 8 shows the function of extracting the 
correspondence relationship of the user name that logged in 
the client and the IP address of it. Process (1) and process 
(2) are same as those in Figure 7. After the authentication is 
authenticated, user interface for inputting extraction 
conditions are displayed on the Web Browser on the client 
(3). When the system administrator inputs the extraction 
conditions, it is sent to the program on the Web Server. The 
program performs an inquiry on the table which stores the 
user name and IP address. The correspondence relationship 
records of user name and IP address are extracted and 
displayed on the Web Browser through the program on the 
Web Server. 
(3) Function that a system administrator transmits a 
message to a client-side 
Figure 9 sows the function of sending a message to the 
client side. Process (1) and process (2) are same as those in 
Figure 7. After the authentication is authenticated, the lists 
of the user name that logged in the client and the IP address 
are acquired (3). Based on the lists, the user interface for 
sending a message to the client side is displayed on the Web 
Browser on the client. The user interface has the function of 
selecting destination users or clients, and the function of 
inputting the message sentences. After the network 
administrator selects and inputs them, a request of sending 
the message is sent to the program on the Web Server. The 
message is sent through the program, and displayed on the 
Web Browser at the client side.  
 
Figure 9. Function of sending a message to the client side 
 
As a first point, authentication processes are needed to be 
implemented by use of encrypted communication based on 
https protocol and public key infrastructure (PKI). To be 
concrete, processes of (1)(3)(4) in Figure 7 and those of 
(1)(3)(4)(5) in Figure 8, those of (1)(4)(5) in Figure 9 need 
to be encrypted. Next, as means of the security measures of 
Web Server, access control by client authentication needs to 
be adapted. Client authentication is a method of access 
control on the Web Server that is realized by using the 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

private key which a system administrator holds. Therefore, 
security level becomes higher than simple authentication 
method using user name and password.  
This is because it is necessary for future extensibility of 
the DACS system to be considered. The DACS system is 
going to be expanded to operate on the Internet. Therefore, 
implementation using that is used https and PKI on the 
Internet normally, is necessary.  In addition, LDAP server is 
adapted as an authentication server. Because it is used on 
the Windows Server and Unix/Linux Server normally, it is 
adopted in many organizations. To be concrete, Active 
Directory is used on a Windows server, OpenLDAP is used 
on UNIX/Linux servers.  
Then, when a Web Server and the LDAP server are 
located on the different server machine, process (2) in 
Figure 7,8 and 9 need to be  also encrypted. Similarly, when 
a Web Server and the LDAP server are located on the 
different server machine, communication processes between 
the Web Server and a DACS Server need to be also 
encrypted.  Then, as a Certificate Authority (CA) which is 
used for secure and certain key management, the CA in the 
high-integrity organization needs to be selected. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The DACS system is for the realization of the effective 
network management based on the DACS Scheme which is 
one of the policy-based network management schemes. In 
this 
paper, 
we 
showed 
technical 
points 
in 
the 
implementation of the support system for operation and 
management of the DACS system. To be concrete, we 
showed three problem of the DACS Scheme on operation 
and 
management, 
and 
technical 
points 
in 
the 
implementation of the functions. Because the DASC scheme 
will be extended into the Internet management system, these 
functions are realized a web-based application based on http 
(or https) protocol to meet it. As a near future work, 
implementation of the support system proposed in this paper 
will be performed. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S.K. Das, D.J. Harvey, and  R. Biswas,”Parallel processing of 
adaptive meshes with load balancing,” IEEE Tran.on Parallel and 
Distributed Systems, vol. 12, No. 12, pp. 1269-1280, Dec 2002. 
[2] M.E. Soklic,“Simulation of load balancing algorithms: a comparative 
study,” ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, vol. 34, No. 4, pp. 138-141, Dec 
2002. 
[3]  J. Aweya, M. Ouellette, D.Y. Montuno, B. Doray, and K.  
Felske,”An adaptive load balancing scheme for web servers,” Int.,J.of 
Network Management., vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 3-39, Jan/Feb 2002. 
[4] C. Metz, "The latest in virtual private networks: part I," IEEE Internet 
Computing, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 87–91, 2003. 
[5] C. Metz, "The latest in VPNs: part II," IEEE Internet Computing, Vol. 
8, No. 3, pp. 60–65, 2004. 
[6] Y. Watanabe, K. Watanabe, E. Hirofumi, and S. Tadaki,"A User 
Authentication Gateway System with Simple User Interface, Low 
Administration Cost and Wide Applicability," IPSJ Journal，Vol. 42，
No. 12,  pp. 2802-2809, 2001. 
[7]  S. 
Tadaki, 
E. 
Hirofumi, 
K. 
Watanabe, 
and 
Y. 
Watanabe,"Implementation and Operation of Large Scale Network 
for User' Mobile Computer by Opengate," IPSJ Journal ,Vol. 46, No. 
4 pp. 922-929, 2005. 
[8] R.Yavatkar, D. Pendarakis, and R. Guerin, "A Framework for Policy-
based Admission Control", IETF RFC 2753, 2000.  
[9] B. Moore, E. Ellesson, J. Strassner, and A. Westerinen, "Policy Core 
Information Model -- Version 1 Specification", IETF RFC 3060, 
2001.  
[10]  B. Moore.,"Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) Extensions", 
IETF 3460, 2003.                                     
[11] J. Strassner, B. Moore, R. Moats, and E. Ellesson, " Policy Core 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) Schema", IETF RFC 
3703, 2004.    
[12] D. Durham, Ed., J. Boyle, R. Cohen, S. Herzog, R. Rajan, and A. 
Sastry,"The COPS (Common Open Policy Service) Protocol", IETF 
RFC 2748, 2000.    
[13] S . Herzog, Ed., J. Boyle, R. Cohen, D. Durham, R. Rajan, and A. 
Sastry,"COPS usage for RSVP", IETF RFC 2749, 2000.                               
[14] K. Chan et al.,"COPS Usage for Policy Provisioning (COPS-PR)", 
IETF RFC 3084, 2001.        
[15] CIM Core Model V2.5 LDAP Mapping Specification, 2002.                        
[16] M. Wahl, T. Howes, and S. Kille,"Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (v3)", IETF RFC 2251, 1997.    
[17] CIM Schema: Version 2.30.0, 2011.                                           
[18]  ETSI ES 282 003: Telecoms and Internet converged Services and 
protocols for Advanced Network (TISPAN); Resource and 
Admission Control Subsystem (RACS); Functional Architecture, 
June 2006. 
[19]  ETSI ETSI ES 283 026: Telecommunications and Internet 
Converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); Resource and Admission Control; Protocol for QoS 
reservation information exchange between the Service Policy 
Decision Function (SPDF) and the Access-Resource and Admission 
Control Function (A-RACF) in the Resource and Protocol specifica-
tion", April 2006. 
[20]  K. Odagiri，R. Yaegashi，M. Tadauchi，and N. Ishii, ”Efficient 
Network Management System with DACS Scheme : Management 
with communication control,” Int. J. of Computer Science and 
Network Security, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 30-36, January 2006. 
[21]  K. Odagiri，R. Yaegashi，M. Tadauchi，and N. Ishii, “Secure 
DACS Scheme, ”Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 
Elsevier, Vol. 31, Issue 4, pp. 851-861, Nov 2008. 
[22]  K. Odagiri，R. Yaegashi，M. Tadauchi，and N. Ishii, “New User 
Support in the University Network with DACS Scheme,” Int. J. of 
Interactive Technology and Smart Education.  
[23]  K. Odagiri, S. Shimizu, R. Yaegashi, M. Takizawa, and N. Ishii, 
"DACS System Implementation Method to Realize the Next 
Generation Policy-based Network Management Scheme," Proc. of Int. 
Conf. on Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
(AINA20010), Perth, Australia,  Japan, IEEE Computer Society,  pp. 
348-354, May 2010. 
[24] K. Wakayama, Y. Decchi, J. Leng, and A. Iwata, “A Remote User 
Authentication Method Using Fingerprint Matching,” IPSJ Journal, 
Vol. 44, No. 2, pp. 401-404, 2003. 
[25] Seno, Y. Koui, T. Sadakane, N. Nakayama, Y. Baba, and T. Shikama, 
“A Network Authentication System by Multiple Biometrics,” IPSJ 
Journal, Vol. 44, No. 4, pp. 1111-1120, 2000. 
[26] Trusted Computing Group, TNC Architecture for Interoperability 
Version 1.4, Revision 4, 2009. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

