A Distributed Cooperative Trust Based Intrusion 
Detection Framework for MANETs 
 
Sureyya Mutlu 
Computer Engineering Department 
Turkish Air Force Academy 
Istanbul, Turkey 
s.mutlu@hho.edu.tr 
Guray Yilmaz 
Computer Engineering Department 
Turkish Air Force Academy 
Istanbul, Turkey 
g.yilmaz@hho.edu.tr 
 
 
Abstract— Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is a collection of 
nodes, which form an infastructureless topology. There is no 
central access point or centralized management. For their 
nature, MANETs present a number of unique problems for 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). This paper introduces an 
intrusion detection framework for MANETs, which is based on 
trust relationship. In our proposed framework, intrusion 
detection system relies on local and global determination of 
attacks within network and carried out in a distributed fashion 
with cooperation among nodes. Trust in this manner is an 
important issue. The nodes watch suspicious activities of 
neighboring nodes. An intrusion detection alert message is 
disseminated throughout the network to report the anomaly. 
Reputation of intrusion detection alert messages is used for 
trust assessment. The proposed framework aims to utilize a 
distributed and cooperative trust based intrusion detection 
system to cope with the disadvantages drawn from mobility of 
nodes and the probability of selfishness, which are unique to 
MANETs.   
Keywords— Mobile Ad Hoc Networks; Trust Management; 
Intrusion Detection Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile Ad Hoc networks (MANETs) have received 
considerable attention in recent years. A mobile ad hoc 
network is a collection of autonomous nodes, which form an 
infastructureless 
topology. 
The 
network 
topology 
dynamically changes as nodes join and move out of the 
network. There is no central access point or centralized 
management. Routing and other network operations are 
carried out by individual nodes. Each node acts as a wireless 
router and routes packets to neighbor nodes to reach intended 
destination. Therefore, ad hoc networking has been proven to 
be a promising solution to increase the radio coverage of 
broadband wireless systems in an infastructureless fashion. 
MANETs are ideally suited for applications where such 
infrastructure is either unavailable or unreliable. Typical 
applications include military communication networks in 
battlefields, emergency rescue operations and environmental 
monitoring [1]. 
The wireless characteristics of transmission medium 
imply limited bandwidth and high error rate in radio 
transmission. Thus, the key point in designing a protocol for 
MANETS is the effective use of bandwidth. On the other 
hand, mostly, MANETs are formed of battery-powered 
devices such as laptops, PDAs and so on in which power 
consumption 
is 
critically 
important. 
Moreover, 
the 
availability of an individual node cannot be assured and 
therefore, services cannot rely on a central entity and must be 
provided in a distributed and adaptive manner [2]. MANETs 
need well-organized distributed algorithms to determine 
network organization, link scheduling, and routing.  
Because network topology can change at any point of 
time, conventional routing will not work in MANETs. Ad 
hoc routing protocols can be classified into two types; 
proactive and reactive. In proactive protocols nodes in a 
wireless ad hoc network keep track of routes to all possible 
destinations. The route is identified in advance. In case of a 
topology change, this modification needs to be disseminated 
throughout the entire network. On the other hand, reactive 
protocols will figure out the routes when required by the 
source node, as needed. When a node needs to send packets 
to several destinations but has no route information, it will 
start a route detection process within the network. Routing 
protocols in ad hoc networks need to deal with the mobility 
of nodes and constraints in power and bandwidth [3].  
Due to their nature, MANETs are more vulnerable to 
security attacks than wired networks. Security in wireless ad 
hoc networks is principally difficult to maintain, particularly 
because of the limited physical protection of each individual 
node, the irregular characteristics of connectivity, the lack of 
certification 
authority, 
centralized 
monitoring 
or 
management. Unlike wired networks where an adversary 
must gain physical access to the network or pass through 
several lines of defense at firewalls and gateways, attacks on 
a wireless network can come from all directions and target at 
any node. That is why every node must be prepared for 
attacks directly or indirectly. Additionally, an attack from a 
compromised node within the network is far more damaging 
and much harder to detect [2].  
MANETs are subject to passive and active attacks. The 
passive attacks typically involve only eavesdropping of data, 
whereas the active attacks involve actions performed by 
adversaries such as replication, modification and deletion of 
exchanged data. Specifically, attacks in MANET can cause 
292
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

congestion, propagate incorrect routing information, prevent 
services from working properly or shutdown them 
completely [4]. 
MANETs present a number of unique problems for 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS). Monitoring traffic by 
promiscuously within wireless radio range is a limiting factor 
in IDS on MANETS. Another problem is the mobility of the 
nodes. Additionally, a node in ad hoc network is more 
vulnerable to compromise. Also, because of the dynamic 
network topology of MANETs, an IDS may not be able to 
obtain enough sample data for accurate intrusion detection 
[5]. 
In this paper, we proposed a trust based distributed and 
collaborative intrusion detection framework for MANETs. 
Section 2 summarizes related work and proposed IDSs on 
MANETS relevant to our approach. Our proposed model is 
presented in Section 3, and finally, conclusion and future 
work are given in Section 4.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Because of their own characteristics, IDSs for traditional 
wired networks do not suit well for MANETs. There have 
been several proposals for Intrusion Detection Systems on 
MANETs [6-18]. 
One general approach for IDS on MANETs is distributed 
and cooperative architecture. In this architecture all nodes in 
MANET have their own local IDS system. Nodes come to a 
decision in a distributed fashion cooperatively. Upon 
determination of an intrusion, nodes share this information, 
asset attack risk degree and take necessary actions to 
eliminate the intrusion using active or passive precautions. 
Other IDS architectures in MANETs are stand-alone and 
hierarchical IDSs. In stand-alone architectures every node 
performs IDSs locally without collaborating and respond 
locally. This IDS architecture has a drawback for network 
attacks. In hierarchical IDS architectures, MANETs are 
grouped into clusters or zones. One of the nodes in a 
zone/cluster is responsible for IDS. IDS is carried out in a 
distributed fashion and with collaboration with other 
clusters/zones. The main advantage of this architecture is 
effective use of constraint resources but has a drawback for 
highly mobile MANETs for establishing zones and detecting 
responsible nodes in clusters. 
A. 
Distributed and Cooperative IDS 
The first IDS for MANETs proposed by Zhang and Lee 
is a distributed and cooperative IDS [1][6]. In this 
architecture, each node detects intrusions locally and come to 
a decision globally if the local evidence for a network attack 
is inadequate. Respond may be local or global depending on 
the coordination among neighborhood nodes. 
Statistical anomaly-based detection is preferred since 
rules cannot be updated in a wireless ad hoc environment 
over misuse base detection. The statistical anomaly-based 
detection composes the local data for IDS. 
A multi-layer intrusion detection and response is 
proposed allowing different attacks at the most effective 
layer. It is believed to achieve a higher detection rate with a 
lower false positive rate. 
Ad Hoc On-Demand Distance Vector [19] (AODV), 
Dynamic Source Routing [20] (DSR) and Destination-
Sequenced Distance Vector [21] (DSDV) algorithms are 
used to have a better rate and false alarm rate metrics.  
The system is reliable if the majority of the nodes are not 
compromised [1]. Additionally, the collaborative detection 
mechanism is susceptible to denial of service and spoofed 
intrusion attacks.  
B. 
Zone Based Intrusion Detection System 
Sun B et al. proposed a non-overlapping zone-based IDS 
[22]. In this architecture, the network is divided into zones 
based on geographic partitioning to save communication 
bandwidth while improving detection performance by 
obtaining data from many nodes. The nodes in a zone are 
called intrazone nodes, and the nodes which work as a bridge 
to other zones are called interzone (gateway) nodes. Each 
node in the zone is responsible for local detection and 
sending alerts to the interzone nodes. Their framework aims 
to allow the use of different detection techniques in each IDS 
agent. 
Intrazone nodes carry out local collection and correlation, 
while gateway nodes are responsible for global collection 
and correlation to make final decisions and send alarms. 
Therefore, only gateway nodes participate in intrusion 
detection. The alerts sent by interzone nodes simply show an 
assessment of the probability of intrusion; the alarms 
generated by gateway nodes are based on the combined 
information received. In their aggregation algorithm, 
gateway nodes use the following similarities in the alerts to 
detect intrusions: classification similarity (classification of 
attacks), time similarity (time of attack happening and time 
of attack detection) and source similarity (attack sources). 
Source similarity is the main similarity used, so the detection 
performance of aggregation algorithm could decrease with 
increasing number of attackers. 
The advantages of an aggregation algorithm using the 
data from both partial and full victims are emphasized: lower 
false positive and higher detection rate than local IDS 
achieves. Nevertheless, its performance can decrease with 
the existence of more than one attacker in the network. They 
also conclude that communication overhead is increased in 
proportion to mobility where local IDSs generate more false 
positives and send more intrusion alerts to gateway nodes. In 
addition, aggregating data and alerts at interzone nodes can 
result in detection and response latency, when there is 
sufficient data for intrusion detection even at intrazone 
nodes. 
C. 
General Cooperative Intrusion Detection 
Architecture 
A cooperative and dynamic hierarchical IDS architecture, 
which uses multiple-layering clustering, is proposed by 
Sterne et al. in [23]. At the beginning, the nodes are assigned 
to clusters and first level clusters act as a management focus 
for IDS activity of immediate surrounding nodes. Then, 
293
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

these first level clusters form a second layer clusters. This 
process goes on until all nodes are assigned to a cluster. To 
avoid single point of failure, they propose choosing more 
than one cluster-head for the top-level cluster. The selection 
of cluster heads is based on topology and other criteria 
including connectivity, proximity, resistance to compromise, 
and accessibility by network security specialists, processing 
power, storage capacity, energy remaining, bandwidth 
capabilities and administratively designated properties. 
In this dynamic hierarchy, data flow is upward, while the 
command flow is downward. Data are acquired at leaf nodes 
and aggregated, reduced and analyzed as it flows upward. 
The key idea is given as detecting intrusions and correlating 
with other nodes at the lowest levels for reducing detection 
latency and supporting data reduction, even as maintaining 
data sufficiency. It supports both direct reporting by 
participants and promiscuous monitoring for correlation 
purposes. 
This architecture targets military applications with high 
scalability and reduced communication overhead through 
hierarchical architecture [23]. However, the cost of 
configuration of the architecture in dynamic networks should 
also be considered.  
D. 
Intrusion Detection Using Multiple Sensors 
Kachirski and Guha propose an IDS solution based on 
mobile agent technology [24], which reduces network load 
by moving computation to data. This is a significant feature 
for MANETs that have lower bandwidth than wired 
networks.  
Proposed IDS structure distributes the functional tasks by 
using three mobile agent classes: monitoring, decision-
making and action-taking. The advantages of this structure 
are given as increased fault tolerance, communication cost 
reduction, improved performance of the entire network and 
scalability. 
Hierarchically distributed IDS architecture divides the 
network into clusters. Cluster-heads are selected by voting 
for a node, which is based on its connectivity. Each node in 
the network is responsible for local detection. Only cluster-
heads are responsible for detection using network-level data 
and for making decisions. Cluster nodes can respond to the 
intrusions directly if they have strong evidence locally. If the 
evidence is insufficient, they leave decision-making to 
cluster heads by sending anomaly reports to them.  
In this proposal although, a scalable and bandwidth-
efficient IDS is proposed by using mobile agents, but 
security issues for mobile agents are need to be investigated.  
E. 
DEMEM: Distributed Evidence Driven Message 
exchanging ID Model  
DEMEM [25] is a distributed and cooperative IDS in 
which each node is monitored by one-hop neighbor nodes. In 
addition to one-hop neighbor monitors, 2-hop neighbors can 
exchange data using intrusion detection (ID) messages. The 
main contribution of DEMEM is to introduce these ID 
messages to help detection, which they term evidence-driven 
message exchange. 
Evidence is defined as the critical information (specific to 
a routing protocol) used to validate the correctness of the 
routing protocol messages, for instance, hop count and node 
sequence number in AODV. To minimize ID message 
overhead ID messages are sent only when there is new 
evidence, (it is called evidence-driven). DEMEM also 
introduces an ID layer to process these ID messages and 
detect intrusions between the IP layer and the routing layer 
without modifying the routing protocol, so it can be applied 
to all routing protocols. 
DEMEM uses the specification-based IDS model. There 
are nodes called Multipoint Relays (MPRs), which serve to 
reduce the flooding of broadcast packets in the network. 
These nodes are selected by their neighboring nodes called 
MPR selectors. The packets of an MPR node’s MPR 
selectors are only retransmitted by that MPR node. Topology 
control messages are sent by each node periodically to 
declare its MPR selectors.  
DEMEM cannot detect collaborative attacks. For 
example, two attackers who falsely claim that they are 
neighbors might not be detected by the above constraints. 
DEMEM introduces three authenticated ID messages for 
Optimized Link State Routing Protocol [20] (OLSR). 
 
 
The first message is ID-Evidence, which is designed 
for two-hop-distant detectors to exchange their 
evidence concerning one-hop neighbors, MPRs and 
MPR selectors on OLSR.  
 
The second message, ID-Forward, is a request to 
forward any held ID-Evidence messages to other 
nodes. This means that a node can request the holder 
of evidence to forward it directly, rather than 
sending it itself, so reducing message overhead.  
 
The last message, ID-Request, is designed to tolerate 
message 
loss 
of 
ID-Evidence 
with 
low 
communication overhead. The false positives and 
delay detection due to message loss are decreased by 
an ID-Request message. Moreover, they specify a 
threshold value to decrease false positives due to 
temporary inconsistencies resulting from mobility. 
When a detector detects an intrusion, it automatically 
seeks to correct the falsified data.  
III. 
DICOTIDS: DISTRIBUTED COOPERATIVE 
TRUST BASED INTRUSION DETECTION 
ARCHITECTURE FOR MANETS 
In this section, we propose a distributed cooperative trust 
based intrusion detection architecture for MANETs. The 
architecture is based on running Local Intrusion Detection 
engines in each node independently. The objective is to 
monitor all network activity within wireless range to detect 
misbehaving nodes on promiscuous mode. That means, if 
node A is in wireless range of node B, it can watch 
communication activity to and from B even node A is not 
involved in. Accruing intrusion detection data in this manner 
has significant advantage. First, it allows local data 
collection without consuming any additional communication 
overhead. Second, it provides first hand observations, which 
294
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

means no need to rely on observations from other nodes, 
which might be false. 
Moreover, intrusion detection is distributed throughout 
the network in case of weak or inconclusive evidence of 
anomaly. A global investigation is initiated to support local 
intrusion detection.  
Flooding algorithm is used to share IDS alert messages. 
Flooding is the mechanism by which a node receives a 
flooded message for the first time, it rebroadcasts that 
message once. Each node is responsible to deliver the 
message to its neighbor within wireless transmission range.  
DICOTIDS mainly focus on detecting compromised 
modes in network. A compromised node can disseminate 
false IDS alert messages or drop the IDS alert message 
flooded by other nodes. Therefore, a trust mechanism is 
established in the network. Trust management can mitigate 
nodes’ selfish behaviors’, such as dropping messages or 
unwillingness for cooperation. Reputation mechanism is 
used as a dynamic rating system.  
Once, a node detects misbehavior of a neighbor node or 
suspicious activity, it starts a distributed IDS algorithm by 
broadcasting IDS alert messages. Nodes periodically share 
their respective data by flooding algorithm and then start a 
diagnostic phase. After the diagnostic phase in which all 
collected data from other nodes are compared, trust 
evaluation phase starts. If a trustworthy node broadcast an 
IDS alert message, intrusion response is activated even if the 
relevant node is not directly involved in IDS assessment. 
Trust management is maintained by watching the neighbor 
nodes activities whether they rebroadcast the IDS alert 
messages or not. A reputation mechanism is used to evaluate 
the trust level of a node. Figure 1 depicts the components of 
the framework.  
 
 
Figure 1. Components of DICOTIDS 
The details of the framework are described as follows: 
A. Local IDS Engine:  
The first phase of the intrusion detection process starts at 
Local Intrusion Detection engine. It sniffs the neighbor 
nodes network activity in promiscuous mode. The engine 
runs a popular network-based IDS, which is the open-source 
Snort [26]. Snort is able to sniff the network activity in 
promiscuous mode and configured with a rule set it can 
function as a real-time IDS. A Snort rule set is a file of attack 
signatures. A match to a signature means that an attack is 
recognized. Each node assumed to have the database of these 
rule sets and functions as a real-time detection system.  
Once an intrusion attempt or a suspicious activity is 
determined, all relevant data is passed to distributed IDS 
analyze service.  
B. Distributed IDS Analyze Service: 
IDS analyze service will use outputs of the Local IDS 
engine as well as IDS alert messages disseminated from 
other nodes. If there is enough evidence for intrusion, this 
service will put intrusion prevention measures into effect and 
forward the related information to IDS alert distribution 
service to inform the other nodes in the network. If there is 
weak or inconclusive evidence of anomaly IDS analyze 
service will request global analysis. Only the replies from the 
trusted nodes will be taken into consideration.  
The functional diagram of Distributed Analyze Service is 
depicted in Figure 2. The service will also try to verify the 
attack by additional IDS Alert messages originated from 
other nodes in the network.  
If the evidence comes via IDS alert message from 
another node in the network, first the trust level of the sender 
node is checked and; 
 
If the message is from a trusted node and there is 
more than one trusted node disseminating IDS alert 
message, than there is strong evidence for an 
intrusion attempt.  
 
If the IDS alert message is from an untrustworthy 
node, the IDS message is ignored.  
 
If the message is from a node, which the trust level 
has not been evaluated yet, then special interest is 
performed. 
 
If the intrusion alert is supported more than a single 
(trust level undecided) node or an intrusion is also 
approved by local IDS, the service may conclude of 
an intrusion. 
 
Figure 2. Functional Diagram of Distributed Analyze Service 
Once the service concludes for an intrusion, first it will 
inform the Intrusion prevention module to take necessary 
actions in order to prevent intrusion. The next is to pass this 
information to IDS alert distribution service. The information 
295
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

includes nodes involved in the intrusion attempt, type of 
attack, priority, strength, timestamp etc.   
The last thing is to inform the trust management service 
to downgrade or set the trust level of the involving node to 
untrustworthy. 
C. IDS Alert Listener / Distribution Service: 
This service is responsible to broadcast the IDS alert 
messages within wireless radio range and watches for the 
neighbor nodes if they rebroadcast the message within a time 
frame. Each message will have a unique message number 
and detected intrusion related information. IDS alert message 
contains: 
 
Originator ID and Originator Message ID (null if 
produces for the first time) 
 
Sender Node ID 
 
Sender Message ID 
 
Compromised/Attacker node’s ID/IP 
 
Attack Type  
 
Classification 
 
Priority  
 
Date/time 
Immediately after, this service will inform the trust 
management service to evaluate reputation values. If the 
neighbor nodes rebroadcast the IDS alert message without 
any modification, trust management service will perform the 
reputation update procedures accordingly. In addition, if this 
does not occur in a limited time frame or the rebroadcasted 
IDS alert message is corrupted then reputation and trust 
assessment is evaluated as described below.  
IDS listener service sniffs the neighbor node’s activities 
in promiscuous mode for the rebroadcasted messages. Upon 
receipt of an IDS alert message, the message is passed to 
distributed IDS analyzer and trust management service. 
D. Trust Management Service: 
Trust management service is responsible to maintain 
relationships among nodes in the network. This service will 
mitigate misbehaving of nodes and enforce cooperation. 
Projected trust management is derived form a reputation 
based scheme proposed by Jiangy hu [27].  Figure 3 depicts 
the components of the service.  
Trust in a node is associated with its reputation value. 
There are three trust levels and we use a trust value T, to 
represent the trustworthiness of a node. A node considers 
another node B either 
 
Trustworthy, with T = 1, 
 
Untrustworthy, with T = -1, or 
 
Trustworthy undecided, with T = 0 
 
A trustworthy node is a well-behaved node that can be 
trusted. An untrustworthy node is a misbehaved node and 
should be avoided in distributed IDS evaluation process. A 
node with undecided trustworthiness is usually a new node in 
the network and special interest should be taken in IDS 
evaluation process.  
Each node keeps a reputation table, which associates a 
reputation value with each of its neighbors. It updates the 
table on direct observation only. Reputation value of a 
neighbor node will not be distributed globally and will be 
stored locally. Reputation values will be shared only if 
requested by other nodes. 
 
 
Figure 3. Components of Trust management Service 
Reputation values R are between a range of 0≤R≤1 and 
there is one threshold Rt,  
R ≥ Rt for trustworthy and  
R < Rt  for untrustworthy.  
For a new node  N with reputation value R and trust 
value T, 
 
T = 1,  
if R ≥ Rt 
 
T = -1, 
if R < Rt   
 
T = 0,  
if R < 0 
Reputation values depend on the behaviors of the node. If 
a node broadcasts an IDS alert message, then it sniffs the 
neighbor nodes in promiscuous mode. If that node 
rebroadcasts the IDS alert message, the originator node 
promotes the reputation value for that node; otherwise, the 
reputation value is downgraded. If the rebroadcasted 
message is modified the nodes trust value will be in 
untrustworthy state. R is the proportion of the total number 
of forwarded messages to the total number of sent messages. 
Each node keeps track of the neighbor nodes and 
establishes reputation values directly. If a node needs to 
query a specific node that is beyond the wireless radio range, 
it will ask for reputation values to all the trusted nodes in the 
network. The average of the replies will set the reputation 
value for the requested node. 
Another factor for a node that will affect it is trust level is 
the correctness of the IDS alert message. All the nodes that 
receive an IDS alert message will also monitor the evidences. 
If there is not enough evidence, the IDS message is 
concluded to be false. So that the trust level for the 
disseminating false messages node will be untrustworthy.  
E. Pseudo Code for DICOTIDS : 
 
Local IDS Engine (LIDS) 
  Watch for Neighboring Node's Network Traffic 
  Compare Net Traffic with IDS Signature Database 
  If Network Activity Matches IDS Signature 
     Create IDS Alert Msg 
     Pass IDS Alert Msg to Dist. IDS Analyze Service 
296
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

     Inform Trust Management Service 
  Endif 
 
Distributed IDS Analyze Service 
  For each IDS Alert Msg received form LIDS do 
  If there is strong evidence 
      Activate IPS 
      Forward IDS Alert Msg to Distribution Service 
      Inform Trust Management 
  Else 
      Request Global Analyze 
  Endif 
For each IDS Alert Msg received from the network 
   Check Trust Level of the sender 
   If the sender is a trusted node 
      Activate IPS 
      Forward IDS Alert Msg to Distribution Service 
    Else 
      Ignore message 
      Inform Trust Management 
   Endif 
   If the sender’s trust level is not assigned 
      If there is more than one sender  
         Activate IPS 
         Forward IDS Alert Msg to Distribution Service 
         Inform trust Management 
         Request Global Analyze for confirmation 
      Else 
      Request Global Analyze 
Endif 
 
Distribution/Listener Service  
   Broadcast IDS Alert Message 
   Listen for the neighboring nodes to rebroadcast 
   Inform Trust Service for successful rebroadcasts 
   Inform Trust Service for unsuccessful rebroadcasts 
 
Trust Management Service  
   Evaluate the reputation value for each neig nodes 
   For each neighboring node 
       If reputation value is greater than the threshold 
            Assign node’s Trust Level as Trustworthy 
       Else 
            Assign node’s Trust Level as Untrustworthy 
       Endif 
   Update databases respectively 
IV. 
SIMULATION AND PEFFORMANCE ANAYSIS 
The objective of simulation and performance analysis is 
to determine the feasibility of DICOTIDS in MANETs 
where there are a number of malicious nodes. The metrics to 
evaluate the performance are described below. 
A. Metrics 
IDS Alert Message Delivery Ratio: The ratio of the IDS 
alert message delivered to the destination nodes. The 
delivery ratio is directly affected by uncooperative behavior, 
number of malicious nodes, and packet loss.  
Message Overhead: The ratio of redundant messages to 
the total number of messages relevant to the IDS instance.  
The number of IDS instances to evaluate the trust level of 
nodes: The reputation rates are directly involved in 
evaluating the trust level of a node in coherence with the 
reputation threshold value. 
B. Simulation and Results 
We have partially simulated the DICOTIDS in Network 
Simulator (NS-2) [28]. For all the metrics we want to 
evaluate, we used fixed parameters for network environment. 
Also, we assumed that every node has a Local Intrusion 
Detection System (LIDS) with updated signatures. 
We ran the simulation for two scenarios.  
Scenario #1: Few (n<3) malicious nodes with a total 
number of 15 nodes. 
Scenario #2: More (n>7) malicious nodes with a total 
number of 15 nodes. 
C. Analysis 
As the number of malicious nodes in the network 
increase, the IDS alert delivery ratio is decreased 
proportionally. The layout and the mobility of the nodes 
have an impact in the ratio also. However, mostly this ratio 
satisfied the requirements of the whole system. 
In some cases, especially with a high dense node layout, 
several nodes initiated the distributed IDS analysis process 
for the same instance. Because the reputation values and trust 
levels are stored and evaluated locally, the disharmony 
among nodes resulted in the increase of redundant message. 
However, this did not have a crucial effect on the total 
performance. 
In order to determine untrusted nodes and successfully 
identify malicious nodes, a number of intrusion instances are 
required. On the first occasion of an intrusion attempt, nodes 
need to rely on local intrusion detection system (LIDS). But, 
as the number of instances increase, accurate reputation 
values and trust levels are evaluated respectively. 
Additionally, the reputation threshold value (RT) should 
be set to lower values for fixed or low mobile networks 
rather than the value for highly mobile networks. 
The proposed framework should be feasible for networks 
with nodes with low mobility. On the other hand, we 
assumed that all nodes have the same emitting power. That 
means with different emitting powers, reputation mechanism 
may fail for the event that node B is in the range of node A, 
but node A is not in the range of node B.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A trust based distributed intrusion detection framework is 
proposed in order to protect nodes from performing 
misbehavior or selfish behavior in MANETS. Trust, in the 
framework, is mainly based on direct observation, but 
indirect observations are also applied. The proposed 
infrastructure provides robustness against the propagation of 
false trust information by malicious nodes.  
A dynamic and collaborative ad hoc intrusion detection 
system has been proposed.  Our approach does not modify or 
restrict the network discovery or routing protocols. The 
concepts discussed in this paper are in broad sense that they 
can easily be integrated to existing routing protocols.   
297
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

We aim to fully simulate the framework in NS-2 [28], an 
open source network simulator. The message overhead and 
resistance to intrusion in relevant to the number of 
compromised nodes in the network is critical. In addition, the 
effects of the mobility of the nodes in the network need to be 
observed. Additionally, testing the model using different 
routing protocols will conclude valuable data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y Zhang and W.Lee, Intrusion Detection In Wireless Ad Hoc 
Networks. In proc of the 6th Int Conf on Mobil Comput and Netw 
(MOBICOM), 2000, pp. 275-283 
[2] 
S. Sen and J.A.Clark, Intrusion Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks, Guide to Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, Computer 
Communications and Networks, 2009,  pp. 441-442  
[3] 
K. Pathan and C.S. Hong, Routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, 
Guide to Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, Computer Communications and 
Networks, 2009, pp.63-66. 
[4] 
L. Zhou and Z. Haas, Securing Ad Hoc Networks, IEEE Network 
Magazine, vol. 13, no. 6, 1999. pp.21 
[5] 
P. Brutch and C. Ko, Challenges in Intrusion Detection for Ad Hoc 
Networks, IEEE Workshop on Security and Assurance in Ad hoc 
Networks, Orlando, FL, January 28, 2003. 
[6] 
Y. Zhang and W. Lee, Y-A. Huang, Intrusion detection techniques for 
mobile wireless networks, Wireless Networks, vol. 9, 2003, pp. 545-
556. 
[7] 
R. Ramanujan, A. Ahamad, J. Bonney, R. Hagelstrom, and K. 
Thurber, Techniques for intrusion-resistant ad hoc routing algorithms 
(TIARA), IEEE MILCOM 2000, Los Angeles, 2000, pp. 660-664. 
[8] 
S. Buchegger and J-Y. Le Boudec, Performance analysis of the 
CONFIDANT protocol (Cooperation of Nodes: Fairness in Dynamic 
Ad-hoc Networks), 3rd ACM Int. Symp. on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks and Computing, Switzerland, 2002, pp. 226-236. 
[9] 
M. Kuchaki Rafsanjani, A. Movaghar, and Faroukh Koroupi, 
Investigating Intrusion Detection Systems in MANET and Comparing 
IDSs for Detecting Misbehaving Nodes, World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology 44, 2008, pp.351-355. 
[10] R. Puttini, J-M. Percher, L. Me, and R. de Sousa, A fully distributed 
IDS for MANET, 9th Int. Symp. on Computers and Commun. (ISCC 
2004), 2004, pp. 331-338. 
[11] G. Vigna, et al., An intrustion detection tool for AODV-based ad hoc 
wireless networks, Annual Computer Security Applications Conf. 
(ACSAC 2004), Tuscon, 2004, pp. 16-27. 
[12] A. Pirzada and C. McDonald, Establishing trust in pure ad-hoc 
networks, 27th Australian Conf. on Computer Science, Dunedin, New 
Zealand, 2004, pp. 47-54. 
[13] Y. Rebahi, V. Mujica, and D. Sisalem, A reputation-based trust 
mechanism for ad hoc networks, 10th IEEE Symp. on Computers and 
Communications (ISCC 2005), 2005, pp. 37-42. 
[14] A. Karygiannis, E. Antonakakis, and A. Apostolopoulos, Detecting 
critical nodes for MANET intrusion detection, 2nd Int. Workshop on 
Security, Privacy, and Trust in Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
(SecPerU 2006), 2006, pp. 7-15. 
[15] H. Yang, J. Shu, X. Meng, and S. Lu, SCAN: self-organized network-
layer security in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE J. on Sel. Areas in 
Communications, vol. 24, 2006, pp. 261-273. 
[16] T. Chen and V. Venkataramanan, Dempster-Shafer theory for 
intrusion detection in ad hoc networks, IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 
9, 2005, pp. 35-41. 
[17] D. Subhadrabandhu, S. Sarkar, and F. Anjum, A framework for 
misuse detection in ad hoc networks - part II, IEEE J. on Sel. Areas in 
Communications, vol. 24, 2006, pp. 290-304. 
[18] Y. Zhang and W.Lee, Intrusion Detection Techniques for Mobile 
Wireless Networks, Wireless Networks 9(5), 2003, pp. 545-556. 
[19] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, and S. R. Das, Ad hoc on-demand 
distance vector (AODV) routing. July 2000. 
[20] P. Jacquet, P. Muhlethaler, T. Clausen, A. Laouiti, A. Qayyum, and 
L.Viennot, Optimized link state routing protocol for ad hoc networks, 
in: IEEE International Multi Topic Conference, 2001, pp. 62–68. 
[21] C. Perkins and P. Bhagvat, Highly dynamic destination-sequenced 
distance-vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers. ACM 
Computer Communications Review, 1994, pp. 234-244. 
[22] Sun B and Wu K et al. Zone-Based Intrusion Detection System for 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. Int J of Ad Hoc and Sens wireless 
Networks 2:3,2006 
[23] D. Sterne and R. Balasubramanyam et al. A general Cooperative 
Intrusion Detection Architecture for MANETs. In Proc of the 3rd 
IEEE IWIA, 2005, pp.57-70 
[24] O. Karchirski and R. Guha, Effective Intrusion Dtection  Using 
Multiple Sensors in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks. In proc of the 36th 
IEEE Int Conf on Syst Sci (HICSS), 2003, pp.244-248 
[25] C. Tseng and  S.Wang, DEDEM: Distributed Evidence Driven 
Message Exchange Intrusion Detection Model for MANET. In proc 
of the 9th Int Symp on Recent Adv in Intrusion Detect LNCS 4219, 
2006, pp.249-271 
[26] Snort, <www.snort.org> 10.04.2011 
[27] J. Hu and M. Burmester, Cooperation in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, 
Guide to Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, 2009, pp.43-53. 
[28] NS2, Network Simulator – 2, <www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns> 10.04.2011 
 
298
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

