Island-Based Sensor Relocation in Wireless Sensor Network to Improve
Connectivity
Sahla Masmoudi Mnif
National School of Computer Science
University of Manouba
Tunisia 2010
e-mail: sahla.masmoudi@ensi-uma.tn
Leila Azouz Saidane
National School of Computer Science
University of Manouba
Tunisia 2010
e-mail: leila.saidane@ensi.rnu.tn
Abstract—Wireless
sensor
networks
applications
require
connectivity between deployed sensors over the region of
interest (ROI). We note that the random deployment of
sensors, leads to dividing the network in different partitions
and makes the communication impossible between deployed
nodes. In this paper, we propose to use a mobile robot which
will travel through the supervised area and will relocate
redundant sensor nodes in order to ensure connectivity. We
assume in our work that the mobile robot is not aware of the
network topology, so that the robot has to discover the network
topology and to enhance the connectivity in the WSN. We
propose for this purpose two Island-Based strategies. In the
first strategy, the robot walk is made in a random manner; this
strategy is called Island-Based Random Walk (IBRW). In the
second strategy, called Island-Based Walk with Memorization
(IBWM), the robot memorizes the collected information and
tries to improve the connectivity in the WSN. Through
simulation we evaluate and compare the performances of these
strategies.
Keywords- Sensor; Wireless Sensor network; Connectivity;
Mobile Robot; Relocation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Ensuring connectivity in Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs) is a challenging issue, especially in hazardous areas.
Many applications of WSN require an important level of
connectivity in the network to detect any abnormal event
(e.g., fire, seism, intrusion detection, etc.) and forward an
alert to the "sink" node in order to inform users. As examples
we can mention, detection instruction application in military
fields, the survey of frontiers zones and the control of
mountains and forest occupied by terrorists. In fact, to survey
this kind of environment, sensors are generally deployed, in
a random manner (e.g., dropped from an aircraft). Sensor
nodes are expected to detect any given events (intrusion, fire,
etc.) and communicate together in order to survey a Region
Of Interest (ROI). But nevertheless, the total connectivity
between sensors is not guaranteed with random deployment
of sensor nodes, which leads generally, in partition of the
network.
Upon
an
initial
deployment,
the
sensors
should
communicate and maintain this communication between
nodes in order to stay reachable to each other.
A.
Motivation
In recent years, the mobility has been introduced in
WSNs to ensure and improve connectivity and coverage of
the ROI. The sensor node using a mobile platform will have
the possibility to move and to relocate its position. In our
work, we are essentially interested by hazardous areas like
inaccessible mountains, forests and deserts or harsh frontiers.
Our goal is to survey these areas against any attacks (terrorist
attacks). For this kind of areas, the deterministic deployment
of sensors is not easy. For this purpose, in this paper we deal
with a random deployment of sensors.
In general case, with random deployment the total
connectivity is not guaranteed. Sensors need to be relocated
to achieve total connectivity. Some existing sensor self-
deployment algorithms [4][12][15] are adaptive to node
failure and may actually be employed to solve the sensor
relocation problem regarding sensing hole healing. A sensor
relocation algorithm is proposed in [2]; this algorithm
relocates redundant nodes in a cascading manner. However,
its assumption, i.e., pre-knowledge about sensor field, makes
it less practical in real-world scenario. Noting that, using
mobile sensor nodes is expensive, we envision using, in our
work, static sensor nodes and a mobile robot to relocate
static nodes if necessary. The robot is assumed to be
equipped with sensors and moves through the ROI according
the given strategies. The robot has to relocate sensors to
obtain a connected and covered network. The main task of
the mobile robot is to discover disconnected nodes and to try
to ensure total connectivity over the network.
Different
scenarios are envisaged where robot is in short of static
sensors and should pick up redundant sensors and relocate
them in the ROI. We propose to exploit the redundant nodes
resulting in random deployment of sensors rather than
adding some new sensors for economic purpose.
B.
Problem Statement
We consider a given ROI equipped with a large number
of wireless sensors which are deployed randomly in this area.
By this deployment of nodes, the connectivity between nodes
is not guaranteed. In our work, we propose to use a mobile
robot to relocate redundant sensors in order to ensure
communication between sensors.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

Assumptions: we are assuming the following:
•
The deployed nodes are wireless static sensors.
•
The number of deployed sensor nodes is very
important.
•
Each sensor node is characterized by its unique
Identity which is computed from its address.
•
Each sensor node is able to compute its location by
mean of localization technique like the Global
Positioning System (GPS).
•
Each sensor node has two independent components:
sensing and communication units. Both parts are
powered from the same limited source of power
(battery).
•
Each sensor node is able to compute its residual
energy.
•
The transmission (communication) range of each
node is denoted rc. We suppose that all nodes have
the same communication range.
•
The sensing range of each node is denoted rs. We
suppose that all nodes have the same sensing range.
•
After a random deployment of sensor nodes in the
area, they will be redundant nodes in some zones
and they will be non- covered zones.
•
We use a mobile robot which is a mobile sensor and
have a very important storage and computation
capacities.
•
The robot has a communication range noted Rc and a
sensing range Rs larger than the other sensor nodes.
•
Initially, the mobile robot is equipped with sensor
nodes (which we will call them “Reserve Nodes”)
that it can use them to enhance connectivity in the
network.
The mobile robot should run through the controlled area
and decides the appropriate action to do: the robot can
discover the network topology (discover the position of
deployed sensors), can pick up redundant sensors or can
continue its travel in the ROI.
Our paper is structured as follows: We start with a brief
review of the existing solutions for the redeployment of
sensors in WSN. Then we present our solution and we
validate it by means of different experiments and simulations
and finally, we close this paper by a conclusion.
II.
RELATED WORK
In recent years, sensor relocation has been a challenging
matter that was studied by many researchers. Several
solutions have been proposed to solve the redeployment
issue. One relevant solution was to provide motion capability
to all sensors. This way, the sensors can move and relocate
themselves in order to adjust the topology and achieve the
connectivity and/or the coverage.
The
sensors
must
synchronize
their
movement
to
enhance the network topology.
Among the proposed solutions, we mention particularly
the cascade motion which is detailed in [2]: instead of
moving directly to the target, the sensor nodes adopt a
cascade movement which means that the nearest node to the
target point will move there, and the location of nearest node
is replaced by moving another sensor and so on.
Virtual Forces Aspect has been also proposed as a
solution for sensor relocation. In this way, deployed sensors
communicate together and compute their new locations in
order to ensure connectivity and/or coverage. Then these
sensors exercise a repulsive or an attractive force to move to
their estimated locations. This strategy was studied and
presented in [18].
The mobility of nodes is very efficient and improves the
network topology, but it requires an important energy
consumption which causes the node depletion and decreases
the network lifetime.
Other solutions consist of the use of fixed sensor nodes
and the network is assisted by some "actors" like mobile
robots.
Some studies proposed to use the robot to carry data
between disconnected sensors so that the robot collects the
detected
event
from
nodes
and
then
delivers
these
information to the other nodes. This approach is presented by
Zhao et al. [19]. In this way, the event is delayed and a
latency time is introduced which can be considered as a
shortcoming for critical applications.
Another set of related works include algorithms using
DATA MULES [14][15], which
are
wireless devices
integrated on mobile entities (e.g., animals, vehicles, etc.) A
DATA MULE is a data collector; it picks up data from nodes
and relays it to other nodes, so that, data would not be
relayed on long routes and the network lifetime is increased
In other proposed solutions, the actors are mobile sensors
that exploit the redundant nodes and relocate them to achieve
better connectivity and/or coverage trying to preserve the
network lifetime as long as possible. Most of the proposed
solutions are grid-based ones like the solution proposed in
[2]. For sensor relocation in mobile sensors networks we
mention for example ZONER proposed in [20]. This solution
presented a distributed zone-based sensor relocation protocol
for mobile sensors on the basis of restricted flooding
technique. When mobile sensors are cost effective and have
critical energy constraints, we try in our work to propose a
sensor relocation strategy for static sensor networks using a
mobile robot.
III.
PROPOSED SOLUTIONS
In this section we present our approach to relocate the
sensors using a mobile robot. We start this section by
presenting the network modeling and then we define the
robot algorithms to relocate the sensors.
We assume that the region of interest is unreachable,
making the deterministic deployment impossible. Hence, we
consider an initial random deployment of sensor nodes and
we scatter a large amount of sensors within the region of
interest.
Each node in the network knows its own position by an
attached GPS (Global Positioning System) or any other
equipment
of
localization.
Sensors
have
the
same
communication range rc and the same sensing range rs, we
note that rc >= rs.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

Using this kind of sensor deployment, connectivity in the
resulted network is not guaranteed. Furthermore, the random
deployment leads to the creation of disconnected islands.
1)
Definitions:
Island: An isolated set of connected sensor nodes.
MainIsland: The Island containing the "Sink" node is
called “Main Island”.
Redundant sensor: a sensor is said to be redundant if his
perception zone is covered by the perception zones of other
sensors.
In each island, the connectivity is ensured but the islands
are not able to communicate between each other. Generally,
each island contains redundant sensor nodes. Figure 1 shows
an example of an Island-based network.
Figure 1. Example of an Island-Based WSN.
2)
Redundant Sensor Identification: the mobile robot
has to identify the redundant sensors in order to use
them to connect islands. We use a hexagonal
partition of region in order to identify and locate
redundant sensors. The structure of hexagon cell is
chosen in a manner that sensors belonging to two
adjacent cells are able to communicate. A sensor is
said to be redundant if its cells (perception zone) is
covered by other cells. Tasks of redundant sensors
can be made by the neighboring sensors and so that
the redundat sensor can be in a passive mode in
order to save energy.
3)
Island-Head Identification : For each Island, a
chief is elected, called Island-Head. This island-
Head collects all the information about the island
(positions of redundant nodes, positions of nodes in
the islands, etc.). The Island-Head is elected as the
node with the highest level of residual energy and
having the largest set of neighbors. In order to
select the Island-Head, an election factor noted f is
defined by (1):
nodes
n
res
Nb
Nb
E
E
f
2 *
1
2 *
1
max
+
=
(1)
where Eres and Emax, represent respectively the residual
energy and the maximum level of energy for a given node.
Nbn and Nbnodes refer to the number of neighbors of a sensor
node and the number of nodes in a given Island.
The node with the highest value of f is elected as an Island-
Head. In case of multiple candidates, the node with higher
Identity is elected. A backup Island-Head is chosen to
replace Island-Head in case of its depletion.
When the Island-Head is elected, it collects the positions
and all information concerning the redundant nodes. After
that, the Island-Head orders the redundant sensor nodes go
to the passive mode (sleeping mode) to save energy of the
whole network.
We assume that the robot knows the position of the sink
node. Therefore, it is not aware of the network topology.
Hence, the main role of the mobile robot is to discover the
topology of the network and simultaneously, it tries to
redeploy redundant sensors in order to enhance the network
topology and to ensure connectivity between each Island of
the network and the “MainIsland” to obtain a connected
network.
We notice that, the mobile robot is considered as a
sophisticated
entity
with
an
important
computational
capability and a large amount of energy. We suppose also
that the robot can be recharged as needed. The robot has
also sensing and communication capabilities, we note Rc the
communication range of the robot and Rs its sensing range;
Rc>= Rs. We assume also that the robot is equipped by a
number
of
sensors
Nbres
that
can
be
used
connect
disconnected Islands.
Each couple of nodes (whether sensor node or robot) can
communicate directly when they are within each other
communication range.
In our solution, we will exploit sensor redundancy to
enhance the connectivity over the network. We mention that
the mobile robot can be in one of these states:
•
Discovering topology: it has to discover the position
of deployed sensors, Islands, etc.
•
Collecting redundant sensors: when encountering
redundant nodes, the robot can pick them up.
•
Connecting Island: the robot places sensors in order
to connect the Islands
•
Free: the robot has no task to do.
We propose two strategies for sensor relocation: the first
strategy is called Island-Based Random Walk (IBRW) in
which the robot walk is made completely in a random
manner and the second strategy is called Island-Based Walk
with Memorization (IBWM) in which the robot walk is
made based on the recently discovered information (about
topology, position of redundant nodes, disconnected islands,
etc.)
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

A.
Island-Based Random Walk
Our first proposed solution is called Island-Based
Random Walk (IBRW). In this solution the robot walks in
the ROI in a random manner. Periodically, the robot stops
(after a distance of 2* Rc) and sends a Hello-Robot
Message. Each sensor receiving a "Hello-Robot", forwards
this message to its "Island-Head" and the "Island-Head"
replies
with
"Island-information"
containing
all
the
information concerning this island (position of nodes,
positions of redundant sensors, sensors identities, number of
redundant nodes, etc.).
•
If the robot does not receive any reply (after a
prefixed duration), it continues its walk in a random
direction.
•
If the robot receives an "Island-information", it
computes the position of the nearest node of the
"sink" and then it calculates the number of needed
sensors to connect the island to the “MainIsland”.
o
If
this
requested
number
of
sensors
is
available on the robot, it relocates them (the
nodes
will
be
relocated
according
to
hexagonal pavement).
o
If this requested number of sensors is not
available on the robot, it continues its walk in
a random manner.
Figure 2 shows the way that two Islands should be
connected using the hexagonal pavement. Green cells are
used to connect an Island to the “MainIsland”.
Figure 2. Connecting two Islands
B.
Island-Based Random Walk with Memorization
In this strategy, the robot adopts the same functioning as
the IBRW with some other amelioration. The robot is
initially in a free state. The robot starts its travel in
Discovering Topology state and it moves through a random
direction. The robot, during this state, sends periodically a
Hello-Robot Message. When the robot encounters an Island,
it receives a reply from the Island-Head. This message
contains all information about the considered Island. All
received information is saved in the robot and the robot
updates its information about the network topology.
•
When a robot encounters an Island, it memorizes all
the information concerning this Island mainly the
locations of redundant nodes.
•
When they are no carried sensors on the robot, the
robot returns back to the nearest redundant nodes,
picks them up and relocates them like in the IBRW
algorithm. Then the robot continues its travel in a
random direction.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Our proposed solution is implemented under NS2
simulator.
Several
simulations
were
established
with
different scenarios. For all simulations we use a large
number of deployed sensors to ensure full connectivity and
enhance coverage over the network.
The sensors are initially deployed randomly through a
square ROI; we set rc=25m, rs=25m and Rc=45m. We set the
dimension of the ROI to 500*500. The Initial load of the
robot 5Reserve nodes) is fixed to 60 sensors. The number of
deployed sensor nodes is set to 200 sensors in the first time.
In a second step, we will vary the number of deployed
sensors from 100 to 600 sensors.
The number of created islands over the network is an
important factor which gives us an idea on the total
connectivity in the network. Figure 3 shows that the number
of created islands increases when the number of deployed
sensors decreases. As a result, the connectivity between
nodes increases when the number of deployed sensors
increases.
Figure 3. Number of formed Islands
In our work we try to attend a tradeoff between the
number of deployed sensors and the connectivity rate. In
other terms, we try to determine the optimal number of
deployed sensors to achieve a desired connectivity level.
To evaluate our proposed solutions we fixed some
metrics like connectivity rate, connectivity Time, the total
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

travelled distance by robot and the average consumed energy
by static sensors.
A.
Connectivity Time
Connectivity time (CT) is the time needed by the robot
to ensure connectivity over the entire network. This metric
should to be minimized.
Figure 4 shows that when the number of deployed
sensors increases, the connectivity time decreases for the
two proposed strategies IBRW and IBWM. This can be
explained by the important number of redundant sensors
when the number ofdeployed sensors number increases. In
this
case
the
number
of
Islands
to
connect
to
the
“MainIsland” decreases.
We remark also that IBWM outperforms IBRW in terms
of connectivity time which can be explained by the
optimization of functioning of robot for IBWM compared to
IBRW.
Figure 4. Connectivity Time
B.
Connectivity Rate
The connectivity rate (CR) is the rate of connected
sensors in the network; this metric can be given by (2)
number of deployed sensors
The
number of connected sensors
The
(2)
This metric should be maximized to enhance the
performance of the tested algorithms. We modify the number
of deployed sensors and we compute the CR to show the
impact of the numbers of the deployed sensors on the
connectivity rate.
Figure 5. Connectivity Rate
Figure 5 shows that CR increases with the number of
deployed sensors. Figure 5 illustrates also that IBWM
algorithm outperforms IBRW in terms of connectivity rate.
In fact, the walk of robot is more optimized in IBWM
strategy making the connectivity process easier.
C.
Total Travelled Distance
We compute for each proposed algorithm the total
travelled distance by the robot. Figure 6 shows that the
travelled distance decreases when the number of deployed
sensors increases. In fact, in this case, the robot had to
connect more Islands to the “MainIsland” and is obliged to
travel more long distances. Figure 6 shows also that IBWM
outperforms the IBRW in terms of the total travelled
distance. In fact, compared to IBRW, the IBWM algorithm
exploits the nearest discovered redundant sensors.
Figure 6. Total Travelled Distance
D.
Energy Consumption
The high energy consumption driven by mobile sensors
is an important criterion which justifies the use of static
sensors and a mobile robot to redeploy them. We compute
for our proposed solutions the average consumed energy by
all static sensors. Figure 7 represents the mean consumed
energy according to the number of deployed sensors.
Figure 7. Average Consumed energy by static sensors
We note that the energy consumption decreases with the
number of deployed sensors. In fact, when the number of
deployed sensors increases, the number of resulted islands
decreases and so the number of redundant sensor nodes
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

increases within each island; the redundant nodes will be in
sleeping mode. We note also that IBWM outperforms
IBRW strategy in terms of consumed energy. In fact, in
IBRW
strategy,
the
robot
does
not
memorize
any
information about the topology. Each time the robot is
obliged to communicate with encountered sensors.
E.
An illustrative Example:
Our
proposed
solutions
can
be
used
to
insure
connectivity in WSN applications. We mention mainly
agriculture precision, where a set of sensor nodes is
randomly deployed on a zone and a mobile robot can be used
to ensure connectivity in this network. From Figure 4, we
can know the minimum number of needed deployed sensors
to ensure connectivity in a given time. We can also
determine the minimum number of needed sensors to have
connectivity lower than a given threshold. For example in
our example the CR is greater than 0.96 when the number of
islands exceeds 7.
Detection Intrusion in hazardous areas is an example
which can use our work. A robot can be used to redeploy
sensors in order to achieve total connectivity. The optimal
number of deployed sensors to achieve a given level of
connectivity in a given time can be determined from curves
and figures resulting from our simulations.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In
this
paper
we
proposed
a
robot-based
sensor
relocation to ensure connectivity in the Wireless sensors
networks. We proposed to model our network by a set of
disconnected islands that are formed due to a random
deployment of nodes. We proposed also to use a mobile
robot to relocate redundant nodes in order to connect the
islands of the networks.
We defined two strategies; in the first one IBRW, the
mobile robot makes a random travel. In the second one the
robot memorizes the locations of encountered redundant
nodes and uses the nearest ones when needed. Through
several simulations we validated our work.
We show that our work can be used to determine a
tradeoff between the required connectivity rate or time and
the number of deployed sensors.
As a further work we propose to enhance these solutions
by the use of a large number of robots and we propose also
to compare our proposed solutions to other relevant
proposed solutions in literature.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Kershner, The number of circles covering a set, American Journal
of Mathematics, 1939,p665-671,
[2]
T.La Porta, G.Wang, G.Cao and W.Wang, Sensor Relocation In
Mobile Sensor Networks, Infocom 2005.
[3]
F.Wang, M.Thai and D.Du, on the construction of 2-connected virtual
backbone in wireless networks, IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications 2009.
[4]
A.Abbasi, M.Younis and K.Akkaya, Movement-assisted connectivity
restoration
in
wireless
sensor
and
actuator
networks.
IEEE
Transactions on Parallel Distributed Systems 2009.
[5]
G.Wang, G.Cao and T.Laporta, A Bidding Protocol for Deploying
Mobile Sensors, The 11th IEEE International Conference on Network
Protocols (ICNP) 2003.
[6]
G.Wang,
G.Cao
and
T.Laporta,
Movement-assisted
sensor
deployment, Infocom 2004.
[7]
G. Fletcher, X.. Li, A. Nayak and I.Stojmenovic, Carrier-based sensor
deployment by a robot team, IEEE SECON, 2010.
[8]
Y. Mei, C. Xian, S .Das, Y. C.Hu and Y. H.Lu, sensor replacement
using mobile robots, computer communication 30(13) 2007.
[9]
D.Xuan, Z.Yun, X.Bai, S.Kumar and Ten H. Lai, Deploying Wireless
sensors to achieve both coverage and connectivity, Mobile Ad Hoc
Networking and Computing,2006.
[10] X.Li and N.Santoro, ZONER: a zone-based sensor relocation protcol
for mobile sensor networks, IEEE WLN, 2006.interface,” IEEE
Transl. J. Magn. Japan, vol. 2, August 1987, pp. 740–741, [Digests
9th Annual Conf. Magnetics Japan, p. 301, 1982].
[11]
X.Li, N.Santoro and I.Stojmenovic, Mesh-based sensor relocation for
coverage maintenance in mobile sensor networks, UIC 2007.
[12]
A.Howard, M.J.Mataric and G.S.Sukhatme, Mobile Sensor Networks
Deployment Using Potential Fields: A Distributed, Scalable Solution
to the Area Coverage Problem, the 6th International Symposium on
Distributed Autonomous Robotics Systems, 2002.
[13]
E.Egea-López, J.Vales-Alonso, A.S.Martínez-Sala, P. Pavon-Mariño
and J.García-Haro, Simulation Tools for Wireless Sensor Networks,
Summer Simulation Multiconference - SPECTS,2005.
[14]
I.F.Akyildiz, W.Su, Y.Sankarasubramaniam and E.Cayirci, A Survey
On Sensor Networks, IEEE Communications Magazine,2002.
[15]
T.Watteyne, Using Existing Network Simulators for Power-Aware
Self-Organizing Wireless Sensor Network Protocols, INRIA,2006.
[16] G. Chalhoub, Réseaux de capteurs sans fil, Clermont Université,2009.
[17] A.Gallais, J.Carle and D.Simplot-Ryl , La k-couverture de surface
dans les réseaux de capteurs, AlgoTel, 2007.
[18]
X.Wang, Sh.Wang andD.Bi, Virtual force-directed particle swarm
optimization for dynamic deployment in wireless sensor networks,
ICIC, 2007.
[19]
W. Zhao, M.Ammar, and E. Zegura, A message Ferrying Approach
for data deliveryin sparse mobile adhoc networks, Mobihoc 2004.
[20] A.M. Khedr and H. Ramadan, Effective Sensor Relocation Technique
in Mobile Sensor Networks, IJCNC Vol3, No.1, january 2011.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-482-4
ICNS 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Networking and Services

