High Resolution mmWave Radar by Radar Fusion
and Sparse SAR
Thomas Moon
Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana-Champaign, USA
tmoon@illinois.edu
Abstract—In automotive applications, mmWave radar has been
limited to measuring the range of objects. Its limited role comes
from two reasons: low resolution in three-dimensional (3D)
imaging and blind spot from specularity. A single automotive
radar typically has less than 5GHz bandwidth, and therefore
its distance resolution is insufﬁcient. By fusing multiple radars
operating different frequencies, the total bandwidth of the radar
system can be increased. Strong specular effects of mmWave
signals cause incomplete or shabby radar images due to few
reﬂected signals. We address the blind spot problem with random
spatial sampling, resulting in the ability to reconstruct the radar
image with missing reﬂected signals. Numerical results are used
to prove the concept.
Index Terms—FMCW radar; SAR; Compressive Sensing;
Autonomous Vehicle.
I. INTRODUCTION
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) are no longer a dream, but a
close reality. Google has been working on self-driving tech-
nology since 2009 and begun testing their prototype without
a safety driver in 2017 [1]. Major automotive companies,
such as Nissan, BMW, Ford, Tesla, GM, have already started
testing their AVs and some of them announced a plan to
develop commercial AVs in the consumer market by 2020. The
recent progress in AVs has been achieved by the cutting-edge
technology including advanced control theory, deep learning,
sensor technology and so on. Among these advanced technolo-
gies, sensors that obtain 3D images of the environment are
the ﬁrst stage and one of the most important processes that
enable autonomous driving. Even in today’s non-autonomous
vehicles, a number of sensors are implemented to assist the
driver.
However, fully autonomous vehicles without any driver’s
intervention require some challenges to be cleared. In 2014,
the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) published a
standard that deﬁnes six different levels for vehicles from
fully manual (Level-0) to fully automated system (Level-
5) [2]. To achieve a Level-5 autonomous vehicle, the vehicle
should perform all the driving functions under all roadway and
environmental conditions that can be managed by a human
driver. In current AVs’ sensing system, optical sensors such
as Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) and camera take
a major role for 3D imaging. As both sensors operate at
the optical wavelength, they can provide accurate perception
in most scenarios. However, their sensing performance is
signiﬁcantly degraded in low visibility conditions such as fog,
smog, and snow because the light is scattered before it arrives
at the targets in such conditions [3].
In contrast to LiDAR and camera, radar can perform equally
well in fog, smog, snow, and dark, as well as in sunny weather.
A typical commercial LiDAR and radar system can achieve
around 150m range detection and camera can do 300m in the
sunny weather. While the camera visibility drops below 100m
in the dark and the LiDAR below 50m in fog, smog, and
snow, the radar can maintain almost the same performance in
any conditions [4]. F In recent years, the automotive industry
has started to adapt mmWave radar whose wavelength is much
shorter than the conventional radar. This advance provides the
radar system a higher resolution image. In addition to the
resolution beneﬁts, the size of the radar system is shrunk by
the shorter wavelength. With the compact size, forming an
array of antenna is feasible and practical.
However, the role of mmWave radar has been limited to
measuring the range of the objects in automotive application.
Its limited role comes from two reasons: (1) low resolution
in 3D imaging, (2) blind spot from specularity. A commercial
LiDAR can offer 3D images with the distance accuracy of
2cm, the vertical resolution of 1 degree and the horizontal
resolution of sub-degree [5]. On the other hand, the current
commercial automotive mmWave radar typically provides the
distance resolution of 5-70cm and the horizontal resolution
of 7-15 degree, which is not accurate enough to perform the
3D imaging [6] [7]. Furthermore, mmWave signals experience
mirror-like specular reﬂections causing only a few reﬂections
back to the radar receiver. According to recent researches [8]–
[10], 80% of the received power at 60-70GHz is carried by
specular contribution rather than by scattering effects. This
mirror-like characteristic can produce a blind spot of the radar
image.
Indeed, mmWave radar is a great candidate to support Li-
DAR and camera in harsh driving conditions in AVs. However,
we observe the following challenges that hamper the mmWave
radar from producing high resolution imaging.
● The upper limit of the distance resolution of mmWave
radar is no better than 3cm. In theory, the distance
resolution depends on the bandwidth of the transmitted
radar signal, i.e., a radar with wider bandwidth can give a
higher distance resolution. However, a single automotive
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

radar today typically has less than 5GHz bandwidth.
The limited bandwidth comes from hardware constraints
(antenna or front-end Radio Frequency (RF) devices). In
order to cover the wider bandwidth in a single radar
platform, its antenna should also support the wide band-
width which brings other technical challenges [11] [12].
A wideband tunable RF device with low latency is also
another requirement.
● The image acquired by mmWave radar can be either
incomplete or shabby due to strong specular effects of
mmWave signals. Because of the specular reﬂection, few
or none of the reﬂected signals off the object head back
to the radar.
We brieﬂy outline our core approaches and research ques-
tions next.
● Radar fusion: We propose to use the existing radar
platforms without any hardware modiﬁcation and utilize
them to collaborate with each other. By fusing the multi-
radars over different operating frequencies, the combined
information can be helpful to achieve a better resolution.
However, new challenges emerge when fusing the multi-
radars. (1) Simply concatenating the sample sets will lose
the coherency between them, and therefore does not lead
to improving the resolution. Preserving mutual coherence
is required prior to processing further. (2) With the mutual
coherence, the information is still missing in the fre-
quency gaps between the multi-radars. Precise modeling
of the missing gaps is a critical problem. (3) Adapting
compressive sensing algorithm to reconstruct the missing
information is not fully feasible in this scenario because
the operating frequencies are not spread over randomly.
As they are rather located in a speciﬁc frequency range,
the performance of the compressive reconstruction will
be compromised.
● Spatial diversity: In order to resolve the specularity in
mmWave signals, we exploit spatial diversity. We ob-
served that the specularity can give the radar a stronger
reﬂection than the scattering when the radar locates at
the right angle. By the mobility of automotive radar
due to vehicles’ movement, a synthetic aperture can
be created. However, implementing Synthetic Aperture
Radar (SAR) on vehicles has the following challenges. (1)
Unlike airborne ﬂight path whose velocity and trajectory
are close to constant and linear, the vehicles create an
irregular velocity and driving trajectory. (2) While the size
of synthetic aperture in airborne objects can be extremely
large, a much shorter aperture in the vehicle scenario may
not be enough to resolve the specularity by itself.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the proposed high resolution Frequency Modulated
Continuous Wave (FMCW) radar system. Section III discusses
the conclusions and future works.
Fig. 1.
An example of fusing two radar systems is shown. (a) Two radar
systems operating different bands. (b) Comparison of the resulting distance
proﬁles.
II. HIGH RESOLUTION FMCW
A. Radar Fusion
The distance resolution of FMCW radar, ∆d, is bounded
by its bandwidth,
∆d = C
2B
(1)
where C is the speed of light, and B is the bandwidth of the
FMCW radar. Increasing the bandwidth of radar, however, is
not a simple task. RF devices that support the wide bandwidth
are an expensive solution, especially to sweep the wide range
in a short period. It is also a challenging problem to design
a wideband antenna [11], [12]. Hence, it is urged to consider
a new approach for this problem. Instead of increasing the
bandwidth of a single radar, we propose to exploit the existing
mmWave radar platforms (i.e., 24GHz, 60GHz, and 79GHz
radars) without any hardware modiﬁcation and utilize them to
collaborate. By fusing the multiple radars over different fre-
quencies, the combined information can be helpful to achieve
a better resolution.
Consider an FMCW system with a full bandwidth that can
achieve the desired distance resolution. Fig. 1 (a) shows an
example of two sub-radar systems operating in two different
frequencies. Each sub-radar system has a worse distance
resolution than the one with the full bandwidth shown in Fig. 1
(b). For the sake of simplicity, we assume every radar has the
same FMCW slope, α, and the same period of measurement,
T. Then, the sub-radars can be viewed as a truncated FMCW
system. The received signal for the full-bandwidth FMCW is
xfull(t) =
M
∑
m=1
ej2π(ατmt+f0τm),t = nTs,n = 0,...,N − 1 (2)
where M is the number of reﬂectors, τm is the TOF of the
m-th reﬂector, f0 is the starting frequency of the FMCW, Ts
is the sampling period, and N is the number of samples. Note
that the frequency and the phase of the received signal are
related to τm. Then, we can deﬁne a support function h(t) as
h(t) = rectT (t − t1) + rectT (t − t2)
(3)
where rectT (t) is a rectangular function centered at 0 whose
period is T, and amplitude is 1. The measured beat signal from
the sub-radars is expressed by multiplying h(t) and xfull:
xmeas(t) = h(t) ⋅ xfull(t) + w(t).
(4)
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Fig. 2. (a) FFT magnitude of the measured beat signal reﬂected by a single
reﬂector. (b) Error function.
where w(t) is additive white Gaussian noise. The best estimate
of τm would minimize the following error function:
E(̃τ̃τ̃τ) = 1
N
N−1
∑
n=0
∣∣xmeas(nTs)
− h(nTs) ⋅
M
∑
m=1
ej2π(α ˜
τmnTs+f0 ˜
τm)∣∣2,
where ̃τ̃τ̃τ is a M-length vector of τ1,...,τM. However, the error
function is not convex due to the complex exponentials. For
further simplicity, consider a single τ and the frequency bands
of the two radars are right next to each other, leading to a
single rectangular function h(t) with a full band period. The
error function can be re-written as
E(˜τ) = 1
N
N−1
∑
n=0
∣∣ej2π(ατnTs+f0τ) − ej2π(α˜τnTs+f0˜τ)∣∣2
= 2 − 2
N cos[2π(f0 + α(N − 1)Ts
2
)(τ − ˜τ)]
⋅ sin[παNTs(τ − ˜τ)]
sin[παTs(τ − ˜τ)]
If one can ﬁnd ˜τ that satisﬁes the minimum value of the error
function, the distance resolution can be improved better than
C
2B .
The error function can be considered as an amplitude
modulated signal with a carrier signal of frequency f0 + (N −
1)αTs/2 enveloped by the aliased sinc function as shown
in Fig. 2 (b). Note that the period of the carrier signal is
dominated by the starting frequency f0 (20-80GHz range) than
the bandwidth term (below 5GHz), which results in multiple
periods of the carrier signal in one FFT bin. Hence, gradient
descent would not ﬁnd the global optimum point due to many
local minima in the search range. One can evaluate the error
function by exhaustive search. The initial estimation of ˜τ can
be given by the location of the FFT peak (38th FFT bin)
in Fig. 2 (a). However, ﬁnding the global minimum (38.4 in
Fig. 2 (b)) requires a very ﬁne step size due to high-frequency
components from the carrier signal. The computation time will
even worsen when there are multiple reﬂectors in a single FFT
bin. Therefore, we propose to leverage the envelope instead of
directly using the error function as a cost function. Because
the envelope shares the minimum point with the original error
function, one can ﬁnd the same solution. The envelop signal
varies slower and has fewer local minima, which will cause
fewer difﬁculties to ﬁnd the minimum value.
The description above assumes a single reﬂector and a
smooth truncated FMCW system. Various research questions
show up when these assumptions are not valid anymore. (1)
The number of reﬂectors is usually unknown. An additional
process to estimate the number of reﬂectors before solving the
problem is required. (2) Multiple numbers of reﬂectors can be
located within a single FFT bin. It will increase the number of
variables to solve. Even with the single reﬂector assumption,
an extremely ﬁne step size is required due to the high-
frequency component in the error function. (3) The truncated
FMCW systems will have a frequency gap between them. It
will make the error function complicated and challenging to
solve.
B. Spatial Diversity
mmWave signals experience mirror-like reﬂections on the
surface of the objects [8]–[10]. Because of the specular
reﬂection, few or none of the reﬂected signals off the object
can head back to the radar unlike the scattering effect (or
diffuse reﬂection). The specular reﬂection becomes even more
substantial on a smooth metallic surface, such as vehicles. The
weak back-reﬂection due to specularity will produce an either
incomplete or shabby image.
In order to resolve the specularity in mmWave signals, we
exploit the spatial diversity of the vehicles. We observed that
the specularity can give the radar a stronger reﬂection than the
scattering when the radar locates at the right angle. In addition
to resolving specularity, the spatial diversity can also help the
radar improving its image. During the motion of the radar
on a vehicle, the data is collected over time. The different
geometric positions of the radar created by the motion of the
radar produce a large synthetic aperture. In theory, a larger
antenna aperture can produce a higher resolution.
The conventional SAR algorithms, such as Range-Doppler,
utilize the phase-modulation effect of the echo signals and
transform the spatial domain into the spatial frequency domain
to resolve the locations of the objects. The Range-Doppler
approach, however, is challenging to adapt non-uniform spatial
sampling. In this paper, we consider a linear inverse-based
SAR algorithm in order to incorporate random radar motion.
SAR imaging can be viewed as a linear inverse problem in
which the unknowns are the reﬂectivity map of the objects. A
received signal at position u is linearly related to the unknowns
as:
ru(t) = ∬ s(x,y)ej2π[ατ(x,y;u)t+f0τ(x,y;u)] dxdy
(5)
where s(x,y) is the reﬂectivity map at x and y. Note that
τ is a function of x and y at given u. We can discretize x
and y and vectorize s(x,y) and obtain the following system
equation at u:
ru = Aus + w,
(6)
where s is the vectorized s(x,y), w is additive white Gaussian
noise, and Au is the matrix whose columns are the complex-
exponential kernels in (5). By stacking the entire received
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Fig. 3. SAR performance comparison by simulation : (a) original scene, (b) proposed sparse-driven SAR, and (c) conventional SAR by pseudo-inverse.
signal at all u, the entire system becomes r = As + w. Given
the limited number of measurements, the inverse problem can
be ill-posed. We exploit the observation that the reﬂectivity
map is sparse consisting of a small number of objects. Hence,
the estimation of s can be obtained by
min
s
1
2∥r − As∥2 + λ∥s∥1
(7)
The choice of λ determines the relative contribution of
the sparsity. Fig. 3 illustrates the simulation results of SAR
images. By randomly taking 30% of the entire spatial samples,
the reconstructed images by the sparse-driven SAR and by the
pseudo-inverse are shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c), respectively.
While the sparse-driven SAR can reconstruct accurate SAR
images with random radar positions, several research questions
remain as the followings: (1) The target objects are assumed to
be ideal scatters. Can we model the specularity and reconstruct
the image? (2) The position of the radar has no error in the
above simulation. When there exists noise in the measurement
of the radar position, how can we adapt the errors? (3) In
the practical scene, the targets are expected to be piecewise
smooth, which is not modeled in the above model. Can we
incorporate such smoothness in our model?
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed research demonstrates how the performance
of mmWave radar can be extended and provide autonomous
vehicles with more reliable sensing capability. This research
provides a new method for increasing the mmWave radar
resolution by understanding the principles of electromagnetic
(EM) radiation and the mathematical model of radar under
dynamic vehicle motion.
● The proposed research will develop a model to combine
multiple radar platforms and fuse the information in order
to achieve better distance resolution. We will gain a better
understanding of radar fusion and establish a framework
to investigate the behavior of mmWave signals at different
frequencies.
● The proposed research will investigate how the specu-
larity of mmWave signal degrades the radar image. By
understanding its specular behavior in vehicle situations,
we will develop a new model for automotive radar
imaging that resolves the specularity.
● The proposed research will incorporate the dynamics of
vehicles in radar sensing/imaging. We will integrate the
principles of EM radiation and the mathematical model
of the radar in dynamic vehicle motion. This will provide
a new algorithm for higher resolution radar images.
REFERENCES
[1] A.
J.
Hawkins,
“Waymo
is
ﬁrst
to
put
fully
self-
driving
cars
on
US
roads
without
a
safety
driver,”
https://www.theverge.com/2017/11/7/16615290/waymo-self-driving-
safety-driver-chandler-autonomous, accessed: 2021-05-19.
[2] SAE On-Road Automated Vehicle Standards Committee and others,
“Taxonomy and deﬁnitions for terms related to driving automation
systems for on-road motor vehicles,” SAE International, 2021, accessed:
2021-05-19.
[3] B. Yamauchi, “Fusing ultra-wideband radar and lidar for small ugv
navigation in all-weather conditions,” in Int. Soc. Opt. Eng.(SPIE), vol.
7692, 2010, pp. 1–10.
[4] M. Barnard, “Tesla and Google Disagree About LIDAR? Which
Is Right?” https://cleantechnica.com/2016/07/29/tesla-google-disagree-
lidar-right/, 2016, accessed: 2021-05-19.
[5] Velodyne, http://velodynelidar.com/products.html, 2018, accessed: 2021-
05-19.
[6] Bosch, “Radar-based driver assistance systems,” https://www.bosch-
mobility-solutions.com/media/global/products-and-services/passenger-
cars-and-light-commercial-vehicles/driver-assistance-
systems/predictive-emergency-braking-system/mid-range-radar-sensor-
(mrr)/product-data-sheet-mid-range-radar-sensor-(mrr).pdf,
2018,
accessed: 2021-05-19.
[7] J. Hasch et al., “Millimeter-wave technology for automotive radar
sensors in the 77 ghz frequency band,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave
Theory and Techniques, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 845–860, 2012.
[8] W. Fan, I. Carton, J. Ø. Nielsen, K. Olesen, and G. F. Pedersen,
“Measured wideband characteristics of indoor channels at centimetric
and millimetric bands,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications
and Networking, vol. 2016, no. 1, p. 58, 2016.
[9] K. Haneda, J. J¨arvel¨ainen, A. Karttunen, M. Kyr¨o, and J. Putkonen,
“A statistical spatio-temporal radio channel model for large indoor
environments at 60 and 70 ghz,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 2694–2704, 2015.
[10] F. Fuschini et al., “Analysis of in-room mm-wave propagation: Direc-
tional channel measurements and ray tracing simulations,” Journal of
Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 727–744,
2017.
[11] P. S. Hall, P. Gardner, and A. Faraone, “Antenna requirements for
software deﬁned and cognitive radios,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.
100, no. 7, pp. 2262–2270, 2012.
[12] P. S. Hall et al., “Reconﬁgurable antenna challenges for future radio sys-
tems,” in Antennas and Propagation, 2009. EuCAP 2009. 3rd European
Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 949–955.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

