Mobility-based Greedy Forwarding Mechanism for Wireless Sensor Networks 
 
Riad Kouah, Mohamed Aissani 
Research Unit in Computer Science 
Ecole Militaire Polytechnique (EMP) 
P.O. Box 17 Bordj-El-Bahri, Algiers, Algeria 
riadkouah@hotmail.com, maissani@gmail.com 
Samira Moussaoui 
Computer Science Department 
University of Science and Technology (USTHB) 
P.O. Box 32, Bab-Ezzouar, Algiers, Algeria 
smoussaoui@usthb.dz 
 
 
Abstract—Geographic routing in mobile sensor networks has 
attracted attention in recent years. When a sensor node has a 
packet to forward, it selects the closest available neighbor to 
the sink as next forwarder regarding only location parameter. 
However, this strategy does not consider the mobility of sensor 
nodes. To overcome this problem, we propose in this paper an 
efficient geographic routing mechanism based on a new next-
hop selection metric. It combines the distance to the sink, the 
moving direction and the moving speed of the forwarding 
candidate neighbors. This moving direction is based on 
neighbor evolution in distance according to the sink calculated 
by a sender node between two successive received location 
beacons. Associated with the well-known GPSR routing 
protocol, our mechanism achieved good performance in both 
delivering data packets and conserving resources of sensor 
nodes. 
Keywords—mobile sensor networks; geographic routing; 
sensor mobility; greedy forwarding. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Geographic routing in wireless sensor networks (WSNs), 
and especially greedy forwarding, is a new challenge when 
nodes move. In fact, the efficient and scalable greedy 
forwarding is a promising scheme for large-scale WSNs 
when location of each node is available [1, 2]. Indeed, the 
current packet is forwarded to a 1-hop neighbor who is closer 
to the sink than the sender node. This process is repeated 
until the data packet reaches the sink. Traditionally, the next-
forwarder selection is based only on the location parameter. 
However, this can degrade the performance of geographic 
routing in mobile WSNs. The location failure, which is 
resulted from mobility of nodes, degrades the routing 
performance in delivering packets and wastes the limited 
energy of nodes. 
Although existing works [3-9], summarized in Section 
II, play important roles in improving the performance of the 
geographic routing in mobile WSNs, design of new routing 
solutions is still a challenging research area. Thus, we first 
analyze in this paper the impact of node mobility on the 
routing performance and then we propose an efficient 
geographical routing mechanism, called MGF (Mobility-
based Greedy Forwarding), which combines the distance to 
the sink, the moving direction and the moving speed of the 
forwarding candidate neighbors of a sender node in a new 
routing decision metric. This combination is also used the 
DGF (Direction-based Greedy Forwarding) mechanism that 
we have proposed in our previous work [10]. The difference 
between the two mechanisms is explained as follows. To 
calculate a neighbor moving direction according to the sink, 
the DGF mechanism uses the neighbor evolution in both 
distance and angle between two successive location beacons 
that receives a sender node, but the MGF mechanism uses 
the neighbor evolution in distance only. 
We associate the proposed MGF mechanism with the 
well-known GPSR (Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing) 
protocol [2] in order to improve its efficiency in mobile 
WSNs and the obtained protocol is called GPSR-MS (GPSR 
with Mobile Sensors). The major difference between GPSR-
MS and existing protocols dedicated for mobile WSNs 
(Section II) includes the following aspects: 
• GPSR-MS operates without organizing network in 
clusters, while the majority of existing routing 
protocols designed for mobile WSNs are cluster-
based where the maintenance process consumes many 
resources of sensor nodes. 
• In existing cluster-based routing protocols, the greedy 
forwarding mode is not applied, while the GPSR-MS 
protocol is based on this scalable and efficient mode. 
• Few of existing routing protocols are designed for 
mobile WSNs. Therefore, the GPSR-MS protocol 
strengthens this class of protocols. Our objective is to 
maximize the packet delivery ratio with the minimum 
consumption of energy. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the main routing schemes and protocols proposed 
in literature for mobile WSNs. Section III discusses the 
node mobility effect on the greedy forwarding performance. 
Section IV presents the proposed MGF mechanism. Section 
V evaluates performance of our proposal. Section VI 
concludes the paper. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Node mobility has added several challenges in mobile 
WSNs. One of these challenges is routing. Existing routing 
protocols in mobile WSNs based on type of nodes are 
regrouped in three classes: protocols that support static 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

nodes and mobile sink(s) [3-4], protocols that support 
mobile nodes and static sink(s) [5-8], and protocols that 
support mobile nodes and mobile sink(s) [9]. In literature, 
the majority of works have been focused on the first class of 
protocols. In other hand, there are less works concerning 
both the second and the third class. 
Fodor et al. [3] propose the gradient-based routing 
protocol (GBRP) to use mobile sinks that move in order to 
decrease the energy consumption of the whole network. In 
GBRP, sensor nodes maintain a list of neighboring next 
hops that are in the right direction towards the closest sink. 
The protocol uses a restricted flooding to update locations of 
the mobile sinks. The principle behind is to register by each 
node the cost between the appropriate sink and the given 
node and to update only these routing entities where the 
relative change in cost is above a threshold. Wang et al. [4] 
propose a mobile sink routing protocol (MSRP) with 
registering in cluster-based mobile WSNs. The MSRP 
architecture consists of four phases: clustering, registering, 
dissemination and maintenance. The cluster-heads are 
elected and the network is divided into multiple clusters 
during the first phase. The mobile sink which comes into the 
communication range of a cluster-head is registered into this 
cluster using the second phase. Once the mobile sink is 
registered, it immediately receives from the cluster-head all 
sensed data in the cluster during the third phase. Possible 
new sensor nodes are added to the cluster and the cluster-
head is then evaluated during the fourth phase. Yang et al. 
[5] propose a dynamic enclose cell (DEC) routing algorithm 
which decreases the control overhead by constructing cells 
to retain stable the network in high mobility. DEC groups 
the nodes into cells and develops the routing path using the 
cells boundaries. When the nodes are moving, only the 
adjacent cells of the moving nodes are reconstructed. In this 
way, the negative impact of the node mobility is minimized. 
Arboleda et al. [6] propose a cluster-based routing (CBR) 
protocol for mobile WSNs using zone-base information and 
a cluster-like communication between nodes. The CBR 
protocol is based on two stages: route creation and route 
preservation. Lambrou et al. [7] present a routing scheme 
for hybrid mobile WSNs that forwards packets to mobile 
nodes. The routing of data messages, containing position of 
each detected event, can be easily achieved using a 
geographic routing based on greedy techniques towards a 
fixed sink. Moreover, the sink can easily request 
information from a specific region or even a single static 
node using the position information. Santhosh-Kumar et al. 
[8] propose an adaptive cluster-based routing (ACBR) 
scheme for mobile WSNs by including mobility as a new 
criterion for creation and maintenance of clusters. Saad et al. 
[9] propose an energy efficient routing algorithm called 
Ellipse-Routing. Using a region-based routing, the proposed 
algorithm builds a virtual ellipse thanks to the source and 
the sink geographic positions. So, only nodes within this 
ellipse can forward a message towards the sink. Then, the 
algorithm was extended in order to take in account the 
errors that occur in node location. 
III. NODE MOBILITY EFFECT ON GREEDY FORWARDING 
In greedy forwarding, the selected next forwarder is the 
closest neighbor to the sink in term of distance, projection, 
or direction based only on the nodes’ location. But, mobility 
of nodes causes the problem of location information 
freshness inside the neighbors table of each sender node. 
This may result failures in routing decisions. This problem 
can be resolved by broadcasting location beacons. But when 
node mobility increases rapidly, the beaconing overhead 
(packet control) grows also rapidly. 
When nodes move, the greedy forwarding mode does not 
often guaranty positive progression of data packets towards 
the sink. Thus, when a sender node selects its next 
forwarder, the later may be not available because it moved. 
In the other hand, another node can comes into the sender 
neighborhood, but it is not considered when selecting the 
next forwarder because it was not detected by the sender 
node. This situation has its importance when the non-
detected node is the closest neighbor to the sink. 
Figure 1 shows the impact of location beaconing period 
on greedy forwarding. When this period is long, table of 
neighbors of current node   will be obsolete due to 
movements of nodes  and . At time  (Figure 1-a), node 
 is leaving the communication range of node  and node  
is coming into this range. At time  (Figure 1-b), if node  
selects as forwarder node  (i.e., a non-available neighbor), 
the packet will be lost due to link failure. In the other hand, 
the non-detected neighbor  is not considered by node  
although it is the closest neighbor to sink . 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.  Beaconing period impact on greedy forwarding. 
Figure 2 presents the nodes’ moving direction impact on 
the greedy forwarding. At time   (Figure 2-a), node  
moves toward sink   and node   moves in the opposite 
sense of sink . However, at time  (Figure 2-b), node  
will be the closest neighbor to sink  according to node . 
But, the closest neighbor in the neighbors table of node  is 
always node . Because the obsolete table of node , the 
packets that should be sent to node  will be always sent to 
node . This problem will be resolved in next broadcasting 
period. Figure 3 depicts the nodes’ moving speed impact on 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

the greedy forwarding. Current node  has two neighbors: 
node   and node   that move in the same direction 
regarding sink , but node  is more speedy than node . At 
time  (Figure 3-a), node  is closest to sink  than node . 
Then node  is the best forwarder node. At time  (Figure 
3-b), node  becomes closer to sink  than node . But, 
node  will not be considered as the new best forwarder 
because the neighbors table of current node   is not yet 
updated. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.  Node moving direction impact on greedy forwarding. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.  Nodes’ moving speed impact on greedy forwarding. 
 
Also, mobile nodes can repair voids that appear in a 
WSN due to their moving propriety. Consequently, greedy 
forwarding mode will be more preferment by using the 
shortest paths. With mobility of nodes, effect of the problem 
caused by voids (holes) on geographic routing performance 
is reduced [11]. In fact, the movement of sensor nodes can 
eliminate some voids created in WSNs. Thus, a geographic 
routing protocol, such as GPSR, reduces the use of 
bypassing mode where routing paths are long and then the 
energy consumption is excessive and the end-to-end delay is 
extended.  
In greedy forwarding mode, the progress of packets 
toward the sink is rapid. Figure 4 shows the positive impact 
of nodes’ mobility on routing-path length, between source 
node  and destination node , by repairing a void without 
using a specific scheme. Consequently, GPSR will use 
reedy mode in the most cases. At time  (Figure 4-a), a 
void appears in network. At time  (Figure 4-b), this void is 
repaired thanks to movement of some nodes. Then, average 
path length, end-to-end delay and energy consumption will 
be reduced significantly. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.  Nodes’ movement impact on repairing voids. 
IV. PROPOSED MGF MECHANISM 
To be efficient in mobile WSNs, the proposed MGF 
mechanism uses a new decision metric when selecting the 
next forwarder of the current packet. This metric considers 
the moving direction, the moving speed, and the distance to 
the sink of forwarding candidate neighbors of the sender 
node. The MGF mechanism supposes that each node moves 
with a strict direction according to the sink. However, each 
neighbor of a node  can moves toward sink , moves away 
from sink , or stills static according to sink . The moving 
direction is defined by the distance variation of the 
neighbors according to sink , as shown in Figure 5. The 
moving direction of neighbor , between two recent times 
 and , is calculated using its two last distances to sink . 
Neighbor  may approaches (or far from) sink  in term of 
distance variation. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Node approaching to the sink in term of distance. 
 
The greedy mode weaknesses, discussed in this section, 
induce packet losses, delivery delays and excessive energy 
consumption. Indeed, the use of only distance to select the 
intermediate forwarders has limits in dynamic environments 
caused by nodes’ mobility. However, the use of periodic and 
frequent location beacons cannot resolve the problem 
because it creates packet collisions, overloads the network 
and consumes more energy. Consequently, some packets 
will be lost and other packets will be delayed. Therefore, the 
next forwarder selection in a node must consider multiple 
 
 
 
 
	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

metrics of its neighbors, such as moving speed, moving 
direction and distance to the sink. The objective is to obtain 
a geographic routing protocol that maximizes the packet 
delivery ratio, minimizes the average path length and 
reduces the control packet overhead. 
We suppose a WSN formed by one static sink and 
several mobile nodes. Thanks to network initialization 
phase, each node knows its position, positions of its 
neighbors, and the sink’s position. Also, each node has a 
table (TABLE I) which contains information about its 
neighbors, such as location, moving speed and moving 
direction. The proposed MGF mechanism operates in two 
following phases: neighbors’ information update and next-
forwarder selection. 
 
1) Neighbors’ information update: Each sensor node 
broadcasts periodically a 1-hop location beacon informing 
its neighbors about its geographic position. The period of 
this beacon can be fixed according to the nodes’ moving 
speed. Thanks to these beacons, each node updates a local 
table containing information about all neighbors. We added 
to these table two new fields to record moving speed and 
moving direction of each neighbor. TABLE I shows the 
structure of the neighbors’ table of a node. We also added a 
specific field in a location beacon, where the structure is 
given in TABLE II, to convey the moving speed of a node 
to all its neighbors. When a node  receives a beacon 
 from 
its neighbor , it checks the existence of  in its neighbors’ 
table . If node  does not exist, node  inserts information 
concerning  in  (TABLE I), else it calculates the new 
moving direction of  by using Formula (1), where ,  
represents the old distance separating 	,  from sink  
calculated using , 
,  is the new distance separating 
 from  calculated using 
. The distances ,  and 

,  are based on locations that are extracted from , 
respectively from 
, are given by the respective formulas 
(2) and (3). Note that 	,  and , are locations of  in , 
	, and , are locations of  in 
, 	 and  are locations 
of sink s in current node . Once the above calculations are 
done by node , it updates all information concerning each 
neighbor  in its table . 
,   , 

,                                                            1 
,   	,  	  ,                        2 

,   	,  	  ,                        3 
 
2) Next-forwarder selection: This phase aims to 
enhance the greedy mode of GPSR by handling parameters 
of the mobile nodes. Thus, we propose a new routing factor 
combining three parameters: 1) distance ,  between 
neighbor   and sink  , 2) moving direction ,  of 
neighbor  and 3) moving speed   ! of neighbor . 
When current node  has to send a packet to sink , by using 
a greedy forwarding, it selects from its neighbors table a 
node   having the smallest "#$%&',   given by 
Formula (4), where direction ,  is given by Formula 
(1). Note that when ,  is equal to 1 then  is static, 
when it is greater than 1 then  approaches the sink, and 
when it is less than 1 then  moves away from the sink. 
"#$%&',   ,  ( , 
  ! 
                4 
TABLE I.  STRUCTURE OF A NEIGHBORS TABLE. 
Field 
Mission/Content 
ID 
Identifier of a neighbor node 
Position 
Coordinates 	*,* of a neighbor +  
Direction 
Neighbor moving direction 
Speed 
Neighbor moving speed 
ExpTime 
Expire time of a neighbor in the table 
TABLE II.  STRUCTURE OF A LOCATION BEACON. 
Field 
Mission/Content 
ID 
Identifier of the node that sent a beacon 
Position 
Location of the node that sent a beacon 
Speed 
Moving speed of the node that sent a beacon 
 
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
We first implemented and evaluated the traditional GPSR 
protocol using the simulator NS2 [12] with mobility of 
nodes. Then we associated the proposed MGF mechanism 
with GPSR and evaluated in same conditions the resulting 
protocol (GPSR-MS). Since GPSR can handle mobility of 
nodes by reducing the location beacon period, we evaluate 
performance of this protocol under four values of this period 
(2, 3, 4 and 5 milliseconds) and obtained results are shown in 
the graphs as GPSR(2), GPSR(3), GPSR(4) and GPSR(5), 
respectively. This period is set to 5 milliseconds (ms) for the 
proposed GPSR-MS protocol. 
For our simulations, we used a terrain 600×600 meters 
with 350 mobile sensors deployed randomly. Then they 
moves according to Random Waypoint Model (RWM) with 
a random speed in [5-20] mps (meter per second) to simulate 
the mobility in realistic environments. The sink is placed at 
the center of the terrain and 12 sources are selected 
randomly. Each source generates one CBR flow with a rate 
increased step by step from 1 to 12 pps (packet per second). 
For each rate and at the end of the simulation time, we 
measure the packet delivery ratio, the control packet 
overhead, the average path length and the network energy 
consumption per delivered packet. 
Compared to the original GPSR protocol in Figure 6, the 
proposed GPSR-MS protocol achieves a better packet 
delivery ratio. Indeed, the number of packets dropped in 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

GPSR is important when a beaconing period is large (5 
milliseconds). Also, Figure 7 shows a good performance of 
GPSR-MS in term of average path length compared to the 
original GPSR protocol. This is due to our MGF mechanism 
that dynamically selects as next forwarders the neighbors 
that move toward the sink. 
Note that when the location beacon is not large (2 
milliseconds) the average routing-path length is reduced in 
the original GPSR protocol because tables of neighbors of 
sensor nodes are frequently updated. Consequently, GPSR 
generates many location beacons that overload the network 
(Figure 8) and then consumes excessive energy of sensor 
nodes (Figure 9). On the other hand, the proposed GPSR-MS 
protocol delivers more data packets, generates less control 
overhead and optimally manages energy of nodes compared 
to all variants of the GPSR protocol. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Packet delivery ratio vs. source rate. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Average path length vs. source rate. 
 
Figure 8.  Control packet ovearhead vs. source rate. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Energy consumption vs. source rate. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Existing geographic schemes using greedy forwarding in 
mobile WSNs still have problems according mobility of 
sensor nodes. To contribute on solving these problems, we 
have proposed the MGF mechanism for mobile WSNs. It is 
simple to implement, saves the network resources and could 
be associated with various geographic routing protocols. The 
merit of our proposal is that the current packet is forwarded 
to the best neighbor node in terms of distance, moving 
direction and moving speed according to the static sink. We 
have associated the MGF mechanism with the well-known 
GPSR protocol and the resulting protocol, called GPSR-MS, 
has achieved good performance compared to different 
0,60
0,64
0,68
0,72
0,76
0,80
0,84
0,88
0,92
0,96
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
packet delivery ratio (%)
rate (pps)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
average path length (#hops)
rate (pps)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
0,018
0,019
0,021
0,022
0,024
0,025
0,026
0,028
0,029
0,031
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
control packet overhead  (%)
rate (pps)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
0,090
0,094
0,098
0,102
0,106
0,110
0,114
0,118
0,122
0,126
0,130
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
energy consumption  (j/p)
rate (pps)
GPSR-MS
GPSR(5)
GPSR(4)
GPSR(3)
GPSR(2)
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

versions of the original GPSR. Indeed, GPSR-MS delivers 
more packets, broadcasts less control packets, uses the 
shortest routing paths and economizes much energy of 
sensor nodes. Our future work will evaluate performance of 
the GPSR-MS protocol with the group mobility concept. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Q. Fang, J. Gao, and L.J. Guibas, “Locating and bypassing 
holes in sensor networks,” IEEE Mobile Networks and 
Applications, vol. 11(2), pp. 187–200, April 2006. 
[2] B. Karp and H. Kung, “GPSR: Greedy perimeter stateless 
routing for wireless networks,” Proc. of the ACM/IEEE 
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 243-
254, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, August 6-11, 2000. 
[3] K. Fodor and A. Vidacs, “Efficient Routing to Mobile Sinks 
in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. of the 2nd International 
Workshop on Performance Control in WSNs (PWSN), pp. 1–
7, Austin, Texas, USA, October 23, 2007. 
[4] Y.H. Wang, K.F. Huang, P.F. Fu, and J.X. Wang, “Mobile 
Sink Routing Protocol with Registering in Cluster-Based 
WSNs,” Proc. of the 5th International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing, pp. 527-535, Oslo, 
Norway, June 23-25, 2008. 
[5] Y. Yang, L. Dong-Hyun, P.K. Myong-Soon, and I.H. Peter, 
“Dynamic Enclose Cell Routing in Mobile Sensor Networks,” 
Proc. of the Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference 
(APSEC), pp.736-737, Busan, Korea, Nov. 30 – Dec. 3, 2004. 
[6] M. Liliana, C. Arboleda, and N. Nidal, “Cluster-based 
Routing Protocol for Mobile Sensor Networks,” Proc. of the 
3rd International Conference on Quality of Service in 
Heterogeneous Wired/Wireless Networks, pp. 24-28, Canada, 
August 7–9, 2006. 
[7] C.G. Panayiotou, T. Theofanis, and P. Lambrou, “A Survey 
on Routing Techniques supporting Mobility in Sensor 
Networks,” Proc. of the 5th International Conference on 
Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, pp. 78–85, China, Dec. 
14-16, 2009. 
[8] G.S. Kumar, A. Sitara, and K.P. Jacob, “An adaptive cluster 
based routing scheme for mobile wireless sensor networks,” 
Proc. of the 2nd International Conference on Computing, 
Communications and Networking Technologies, pp. 1-5, 
Karur, India, July 29-31, 2010. 
[9] C. Saad, A. Benslimane, J. Champ, and J.C. Konig, “Ellipse 
routing: A Geographic Routing Protocol for Mobile Sensor 
Networks with uncertain positions,” Proc. of the 2nd Int’l 
Conference on Future Generation Communication and 
Networking, pp. 1–5, Sanya, China, December 13-15, 2008. 
[10] R. Kouah, S. Moussaoui and M. Aissani, “Direction-based 
Greedy Forwarding in Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks”, 
Proc. of the Eighth Advanced International Conference on 
Telecommunications (AICT), Stuttgart, Germany, May 27-
June 1, 2012. 
[11] M. Aissani, A. Mellouk, N. Badache, and M. Boumaza, “A 
Novel Approach for Void Avoidance in Wireless Sensor 
Networks, International Journal of Communication Systems 
(IJCS), vol. 23(8), pp. 945–962, 2010. 
[12] Collaboration between researchers at UC Berkeley, LBL, 
USC/ISI, and Xerox PARC. The ns Manual, on line at: 
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/, last access in Jan. 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

