Customized and Geolocated TV Channels about The Way of Saint James 
 
 
Sonia Valladares Rodríguez, Manuel J. Fernández Iglesias, Roberto Soto Barreiros, Luis E. Anido Rifón, Carlos 
Rivas Costa 
Department of Telematics Engineering 
University of Vigo 
Vigo, Spain 
{soniavr, manolo, rsoto, lanido, carlosrivas}@det.uvigo.es 
 
 
Abstract—The technical and procedural state of the art in 
video distribution and computer-mediated collaboration is 
mature enough to revisit the traditional television concept. The 
evolution of the state of the art made possible the concept of 
personal television, understood as viewers configuring what 
they wish to watch assisted by a smart recommendation system 
that proposes content adapted to their personal profile. We 
introduce a personalized interactive service platform intended 
to enhance the experience of completing the Way of Saint 
James. This platform can be accessed using devices like TV 
sets, mobile terminals or personal computers, and it is 
technologically supported by a blend of interactive TV, mobile 
communications, geolocation and semantic recommendation 
technologies. This proposal enhances the online provision of 
multi-technology services, the final users’ experience by 
providing accurate, personalized and geolocated multimedia 
content on the Way of Saint James as well as the promotion of 
tourism initiatives related to the Way, a key aspect in the 
promotion of Galice and Spain as touristic destinations. 
Keywords- TV Channels; customization; geolocation; The 
Way of Saint James; recommendation semantic model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Way of St. James as a framework for personal and 
spiritual development has not been conveniently addressed 
from a technological point of view. Along the Way, pilgrim-
targeted services are mainly focused on weather forecast, 
alternateroutes, difficulties to overcome, places to visit, etc. 
In turn, the platform discussed in this paper is intended to 
provide interactive, personalized online information services 
according to the profile and location of individual pilgrims. 
More specifically, it facilitates the creation, management and 
visualization of customized content channels fed from a 
broad range of content providers. In line with the very 
concept of completing the Way of St. James, this proposal 
tackles some aspects with relevant social impact, like 
accessibility, personalisation and ubiquity.  
The development of this service platform was initiated 
with a thorough analysis of the state of the art, which is 
discussed in Sect. II. This analysis was focused on the 
technologies supporting the development of the system, 
namely Internet TV, mobile technologies, geolocation, and 
semantic technologies. Then, we discuss in Sect. III the 
application 
of 
semantic 
technologies 
and 
smart 
recommendation techniques to develop personalized services 
and to provide access to geolocated content using mobile 
terminals, which will guarantee the ubiquity of the services 
provided. We also discuss there collaborative tagging of 
resources as a tool to implement automated personalized 
content programming, which basically consists on utilizing a 
collectively generated knowledge base to develop algorithms 
to generate a personalized programming grid targeted to final 
users, namely pilgrims and pilgrim hostels along the Way. A 
content revision system has also been implemented to 
address issues like the verification of author rights, age 
classification of content, or tag validation. 
Section IV is devoted to introduce the platform’s main 
features, 
architecture, 
services 
deployed, 
and 
some 
implementation feedback. Geolocated and personalized 
multimedia channels may be accessed using mobile devices 
or smart TV sets in hostels. In this later case, the hostel 
management will define the actual programming grid. We 
will also discuss the main characteristics of the system back-
end, that is, a multimedia content repository fed from 
different sources, including official content providers (e.g., 
public administrations, public broadcasters); hostels along 
the Way providing news, information about hostel facilities 
or specific recommendations; and the pilgrims themselves, 
as they have available a personal space to socialise and share 
videos according to the Web 2.0 concept.  
Finally, Section V provides some conclusions and 
lessons learnt from the implementation of the platform and 
the provision of multiple services. 
In a nutshell, this platform illustrates the application of 
state-of-the art and novel information and communication 
technologies to contribute to the advance of tourism-related 
services, a strategic sector for the Galician and Spanish 
economy.The development of a semantic recommendation 
engine in this context is the most relevant novel contribution 
of the research presented in this paper. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
There are several information systems available related to 
the Way of St. James. Most of them are web portals like the 
Pilgrim’s Web [1], caminodesantiago.com [2] or xacobeo.es 
[3]. All these systems provide as their main feature 
information about the Way, including route alternatives, 
points of interest, or weather forecast information. In some 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

cases, they also provide functionalities to facilitate 
communication among pilgrims though discussion fora, 
comments or ratings. The information provided is mostly 
static and is never personalized according to the pilgrims’ 
profile or their location. Thus, we can conclude that the 
pilgrims’ experience could be dramatically improved by 
providing a multimedia-based, multi-platform information 
service. For this, we will rely on three base technologies to 
build the foundation of this proposal: 
1) Internet-TV: it facilitates access to Internet services 
through TV sets. This technology blends information 
transmission and multimedia content broadcasting through 
IP networks, and supports the visualisation of content using 
a broad range of devices, including smartphones, tablets, 
game consoles, Internet-enabled TV sets, or HTPCs, that is, 
small, low-cost computers embedding a media centre (e.g., 
Mediaportal [4], Windows Media Center [5], MooVida [6] 
or XBMC [7]) to facilitate multimedia content visualisation, 
Web access, and additional Internet TV services. 
2) Mobile and Geolocation technologies: 
 
they 
providegeographically contextualized information to final 
users. The present-day market of mobile devices is an 
especially dynamic one, and technological innovations from 
major players in this sector (e.g. Samsung, Apple, Nokia, 
HTC, etc.) are constantly being introduced. Besides, the 
integration of GPS and movement detection support enables 
the development of novel geolocation applications and 
services 
like 
Google 
Latitude 
[8], 
Fire 
Eagle 
[9]orPlazes[10]. 
3) Semantic technologies: they support the semantic 
description and processing of content, resources and 
services, their adaptation to users’ profiles, and the 
provision of personalized recommendations. As this is the 
main technological contribution of this work, the application 
of semantic technologies in the framework of this project is 
discussed in more detail below. 
III. 
SEMANTIC MODEL FOR RECOMMENDATION 
A. General Overview 
Knowledge representation techniques support the explicit 
declaration, using sentences and logic rules, of the factual 
and tacit knowledge in a given domain of interest. This 
knowledge may be manipulated and semantically queried 
using an inference engine, which in turn facilitates its 
automated processing and the extraction of new knowledge 
from already existing one (i.e., to perform inference 
processes). In turn, this enhances the quality of the 
recommendations to final users. 
The formal foundations of knowledge representation are 
being addressed in the framework of Artificial Intelligence 
since the ’60, but their mainstream usage in practical 
applications was only possible after the introduction of the 
Semantic Web concept [11]around ten years agoby the 
World-Wide Web Consortium (W3C¡Error! No se 
encuentra el origen de la referencia.).Presently, W3C 
supports the standardisation of logic sentence declaration 
languages like Resource Description Framework Schema 
(RDF/S [12])andWeb Ontology Language (OWL [13]), logic 
rules (Semantic Web Rule Language, SWRL [14]) and 
semantic queries (SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query 
Language, SPARQL [15]). These languages are supported by 
several software development frameworks (e.g., Jena [16]) 
and by several inference engines like Racer [17], Fact [18]or 
Pellet [19]. Racer and Pellet are used in this proposal. 
B. Ontology Development Process 
To construct the semantic models that eventually will 
support the smart programming systems to provide content 
recommendations according to pilgrims’ profiles, we 
followed 
a 
methodological 
approach 
based 
on 
Menthonlogy[20], including some adaptations extracted 
from Uschold-King, Noy-McGuinnesandUPON[21]. The 
construction of these models has been organized according 
to a series of stages, each of them providing a specific 
(sub)model: 
1) Specification model: it states the objectives and the 
scope of the semantic model by means of competence 
questions. These artefacts are questions expressed in natural 
language to which the system being developed should 
provide responses. Competence questions are extremely 
useful because they make the scope of the underlying 
ontology explicit, and provide an instrument to facilitate 
quality assessment in evaluation processes. In the 
framework of this research, competence questions like the 
ones collected in Table I have been defined. 
2) Conceptualisation model: it identifies concepts and 
relations among concepts, as illustrated in Figure 1 
representing the model produced along this project. 
3) Formalisation 
model: 
instantiates 
the 
Conceptualisation Model through descriptive logic and 
Horn formalisms. 
4) Coding model:translates the Formalisation Model 
into executable code. More specifically,ontology coding in 
our case was supported by the W3C-recommended language 
OWL and the Protégé software platform. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Excerpt of the conceptualisation phase’s outcome 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

TABLE I.  
EVALUATION MODEL 
 
Evaluation Model – Competence questions 
Natural 
language 
SPARQL sentences 
1 
Which 
programmes 
(P) are 
relevant to 
user (U)? 
PREFIX 
channelTV:<http://193.146.210.125/canleTV/ontol
ogy.owl#> 
SELECT DISTINCT ?P 
WHERE {?UserchannelTV:idUser ?U . 
?UserchannelTV:interests ?I . 
?PchannelTV:tags ?e . 
Filter(regex(?U,"U")). 
Filter (regex(?I,?e))} 
 
2 
Which 
relevant 
programmes 
(P) are 
broadcast in 
the vicinity of 
user (U)? 
PREFIX 
channelTV:<http://193.146.210.125/canleTV/ontol
ogy.owl#> 
SELECT ?P 
WHERE { ?User channelTV:idUser ?U. 
?UserchannelTV:recommended?R. 
?RchannelTV:distanceProgramme ?D. 
?RchannelTV:distanceUser ?DU. 
?RchannelTV:programme ?P 
Filter(regex(?U,"U")). 
Filter(?D < 5). 
Filter(?DU < 10)} 
3 
Which 
programmes 
(P) are 
available to 
user (U)? 
PREFIX 
channelTV:<http://193.146.210.125/canleTV/ontol
ogy.owl#> 
SELECT ?P 
WHERE { ?User channelTV:idUser ?U. 
?UserchannelTV:recommended ?R. 
?RchannelTV:programme ?P. 
?RchannelTV:value ?v. 
Filter(regex(?U,"U")). 
Filter(?v<10)} 
 
5) Evaluation model: it supports the verification of the 
final system prior to its deployment using the competence 
questions defined in the specification stage. In this phase, 
competence questions are expressed in a semantic query 
language, namely SPARQL, as illustrated in Table I. 
 
IV. 
A MULTI-DEVICE SYSTEM TO SUPPORT TOURISM 
SERVICES 
The final outcome of this project consists of a multi-
device application to provide information to pilgrims 
walking the Way by means of a network of personalized and 
geolocated TV channels. These channels’ programming grids 
are configured according to the pilgrims’ profiles, that is, 
their mother tongue, their interests (e.g., gastronomy, nature, 
religion, etc.), and their specific location along the 
pilgrimage route. Users’ interests are captured from the 
information provided by users upon registration, and this 
information is updated every time users actualize their 
profile or visit relevant landmarks along the route. In other 
words, users’ interests are modelled as a blend of static and 
dynamic data organised as objects and classes according to 
the developed ontological model (cf. Sect. III). 
Thus, the foundation of this proposal is a multi-platform 
video distribution and access system configured as a network 
of 
personalized 
channels 
able 
to 
provide 
smart 
recommendations using sematic algorithms.  
This system provides a triple path to content: 
• 
Anywhere, anytime, using a mobile device with 
3G/3G+ connectivity (e.g., smartphone, tablet). 
• 
At hostels along the way, using a mobile device 
(e.g., smartphone, tablet) with Wi-Fi connectivity. 
• 
At hostels along the way, through standard TV sets 
where pilgrims may access, besides standard 
broadcasted channels, a specific TV channel 
customized to each accommodation facility. 
This work involves several interacting agents that 
provide multiple services through the network. More 
specifically, the main actors involved in the platform are: 
a) Pilgrims: they use their mobile devices to access the 
provided personalized TV channels. 
b) Hostels: they may configure their own channel to 
provide information through standard TV sets. 
c) City councils:they produce and broadcast thematic 
channels with information on services, places of interest, 
celebrations, etc. within their influence area. 
d) Public administrations at regional and national 
level: they produce specific channels to promote and 
provide detailed information on routes and places along the 
Way. 
e) Small/mediumentrepreneurs: 
they 
create 
commercials to promote their products and services (e.g., 
rural accommodation, souvenirs, local gastronomy, local 
produce, etc.). 
A. Architecture 
The deployment of this video distribution system requires 
the design, development and deployment of several sub-
systems, each of them providing a specific functionality. 
This section describes the most relevant characteristics of the 
main logical subsystems in the system architecture depicted 
in Figure 2: 
1)  Backend:it is the central repository providing a 
storehouse for all relevant system’s data. Information is kept 
about user profiles, programming grid status, programming 
schedule, active channels, service identification, multimedia 
content, metadata used for channel customisation, etc. 
2) Content repository (CR):it stores program content 
and associated metadata needed for classification and 
location by external search engines. Content providers 
access this component to upload new content or to update 
existing content, and programmers fetch programmes to be 
included in programming grids. This repository has been 
implemented as a multimedia content management system 
(CMS) and ancillary subsystems. It supports several 
interfaces adapted to different content sources (e.g., TV-
HTPC, mobile devices, etc.) 
3) Channel 
generator 
(CG):it 
processes 
content 
descriptions stored in content repositories and creates 
personalized playlists according to users’ profiles, including 
the most relevant content depending on user preferences and 
user (geo)location along the Way.  
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
Figure 2.  System’s architecture 
4) Programming Management System (PMS):it is used 
to manage the programming grid associated to each channel, 
providing concurrent access to programmers according to 
their profiles (e.g., role, authentication level, etc.). This 
subsystem 
also 
supports 
the 
implementation 
of 
programming scopes (i.e., the assignment of programming 
slots to specific programmers) and guarantees the coherence 
of the overall programming grid. 
5) Programming Front-End (PFE): implements a Web-
based user interface to the PMS. It provides programmers’ 
authentication, the assignment of programming scopes to 
programmers, and concurrent access to the PMS. 
6) Play-Out:this system feeds to video terminals the 
video content in each programming grid slot. This module 
also conditions the piece of content according to each 
specific user platform (i.e., TV-HTPC or mobile terminal) 
performing the required conversions (e.g., applicable codec, 
aspect ratio, video container, etc.) to guarantee the best 
possible user experience. 
7) Access portal: it provides a front-end for users’ video 
terminals. It embeds a streaming video viewer matching the 
user’s terminal and receives content from the Play-Out 
module. It also displays information about the content being 
visualized (e.g. starting and ending time, duration, synopsis, 
etc.) and a simple electronic programme guide (EPG). 
 
B. Services 
Users have access to a portfolio of multi-platform 
services. These services are classified according to the user 
platform: 
1) PC interface: it is a Web portal where users may 
configure a programming grid for a given channel. Figure 3 
depicts an example of a weekly programming grid. This grid 
may also be visualized according to specific time intervals 
(horizontal view) or specific days (vertical view).The main 
activities that can be performed through the PC interface 
are: 
a) Programming 
grid 
management:As 
discussed 
above, users may populate with content a channel’s 
programming grid. 
b) Channel management:encompasses all tasks related 
to the channels’ life cycle: creating, listing, searching, 
modifying, and deleting channels. 
c) Channel Administrator’s management: includes all 
activities related to the management of the individuals that 
may manage channels and their programming grids: create, 
modify and delete administrators; assign channels to 
administrators; enable and disable programming slots 
(scopes) to be managed by administrators, etc. Figure 4 
illustrates the channel administration functionalities. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example I of the PC Interface 
2) Mobile interface: to access this interface, users 
(typically 
pilgrims) 
should 
have 
an 
Android-based 
smartphone with Internet access. Figure 5 illustrates the 
mobile interface. Through this interface, users may access 
customized and geolocated services according to their 
profile along the Way. The most relevant services available 
through the mobile interface are: 
a) Visualisation of multimedia channels availablein a 
given geographical range, according to users’ location. 
b) Geolocation services supported by an embedded 
GPS device or through Google Maps[1]. 
c) Multimedia content upload.Content submitted will 
be supervised by system administrators prior to being stored 
in the content repository. 
d) Content geolocation. Users may indicate a range for 
the validity of the uploaded content along the Way of St. 
James. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
Figure 4.  Example II of the PC Interface 
 
Figure 5.  Example of the mobile interface 
3) TV-HTPC interface: this access interface is targeted 
to users (i.e., pilgrims) staying in a hostel along the Way. 
Besides traditional TV channels available in the area, users 
may visualize specific channels providing multimedia 
content to prepare and enhance their experience. Figures 6, 
7 and 8 provide some examples of this interface. The main 
services in this case are: 
a) Searching of channels in the geographical vicinity of 
a given hostel, or relevant to it. 
b) Multimedia content visualisation. 
c) Access to specific content slots in a programming 
grid. 
C. Validation 
At the time of writing this paper the developed platform 
is in its validation stage, and more specifically in the second 
stagebelow. A collection of mechanisms has been designed 
to test the usability and evaluate the users’ degree of 
satisfaction. Validation has been organized around two 
stages: 
 
Figure 6.  Example I of the TV-HTPC interface 
 
Figure 7.  Example II of the TV-HTPC interface 
 
Figure 8.  Example II of the TV-HTPC interface 
• 
The members of the research group performed the 
final testing phases of any software project. This 
testing also included usability assessment. This 
phase produced a fully functional beta release that 
was transferred to the second stage.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

• 
Once the beta release has been produced, it was 
transferred to field test. For that, a representative 
user sample has been selected including all user 
profiles in the final system (i.e., pilgrims, 
administrators, 
content 
producers, 
and 
programmers). Instruments being used along this 
validation stage include users’ perception surveys 
about usability and functionality; analysis of user 
interactions from collected system logs; direct 
observation of user interactions; and analysis of 
users’ satisfaction in relation to pilgrims not using 
this system. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The focus of this work is the development of multi-
technology, multi-platform multimedia online services. We 
may consider its outcome as a proof-of-concept that will be 
eventually deployed to enhance users’ experience in the 
framework of one of the key elements of the Spanish tourism 
sector, namely the Way of St. James. 
This proposal blends some of the most relevant state-of-
the-art information and communication technologies to 
provide anovelonline service. For example, it introduces 
semantic technologies to characterize user profiles for 
advanced customisation, and to contribute smart planning 
algorithms for multimedia content broadcasting.  It also 
integrates later developments in content adaptation and 
interfacing to configure a multi-device system to enable 
access to personalised multimedia content from smartphones, 
TV-HTPC sets and personal computers. The system also 
supports collaborative content tagging and geolocation. 
Privacy of personal data is a major concern in any 
modern online application. In our case, data collected in the 
central server about users’ interests is utilized to provide 
personalised recommendations. Apart from the validation of 
the security mechanisms implemented to protect this 
information, we are also defining a privacy policy to be 
eventually enforced when the final system is deployed. The 
perception surveys performed during the validation phase are 
also relevant to obtain feedback about users’ privacy 
concerns.  
Finally, and besides the technical contributions, this 
system dramatically improves the quality and relevance of 
the information available to pilgrims in the Way of St. 
James, which in turn contributes to the touristic promotion of 
this world-relevant pilgrimage way. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been performed under the support of: (1) 
the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the 
Galician Regional Government under projects “Customized 
and geolocated TV channels about The Way of Saint James” 
(10TIC050E) and "RedPlir" (CN2012/319); and (2) the 
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation under grant 
“Methodologies, Architectures and Standards for adaptive 
and accessible e-learning (Adapt2Learn)” (TIN2010-21735-
C02-01). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Website 
of 
http://www.jacobeo.info/index.php. 
[Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[2] Website of http://www.caminosantiago.com/. [Last Accessed 
in November 2012] 
[3] Website of http://www.xacobeo.es/ .[Last Accessed in 
November 2012] 
[4] Official website of http://www.team-mediaportal.com/ [Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[5] Official 
website 
of 
Windows 
Media 
Center. 
http://www.microsoft.com/latam/windows/products/windows
vista/features/details/mediacenter.mspx [Last Accessed in 
November 2012] 
[6] Official website of Moovida. http://www.moovida.com/ [Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[7] Official website of XBMC. http://xbmc.org/ [Last Accessed 
in November 2012] 
[8] Official 
website 
of 
Google 
Latitude. 
http://www.google.com/intl/en_us/latitude/intro.html[Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[9] Official website of FireEagle. http://fireeagle.yahoo.net/ [Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[10] Official website of Plazes. http://plazes.com/ [Last Accessed 
in November 2012] 
[11] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic 
Web. Scientific American (May Issue) “, 2011. 
[12] G. Klyne, and J. Carrol, “Resource Description Framework 
(RDF): 
Concepts 
and 
Abstract 
Syntax“. 
W3C 
Recommendation, World Wide Web Consortium, 2004. 
[13] D. McGuinness, and F. Harmelen, “OWL Web Ontology 
Language Overview“. W3C Recommendation, World Wide 
Web Consortium. 2004. 
[14] I. Harrocks, P. Patel, B. Harold, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, and M. 
Dean, “SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining 
OWL and RuleML“. W3C Member Submission. World Wide 
Web Consortium, 2004. 
[15] D. Beckett and J. Broekstra, “SPARQL Query Results XML 
Format“. 
W3C 
Recommendation, 
World 
Wide 
Web 
Consortium, 2008. 
[16] P. McCarthy, “Introduction to Jena“. IBM DeveloperWorks 
Report, 2004. 
[17] V. Haarslev and R. Möller, “Racer: A Core Inference Engine 
for the Semantic Web“. 2nd International Workshop on 
Evaluation of Ontology-based Tools (EON2003), Sanibel 
Island, Florida (EE. UU.), 2003, pp. 27-36. 
[18] D. Tsarkov and I. Horrocks, “FaCT++ Description Logic 
Reasoner: System Description“. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 2006, pp. 292-297. 
[19] E. Sirin, B. Parsia, B. Cuenca, A. Kalyanpur, and Y. Katz, 
“Pellet: A practical OWL-DL reasoner. Journal of Web 
Semantics“, vol.5 (2), 2007. 
[20] METHONTOLOGY: 
From 
Ontological 
Art 
Towards 
Ontological 
Engineering. 
http://oa.upm.es/5484/1/METHONTOLOGY_.pdf 
[Last 
Accessed in November 2012] 
[21] A. De Nicola, M. Missikoff and R. Navigli, “A Proposal for a 
Unified Process for Ontology Building: UPON“, 2005, pp. 
655-664. 
[22] Official 
website 
of 
Google 
Maps. 
http://www.google.com/maps [Last Accessed in November 
2012
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

