The Impact Of Extra Traffic On The Control Channel Over The Performance Of 
CCA Applications  
 
Iallen Gábio de Sousa Santos, Felipe Eduardo N. Mazullo and André Castelo Branco Soares  
Departamento de Computação 
Universidade Federal do Piauí - UFPI 
Teresina-PI, Brazil 
iallen16@gmail.com, felipemazullo@gmail.com, andre.soares@ufpi.edu.br 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an analysis of the impact of 
competing traffic on the control channel on the performance of 
applications like Chain Collision Avoidance (CCA). These 
vehicular network’s applications are addressed to traffic safety 
aiming chain collision avoidance. This work shows the impact 
of signaling messages of other applications (in the control 
channel) in the CCA application’s performance. The results 
were carried out considering since an ideal scenario (without 
concurrent traffic) until a scenario with high utilization level of 
control channel. Besides, the impact of the transmission power 
in the CCA applications is also evaluated. 
Keywords-vehicular; network; CCA; safety; traffic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With growing number of automobiles traveling through 
the roads, the probability of accidents increases. Such 
accidents endanger drivers and passengers, while still 
causing financial loses. 
There are studies being conducted with the purpose of 
developing new mechanisms to reduce traffic accidents. 
Among these mechanisms lies the development of Intelligent 
Transportation System (ITS). Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks 
(VANETs) are networks formed by automobiles and/or fixed 
equipments usually localized at the side of the roads. These 
networks support the ITS through the communication 
between vehicles and operate to avoid accidents [1] [8]. One 
of the main motivators for the development of vehicular 
networks is the development of applications that aim to 
increase traffic safety [1]. One problem often found in traffic 
is chain collision. In this case, the braking of one vehicle 
could lead to collisions among the vehicles that come behind 
the first one. VANETs are able to support applications with 
the purpose to avoid chain collisions, they are called Chain 
Collision Avoidance (CCA) applications [7]. 
This paper presents a study on the extra traffic impact 
over the control channel on the performance of manual and 
automatic CCA applications. The CCA applications are 
evaluated on 4 scenarios with different levels of traffic 
competition on the control channel. Their performance is 
analyzed in terms of vehicle collisions and percentage of 
successful delivery of emergency messages. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the 
fundamentals of vehicular networks and the Wireless Access 
in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) architecture. Section 3 
describes the related work and contributions of this article. 
Section 4 presents the problem of chain collisions and the 
CCA applications. Finally, in sections 5 and 6 are the results 
and conclusions, respectively. 
II. 
VANETS AND THE WAVE ARCHITECTURE 
The primary goal of vehicular networks is to establish 
the conditions to allow for communication between 
vehicles. Vehicles can communicate directly (Vehicle to 
Vehicle Communication – V2V) or by making use of an 
infra-structure located at the side of the road (vehicle to 
roadside infrastructure – V2R) [5]. 
The applications for VANETs can be classified into: i) 
entertainment applications, ii) driver assistance applications, 
and iii) traffic safety applications. 
The entertainment applications include file sharing, 
text messaging and Internet access. The driver assistance 
applications can, for example, provide information about the 
traffic in a particular region, on the existence of free 
parking, tourist spots etc. The traffic safety applications aim 
to prevent accidents. In this class are the applications that 
warn about the possibility of collisions at intersections, 
warn the driver about speeding and, in general, anticipate 
the reaction of the driver in order to decrease the risk of 
traffic accidents [1]. 
VANETs have some peculiarities in relation to 
traditional mobile networks, such as: nodes moving at high 
speed, short contact time, highly dynamic network, the fact 
that nodes have their movement restricted by roads, the need 
to 
provide 
high 
scalability, 
among 
others. 
Those 
characteristics make the existing protocols for mobile 
networks not suitable for use in a vehicular environment [2]. 
An architecture called Wireless Access in the 
Vehicular Environment (WAVE) is being developed to 
support vehicular networks [8]. In the experiments 
performed for this paper, we used the WAVE architecture 
implemented in the NCTUns 6.0 simulator, including the 
medium access protocol IEEE 802.11p based on the IEEE 
802.11 but modified to work on multiple channels [3]. 
The WAVE architecture works with multiple channels, 
a control channel (Control Channel - CCH) and several 
service channels (Channels Service - SCHS). The control 
channel can be used to send frames containing Wave Short 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

Message (WSM) packets, sent by critical applications. 
Service channels can be used to send both frames with 
WSMs and frames containing IPv6 packets [8]. 
The Wave Basic Service Set (WBSS) is a set of 
WAVE stations that can communicate using service 
channels. To join a WBSS a node must first receive a 
beacon frame that is sent through the control channel. This 
frame is sent by the WBSS provider node and contains all 
information necessary for the association of the receiving 
node. In this paper, WBSS provider nodes were used to 
transmit beacon frames generating extra traffic on the 
control channel. 
III. 
RELATED WORK AND CONTRIBUTIONS 
The development of vehicular networks has been 
widely promoted in order to permit the use of applications 
to enhance traffic safety [4], [5], [7], [6] and [9]. Among 
these there are the CCA applications that aim avoid chain 
collisions through the exchange of emergency messages 
aimed at preventing sequential collisions of vehicles [7], [9]. 
Tomas-Gabarron et al. [7] made an evaluation of CCA 
applications using the IEEE 802.11p, varying parameters 
such as the power of the signal transmission and the vehicle 
speed  (alternating between 108 km/h and 144 km/h). The 
authors evaluated the performance of the CCA application 
in cases where only some of the vehicles involved supported 
the application. CCA applications presented a deficiency in 
these scenarios. 
S. Xu et al. [9], evaluate a multi-hop broadcast 
protocol for the transmission of emergency messages in a 
highway scenario. This work primarily investigated the 
successful message delivery while considering the end-to-
end delay, without assessing the amount of accidents. 
This main contribution of this paper is a detailed study of 
the impact of concurrent transmissions on the control 
channel over the performance of CCA applications. This 
paper evaluates four scenarios with different levels of 
competition on the control channel. The level of competition 
on the control channel is influenced by actual characteristics 
of the roads, such as two-way traffic and roads with more 
than one traffic lane. These characteristics influence the 
density of cars and therefore cause greater competition in the 
control channel, which directly impacts the performance of 
CCA applications. In addition, we also evaluated the impact 
of various transmission power levels in the success of CCA 
applications. 
IV. 
CHAIN COLLISIONS AND CCA APPLICATIONS 
Chain collisions are a frequent problem in traffic, they 
are caused by the sudden braking of a vehicle. Typically, 
such braking occurs by technical or human error, leading to 
a series of sequential collisions behind the vehicle that first 
braked. 
Fig. 1 illustrates a chain collision scenario. Vehicle 1 
sees the obstacle in front of him and brakes. The second 
vehicle only realizes what happened after vehicle 1 starts 
reacting. The braking only occurs after the reaction time of 
vehicle 2’s driver. This reaction time varies from driver to 
driver and is influenced by the driver’s level of attention. 
In this article, we call perception instant the moment 
the driver perceives the obstacle or the car braking 
immediately in front him. The reaction time is the time it 
takes the driver to react after the moment of perception. 
J.-B. Tomas-Gabarron et al. [7] mentioned that the 
reaction time is normally between 0.5 and 1 second. The 
reaction instant is the moment when the driver begins its 
braking. Therefore, the reaction instant can be obtained by 
adding the reaction time of the driver to the perception 
instant. 
Given two vehicles, v1 and v2, that travel in the same 
direction and in the same traffic lane. Vehicle v2 is right 
behind v1. When v1 brakes, it lets v2 know through its 
brake lights. In general, the perception instant of v2’s driver 
is very close to v1’s driver reaction time. However, v2’s 
driver will take some time to react. This time depends on the 
level of attention of v2’s driver. 
The reaction instant of each driver depends on his own 
reaction time and the reaction time of all drivers in front 
him. Thus, the problem of chain collision worsens the more 
vehicles there are. 
Here are some definitions considering that the first car 
in a platoon of n cars brakes sharply. 
RI(n) is the reaction instant of the vehicle at position n. 
The time to detect the abrupt braking (Tdab) is the time 
required by the CCA application in the first vehicle to brake. 
This is interpreted by the CCA application as a high 
probability of chain collision involving the vehicles that are 
coming right behind the first one. After that time interval the 
CCA application sends the emergency message to the cars 
that are right behind the first one. TPT(n) is the transmission 
and propagation time of the message until it reaches vehicle 
n. MPT is the message processing time. DRT(n) is the time 
that the driver spends to react and start braking process 
(non-automatic) after the instant he identifies the need for 
braking. The automatic reaction time involves the time the 
CCA application needs to start the reaction upon the arrival 
of an emergency message. 
The reaction instant of the vehicle at position n using 
the automatic CCA application is defined by RI (n) = min 
{RI (n-1) + DRT (n), RI (1) + Tdab + TPT (n) + MPT}. In 
this case, the difference between the reaction instants is 
 
Figure 1. Example of a chain collision scenario. 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

essentially the difference between the transmission and 
propagation times to each vehicle in the platoon. 
The reaction instant of the vehicle at position n using 
the manual CCA application is defined by RI (n) = min {RI 
(n-1) + DRT (n), I (1) + Tdab + TPT (i) + MPT + DRT (i)}. 
In this case the difference between the reaction instants is 
influenced by the manual reaction time of each driver. 
The reaction instant of the vehicle at position n without 
using the CCA application is defined by RI (n) = RI (n-1) + 
DRT (i). The difference between the reaction instants of 
each driver is influenced by the manual reaction time of the 
driver at position n and the reaction time of all drivers in 
front of him. 
The difference between the reaction instants of each 
vehicle in the platoon influences the number of collisions. 
One solution to minimize this problem is to approximate the 
reaction instants of the vehicles in the platoon. This can be 
achieved through the exchange of messages between the 
vehicle which caused the accident and the other vehicles in 
the platoon. This is the foundation of CCA applications. 
CCA applications start their procedures upon detecting 
an abrupt braking. The application then sends an emergency 
message to vehicles behind the vehicle that braked. On the 
receiving end, upon receiving the emergency message the 
CCA application can start am automatic braking or simply 
issue a warning to the driver so that he can start braking. 
CCA applications that trigger an automatic reaction on 
the vehicle are called automatic CCA applications. If the 
CCA application only sends an alert to the driver then it is 
called manual CCA application [7]. 
Fig. 2 illustrates how two vehicles (v1 and v2) get 
closer due to an emergency braking made by vehicle v1. 
At the i1 instant, v1 and v2 are separated by a distance 
d0. At i2, v1’s driver starts  braking abruptly (for example, 
by suddenly realizing there is an obstacle in front of him). 
Therefore, RI (v1) = i2. Still, at i2 v2’s driver observes v1’s 
brake lights. It is worth noting that only in the instant i3, i3 
= i2 + DRT (v2), v2 starts its braking process. At i3, the 
distance between v1 and v2 is equal to d1, which is smaller 
than d0. 
From the instant i3 onwards, the two vehicles are 
already slowing down, but v1’s speed remains smaller than 
v2’s. Therefore, at the time of stopping (i4) the distance 
between the two vehicles is d2, which is smaller than d1. 
The value of d2 might be zero, characterizing the collision 
of vehicles. 
In a scenario with more than two vehicles, the 
approach between two vehicles happens exactly as showed 
in Fig. 2 and from time i3 onwards cycle restarts for the next 
pair of vehicles. 
CCA applications are driven towards traffic safety and 
aim to prevent chain collisions. The CCA application 
functioning is based on the exchange of emergency 
messages between vehicles. If the vehicle is using an 
application automatic CCA application, the vehicle reacts 
automatically. If the vehicle uses a manual application an 
alert is sent to the driver, and he is responsible for the 
braking. 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The performance evaluations were performed with the 
help of the  NCTUns 6.0 simulation tool. This simulator was 
chosen because of several characteristics: i) it has integrated 
traffic and network simulators, ii) it has the WAVE protocol 
stack, therefore  directly supports vehicular network 
simulations and iii) it allows for microscopic modeling, i.e. 
simulations with traffic parameters and network events 
defined for each node. All of this is favorable for modeling 
chain collision situations. 
The WAVE architecture, which is implemented in the 
NCTUns 6.0 simulator, was used for inter-vehicle 
communications. The WSM protocol was used for sending 
emergency messages. 
Table I shows the traffic parameters and Table II 
shows the parameters concerning the CCA applications used 
in the simulations.  
The traffic parameters characterize a scenario with 
high risk of collision. While this it may not occur 
constantly, this is the kind of scenario where chain 
collisions usually happen. This situation can be found 
mostly in medium and big sized cities. Studies have been 
 
 
Figure 2. Two vehicles during a braking situation. 
TABLE I.  
TRAFFIC PARAMETERS 
Traffic parameters 
Average speed 
16 m/s 
Number of vehicles on the 
platoon 
30 
Average distance between 
vehicles 
10 m 
Max deceleration 
10m/s² 
Vehicle length 
3m 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

conducted addressing scenarios with different average car 
speeds to evaluate the influence of speed on the number of 
collisions. 
The number of vehicles generating extra traffic on the 
control channel was varied to observe the impact of extra 
traffic on the control channel over the performance of CCA 
applications. 
In addition, we evaluated the impact the signal power 
used to transmit emergency messages has over the delivery 
rate of these messages and the number of vehicle collisions. 
The header of a WSM contains information on which 
channel to be used, power and transmission rate associated 
with each packet enabling the control of these parameters by 
applying them to each package individually. 
To assess the impact of extra traffic on the control 
channel over the performance of CCA applications we 
considered four scenarios. Scenario 1 presents ideal 
conditions, there is no competition on the control channel. 
In a single traffic lane, there are 30 vehicles with 10 meters 
of distance between vehicles. Experiments were carried out 
to evaluate the performance of CCA applications from the 
moment the first driver in line performs an abrupt braking. 
The metric of interest is the number of collisions between 
vehicles. 
In Scenario 2, besides Scenario 1 characteristics, we 
also consider concurrent transmissions on the control 
channel. On the single traffic lane there are also vehicles 
providing on average a WBSS every 200 meters. This 
means that the WBSS provider vehicle periodically sends 
beacon frames on the control channel. These beacon frames 
compete with emergency WSM messages from CCA 
application. 
Scenario 3 also considers only one direction of traffic, 
but has three traffic lanes with vehicles using the control 
channel. Scenario 4 has vehicles traveling in 6 traffic lanes, 
3 lanes in each direction. In scenarios 3 and 4, for each lane 
at each 200 m there is vehicle providing a WBSS. In all 
scenarios considered, the platoon of vehicles 30 (discussed 
in terms of vehicle collision) is present in only one of the 
lanes. In all scenarios we assume an average speed of 
16m/s. Initially, we assume a transmission power of 28dBm. 
All results are presented with a confidence interval with a 
confidence level of 95%. 
It is noteworthy that the maximum number of 
collisions in a platoon of n vehicles is n -1, because in this 
work we assume that the first vehicle does not collide with 
any obstacle, therefore the maximum number of collisions 
in the studies presented is 29. 
Fig. 3 shows the performance without the CCA 
application, and the performance with the automatic and 
manual application for each of the scenarios. 
In general, there is a significant decrease in the number 
of collisions when the CCA application is used. Without the 
application over 20 collisions occurred. When the 
application was put to use at the worst case there were less 
than 4 collisions. 
Fig. 4 shows the manual and automatic CCA 
performance concerning the number of collisions for each of 
the 4 scenarios previously presented. 
By increasing the number of traffic lanes the number 
of beacon transmissions on the control channel also 
increases. The beacon transmissions compete with the 
emergency messages from the CCA application. The 
increase of this concurrent traffic on the control channel 
negatively impacts the performance of CCA applications. 
This is shown through the increasing number of vehicle 
collisions as a function of increasing the number of traffic 
TABLE II.  
CCA APLICATIONS PARAMETERS 
CCA aplications parameters  
Transmission power 
21 dBm, 28 dBm, 35 dBm 
Transmission rate 
6 Mbps 
Transmission channel 
178 (control channel) 
Emergency deceleration detection time 
0.4s 
Emergency message processing time 
0.2s 
Driver reaction time 
0.5s   -  1s 
 
Figure 3. Performance Comparison of the CCA applications in the studied 
scenarios. 
 
 
Figure 4. Manual and automatic CCA performance in each scenario 
studied. 
 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

lanes. This behavior occurs in both manual and automatic 
CCA application. This increased competition in the control 
channel increases the odds of collisions involving 
emergency messages frames. 
 As a direct consequence from the increased 
competition, there is a decrease in the successful delivery 
rate of messages from the CCA application, causing more 
vehicle collisions. 
Table III shows the successful delivery rate of 
emergency messages and its impact over the average 
number of vehicle collisions in each scenario. 
In Table IV, there is a decrease in the successful 
delivery rate of CCA messages as competition increases in 
the control channel. For example, in the scenario 4 with 6 
traffic lanes, the successful delivery rate is 87.16%, which 
means a loss of 12.84% of emergency messages. This 
explains the decrease in the CCA performance. It is 
noteworthy that this behavior was also observed in 
Scenarios 2, 3, but with less intensity. 
Afterwards, a study was conducted to assess the 
impact of the WSM messages transmission power over the 
performance of CCA applications. In this study we 
considered a scenario similar to the one in scenario 4. 
Fig. 5 compares the performance of manual and 
automatic CCA as a function of the transmission power of 
emergency messages. Table IV shows successfully delivery 
rates for each transmission power level used.  
Fig. 5 shows that the smallest number of vehicle 
collisions presented itself with the highest transmission 
power, 35 dbm. 
In Fig. 5, there is a small average number of collisions 
(below 0.5) with a transmission power of 35 dBm. It’s 
important to point out that 35 dBm represents a longer range 
and obtained a 91.12% emergency message delivery rate. 
The CCA application performances while transmitting with 
21dbm to 28 dBm were very close, enough to cause the 
confidence intervals to overlap. 
Through experiments it was found that the extra traffic 
on the control channel reduces the performance of CCA 
applications, since the number of collisions increases. This 
is associated with a decrease in the successful delivery rate 
of emergency messages. We believe that this increase in the 
number of emergency messages collisions is strongly related 
to the hidden terminal problem. 
By increasing the transmission power the range also 
increases. Although it also increases the collision domain on  
the control channel (which may increase the frame collision 
probability), the increased transmission power decreases the 
occurrence of hidden terminals. 
The increased transmission power has increased the 
delivery success rate of emergency messages and 
consequently improved the CCA application. This behavior, 
observed at least in the scenarios studied in this article, can 
be used to point the hidden terminal problem as the main 
cause of decreased performance of CCA applications in 
scenarios with concurrent traffic on the control channel. 
Fig. 6 illustrates a simplified way how the hidden 
terminal phenomenon may cause a decrease in the 
successful delivery rate of emergency messages. 
In Fig. 6, vehicle A transmits an emergency message 
to vehicles coming after it. However, the message collides 
with beacons transmitted by the vehicle B. As A and B do 
not know about each other, the CSMA-CA protocol is not 
very successful in controlling medium access. In scenarios 
with the higher density of vehicles providing WBSSs the 
TABLE IV.  
SUCCESSFUL DELIVERY RATE OF EMERGENCY MESSAGES 
AND AVERAGE NUMBER OF COLLISIONS IN EACH SCENARIO 
Scenarios 
Delivery rate 
Average of vehicle 
collisions with 
automatic CCA 
aplication 
Average of vehicle 
crashes with manual 
CCA aplication 
Scenario 1 
100.00% 
0 
0.1 
Scenario 2 
92.78% 
0.583333333 
1.1 
Scenario 3 
88.40% 
1.633333333 
1.816666667 
Scenario 4 
87.16% 
1.883333333 
2.4 
 
Figure 5. CCA application performance while varying the 
transmission power. 
TABLE III.  
SUCCESSFUL DELIVERY RATE OF EMERGENCY MESSAGES. 
DELIVERY RATE 
21 dBm 
90.93% 
28 dBm 
87.16% 
35 dBm 
91.12% 
 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

occurrence of this phenomenon is more likely. This 
decreases the performance of CCA applications. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a performance evaluation of 
manual and automatic CCA applications considering four 
scenarios with different levels of concurrent traffic on the 
control channel. Generally, at least under the conditions 
considered in this article, the applications proved efficient, 
significantly reducing the amount of vehicle collisions. 
We identified that with by increasing the concurrent 
traffic on the control channel the CCA application 
performance worsens. This effect was caused due to frame 
collisions, 
which 
prevent 
vehicles 
from 
receiving 
emergency messages sent in WSM packets through the 
control channel. 
The performance of CCA applications as a function of 
the transmission power was also evaluated. In the studies 
carried out for this paper, increasing the transmission power 
decreased the occurrence of the hidden terminal problem 
and improved the application’s performance. 
The scenarios where chain collisions can occur are 
highly diversified. Factors such as the number of vehicles, 
speed, one way traffic or two-way traffic impact the vehicle 
density and consequently the level of competition for access 
control to the control channel. 
Studies are being conducted with the goal of 
minimizing the loss of performance of CCA applications in 
scenarios with competition on the control channel. These 
future studies aim to identify further issues with the use of 
safety applications in VANETs and to propose ways to 
minimize these deficiencies. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K.A. Hafeez , L. Zhao, L. Zaiyi, and B.N. Ma, “Impact of 
Mobility 
on 
VANETs' 
Safety 
Applications” 
Global 
Telecommunications Conference (GLOBECOM 2010), 2010 
IEEE, December 2010, pp. 1-5. 
[2] J. Toutouh and E. Alba, “Performance analysis of optimized 
VANET 
protocols 
in 
real 
world 
tests”, 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Mobile 
Computing 
Conference 
(IWCMC), 2011 7th International, July 2011, pp.1244-1249. 
[3] D. Jiang and L. Delgrossi, “IEEE 802.11p: Towards an 
international standard for wireless access in vehicular 
environments”. In Vehicular Technology Conference, 2008. 
VTC Spring 2008. IEEE, May 2008, pp.2036-2040. 
[4] M. Koubek, S. Rea, and D. Pesch, “Reliable broadcasting for 
active safety applications in vehicular highway networks”. In 
IEEE 71st Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 2010-
Spring), May 2010, pp.1-5. 
[5] B.M. Mughal, A.A. Wagan, and H. Hasbullah, “Efficient 
congestion control in vanet for safety messaging”. In 
International Symposium in Information Technology (ITSim), 
June 2010, pp.654-659. 
[6] T. Taleb, A. Benslimane, and K. Ben Letaief, “Toward an 
effective risk-conscious and collaborative vehicular collision 
avoidance system”. In IEEE Transactions on Vehicular 
Technology, March 2010, pp.1474-1486. 
[7] J.-B. Tomas-Gabarron, E. Egea-Lopez, J. Garcia-Har, and R. 
Murcia-Hernandez, “Performance evaluation of a cca 
application for vanets using ieee 802.11p”. In IEEE 
International Conference on Communications Workshops 
(ICC), March 2010, pp.1-5. 
[8] R. Uzcategui and G. Acosta-Marum, “Wave: A tutorial”. 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, 47(5), May 2009, pp.126-
133. 
[9] S. Xu, H. Zhou, C. Li, and Y. Zhao, “A multi-hop v2v 
broadcast protocol for chain collision avoidance on 
highways”. 
In 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communications Technology and Applications, October 
2009, pp.110-114. 
 
Figure 6: Example scenario with the hidden terminal problem. 
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

