MEDIACTIF 
A dynamic, centralized and real-time digital signage system for  
smooth pedestrian flow control with arbitrary topologies 
 
Thierry Simonnet, Samuel Ben Hamou 
IT Department. 
ESIEE-Paris 
Noisy le Grand, France 
{thierry.simonnet, samuel.benhamou}@esiee.fr 
Jacques Angelé 
inExtendis 
Malakoff, France 
j.angele@inextendis.fr
 
 
Abstract—Digital signage systems distribute all kinds of 
information to specific locations, including retail stores, public 
areas and transportations. Thanks to the massive adoption of 
displays and wide application of wireless networks, digital 
signage can deliver targeted messages designed to accurately 
reach the passing audience and eventually influence customers. 
Digital signage, including Digital Out Of Home, is a natural 
evolution of the old sign painting business. The aim of the 
MEDIACTIF project is to develop a new digital signage 
concept, 
using 
both 
human 
traffic 
modelling 
and 
compartmental behavior based on interests. This is the major 
issue we are facing as of now: crowd motion has extensively 
been studied on peculiar test cases, on both macroscopic and 
microscopic levels, but it is lacking considerable social and 
personal inputs, which are significant for each site and 
scenario. 
Keywords-digital signage; real-time; network; mesh. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The MEDIACTIF Project [1] has been started a few 
months ago to propose solutions to different problems: 
 
Reducing the stress of fair visitors or airports 
clients by reducing crowd congestions and 
increasing the pedestrian flows. 
 
Giving relevant information to users and the 
operations team in real time. 
 
Offering a centralized system that may adapt 
signage to any situation. 
 
Increase security levels with adapting signage 
(redirect pedestrians easily in case of emergency 
situations)   
 
Reducing global waste of both printed signage 
materials, but also aiming at a massive drop in the 
consumption of high toxicity materials like inks. 
Partners on this project have different fields of expertise 
and some of them are facing day to day issues regarding 
their fixed or dynamic signage impact over people 
behaviors. They would like to efficiently inform clients or 
simply redirect them to a specific location.  
As the literature is quite extensive on traffic 
management systems, and also because of a gathered 
experience on this field, it will serve as a basis to this 
project.  
We will first talk about the general purpose of the 
system, followed by an overview of current traffic systems. 
Then we will focus on standards for four identified areas of 
interest before briefly going over the current architecture we 
are considering. We will also slightly talk about additional 
services considered for the system. 
II. 
GATHERED DESIDERATA  
Presently, digital signage systems handle different media 
sources and dispatch them to a pool of selected screens. 
Information can be static (map, pictures, static adverts [2]), 
dynamic (flight departures and arrivals), animated (film 
trailers, animated adverts). Obviously, any combination of 
these previous elements can be displayed on the same screen 
using defined scenarios. Different applications are currently 
being considered and worked on: 
 
Public information: area map, dynamic pathway, 
exit roads. 
 
Communication channels: static and dynamic 
signs, mobile apps, kiosks, social/collaborative 
interactions. 
 
User experience and environment enhancements: 
use of mobile/apps as a natural extension of 
signage, dynamic path finding, and profile adapted 
suggestions, interaction with the digital signage 
information system. 
 
Behavior 
influence: 
events 
propagation 
and 
advertising, customized information, lunch/dinner 
indications, etc., based on activities, objectives, 
profiles and customer interests. 
The MEDIACTIF Project aims not only to display 
different contents on screens, but also to integrate multiple 
sensors in the processing loop. This would allow for signage 
adaptation depending, for example, on:  
 crowd densities 
 personal preferences 
 commercial factors of interest 
 specific or recurrent events 
 previously computed models and statistics 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

These models should be driven by the analysis of 
previous sessions (when available) and will be enhanced 
with the sensors variations/data constantly. 
The needs considered can be so far classified in the 
following categories: users, operations, security, and 
environment. 
A. Users 
In a fair or in an airport, a good way to reduce stress is to 
reduce the global walk time and crowding. “Way finding” 
digital signage can be used to allow for optimal pathways 
for everybody. MEDIACTIF would like to provide a 
comfortable walk by dynamically adapting path suggestions 
with adaptive signage closely linked to affluence sensors. It 
will not only allow for “navigation” but also provide real 
time information (a potential stress factor for some). 
Users will be provided with different kinds of extra 
information which may influence their behaviors. An 
example of this would be to push restaurant information to 
some visitors before lunch time to eventually allow them to 
eat before the rush hour. These data can be fully public and 
basic (restaurant opening hours or placement), more 
practical (remaining available seats), but could also 
influence the subject (inducing the need of a meal with 
restaurant discounts, tastings at specific stands, etc). 
Advertising has also been considered as a part of a future 
remunerated service. 
B. Exploitation 
As usual for such a complex system, the first approach is 
to centralize, at least in a first iteration, all information 
gathering. Doing so it will be easier to process all sensor 
values gathered in real time and compute relevant actions in 
order to update displays. 
All computed information will be attached to different 
scenarios or strategies. Basic information would consider of 
fixed maps and schedules which will cycle with other 
somewhat basic type of data. Each “screen” will be 
displayed for a specific amount of time and cycle according 
to the crowd estimation also in concordance with past 
statistics, or specific times for lunch or particular events. 
This basic mode will be later on enhanced by an 
adaptive algorithm. Depending on unexpected events, 
pathways congestions, specific commercial deals, maps will 
be adapted to drive people efficiently and ensure a general 
fluidity. 
During each fair or over a period of time for airports or 
different clients, every bit of data (crowd movements, 
computed from cameras and sensors, positioning of opened 
desks, active or inactive zones, which will pose problems to 
a global fluidity), will be collected in order to generate new 
model revisions. 
For corporate users, the benefits of such a system are not 
negligible:  
 
Fair organizers will be provided a tangible 
prediction of the flow of persons at their 
exhibition based on to the simulations and past 
data characterizations. 
 
Possibility to quantify the impact of any layout 
modification on the traffic flows.  
 
Commercial trade centers or security offices 
will be able to anticipate influence of any 
departure or arrival of a flight, depending on 
destination or origin. They would also be able 
to manually pilot path redirections to offer a 
better service. 
They ideally should have access to tools allowing them 
to qualify and quantify any kind of influence on people 
traffic interaction. 
C. Security 
Security management takes a great part in MEDIACTIF. 
In case of fire or emergency, digital signage can be used to 
redirect people to the nearest exits or safe routes. Obviously 
all displays must embed a security mode, with an 
autonomous mode and power supply. 
The second security mode we are considering is to allow 
for easier and faster interventions for dedicated services: in 
case of an emergency with a person (malaise for example), 
we would want to adapt the signage around an area to drain 
the crowd and offer a clean pathway for emergency.  
Once again, here, the main advantage regarding the 
security sector, is to allow for a traffic fluidity in order to 
avoid stress and nervous feeling. 
D. Environment 
VIPARIS, one of MEDIACTIF’s partners, is in charge 
of the ten most important congress and exposition centers in 
the Paris area. It accounts for around 330 fairs, more than 
100 spectacle representations, 150 conventions and 620 
enterprise events driving more than 11Milion visitors each 
year. In Paris, one fair produces a mean of 200m3 of waste, 
especially printed signs and posters. Not only this number is 
quite high, but these prints also use highly toxic inks which 
are difficult to recycle. Considering even only 1000 events 
per year for our area, we could suppress at least 200 000m3 
of waste per year using fixed or mobile reusable displays, 
etc. 
III. 
EXISTING URBAN TRAFFIC CONTROL (UTC)  
SYSTEMS 
MEDIACTIF will base its first iterations on the 
experience and results gathered with a urban traffic lights 
control system. Many systems are deployed all around the 
world, handling specific drivers’ behaviors. So far, traffic 
control systems can either be distributed or centralized, 
using plans, local adaptation or be traffic responsive [3].  
So far, we have settled on static and scheduled models as 
entry level rules, which will be influenced by real-time 
adaptive algorithms later on. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

A. Fixed time systems 
The method used to calculate timings defines the 
objective that the system will seek to minimize. This is 
often used to reduce network vehicle delays. The designer 
can optimize different parameters of the network to attain 
different objectives. Although the timing can be biased 
against the main traffic movements, it can generally be 
restrained by adjusting the splits at critical junctions. 
Fixed time systems cannot respond dynamically because 
they use pre-calculated timing plans. They also are unable to 
respond automatically to incidents. This implies that they 
are unfortunately not suitable for situations with any 
variability pattern. In fact they cannot adapt to any change 
in traffic patterns. The Traffic Network Study Tool 
(TRANSYT) in UK was a system that used this technology 
[4]. 
B. Plan selection systems 
Plan selection systems use fixed time plans, but select 
which plan to use according to sensors data, rather than by 
timetables. However, this type of system has not proven to 
be any better than simple time-of-day implementations with 
fixed time plans. Plan selection systems have the same 
advantages and drawbacks as fixed time systems. 
C. Plan generation systems 
Plan generation systems generate their own fixed time 
plans from sensors information and implement them. These 
systems are way less under direct control from exploitation 
people. In theory, this kind of system could respond to 
unexpected incidents, but in reality, their degree of freedom 
is too small to allow them large enough changes in order to 
respond effectively. The Sydney Co-ordinated Adaptive 
Traffic System (SCAT) uses this technology [5]. 
D. Traffic responsive centralized systems 
Traffic responsive systems are fully dynamic. The 
system is based on a central server and communication to 
controllers. The advantages of responsive systems are that 
they can respond to traffic demand, day to day variation, 
unexpected events and traffic evolution. A responsive 
system adjusts its control depending on sensors inputs. A 
centralized system has the advantage that all the relevant 
information, from sensors but also from system is fully 
centralized and available. Centralized traffic management 
systems offer also a better reaction to events and a better 
efficiency [6]. 
SCOOT 
(Split, 
Cycle 
and 
Offset 
Optimisation 
Technique) [7][8] in UK and GERTRUDE (Gestion 
Electronique de Régulation de Trafic Routier Urbain 
Défiant les Embouteillages) in France are traffic responsive 
centralized systems. 
E. Traffic responsive systems with distributed processing 
The features and advantages of distributed responsive 
systems are basically the same as those of centralized 
responsive 
systems. 
A 
major 
difference 
is 
the 
communication system used. A centralized responsive 
system has continuous communication between each 
controller and the central server. A distributive system has a 
router module and each controller is connected to 
neighboring controllers. Messages can be passed between 
any machine or controller to others, routing the message by 
intermediate controllers when necessary. A distributed 
responsive system should be able to work with a route 
guidance system, but interaction is much more complicated 
than for a centralized responsive system. PRODYN in 
France has been implemented and tested on the Zone 
Experimentale et Laboratoire de Trafic de Toulouse (ZELT) 
[9][10]. 
OPAC 
(USA) 
and 
UTOPIA/SPOT 
(Italy) 
implements this architecture. It was a mesh like 
implementation, years before mesh network was fully 
formalized. 
MEDIACTIF will provide a prototype implementation 
for a “people responsive centralized system”, and intends to 
enhance the system using a distributed architecture. 
The major evolution compared to a UTC system is 
people, more particularly individual behaviors. Cars drive 
on separate ways, each line going in a specific direction, 
whereas crowds are more hectic. Another difference is the 
response time of the system. A car traffic (with a max speed 
of 50 km/h) real-time system uses a 1 second internal cycle. 
It is at the moment not easy to establish a correct value for 
crowd behaviors. 
The type and positioning of sensors, as well as a crowd 
dispersion model will take a big part in a sub module 
evaluation during the project. Some partners already have an 
extensive review of different products and technologies 
which will help us get a good grasp of what to avoid at least. 
IV. 
STANDARDS AND TOOLS 
A. Digital signage standards 
The ITU published a whitepaper [11] in which 
Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language is cited as 
"a key standard for the digital sign industry," and that it "is 
increasingly supported by leading digital sign solution 
providers." It is reported in [12] that SMIL players are 
deployed for nearly 100,000 screens in year 2011, and a 
single software provider has won three major projects, 
deploying more than 1,000 SMIL players over the same 
period of time for each one. 
POPAI has released several digital sign standards [13] to 
promote "interoperability between different providers". The 
objective of these standard documents is to establish a 
foundation of performance and behavior that all digital sign 
systems can follow. The current sets of standards published 
by POPAI are: 
 
"Screen-Media Formats" to specify compatible and 
supported file formats. 
 
"POPAI Digital Sign Device RS-232 Standards" 
 
"POPAI Digital Sign Playlog Standards V 1.1" 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
"Digital Control Commands" 
 
"Industry Standards of Digital Sign Terms" 
MEDIACTIF will try to use existing digital signage 
appliances, if already installed. Some airport terminals are 
already equipped for arrival/departure schedule information. 
These systems will be operated using communication 
standards (HTML5, SMIL, SOAP, REST). For new 
contracts or area, the MEDIACTIF Project may have to 
define its own digital signage system that will: 
 
be standard compliant 
 
use different communication channels: IP (wired 
and Wi-Fi), wired and radio RS232, etc. 
B. Crowd motion modelling 
The major issue in handling pedestrians is to define 
accurate models valid for a wide range of topologies and 
flow densities. Models should also be reasonable realistic, 
robust 
against 
incomplete 
data, 
and 
of 
course 
computationally manageable. 
Pedestrian dynamics share some similarities with fluids, 
and it is not surprising that the first models of crowds were 
inspired by hydrodynamics or kinetics of gases. Henderson 
found as early as 1971, from measurements of motion in 
crowds, a good agreement of the velocity distribution 
functions with Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution [14].  
In microscopic models, each individual is represented 
separately. In contrast, in macroscopic models, different 
individuals are not distinguished. Instead, crowd densities 
are at play, usually a mass density derived from cumulative 
locations of persons and also a corresponding locally 
averaged velocity of this density. 
Social forces have been introduced by Helbing in a 
microscopic model [15] based on the idea that pedestrians 
have different perceptions about intimate/personal and 
social space, which leads to repulsive forces between 
persons.  
Cellular automata [16][17][18] are another important 
class of models that are discrete in space and time. Most of 
these models represent pedestrians by particles that can 
move to one of the neighboring cells based on transition 
probabilities which are determined by the desired direction 
of motion, interactions with other pedestrians, and 
interactions with the infrastructure (walls, doors, etc.). 
However, unlike Newtonian particles, persons have a 
free will and may want to avoid jams by changing their 
preferred path when approaching a crowded area, find a new 
path, even if it is not the preferred one. To take into account 
such strategies, microscopic models are to be extended well 
above the present state of the art. Stochastic behavioral rules 
may lead to potential realistic representations of complex 
systems like pedestrian crowds, however, parameterization 
and calibration of such models may remain elusive. 
Following Maury [19], models can also be classified 
according to their stiffness. Soft congestion models are 
applicable when the distance between individuals becomes 
smaller, while hard congestion models propose solutions in 
the case of physical contacts between individuals (when 
people are packed, the overall motion is perturbed by the 
fact that two persons may not occupy the same place at the 
same time). 
Mainly, we have to focus on congestion in crowds in 
motion [19][20][21]. 
This poses a non-trivial modeling problem as we not 
only have to characterize a general walking behavior for 
users, but also have to take into account the fact that 
contacts are usually avoided and mostly not anticipated 
when they occur. We will probably limit our model in the 
first iteration to basic constraints raised by the environment 
and goals derived from a specific location: the expected 
behavior will be surely different between a person in an 
airport terminal and the same person at a fair. Thus we have 
to consider that each individual will move according to its 
current desires though we cannot exclude any spontaneous 
irregularity. Also the model has to be considered on both a 
microscopic and macroscopic level: the initial goal of the 
user will drive its original direction and velocity on a 
macroscopic scale while the interaction with its environment 
(other users or the physical structures defining the area map 
itself) will be evaluated at a microscopic level.  
The other phenomenon to take into account is the fact 
that not only does a small congestion affect the behavior of 
a single individual but a wider one tends to have an effect 
on a group motion at a global scale. At the same time we 
can also consider that an individual, with common sense, 
will tend to avoid high density areas when possible. 
We currently are reviewing the literature on this 
particular problem to find a suitable modeling possibility for 
different scenarios and are considering multiple options, 
such as neural networks, pure statistical models but also a 
quite interesting representation of crowds as fluids to which 
fluid dynamics theories could be applied. 
C. Positionning terminals in mobile computing 
To offer precise services using smartphones, it is 
necessary to be able to pinpoint a position with a good 
precision. There are different techniques available using 
wireless positioning [22]. The smartphone collects the 
received signal and compares the computed vector to the 
vectors previously recorded along the walk. It is also 
possible to measure the distance between mobile terminals 
[23] or fixed access points. 
Presently, some companies are testing such techniques 
to position their staff inside the different airports areas using 
either Wifi or Bluetooth low energy depending on the 
smartphone (Android or iOS). We are also looking at 
emerging solutions such as IEEE® 802.15.4/ZigBee® 
technology positioning options and also some recent 
announcements made by STMicroelectronics with the 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

LPS331AP, an ultra-compact, absolute piezoresistive 
pressure 
sensor 
which 
advertises 
for “3D 
indoor 
positioning and enhanced GPS in portable devices”. 
D. Crowd sensors 
In order to minimize costs at first, we will mostly try to 
use the infrastructure already in place. For some places, this 
includes a camera network covering almost all areas of 
interest. The video feeds will be analyzed in real time using 
OpenCV, an open source computer vision library. Once 
integrated with a digital representation of the concerned 
areas it will allow us to characterize at least individuals 
movements and crowds formations, or as mentioned earlier 
fluid mechanics of each area. Though it will not specifically 
generate any particular quantitative data, it will serve as our 
main source for the crowd dispersion management models 
and redirection protocols in case of emergencies. 
For the numerical part (initially mostly for fairs), we 
have already considered a deeper integration with the 
organizers to be able to monitor the ticketing desks streams. 
For both sectors we will also surely use counting sensors 
based on different technologies (pressure, video, radio) to be 
able to monitor efficiently all concerned area and be able to 
generate appropriate reactions to any event. 
V. 
ARCHITECTURE 
MEDIACTIF will be an adaptive, centralized system. 
All relevant data will first be collected by a specific module 
and will serve to compute crowd models. These will be used 
for primal crowd traffic prediction. They will act as the base 
module for all corporate models like airports and event 
organizers. It should also allow mobile services (free or not) 
for visitors via apps or web services. According to the state 
of the art regulations, it has to follow network standards to 
pilot existing digital signage systems and to communicate 
with its own devices. 
As an integrated platform, we must offer different tools 
for different users and/or operation modes: 
A. Front office tools 
At the early stage, conception tools, like a computer 
assisted design software, are needed for designing sensors 
placements and optimize screens positioning to the site 
topology. Sensors values should be able to be controlled 
from the interface and a synoptical backplane view must be 
able to display a synthetic survey of the whole physical 
implementation. It will allow for enabling/disabling sensors, 
forcing states or displaying specific messages. 
Basic behaviours will be held by computed plans using 
models but adaptive rules will mostly be managed by the 
use of programming languages. Scilab [26] will be the 
original programming tool suggested, handling each 
controller separately and also each area globally. As an 
interpreted language, it proves more convenient to program 
specific rules and test them using the included web interface 
as a frontend. Once the tuning phase is finished, files will 
probably be compiled and integrated as executable 
application inside the backend system for performance and 
confidentiality reason. 
B. Backoffice tools 
The back-office architecture is organized around 
communication, events and sensors management. 
For a fair, or for an airport terminal, it is possible to 
define basic events or rules (holidays, week-end, plane 
arrivals and departures) and associate, to each of them, fixed 
plans to anticipate crowd variations. 
Using key sensors values, it is possible to manage 
adaptive modes (last minute gate changes, system failure, 
human weaknesses, etc.). One of the key rules will be to 
take a crowd increase immediately into account, but 
awaiting stabilization for a decrease. 
C. Data management 
During an event like a fair or even on a 24/7 schedule 
for the airport case, the system will store key data, time 
stamped in a big data server, which will later on be used to 
compute a new model version adapted to a specific location. 
The first system model will surely be an a priori model, 
based on knowledge and extensive statistics. During 
operations, real time data and predictions will be compared 
and analyzed, with a set of specific events and conditions. 
For the next fair, a new refined model will be setup and 
tested with all past data. The objective is to minimize 
differences between model prediction and real situation. 
Unexpected events will be removed to compute a new 
model. 
Based on physical and goals differences between each 
particular location, models will evidently be different in the 
long run but can be tuned for specific events based on 
similarities. 
D. Tools for operations users 
MEDIACTIF has to stand as a complete system for 
corporate users. 
Taking the airport scenario, such a system must firstly 
reduce walk time and crowd generation/increase but it could 
also have a more commercial aim, especially for shops. 
Today, it is quite impossible to evaluate the influence of an 
arrival or a departure over shop businesses. With this 
system, it will be possible to anticipate these events and 
adjust an adequate commercial response. 
For fair organizers, the situation is quite different. It is 
necessary to ensure a global fluidity in the alleys but also to 
maximize visitors just before a congestion level is attained. 
We also want to be able to help organizers in designing 
their fairs and anticipate the temporal and spatial 
distributions of global and local traffic flows. Consequences 
are evident: scaling a fair with an optimized topology and 
pathways, identifying probable critical spots and times for 
congestions, lowering the stress and improving the security, 
while enabling new business models based on deliveries of 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

quantitative 
predictions 
and 
actual 
traffic 
flow 
measurements.     
E. End users/passerby benefits 
For the end user, benefits are much more concrete. First, 
a reduced walk time and/or a better walk fluidity decreases 
the perceived fatigue. This not only avoids the greater part 
of stress but can lead for a global increase in the positive 
perception of the fair and/or a longer stay, which could 
translate in more business opportunities. Another direct 
benefit is relevant and up to date information for any 
unexpected events.  
For commercial or enhanced services, end users can also 
have individual and exclusive information or vouchers on 
their smartphone depending on each and everyone’s 
profiles. Signage for a business man with luggage will not 
be the same as signage for a family. 
Another example would also be to handle access points 
like car parks or cash desk locations. Of course this implies 
a refined management of every parameter of a particular site 
and a better anticipation, avoiding manual transit time 
measures. 
F. Commercial tools 
MEDIACTIF is not only a Digital Signage System. It 
can also be considered as an engineering commercial 
methodology. 
It can be used as a conception tool for commercial 
purposes design, crowd modelling, fair design, etc. 
Localization, path finder, thematic itineraries, specific 
profile handling (disables people, families, etc.) can be 
managed with the right plug-in on the system. 
VI. 
SERVICES 
MEDIACTIF is a dynamic Digital Signage management 
system. But it can also be considered as a bartering 
platform. It can establish relationships between different 
operators like restaurants, advertising and media companies. 
The system offers data and capabilities to address users’ 
needs which can be driven through services by external 
operators. 
We plan to offer different levels of services, from low 
level like security to high level like data exchange. 
The first level to handle is security. Even if the system is 
down, or if there is no communication to controllers, 
signage must work fully independently to indicate at least a 
fixed map and fire exits during a defined time.  
The first enhanced mode would be to offer a basic plan 
to allow users pathway indications. 
In case of a failure from the central server or in the 
transmission of data, controllers can work with fixed time 
scheduled plan, displaying basic signage information for 
each programmed schedule. Controllers are then considered 
as autonomous. 
In the “centralized plan selection mode”, the central 
server and data transmissions are up. Plans are computed 
and controllers are synchronized to provide a basic signage 
based only on the model. 
The “centralized traffic responsive mode” will have 
computed plans with synchronized controllers and sensor 
data handled to provide a full adaptive system. It also 
includes an enhanced security mode to manage security 
intervention of paramedics, police or fire men in case of 
serious unexpected events (illness, fire, robbery, etc.). 
The last level is the real bartering platform. It includes 
commercial services like advertising, external high level 
information (number or remaining seats in a restaurant, 
extra waiting room in an airport terminal, etc.) and paid 
services for end users. 
Digital signage systems can also work together to 
contribute to a large network. Specific time slots on the 
displays can be sold off to different partners, for example 
via auctions. This concept is known as a digital sign 
exchange [24][25]. 
It is also interesting to integrate smartphones as part of 
digital signage. Information displayed on these devices 
should be more specific depending on user profiles. Some 
information like pathway or localization could be free of 
charge, but some others must remain profitable like 
restaurant reservation or VIP services. 
The whole system perimeter can be different depending 
on corporate users’ wishes. The basic localization is the fair 
itself or an airport terminal. But it also can include 
peripheral areas that generate all incoming flows of people 
like cash register, passport control desks, car parks, all 
points of arrival. 
Here, the key point will be about the zoning itself: each 
zone must have a complete consistence for human behavior. 
Car parks never generate the same crowd congestion as a 
passport control desk, for example. 
We perceive MEDIACTIF as a crowd management 
system, however it must mainly be an engineering method: 
by understanding crowd phenomena, human behaviors and 
interactions, we can propose to equip an area with sensors 
and displays to generate the relevant information at the right 
place and time. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
The MEDIACTIF Project is at its very early stages of 
development. Surely some critical points must be solved 
first. Models must be setup to take care of the different 
usage scenarios considered so far (fairs, airports, etc.). We 
must handle people behaviors depending on tangible 
parameters (time, events, etc.) but also on unquantifiable 
parameters like personal interests. 
Another point to solve is indoor localization. A 
multimodal approach is planned using physical sensors and 
networking (Wi-Fi) though we are also looking at other 
options based on mesh networks. 
A first basic prototype with real experiment is planned at 
the beginning of year 2015. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
ESIEE-Paris works in close cooperation with !nstantané 
(project leader), Aéroports de Paris, VIPARIS, Scilab 
Enterprises, INNES, PERTIMM, B2B EN-TRADE. 
Some research leading to these results has received funds 
from the French Governement (DGCIS), Conseil Régional 
d’Ile de France and Conseil Général de Seine Saint-Denis for 
the FUI 16 program. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Mediactif, http://mediactif.esiee.fr/, [retrieved: March, 2014]. 
[2] J. V. Harrison and A. Andrusiewicz, “The digital signage 
exchange: a virtual marketplace for out-of-home digital 
advertising”, Proceedings 4th ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, June 2003, p. 274 
[3] K. Wood, “urban traffic control : systems review”, Transport 
Research Laboratory, Crowthorne, Berkshire, 1993 
[4] B. M. Chard and C. J. Lines, “TRANSYT: The latest 
developments”, Traffic Engineering and Control, vol. 28, 
1987, pp. 387-390 
[5] A. M. N. Mocofan, R. Ghiţă, V. R. T. López and F. C. 
Nemţanu, “Comparative Assessment of Traffic Control 
Parameters within an UTC-Distributed System”, J. Transp. 
Eng., 10.1061/(ASCE)TE.1943-5436.0000634, vol. 140,  
March 2014. 
[6] E. Franceries, “Centralized traffic management system as 
response to the effective realization of urban traffic fluency”, 
Archives of Transport System Telematics, vol. 4, 2011, ISSN 
1899-8208 
[7] K. Wood and R. T. Baker, “Using SCOOT weightings to 
benefit strategic routes”, Traffic Engineering and Control, 
1992 
[8] R. D. Bretherton and G. T. Bowen, “Recent enhancements to 
SCOOT 
- 
SCOOT 
Version 
2.4”, 
Proceedings 
3rd 
International Conference on Road Traffic Control, IEE, May 
1990 
[9] J. J. Henry, J. L. Farges and J. Tuffal, “The PRODYN real 
time traffic algorithm”, IFAC/IFIP/IFORS 4th Conference on 
Control in Transportation Systems, 1984 
[10] S. P. Shepherd, “A review of traffic signal control”, Institude 
of Transport Studies, University of Leeds, Working paper 
349, January 1992. 
[11] “Digital signage: the right information in all the right places”, 
http://www.itu.int/oth/T2301000015/en, [retrieved: March, 
2014]. 
[12] “The 
Popularity 
of 
SMIL 
in 
Digital 
Signage”, 
http://www.iadea.com/technology/smil, 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2014]. 
[13] “POPAI 
Digital 
Signage 
Content 
Standards”, 
http://popai.com/docs/DS/ScreenFormat%20Standards%20Dr
aft%20rev097.pdf, [retrieved: March, 2014]. 
[14] L. F. Henderson, “The statistics of crowd ﬂuids”, Nature, vol. 
229, 1971, pp. 381-383. 
[15] D. Helbing and P. Molnár, “Social force model for pedestrian 
dynamics”, Phys. Rev. E, vol. 51, 1995, pp. 4282-4286. 
[16] V.J. Blue and J. L. Adler, “Cellular automata microsimulation 
of bi-directional pedestrian ﬂows”, Transportation Research 
Board, vol. 1678, 1999, pp. 135-141. 
[17] M. Fukui and Y. Ishibashi, “Jamming transition in cellular 
automaton models for pedestrians on passageway”, Journal of 
the Physical Society of Japan, vol. 68, 1999, p. 3738. 
[18] P. G. Gipps and B. Marksjö, “A micro-simulation model for 
pedestrian ﬂows”, Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 
vol. 27, 1985, pp. 95-105. 
[19] B. Maury, A. Roudneff-Chupin, F. Santambrogio and J. 
Venel, “Handling congestion in crowd motion modeling”, 
Networks and heterogeneous media, American Institute of 
Mathematical Science, vol. 6, no. 3, September 2011 
[20] B. Maury and J. Venel, “A discrete contact model for crowd 
motion”, ESAIM: Mathematical Modelling and Numerical 
Analysis, vol. 45, January 2011, pp. 145-168. 
[21] B. Maury, A. Roudneff-Chupin and F. Santambrogio, “A 
macroscopic crowd motion model of gradient flow type”, 
Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences, vol. 
20, 2010, pp. 1787-1821. 
[22] Y. Gu, A. Lo and I. Niemegeers, “A survey of indoor 
positioning systems for wireless personal networks”, IEEE 
Commun. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 13-32, 1Q 
2009 
[23] F. Barcelo-Arroyo, M. Ciurana and I. Martin-Escalona, 
“Process and system for calculating distances between 
wireless nodes”, U.S. Patent 8 289 963, October 2012. 
[24] J. V. Harrison and A. Andrusiewicz, “The digital signage 
exchange: a virtual marketplace for out-of-home digital 
advertising”, Proceedings 4th ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, June 2003, p. 274, ACM 2003, ISBN 1-58113-
679-X. 
[25] J. V. Harrison and A. Andrusiewicz, “An Emerging 
Marketplace for Digital Advertising Based on Amalgamated 
Digital Signage Networks”, IEEE International Conference on 
Electronic Commerce (CEC 2003), June 2003, ISBN 0-7695-
1969-5. 
[26] Scilab, http://www.scilab.org/, [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
 
 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

