A Novel Passive Tracking Scheme Exploiting Adaptive Line of Sight Links 
Deockhyeon Ahn, Jungpyo Lee, Chao Sun, Youngok Kim* 
Electronic Engineering Dept. 
Kwangwoon University 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: *kimyoungok@kw.ac.kr 
Abstract—The wide deployment of wireless access points and 
smart mobile devices has been recently addressed in the 
research field of positioning. In traditional positioning 
schemes, the target is assumed to hold a tag or a transceiver 
for being tracked and it is regarded as active tracking. 
However, the target without any tags nor transceivers can be 
tracked by using radio frequency tomography, and it is known 
as passive tracking. In this paper, we propose a passive 
tracking 
scheme 
exploiting 
adaptive 
line-of-sight 
links 
(LOSLs). In the proposed scheme, the LOSL between each of 
wireless mobile device and wireless access point can be 
constructed adaptively to enhance the tracking performance in 
indoor environment. It maintains only least links while waiting 
for detection of a target with minimum energy consumption. 
However, when a target is detected with the least links, we can 
get a more accurate trajectory of the target by adaptively 
increasing the complexity of the links higher. According to the 
simulation results, it is shown that the proposed scheme can 
enhance the positioning performance remarkably. 
Keywords-positioning; active tracking; passive tracking; 
adaptive links. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
According to literatures, positioning schemes can be 
classified into two categories: Active tracking that requires 
the target to hold actively a device for tracking, such as a tag 
or a transceiver, and Passive tracking that tracks passively 
the target without any of devices [1]. However, the active 
tracking scheme has a limitation that it is not always 
expected for the tracked persons, such as criminals and 
intruders, to possess any devices for tracking. Accordingly, 
this issue has provoked much research about the passive 
tracking scheme. Zhou et al. had introduced a passive indoor 
tracking scheme with geometrical formulation [2]. They 
explored the characteristics of the wireless propagation radio 
frequency tomography (RFT) [3]-[6], under line-of-sight 
links (LOSLs), and by formulating the geometrical problem 
and applying Particle Swarm Algorithm (PSO) [7], the 
trajectory of the target can be estimated accurately. However, 
it is not efficient to maintain complex LOSLs under waiting 
for detection of a target with energy consumption. Moreover, 
since there are limitations of detecting multi-targets and 
more complex situations with triggered sequence error or 
time stamp error. In this paper, we propose a novel passive 
tracking scheme exploiting adaptive LOSLs to overcome the 
limitations of the conventional scheme. Therefore, we can 
get a more accurate trajectory of the target by increasing 
adaptively the level of the link complexity higher, while the 
conventional scheme is based on the fixed LOSLs. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sect. II, 
the basic concept of the conventional passive tracking 
scheme based on RFT are briefly discussed. In Sect. III, a 
passive tracking scheme exploiting adaptive LOSLs is 
proposed. In Sect. IV, the positioning performance of the 
proposed scheme is evaluated with computer simulations. 
Finally, our concluded remarks are summarized in Sect. V. 
II.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
A basic concept of the conventional passive tracking 
scheme based on RFT is described in Figure 1. As shown in 
the figure, a RFT operator consists of two access points 
(APs) (1, 2) and two RSS indicators (a, b), and it estimates a 
cross point (CP) on the LOSL [2]. Note that the CP 
indicates the intersecting point by the target on the LOSL. 
Both the RSS Indicators and the APs are placed on either 
side of the corridor, forming a LOSL web to monitor the 
corridor. When an obvious RSS fluctuation on a LOSL is 
detected, it is defined as this LOSL is triggered by the 
target. When a pedestrian walks across the RFT operator 
from position A to B in Figure 1, the triggered sequence of 
LOSLs is record as L(i), (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), which are L(1, a), 
L(1, b), L(2, a), and L(2, b), respectively. Note that L(i) is 
represented as a 1st order straight line, y = ki⋅x + bi, where ki
and bi are foreknown according to the coordinates of the 
APs and the RSS Indicators.  
Figure 1 . CP estimation on L(2,a) by a RFT operator 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 2. Scenario with proposed scheme 
Generally, when L(i) is triggered, the middle point, 
which is O on L(3) in Figure 1, on L(i) is selected as the CP 
for minimizing the tracking error, and it is called as a central 
method (CM) scheme. Once the triggered sequence is 
considered, however, the CP can be set as the middle point 
of the restricted segment (the cross mark in Figure 1) on the 
LOSL, which is cut by the previous obstructed LOSL and 
the subsequent obstructed LOSL, and it is given as follows: 
For example, in Figure 1, the CP on L(2, a), must locate 
on segment O2 in common sense because the previous 
triggered LOSP is L(1, b) and the later triggered LOSP is 
L(2, b). However, if the previous triggered LOSP is L(1, a) 
and the later triggered LOSP is L(2, a), the CP will be 
located on segment Oa. With the presented example in 
Figure 1, therefore, the CP is located at the middle point of 
segment O2, which is cut by L(1, b) and L(2,b) for further 
minimizing the tracking error. 
III.
PROPOSED SCHEME
As for the conventional scheme, it is not efficient to 
maintain complex LOSLs under waiting for detection of a 
target with energy consumption. We assumed that more 
transmitting power is used to maintain complex links, 
because the distance between AP and RSS indicator is 
increased. Moreover, there are other limitations of detecting 
multi-targets and performance with fixed structure of LOSL 
web. In this paper, therefore, we propose a novel passive 
tracking scheme exploiting adaptive LOSLs. 
Figure 2 shows a scenario with the proposed scheme. In 
the proposed scheme, it remains level 0, as the standby state 
with minimum number of LOSLs. When the LOSL is 
triggered, the level is changed to higher level with respect to 
the situations such as multi-targets or enhanced accuracy of 
tracking. In this paper, three representative situations are 
considered; when we want to get higher accuracy of the 
trajectory of the target, when the multi-targets are detected, 
when the sequence history of trajectory of the target is not 
clear.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Figure 3. The flow chart of proposed scheme 
Firstly, when we just want to get higher accuracy, we 
can make it by increasing the number LOSLs per each of 
nodes as shown in the Figure 2. By changing level 0 to 2, 
then, we can get more CPs, and we can track the trajectory 
of the target more densely. 
Secondly, if we get different trigger sequences with 
different directions, compared with originally tracked 
trajectory, then we can assume that there are multiple 
targets. Tracking of the multi-targets cannot be achieved 
with only the low levels. To make a clear division with 
original target, we can increase the number of LOSLs and 
compare the triggered sequence of original target with that 
of new targets. Moreover, by increasing the number of 
LOSLs, we can decrease the tracking error when the 
sequence history of trajectory of the target is not clear. 
Figure 3 presents the flow chart of the proposed scheme. 
For the first step, we make the LOSLs for target detection 
by sending propagation signals from APs to RSS Indicators. 
Then, it maintains ‘standby state’ with only minimum basic 
links for detecting target while saving power consumption. 
When a target is detected with the basic links, the proposed 
scheme increases the complexity of LOSL. Meanwhile, if 
the proposed scheme has enough information of the 
sequence with time stamp for tracking the target, it moves 
on to the next step to find out the trajectory of the target. 
However, if the information of the sequence with time 
stamp is missed or the sequence history is not reasonable, 
then it moves on the next step. In the next step, it can bring 
the level of LOSL to higher level and goes back to former 
step until the conditions are satisfied. 
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We performed computer simulations with MATLAB. In 
the simulations, Wi-Fi APs and smart-phones are assumed 
as APs and RSS indicators, and the characteristics of Wi-Fi 
signal are measured and modeled with path-loss and fading 
effects. The simulation also models a 20m x 20m space with 
5 APs and 5 RSS indicators to validate the effectiveness of 
the proposed scheme. 
(a)
Level 0 (units: meters) 
(b)
Level 1 (units: meters) 
(c) Level 2 (units: meters)
Figure 4. Results of simulations with the proposed scheme (x-axis and y-
axis indicate the coordinates in meters) 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

With the proposed scheme, we used the CM scheme, 
which sets the central point of each of the LOSLs to the CP 
for estimating the real CP, which is the intersecting point by 
the target on the LOSL. Note that purple stars indicate the 
real CPs on the actual trajectory of target. Figure 4 shows 
the result of simulations with the proposed scheme. The 
green solid line indicates the actual trajectory of target, 
which is made randomly, while the red line with circle 
marks indicates the estimated trajectory of the target and the 
dotted lines are the LOSLs. As shown in the figure, the 
proposed scheme can change the levels of LOSL web from 
0 to 2 and even more to enhance the tracking performance. 
Note that the level 1 is the tracking performance with the 
conventional scheme. In the simulations, we used only five 
couples of APs, but we can notice that the performance of 
tracking is enhanced remarkably, and the errors are reduced 
as the number of LOSLs is increased. It is reasonable that 
the power consumption of the proposed scheme is decreased 
because it can save the transmitting power, while it waits for 
the target. However, the amount of power saving depends 
on the scenarios with different ratio of waiting time and 
active 
time. 
Therefore, 
we 
are 
under 
performing 
experiments for the proposed scheme to confirm the 
operation of the algorithm in terms of the power saving as 
well as the accuracy, and the results will be discussed in 
future works. Moreover, if there is an error of the triggered 
sequence or time stamp, which is caused from events of the 
multi-targets, the proposed scheme can track the multi-
targets with independent sequence and time stamp.  
V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a passive tracking scheme 
exploiting adaptive LOSLs. In the proposed scheme, the 
LOSL between each of wireless mobile device and wireless 
APs can be constructed adaptively to enhance the tracking 
performance in indoor environment. Compared with the 
conventional scheme, we can get advantages in accuracy, 
while maintaining the existing number of APs, by increasing 
the number of LOSLs in each of levels. It is natural that the 
tracking accuracy becomes higher when the number of APs 
increases. However, there are several issues left for future 
works. As the number of LOSLs is increased, the complexity 
also is proportionally increased. Therefore, one of the future 
work is to find an optimal number of APs’ deployment for 
tracking a target in usual indoor environment. Also, we need 
to evaluate the performance of the proposed scheme with 
various number of multi-targets in future works. Moreover, 
we will analyse the stability of the algorithm with respect to 
the accuracy of the inputs in future works. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Basic Science 
Research 
Program 
through 
the 
National 
Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF), funded by the ministry of 
Education (NRF-2016R1D1A1B03932980). 
REFERENCES
[1] G. Deak, K. Curran, and J. Condell, “A survey of active and 
passive indoor localisation systems,” Comput. Commun., vol. 35, 
pp. 1939–1954, Sep. 2012 
[2] B. Zhou, N. Kim, and Y. Kim, "A Passive Indoor Tracking 
Scheme With Geometrical Formulation," IEEE Antennas and 
Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 15, pp. 1815-1818, Oct. 2016. 
[3] S. Nannuru, Y. Li, Y. Zeng, M. Coates, and B. Yang, “Radio-
frequency tomography for passive indoor multitarget tracking,” 
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 12, pp. 2322–2333, Dec. 2013. 
[4] Y. Guo, K. Huang, N. Jiang, X. Guo, Y. Ki, and G. Wnag, “An 
exponential-rayleigh model for RSS-based device-free localization 
and tracking,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol.14, pp. 484 - 494, 
Mar. 2015. 
[5] O. Kaltiokallio, M. Bocca, and N. Patwari, “A fade level-based 
spatial model for radio tomographic imaging,” IEEE Trans. Mobile 
Comput., vol. 13, pp. 1159–1172, Jun. 2014. 
[6] I. Sabek, M. Youssef, and A. Vasilakos, “ACE: an accurate and 
eficient multi-entity device-free WLAN localization system,” IEEE 
Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 14, pp. 261–273, Feb. 2015. 
[7] S. Selleri, M. Mussetta, P. Pirinoli, R. Zich, and L. Matekovits, 
“Some insight over new variations of the particle swarm 
optimization method,” IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 
5, pp. 235–238, Dec. 2006.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-554-8
ICNS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

