Simulations for Stochastic Geometry on the Performance of
V2X Communications in Rural Macrocell Environment
Victor Obi∗ and Seungmo Kim∗
∗{vo00840,seungmokim}@georgiasouthern.edu
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Georgia Southern University
Statesboro, GA, USA
Abstract—Vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communications is a
concept that has been around for the past decade. It involves
communication between vehicles and other types of infrastruc-
ture. This application is exceptionally useful for emergency
services such as ambulances, ﬁre trucks etc. This is because
an emergency vehicle can communicate with the trafﬁc light
infrastructure and make it give the green signal thereby allowing
vehicle to pass quickly. This is useful because it alerts other
cars and pedestrians on the road when an emergency vehicle is
present. In this paper, a V2X communications system in an urban
setting will be simulated using MATLAB and the Automated
Driving Toolbox. The purpose of simulation in MATLAB is to
test if vehicle to vehicle communication is affected by buildings
and other infrastructure. The ﬁrst Simulation is constructed
using the Automated driving simulator. In this simulation clover
highway is constructed and cars are added to mimic a busy
highway. The second simulation involves several nodes being
programmed in MATLAB and intersecting at various points
to simulate an overpass highway. The end goal of this project
to successfully simulate a V2X communications system with
additional components added within the program to represent
additional cars and infrastructure.
Index Terms—Stochastic geometry, V2X, Rural macrocell,
Suburban highway
I. INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this paper is to construct a clover highway
with vehicles on all roads and have movement by the cars on
all junctions. The project will be accomplished using MAT-
LAB and the toolboxes associated with it. Through this project
we will simulate vehicle-to-everything communications (V2X)
communications which stands for vehicle to everything com-
munications. There are several components to V2X, which
include Vehicle to vehicle (V2V), vehicle to infrastructure
(V2I), vehicle to pedestrian (V2P), vehicle to network (V2N),
etc. As such, V2X has already taken the notion as a leading
driver technology enabling cars to communicate with each
other and other external systems (i.e. trafﬁc lights, streetlights,
parking garages, pedestrians) [1].
Nevertheless, the V2X communications are at the most
critical moment in its history. The main reason is the federal
government’s movement that favors the Wi-Fi as an effort
to meet the burgeoning bandwidth demand. The movement
directly affected the spectrum for V2X communications. The
spectrum of 5.850-5.925 GHz (also known as the 5.9 GHz
band) was assigned to V2X communications for supporting
the intelligent transportation system (ITS) use cases in 1999 by
the United States Federal Communications Commission (U.S.
FCC). However, after many years of hearing and discussion,
the FCC voted in a bipartisan support to reduce the bandwidth
for V2X from 75 MHz (5.850-5.925 GHz) to 30 MHz (5.895-
5.925 GHz) while granting the remainder of the 5.9 GHz to
Wi-Fi [2].
In particular, a V2X communications system has been
found to be interference-constrained mainly due to a large
communications range for each vehicle [3]. There were two
main technologies supporting the V2X communications func-
tionalities, namely the dedicated short-range communication
(DSRC) [4][5] and C-V2X [6][7]. Moreover, such an inter-
technology interference between dissmilar wireless systems
has been studied quite a few times in the litereature [8][9].
Albeit not presented in this paper, our analysis has found that
a suburban geometry yielded a higher level of interference
because of the openness in signal exchange among vehicles.
On the other hand, ironically, an urban geometry marked a
lower level of interference among vehicles due to existence
of blockage provided by physical obstacles (e.g., buildings).
Motivated from this ﬁnding, this paper focuses on the per-
formance evaluation of a V2X communications system in a
suburban environment.
Contribution of This Paper: This paper provides a suburban
highway environment where the performance of a V2X com-
munications can be evaluated. The framework aims to serve
as a conceptual basis for further study based on the stochastic
geometry, which will more precisely assess the performance of
V2X communications in safety-critical use cases. As a means
to accommodate a higher level of ﬂexibility in the distribution
of vehicles, this study is focused on providing a computer
simulations framework.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
Recall from Section I that a suburban environment is of
particular signiﬁcance in the analysis of V2X communications
due to a higher interference. As an effort to capture the unique
characteristics of a suburban geometry, this paper adopts a
Rural Macrocell (RMa) environment that is deﬁned in the
channel model by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP) [10]. Technical details follow in this section.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

Fig. 1. The original approach for the project
Fig. 2. Highway Simulation using automated driving toolbox (The blocks represent the vehicles and the dots represent the paths the vehicles take.)
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

CW = 31
50
100
150
200
250
300
Vehicle density (# vehicles/km2)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Suburban
Urban
Urban (Discounted)
Fig. 3. Comparison of PDR between urban and suburban geometries (with CW = {31, 127})
A. Path Loss
The rural deployment scenario focuses on larger and con-
tinuous coverage. The key characteristics of this scenario
are continuous wide area coverage supporting high speed
vehicles. Several key technical characteristics are provided in
the speciﬁcation [10]:
• Distribution of nodes: Uniform
• Indoor/Outdoor: 50% indoor and 50% outdoor
• LOS/NLOS: Both LOS/NLOS
where LOS and NLOS stand for line-of-sight and non-line-of-
sight, respectively.
For the path loss model characterized for the RMa geometry,
the readers are encouraged to refer to Table 7.4.1-1 of the
speciﬁcation [10].
B. Geometry
Now, we proceed to creation of geometric models for the
RMa. As a representative of the RMa model, we create a sub-
urban environment where two highway segments cross, which
forms a 4-way junction. Fig. 1 describes the geometry (on the
left) and a snapshot of the MATLAB code implementing the
geometry (on the right).
On the created geometry, we move on to distribute vehicles
at the density of 100 vehicles per km−2, which is illustrated in
Fig. 2. The normalization by km2 is attributed to the dimension
of the geometry as shown on the righthand side of Fig. 2.
Details on our methodology will follow in the next section.
III. SIMULATIONS METHODOLOGY
This section depicts why and what we do in the simulations
as proposed in the previous section.
A. Justiﬁcation of Methodology
We found that simulation would accomplish the best efﬁ-
ciency as the main method to evaluate the performance of the
proposed mechanism, based on several advantages [11].
First, as presented through Figs. 1 through 2, the parameters
deﬁning and operating the proposed study are quite diverse in
types and values, which makes it challenging to explore the
parameters’ dynamic orchestration in concert. A simulation
provides a relatively easier control over such a large space
composed of various parameters with wide ranges of values.
It gives an obvious advantage over mathematical derivations
and testbed implementations. One can easily anticipate a high
degree of complexity in changing the setting every time a
new round of simulation is executed, while a large number of
iterations is inevitable to present a statistically stable result
in such a complex setting. As an effort to deal with the
complexity, we adopt simulation as the main methodology,
which, as shall be presented in this section, did efﬁciently
evaluate the proposed system in a wide diversity of parameter
settings.
Second, simulations enable computations without being
caught up with restrictions or errors caused by computing
environmental factors including hardware, compiler, language,
etc. Taking into account all the available options for all of
those factors will complex the performance evaluation to a
too high degree, which, as such, will make it hard to precisely
identify the factors determining the key performance.
B. Development of Simulations Framework
During the early stages of the project, there was an attempt
to construct the highways in MATLAB programmatically
however that proved to be in efﬁcient for the goal in mind
(as shown in Fig. 1). The approach for the project was then
changed and instead of creating the roads programmatically we
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

decided to draw it out using the Automated driving toolbox (as
seen in Fig. 2). Through use of the automated driving toolbox,
the highways were constructed, and the moving vehicles were
able to be simulated.
IV. RESULTS
Taking a comparative look at the urban and suburban
geometries, we calculate the performance of a V2X network
in terms of the packet delivery rate (PDR) as shown in Fig. 3.
The ﬁgure shows that with CW of 31 and 127, a vehicle can
achieve a higher PDR in an urban scenario. The rationale is
that that the blockage acts to reduce the number of neighboring
vehicles that “compete” for a channel. In other words, in an
urban scenario, the receivability among the Rx vehicles not
undergoing blockage is higher compared to a suburban setting.
The reason is that the blockage also serves as physically
dividing a large network into smaller ones.
However, we would not recommend one taking the result
in Fig. 3 that an urban setting is more advantageous in the
performance of exchanging signals. This is because the PDR
is not displaying the number of vehicles that received the
BSM. In other words, the physical coverage of a message
broadcast must be suppressed in an urban setting compared
to a suburban scenario where no blockage exists. Therefore,
the third bar (“orange” in color) in the ﬁgure shows the PDR
that is “discounted” by the blockage rate, which gives the
number of vehicles that are actually able to receive a BSM
after consideration of the blockage.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has presented a simulation framework that pro-
vides an analytical capability based on the stochastic geometry.
The paper has put particular focus on the suburban geometry,
in consideration of a higher interference caused by lack of
blockage of signals among vehicles. Based on the simulations,
this paper has also presented a comparative analysis between
the urban and suburban scenarios. The result indicated that
a higher PDR could be achieved in an urban setting, but a
discount must be applied because the higher performance was
achieved only among a certain subset of vehicles due to the
blockage.
Moving forward the plan is to add more nodes at various
points of the graph and vary the speeds for each node to see
how that affects the performance of the simulation. Though
certain aspects of the code have been manipulated to help
reach the goal of consistency, the plan is to push the boundaries
of the code and see what other applications the code can be
used in.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Kim, “Impacts of mobility on performance of blockchain in VANET,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, May 2019.
[2] U.S. FCC, “Use of the 5.850-5.925 GHz band,” FCC-20-164A1 Rcd,
Nov. 2020.
[3] Y. S. Song and S. K. Lee, “Analysis of periodic broadcast message
for DSRC systems under high-density vehicle environments,” in Proc.
IEEE International Conference on Information and Communication
Technology Convergence (ICTC) 2017.
[4] S. Kim and C. Dietrich, “A novel method for evaluation of coexistence
between DSRC and Wi-Fi at 5.9 GHz,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commu-
nications Conference (Globecom) 2018.
[5] S. Kim and B. J. Kim, “Crash risk-based prioritization of basic safety
message in DSRC,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, Nov. 2020.
[6] S. Kim and B. J. Kim, “Reinforcement learning for accident risk-
adaptive V2X networking” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Con-
ference (VTC) 2020 Fall.
[7] S. Kim, B. J. Kim, and B. Park, “Environment-adaptive multiple access
for distributed V2X network: A reinforcement learning framework,” in
Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) 2021 Spring.
[8] J. Lee, T. Kim, S. Han, and S. Kim, “An analysis of sensing scheme
using energy detector for cognitive radio networks,” in Proc. IEEE
International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Com-
munications (PIMRC) 2008.
[9] S. Kim and C. Dietrich, “Coexistence of outdoor Wi-Fi and radar at 3.5
GHz,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 6, iss. 4, Aug. 2017.
[10] 3GPP, “5G; Study on channel model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100
GHz (3GPP TR 38.901 version 16.1.0 Release 16),” ETSI TR 138 901,
v16.0.0, Nov. 2020.
[11] S. Kim and A. S. Ibrahim, “Byzantine-fault-tolerant consensus via
reinforcement learning for permissioned blockchain implemented in a
V2X network,” arXiv:2007.13957, Jul. 2020.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-853-2
ICNS 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Networking and Services

