Traffic Offloading Improvements in Mobile Networks 
 
Tao Zheng, Daqing Gu 
Orange Labs International Center 
Beijing, China 
e-mail: {tao.zheng; daqing.gu}@orange.com 
 
 
Abstract – The exponential increase in mobile IP data usage 
causes a shortage in the mobile bandwidth. Traffic offloading is 
regarded as a solution to the exploding growth of mobile 
broadband data traffic in the mobile networks. In this paper, a 
content aware traffic offload scheme is proposed to implement 
using multiple access paths simultaneously. Moreover, the 
process flow based-on the scheme in Long Term Evolution (LTE) 
and other traffic offloading improvements are also presented. 
This scheme utilizes Content Centric Networking (CCN) concept 
and Digital Fountain Codes to handle the multi-path control and 
reduce the complexity of traffic offload implementation.  
Keywords- Traffic offloading, CCN, Fountain Codes, LTE 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile broadband devices such as smart phones, tablets, 
wireless dongles and some data-intensive apps have resulted in 
an exponential increase in mobile IP data usage, which is 
expected to cause a shortage in the mobile bandwidth. 
According to the Cisco Visual Networking Index Global 
Mobile Data Forecast‎[1], the global mobile data usage tripled 
in 2010 as compared to 2009. Further, the Cisco forecast 
predicts that by 2015, there is going to be a 26 fold increase as 
compared to 2010 levels. 
To anticipate this problem, operators have deployed or are 
deploying‎ “mobile‎ data‎ offloading”‎ solutions to alleviate 
network congestion quickly. Traffic offloading refers to the 
ability to move mobile data traffic from cellular to alternative 
network such as WiFi. So, the data traffic management will be 
an important issue in traffic offloading. 
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has defined 
and is defining some traffic offloading mechanisms in various 
releases. For example, Local IP Access‎[2] in Release 9, 
Selected IP Traffic Offload‎[2], IP Flow Mobility‎[3], Access 
Network Discovery and Selection enhancements‎[4]‎[5]‎[6] and 
Multiple Access PDN Connectivity‎[6]‎[7] in Release 10, 
Broadband Access Interworking using WLAN/H(e)NB and 
Broadband Access Interworking using H(e)NB‎[8] in Release 
11, WLAN Network Selection for 3GPP Terminals‎[9], LIPA 
Mobility and Selected IP Traffic Offload at the Local 
Network‎[10], S2a mobility based on General packet radio 
service (GPRS) Tunneling Protocol (GTP) and WLAN 
Access‎[11] and IP Flow Mobility support for S2a and S2b 
Interfaces‎[12] in Release 12. Traffic management in these 
mechanisms focuses on networks and terminals.  
The objective of the paper is to study and compare the IP 
traffic offloading and management solutions in 3GPP. A 
proposal based on content aware traffic offloading is finally 
presented.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we study 
and compare the IP traffic offloading and management 
solutions in 3GPP. In Section 3, a content aware traffic offload 
scheme and its verification are presented. In Section 4, 
potential extensions in the proposed scheme and other 
improved points in multi-attachment network are studied. 
Finally, Section 5 summarizes the conclusions. 
II. 
TRAFFIC OFFLOADING IN 3GPP 
Traffic offloading is regarded as a solution to the exploding 
growth of mobile broadband data traffic in the deployed 3GPP 
mobile networks. The reason why traffic offloading by WiFi is 
considered to be a viable solution for mobile data traffic 
explosion is that there is a lot of available WiFi spectrum with 
a very large number of compatible devices. And it simplifies 
the complexity as well as cost of managing and deploying a 
Cellular network. In 3GPP, from Release 9 to 12, some traffic 
offloading mechanisms are defined. 
A. Release 9 
 
Local IP Access (LIPA) 
LIPA was introduced in 3GPP Release 9, with the 
discussion on architecture options and impacts to procedures 
being continued in 3GPP Release-10 and 3GPP Release-11 
actively.  
LIPA is a mechanism by which a User Equipment (UE) 
connected to a Home NodeB or Home eNodeB (H(e)NB), is 
able to transfer data to a local data network connected to the 
same H(e)NB system directly, without the data traversing the 
cellular network, and accordingly reduce the load on the mobile 
core network. LIPA also allows the User Equipment (UE) to 
access any external network that is connected to the local 
network.  
Considering an IP based corporate wireless network with 
multiple devices such as laptops, tablets, printers, servers, 
video conferencing units and IP based telephones which all 
need to connect to each other and also connect to the internet. 
The network is implemented using a femto cell gateway and a 
private gateway to which all these devices connect. If a user 
needs to print from a laptop, LIPA helps in routing the print 
request internally, without routing it through the femto cell 
gateway. Also, email could be sent directly through the private 
gateway. 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

LIPA is a simple architecture well suited to local networks. 
LIPA is applicable only to H(e)NB access, not for macro cell 
access. It needs the additional Local Gateway function in 
H(e)NB. 
B. Release 10 
 
Selected IP Traffic Offload (SIPTO) 
SIPTO is a mechanism where portions of the IP traffic on a 
H(e)NB access or cellular network are offloaded to a local 
network, in order to reduce the load on the core network. 
SIPTO is applicable to H(e)NB access or another gateway in 
the cellular network that is closer to the UE. SIPTO can be 
triggered by events like UE mobility, special occasions that 
lead to concentration of traffic or other network rules. 
Compared to LIPA, SIPTO is applicable in both femto and 
macro networks use cases. However, SIPTO‎doesn’t‎help‎radio‎
congestion. 
 
IP Flow Mobility (IFOM) 
IFOM is a mechanism where the terminal has data sessions 
with the same Packet Data Network (PDN) connection 
simultaneously over a 3GPP and a WLAN access network. 
Under this situation, the UE could add or delete data sessions 
over either of the access methods, effectively offloading data. 
Unlike LIPA and SIPTO, where the data offload is largely 
transparent to the UE, the logic of data offloading in IFOM is 
more UE centric and largely transparent to the Radio Access 
Network (RAN). 
IFOM helps in both radio and core network congestion. 
However, compared to LIPA and SIPTO, IFOM needs support 
of Dual Stack Mobile IPv6 (DSMIPv6) and WiFi or other non 
3GPP access network and is more complicated to be 
implemented. 
 
Access Network Discovery and Selection (ANDSF) 
enhancements in Release10 
ANDSF is a module within an Evolved Packet Core (EPC) 
of the System Architecture Evolution for 3GPP mobile 
networks. ANDSF enables consumer-side devices such as 
notebooks, modems and mobile phones to discover and 
communicate with non-3GPP networks such as WiFi or 
WiMAX and enforce network policy controls. Standards 
Related to ANDSF in‎  PP‎are‎ TS‎       ‎[4] ‎ TS‎       ‎[5] 
and TS 23.402‎[6]‎. 
 
Multiple Access PDN Connectivity (MAPCON) 
MAPCON provides the capability for terminals to establish 
multiple connections to different PDNs via different access 
methods and a selective transfer of PDN connections between 
accesses. MAPCON feature is characterized by multiple packet 
core IP addresses at the UE, any of which may be moved (but 
unchanged) between 3GPP cellular and WiFi access without 
impacting the 3GPP access connectivity of the other IP 
addresses. This allows IP traffic to multiple PDNs through the 
use of separate PDN-GateWays (PDN-GWs) or a single PDN-
GW. The usage of multiple PDNs is typically controlled by 
network policies and defined in the user subscription of TS 
23.401‎[7].  
Multiple PDN connections would need to be supported 
when the UE is using LTE for part of data connection and WiFi 
for other part. In fact these two (or multiple) connections 
should be under the control of the same EPC core that can help 
support seamless mobility once the terminal moves out of the 
WiFi hotspot. 
C. Release 11 
The main problems of the interworking between a 3GPP 
system and a fixed broadband access arose from the different 
methods of policy control. 3GPP TS 23.139‎[8] specifies the 
interworking between a 3GPP system and a fixed broadband 
access network defined by Broadband Forum (BBF) to provide 
the IP connectivity to a 3GPP UE using a WLAN and a 
H(e)NB connected to a fixed broadband access network. It 
covers the system description including mobility, policy, 
Quality of Service/Quality of Experience (QoS/QoE) aspects 
between a 3GPP system and a fixed broadband access network 
as well as the respective interactions with the Policy and 
Charging Control (PCC) frameworks.  
3GPP identified the initial use cases for Fixed-Mobile 
Convergence (FMC) in Release 9 and finalized the work on 
phases 1 and 2 within Release 11, and phase 3 will be 
addressed in Release 12 and later releases. 
 
Broadband Access Interworking using WLAN/H(e)NB 
When WLAN is being used for interworking with a fixed 
broadband access network, 3GPP Evolved Packet System (EPS) 
considers both EPC routed traffic and non-seamless WLAN 
offloaded traffic; both traffic types can coexist during network 
operation. That is, UE can simultaneously have a connection to 
both the EPC and the non-seamless WLAN offloaded traffic. 
For the purpose of interworking with a fixed broadband 
access network, a 3GPP system has to recognize the local IP 
address of the UE connected to the fixed broadband access 
network. The S9a interface session can be established and 
perform the policy interworking when the local policy of the 
BBF network indicates that the policy control for non-seamless 
WLAN offload is allowed for the UE, as well as the 3GPP 
home‎operator’s‎policy  
 
Broadband Access Interworking using H(e)NB 
In contrast to the interworking scenario using WLAN 
access, the interworking architecture using H(e)NB supports 
only EPC-routed traffic. For the purpose of interworking with a 
fixed broadband access network, this architecture basically uses 
S9a similar to the architecture using WLAN described above. 
Then‎ the‎ S9a‎ interface‎ also‎ carries‎ the‎ H(e)NB’s‎ local‎ IP‎
address and User Datagram Protocol (UDP) port number(s), 
and/or the Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN) of the fixed 
broadband access network to the Broadband Policy Control 
Framework (BPCF) from the Policy and Charging Rules 
Function (PCRF). 
D. Release 12 
 
WLAN Network Selection for 3GPP Terminals 
3GPP TR 23.865‎[9] studies WLAN network selection for 
3GPP terminals in Release 12. The solutions are based on 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

architectures as specified in TS 23.402‎[6] and will take into 
account Hotspot 2.0 specifications developed by the Wi-Fi 
Alliance (WFA) ‎[13]. 3GPP operator's policies for WLAN 
network selection will be provisioned on 3GPP terminals via 
pre-configuration or using the ANDSF server for their delivery. 
 
LIPA Mobility and SIPTO at the Local Network 
3GPP TR 23.859‎[10] studies on the support of mobility for 
LIPA between the H(e)NBs located in the local IP network and 
functionality to support SIPTO requirements at the local 
network, including mobility. The report is intended to 
document the analysis of the architectural aspects to achieve 
these objectives in order to include the solutions in the relevant 
technical specifications. 
 
Study on S2a mobility based on GTP and WLAN 
Access 
In 3 PP‎T ‎      ‎[11], S2a mobility based on GTP and 
WLAN Access is studied: 
The addition of an S2a based on GTP option. In particular 
this Study Item will develop the necessary stage 2 message 
flows to support S2a based on GTP and mobility between 
GTP-S5/S8 and GTP-S2a; Supporting WLAN access to EPC 
through S2a via mechanisms; The study item gives some 
solutions separately for GTP based S2a and WLAN access to 
EPC through S2a. 
 
Study of IP Flow Mobility support for S2a and S2b 
Interfaces 
  PP‎ T ‎       ‎[12] studies the scenarios, requirements 
and solutions for UEs with multiple interfaces which will 
simultaneously connect to 3GPP access and one, and only one, 
non-3GPP access. Solutions to be studied include the 
possibility of dynamically routing to specific accesses 
individual flows generated by the same or different applications 
belonging to the same PDN connection. The study of solutions 
to support routing of different PDN connections through 
different access systems is also in the scope of this item. This 
study item also investigates the mechanisms for provisioning 
the‎ UE‎ with‎ operator’s‎ policies‎ for‎ multiple‎ access‎ PDN‎
connectivity and flow mobility. 
III. 
CONTENT AWARE TRAFFIC OFFLOAD SCHEME 
This section proposes a content aware traffic offloading 
scheme in 3GPP. In the scheme, fountain codes ‎[14] are used to 
transport the information from servers to terminals through 
different access paths. Fountain codes technique having the 
slight overhead and impressive codec, is exploited to generate 
the segments for delivery. The data streams can be transported 
smoothly in all different access paths simultaneously or part of 
them when breakdown happens and terminals do not need to 
handle the breakdown and recovery. 
 
Figure 1.  System Overview of the scheme 
A. The scheme overview 
The system overview is illustrated in Figure 1. It is 
composed of terminal and remote general Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP) proxies. A local proxy built in the terminal is 
responsible 
for 
the 
conversion 
between 
the 
HTTP 
request/response and the Interest/Data packets. The remote 
proxy exchanges Interest/Data packets with the local HTTP 
proxy through the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or 
UDP based tunnel established over multiple heterogeneous 
links in the content centric way. The remote proxy fetches the 
content from the outer server in the Internet to satisfy the 
terminal’s‎ request ‎ The‎ main‎ reason‎ for using two proxies is 
that the tunnel between the two proxies can help Content 
Centric data stream penetrate the network. 
The working environment can be IPv4 or IPv6. In IPv6 
network, the remote proxy can be assigned with different IPv6 
addresses including unicast address, multicast address and 
anycast address. Given the unicast address, the terminal 
establishes the tunnel with the single specific remote proxy. 
The multicast addressing refers to the configuration where the 
terminal can set up the tunnels concurrently connecting the 
collection of remote proxies. The anycast addressing makes the 
terminal build the tunnel to the nearest remote proxy among 
several candidates. 
Since the service session in the scheme is identified with 
the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) that is independent of 
the IP addresses associated with the different connections to the 
network, the terminal can keep the ongoing session alive as 
long as the content identifier is invariant. The dynamics due to 
the connection switching in the mobile scenario is only visible 
in the tunnel running over the TCP or UDP sessions managed 
by the local HTTP proxy and shielded from the perspective of 
the HTTP session in the normal web-based client of the 
terminal. 
CCN is an alternative approach to the architecture of 
networks which was proposed by Xerox PARC within the 
CCNx ‎[15] project. From the network perspective, in CCN, 
network entities in ordinary network are replayed by data 
entities. 
Unlike state-of-the-art multi-path approaches such as Multi-
Path Transmission Control Protocol (MP-TCP), CCN can help 
us to hide some network control implementing details with the 
help‎of‎the‎‘connection-less’‎nature‎of‎CCN. In the proposed 
solution, we utilize the CCN concept rather than CCN protocol, 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

thus‎it’s‎not‎necessary‎to‎consider the change of network access 
paths through fountain codes to encapsulate data packets.  
The service session coupling with the remote proxy avoids 
the problem of Domain Name System (DNS) resolution 
potentially confronted with the multi-homed terminal. Since the 
remote proxy acts as the agent of the terminal for content 
acquisition, the terminal has no need for DNS resolution except 
to forward the request message to the remote proxy. The update 
on the access router is additionally not mandatory any more 
because the conversion between IP address and URI is 
executed in the sense of application layer. 
B. The scheme in LTE 
When the scheme is applied in LTE network, the remote 
proxy can be deployed within PDN-GW and the local proxy is 
still in terminals. The architecture is showed in Figure 2. 
Terminals can retrieve information from outer server through 
different access system simultaneously and can switch 
smoothly among them without any breakdown. Multiple data 
streams can be transported though multiple access systems, 
such as LTE RAN, trusted non-3GPP access and non-trusted 
non-3GPP access.  
In this scheme, fountain codes are used to transport data 
packets between two proxies. The reasons of choosing fountain 
codes as the encapsulation technology are showed as follows. 
Fountain codes are rateless in the sense that the number of 
encoded packets that can be generated from the source message 
is potentially limitless. Regardless of the statistics of the 
erasure events on the channel, the source data can be decoded 
from‎any‎ser‎of‎K’‎encoded‎packets ‎for‎K’‎slightly‎larger than 
K. Fountain codes can also have very small encoding and 
decoding complexities and automatically adapt the change of 
multiple access paths to avoid the implementation of path 
control details ‎[14].  
 
Figure 2.  The content aware traffic offload in EPC 
The source hosts simply transfer the packets with the 
different coding schemes as many as possible to the destination 
hosts without concerns over the reordering induced in various 
paths. It increases the data throughput and avoids the 
complicated reconciliation between the multiple paths. 
Figure 3 gives the process of the content aware traffic 
offload. 
 
Figure 3.  The process flow generating IPv6 flow label 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 4.  The test-bed topology in lab 
In the terminal, the local proxy‎ handles‎ the‎ application’s‎
request towards outer server through HTTP. The bearer of 
WLAN or EPC is established in advance or when the local 
proxy receives the request. After the local proxy received the 
response from outer server, it sends the requests getting file 
blocks to the remote proxy, which acquires the file from outer 
server, encodes the file blocks by fountain codes and sends 
them to the local proxy though different access paths. The local 
proxy decodes the received blocks and sends them to 
application. During the transportation, the change of paths 
between the remote proxy and the local proxy will not impact 
the‎ blocks’‎ decoding‎ due‎ to‎ the‎ fault-tolerance property of 
fountain codes. 
C. The verification of this scheme 
According to the traffic offloading scheme mentioned 
above, a verification test was implemented in our lab. Because 
there is no mobile data access in the lab, we chose two WiFi 
interfaces and Access Points (AP) to simulate two access paths. 
Figure 4 shows the test topology, which is composed of a 
laptop (including a local HTTP proxy) with two WiFi 
interfaces, two WiFi APs and a remote proxy connecting to 
Internet. 
The local proxy and remote proxy, fountain encoding and 
decoding were implemented through programming. On this 
test-bed, we tested various combinations of two access paths 
and handover between them. The data delivery between the 
laptop and Internet cannot be interrupted in these scenarios. 
The test validated the feasibility and validity of this scheme. 
IV. 
POTENTIAL EXTENSIONS AND IMPROVED POINTS FOR 
MULTI-ATTACHMENT NETWORKS 
The proposed scheme in Section 3 can be easily extended in 
other use cases and there are other improved points for multi-
attachment networks. 
A. Potential Extensions 
The potential extensions of this scheme include mobile 
content distribution and mobile data offloading in addition to 
the mobility management. 
 
Mobile content distribution 
It is simple and practicable to implement the content 
distribution in the IPv6 mobile network with our solution. The 
remote proxy introduced in our method may take the role of 
content cache in the Content Distribution Network (CDN). The 
content centric networking relying on the URI identifier and 
many-to-many transport enables the tight coupling between 
request routing and load balancing in the simplified way where 
the remote proxy can realize the distributed load sharing by 
simply tuning its transmission rate and forwarding the content 
request to other proxies. 
 
Mobile data offloading 
Mobile data offloading, also called traffic offloading can be 
smoothly supported by our solution without interrupting the 
ongoing session. The session maintenance with URI is able to 
shield the negative side-effect yielded by the IP address 
variation due to the link switching triggered by the traffic 
offloading. Given the single service session, the many-to-many 
transport implemented with the Digital Fountain coding makes 
the data delivery through the complementary network 
independent of the original one in the cellular networks without 
fearing the packet reordering that may deteriorate the QoS/QoE 
performance. 
B. Improved points for multi-attachment network 
 
IP aware traffic management 
In EPC network, the IP packets are transported in GTP 
Tunnel. Figure 5 shows the IP packet structure through GTP 
Tunnel. EPC entities just handle GTP Tunnel instead of IP 
packet.  
The UE and the PDN-GW (for GTP-based S5/S8) or 
Serving-GW (for Proxy Mobile IP (PMIP)-based S5/S8) use 
packet filters to map IP traffic onto the different bearers. Some 
EPC’s‎mechanisms ‎such‎as‎QoS ‎PCC, are based-on bearers, 
the packets contained in the same bearer share same QoS 
profile‎and‎be‎treated‎in‎the‎same‎way ‎It’s‎hard‎to‎handle‎IP‎
packets in such mechanisms.  
When UE attaches multiple networks, except for EPC, 
other access methods handle IP packets directly. Therefore in 
EPC, the transport layer is not able to know and use the 
information, e.g., QoS related information, hidden in (1) the 
tunnel header and (2) original IP packet. In the context of this 
paper, by applying IP aware traffic management, the transport 
layer will be able to read and use this hidden type of 
information. So, IP aware traffic management in multi-
attachment network will be beneficial to reduce the complex 
and promote the efficiency of the traffic offloading mechanism.  
 
IPv6 application at multi-attachment radio network 
As a network evolution goal, IPv6 is deployed in mobile 
network, including access network, core network and mobile 
carrier IP network. IPv6 introduction in mobile network will 
impact on QoS of mobile services.  
 
Figure 5.  IP packet structure in GTP Tunnel‎[16] 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

In EPC, there are two IP headers, which correspond to the 
transport layer and the end-user IP packet respectively. That is, 
two IPv6 flow label fields can be handled by mobile network 
entities and IP carrier network entities respectively. 
A sequence of packets sent from a particular source to a 
particular unicast, anycast, or multicast destination constitute a 
flow. In IPv4 network, the 5-tuple of the source and destination 
addresses, ports, and the transport protocol type is able to 
identify a flow. IPv6 has introduced a field named flow label. 
The 20-bit flow label in the IPv6 header is used by a node to 
label packets of a flow. General rules for the flow label field 
have been documented in RFC 3697 ‎[17]. 
In multi-attachment radio network, the IPv6 Flow Label can 
be employed to identify the different access methods and 
provide traffic management based-on flow for further 
processing in EPC. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents the study on the IP traffic offloading 
and management in the multi-attachment network in 3GPP, 
where some mechanisms are investigated and compared. Then 
a content aware traffic offloading scheme based on CCN and 
fountain codes is proposed to handle different access systems 
simultaneously and automatically adapt the change of multiple 
paths to avoid the implementation of path control details. 
Tunnel and proxy can help deploy the scheme when CCN is 
not supported in current networks. Some potential extensions 
of this scheme and improved points for multi-attachment 
network are proposed too. 
We tested this scheme in our lab. Traffic was able to be 
transported smoothly among multiple WiFi access paths. The 
test results verified the feasibility and showed the features of 
the scheme. In the future work, we consider testing the 
extension use cases of this scheme and applying other 
improved points listed in Section 4. In addition, we will focus 
on the performance of this scheme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns7
05/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html, retrieved: February 2014. 
[2] 3GPP TS 23.829 Local IP Access and Selected IP Traffic Offload 
(LIPA-SIPTO) (Release 10), October 2011. 
[3] 3GPP TS 23.261 IP flow mobility and seamless Wireless Local Area 
Network (WLAN) offload (Release 10), March 2012. 
[4] 3GPP TS 24.312 Access Network Discovery and Selection Function 
(ANDSF) Management Object (MO) (Release 10), June 2012. 
[5] 3GPP TS 22.278 Service requirements for the Evolved Packet System 
(EPS) (Release 10), October 2010. 
[6] 3GPP TS 23.402 Architecture enhancements for non-3GPP accesses 
(Release 10), September 2012. 
[7] 3GPP TS 23.401 General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements 
for Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) 
access (Release 10), March 2013. 
[8] 3GPP TS 23.139 3GPP system - fixed broadband access network 
interworking; Stage 2 (Release 11), March 2013. 
[9] 3GPP TR 23.865 WLAN network selection for 3GPP terminals (Release 
12), December 2013. 
[10] 3GPP TR 23.859 Local IP access (LIPA) mobility and Selected IP 
Traffic Offload (SIPTO) at the local network (Release 12), April 2013. 
[11] 3GPP TR 23.852 Study on S2a Mobility based on GTP & WLAN access 
to EPC (Release 12), September 2013. 
[12] 3GPP TR 23.861 Network based IP flow mobility (Release 12), 
November 2012. 
[13] https://www.wi-fi.org/hotspot-20-technical-specification-v100, 
retrieved: February 2014. 
[14] J. Byers, M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and A. Rege, A digital fountain 
approach to reliable distribution of bulk data, Proc. ACM SIGCOMM 
'98, September 1998, pp. 56-67.  
[15] http://www.ccnx.org, retrieved: February 2014. 
[16] T. Zheng, L. Wang, and D. Gu, A flow label based QoS scheme for end-
to-end mobile services, Proc. The Eighth International Conference on 
Networking and Services (ICNS 2012), March 2012, pp. 169-174. 
[17] J. Rajahalme, A. Conta, B. Carpenter, and S. Deering, IPv6 flow label 
specification, IETF RFC 3697, March 2004. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-330-8
ICNS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Networking and Services

