Airborne Surveillance Networks with Directional Antennas 
William Huba, Nirmala Shenoy 
Networking Security and Systems Administration Department, 
Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester NY 14623, USA 
nxsvks@rit.edu 
 
Abstract— Surveillance using unmanned aerial vehicles 
(UAVs) is an important application in tactical networks. Such 
networks are challenged by the highly dynamic network 
topologies, which result in frequent link and route breaks. This 
requires robust routing algorithms and protocols. Depending 
on the coverage area, several UAVs may be deployed thus 
requiring solutions that are scalable. The use of directional 
antennas mitigates the challenges due to limited bandwidth, 
but requires a scheduling algorithm to provide conflict free 
schedules to transmitting nodes. In this article we introduce a 
new approach, which uses a single algorithm 1) that facilitates 
multi hop overlapped cluster formations to address scalability 
and data aggregation;  2) provides robust multiple routes from 
data generating nodes  to data aggregation node and; 3) aids in 
performing distributed scheduling using a Time Division 
Multiple Access protocol. The integrated solution was modeled 
using Opnet and evaluated for success rate in packet delivery 
and average end to end packet delivery latency primarily. The 
notably high success rates important for surveillance purposes 
coupled with low latencies validate the use of the proposed 
solution in critical surveillance applications.   
Keywords-airborne surveillance; network of unmanned 
aerial vehicles; directional antennas; TDMA 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Surveillance networks comprising of airborne nodes 
such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are a category of 
mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs), where the nodes are 
travelling at speeds of 300 to 400 Kmph. Surveillance 
requires aggregation of data captured by all nodes in the 
network at few nodes, from where the data is then sent to a 
center for further action. Due to high mobility of nodes and 
varying wireless environment, the topology in surveillance 
networks is subject to frequent and sporadic changes. Such 
MANETs thus face severe challenges when forwarding data 
from node to node, which is the task of the medium access 
control (MAC) protocol and also in discovering and 
maintaining routes between source and destination nodes, 
which is the task of the routing protocols. Another challenge 
faced is the scalability of the protocols to increasing number 
of nodes which can be addressed partly through clustering 
which can also aid in data aggregation  
In this article, a unique solution for surveillance 
networks comprising of UAVs, equipped with directional 
antennas is investigated. The solution uses a single 
algorithm for several operations such as 1) multi-hop 
overlapped cluster formation, 2) routing of data from cluster 
clients to cluster head to aid in data aggregation, and 3) 
scheduling time slots to transmitting nodes using a Time 
Division Multiple Access (TDMA) based MAC protocol, 
which avails the directional antenna capabilities. To best 
leverage the strengths of this approach, the MAC, clustering 
and routing functions were implemented as processes 
operating using a single address that collaboratively address 
the challenges faced in surveillance networks.  Due to the 
critical nature of the application such a unified or integrated 
approach is justified. This is vetted by the performance tests 
conducted in networks with twenty, fifty and seventy five 
UAVs. The performance metrics of primary interest were 
success in packet delivery and packet delivery latency 
which are very important in surveillance applications.  
The proposed solution with its various components was 
modeled using Opnet. Surveillance applications require low 
packet loss and low information or packet delivery latencies. 
The unique approach introduced in this article achieves 
these performance goals. However due to lack of similar 
published work and the availability of models for such 
application scenarios, this presentation is limited to result 
from simulations of the proposed solution.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.  Section II 
describes related work in the area of TDMA MAC, routing 
in large MANETs and clustering techniques. The benefits of 
the integrated approach are highlighted in the light of these 
discussions. Section III describes the meshed tree algorithm 
- the single algorithm, which is able to support all three 
operations while allowing them to interact efficiently. 
Section IV describes the link assignment strategy.  Section 
V provides the performance analysis conducted using 
Opnet. Conclusions are provided in Section VI.   
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The solution in this work targets an integrated approach, 
facilitated also by the use of a single algorithm.  To the best 
of our knowledge there is no published work that integrates 
different operations such clustering, scheduling at MAC and 
routing using a single algorithm and a single address for 
large surveillance MANETs. In this section, we thus present 
some related work conducted separately in the areas of 
TDMA based MAC and scheduling, routing protocols for 
large MANETs and clustering techniques and conclude by 
highlighting the advantages of an integrated approach.  
TDMA based MAC: To achieve higher capacity and 
better delay guarantees in networks that use directional 
antennas, Spatial reuse Time Division Multiple Access 
(STDMA) MAC can be employed. In STDMA, multiple 
transmissions can be scheduled in a way to avoid packet 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

interference [1]. STDMA thus takes advantage of the spatial 
separation between nodes to reuse time slots. Such schemes 
require strict time synchronization among participating 
nodes. In addition, if the nodes are mobile, periodic changes 
in the network topology require regular and timely updates 
to the schedules. The most challenging task is generating 
conflict free schedules to aid multiple nodes to transmit 
simultaneously in a time slot.  Several algorithms [1-3] have 
been investigated for the purpose. Some adopt a centralized 
approach requiring information about all links at the 
centralized scheduler. Distributed scheduling eases this 
requirement but at the expense of higher complexity.  
Literature is rich with work conducted in the area of 
routing and clustering for MANETs in general. The related 
work presented here is limited to those routing protocols 
that are zone limited and multi hop clustering.  
Clustering or zoning can be efficiently employed for the 
type of convergecast traffic encountered in surveillance 
networks, were the primary traffic flow is from cluster 
clients (CC) to cluster head (CH) [4, 5]. In such cases 
proactive routing approaches are recommended as the 
routing is limited to the cluster or zone and will also reduce 
stale routes. However proactive routing algorithms require 
the dissemination of link state information to all routers in 
the network or zone, which can introduce latency in 
realizing or breaking a route, and high overhead. In the Zone 
Routing Protocol (ZRP) [6] each node pre-defines a zone 
centered at itself. ZRP proposes a framework, where any 
proactive routing protocol can be adopted within the zone 
and any reactive routing protocol can be adopted to 
communicate outside of the zone. Multi path distance vector 
zone routing protocol [6] is an implementation of ZRP that 
uses multi path Destination Sequence Distance Vector [7] 
for proactive routing.  LANMAR [6] routing protocol defines 
logical groups to address scalability where landmark nodes 
keep track of the groups. A local scope routing based on 
Fisheye State Routing is used in the group.  
Multi Hop clustering techniques such as the d-hop or k-
hop clustering [8] algorithms can offer flexibility in terms of 
controlling the cluster size and cluster diameter, but are 
often complex to implement.   
Advantages of the Single Algorithm Approach: From the 
above discussions it would be clear that clustering, routing 
and scheduling are different operations and hence normally 
are based on different algorithms. When combining the 
different operations, it becomes essential to define an 
interworking mechanism for the different algorithms. This 
adds processing complexity. It also results in added 
overhead for the operation of the combined functions. If all 
these operations can be based off a single algorithm the 
complexity and overhead can be reduced.  
Advantages of Interacting Modules: If the above 
approach were possible, and if the MAC, routing, clustering 
and scheduling can use a single address for their operation 
(unlike our current protocol stack, where MAC protocol 
uses 48 bit MAC addresses for its operation and routing 
protocols use 32 bit IP addresses (or 128 bits If IPv6)), we 
can achieve a solution, where the processes can closely 
interact and also avoid issues  and overhead due to protocol 
layering, handling different headers and complex cross 
layered techniques. This would also make the solution 
compact and efficient and foster close interworking among 
the different operations. Such an approach would be ideal 
for critical tactical surveillance networks.         
III. 
THE INTEGRATED APPROACH 
The multi meshed tree (MMT) algorithm [10-12] is the 
one proposed to support the integrated approach and will be 
briefly explained first. Cluster formations, proactive routing 
and TDMA scheduling based on this algorithm will be 
explained subsequently.  
A. The Multi Meshed Tree Algorithm 
The formation of a single meshed tree based on the 
MMT algorithm is described with the aid of Fig. 1. The 
dotted lines connect nodes that are in communication range 
with one another at the physical layer. The node designated 
as CH is the root of the meshed tree. For ease in 
explanation, the meshed tree formation is kept simple and 
restricted to nodes that are connected to the CH by a 
maximum of 3 hops. At each node several values or IDs 
have been noted. These are the virtual IDs (VIDs) assigned 
to the node when it joins one of the tree branches in the 
meshed tree. Without loss of generality, assume that the CH 
has a VID ‘1’. All nodes connected to this CH will have ‘1’ 
as the first digit in their VIDs. Extending the above logic, a 
node gets a VID, which will inherit as its prefix the VID of 
the node upstream in the tree branch (the parent node), 
followed by a single (or multiple) digit(s) which indicates 
the child number under that parent. In the presented work 
the child number is restricted to a single integer - validated 
by the fact that having more than nine children under a 
single parent node could cause bottleneck issues during 
traffic aggregation. In Fig. 1, each arrow from CH is a tree 
branch that connects the nodes to the root.  
Flexible Multi-hop Cluster Formation: Except for the 
CH, each node in Fig. 1 is a CC that will send the captured 
surveillance data to the CH. The size of the tree branch can 
be limited by limiting the length of the VID, which in turn 
allows control of the diameter of the cluster. Each node that 
joins the cluster has to register with the CH, by forwarding a 
registration request (reg_req) along the branch of the VID. 
Fig. 1. Cluster Formation Based on Meshed Trees 
CH 
A
B
C 
D 
F 
G 
E 
1 
11
12
121
111
13 
14 
141
142 
143 
1421 
131 
132 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

This confirms the path defined by the VID and also allows 
the CH to accept /reject a joining node to control the cluster 
size. The number of VIDs allowed for a node can control 
the amount of meshing in the tree branches of the cluster.  
Multiple Dynamic Proactive Paths: The branches of the 
meshed tree provide the route to send and receive data and 
control packets between the CCs and the CH. The branch 
denoted by VIDs 14, 142 and 1421 connects nodes C (via 
VID 14), F (via VID 142) and E (via VID 1421), 
respectively, to the CH. Consider packet forwarding based 
on VIDs in which the CH has a packet to send to node E. If 
the CH decided to use E’s VID 1421, it will include this as 
the destination address and broadcast the packet. En route 
nodes C and F will pick up the packet and forward to E. 
This is possible as the VIDs for nodes C and F are contained 
in E’s VID. The VID of a node thus provides a virtual path 
vector from the CH to itself. Note that the CH could have 
also used VIDs 143 or 131 for node E, in which case the 
path taken by the packet would have been CH-C-E or CH-
D-E respectively. Thus, between the CH and node E there 
are multiple routes as identified by the multiple VIDs. The 
support for multiple proactive routes through the multiple 
VIDs allows for robust and dynamic route adaptability to 
topology changes in the cluster, as the nodes request for new 
VIDs and joins different branches as their neighbors change. 
This keeps the routes non-stale.  
B. Scheduling  
The VIDs carry link information between a pair of nodes 
that share a parent-child relationship. Thus a link assignment 
strategy was adopted in this work. The structure of the VIDs, 
also allows each node in a cluster to be aware of its 
neighbors due to the parent-child relationship defined by the 
VIDs. This allows a node to schedule time slots with its 
neighbors (parent or child) taking into consideration its 
current committed time slots to its other neighbors. 
C. Scalability 
A surveillance network can comprise of several tens of 
nodes; hence the solutions for surveillance networks have to 
be scalable to that many nodes. We assume that several 
‘data aggregation nodes (i.e., CHs)’ are uniformly 
distributed among the non-data aggregation nodes during 
deployment of the surveillance network. Meshed tree 
clusters can be formed around each of the data aggregation 
nodes by assuming them to be roots of the meshed trees. 
Nodes bordering two or more clusters are allowed to join 
the different meshed trees and thus reside in the branches 
originating from different CHs. Such border nodes will 
inform their CHs about their multiple VIDs under the 
different clusters. When a node moves away from one 
cluster, it can still be connected to other clusters, and thus 
the surveillance data collected by that node is not lost. Also, 
by allowing nodes to belong to multiple clusters, the single 
meshed tree cluster based data collection can be extended to 
multiple overlapping meshed tree (MMT) clusters that can 
collect data from several tens of nodes deployed over a 
wider area with a very low probability of losing any of the 
captured data. This addresses the scalability requirements in 
surveillance networks.  
D. Interworking of Modules 
It is important to understand the interworking of the 
modules and their interaction with the directional antenna 
system. Hence, the directional antenna system is first 
described followed by the interactions among the modules 
and their use of the directional antenna systems.  
Directional Antenna System: All nodes in the 
surveillance network are assumed to be equipped with four 
phased array antennas capable of forming two beam widths. 
One beam width is focused with an angle of 10o and the 
other is defocused with an angle of 90o. The defocused 
beams are used for sending broadcast packets, while the 
focused beams are used for unicast or directed packets. Each 
antenna array covers a quadrant (90o) and is independently 
steerable to focus in a particular direction within that 
quadrant in the focused beam mode.  
We also assume that each node is equipped with a 
Global Positioning System (GPS) which is used for time 
synchronization and to provide node position. The latter 
information is used in a tracking algorithm to estimate the 
location of a receiver node, so transmitting nodes can direct 
their beams to the destination node.  
Interworking Principles: The surveillance data collected 
by the nodes is passed to the MMT clustering and routing 
module, which decides the route or VID to use to forward 
the data to the CH. Once the route has been decided, the 
node knows the address of the next hop node which will 
forward the packet. This information will be used by the 
STDMA scheduler to schedule slots, taking as input the 
number of slots, slot time and control slots. This 
Fig. 2. Scheduler Operations with other Modules 
Surveillance data 
MMT clustering and 
routing 
Route and link (VID) 
information passed to 
scheduler 
Controls antenna array,      
beam width, packet 
framing and link status 
monitoring 
STDMA scheduler 
 
Medium Access 
Control 
Directional 
antenna System 
Position 
Timing   
Number of slots 
Control slots    
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

information is then passed to the MAC to create the frame 
and forward to the next node. Before forwarding, the MAC, 
locates the destination node position and controls the 
antenna array to transmit the packet using a directed beam.    
Scheduler Operations: The scheduling algorithm has to 
schedule time slots for (1) cluster formation after 
deployment of the UAV nodes, (2) subsequent cluster and 
route maintenance, and (3) data aggregation. It should also 
send updated schedules in a timely manner as network 
topology changes. For all of these operations different 
categories of time slots as described below were used.  
• Broadcast Slots: Some slots are preselected as broadcast 
slots in which they announce their VIDs, location, and 
current schedule, in a configuration (conf) packet, so 
neighboring nodes can listen and decide to join the cluster.  
• Directed Slots: All other slots are used in a directed 
mode, where one node is transmitting using the directed 
beam to its listening neighbor. Directed slots can be 
assigned slots or temp (unassigned) slots. 
• Temp Slots are used by nodes to negotiate for a common 
time slot for data transfer.  
• Assigned Slots: Temp slots become assigned slots after 
a mutual negotiation by a pair of nodes. In the assigned slots 
control information for cluster and route maintenance, link 
maintenance (lnk_ mnt) control packet generated by the 
MAC and data packets are sent and received. Assigned slots 
are unidirectional and are used either for transmitting (data-
tx) or receiving (data-rx).  If there are data packets to be sent 
in such slots slot, the control packets are sent first, followed 
by the data packets. When there are no data packets to send, 
the MAC sends lnk-mnt packets to monitor the link status.  
IV. 
LINK ASSIGNMENT  
The approval of a new node by the CH is an indication 
that the CC has both a physical and logical path towards the 
CH. Scheduling slots for the new node starts subsequent to 
its acceptance into a cluster by the CH. Nodes individually 
schedule data slots in a distributed manner with their one-
hop neighbors making the scheme truly distributed. The end 
to end information is carried by the VIDs. Time slots are 
scheduled for as long as at least one VID remains between a 
node pair. The process of mutual scheduling is explained 
with the aid of Fig. 3 below. 
Details about cluster formation, VID acquisition and 
control packets are covered in [10-12]. When node A 
advertises its VIDs via a conf packet it attaches its current 
schedule and GPS coordinates. Node B receives the packet 
and decides to request a VID under one of the advertised 
VIDs. Node B will then reserve a data-rx slot from one of 
the temp slots advertised by the parent that matches with its 
own temp slot and respond with a registration request 
(reg_req), and the updated schedule to node A. Node A in 
turn assigns another temp slot that is common to the pair as 
a data-rx slot for receiving packets from node B. It then 
forwards the registration request from node B towards the 
CH. During the next frame, node A will send a lnk_mnt 
packet to node B with the updated schedule. Thus a set of 
slots for transmitting and receiving between nodes A and B 
are decided. No other node’s schedule is taken into account 
unless it directly affects the current link between two 
negotiating nodes.  
The process of allowing a new requesting node a VID to 
reserve a data_rx slot in which the parent node can transmit 
allows the parent node to resolve conflicts in case the 
suggested data_rx slot is not available. The parent node does 
this by sending a lnk_mnt packet on a data-rx slot reserved 
by the child, requesting that it change its data-rx slot.  
A. On Demand Slot Allocation  
The above negotiation can be tuned to traffic demands at 
a node. For example if node A’s buffer indicates packet (to 
be sent to node B) accumulation beyond a threshold value, 
then in the next lnk-mnt packet, A can request node B to set 
aside x data-rx slots, where the value x is capped to avoid 
one node taking up all available slots. Node B will respond 
with the updated schedule by setting aside the x slots 
provided it has no such similar demands from its other 
neighbors. If there are similar demands, it will allocate slots 
proportional to the demands of tis neighbors. The on demand 
allocation can result in increased number of data-rx slots at B 
(to receive from node A) though the single data-tx towards 
node A will be maintained unless changed by a demand. The 
tuning of the on-demand slots is executed every frame. 
V. 
SIMULATIONS 
The performance evaluations of the surveillance network 
using the proposed solution was carried out using Opnet 
(version 14.5) simulation tool. All the processes explained 
above were modeled in Opnet. For surveillance data, each 
CC generated a 1 MByte file, which was then sent to the CH 
for aggregation. Normally UAVs travel in elliptical 
trajectories for surveillance purposes. In the models, we 
used circular orbits, to introduce more route breaks and thus 
stress test the solution. These circular orbits had a diameter 
of 20 Km (which defines the areas for each scenario), while 
the maximum transmission range was limited to 15 Km. the 
overlap between trajectories is seen in Fig. 4. A maximum 
of 5 UAVs were allowed in one circular trajectory, thus the 
UAVs were deployed over a wider area, which was covered 
with several trajectories. For example, in the 20 node 
scenario, there were four circular trajectories with slight 
overlap in their trajectories, to avoid physical network 
Conf (VID list, 
Location, 
Schedule) 
A 
B 
Allocate a common temp slot as 
data rx from A 
Reg_req (VID request, Location, 
Updated Schedule) 
Lnk_mnt 
(Schedule with 
a data rx from 
B slot) 
Fig. 3. Distributed Scheduling Across Neighbors 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

segmentation as shown in Fig 4. In the trajectories, the 
speed of the UAVs varied between 300 to 400 Kmph; 
hence, the different colors for the trajectories.   
The 
physical 
layer 
parameters 
were 
maintained 
invariant. Packets with 1 bit error rate were dropped and no 
Forward Error Correction was implemented. In the focused 
beam mode the data rate is 50 Mbps and in the defocused 
mode the data rate is 1.5 Mbps. A single frame had 50 
timeslots each of 4 ms duration and 0.5 ms guard time. 
These values were optimized based on our prior work [4, 5]. 
 
Due to the lack of similar published work and 
comparable models in Opnet the performance of the 
presented solution is analyzed with respect to the 
performance goals we had stated for surveillance networks 
earlier namely success in packet delivery, and latency in 
packet and file deliveries. Included in the performance 
graphs are the overhead incurred by the MAC and routing 
protocols, and the average hops encountered during packet 
delivery, which is useful in explaining some results  
Overhead is the % of control traffic as a ratio of all 
traffic i.e., including data traffic in the network. Packet 
latency recorded was the end to end latency i.e. from the 
time the packet was sent by a sender node till it was 
received by the CH. File delivery latency was calculated 
similarly.    
In each of the test scenarios, a certain number of nodes 
were randomly selected to send a 1 MByte file to the CH. 
These selected nodes sent the files simultaneously, thus 
stress testing the solution.  Furthermore the number of 
sending nodes was increased to include all of the nodes 
except the data aggregation nodes, which is a highly 
stressful test scenario. Each test scenario was repeated with 
20 different seeds (high prime numbers) and the results 
averaged over these seeds. The simulations were limited 20 
runs in each case due to the stable outcomes noticed with 
different seeds.   
A. 20 Nodes Scenario  
Figures 5A to 5C are the plots for the twenty UAV 
scenario with 4 clusters. The x axis in all plots shows the 
number of nodes that are simultaneously sending 
aggregation traffic, i.e., 1 MByte file to the 4 CHs.  The 
number of sending nodes was varied from 4 to 16. In the 
last case all 16 CCs were sending a 1 MByte file 
simultaneously to the CHs.  
With increasing number of senders, the success rate hardly 
dropped below 100%. This shows the efficiency of the 
scheduler to successfully schedule all the packets that are 
arriving simultaneously. The average hops recorded in 
graph 1 however shows a decrease when the number of 
sending nodes was increased. When 20 nodes were selected 
to send traffic they encountered an average hop distance of 
1.8 hops; which dropped to 1.4 hops when all 16 nodes were 
sending traffic. This is because of the random way in which 
the sending nodes were selected. The average hops graph 
can be interpreted thus – the first four nodes that were 
selected were farther away from the CHs, but as more nodes 
were randomly picked they were closer to the CH. The 
impact of this is noticeable in the packet and file latencies 
recorded in graph B, which shows a decrease with 
increasing number of senders.  
Fig. 4. Typical Deployment and UAVs 
  
Fig. 5A. Success rate % and Avg hops vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 5B. Average packet and file latency vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 5C. Control overhead vs senders 
             5              10            15           20            25             30           35            40              45  
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

In Fig. 5B, the average packet latency recorded was less 
than 0.8 seconds. Acceptability of packets arriving at this 
latency depends on the criticality of the surveillance 
application. If an upper limit was specified then that could 
be used as a cut off to drop packets arriving late. The file 
delivery latency is only slightly higher at around 1.2 
seconds, which shows that all packets in the 1 MByte file 
were transported from the data collection node to the 
aggregation nodes, i.e., the CH within the time.  
Fig. 5C is the plot of a very important parameter as it 
shows the channel bandwidth used by the control traffic 
both by the MMT based routing protocol as well as the 
MAC protocol. The MAC and routing overhead were 
recorded to show the ratio of messages used for control 
purposes by two operations.  
The MMT routing overhead was below 20% while the 
MAC overhead reduced from 10% when there were 4 
sending nodes to less than 5% when there were 16 sending 
nodes. It should be noted that the MMT routing traffic also 
includes the cluster formation control traffic.  
The MAC overhead shows a decrease with increasing 
number of senders, because when there are fewer data 
packets to send (with less senders) the MAC still sends 
maintenance packets, thus the ratio of control bits to the 
total bits that travelled the network, shows a decrease when 
there are more data packets in the network. The routing 
overhead records a very slight increase (around 1%) with 
increasing senders, which can be attributed to more route 
maintenance which will be triggered to correctly route the 
high amount traffic generated.  
B. 50 Nodes Scenario  
Figures 6A to 6C are the plots for the 50 UAV scenario 
with 10 clusters. The number of UAVs sending 1 MByte 
file simultaneously was varied from 10, 20 to 40. Thus in 
the case of the 40 senders, all CCs were sending 1 MByte 
files to the CHs simultaneously.  
The success rate in graph A shows a slight drop to 
around 99.7 % as the senders increased, which shows the 
reliability in data transfer of the proposed solution and its 
scalability as the number of surveillance nodes and data 
sending nodes increased. The average hops which is plotted 
along with success rate graph does not show a linear 
decrease as in Fig 5 graph A. This is again attributed to the 
random selection in sending nodes. The first 10 senders 
were on an average of 1.7 hops from the CH, the added 10 
senders for the 20 node case reduced the average hops to 
slightly above 1.5, and the last 20 senders brought the 
average hops to 1.5.   
Figure 6B reflects the impact of the average hops in the 
packet and file delivery latency. There is drop when the 
senders increase from 10 to 20, this is because the average 
hops has a steep decrease from 1.7 to 1.5. However the 
average hops drops very slightly when senders are increased 
from 20 to 40 nodes, this and the fact that there is more 
traffic and more buffering by the nodes, the packet and file 
latency increase with increase in senders from 20 to 40.   
The MAC and routing overhead in Fig 6C show a similar 
trend as observed in Fig 5. Though the number of nodes has 
increases, control traffic is calculated as a ratio of control 
traffic to total traffic in the network during the time that the 
files are being delivered.   
C. 75 Nodes Scenario  
Figures 7A, 7B and 7C are the performance plots for the test 
scenario with a total of 75 UAVs and 15 clusters, the 
number of sending nodes was varied from 15, 30 to 60. 
Hence again when 60 nodes are sending 1  Mbyte file it is 
the case of all CCs sending traffic to the CHs. The success 
rate dropped to around 98.7% with increasing number of 
senders – reflecting the robustness of the proposed solution 
and its scalability to increasing UAVs and increasing 
number of senders. The plot of the average hops again 
shows a decrease from 1.55 to 1.47 as the number of senders 
selected randomly to send the traffic to the CH was 
increased.  
Figure 7B is the plot for the packet and file latency. The 
plot shows an increase because the change in the average 
hops was 0.06 as the number of senders was increased. The 
latency trends reflect the average hops trend. Figure 7C 
 
Fig. 6A. Success rate % and Avg hops vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 6B. Average packet and file latency vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 6C. Control overhead vs senders 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

which is the plot of the MAC and routing overhead has a 
similar trend as noted for the 20 and 50 node scenarios.  
Summarizing, the performance graphs indicate the high 
robustness of the proposed solutions to highly mobile and 
stressful MANET conditions. The continually high value of 
success rate despite the increase in the network size and the 
increase in the number of sending nodes indicate the 
reliability of the proposed solutions and its scalability. The 
packet and file latencies never exceeded 0.8 seconds and 1.2 
seconds respectively in the three network setups. This 
indicates the robustness of the scheduling algorithm. 
The overheads noted have similar trends and show very 
little difference as they were calculated as a ratio of the 
traffic in the network. The senders in each case were a 
quarter of the CCs, half of the CCS and the rest of the CCs. 
The control traffic increases with the increase in the number 
of nodes in a scenario, but as it is expressed as a ratio of all 
the traffic in the network including the data traffic, and due 
to the ratio of senders being consistent in all scenarios, this 
value can be noticed to be very close in all scenarios. 
VI. 
CONLUSION  
Surveillance networks are critical tactical applications, 
and hence require special consideration during solution 
design. The primary goal in surveillance networks of UAVs 
is to collect the captured data reliably at few nodes, and with 
low latencies. In this work we presented a solution that uses 
an integrated approach where MAC, routing and scheduling 
are based off a single algorithm and use a single address - 
the VIDs for their operations. This results in a low 
complexity yet robust and scalable solution.  
The solution was evaluated in a UAV surveillance 
network of varying sizes of 20, 50 and 75 nodes. In each case 
the numbers of simultaneous 1 MByte file senders were 
increased from one quarter to one half to all of the remaining 
nodes besides the aggregation nodes. This was a highly 
stressful test case. The results achieved under such stress 
situations were very good. The drop in reliable and timely 
delivery was very low as the numbers of senders were 
increased. These results thus validate the use of the solution 
to such critical tactical applications.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly by funded by AFRL, Rome NY 
under contract no. 30822, and partly from ONR.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Fernandez S. G., “On the performance of STDMA Link Scheduling 
and Switched Beamforming Antennas in Wireless Mesh Networks”, 
Master's thesis, King's College London  United Kingdom, 2009.  
[2] 
Grönkvist J. and Hansson A., “Comparison between graph-based and 
interference-based STDMA scheduling,” in MobiHoc, 2001 pp 255-
258 
[3] 
 Grönkvist J., “Assignment methods for spatial reuse TDMA, in”, 
First Annual Workshop on Mobile and Ad Hoc Networking and 
Computing, 2000, pp. 119–124. 
[4] 
Gerla M. and Tsai J., “Multicluster, mobile, multimedia radio 
network,” Wirel. Netw., vol. 1, pp. 255-265, 1995 
[5] 
Lian, J.; Agnew, G.B. and Naik, S., “A variable degree based 
clustering algorithm for networks,” Computer Communications and 
Networks, 2003. ICCCN 2003. Proceedings. The 12th International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp. 465-470, 20-22 Oct. 2003 
[6] 
Hong X., Xu K., and Gerla M., “Scalable Routing Protocols for 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, IEEE Network Journal, July/Aug 2002, 
Vol 16, issue 4, pp 11-2.  
[7] 
Abolhasan M., Wysocki T. and Dutkiewicz E., “A review of routing 
protocols for mobile ad hoc networks”, Journal of ad hoc networks, 
Elsevier publications, 2004 
[8] 
Orakwue C., Al-Mousa Y., Martin N. and Shenoy N., “Cluster Based 
Time Division Multiple Access Scheme for Surveillance Networks 
using Directional Antennas”   ICSPCS, Brisbane Australia Dec 2010.  
[9] 
Amis, A. D., Prakash, R., Vuong, T.H.P. and Huynh, D.T., “Max-min 
d-cluster formation in wireless ad hoc networks,” INFOCOM 2000. 
vol.1, no., pp.32-41 vol.1. 
[10] Huba W., Martin N., Al-Mousa Y., Orakwue C. and Shenoy N., “A 
Distributed Scheduler for Airborne Backbone Networks with 
Directional Antennas”, ComsNets, Bangalore India  2011 
[11] Martin N., Al-Mousa Y. and Shenoy N., “An Integrated Routing and 
Medium Access Control Framework for Surveillance Networks of 
Mobile Devices” 12th ICDCN 2011, Springer Verlag, pp 315-323.  
[12] Daniel L., “A comprehensive overview about selected Ad hoc 
networking routing protocols”, Technical Report, Department of 
Computer Science, Munich Technical University, Germany 
 
 
Fig. 7A. Success rate % and Avg hops vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 7B. Average packet and file latency vs senders 
 
 
Fig. 7C. Control overhead vs senders 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-186-1
ICNS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Networking and Services

