Electric-Vehicle-based Ad Hoc Networking and Surveillance for Disaster Recovery 
Proposal of Three-Dimensional Mobile Surveillance Using Electric Helicopters 
 
Kenichi Mase 
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata 
University 
Niigata-shi, Japan 
mase@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp 
Takuya Saito  
Research Institute for Natural Hazards & Disaster 
Recovery, Niigata University 
Niigata-shi, Japan 
takuya@net.ie.niigata-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we argue that small electric vehicles 
(mini-EVs) may become increasingly prevalent in the future, 
leading to the realization of the so-called ubiquitous EV society. 
EVs have the potential to be a great resource for recovery from 
large-scale disasters. Specifically, each EV can be equipped 
with wireless communication devices, and so EVs in a disaster 
area can link together to form an EV-based mobile ad hoc 
network (EVANET). Two use cases of EVANET are 
emergency networks and disaster area surveillance. Focusing 
on the latter application, we present the concept of three-
dimensional mobile surveillance (3DMS). In 3DMS, EVs on the 
ground cooperate with small lightweight unmanned electric 
helicopters (mini-EHs) to cooperatively collect information 
about the disaster area. Each EV and mini-EH pair is 
equipped with cameras and other sensors to monitor disaster 
damage. We present an effective method of solving the 
problem of limited continuous flying time of EHs. We 
investigate the requirements for a mini-EH in 3DMS. In 
particular, we demonstrate that autonomous piloting is 
necessary. To support autonomous piloting, we propose that 
EH position information be obtained using GPS and a low-
power wireless transmission system between the mini-EH and 
the corresponding EV. We call this system the EH positioning 
system. Based on real-world experiments, we show that a 
prototype of the EH positioning system has adequate 
capabilities in terms of both transmission range and energy 
consumption. 
Keywords-ad hoc network; disaster; electric vehicle; 
helicopter; GPS 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Great East Japan Earthquake and the resulting 
tsunami on March 11, 2011, caused severe disruption in both 
the telecommunications and power supply networks [1]. In 
the fixed telephone system (NTT-East), 18 telecom buildings 
were destroyed and 23 were flooded, 90 transmission routes 
were disconnected, 1,000 telecom buildings were powered 
off and 300 ceased to operate owing to a shortage of fuel for 
generating electric power, and 1.5 million subscriber lines 
became unusable. In the cell phone networks (NTT DoCoMo, 
KDDI, and Softbanks), 12,000 base stations ceased to 
operate (mostly because of commercial power failures and 
consequent battery power shortage), and the traffic 
regulation ratios were 70–95% and 30% for voice and mail, 
respectively. After the occurrence of the earthquakes and the 
tsunami over a wide area of East Japan, telecom companies 
made remarkably continual efforts to repair the disrupted 
buildings, facilities, and equipment in order to restore their 
services under the harsh conditions. However, the resources 
of the telecom companies were very limited in comparison 
with the scale of the damage caused by the disaster. 
Depending on their location, the population of the affected 
areas had either no communication services or disrupted 
services for days, weeks, or even months after the earthquake.  
Today, environmental destruction and global warming 
have become serious concerns. Thus, there is an urgent 
worldwide need for the evolution of low-carbon sustainable 
societies. Automobile exhausts have been, and continue to be, 
a major cause of air pollution, but the markets for emission-
reducing hybrid cars and electric vehicles (EVs) have 
experienced significant growth recently. EVs are an ideal 
exhaust-free means of minimizing air pollution in large cities, 
and they are expected to become increasingly popular as 
their associated costs continue to decrease. Further, in both 
developing and advanced nations, small one- or two-seater 
EVs (mini-EVs) are attracting attention as economical 
vehicles for use in communities, and it is expected that they 
will become increasingly prevalent in the near future. A 
further advantage of such vehicles is that they can provide 
mobility to the elderly, many of whom find regular walking 
difficult, so mini-EVs are an attractive proposition for aging 
societies. 
When a large-scale disaster occurs, the first priority is to 
recognize the nature and scope of the disaster damage over 
the affected area in order to most effectively begin rescue 
and disaster recovery activities. The efficiency of activities 
such as surveying the damage, discovering survivors, and 
saving lives, however, is reduced by the lack of information 
on the disaster area owing to the destruction of and damage 
in the communications infrastructure and prolonged 
confusion in telecommunications services, as mentioned 
earlier. There is an urgent need to establish a more effective 
way of quickly providing a temporary communications and 
surveillance network over a large disaster area.  
In this study, which assumes a growing market 
penetration by EVs in the near future, a novel approach for 
efficient networking and surveillance over a wide disaster 
area is presented. In our proposal, EV-based mobile ad hoc 
networking is used to rapidly deploy a communications 
network in the disaster area. A key player in our proposed 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

system is the unmanned electric helicopter (EH). EVs and 
EHs are cooperatively employed to perform surveillance 
activities within the disaster area, allowing three-dimensional 
mobile surveillance (3DMS). There are many studies on 
applications of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) including 
helicopters [2]-[14]. Some of these are targeted at disaster 
surveillance. However, the potential and benefits of EHs for 
use in wide-area disaster surveillance have not been fully 
explored.  
Our main contributions are as follows: 1. The novel idea 
of cooperatively using EVs and unmanned EHs for wide-
area disaster surveillance. 2. An effective method of solving 
the significant problem of limited continuous flying time of 
EHs. 3. The prototype of a feasible EH positioning system 
for autonomous piloting. The rest of this paper is organized 
as follows: Section II describes the usefulness of ad hoc 
networks using EVs to provide emergency communication 
networking in disaster areas. Section III presents the concept 
of 3DMS using EVs and EHs, with an analysis of the 
availability of EHs for airborne surveillance. Section IV 
describes not only the EH positioning system to support 
autonomous piloting but also the prototype development and 
initial experimental results. Finally, Section V offers our 
conclusions. 
II. 
AD HOC NETWORKS USING ELECTRIC VEHICLES 
DEPLOYED IN DISASTER AREAS 
A. Background 
The electric vehicle (EV) is considered an attractive 
alternative to the gasoline-powered car as a means of 
reducing air pollution caused by automobile exhaust gases. 
With the objective of replacing gasoline-powered cars with 
electric ones, major automobile manufacturers have been 
developing EVs whose production costs and continuous 
driving ranges are comparable with those of conventional 
automobiles powered by gasoline engines. Although these 
goals have not yet been fully achieved, the EV market has 
recently experienced significant growth. 
A very small EV with one or two seats, which we call a 
mini-EV (see the specifications of mini-EVs in [15]), is 
another promising development, which in the near future 
may be popular in communities regardless of issues of  air 
pollution from CO2 emissions. Mini-EVs are cheaper to 
purchase or maintain and require smaller parking spaces, 
allowing households to possess them as their first car or as 
additional cars. They are also ideal for B2B and B2C 
delivery services in communities. They have further uses, 
especially in an aging society. It has been reported that cars 
driven by elderly drivers typically carry only one or two 
passengers, and the distance driven each day is relatively 
short, conditions that are well matched by the limited 
capabilities of current EVs. Unlike a gasoline-powered 
vehicle, an EV has no mechanical engine and requires little 
maintenance, which is convenient for the elderly. Gasoline-
powered vehicles must also be refueled at gas stations, which 
can be a burden on an elderly driver. In contrast, a mini-EV 
can be powered at home or solely by a solar battery mounted 
on the roof, thereby eliminating the time needed to attend a 
gas station. These features significantly reduce the burden of 
vehicle maintenance on the elderly.  
A serious problem in many communities is the 
inconvenience caused by changes in public transportation 
services, such as where the frequency of a bus service is 
reduced or cancelled on routes that are unprofitable. In this 
context, the availability of mini-EVs in a community 
becomes important. A personal EV may be conveniently 
used to support personal mobility for daily activities such as 
shopping and visiting others in the neighborhood, 
particularly for the aged who may have difficulty walking. 
Thus, personal EVs can improve the quality of life (QOL) 
for the elderly and contribute to the realization of a vibrant 
community. Mini-EVs will potentially create a new EV 
market in the near future, achieving significantly greater 
penetration in the community to fashion what in this paper is 
referred to as the ubiquitous EV society. The battery capacity 
of an EV, even a mini-EV, is not comparable to that of the 
battery in a gasoline-powered car. An improvement in the 
energy density of batteries is further expected. The 
ubiquitous EV society will be one of ubiquitous large-
capacity batteries, which will additionally prove to be useful 
during any prolonged blackout following on from a large-
scale disaster. 
B. EV-based Ad Hoc Networks 
Communications after large-scale disasters and between 
cars have been considered major applications in the research 
and development of mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs) [16]. 
With regard to car-to-car communication, the vehicular ad 
hoc network (VANET) [17] has been studied particularly 
within the framework of intelligent transport systems (ITS). 
A vehicle is equipped with a communication device, 
allowing the vehicle to act as a communication station to 
form a MANET with other vehicles. The presence of 
gasoline-powered vehicles is implicitly assumed in VANET 
research, and the applications of a VANET while the vehicle 
is driven are of major interest. With its increasing penetration, 
however, the mini-EV can become a principal player in the 
formation of a VANET. An EV-based ad hoc network is 
called an EVANET [15]. It is noteworthy that an EV can 
operate as a communication station for a long time by using 
its large-capacity battery, regardless of whether it is moving 
or stationary, whereas a gasoline-powered vehicle cannot 
provide the same utility when its engine is switched off. 
Consequently, EVANET applications need not be limited to 
situations where the vehicle is being driven, but may be 
enhanced to provide new services when the vehicle is parked. 
For example, suppose that mini-EVs in individual household 
parking spaces at night form an EVANET within a 
community. In such a scenario, the EVANET might act as a 
sensor network to detect or prevent crimes such as burglary. 
C. Use Cases for Disaster Recovery 
In the ubiquitous EV society, a tremendous number of 
EVs may be in use by a community. When a disaster occurs, 
many of these may be utilized for disaster recovery. Mini-
EVs owned by public offices and those volunteered by 
individuals can be deployed to form an EVANET. In order to  
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

TABLE I.  
ALTERNATIVES FOR SURVEILLANCE FROM THE AIR IN COOPERATION WITH MINI-EVS 
 
Mobility 
Hovering 
Wind 
resistance 
Operation 
time 
On-EV 
charging 
Logistics 
Tethered 
balloon 
No 
Yes 
Limited 
Fair 
Feasible 
Full backup needed 
Airship 
Low 
Yes 
Limited 
Fair 
Difficult 
Full backup needed 
Helicopter 
Low 
Yes 
Fair 
Limited 
Feasible 
Light support needed 
(electric helicopter) 
Airplane 
High 
No 
Fair 
Limited 
Difficult 
Full backup needed 
 
reach a position suitable for networking, a mini-EV can take 
advantage of its small body to pass through narrow routes 
while avoiding any obstacles created by the disaster. Two 
major applications of EVANETs are presented below.  
1) Emergency network: When telecommunications 
services are degraded or disrupted by traffic congestion or 
damage to network facilities, an EVANET can function as a 
secondary telecommunications infrastructure (emergency 
network) throughout the affected area. Forming an 
EVANET can drastically shorten the network construction 
time compared to conventional methods. The surplus battery 
power available can be remotely monitored using the 
EVANET itself, and mini-EVs whose batteries have been 
exhausted can easily be replaced with others whose batteries 
are fully charged. Such emergency networks can be used for 
rescue purposes, damage surveying, and communicating 
with people in shelters [18]. The higher their antennas are 
located, the greater the probability that a line-of-sight (LOS) 
exists between two communication stations. A longer 
transmission range is also expected because of the decrease 
in radio reflection from the ground. For reasons of wind 
resistance and driving safety, a 10-m-high antenna cannot be 
used on an EV while it is being driven. However, a high 
antenna can be used when the EV is parked. Specifically, an 
elastic pole fixed vertically to the car body can be used to 
support an antenna mounted on its top. This pole can be 
retracted and carried by the EV while it is driven. The 
experimental results show that a higher antenna can extend 
the transmission range owing to the increase in the line-of-
sight range and the decrease in radio reflection from the 
ground. The throughput of a 9-m-high antenna is 
significantly greater and more stable than that of a 2-m-high 
antenna [19]. 
2) Disaster area surveillance: An EVANET can 
function as a surveillance infrastructure in a disaster area. In 
addition to its communication device, each EV is equipped 
with cameras and sensors for collecting information on the 
affected area. The information collected by each EV is 
delivered through the EVANET to the data collection 
station, where an Internet gateway is available. It is thus 
possible for a disaster recovery headquarters to efficiently 
and quickly obtain basic information over a wide disaster 
area in order to acquire an overview of the damage to allow 
for an effective allocation of rescue and recovery resources. 
III. 
THREE-DIMENSIONAL MOBILE SURVEILLANCE 
A. Surveillance from the Air 
By deploying a number of EVs in the disaster area, it is 
possible to achieve mobile surveillance that is both extensive 
and efficient. In addition, airborne surveillance is considered 
an effective way to efficiently obtain a complete view of a 
disaster area [11]-[14]. By combining the surveillance results 
from the air and ground, improvements in the coverage, 
accuracy, and efficiency of the surveillance can be expected.  
The various means of airborne surveillance are listed and 
qualitatively evaluated in Table I. The airship, helicopter, 
and airplane can be either manned or unmanned for piloting. 
The former is costly and the availability of human pilots is 
limited. In this paper, the latter is investigated. The tethered 
balloon and airship have relatively little wind resistance, 
since both use bladders inflated with helium gas for lift. In 
the case of the tethered balloon, it is necessary to bring 
helium gas bottles to the site for inflating or refilling the 
balloon, for which the balloon needs to be brought to the 
ground and then released again. The surveillance coverage is 
limited, but a power source is not required, allowing for 
relatively lengthy surveillance [20]. The airship allows 
extensive flying and hovering over the disaster area, but fuel 
is necessary for flying and continuous operation time is 
limited by both the decrease in gas pressure and the fuel 
consumption. The helicopter has characteristics in common 
with the airship, but fuel consumption is greater and 
continuous operation time is further limited. Due to its flight 
characteristics, 
the 
airplane 
has 
difficulty 
both 
in 
continuously monitoring the same area and in adapting its 
route according to the situation. Like the helicopter, its 
continuous operation time is limited by its fuel consumption. 
As the power source for flying, an engine using a fuel such 
as gasoline or a motor with a battery may be considered, but 
the appropriate choice is necessarily based on the application 
requirements. A motor can be selected if the helicopter or 
airplane is small and light and a relatively short continuous 
operation time is acceptable. The need for a human pilot on 
the ground should be avoided by means of autonomous 
piloting, which allows for a longer period of continuous 
operation. Since a battery is necessary to provide the energy 
source for mounted cameras and communication devices, its 
capacity is also a limitation on continuous operation time. 
Such constraints need to be carefully balanced at the design 
stage with respect to continuous operation time. 
Each  method  requires  support  services  such  as  the  
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

supplementing of helium gas or engine fuel and battery 
charging for a motor or communication device. In mobile 
surveillance, where a large number of EVs are deployed 
within the disaster area, an EV on the ground can be used as 
a base station for battery charging (on-EV charging). On-EV 
charging can easily be used for a tethered balloon or a 
helicopter. In the case of a very small EH, the roof of an EV 
can be used as the heliport and the battery of the EH can then 
be charged from the battery of the EV. An airship is 
considerably bigger than a tethered balloon and requires a 
relatively large space for landing, and an airplane needs a 
runway for takeoff and landing, while a tethered balloon 
needs periodic topping-up of its helium gas. These supports 
are unnecessary for an EH owing to on-EV charging. 
B. System Concepts 
Based on the qualitative evaluation of the possibilities of 
airborne surveillance in Section III.A, we have chosen the 
EH for our system. The proposed surveillance system is thus 
composed of EVs, including mini-EVs, and tiny unmanned 
EHs (mini-EHs). In the proposed system, each EV also 
functions as the carrier of a mini-EH. That is, each EV is 
equipped with a mini-EH on its roof for the deployment, 
takeoff, and landing of the mini-EH. Moreover, the EV 
provides charging from its battery to that of the mini-EH. 
The EVs and mini-EHs are equipped with cameras and 
sensors used for surveillance. These unique features 
differentiate the proposed system from existing approaches 
[11]-[14]. This system is referred to as a three-dimensional 
mobile 
surveillance 
(3DMS) 
system. 
The 
smallest 
configuration of the 3DMS system is a single pairing of an 
EV and an EH. Many EVs and EHs, however, are required to 
participate in cooperation for the surveillance of a large 
disaster area. In principle, the pairing between EVs and EHs 
is fixed, but more flexible pairing relations can also be 
considered. For example, some EVs may perform 
surveillance without their partner EHs, or may cooperate 
with and provide charging to EHs other than their partner.  
To minimize the total weight of the mini-EH, the weight 
of the battery for its motor is strictly limited, which means 
that the battery capacity is also limited, allowing only for a 
relatively short continuous flight. However, a mini-EH can 
engage in airborne surveillance repeatedly, owing to on-EV 
charging. A carrier EV may be equipped with a fast charger 
to shorten the charging time. In addition, a carrier EV can be 
equipped with spare EH batteries. By substituting a spare EH 
battery for the spent battery of the landed mini-EH, the 
waiting time of the mini-EH on the heliport of the EV is 
shortened. The spent EH battery from the mini-EH is 
recharged on the EV in preparation for reuse. The driver of 
the EV is typically someone who cannot manually pilot the 
corresponding mini-EH. Autonomous piloting of the mini-
EH should thus be supported in principle. 
It is possible to view the entire disaster area from the air. 
A mini-EH can monitor from the air locations that an EV 
cannot access owing to a lack of roads or the presence of 
obstacles, and from there can then take pictures and search 
for survivors. EVs and mini-EHs form a mobile ad hoc 
network and share the  information collected by each EV and  
TABLE II.  
REQUIREMENTS FOR MINI-EH IN 3DMS 
Mini-EH Features 
Required Values 
Size (Length and width) 
Less than 1 m 
Mass 
1–3 kg 
Maximum altitude 
100–200 m 
Maximum speed 
50–60 km/h 
Payload 
500–1000 g 
Continuous flying time 
No less than 15 min 
Wind resistance 
6 m/s 
Rain resistance 
10 mm/h 
Remote-control range 
200–1000 m 
 
mini-EH, delivering such information to a data collection 
station. When two EVs are out of transmission range with 
each other, a mini-EH in the air can be used as their relay 
node or message carrier [21]. 
C. Requirements 
Based on the system concepts given in Section III.B, the 
requirements for a mini-EH in 3DMS are summarized in 
Table II. 
A mini-EH can be remotely piloted through the use of 
commands (simple piloting). Specifically, the following 
functions should be supported: 
 
Takeoff and ascent to the designated altitude 
 
Hovering at the designated altitude and position 
 
Landing from the current position 
 
Progressing or retreating, sliding right or left, and 
ascending or descending at the designated speed and 
time 
 
Turning right or left with the designated angle 
 
Circuitous flight around the designated position with 
the designated speed  
In addition, autonomous piloting should be supported for 
a mini-EH. Some examples of autonomous piloting are as 
follows: 
 
Landing on the heliport on the roof of the 
corresponding carrier EV 
 
Flying at the same altitude, direction, and distance 
from the carrier EV 
 
Returning to the takeoff location and landing when 
communication with the carrier EV is lost 
 
Returning to the carrier EV and landing before the 
battery is spent 
The development of a piloting system that meets the 
above requirements is beyond the scope of this paper. 
D. Availability of EH for Airborne Surveillance 
As mentioned in Section III.B, a mini-EH can fly 
continuously for a relatively short time due to its limited 
battery capacity, and the on-EV charging time may be 
considerably longer than the continuous flying time, 
resulting in a low availability, which is defined as the ratio of 
the total flying time to the total surveillance period. By using 
spare batteries, the availability can be improved. Without 
loss of generality, we assume that the mini-EH consumes a 
single battery for each flight. Let n be the total number of 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 1.  Rotation of charging and use of batteries for EH flying. 
 
batteries, including spare batteries. In the example of Fig. 1, 
three batteries are used in rotation, where the ith battery Bi 
(i = 1, 2, 3) is used during the flying periods marked by Bi in 
the upper part of the figure, and is charged on the EV during 
the periods marked by Bi in the lower part of the figure. The 
following relation is easily obtained from Fig. 1: 
 
 
 


The availability, A, is then given by the following equation: 
 
 

 

A numerical example is given in Fig. 2, where the 
availability versus the total number of EH batteries n are 
shown for three different charging times Tc: 15, 30, and 60 
min, assuming that Te = 1 (min) and Tf = 15 (min). The 
availability   increases   with   increasing   n   and   becomes 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1
2
3
4
5
Availability
Number of total batteries (n)
Tc=60 min
Tc=30 min
Tc=15 min
Tc= 60min
Tc= 30min
Tc= 15min
 
Figure 2.  Number of total batteries. 
saturated when n reaches and exceeds its minimum required 
value; at this point, the mini-EH does not need to wait for the 
on-EV charging to be completed, and maximum availability 
is obtained. It is shown that the waiting time and the total 
number of batteries are in the trade-off relation, and 
relatively fewer EH batteries are sufficient to obtain the 
maximum availability under practical assumptions. 
IV. 
EH POSITIONING SYSTEM TO SUPPORT AUTONOMOUS 
PILOTING 
A. Basic Approach 
Most EH products in the market support simple operator-
controlled piloting and some partly support the autonomous 
piloting mentioned in Section III.C. There are two 
approaches to autonomous piloting for 3DMS. In the first 
approach, autonomous piloting is developed on the basis of 
existing products. In the second approach, autonomous 
piloting is developed independently of the existing products. 
We adopt the second approach because we want to develop 
an autonomous piloting system that can be applied to any EH 
product, allowing the user to select an appropriate EH 
product for 3DMS from many candidates. In the proposed 
method, the basis of the autonomous piloting is to recognize 
the current positions of the mini-EH and the partner (carrier) 
EV, which is responsible for piloting the mini-EH (and is 
thus referred to as the piloting EV). To this end, both the 
mini-EH and the EV are equipped with GPS receivers. The 
GPS measurement data are periodically transmitted from the 
mini-EH to the partner EV. A similar method was also used 
for managing the formation flight of unmanned aerial 
vehicles (UAVs) in [8]. However, our system and prototype 
are both optimized to our application in terms of 
transmission range and the maximum speed and payload of 
the mini-EH. The mini-EH controller on the EV compares 
the GPS data history of the mini-EH with that of the EV and 
sends appropriate commands to guide the mini-EH toward 
the desired position. In order to realize such autonomous 
piloting, the EV needs to have functions to periodically 
collect GPS data from the mini-EH. We call this system the 
EH positioning system. 
The transmission range of the radio system used for the 
Te
Te
Te
Tf
Tf
Te
B1
B2
B3
Flying period
using  battery Bi
On-EV landing
period
On-EV charging
period
Tw
B1
B2
B3
Tc
Time
B1
B2
B3
Tf: Flying time
Te : Battery exchange time
Bi: Battery i ( i=1,2,3)
Tc
Tw
Tw: Waiting time
Tc : Charging time
 0
)
(Others
　
e　
f
c
f
T
T
T
nT
A
 2


0)
(
w 
T
　
e
f
f
T
T
T


0)
(
w 
T
e
f
c
w
T
n
T
n
T
T
2)
(
)1
(





)
2
(
e
f
e
f
c
T
T
T
T
T
n




91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

EH positioning system should be designed sufficiently 
greater than that of the one used for remotely piloting the 
mini-EH. When the mini-EH happens to wander beyond its 
remote-control range, the carrier EV can still receive position 
data from the mini-EH. According to the requirements given 
in Section III.C, the mini-EH should be designed to land on 
the site when it has lost control from the piloting EV. The 
mini-EH continues to periodically transmit location 
messages so that the piloting EV can easily search for the 
lost mini-EH. In this sense, the EH positioning system is 
independent of the remote-piloting mechanism of the mini-
EH, in accordance with the aforementioned second approach, 
which is more reliable than the first approach. 
B. System Components 
The EH positioning system is composed of a tag 
mounted on the mini-EH and a base station in the partner EV. 
An EH-tag is composed of a CPU, GPS receiver, barometer, 
radio transceiver, antenna, memory, and battery (see Fig. 3). 
The GPS receiver in the EH-tag periodically performs a 
measurement and the GPS data are transmitted to the base 
station on the EV. To reduce the battery consumption of the 
EH-tag, a license-free low-power transmission system with a 
maximum transmission power of 10 mW is used for data 
transmission from the EH-tag to the base station on the EV. 
We expect that when the EH is in flight, the GPS 
measurements by the EH-tag are always successful, line-of-
sight is maintained between the EH-tag and the base station, 
and the measured GPS data can be successfully transmitted 
to the base station.  
A base station includes a communication module, micro 
server, memory, and router. The communication module (see 
Fig. 4) is used to receive GPS data sent from the EH-tag. The 
 
400 MHz
low-power
ratio module
CPU
GPS
Battery
Barometer
Memory
 
Figure 3.  Functional blocks of an EH-tag. 
 
400 MHz
low-power
ratio module
CPU
GPS
RS232C
I/F-BOX
EV battery
Micro server
 
Figure 4.  Functional blocks of the communication module of a base 
station on an EV. 
 
Figure 5.  Functional blocks of a base station on an EV. 
 
base station is connected to the mini-EH controller on the 
EV (see Fig. 5). It is also equipped with various sensors, 
including a camera, weather sensor, and barometer to 
monitor the surroundings of the EV. 
C. Power-Saving Mechanism 
The mini-EH controller on the EV periodically sends 
status information, such as flying/landing status and flying 
speed, of the EH to the base station. The base station in turn 
determines the frequency of GPS measurements and sends it 
to the EH-tag. For energy conservation, GPS measurements 
in the EH-tag are periodically performed only when in the 
flying state. The measured GPS data and the barometer 
readings are subsequently sent to the base station. The base 
station periodically updates the period of GPS measurements. 
If a pre-determined number of consecutive updates are not 
received, the pre-determined minimum period is configured 
in the EH-tag. 
The frequency of the GPS measurements during the 
flight of the mini-EH should be configured to detect a change 
of distance between the mini-EH and the piloting EV of the 
order of 10 m flown at the maximum relative speed. When it 
is 10 m/s, the frequency should be set to around once per 
second. This frequency may be dynamically configured to 
decrease, reflecting the normally lower speed of the mini-EH, 
so that energy consumption may be minimized. 
 
 
Figure 6.  The case and IC motherboard developed for an EH-tag. 
Communication
module
Memory
Micro
server
Router
To EVANET
Weather 
sensor
Camera
EH Controller
EV battery
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

0
20
40
60
80
100
3
4
5
6
7
Data delivery success ratio 
( % )
Distance (km)
Sawata
Niigata
Niigata University
Sawata on Sado Island
Base Station
Base Station
TABLE III.  
SPECIFICATIONS OF COMPONENTS FOR EH-TAG 
Components 
Size (mm) 
Mass (g) 
IC motherboard 
96 × 50 × 0.8 
10.5 
Case  
110 × 53 × 49 
33 
Lithium-thionyl chloride battery 
Φ14.5 × 24.5 
9 
GPS antenna 
3.2 × 1.6 
0.9 
Radio antenna 
Φ5.5 
0.9 
GPS module 
15 × 12.5 
1.1 
Microcomputer 
17×17 
0.5 
Resistor, condenser 
1.0×0.5 
Not 
measurable 
 
D. Prototype Development 
We developed prototypes of the EH-tag and base station 
mentioned in Section IV.B. The main challenge was the 
development of a small lightweight EH-tag that can be 
mounted on the mini-EH. A picture of the developed EH-tag 
is shown in Fig. 6, and the specifications of the components 
selected for the EH-tag are listed in Table III. The total mass 
is about 60 g, which meets the mini-EH payload limit of the 
requirements in Table II. We used only existing products for 
the components of the developed EH-tag. Further reductions 
in size and weight can be expected by using components 
designed specifically for the EH-tag. 
E. EH-tag Battery Lifetime 
A small lightweight battery that is capable of operating at 
3 V and of the order of 10 mA is necessary as the energy 
source of the EH-tag. To meet this requirement, a lithium-
thionyl chloride battery with a capacity of 1,100 mAh was 
selected. To estimate the lifetime of the battery used for the 
EH-tag, we conducted experiments in which GPS 
measurements were performed every minute and the 
measurement data were transmitted to the base station each 
time the measurement succeeded. Based on the results of the 
experiments, the battery lifetime is about 31 h. The current 
draw is highest, at 45 mA, during GPS measurements. 
Assuming that a GPS measurement is conducted every 
second in the worst case, as mentioned in Section IV.C, and 
that the current draw is constant at 45 mA, the calculated 
lifetime of the EH-tag battery is about 24 h. It is also 
expected that the GPS measurements will stop or slow down, 
as mentioned in Section IV.C. Considering these factors, 
which reduce the energy consumption, the EH-tag can be 
expected to work continuously for at least one whole day 
without the need for recharging or replacement, which is 
well suited to a 3DMS application. 
F. Real-World Data Delivery Experiments 
We conducted experiments to verify the transmission 
range of the EH positioning system by using the base 
stations on the Niigata University campus and in Sawata on 
Sado Island (see Fig. 7). GPS measurements were performed 
by the EH-tag every 1 min for 10 min at each distance from 
the base station and at each height from 20 m to 100 m above 
the ground in 20 m steps. Unlike our objective of using EH- 
tag on the EH, we used a balloon to hold the EH-tag in the 
Figure 7.  Experimental sites. 
Figure 8.  Data delivery success ratios for the EH positioning system. 
 
air at each height in this experiment, because a prototype EH 
was not ready at that time. It is worth noting that a similar 
data delivery performance would be obtained when the EH-
tag is actually mounted on a mini-EH. The measured GPS 
data were sent to the base station. As expected, there were no 
failures 
in 
GPS 
measurements. 
The 
average 
data 
transmission success ratios are shown in Fig. 8. It is observed 
that a data transmission success ratio of almost 100% was 
achieved at both sites for distances up to 6 km. However, 
there were examples of the case in which the transmission is 
unsuccessful even though the distance is relatively short. We 
surmise that these failures occur when the EH-tag posture is 
changed due to the balloon swinging in the wind. 
Thus, it has been confirmed that the EH positioning 
system has sufficient data transmission range, significantly 
exceeding the remote piloting range of the mini-EH, and can 
be applied to 3DMS. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we argued that small electric vehicles 
(mini-EVs) may be increasingly common in the future, 
leading to the realization of the so-called ubiquitous EV 
society. In the future, these EVs can be a great resource for 
recovery from large-scale disasters. Specifically, where each 
EV is equipped with wireless communication devices, a 
number of EVs available in a disaster area can form EV-
based mobile ad hoc networks (EVANETs). Two use cases 
of EVANET are emergency networks and disaster area 
surveillance. Focusing on the latter application, we presented 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

the concept of three-dimensional mobile surveillance 
(3DMS). In 3DMS, the EVs on the ground cooperate with 
small lightweight unmanned electric helicopters (mini-EHs) 
to collect information on the disaster area. Each EV and 
mini-EH pair is equipped with cameras and other sensors to 
monitor damage arising from the disaster. We gave an 
effective method of solving the problem of the limited 
continuous flying time of EHs. We investigated the 
requirements for a mini-EH in 3DMS. In particular, we 
pointed out that autonomous piloting is necessary. To 
support autonomous piloting, we proposed that EH position 
information be obtained using the GPS and a low-power 
wireless transmission system between the mini-EH and the 
corresponding EV. We call this system the EH positioning 
system. Based on real-world experiments, we showed that a 
prototype of the EH positioning system has adequate 
capabilities in terms of transmission range and energy 
consumption.  
Future works include resolving the EV positioning 
problem in a large disaster area, autonomous creation of EH 
flight routes based on the position of a partner EV, the 
assignment of surveillance work among EVs and their 
partner EHs, performance evaluation of surveillance data 
collection, and the development of a prototype of the 
autonomous piloting system for 3DMS in order to 
demonstrate the feasibility of the 3DMS on the basis of real-
world experiments and performance evaluations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS Grants-in-Aid for 
Scientific Research (KAKENHI) Grant Number 24246068. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
K. Mase, “Communication Service Continuity under a Large-Scale 
Disaster-A Practice in the Case of the Great East Japan Earthquake,” 
IEEE ICC 2012 Workshop, June 2012. 
[2] 
D. Kingston, R. Beard, T. McLain, M. Larsen, and W. Ren, 
“Autonomous Vehicle Technologies for Small Fixed Wing UAVs,” 
In AIAA 2nd Unmanned Unlimited Systems, Technologies, and 
Operations-Aerospace, Land, and Sea Conference and Workshop & 
Exhibit, San Diego, CA. Paper no. AIAA-2003-6559, pp. 1-10, 2003. 
[3] 
R. Beard, D. Kingston, M. Quigley, D. Snyder, R. Christiansen, W. 
Johnson, T. McLain, and M. A. Goodrich, “Autonomous Vehicle 
Technologies for Small Fixed-Wing UAVs,” AIAA Journal of 
Aerospace Computing, Information, and Communication, Vol. 2, pp. 
92-108 January 2005. 
[4] 
T. J. Koo, D. H. Shim, O. Shakernia, B. Sinopoli, Y. Ma, F. Hoffman, 
and S. Sastry, “Hierarchical Hybrid System Design on Berkeley 
UAV,” International Aerial Robotics Competition, 1998. 
[5] 
F. N. Webber and R. E. Hiromoto, “Assessing the Communication 
Issues Involved in Implementing High-Level Behaviors in Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles,” IEEE Military Communication Conference 
(MILCOM), pp. 1-7, 2006. 
[6] 
Z. Han, A. L. Swindlehurst, and K. J. R. Liu, “Smart 
Deployment/Movement of Unmanned Air Vehicle to Improve 
Connectivity in MANET,” In Proceedings of WCNC 2006, Vol. 1, pp. 
252-257, 2006. 
[7] 
P. Zhan, K. Yu, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “Wireless Relay 
Communications with Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: Performance and 
Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., Vol. 47, No. 3, 
pp. 2068-2085, 2011. 
[8] 
S. Gil, M. Schwager, B. Julian, and D. Rus, “Optimizing 
Communication in Air-Ground robot networks Using Decentralized 
Control,” pp. 1964-1971, 2010. 
[9] 
O. Burdakov, P. Doherty, K. Holmberg, J. Kvarnstrom, and P-M. 
Olsson, “Positioning Unmanned Aerial Vehicles as Communication 
Relays for Surveillance Tasks,” In Proceedings of the 5th Robotics: 
Science and Systems Conference (RSS), 2009.  
[10] C. Dixon and E. W. Frew, “Optimizing Cascaded Chains of 
Unmanned Aircraft Acting as Communication Relays,” IEEE Journal 
on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 30, No. 5, pp. 883-898, 
June 2012. 
[11] G. M. Saggiani and B. Teodorani, “Rotary wing UAV potential 
applications: An Analytical Study through a Matrix Method,” Aircraft 
Engineering and Aerospace Technology, Vol. 76, No. 1, pp. 6-14, 
2004. 
[12] D. W. Casbeer, D. B. Kingston, R. W. Beard, T. W. McLain, S. Li, 
and R. Mehra, “Cooperative Forest Fire Surveillance Using a Team of 
Small Unmanned Air Vehicles,” International Journal of Systems 
Science, Vol. 37, No. 6, pp. 351-360, 2005. 
[13] K. Alexis, G. Nikolakopoulos, A. Tzes, and L. Dritsas, “Coordination 
of 
Helicopter 
UAVs 
for 
Aerial 
Forest-Fire 
Surveillance,” 
Applications of Intelligent Control to Engineering Systems, pp. 169-
193, 2009. 
[14] R. W. Beard, T. W. McLain, D. B. Nelson, D. Kingston, and D. 
Johanson, “Decentralized Cooperative Aerial Surveillance Using 
Fixed-Wing Miniature UAVs,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, No. 
7, pp. 1306-1324, July 2006. 
[15] K. Mase, “Information and Communication Technology and Electric 
Vehicles – Paving the Way towards a Smart Community,” IEICE 
Trans. Commun., Vol. E95-B, No. 6, pp. 1902-1910, June 2012. 
[16] J. Hoebeke, I. Moerman, B. Dhoedt, and P. Demeester, “An 
Overview of Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Applications and 
Challenges,” Journal of the Communications Network, Vol. 3, pp. 60-
66, 2004. 
[17] H. Hartenstein and K. P. Laberteaux, “A Tutorial Survey on 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 
46, No. 6, pp. 164-171, 2008. 
[18] K. Mase, “How to Deliver Your Message from/to Disaster Area,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 52-57, 2011. 
[19] K. Mase and J. Gao, “Electric Vehicle-based Ad-hoc Networking for 
Large-Scale 
Disasters- 
Design 
Principles 
and 
Prototype 
Development,” The 5th Ad Hoc, Sensor and P2P Networks 
Workshop (AHSP 2013), March 2013. (To be presented). 
[20] H. Oka, H. Okada, and K. Mase, “Experimental Evaluation of 
SKYMESH Using Terrestrial Nodes,” Proceedings of 16th Asia-
Pacific Conference on Communications, 2010. 
[21] W. Zhao, M. Ammar, and E. Zegura, “A Message Ferrying Approach 
for Data Delivery in Sparse Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” Proceedings 
of the 5th ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking and Computing, pp. 187-198, 2004. 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-256-1
ICNS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Networking and Services

