Telco-Carrier grade Evaluation of 5G SDN/NFV-enabled Policy Control Concepts 
 
Michael Maruschke 
Hochschule für Telekommunikation Leipzig (HfTL) 
Leipzig, Germany 
e-mail: maruschke@hft-leipzig.de 
 
Jan Kasimir and Manuel Keipert 
Telekom Deutschland GmbH 
Bonn, Germany 
e-mail: jan.kasimir@telekom.de 
e-mail: manuel.keipert@telekom.de 
 
 
Abstract—The main question that this paper intends to answer 
is what telecommunication operators could do for their mobile 
network evolution until 5th Generation (5G) mobile networks 
are deployed for mass-market and beyond 2020. Especially in 
scope is policy-related functionality in the core network. The 
roadmap for mobile networks should take into account tech-
nologies such as Software Defined Networks (SDN) and Net-
work Function Virtualization (NFV) but also consider com-
mercial necessities. This paper examines five approaches pro-
posed by the authors, covering the full range from extending 
the policy controller's capabilities to removing as many ele-
ments of the policy framework as possible. Approaches are 
rated through evaluation criteria chosen by the authors to 
create a transparent, objective and Telco-Carrier grade feasi-
ble conclusion. The conclusion gives operators possibilities for 
their strategic roadmap towards 5G networks and support any 
upcoming design decisions. 
 
Keywords-5G; NFV; PCF; QoS; SDN 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
With the advent of 5G, SDN and NFV, the motivation 
for a Telco-Carrier to evaluate policy control concepts is 
paramount for strategic cost and architecture resource plan-
ning. However, up to the present, there is no SDN- and 
NFV-enabled 5G network available for a Telco-Carrier 
grade deployment of large scale mass-market production. 
In infrastructure-owning operators' cellular mobile net-
works, the policy controller is an essential function. It pro-
vides sophisticated policy handling to ensure service quality 
and charging [1]. It is also required to realize public voice 
telephony services in packet-switched networks like Voice 
over LTE (VoLTE) [2]. The policy controller is part of the 
comprehensive Policy & Charging Control (PCC) frame-
work, consisting also of policy enforcement functions. 
The PCC framework in the cellular mobile packet net-
work will undergo significant changes in multiple dimen-
sions with the transition to 5G networks. Until 5G is availa-
ble and deployed on a large scale, many other technologies 
impact policy evolution such as SDN and NFV. The com-
plete core network infrastructure is impacted by the emer-
gence of SDN, NFV and 5G. All three technology trends 
influence different layers of the Telco operator production 
network, comprising network layer SDN, system virtualiza-
tion and 'cloudification' NFV up to the 5G application layer. 
Beside those big trends, there are many other aspects di-
rectly impacting the policy controller. Accordingly, there 
are use cases (e.g., full flat rate or Internet of Things (IoT) 
based), where dynamic policy control will be dispensable. 
Telco operators are constantly adapting their network 
strategy to keep up, firstly with a fast-growing number of 
terminal devices of all kind (Smartphones, tablets, IoT de-
vices, autonomous driving vehicles, etc.), secondly with the 
rapidly increasing mobile data traffic those devices produce 
and thirdly with the complexity increases due to new ser-
vices. Mobile data traffic grew tremendously in the last few 
years and forecasts indicate that this trend will continue in 
the future [3]. The diversity of terminals and use cases that 
will come with IoT and 5G will put even more demanding 
requirements on the Telco network infrastructure, for exam-
ple in terms of latency, bandwidth and other Quality of Ser-
vice (QoS) related parameters [4]. The PCC framework is 
key for dynamic QoS policing. 
With regards to the PCC framework that provides data 
charging, VoLTE enablement and QoS handling for data 
sessions, the evolution towards a 5G network implies many 
challenges. The diversity of use cases and its usage patterns 
changes profoundly from 4th Generation (4G) to 5G net-
works [4]: 
• 
QoS functionalities will be refined to fulfill stringent 
5G use case and become highly adaptive (dynamic real-
time adapting). 
• 
Other new use cases like Vehicular-to-Everything 
(V2X) and IoT might not require a dynamic policy con-
troller at all. This QoS-related challenge in 5G of pre-
dictable end-to-end (E2E) latency of a few milliseconds 
might not utilize a centralized Policy & Charging Rules 
Function (PCRF) in the mobile core network. 
• 
Static versus dynamic rule assignment in 5G will de-
pend on the use case. Static rule assignment bears cost-
saving potential as no full-fledged PCRF is required. 
• 
Decentralization of control functions to the core edge 
(assuming that this is possible) enables the network to 
cope with strict latency requirements. 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

In the process of SDN/NFV-based 5G network transfor-
mation, there are opportunities for architecture design im-
provement that have been identified by the authors. This 
paper presents five approaches that propose adaptations to 
the Policy Control Function (PCF) – the policy controller in 
5G. 
In section II, related work and a standardized context of 
basic architectures for the 5G network, SDN and NFV are 
introduced. Section III covers the descriptions of the five 
approaches. In section IV the approaches are evaluated and 
compared, resulting in our recommendations for Telco oper-
ators as to how to include these into their roadmaps. Section 
V concludes with a summary of the next steps towards 5G 
for Telco operators. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
 Research Contributions 
A.
In 2015, an academic study was focusing on a fair QoS 
resource reservation concept for upcoming 5G networks [5]. 
Nevertheless, this work was not integrated into the 3GPP 
5G specifications. 
Two more recent contributions address the issue of re-
source allocation for a key element of 5G networks, the 
network slices. One paper introduces three new network 
functions to analyze traffic per network slice, to manage the 
access rights on network slice resources, and to provide an 
adaptive traffic forecast model [6]. The other paper presents 
a model to orchestrate slices based on typical service de-
mands considering the underlying resource capacities [7]. 
Both research papers relate to optimization of network slice 
resource usage. Nevertheless, those are pure simulations or 
calculations that were not verified under real Telco-Carrier 
network conditions. Furthermore, all three contributions do 
not address the functional core network nodes that are intro-
duced with 5G, e.g. PCF or User Plane Function (UPF). 
 5G/SDN/NFV Reference Architectures 
B.
The approaches - presented in section III - are based up-
on 5G/SDN/NFV architectures. For a better understanding, 
these basic architecture designs are presented in this section. 
With regards to 5G, the 3GPP Release 15 proposed sys-
tem architecture in a domestic scenario is used [8]. Figure 1 
shows this 3GPP 5G architecture with service-based inter-
faces within the control plane.  
 
 
Figure 1: Service-based 3GPP 5G Architecture (cf. [8]) 
Besides other logical network functions, the control 
plane includes the PCF and the Session Management Func-
tion (SMF). The SMF operates as centralized element be-
tween logical control plane network functions and the UPF 
via interface N4. 
A high-level SDN architecture, taken from the ITU-T 
Recommendation Y.3300 [9], is shown in Figure 2. Stimu-
lated from SDN applications, the centralized SDN controller 
manages the local existing network devices (in the SDN 
Resource Layer). 
 
 
Figure 2: SDN Architecture in three Layers (cf. [9]) 
To operate and provide a NFV environment with all re-
quired configurations, a Management and Orchestration 
(MANO) framework is specified. The European Telecom-
munications Standards Institute (ETSI) determined a high-
level functional architectural framework for NFV and 
MANO [10]. 
 Figure 3 displays the ETSI NFV MANO architecture 
comprising the three functional nodes NFV Orchestrator 
(NFVO), VNF Manager (VNFM) and Virtualized Infra-
structure Manager (VIM). 
 
 
Figure 3: NFV MANO Architecture (cf. [10]) 
III. 
PCC APPROACHES 
The goal of all approaches is to either extend the policy 
controller's capabilities to improve the network, or remove as 
many elements of the policy framework as possible in order 
to reduce complexity and costs. 
 SMF-integrated PCF 
A.
In this approach, the PCF is integrated into the SMF to 
optimize the logical infrastructure. The resulting architec-
ture is depicted in Figure 4 that shows an SMF with policy 
control functionalities. 
The resulting architecture is more compact. The extend-
ed SMF (enhanced with PCF) unites session management 
functions (manage session establishment, modification and 
release; control Internet Protocol (IP) address allocation; 
advice policy enforcement in UPF) and the policy manage-
ment (evaluate policy decisions). 
UE
5G-AN
UPF
DN
SMF
AMF
N3
N2
N1
N6
N4
NSSF
PCF
UDM
AF
AUSF
Nnssf
Nausf
Npcf
Namf
Nudm
Nsmf
Naf
SDN Application Layer
SDN Control Layer
SDN Resource Layer
Multi-Layer
Management
Functions
NFVI Working Domain
VNF Working Domain
OSS / BSS
MANO Working Domain
NFVO
VIM
VNFM
Os-Ma-nfvo
Vn-Nf
Nf-Vi
Ve-Vnfm
Or-Vnfm
Vi-Vnfm
Or-Vi
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
 
Figure 4: Overview for SMF-integrated PCF Approach 
The service-based interface Npcf between a separated PCF 
and SMF can be omitted. Interactions between PCF and 
other required functionalities (e.g. Application Function 
(AF), Unified Data Management (UDM)) corresponding to 
the 3GPP TS 23.503 (section 5.3) [11] will be realized via 
SMF. 
 SDN-based PCF 
B.
In this approach, a new interface between SMF and SDN 
controller is introduced exchanging information between 
PCF and SDN controller over SMF. This enables the SDN 
controller to decide whether and how to include such infor-
mation into its transport network steering process. 
The precondition is that the mobile core network is de-
ployed on top of an SDN-controlled network infrastructure. 
As it can be seen from Figure 5, mobile core network 
functions operate on the application layer from an SDN 
architectural point of view. The SDN controller processes 
information provided by SMF. The decision for a SMF (and 
not PCF) to SDN controller interface is justified through the 
SMF's holistic view of the data sessions. The SDN controller 
steers the network device in the resource layer. Management 
functions are outlined on the left side of the figure. 
 
 
Figure 5: Overview for SDN-based PCF Approach 
The SMF delivers session/subscriber related information 
from PCF via the SDN controller's Northbound Controller 
Interface (NCI). On this way, the SDN controller becomes 
service aware and is enabled to adapt the underlying 
transport layer forwarding path and capacity for a data flow 
according to a service's requirements, e.g., latency and QoS. 
 Slice-specific PCF 
C.
This approach proposes multiple instances of slice-
specific PCFs (sPCF). The sPCFs are responsible for one 
single slice, tailored to serve the slice-specific use cases. 
The precondition for this approach is Network Slicing. 
When a subscriber establishes a new session, the Network 
Slice Selection Function (NSSF) assigns the session to a 
slice. A common PCF (cPCF) is deployed in a common 
domain and coordinates policy management. It is connected 
to the NSSF and provides relevant information to the slice 
that is in charge of the subscriber. 
 
 
Figure 6: Overview for Slice-specific PCF Approach 
(cf. [12] figure 6.1.1.1) 
Figure 6 shows an operator's mobile core network with two 
slices and one common domain in the middle – the area 
where the two slices overlap (cf. [12] figure 6.1.1.1) . Both 
slices, enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB) and Critical 
Communications (CriC), have their own sPCF that is con-
nected to the cPCF in the common domain. Other common 
Control Plane Network Functions (cCP NFs) can be found 
in the common domain. Furthermore, there are dedicated 
Control and User Plane Network Functions (CP NFs and UP 
NFs) in each specific slice. The cPCF is approached first 
when a customer session establishment request is sent. It is 
connected to all sPCFs via an interface and forwards the 
request to the most suitable sPCF instance in a slice. The 
Radio Access Network (RAN) is informed about the chosen 
slice and forwards subsequent control and user plane traffic 
directly to the slice's functions. 
 PCF-based NFV orchestration 
D.
In this approach, a virtualized PCF is connected to the 
VNFM function in the NFV MANO working domain, de-
picted in Figure 7. 
A precondition is that the 5G reference architecture is 
virtualized in an NFV environment. PCF and other network 
functions are deployed as VNFs. 
The virtualized PCF delivers aggregated application layer 
information about subscribers, services used, etc., in real-
time via Operations Support Systems/ Business System Sup-
port (OSS/BSS) layer and NFVO to VNFM for a more accu-
rate VNF lifecycle management and monitoring purposes. 
 
UE
5G-AN
UPF
DN
SMF
AMF
N3
N2
N1
N6
N4
NSSF
PCF
UDM
AF
AUSF
Nnssf
Nausf
Npcf
Namf
Nudm
Nsmf
Naf
PCF
SDN Resource Layer
SDN Control Layer
SDN
Application
Layer
SDN Controller
Network 
Device
AMF
NSSF
AUSF
Nnssf
Nausf
Namf
OpenFlow
UDM
Nudm
PCF
Npcf
Nsmf
Network 
Device
OpenFlow
AF
Naf
SMF
NCI
Multi-Layer
Management
Functions
eMBB Slice
CriC Slice
NSSF
cCP NFs
CP NFs
UP NFs
CP NFs 
UP NFs
sPCF
sPCF
cPCF
RAN
UE
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 
Figure 7: Overview for Virtualized PCF Approach in NFV MANO 
PCF can provide, for example, the type of device, type 
of service or device location. Such information allows the 
VNFM to handle VNF lifecycle management (VNF instanti-
ation, scaling and termination) more accurately with regards 
to the demand, quality requirements, and so forth. 
 Obsolete PCF 
E.
There are multiple use cases already today and there will 
be even more in the future that do not require a PCF. Typi-
cally, operators aim for network simplicity, hence in today's 
network the PCRF often controls all mass market subscrib-
ers. This approach recommends not applying (dynamic) 
policy control for some new IoT and 5G use cases as well as 
existing use cases where dynamic PCC is not needed. Hence 
a valid strategy option is to remove customers and use cases 
from the PCF. 
IV. 
APPROACH EVALUATION 
Several evaluation criteria have been created, particular-
ly from an infrastructure-owning Telco-Carrier perspective. 
The criteria are a mixture of standard conformity and tech-
nical design aspects, as well as commercial considerations. 
A summary of the evaluation of our five PCC approach-
es is presented in a table. 
Finally, the approach rating is illustrated more detailed. 
 Definition of Evaluation Criteria 
A.
1) Standards Developing Organization (SDO) 
conformity (SDO conf.) 
This criterion verifies the conformity with regards to the 
existing technical standards (e.g., 3GPP specifications). 
 
2) Pre-5G compliance (Pre-5G) 
This criterion evaluates whether an approach could be 
implemented in a 4G network. 
 
3) Complexity of Integration and Operation (Compl.) 
This criterion evaluates the complexity of the technical 
implementation and operation for the approach. 
 
4) Cost (Cost) 
This criterion estimates the incurred costs for the ap-
proach. It excludes any costs for SDN and NFV. Here we 
assume that costs include Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) and 
Operational Expenditure (OPEX). 
 
5) Consumer Business Opportunities (Business) 
This criterion estimates if new business opportunities are 
generated by this approach, with regards to additional reve-
nue. 
 Summary of the Evaluation 
B.
Table 1 presents our approach evaluation summary. The 
evaluation is done via a three-tier scale. The scale is defined 
as follows: 
• 
the approach has a positive effect with regards to 
the evaluation criterion: '+' 
• 
the approach has a neutral influence with regards 
to the evaluation criterion: 'o' 
• 
the approach has a negative effect with regards to 
the evaluation criterion: '-'. 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 1: APPROACH EVALUATION SUMMARY 
Evaluation criteria 
Approaches 
SMF-integrated 
PCF 
SDN-based PCF 
Slice-specific PCF 
PCF-based 
NFV 
orchestration 
Obsolete PCF 
SDO conformity 
o 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
Pre-5G-compliance 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Complexity of Integra-
tion and Operation 
- 
o 
o 
o 
+ 
Costs 
+ 
o 
- 
- 
+ 
Consumer Business 
Opportunities 
o 
+ 
+ 
o 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NFVI Working Domain
VNF Working Domain
OSS / BSS
MANO Working Domain
NFVO
VIM
VNFM
Os-Ma-nfvo
Vn-Nf
Nf-Vi
Ve-Vnfm
Or-Vnfm
Vi-Vnfm
Or-Vi
PCF
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

 PCC Approach Rating 
C.
1) SMF-integrated PCF 
The approach centralizes policy and session manage-
ment in one network node and it is assessed by the evalua-
tion criteria as follows: 
a) SDO conf.: PCF interactions with other control 
plane functions (e.g., UDM) will be integrated into 
SMF 
b) Pre-5G: Evolved Packet Core (EPC) point-to-point 
interface design causes unmanagable complexity 
c) Compl.: shared PCF/SMF interface complicates 
maintainability 
d) Cost: no additional operational costs for dedicated 
PCF; further savings through licensing cost 
reduction 
e) Business: no new business opportunity, but existing 
use cases remain 
 
2) SDN-based PCF 
The approach enables mobile data session information 
exchange to an SDN controller and it is assessed by the eval-
uation criteria as follows: 
a) SDO conf.: no fundamental change in design 
principles 
b) Pre-5G: only requirement is the deployment of a 
SDN 
c) Compl.: complication through NCI design & 
integration effort 
d) Cost: minor interface design and  integration costs 
e) Business: new service quality enforcement options on 
network layer, although not visible to end customer 
 
3) Slice-specific PCF 
The approach decentralizes policy control functionality 
and it is assessed by the evaluation criteria as follows: 
a) SDO conf.: no fundamental change in design 
principles 
b) Pre-5G: requirements are deployment of NFV and 
Network Slicing 
c) Compl.: decentralization facilitates PCF with 
reduced functionality, but interactions between PCFs 
drives complexity 
d) Cost: increase due to acquisition and operation for 
multiple PCF nodes 
e) Business: offer services for diverse use cases in 
dedicated independent slices 
 
4) PCF-based NFV orchestration 
The approach improves NFV MANO processes and it is 
assessed by the evaluation criteria as follows: 
a) SDO conf.: no change in design principles 
b) Pre-5G: only requirement is the deployment of a 
NFV 
c) Compl.: complication through new interface design 
& integration effort 
d) Cost: minor interface design and integration costs; 
MANO 
function 
enhancement 
to 
incorporate 
interface 
e) Business: no new business opportunity, but existing 
use cases remain 
 
5) Obsolete PCF 
The approach reduces complexity in the mobile core 
network and it is assessed by the evaluation criteria as fol-
lows: 
a) SDO conf.: PCF removal is not foreseen by 3GPP 
b) Pre-5G: same constraint as for 5G, namely no more 
dynamic policy handling 
c) Compl.: no PCF node and streamlining of use cases 
d) Cost: neither licensing nor operational costs for 
PCF 
e) Business: reduction of feasible use cases 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The best improvement for the pre-5G and 5G architecture 
in the authors' view is a combination of the approaches de-
pending on the use cases. This is most easily done in a slice-
able, virtualized and programmable core network, which is 
expected to be built in the near future to be prepared for 5G. 
 Combining Approaches 
A.
In 5G, the recommended basic setup is to have one slice 
per 3GPP use case category [13]: eMBB, CriC, Massive 
Machine Type Communications (mMTC), Enhancement of 
Vehicle-to-Everything (eV2X). 
 
 
Figure 8: Combining Approaches 
Figure 8 constitutes a sliced operator network on top of 
an NFV-virtualized and SDN-controlled infrastructure, 
where all approaches are implemented. The slice-specific 
PCF approach is implemented implicitly, as Network Slicing 
is employed and multiple PCFs are used. The PCF-based 
NFV orchestration approach is also implied as each slice 
slice-specific
PCF
eMBB
Slice
SMF-
integrated 
PCF
CriC
Slice
SDN-based 
PCF
mMTC
Slice
obsolete 
PCF
eV2X
Slice
SDN-based 
PCF
NFV Virtualization
PCF-based NFV orchestration
SDN Infrastructure
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

PCF can integrate the interface to VNFM if required. For 
each slice, there is one approach applied: 
 
a) eMBB slice 
Operates conventional mobile data use cases (that require 
high bandwidth) and VoLTE. The SMF-integrated PCF 
approach is advisable here, especially with respect to VoL-
TE. 
 
b) CriC slice 
Use cases in this category are for example factory auto-
mation and telemedicine. Low latency and high availability 
is essential to such critical communication. The network can 
support fulfillment of such demands through optimized rout-
ing with the help of an SDN. Applying the SDN-based PCF 
approach further improves the route optimization process of 
the SDN controller. 
 
c) mMTC slice 
The focus in this slice lies on IoT use cases that need 
high resource and energy efficiency. Wearables, sensors and 
other IoT devices rely on a long-lasting power supply and 
transmit typically very small data. Dynamic policy rule eval-
uation is not required; hence the obsolete PCF approach is 
recommended to reduce complexity, latency and save mon-
ey. 
 
d) eV2X slice 
Use cases demands are similar to CriC use case demands 
(low latency and high availability) plus safety aspects and 
positioning accuracy. Therefore, the SDN-based PCF ap-
proach is a suitable option. 
 Final considerations 
B.
It should be stated that there is no 'one-size-fits-all ap-
proach' that is equally suitable for all types of operators. 
Moreover, there is no single approach for an operator but 
always a well-balanced mixture to bridge the time between 
4G deployments and future SDN and NFV based 5G net-
works. Operators are diverse in terms of technical, infra-
structural and financial aspects as well as service offerings, 
market position, etc. Those aspects matter as these drive the 
complexity of the network, which makes it usually difficult 
for big infrastructure-owning Telco-Carriers to adapt. All 
results and recommendations must be interpreted by the 
operators. Combining these approaches to the operators 
needs provide a real benefit partially already now as well as 
for sure with 5G based on the flexibility of a SDN/NFV 
Telco cloud. 
Beside these overarching strategic results, the paper pro-
poses five PCC approaches for network enabling and signif-
icant cost cutting. 
This paper is intended to allow the operator to adapt the 
3GPP 5G reference architecture to meet its carrier-specific 
needs and network strategy. Nevertheless, for each operator 
the challenge remains to develop its real deployed carrier 
networks and processes towards a 5G-enabled policy control 
based network. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  3GPP, TS 23.203 - Policy and Charging Control 
Architecture (Release 15) V15.2.0 (2018-03).  
[2]  GSM Association, Official Document IR.92 - IMS 
Profile for Voice and SMS V11.0, 2017.  Available: 
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/wp-
content/uploads//IR.92-v11.0.pdf. 
[3]  Ericsson, 
June 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/mobility-
report/documents/2017/ericsson-mobility-report-june-
2017.pdf. 
[4]  3GPP, TS 22.261 - Service requirements for the 5G 
system V16.2.0 (2017-12).  
[5]  R. Trivisonno, R. Guerzoni, I. Vaishnavi und A. 
Frimpong, „Network Resource Management and QoS 
in 
SDN-Enabled 
5G 
Systems,“ 
2015 
IEEE 
GLOBECOM , Dec. 2015, ISBN: 978-1-4673-9526-7. 
[6]  V. Sciancalepore, K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez, D. 
Bega, M. Gramaglia und A. Banchs, „Mobile Traffic 
Forecasting for Maximizing 5G Network Slicing 
Resource Utilization,“ IEEE Conference on Computer 
Communications (INFOCOM 2017), May 2017, ISBN: 
978-1-5090-5336-0.  
[7]  D. T. Hoang, D. Niyato, P. Wang, A. De Domenico 
und E. Calvanese Strinati, „Optimal Cross Slice 
Orchestration for 5G Mobile Services,“ 16 December 
2017. 
submitted 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05912.  
[8]  3GPP, TS 23.501 - System Architecture for the 5G 
System (Release 15) V15.0.0 (2017-12).  
[9]  ITU-T, Recommendation Y.3300 - Framework of 
software-defined networking, (06/2014). 
[10]  ETSI, GS NFV-MAN 001 – Network Functions 
Virtualization (NFV);  Management and Orchestration 
v1.1.1, (2014-12) . 
[11]  3GPP, TS 23.503 - Policy and Charging Control 
Framework for the 5G System (Release 15) V15.0.0 
(2017-12).  
[12]  3GPP, TR 23.799 - Study on Architecture for Next 
Generation System (Release 14) V14.0.0 (2016-12).  
[13]  3GPP, TR 22.891 - Feasibility Study on New Services 
and Markets Technology Enablers (Release 14) 
V14.2.0 (2016-09). 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-633-0
ICNS 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Networking and Services

