The Effectiveness of Blended Distance Learning 
A Multi-Dimensional Analysis within ICT Learning 
 
Ron Kovac 
Ball State University 
Muncie, USA 
e-mail: rkovac@bsu.edu 
Kristen E. DiCerbo 
Independent Researcher 
Phoenix, USA 
e-mail: kdicerbo@cisco.com
 
 
Abstract—eLearning as an educational mode of delivery 
presents many new challenges to educators and students.  The 
change in modality of the teaching/learning environment begs 
many questions in regard to effectiveness and efficiency of 
student learning (the main goal of our educational system). The 
focus of this research and paper is the effectiveness of Blended 
Distance Learning for training instructors.  Blended Distance 
Learning, growing in popularity recently, has learners doing 
part of their studies in person, and part of their studies 
remotely 
(either 
synchronously, 
asynchronously, 
or 
a 
combination). Effectiveness of Blended Distance Learning will 
be measured in two dimensions: instructor outcomes and then 
subsequent outcomes of students. The study looks at both 
attitudinal and academic outcomes of students and instructors 
by instructor training modality. The results of this study hold 
implications for education in general, but specifically for those 
making decisions about learning methodologies and platforms  
to use when training teachers.   
Keywords-Blended distance learning; e-learning; teacher 
training 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the current attention paid to eLearning, we become 
aware that this modality of education is growing and here to 
stay. Although eLearning is not a panacea for all of 
education problems, it does present another tool, with 
benefits and detriments for the student and the instructor, in 
terms of both attitudes and resulting learning (the ultimate 
goal of our educational system). With this new modality, a 
series of questions arise, centering on educational 
effectiveness (learning), the efficiency of this new modality, 
and the ways to use different instructional methodologies 
within the framework of eLearning. 
The focus of this research and paper is on the 
effectiveness of Blended Distance Learning (BDL), a 
specific form of eLearning, for training teachers.  BDL has 
learners doing part of their studies in person and part 
remotely 
(synchronously, 
asynchronously, 
or 
a 
combination).   BDL has the attraction of not fully 
abstracting the course or the people involved, while also 
allowing the freedom and flexibility that remote learning 
offers.  Many major institutions and entities have settled on 
this as a key learning methodology in their business plan. 
However, others have expressed concern that BDL classes 
can be as challenging and effective as in-person classes. 
While there has been a fairly large body of research on 
student BDL training, less is known about training teachers 
via BDL methodologies. This is the question this paper will 
explore. 
Effectiveness of BDL will be measured in two 
dimensions. The first dimension will compare the final exam 
and satisfaction survey scores of instructors who took a 
course via BDL with instructors who took the course in a 
purely face-to-face traditional manner.  Although the 
instructors were not randomly assigned to the two test 
groups, similarity was sought in age, gender, and background 
of the instructors.  
The second dimension of this study will look at the 
students of these two instructor groups. Each of these 
instructors, after training in a specific ICT cognate area, went 
to their classrooms to instruct their students in the same ICT 
cognate area.  Effectiveness was measured in their students 
by their final exam scores and their course satisfaction 
survey.  The instructors and the students were provided the 
same final exam score and satisfaction survey. 
The results of this study hold implications for education 
in general, but specifically within the BDL environment.  
The results of this study also hold merit for studying the 
effects of BDL instructor training on the instructors directly 
and their students that they teach. In the paper below we will 
first review relevant literature, then describe the analysis of 
instructor and student outcomes based on instructor training 
type, and finally end with a discussion of implications. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The National Center for Education Statistics [1] reports 
that the K-12 public school enrollment in distance learning 
classes in the U.S. grew 65% in the years from 2002 to 2005.  
A more recent study by Picciano and Seaman [2] finds that 
more than a million students were educated via DL 
methodologies in the academic year of 2007-2008. Caution 
should be used when looking at the phenomenal growth of 
DL first because DL courses, and especially BDL courses, 
and include everything from correspondence courses to 
course with minimal remote use [3], but it is clear that the 
practice of taking courses remotely is increasing.   
Analysis and study in the field of eLearning has been 
going on since eLearnings’ inception. The results have been 
varied but meta-studies conducted recently point to some 
consistencies and trends in evolution and results [3].  
Because this DL and BDL field has existed long enough and 
344
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

has high appeal for researchers and policy makers, enough 
studies of BDL have been done to warrant a meta-analysis of 
results. Meta-analysis is a technique for combining the 
results of many research studies to obtain a composite 
estimate of effect. It is essentially research on research, 
combining all the results of similar studies.  Of over 90 
studies reviewed by this meta-analysis only ½ provided 
sufficient statistical data and methodologies required to fit 
the rigor of this analysis. Most of these studies were 
conducted in higher education and/or specific cognate areas 
(Military, Training, ICT area).  The studies ranged from 
1994 – 2008.  
The main finding of the study was that those in distance 
education classes had slightly better outcomes than those in 
face to face classes [3].  However, on further examination, it 
became clear that in fact the outcomes from face to face 
instruction and pure online instruction were approximately 
equal (all other elements being equal), but that BDL offers 
an advantage as seen by differences in exam scores across 
the studies in the analysis. The authors note that students in 
BDL classes often have both additional learning time and 
more instructional elements than those in face to face classes. 
Therefore, differences in outcomes may be due to these 
factors rather than any media or delivery method per se. 
There has also been some work done on student 
satisfaction in BDL courses as applied to traditional face to 
face courses [4].  Besides the obvious benefits of DL and 
BDL, comfort and convenience [5], other items came up in 
research related to satisfaction in BDL courses. Five themes 
seem to emerge as constant and consistent; 1) classroom 
climate, 2) learning needs, 3) learner efficacy, 4) interaction 
and 5) appropriate format for the content [6]. At first blush 
one would not think of these are benefits of BDL course but 
the clientele in the study. The implications are many but 
seem to center around the recognition of different formats 
require different methodologies, Responsiveness to the 
variety of learning styles in the “classroom”, empowering 
students and quality of material and format used in distance 
learning.  
In regard to the degree of blendedness (mixture of face to 
face and remote), Voos [7] suggested it is unlikely that the 
proportion makes the difference in the course but that 
reconsideration of course design, new instructional media 
choices, and learning strengths and weaknesses make the 
difference.  As Privateer [8] states so eloquently,  
“Opportunities for real change lie in creating new types of 
professors, new uses of instructional technology and new 
kinds of institutions whose continual intellectual self-
capitalization continually assures their sites as learning 
organizations” (p. 72). Interestingly most of these studies 
have focused on the effects of BDL on students [9]. This 
study examines the effect of BDL learning during instructor 
training. 
III. 
STUDY 1 
The first study looks at the effects of instructor training 
method on instructor outcomes. 
A. Participants 
The context of this study is the Cisco Networking 
Academies. This study analyzed existing data from two 
groups of instructor trainees in the Academy: one trained in a 
BDL class and one trained via in-person classes. Instructors 
in the Network Academies are required to complete training 
courses in each of the classes they are going to teach. These 
courses have traditionally been five day, eight hour per day, 
in-person classes. However, in more cases, these classes 
have been distributed over time and place. Instructor trainees 
who completed instructor training in one of the four 
Exploration courses in the 2009 calendar year were included 
in the study. The BDL sample was also limited to trainees 
with completed course feedback forms and final exam scores 
who were trained in a class with more than one student were 
included in this study. The determination of whether a class 
was offered in the BDL format was made based on the 
instructor trainers’ indication of method of offering classes 
indicated in the online class management system.  
There were 364 instructors trained via BDL in the year. 
There were 10,412 instructors trained via in-person classes. 
In an attempt to get a better-matched sample, in-person 
trainees taught by the same instructors who taught BDL 
students were selected. We then randomly selected 
participants to get a similar sized sample with equivalent 
geographic and education level characteristics, resulting in a 
sample of 400 instructors trained via In-person classes. The 
groups are distributed as shown in Table 1 
TABLE 1. DISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLE BY CLASS MODE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BDL 
In-Person 
  
n 
% 
n 
% 
  
Network 
Fundamentals 
135 
37.5 
150 
37.5 
  
Routing Protocols 
and Concepts 
95 
26.4 
105 
26.25 
  
LAN Switching 
and Wireless 
68 
18.9 
75 
18.75 
  
Accessing the 
WAN 
62 
17.2 
70 
17.5 
  
Total 
364 
100.0 
400 
100.0 
345
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

The participants were distributed by geographic theater 
as follows: Asia Pacific: 3.0%, Western Europe: 20.9%, 
Emerging Markets (Latin America, Middle East, Africa): 
49.7%, and United States and Canada: 26.4%. There were 
relatively few participants from Asia as the BDL approach 
has been less adopted there in the Networking Academy.  
B. Measures 
Four measures were used to assess outcomes for both the 
instructor trainees: Satisfaction, Confidence, and Instructor 
rating subscales from the Course Feedback form and Final 
Exam scores. The Satisfaction, Confidence, and Instructor 
rating scores are each the means of a set of questions on the 
Course Feedback Form that the instructor trainees complete 
after a class. The Satisfaction scale asks students to rate their 
overall satisfaction with items such as labs, assessments, and 
course materials. Ratings are made on a five point scale (1 = 
Very Dissatisfied; 5 = Very Satisfied). The Confidence scale 
asks students to rate their confidence in performing various 
networking-related tasks taught in the course. Ratings are 
again completed on a 5 point scale (1 = Not at all confident; 
5 = Very confident). The Instructor scale asks students to 
rate their instructor on things such as preparedness and 
approachability. These are rated on a 5 point agreement scale 
(1 = Strongly Disagree; 5 = Strongly Agree). The final exam 
is taken by each student at the end of every class. It is a 50 
question multiple choice exam. Requirements from the 
Networking Academy require that the exam be proctored, 
whether the class is BDL or in-person. 
C. Results 
There are significant mean differences between the BDL and 
In-person groups for all four measures, as seen in Table 2.  
The Confidence, Satisfaction, and Instructor subscales have 
significantly higher means for the BDL group, while the 
Final Exam scores are significantly higher for the In-person 
group.  However, it should be noted that the effect sizes are 
extremely small. This means that although there were 
statistically significant differences between the two groups, 
for most practical purposes, their ratings were very similar. 
 
 
TABLE 2. INSTRUCTOR RESULTS BY CLASS MODE 
 
 
Analysis by Curriculum 
 
Comparisons were also conducted by curriculum 
subgroups: Network Fundamentals, Routing, Switching, and 
WAN. Tables 3 and 4 show these results. Effect sizes are 
provided for statistically significant differences 
In the Network Fundamentals subgroup, the only 
significant mean difference between the BDL and In-person 
groups is for the Final Exam.  The mean Final exam score 
for the In-person group is significantly higher than the BDL 
group with a small effect size. Again, this means that the 
difference between the groups is small, however, it may be 
that taking the first class in the Networking Fundamentals 
curriculum is slightly more difficult with a remote 
component. 
In the Routing subgroup, the means for the BDL group 
are significantly higher than the means for the In-person 
group for the Confidence and the Instructor Subscales. In the 
Switching subgroup, the mean scores for the BDL group 
were significantly higher than the In-person group for the 
Confidence and the Instructor Subscales. In the WAN 
subgroup, the mean scores for the BDL group were 
significantly higher than the mean scores for the In-person 
group on the Confidence subscale. 
 
TABLE 3. DIFFERENCES BY CLASS-NF AND ROUTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BDL 
Mean 
Effect 
Size 
BDL 
90.63 
Final Exam* 
 
In-Person 
92.84 
-0.15 
BDL 
4.19 
Confidence* 
 
In-Person 
3.98 
0.14 
BDL 
4.67 
Instructor* 
 
In-Person 
4.58 
0.07 
BDL 
4.33 
Satisfaction* 
 
In-Person 
4.21 
0.10 
  
  
Network 
Fundamentals 
Routing 
  
BDL 
Mean 
ES 
Mean 
ES 
BDL 
88.76 
91.44 
Final Exam 
In-
Person 
93.55 
-0.27 
92.14 
 
BDL 
4.24 
4.26 
Confidence 
In-
Person 
4.14 
 
4.03 
0.15 
BDL 
4.60 
4.76 
Instructor 
In-
Person 
4.62 
 
4.59 
0.16 
BDL 
4.31 
4.34 
Satisfaction 
In-
Person 
4.22 
 
4.22 
 
 
346
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

TABLE 4. DIFFERENCES BY CLASS – SWITCHING AND LAN 
  
  
Switching 
WAN 
  
BDL 
Mean 
ES 
Mean 
ES 
BDL 
91.84 
91.87 
Final 
Exam 
In-
Person 
92.58 
 
93.34 
 
BDL 
4.14 
4.04 
 
Confidenc
e 
In-
Person 
3.93 
0.14 
3.74 
0.19 
BDL 
4.76 
4.59 
Instructor 
In-
Person 
4.59 
0.15 
4.53 
 
BDL 
4.36 
4.34 
Satisfactio
n 
In-
Person 
4.21 
 
4.19 
 
 
IV. 
STUDY 2 
Study 2 examines the outcomes of students based on the 
training modality of their instructor. 
A. Participants 
This study examined existing data of students who took 
classes from instructors who were examined in Study 1. This 
resulted in overall samples of 3514 students of BDL-trained 
instructors and 3421 students of In-person trained instructors. 
B. Measures 
As with the instructors, four measures were used to 
assess outcomes for both the instructor trainees: Satisfaction, 
Confidence, and Instructor rating subscales from the Course 
Feedback form and Final Exam scores.  
C. Results 
When the data for all four courses is combined, the 
means for the Confidence, Instruction, and Satisfaction 
subscales and the Final Exam scores are significantly higher 
for students enrolled in classes taught by BDL-trained 
instructors (see Table 5). However, it should be noted that 
the effect sizes were very small. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE 5. OUTCOMES FOR STUDENTS BY INSTRUCTOR TRAINING MODE 
 
Group 
N 
Mean 
ES 
 
BDL 
3514 
3.61 
 
Confidence* 
 
In-person 
3410 
3.51 
0.06 
 
BDL 
3470 
4.30 
 
Instruction* 
 
In-person 
3328 
4.23 
 
0.05 
 
BDL 
2477 
3.80 
 
Satisfaction* 
 
In-person 
1723 
3.72 
 
0.06 
 
BDL 
2430 
80.53 
 
Final Exam* 
 
In-person 
2476 
79.59 
0.03 
 
For Network Fundamentals, the Confidence subscale, 
Instruction subscale, and Satisfaction subscale means were 
significantly higher for students enrolled in classes taught by 
BDL instructors. For Routing, the Confidence subscale mean 
is significantly higher for students enrolled in classes taught 
by BDL-trained instructors, although the effect size was 
small.  There were no significant differences in the other 
measures. 
For Switching, the means for the Confidence, Instruction, 
and Satisfaction subscales and the Final Exam scores are 
significantly higher for students enrolled in classes taught by 
BDL-trained instructors. The difference in final exams is the 
only one that approaches even a small effect. 
For WAN, the means for the Confidence, Instruction, and 
Satisfaction subscales and the Final Exam scores are 
significantly higher for students enrolled in classes taught by 
BDL-trained instructors. Both satisfaction and final exam 
approach a small effect. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This section discusses the results of Study 1 and 2, the 
limitations of the studies, and conclusions we might reach. 
A. Discussion 
The purpose of this study was to determine whether there 
were differences in outcomes for instructors trained via BDL 
and those trained via in-person classes. In addition, it 
explored potential differences in their students’ outcomes. As 
the results are examined, it is important to keep in mind the 
general rule of thumb that effect sizes less than .20 are 
negligible and likely not clinically important (i.e., there will 
be little noticeable difference in the individuals). Effect sizes 
from .20 to .40 are generally considered small [9].  
When looking at differences in instructors, the difference 
in final exam scores between BDL and In-person trainees in 
the Network Fundamentals course is significant and falls in 
the range of a small effect. This suggests that for the first 
course, students may perform slightly better when trained in 
In-person classes. Given that this is the first class in the 
sequence and for many students may be their first exposure 
347
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

to the content, it is possible that the camaraderie and support 
available during In-person classes may be particularly 
helpful. In addition, it may be that access to real equipment 
is more important in this class. Although there are other 
significant differences in the opinion survey questions 
favoring BDL classes, these are of negligible effect size. 
When examining differences in student outcomes, effect 
sizes of differences are even smaller. The results overall 
indicate that there are not meaningful differences in student 
outcomes dependent on mode of instructor training.  
B. Limitations 
It should be noted that the instructors who participated in 
the BDL model of instructor training were self selected.  
Therefore, a causal link cannot be established because this is 
not an experimental study. In addition, the instructor trainers 
for the two groups were not identical. Results therefore 
cannot absolutely be attributed to class format. We also do 
not have any visibility into the details of the BDL offering 
(e.g., how many days/weeks long the course is, what 
proportion and activities are offered remotely vs. in-person 
etc.) This analysis relies heavily on student survey responses. 
Although we have removed students who were clearly not 
taking this seriously (e.g., those with the same response to 
each question), the heavy reliance this potentially unreliable 
source should be considered. Finally, we rely in instructor 
trainers to accurately report whether their class is offered in a 
BDL format. It is unknown the extent to which trainers may 
mis-label their classes. 
C. Conclusion and Future Work 
Future research should look more closely at the variables 
that are associated with successful BDL offerings for 
teachers. There are likely both characteristics of instructor 
trainees and course practices that are related to positive 
outcomes for both instructors and their subsequent students. 
In addition, research might explore differences between 
initial 
teacher 
training 
and 
ongoing 
professional 
development.  
There are continued questions about the impact of 
training instructors via blended distance learning. This study 
examined this question with a global sample of instructors 
and revealed there are very few differences in instructor 
outcomes or the outcomes of the students they teach. There 
was some suggestion that instructors may have slightly lower 
exam scores in the first course in the sequence when taken 
via BDL. Other than this, differences were negligible and, if 
anything, favored the BDL solutions. These findings align to 
a growing body of literature that suggests that BDL solutions 
produce similar results to In-person learning. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Zandberg and L. Lewis, Technology-based distance 
education courses for public elementary and secondary school 
students: 2002-03 and 2004-05. Washington, D.C.: National 
Center for Educational Statistics, 2008. 
[2] A. G. Picciano and J. Seaman, K-12 Online learning: A 
Follow-up 
of 
the 
Survey 
of 
U.S. 
School 
District 
Administrators. Needham, MA: The Sloan Consortium, 2009. 
[3] B. Means, Y. Toyama, R. Murphy, M. Bakia, and K. Jones, 
Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online learning: A 
Meta-Analysis and Review of Online Learning Studies. 
Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of Education, 2010. 
[4] P. Gerbic, E. Stacey, B. Anderson, M. Simpson, J. Mackey, 
C. Gunn, and G. Samarawickerma, “Blended learning: Is 
there evidence for its effectiveness?” Proceedings ascilite 
Auckland, 2009, pp. 1214-1216. 
[5] D. Parkinson, W. Greene, Y. Kim, and J. Marioni, “Emerging 
themes of student satisfaction in a traditional course and a 
blended distance course,” TechTrends, vol. 47, Jul-Aug. 
2003, pp. 22-28. 
[6] F. Spooner, L. Jordan, B. Algozine, and M. Spooner, 
“Evaluating instruction in distance learning classes,” J. Educ. 
Res., vol. 92, 1999, pp. 132-140. 
[7] R. Voos, “Blended learning: What is it and where might it 
take us?” Sloan-C View, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 2-5. 
[8] P. M. Privateer, “Academic technology and the future of 
higher education: Strategic paths taken and not taken,” J. 
Higher Educ., vol. 70, pp. 60-79. 
[9] A. Smith and N. Moss, “Large scale delivery of Cisco 
networking Academy program by blended distance learning,” 
Sixth International Conference on Networking and Services, 
March 2010, Cancun, MX. 
[10] J. Cohen, Statistical Power for the Behavioral Sciences. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
348
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

