Classroom-based Multi-player Network Simulation 
Experiences of interactive scenarios using Packet Tracer 
Andrew Smith 
Faculty of Mathematics, Computing and Technology 
The Open University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
a.smith@open.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— The delivery of group-based remote collaborative 
work in the practice based learning domain of computer 
networking, historically has presented challenges in scale, 
management, security and technological resource to support 
delivery, assessment and learning. In partnership with the 
Packet Tracer development team at Cisco Systems, this 
paper explores the outcomes of a series of class based 
experiments, supporting the research into the development  
of a ‘simulated’ Internet using Packet Tracer. 
Keywords- packet tracer; practice based; collaborative; 
Cisco; virtual labs; Networking Academy; CCNA; Supported 
Open Learning; gaming; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Open University in the United Kingdom has offered 
the Cisco Certified Networking Associate (CCNA) and 
Cisco Certified Networking Professional (CCNP) via 
blended distance learning to over 3000 students since 2005, 
as discussed by Moss and Smith [1]. 
 
Research into the creation of learning solutions for 
students taking the CCNA and CCNP programmes via 
blended distance learning has already taken place with work 
on the NDG [2] system in the management of remote 
tutorials using Skype by Smith and Moss [3] and the 
utilization of the virtual laboratory by the setting of course 
assessment items, Prieto-Blázquez, J. et al. [4]. The 
utilization of the Packet Tracer environment led to the initial 
development of a remote relay server using a one:many 
community of practice, where each participant connected 
their remote simulated network (the client) to a central 
simulated network (the server), as described by Smith and 
Bluck [5]. 
 
A conclusion of the research by Smith and Bluck is that 
there was the potential to develop group-based activities, 
where learners in an online situated learning environment, 
Lave, J. et al [6] could work on a simulated practical to 
create a large infrastructure, based on a set ‘local’ task to 
create a Wide Area Network (WAN) connection with a 
Local Area Network (LAN).  
 
This paper explores how the research was extended into 
classroom-based experiments, how these were designed, the 
rationale for  group selection.  
A. The group-based scenario 
The group-based activity is presented to students in two 
parts. A reflection on previous work accomplished with 
packet tracer was that many students as well as their 
instructors did not as yet understand the full feature and 
function of the inbuilt ‘multiuser’ tool. To overcome this, the 
student group would commence the activity with a formative 
warm-up exercise, where students are paired with the task of 
creating a simple network of two hosts and being able to 
send a ‘virtual’ ping from one Packet Tracer instance to the 
other across the academic network as illustrated in Fig. 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Peered example of Packet Tracer Multi-user communication. 
This short exercise sets the scene and ensures all 
participants are working from the same stand-point in their 
ability to use the software. All of the participants are already 
low-level users of Packet Tracer, by virtue of their 
membership as students of the Cisco Academy programme, 
CCNA discovery and exploration curricula [7], in the 
integrated use of this application in their studies. By 
introducing the participants to the ‘multiuser’ tool, their 
understanding of the additional tools available in Packet 
Tracer is increased. 
 
Following the formative activity, the students participate 
in the large-scale activity to build a large-scale simulated 
WAN, with multiple individual simulated LAN’s inside the 
confines of the typical academic network. Having no 
physical connection or contact with the underlying ‘real’ 
network environment, by virtual of the simulated nature of 
Packet Tracer and its use of the Packet Tracer Messaging 
Protocol (PTMP) [8]. 
 
The structure of the activity is a duplication of the 
experimentation explored in the paper by Smith and Bluck 
[5], with the relay, no longer a remote server, but the 
306
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

teachers computer. This assists the learning process 
experienced by the students and observing instructor, 
discussed by Laurillard [9] as in each session, the teacher’s 
computer is attached to a classroom data projector. Each 
student is able to see their own multiuser connection locally 
as well as their remote connection on the teachers Packet 
Tracer instance. This reinforces the assurance they are 
correctly participating in the practical task and students are 
also successfully building a remote (otherwise normally 
unseen) connection.  
 
The relay instance of Packet Tracer, run a router with a 
series of switches all connected to a core switch (Fig. 2). The 
simulated protocol selected is the Extended Interior Gateway 
Routing Protocol (EIGRP), in technical terms; has a lower 
device configuration overhead. The simulated WAN uses a 
class A, IP address, of 10.x.x.n and each simulated LAN is a 
Class C, with each student having 192.n.x.x. For each 
system, n, is a unique number issued to each participating 
student.  The relay has been designed to cope with 120 
participants, the activity will by virtual of the second class C 
IP address octet support 254 participants. 
 
Figure 2.  Teacher relay-server structure 
Routing protocols as with many network technologies 
can be configured many different ways to achieve the same 
goal. To remove any confounding variance, all students are 
presented with an instruction sheet, with the commands they 
must use, and where they need to be applied. Fig 3, lists the 
routing commands on the teachers relay-server, which all 
students are able to see during the activity. Fig. 4 illustrates 
the routing commands the students have to apply onto their 
own Packet Tracer instances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Teacher relay-server routing commands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Student Packet Tracer instance routing commands 
The students own instance of packet tracer is a self-
constructed system which when assembled should resemble 
the illustration in Fig. 5. The system is deliberately 
simplified to reduce any potential confounding variance, by 
ensuring the students had two specific devices and cable 
types to implement. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Student Packet Tracer instance 
B. Selecting the groups 
The challenge in any activity requiring volunteers is the 
recruitment of the volunteers themselves. In the time span 
since the initial research and paper there have been three 
successful interactive scenarios. The timing of these have 
been principally driven by centre availability and timetabling 
constraints, collaborating teacher availability and ensuring 
the session fits in with the students learning, where the 
activity is in harmony with their studies and their current 
curriculum. 
 
All participating students need to have a minimum of the 
equivalent to Cisco CCNA exploration or discovery first 
course behind them to have a comprehension of the 
networking terminology and technology. 
 
The student age range was kept to a small window, with 
participating students being either second years on a high 
school equivalent technical vocational programme [10] or 
first years on an undergraduate honours degree programme. 
This gave a range of 17-20 years of age with the majority in 
the 18/19 year-old age group. 
 
interface FastEthernet0/0 
no shutdown 
ip address 10.255.255.254 255.0.0.0 
interface FastEthernet0/1 
no shutdown 
ip address 200.200.200.200 255.0.0.0 
router eigrp 123 
network 10.0.0.0 
network 200.200.200.0 
no auto-summary 
 
interface FastEthernet0/0 
no shutdown 
ip address 10.0.0.n 255.0.0.0 
interface FastEthernet0/1 
no shutdown 
ip address 192.n.0.1 255.0.0.0 
router eigrp 123 
network 10.0.0.0 
network 192.n.0.0 
no auto-summary 
307
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

The sessions were in May, November and December 
2010, reflecting the academic calendars of each group and 
availability. The May and November sessions were with two 
groups of 18 and 11, 17-19 year olds at a college of further 
education. The December session was with a group of 30, 
18-20 year-old year one undergraduate students at a London 
University. 
Group selection was based on the class/group available at 
the time suited to the demands of timetable, and availability 
of the willing volunteer teacher and the researcher.  
 
II. 
MANAGING THE ACTIVITIES 
The sessions were scheduled for a three hour ½ day 
block, according to timetabling. The first was a morning 
session 09:00 to 12:30 with break, the second session was 
10:30 to 15:00 with intervening lunch break and the third 
session was a PM session from 14:00 to 17:00 with a short 
break. 
 
Each session used the majority of the time, with an 
average of thirty minutes remaining to enable the students to 
complete an optional challenge activity. 
 
In each session the researcher acted as teacher/facilitator 
whilst the normal session teacher/instructor acted as class-
room assistant and secondary observer. 
 
Each session was facilitated as a in-class teaching 
session, where each of the student participants were aware 
that they were helping to test the multiuser functionality of 
Packet Tracer and get in return additional networking skills 
(learning). 
 
Using a data projector connected to the teacher’s 
computer running the relay instance of packet tracer, 
provided an essential conceptual and visual tool for students 
already discussed by Janitor and Kniewald [11]. Enabling 
them to see how their own LAN and WAN was behaving in 
relation to the greater WAN infrastructure. 
 
Typical of an academic network, each computer running 
had the same hardware specification and operating system 
installation, including local policy constraints and user 
rights, therefore ensuring that each student participating had 
the same technological advantage/disadvantage, as all others 
during the lifecycle of the activity. 
 
The activity was managed in a systematic follow-the-
leader step-by-step format, keeping all students to the same 
position in the process. By having the additional facilitator, 
the students were able to remain engaged and have their 
questions/misunderstandings answered. 
III. 
OBSERVATIONS 
Qualitative feedback was collected from each cohort, the 
intention was to understand their personal viewpoint of their 
experience participating in the sessions as well as 
participating in the activities.  
 
At the end of each session, before departure, the students 
were asked to complete a short anonymous questionnaire, 
with questions listed in Table 1.  
 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONAIRE 
Question 
Number 
Question 
1 
Has this exercise enhanced your practical understanding of 
IP addressing? (Y/N) 
2 
Have you used the Packet Tracer Multiuser tool before this 
session? (Y/N) 
3 
In your own view, has this given you some understanding 
of routing protocols? (Y/N)a 
4 
Would you consider continuing to use Packet Tracer in the 
way demonstrated today? (Y/N) 
a. this was contextualized for some students, describing their use of EIGRP 
The questionnaire results are summarized in Table 2. As 
the groups are small, and the questionnaire short, there are no 
missing responses. The students were able to drop the forms 
into a box on departure. There was no additional personal 
information requested. 
TABLE II.  
QUESTIONAIRE RESULT DATA 
Feedback 
May (18) 
November (11) 
December (30) 
Question 
Number 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
1 
14 
4 
11a 
0 
21 
9 
2 
0 
18 
0 
11 
2 
28 
3 
15 
3 
11 
0 
24 
6 
4 
16 
2 
11 
0 
26 
4 
a. 
this is earlier in the academic year for this cohort 
From the results in Table 2, the dominant feedback 
implies that the students believed that using the simulated 
practical was a personal benefit, where the responses to 
questions one and three indicate a high percentage (Table 3) 
of positive responses to the enquiry. 
TABLE III.  
QUESTIONAIRE RESULT PERCENTAGE 
Feedback as a percentage 
May (18) 
November (11) 
December (30) 
Question 
Number 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
1 
77.7 
22.3 
100 
0 
70 
30 
2 
0 
100 
0 
100 
6.7 
93.3 
3 
83.3 
16.7 
100 
0 
80 
20 
4 
88.8 
11.2 
100 
0 
86.6 
13.4 
 
It is notable that for the November cohort, the groups of 
students were in the early stages of their learning for the 
308
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

academic year, whereas the May and December cohorts were 
either at the end of their respective academic year or 
semester. 
 
Questions two and four explored the student’s experience 
of Packet Tracer. Apart from two outliers (reason unknown), 
question two indicated that the majority had not used the 
multiuser tool beforehand. With Question four, the response 
indicates an interest held by the students to continue using 
the multiuser tool in packet tracer. This may have been 
stimulated by their feelings regarding the preceding session. 
 
In engaging with the practical activities, the students 
could be seen to link constructivist personal concepts as 
described by Piaget [12] and readily connect their own 
private concepts to a visual, simulated physical network 
environment. 
IV. 
NEXT STEPS 
The centres involved are willing to host future sessions, 
inviting the researcher back to continue the same exercise as 
well as different scenarios. 
 
Other centres are interested in participating in the 
research and are willing to engage in the activities described 
in this paper, as well as working towards more complex 
scenarios. The challenge for these centres as for the original 
participants is finding the right group, at the right time in 
their year as well as in the study week. 
 
More complex systems have already been designed, 
where the students will participate in an activity to create a 
relay-mesh, with the students working in a group to build 
one system around a local relay. The local relay will connect 
to a central relay, illustrated in Fig. 6, as a relay-relay. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  A relay-relay model 
Once 
the 
centres, 
the 
students 
and 
also 
the 
teacher/instructors become familiar with the technology and 
the constructivist learning experience, the plan is to move the 
activity to a remote ‘central’ relay server model. This is  
reflective of the work carried out by Smith and Bluck [5] in 
2009 and able to support a larger collaboration of 
participants. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The activities have demonstrated that once the student 
has been given an introduction to the multiuser tool, they are 
able to engage in a structured activity to build a complex 
simulated network environment, reflecting the model of 
situated learning discussed by Lave and Wenger [6].  
 
Formal questionnaire feedback as well as the in class 
anecdotal experience of the researcher, reflects an 
enthusiasm from the learners to continue studies using the 
Packet Tracer application in this mode. 
 
Research discussed in this paper, allied with prior 
research suggests that the structured development of a 
system to create a simulated Internet would provide an 
alternate learning methodology for in class as well as remote 
distance based learners. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author would like to thank Paul Wallin of Kingston 
University (UK) and Ken Lamb, Milton Keynes College 
(UK) and their students for their support, hard work and 
enthusiasm. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Moss, N. and Smith, A. (2010). Large scale delivery of Cisco 
Networking Academy Program by blended distance learning. In: 
ICNS’10 Proceedings of the 2010 6th International Conference on 
Networking and Services, Cancun, Mexico. 
[2] 
NDG: http://www.netdevgroup.com, last accessed 15/03/2011 
[3] 
Smith, A. and Moss, N. (2008). Cisco networking: using Skype and 
Netlab+ for distance practical learning. In: IADIS e-Learning 2008 
conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 22-25 July 2008, 
[4] 
Prieto-Blázquez, J. et al. (2008). An Integrated Structure for a Virtual 
Networking Laboratory. In IEEE transactions on Industrial 
Electronics, Vol 55, no 6, pp 2334-2342   
[5] 
Smith, A. and Bluck, C. (2010). Multiuser Collaborative Practical 
Learning using Packet Tracer. In: ICNS’10 Proceedings of the 2010 
6th International Conference on Networking and Services, Cancun, 
Mexico. 
[6] 
Lave, J. and Wenger E. 1991, Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, p.91 
[7] 
Cisco Networking Academy: http://cisco.netacad.net, last accessed 
15/03/2011 
[8] 
Wang, M. (2008), Packet Tracer 5.0, Packet Tracer Messaging 
Protocol (PTMP), Specifications Document: Cisco Systems 
[9] 
Laurillard, D. (2002) Rethinking University Teaching: a framework 
for the effective use of educational technology (2nd edition) London, 
Routledge Falmer, P154. 
[10] BTEC in Information Technology : 
http://www.edexcel.com/quals/nationals10/it/Pages/default.aspx, last 
accessed 15/03/2011  
[11] Janitor, J and Kniewald, K (2010). Visual Learning Tools for 
Teaching/Learning Computer Networks. In: ICNS’10 Proceedings of 
the 2010 6th International Conference on Networking and Services, 
Cancun, Mexico. 
[12] Piaget, J. (1978). Success and Understanding. London: Routledge & 
Kegan
 
309
ICNS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Networking and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-133-5

