Instantaneous Autonomous Aerial Reconnaissance for Civil Applications 
A UAV based approach to support security and rescue forces 
 
Florian Segor, Axel Bürkle, Matthias Kollmann, Rainer Schönbein 
IAS - Interoperabilität und Assistenzsysteme 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
{florian.segor, axel.buerkle, matthias.kollmann, rainer.schoenbein}@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract - The Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System 
Technologies and Image Exploitation (IOSB) deals with the 
interoperability of stationary and mobile sensors and the 
development of assistance systems, which optimize and 
simplify the operation of such systems. In particular one of the 
focuses is research on swarms with airborne miniature drones 
and their applications. The photo flight presented in this paper 
is one of the applications developed to bring the advantages of 
a swarm into a realistic scenario. With the aim to support 
rescue or security forces in action, the photo flight generates an 
immediate 
up-to-date 
situation 
picture 
by 
using 
an 
autonomous swarm of miniature drones. 
Keywords - aerial situation image, unmanned aerial vehicles, 
swarm, search and rescue  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents our most recent work on a software 
module called “photo flight”, which was developed as part of 
the ground control station AMFIS [1]. AMFIS is a 
component-based modular construction kit currently under 
development as a research prototype. It already has served as 
the basis for developing specific products in the military and 
homeland 
security 
market. 
Applications 
have 
been 
demonstrated in exercises for the EU (PASR 1  program), 
German Armed Forces, and the defense industry. The 
surveillance system AMFIS is an adaptable modular system 
for managing mobile as well as stationary sensors. The main 
task of this ground control station is to work as an ergonomic 
user interface and a data integration hub between multiple 
sensors mounted on light UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles) 
or UGVs (unmanned ground vehicles), stationary platforms 
(network cameras), ad hoc networked sensors, and a 
superordinated control center. 
The photo flight is a special feature of the flight route 
planning in AMFIS that allows the user to generate a highly 
up-to-date aerial picture of a predefined area in a short time. 
The software module itself is designed to work as 
independent standalone software as well as a part of the 
complex control system AMFIS. 
After a short survey of related work an overview of the 
application scenarios is presented, followed by a description 
of the airborne platform in section IV. Section V introduces 
                                                           
1 Preparatory Action for Security Research 
the used algorithms followed by the description of the post 
processing, conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
As far as we know the photo flight is a quite unique 
project. However, there are some projects with a similar 
scope. 
At the “Universität der Bundeswehr” in Munich Dr. P. 
Reidelstuerz is developing a UAV for precision farming [2]. 
It is used to analyze agricultural areas from the air to find the 
regions that need further manuring to optimize the growth of 
the crop. A commercial of the shelf fixed wing model is 
equipped with an autopilot and either a near infrared or a 
high quality camera. With this technique the biomass 
development and the intensity of the photosynthesis of the 
plants can be monitored. 
The AirShield project (Airborne Remote Sensing for 
Hazard Inspection by Network Enabled Lightweight Drones) 
[3][4], which is part of the national security research 
program funded by the German Federal Ministry of 
Education 
and 
Research 
(BMBF), 
focuses 
on 
the 
development of an autonomous swarm of micro UAVs to 
support emergency units and improve the information basis 
in case of huge disasters. The aim is to detect potentially 
leaking CBRNE contaminants in their spatial extent and to 
carry out danger analysis with the help of these data without 
endangering human life. The swarm is supported by a highly 
flexible 
communication 
system, 
which 
allows 
communication between the swarm members and between 
the swarm and the ground station. 
The precision farming project as well as the AirShield 
project are very promising and showed first results. 
However, the application aim of both projects differs from 
ours although we plan to extend the photo flight to scenarios 
similar to the ones of AirShield (see Extensions and Further 
Work). 
III. 
APPLICATION SCENARIOS 
The security feeling of our society has significantly 
changed during the past years. Besides the risks arising from 
natural disasters, there are dangers in connection with 
criminal or terroristic activities, traffic accidents or accidents 
in industrial environments. Especially in the civil domain in 
case of big incidents there is a need for a better data basis to 
72
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
Figure 1. Situation picture from photo flight (ca. 9500 x 9000 pixel) 
 
support the rescue forces in decision making. The search for 
buried people after building collapses or the clarification of 
fires at big factories or chemical plants are possible scenarios 
addressed by our system. 
Many of these events have very similar characteristics. 
They cannot be foreseen in their temporal and local 
occurrence so that situational in situ security or supervision 
systems are not present. The data basis on which decisions 
can be made is rather thin and therefore the present situation 
is very unclear to the rescue forces at the beginning of a 
mission. Exactly in such situations it is extremely important 
to understand the context as fast as possible to initiate the 
suitable measures specifically and efficiently. 
An up-to-date aerial image can be a valuable additional 
piece of information to support the briefing and decision 
making process of the applied forces. However, helicopters 
or supervision airplanes that can supply this information are 
very expensive or even unavailable. Up-to-date high-
resolution pictures from an earth observation satellite would 
provide the best solution in most cases. But under normal 
circumstances these systems will not be available. 
Nevertheless, it would usually take too long till a satellite 
reaches the desired position to provide this information. A 
small, transportable and above all fast and easily deployable 
system that is able to produce similar results is proposed to 
close this gap. 
The AMFIS tool “photo flight” can provide the lacking 
information by creating an overview of the site of the 
incident in a very short time. The application can be used by 
first rescuers for example directly on site with relative ease. 
The results provide a huge enhancement to already available 
information. 
Applications include support of fire-fighting work with a 
conflagration, clarification the debris and the surroundings 
after building collapses, and search for buried or injured 
people. Additionally the system can be used to support the 
documentation and perpetuation of evidence during the 
cleaning out of the scene at regular intervals. 
Non-security related application scenarios are also 
conceivable, as for example the use of infrared cameras to 
search large cornfields for fawns before mowing or to 
document huge cultivated areas or protective areas and 
biotopes. 
The photo flight tool, which was developed from a 
former research project, shows excellent results in the 
production of up-to-date aerial situation pictures in ad hoc 
scenarios. The intuitive and ergonomic graphic user interface 
allows the operator to define an area of interest and start the 
photo flight. The results are a number of images depending 
on the size of the area of interest. They are merged and geo-
referenced by suitable tools. 
Since AMFIS is capable of controlling and coordinating 
multiple drones simultaneously [5] the photo flight tool was 
designed to make use of the advantages and benefits of a 
UAV swarm. By using more than one single UAV, the same 
search area can be covered in less time or respectively a 
bigger area can be searched in the same time. 
The biggest problem when working with multiple UAVs 
is the dwindling clarity for the operator, especially when 
there are different types of UAVs and payloads. The more 
drones used in an application the more complicated the 
control of the single systems gets. That is why it is most 
essential to reduce the working load on the user as much as 
possible. Therefore the idea of a self-organizing swarm is 
transferred to the photo flight application in order to reduce 
the efforts for controlling this tool to a minimum. The user 
only has to define the area of interest and decide, which 
drones he would like to use. 
All additional work as for example the composition of 
the respective flight routes or the control of the single UAVs 
including the observation of the aerial security to avoid 
collisions up to setting the return flight is done by the 
application. 
IV. 
PLATFORM DESCRIPTION 
The primary aim of the photo flight is the clarification of 
certain areas. The used drones do not necessarily have to be 
identical. 
They 
also 
can 
differ in their 
technical 
configurations. Nevertheless, in this first research attempt to 
build a swarm, UAVs of the same type were used. 
A lot of effort has been put into the selection of this flight 
platform. A platform that already comes with a range of 
sensors, an advanced control system and autonomous flight 
features significantly reduces the effort necessary to realize a 
cooperative swarm of micro drones. Furthermore, when it 
comes to flying autonomously, the system has to be highly 
reliable and possess sophisticated safety features in case of 
malfunction or unexpected events. 
Other essential prerequisites are the possibility to add 
new sensors and payloads and the ability to interface with the 
UAV’s control system in order to allow autonomous flight. 
A platform that fulfils these requirements is the quadrocopter 
AR100-B by AirRobot (see Figure. 2). It can be both, 
controlled from the ground control station through a 
73
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

command uplink and by its payload through a serial 
interface. 
  
To form a heterogeneous swarm from different UAVs, 
new systems were gradually integrated. Currently, beside the 
AR100-B there is also a Microdrones MD-400 as well as a 
MikroKopter with eight rotors (MK Okto). The user can 
identify the system by its call sign – the operation of the 
drone, however, remains identical, rendering the complexity 
of the heterogeneity transparent. 
V. 
ALGORITHMS 
To be able to clarify an area of interest by multiple 
drones the polygon defining that area must be divided into 
several subareas, which can then be assigned to the 
individual UAVs. It is important that each of the branches is 
economically optimized for its appropriate drone. UAVs 
with longer endurance or higher sensor payload can clear up 
vaster areas and should therefore receive longer flight plans 
than systems with a lower performance. 
Besides, the flight routes must consider the behavior of 
the drones at the single photo points and their flight 
characteristics. Tests with the multicopter systems have 
shown that an optimum picture result can be achieved if the 
system stops at each photo point for two to four seconds to 
stabilize. Proceeding precisely in such a way, no special 
flight behavior must be considered, because the drones show 
identical flight characteristics in every flight direction due to 
their construction. Indeed, this behavior also decisively 
affects the operation range, because such stops reduce the 
efficiency of the drones. To solve this problem, a stabilized 
camera platform, which compensates the roll, pitch and yaw 
angles, was developed at Fraunhofer IOSB. Nevertheless, if 
the photo points are flown by without a stop, an enlargement 
of the flight radii must be considered at turning points. Since 
in future versions also fixed-wing aircrafts may be used, 
further attention must be paid to the fact that the calculated 
flight paths can also be optimized for systems with different 
flight characteristics. 
The algorithm developed from these demands consists of 
two main steps. The first part is to break down the given 
polygon of the search area in suitable partial polygons (A). 
Then, the optimum flight route per partial polygon is 
searched for each individual drone (B). 
A. Calculation of the partial polygons 
Different attempts for decomposing the whole polygon 
into single sub cells were investigated. 
A nice and elegant method to divide an area into subareas 
is the so-called “Delaunay-Triangulation” [6]. Unfortunately 
it proved to be very difficult to divide a polygon in such a 
way that the resulting partial polygons correspond to a 
certain percentage of the whole area. 
In addition to the basic triangulation the single polygon 
needed to be checked for their neighborhood relations in 
order to compose them accordingly again. The originating 
branches would hardly correspond to the targeted area size 
so that additional procedures would have to be used. 
As an alternative the possibility to divide a polygon by 
using an approximation procedure and surface balance 
calculation to get partial polygons was investigated. With 
this variation the polygon is disassembled first into two 
incomparably large parts by using predefined angles through 
the surface balance point. Besides it is irrelevant whether the 
balance point lies outside or within the body. According to 
the desired size the algorithm can select the bigger or the 
smaller partial polygon as a source area for any further 
decomposition. Afterwards the calculated partial polygon is 
divided again by the surface balance point. This process 
continues recursive until the requested area size is reached. 
On this occasion an approximation procedure could be used 
to calculate a solution as quickly as possible. However, this 
segmentation method only works with convex polygons. For 
concave polygons it is necessary to prevent that the area is 
divided into more than only two parts.  
A quicker and mathematically less complicated variation 
to split a polygon is the scanning procedure (see Figure 3). 
The method is equal to what is called rendering or scan 
conversion in 2D computer graphics and converts the 
polygon into a grid of cells. That implies that a higher 
resolution (i.e. a smaller cell size) will result in a more 
accurate match of the grid with the originally defined area. 
To be able to divide the grid afterwards the number of 
required cells is calculated from the desired area size. With 
this information and by using a suitable growth algorithm, 
which extends from any start cell within the grid as long as 
enough cells have melted, one single continuous area of the 
desired size can be calculated. This technique resembles the 
flood-fill algorithm [7] also known from computer graphics. 
Likewise in this case it is very urgent to know the 
neighborhood relationship of the cells. Nevertheless, this is 
quite simple because in contrast to the same problems with 
 
Figure 3. Scanning procedure 
 
 
Figure 2. Sensor platform AirRobot 100-B 
 
74
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

the triangulation each of these cells is commensurate and is 
therefore easy to assign to the co-ordinate system. 
To receive a very simple and steady grid polygon, 
different growth algorithms were compared to each other. A 
straight growing algorithm turned out to be the most efficient 
because the results showed more straight edges than other 
algorithms. In direct conclusion this means a significant 
reduction of the required rotary and turn maneuvers of the 
UAV, which leads to a better cost-value ratio in case of using 
UAVs with a limited turning rate. The generated grid 
polygons are recalculated into partial polygons just to 
disassemble them once more into a grid. This time the grid 
size corresponds to the calculated dimension of the footprint, 
which depends on the camera specification (focal length and 
picture sensor) in combination with the desired flight altitude 
of the drone. 
B. Calculating the flightpath 
To receive an efficient and economically reasonable 
flight route it is important to find the shortest path that 
includes all way points and that in addition contains the 
smallest possible number in turn maneuvers.  
The best flight path solution can only be calculated by 
using a highly complex algorithm and even than an optimal 
result cannot be achieved in limited time (see the problem of 
the travelling salesman [8]). 
To get acceptable results under the constraint to keep the 
expenditure as low as possible, different variations were 
checked mutually. 
 Because as mentioned earlier a very steady flight route 
with as few as possible direction changes offers big 
economic advantages, a method was developed, which 
processes the polygon according to its expansion in columns 
or line-by-line similar to a type writer. The so calculated 
flight route shows a clearer construction in particular with 
bigger areas.  
Afterwards the calculated flight route is complemented 
with safe approach and departure air corridors to avoid 
collisions between the team members. 
VI. 
POST PROCESSING 
The data accumulated by the drones are post processed 
after the flight to generate an overall result from the single 
images. Two steps of post processing are done: transferring 
the images (A) and the mosaiking and geo-referencing (B). 
A. Transferring the images 
To receive high-quality pictures, high-resolution cameras 
(10-15 megapixels) are used as payloads for the UAVs. In 
order to transmit the originating images to the ground station 
a transport medium must be used that has enough data 
capacity available. The most elegant method to transfer the 
images is to use the downlink of the drone. This assumes that 
the UAV provides an interface, which can be used to feed 
the data into the downlink of the system. If such an interface 
is not available other procedures have to be found. During 
the development of the photo flight, different technologies 
were tested and evaluated. 
To keep the system as simple as possible, the best 
solution would be to select a communication device that has 
a great acceptance and is widely used. Therefore the first 
drafts where done by Wi-Fi. To build such an additional 
communication line between the UAVs and the ground 
station a small secure digital memory card was used. This 
SD card fits perfectly well into the payloads and is able to 
establish a Wi-Fi connection and to transmit the captured 
images automatically. The problem with this solution is that 
in most cases the frequencies for the digital video downlink 
of the drones is in the 2.4 GHz band which is also used by 
Wi-Fi for broadcasting. For this reason it can be assumed 
that at least the Wi-Fi transmission will be disturbed heavily. 
The best solution for this problem is to move either the 
digital video downlink or the Wi-Fi to the 5 GHz band. 
Unfortunately in the current system stage the video downlink 
is fixed and the used Wi-Fi SD card is not capable of using 
the 5 GHz band. 
For now, the images have to be transferred manually to 
the ground station. 
B. Mosaiking and geo-referencing 
To benefit from the advantages of the photo flight in full 
extent, the images taken must be merged to an overall 
situation picture according to the demand and can be brought 
into the correct geographical position.  
For this purpose different tools were compared to each 
other. The application of different freeware products showed 
completely good results but the integration into the overall 
system proved to be difficult. The software ABUL, 
(Automated image exploitation at the example of the UAV 
LUNA), which was also developed at Fraunhofer IOSB 
would be a possible candidate. However, it is on account of 
its application aim a too mighty software, which would need, 
in addition, immense hardware capacities. 
Due to the fact that the geo information system used in 
the photo flight application is based on the software by ESRI 
[9], which also provides different methods for mosaiking and 
geo referencing, this variation was also examined. The first 
results did not show the same quality as previous 
experiments but they are promising. 
 
Figure 4. Calculated flight paths for two UAVs 
75
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

The main problem, which leads to disturbances in the 
final mosaic is, on this occasion, the divergence or 
inaccuracy of the calculated footprints of the sensor payload. 
These calculations are based on the GPS position of the 
drone and the aperture angle of the optic or the size of the 
used sensor. 
To reach more exact values a way must be found to bring 
the calculated positions of the UAVs in consistency with 
their real positions. Because these problems are not trivially 
solvable, another approach could be more promising. Thus it 
is examined at the moment to what extent the calculation of 
the corner co-ordinates of the single images can be improved 
by taking into account certain a priori knowledge and the use 
of various filters. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
The described algorithms were implemented as a 
software library and are integrated into a geographic 
information system based on ESRI software specially 
provided for test purposes. The photo flight tool is an 
independent software module whereas the logic behind it is 
interchangeable and thus can be used in other software 
modules like the situation representation module of AMFIS 
mentioned above. The results of the algorithm and its ability 
to adapt to new flight systems with other flight 
characteristics are currently evaluated. The software was 
integrated into a three-dimensional simulation tool and the 
first real test attempts with homogeneous and also with small 
heterogeneous swarms have taken place. 
This research project resulted in a complex prototype 
system, which is able to form a fully autonomous swarm of 
UAVs on the basis of several drones and a standard PC or 
mobile computer at almost any place in very short time that 
allows acquiring a highly up-to-date aerial image. The 
sustained data can also make it possible to understand 
complex blind scenarios quicker. It permits a more exact 
planning and simplifies the contact with the situation. The 
deployment of a swarm with a theoretical unlimited number 
of UAVs means thereby a huge advancement in the field of 
local just-in-time reconnaissance. 
VIII. EXTENSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
In parallel to the work on the photo flight algorithms a 
small gas sensor, which can also be carried as a payload by 
an UAV was developed in cooperation with an industrial 
partner (see Figure 5).  
The gas sensor is designed as a very light and compact 
payload and has been built as a prototype. It can be equipped 
with up to five different gas sensors and contains, in 
addition, a sensor to detect universal inflammable gases and 
a photoionisation detection sensor. Future versions will also 
be able to detect temperature and humidity. The selection of 
the five gas sensors can be changed to fit different 
applications at any time. A supplementation or a further 
development of the photo flight, in which at least one UAV 
is equipped with a gas sensor, is planned. Because the aim of 
this application differs from the original task - visual 
reconnaissance - above all the geometry of the flight routes 
must be adapted. This can be assumed from the fact that 
either the propagation of the gases or the concentration at 
certain places is of interest. That means that a meandering 
flight path over a relatively small area makes no sense. 
To recognize the propagation of gases certain a priori 
knowledge like origin, wind force and direction is necessary. 
With the help of these data a propagation model can be 
provided as a basis for the calculation of optimum flight 
routes to validate the estimated results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank their colleagues and 
students, who have contributed to the work presented in this 
paper, especially Sven Müller, Steffen Burger and Thorsten 
Ochsenreither. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Leuchter, T. Partmann, L. Berger, E. J. Blum, and R. Schönbein, 
“Karlsruhe Generic Agile Ground Station,“ In: J. Beyerer (ed.), 
Future Security. 2nd Security Research Conference 2007, 12th - 14th 
September 2007, Karlsruhe, Germany. Fraunhofer Defense and 
Security Alliance (pp. 159-162). Karlsruhe, Universitätsverlag. 
[2] Universität 
der 
Bundeswehr 
München, 
Germany, 
http://www.unibw.de/lrt13_2/Forschung/Projekte/UAVPF, 2010 
[3] K. Daniel, B. Dusza, A. Lewandowski, and C. Wietfeld, “AirShield: 
A System-of-Systems MUAV Remote Sensing Architecture for 
Disaster Response”, IEEE International Systems Conference 
(SysCon), Vancouver, 2009 
[4] K. Daniel, B. Dusza, and C. Wietfeld, “Mesh Network for CBRNE 
Reconnaissance with MUAV Swarms”, 4th Conference on Safety and 
Security Systems in Europe, Potsdam, 2009 
[5] A. Bürkle, F. Segor, and M. Kollmann, “Towards Autonomous Micro 
UAV Swarms,” In: Proceeding of the International Symposium on 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Dubai, UAE, 2010. 
[6] B. N. Delaunay, “Sur la sphere vide,” In: Bulletin of Academy of 
Sciences of the USSR 7, Nr. 6, S 793-800, 1934 
[7] D. Hearn and M. P. Baker, “Computer Graphics, C version, 2nd Ed,” 
Prentice Hall, 1997. 
[8] D. L. Applegate, R. E. Bixby, V. Chvátal, and W. J. Cook, “The 
Traveling Salesman Problem. A Computational Study,” Princeton 
University Press, Februar 2007. 
[9] Esri Enterprise, USA, http://www.esri.com, 2010. 
 
 
Figure 5. Gas sensor to detect inflammable gases, Ammonia, Nitrogen 
Dioxide, Sulphur Dioxide, Carbon Monoxide and Chlorine 
76
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

