LonMaps: An Architecture of a Crime and Accident Mapping System
based on News Articles
Hideaki Ito
School of Engineering, Chukyo University
101 Tokodachi, Kaizu-cho, Toyota, Aichi, Japan
Email: itoh@sist.chukyo-u.ac.jp
Abstract—LonMaps is an information system for a crime
and accident mapping system based on news articles, which
enables extraction of certain information items from the
news article. To realize the system, four types of information
items are extracted, which are crimes/accidents (incidents),
places, dates, and personal names. For capturing incidents, a
thesaurus consisting of two types of terms, daily and legal
terms, is used. Daily terms are used in daily life, while
legal terms are used in legal situations. Places, dates, and
personal names are extracted on the basis of typical news
report patterns. Finally, experiments are performed using
LonMaps to evaluate its effectiveness of processing queries
and of extracting information items.
Keywords—crime and accident map; news article; thesaurus;
sentence pattern; extraction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, several types of systems for information pre-
sentation and management have been developed by integrat-
ing maps [6]. When locations play an important role in such
information and are presented on maps, a system that deals
with such information becomes more useful. A collection
of local news about crimes and/or accidents (incidents) is
one such type of content that is published in newspapers. In
order to annotate such news articles, it is required to extract
key items from articles. Key items are elements such as
the types of incidents, places, dates, and personal names.
Extracted items are useful not only for mapping incidents
on maps but also for managing and retrieving news articles.
To integrate local news articles and maps and to manage
news articles, LonMaps (Local News Map System) is being
developed [14]. Maps indicate places where incidents occur.
The system analyzes a single news article to extract infor-
mation items consisting of an incident, a place, a date, and a
personal name. Local news articles have similar structures,
so patterns for representing news are found relatively easily.
News articles are analyzed by such patterns. After the
analysis, the places of incidents are displayed on maps and
their positions on the maps are obtained using geo-coding.
LonMaps is implemented using GoogleMaps [11].
The type of incident is extracted from the news article.
News articles consist of legal terms and daily terms. Legal
terms are used in laws, courts, and police departments, i.e.,
legal situations, while daily terms are used in daily life.
Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the gap between the two
types of terms, and to annotate a news article using legal
terms is needed for preventing ambiguous representation
of incidents. Even if the article is described in only daily
terms, suitable legal terms are captured from them. To
reduce this gap and to correlate the two types of terms,
a thesaurus is constructed. This thesaurus is used not only
for annotating news articles but also for retrieving them.
Several types of location-centered and geographic in-
formation system are being developed with integrated
maps [6]. Ilarriet al. [13] discussed that location-aware
information is useful in our daily life. When a disaster
happens, a crisis map becomes a social tool [10]. Some
systems that indicate crimes on maps are developed and
they are referred to as crime maps [2], [8], [17], [18].
Locations involving local news articles are indicated on
maps available online [1]. A system that allows end users to
note local information on maps has been proposed in [12].
A news article analysis systems have been developed in [9],
[16]. Moreover, information extraction systems have been
developed in [19], [20], where sentence analysis, gram-
matical knowledge, and templates are used. Some systems
extract places from news articles, and they indicates the
extracted places on maps [4], [21].
Many existing thesauri are built depending on the ap-
plication domain. They are utilized for retrieval and an-
notation [3], [5]. The thesaurus of LonMaps is designed
for crimes and accidents, and is used to correlate daily
terms and legal terms collected from actual news articles.
There are some types of links used to connect two terms.
For retrieval and annotation, traversing of the thesaurus is
controlled depending on types of terms and links.
Development of LonMaps is currently underway, and
its overview, the details about the procedures of using the
thesaurus, as well as place and date extraction are discussed
in [14]. This paper shows some considerations about this
system, description of news articles, name extraction pat-
terns, and some experimental results of query processing
and of extracting information items.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
design of components. Some mechanisms using a thesaurus
are shown in Section III. Section IV shows sentence pat-
terns for extracting information items. Some experimental
results are shown in Section V. Finally, conclusion and
future work are described in Section VI.
II. AN OVERVIEW OF LONMAPS
A. Design of LonMaps
When a news article is read, it is well-known that the
‘5W1H’ (what, when, where, who, why, and how) of an
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

retrieval mechanism
period
region
crimes 
accident
text 
matching
retrieval result
map
thesaurus
news database
metadata 
news article
geo-coding 
what
where
when
who
news article
newspaper
extraction mechanism
editor
Figure 1.
An overview of LonMaps.
<articles> 
<article id>  ; news id 
 
<issue year month day />   ; issued date 
<happen year month day /> ; occurrence date 
<newspaper which> </newspaper> 
 
of morning or evening editions of the newspaper. The value is the name of a 
          newspaper.  
<accident> ; annotation by incidents.
 
<man-assigned> </man-assigned>  ; man assigned 
incident list, if required. 
  
<captured> </captured> ; a list of captured incidents in 
terms of legal terms. 
</accident> 
<address lng lat> </address> ; 
 
 respectively.  The value is the places of an address 
          and/or location . 
  
<headline> </headline> ;  the headline of a news article. 
<text> </text> ; the body of a news article. 
</article> 
         ... 
</articles>
Figure 2.
A structure of a news article in XML.
incident are key items [15], [21]. We deal with four of
these when using LonMaps: ‘4W’ (what, when, where, and
who).
The requirements of the system are as follows: (1)
extraction of places where incidents occurred and indication
of places on maps, (2) annotation of news articles in legal
terms, and (3) clariﬁcation of the relationships between
daily terms and legal terms using a thesaurus that consists
of these two types of terms.
The features of the system are as follows:
• Four information items are captured from a news
article: incidents, places, occurrence dates, and per-
sons. These items are captured using the thesaurus
and patterns that are deﬁned by us. The dates, the
places, and personal names are captured on the basis
of patterns of the sentences. In many news articles,
conventional patterns are typically used to describe the
article.
• The thesaurus is provided for determining the rela-
tionship between legal terms and daily terms. This
thesaurus includes not only terms representing inci-
dents but also terms directly and/or indirectly related
to incidents.
The thesaurus of the system is used to reduce the gap be-
tween daily terms and legal terms. For example, in retrieval
of news articles, when a user speciﬁes a query in terms
that are a conventional representation of crimes or a usual
representation of incidents, i.e., daily terms, some news
articles cannot be retrieved, because they do not include
recognizable daily terms. Daily terms are not always used
for representing incidents, so legal terms may be required
to retrieve the news article. In addition, it is necessary to
annotate news articles in legal terms to describe incidents
through formal and uniform representations. Since a news
article may not include any legal terms, it is necessary to
ﬁnd suitable legal terms from a collection of daily terms
that appear in the article.
Figure 1 shows the overview the architecture of Lon-
Maps. The system consists of a retrieval mechanism, an
extraction mechanism, an editor, and a news database. The
retrieval mechanism retrieves news articles. The extraction
mechanism analyzes news articles. Moreover, an editor is
used to edit a news database, e.g., deﬁning a news article
and modifying elements of news articles. The extraction
mechanism is a main component of this editor.
B. Description of News Articles
A news database is a collection of news articles de-
scribed in XML. Figure 2 shows tags for describing a
news article. In this description, metadata of the news
article are included. The metadata include elements such
as publication date and the newspaper name. An entire
set of news articles is indicated by <articles>. Each
news article is indicated by <article>. The id at-
tribute is an article identiﬁer. <newspaper> indicates
the name of a published newspaper. <issue> speciﬁes
a publication date. <happen> speciﬁes a date when
an incident occurred. <accident> speciﬁes a type of
incident. <man-assigned> denotes a list of incidents
assigned by a person. <captured> is a list of incidents
captured by the system. <address> speciﬁes a place,
and its longitude and latitude are obtained using geo-
coding provided by GoogleMaps. <headline> speciﬁes
the headline. <text> speciﬁes the main text. The system
tries to capture the values of <happen>, <incident>,
and <address>.
C. Description of Queries
Three types of queries are available in LonMaps: a
keyword query, a time period query, and a region query.
Figure 3 shows the structure of a screen for specifying
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

keyword search
region search
time period search
using a thesaurus
exact matching
query term
published date
occurrence date
specification of a region / execution
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Figure 3.
Structure of a screen for specifying a query in LonMaps.
queries. The ﬁrst part of Figure 3 is a map. The second
part is for a keyword query and a form to input query
terms. If an expansion using the thesaurus is selected, given
terms are expanded. Otherwise, when terms are given, exact
matching is applied. A query is speciﬁed in query terms and
logical connectives, i.e., and, or, and not. The third part of
the screen is for a region query. A region is speciﬁed ﬁrst,
and then news articles within a speciﬁed region are sought.
The fourth part is for a time period query. The occurrence
date and/or a published date are speciﬁed as the query.
After queries are speciﬁed, retrieval results are obtained.
The retrieval mechanism shows the results on the map.
Although markers are not shown in Figure 3, the retrieved
articles are indicated by markers.
III. UTILIZATION OF THE THESAURUS
A. Structure of the Thesaurus
Daily terms are usually used and easy to understand in
daily life, while legal terms are deﬁned explicitly. To re-
trieve and annotate news articles, it is necessary to correlate
these two types of terms. The thesaurus is constructed from
a collection of news articles and the Japanese compendium
of laws, whose conceptual structure is shown in Figure 4.
There are two types of legal terms. One is the formal names
of laws. Laws are deﬁned in a hierarchical structure. The
other is the legal representation of particular crimes and
accidents. In contrast, daily terms are informal names for
incidents, relevant terms, verbs, and conjugations. Relevant
terms do not directly represent incidents but frequently co-
occur with other daily terms. Moreover, the original form
of a verb and its conjugations are considered daily terms.
Four types of links are deﬁned: “is-a”, “general-term”,
“associated-with”, and “conjugation-form”. Two legal terms
are connected by “is-a”. A collection of legal terms is
organized into a hierarchical structure. Two related terms
are connected by the “associated-with” link to each other.
This link is used for connecting not only two daily terms
but also a daily term and a legal term. A verb and its con-
jugations are connected by “conjugation-form.” Moreover,
if an inverse link of a link is required, it is set explicitly.
Furthermore, “general-term” and “associated-with” are used
for connecting legal terms and daily terms. The former is
used for converting the legal term to corresponding daily
terms. The latter connects two terms that often co-occur
and are strongly associated with each other.
A part of the thesaurus is shown in Figure 5. Its root
is the node “root”. At the second level, the root node has
two children: “law” for deﬁning laws and “accident” for
deﬁning accidents.
B. Query Processing using the Thesaurus
When a term deﬁned in the thesaurus is given as a query
term, the given term is expanded by traversing connected
links from the given term to others in turn. When a given
term is the name of a law, at ﬁrst, descendants of the given
term are obtained by following “is-a” links recursively.
Next, by following “general-term” links connecting legal
terms, daily terms are obtained. Finally, relevant terms
and conjugations are obtained by “associated-with” and
“conjugation-form” links. A set of these obtained terms is
treated as the response to the query terms.
When a daily term is given as a query term, a legal term
corresponding to the given term is ﬁrst obtained. Next, the
terms that are connected to the given term by “associated-
with” and “conjugation-form” links are obtained. For each
obtained daily term, the procedure for processing a daily
term is then applied recursively.
C. Annotation using the Thesaurus
To ﬁnd an incident of a news article, it is examined
whether terms deﬁned in the thesaurus appear, or not.
Consequently, some daily terms are founded. Legal terms
related to these daily terms are sought. For example, assume
a daily term appearing in a news article, as shown in
Figure 6. The related legal terms are captured by the
inverse link of “general-term”. Moreover, certain terms
connected to the given term with “associated-with” links
are also captured. Consequently, legal terms are selected as
candidate terms for annotation.
In this example, some candidate legal terms are found.
If a term is positioned lower than others in the hierarchical
structure of the thesaurus, the term is considered as an
incident, since a lower term tends to represent a speciﬁc
incident more precisely than higher terms. For example,
assume “murder” and “robbery” are obtained from the
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

is-a
daily terms
associated-with
relevant term
conjugation
hierarchical structure 
(verb)
more details of a 
law of upper 
positioned law
legal 
representations 
of 
crimes/accidents
names of 
crimes/accidents
general-term
root of laws
relevant term
associated-with
accident
concrete 
accident
conjugation-form
relevant term
legal terms
Figure 4.
Components of the thesaurus.
root
crime to interfere 
with the execution 
of government 
affairs
interference with a 
government official 
in the execution of 
his duties
interfere with 
forcible execution
questioning
crime of theft and 
robbery
theft
snatching
snatch
snatched
shoplifting
luggage thief
steal
stole
stealing
accident
car accident
road traffic act
drink-driving
drunk driving
drinking
case 
a name of a law
legal representation
general 
representation
related terms
conjugation-form
is-a
is-a
general-term
associated-with
conjugation-form
law
is-a
general-term
associated-with
conjugation-form
robbery
murder
injury
robbery-and-murder
robbery-injury
(*)
Figure 5.
A part of the thesaurus.
original news article. The annotation mechanism tries to
ﬁnd more speciﬁc terms. Then, “robbery-and-murder” is
selected rather than both “murder” and “robbery”, as shown
in the part of the thesaurus marked by “(*)” in Figure 5.
More details of the procedures used for traversing the
thesaurus are described in [14].
IV. EXTRACTION OF INFORMATION ITEMS
A. Extraction of Places
To extract places where an incident occurred, the fol-
lowing procedures are applied: (1) a part of a sentence
that includes a place is extracted using sentence patterns,
(2) area names are extracted by applying morphological
analysis to the part of the extracted sentence, (3) when
certain area names are omitted, they are complemented, and
ﬁnally, (4) resolution of anaphora references is applied.
The patterns are shown in Figure 7. These patterns con-
sist of three parts. The ﬁrst part is a term representing a time
period, the second a place, and the third a postpositional
particle in Japanese. Here, words are separated by spaces
in English but not in Japanese. For example, let a sentence
including the place be “14 日午前 4 時 ごろ、名古屋市熱田
区 1 番 3 の市道交差点 で(at the municipal road crossing in
3, Ichiban, Atsuta, Nagoya around 4 a.m. in the morning on
the 14th)”. The string between ごろ、(around) and で (at)
is extracted. ChaSen [7], the morphological analysis system
for Japanese is applied to the string for obtaining nouns
included in this string. ChaSen divides a string into words
by ﬁlling spaces between words, and searches for nouns.
Some nouns from the beginning of this are obtained, as long
as possible. The identiﬁed nouns are then concatenated. The
resulting sequence is seemed as a place. For example, “名
古屋市熱田区 1 番 3” is extracted. Then, the complement
of omitted area names and anaphora resolution are applied,
if needed.
B. Extraction of Dates
Analogous to extraction of a place, extraction of an
occurrence date is achieved on the basis of patterns and
the published day. Figure 8 shows patterns for describing
an occurrence date. First, a sequence of numbers and “日
(day)” are found．A modiﬁer for representing time appears
in the same sentence, e.g.,“午前 (in the morning)”. For
example, let “14 日午前 (in the morning on the 14th)”
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

legal terms
is-a
general-term
associated-with
associated-with
daily terms
given term
captured term
Figure 6.
An annotation procedure when a daily term appears in an
article.
from
of
description of a place 
/ an address
about, around
end
past
beginning of the month
middle of the month
end of the month
over
time period 
postpositional particle 
 of Japanese
gray of morning
at
Figure 7.
Patterns for extracting an occurrence place.
number  day
morning
afternoon
gray of morning
Figure 8.
Patterns for extracting an occurrence date.
appear. The number 14 is extracted as an occurrence day.
A month and a year are omitted in many cases. They are
complemented on the basis of the published date of the
news article, since the month of the occurrence day and
the month of the published day are usually the same. The
candidate day of the occurrence date and the published day
of a published date are compared. If the candidate day is
less than the published day, the month of the occurrence
date and the month of the published date are the same. If the
candidate day is greater than the published day, the month
of the occurrence date is determined as the last month of
the month of the published date in many cases.
C. Extraction of Personal Names
Personal names appear in a news article as victims,
suspects, and other parties. Although such personal names
are important in news, it is considered that presenting
personal names in older news articles is unimportant over
the long term. So, the system does not print personal names.
To achieve this, personal names are extracted using patterns.
Figure 9 shows patterns that describe names of a suspect
and/or a victim associated with crimes. Here, word order is
different in English and Japanese. A personal name is a full
name when the name is presented the ﬁrst time. The full
name is a sequence of his/her last name and ﬁrst name in
Japanese. A suspect and a victim are distinguished by the
modiﬁers used with the names. Modiﬁers for a suspect and
for a victim are, for example, ‘suspect’ and ‘title’, respec-
tively. In Figure 9, path (a) is the most popular pattern. The
sequence of this pattern is ‘occupation’, ‘name’, ‘modiﬁer
(suspect or title)’ and ‘(age)’. In (b), a comma between an
occupation and a name is noted. In (c), a case particle is
used. In (d), an address is shown. In cases where a name
TABLE I PRECISION OF QUERY PROCESSING USING A THESAURUS.
precision
legal terms for crime names
0.92
daily terms for crime names
0.48
verbs in daily terms
0.84
nouns in daily terms
0.55
appears several times, the full name is omitted, afterwards.
A personal name is referred by the last name and his/her
modiﬁer. Then, such references are treated as unprintable
words. Moreover, as for occupation, some representations
such as a worker, an ofﬁce worker, or a therapist, are used.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Query processing with the thesaurus was examined. As a
query term, four types of terms were used: legal terms for
crime names, daily terms for crime names, verbs in daily
terms, and nouns in daily terms. Precision of their retrieval
results were measured, as shown in Table I. The precision
for legal terms representing crimes were better than the
precision for other types of terms, since the information
needs representing crimes in legal terms were more precise.
The precision for verbs was better than the precision for
nouns and crimes in daily terms. It appears that verbs were
related to crimes more directly than nouns. Precision was
worse for nouns in daily terms and crimes represented in
daily terms. These terms were ambiguous and were not
directly related to precise crimes. Recalls were high because
the thesaurus was used to expand a given query term and
many related terms were obtained.
Next, validation of annotation was measured. The results
are shown in Table II. About one hundred news articles
were examined for annotation. The average number of
legal terms obtained using the thesaurus was 4.5 for one
article. Among these terms, 2.8 suitable legal terms were
included. The ratio of suitable terms to obtained terms was
0.21. This ratio was computed as (the number of common
terms assigned by a person and by the system)/(the number
of legal terms captured by the system). Person assigned
terms included both legal and daily terms. Moreover, the
ratio of suitable legal terms among obtained legal terms
was computed to be 0.78. This was computed as (the
number suitable legal terms captured)/(the number of legal
terms captured). As described above, news articles were
annotated by a person before extraction of legal terms using
the system. Then terms that represented concrete incidents
and appeared frequently in news articles were selected for
annotation in many cases. It was difﬁcult to annotate in
legal terms since daily terms need to be converted to legal
terms. The results of these two annotation experiments by
a person and by the system indicate that annotation often
involved daily terms when done by a person, whereas by the
system, suitable legal terms were found from daily terms
using the thesaurus.
The validity of places obtained from the appearance of
written words was evaluated. Places where an incident
occurred were extracted using description patterns, and
places were obtained by reading a news article. When the
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

occupation
case particle
address 
first name
last name
suspect
title
age
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
full name
modification
Figure 9.
Patterns for extracting a personal name.
TABLE II VALIDITY OF ANNOTATION.
mean value of the number of captured legal terms
4.5
mean value of valid number of legal terms
2.8
ratio of suitable terms among captured terms
0.21
ratio of valid legal terms
0.78
TABLE III VALIDITY OF OCCURRENCE PLACE EXTRACTION.
validity
pattern matching and concatenating nouns
0.78
pattern matching, ChaSen, complementing place names
and anaphora reference resolution
0.91
place extracted by the system was the same as that extracted
by a person, the system’s response was assumed as correct.
The validity is computed as (the number of news articles
where the places are captured correctly)/(the number of
treated news articles). The result of this experiment is
shown in Table III. The validity of extracted place was 0.78
when only patterns were used. By applying morphological
analysis, omission complement, and anaphora resolution,
the validity improved to 0.91.
Personal name extraction was also examined. In our
experiment, about 96% of appearances of personal names
were covered by described patterns. When a personal name
represented in a full name was obtained, the personal name
described by only her/his last name was captured. However,
there were cases where several names of suspects appeared
in one sentence. LonMaps does not currently have the
capability to classify such patterns.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
LonMaps is being developed as the ﬁrst step toward
building local news maps. This system provides mech-
anisms for retrieval of news articles and extraction of
information items from them using a thesaurus and sentence
patterns.
There are many cases that do not specify speciﬁc places
in a news article. A place is speciﬁed as a division or an
area of a town in many cases and this presents a problem
in how to display a general area within a town. Moreover,
the system captures incidents and retrieves articles on the
basis of the thesaurus. When the thesaurus is used, the
plausibility of relationships between terms is not intro-
duced. When queries are processed and when incidents
are extracted, the relationships between terms are treated
as strict relationships. However, it is necessary to reﬂect
plausibility of such relationships for introducing certainty
of obtained news articles in retrieval and obtained terms in
annotation.
REFERENCES
[1] 47NEWS, http://www.47news.jp/, 12, 2013.
[2] Aichi Prefectural Police Department: http://www.pref.aichi.jp/police/
gaitou/map/index.html, 12, 2013.
[3] J. Bhogal, A. Macfarlan, and P. Smith, “A Review of Ontology based
Query”, Information Processing and Management, Vol.43, pp. 866-
886, 2007.
[4] D.
Buscaldi,
B.
Magnini,
“Grounding
Toponyms
in
an
Ital-
ian Local News Corpus”, Proc. GIR, Article No. 15, 2010,
doi:10.1145/1722080.1722099.
[5] C. Carpineto, G. Romano, “A Survey of Automatic Query Expansion
in Information Retrieval”, ACM Computing Survey, Vol. 44, No, 1,
Article No. 1, 2012, doi:10.1145/2071389.2071390.
[6] K. Chang, Introduction to Geographic Information Systems, McGraw-
Hill, 2010.
[7] ChaSen, NAIST Computational Linguistics Lab, http://chasen-legacy.
sourceforge.jp/, 12, 2013.
[8] CrimeReports, http://www.crimereports.com/, 12, 2013.
[9] T. Furugori, R. Lin, T. Ito, and D. Han, “Information Extraction and
Summarization for Newspaper Articles on Sasso-Jiken”, IEICE Tran.
Inf. & Syst., Vol. E86-D, No.9, pp. 1728-1735 2003.
[10] R.
Goolsby,
“Social
Media
as
Crisis
Platform:
The
Future
of Community Maps/Crisis Maps”, ACM Tran. on Intelligent
Systems
and
Technology,
Vol.1,
No.1,
Article
No.
7,
2010,
doi:10.1145/1858948.1858955.
[11] Google, http://www.google.co.jp/maps. 12, 2013.
[12] M. Haklay and P. Weber, “OpenStreetMap: User-Generated Street
Maps”, IEEE Pervasive Computing, pp. 12-18, Oct.-Dec., 2008.
[13] S. Ilarri, E. Mena, and A. Illarramendi, “Location-dependant
Query Processing: Where We Are and Where We Are Heading”,
ACM Computing Serveys, Vol.42, No.3, Article No. 12, 2010,
doi:10.1145/1670679.1670682.
[14] H. Ito, “An Overview of a News Map System for Local News in
Newspapers”, Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications,
Vol. 243, pp.1031 - 1040, 2012．
[15] Z. Li, M. Wang, J. Liu, C. Xu, and H. Lu, “News Contextualization
with Geographic and Visual Information”, Proc. MM, pp. 133-142,
2011.
[16] A. Mehler, Y. Bao, X. Li, Y. Wang, and S. Skiena, “Spatial Anal-
ysis of News Sources”, IEEE Tran. on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, Vol.12, No.5, pp. 765-772, 2006.
[17] Metropolitan Police Department, http://www.keishicho.metro.tokyo.
jp/toukei. 12, 2013.
[18] R. Paynich and B. Hill, Fundamentals of Crime Mapping, Jones and
Bartlett Publishers, 2010.
[19] S. Sarawagi, “Information Extraction”, Foundations and Trends? in
Databases, Vol.1, No.3, pp 261-377, 2007.
[20] J. Str¨otgen, M. Gertz, and P. Popov, “Extraction and Exploration of
Spatio-Temporal Information in Documents”, Proc. GIR, Article No.
16, 2010, doi:10.1145/1722080.1722101.
[21] B. Teitler, M. D. Lieberman, D. Panozzo, J. Sankaranarayanan, H.
Samet, and J. Sperling, “NewsStand: A New View on News”, Proc.
ACM GIS, Article No. 18, 2008, doi:10.1145/1463434.1463458.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

