Smart Metering based on Wireless Networks for Improved  
Water Management 
 
 
Ho-Hyun Lee, Sung-Taek Hong, Gang-Wook Shin 
K-water Research Institute, K-water(Korea Water Resources Corporation), Daejeon, South Korea,  
dlghgus@gmail.com, sthong@kwater.or.kr, gwshin@kwater.or.kr 
 
Abstract— In the field of water resources management, the 
application of Smart Water Grids (hereafter SWG) has rapidly 
gained traction as a popular method for achieving stable water 
supplies and minimizing the wasting of water. However, unlike 
the smart grids that have been applied to electricity and gas 
sectors, Smart Water Grids are more complicated due to the 
fact that water meters are typically installed under the ground 
making power supply and data transmission more difficult. 
This study takes full advantage of analog meters by using 
L(inductor)/C(Capacitor) sensors in the water meter counters 
for the purpose of developing various wireless communication 
methods in order to find an optimal transmission method. 
Wireless communication systems were examined according to 
their specific frequency environmental conditions to optimize 
the pipeline network operation and management. 
Keywords - Smart Meter; Smart Water Grid; Wireless 
Communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart grid technologies are being studied actively for the 
efficient production and supply of energy against climate 
change and large-scale power shutdown [1-2]. In the field of 
water resource management, the popularity of smart 
metering systems is increasing based on their abilities to 
obtain water usage data in real time which are needed to 
ensure a stable water supply, reduce water treatment costs, 
and meet unexpected water demand increases.  
The price of tap water is very low compared to the cost 
of electricity and gas in Korea, and the cost of installing 
mechanical water meters is relatively cheap. On the other 
hand, the use of mechanical type meters presents many 
challenges in terms of implementing real-time data 
transmission for smart metering. In addition, smart metering 
systems do not work well due to the additional constraints of 
difficult installation conditions which are much different 
from the electricity and gas sector [3-4]. 
In Korea, pipeline networks are mostly installed with the 
meters but they are very slowly developed. There is still 
work to be done so these networks become efficient and to 
the point where they can ensure the safety of water quality 
and the consistency of water pressure and structural integrity. 
Technical approaches, such as monitoring and sensor 
technologies and optimization techniques, are needed in 
order to overcome the weak points [5]. 
The concepts and technologies applied to achieve 
intelligent water distribution systems have sparked a global 
movement to maximize the efficiency and to optimize the 
operation of water distribution networks. Various systems 
are being developed by combining a variety of technologies 
like water quality and quantity sensors and pipeline network 
software. To achieve a sophisticated and intelligent operation 
and management distribution network, the most important 
priorities are real-time leak detection and water quality 
monitoring in cases of emergencies. Thus, the development 
of new types of meters, sensors and integrated operation 
systems should be developed using cutting edge information 
and communication technologies. 
II. 
DEVELOPMENT OF SMART METERS 
A device used in each home’s water meter diameter 
50mm or less can be classified into direct and indirect 
measurement. The indirect method depends on the rotation 
speed of the actual flow and the direct method measures the 
constant volume of water, which is used primarily for testing.  
Half-electronic meters have the mechanical type of 
sensing and transmission to convert electrical signals, but do 
not have any internal microprocessors. There are two kinds 
of mechanical types of water meters. One of them is the 
pulse counting method which uses a lead switch and the 
other is the camera method which takes and sends photos, 
which through image processing, can be analyzed. A digital 
device should be equipped with a microprocessor in order to 
transmit real-time data.  
An electronic water meter consists of sensors and 
additional indicators for flow measurement. The meter has a 
microprocessor which allows for internal data processing and 
storage by detecting electronic signals and displaying them 
in numerical values. A variety of electronic meters have been 
developed using lead switches, hall sensors, and magnetic 
sensors worldwide [6]. 
Electronic meters, in general, still have some limitations. 
For example, they are relatively expensive, frequently 
damaged, and their use might not be extended nationwide. 
Therefore, a half-electronic meter is considered as an 
alternative, which can use the robustness and cheap cost of 
the mechanical meter by adding a sensing unit. In addition, 
while preserving the advantages of an analog meter, it could 
transfer the data from three kinds of wireless transmitters, 
which are as follows: 424MHz Single, 424MHz Multi, and 
2.4GHz ZigBee transmitter. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
A. Development and Performance Test of Flow Meters 
Performance analyses for water meters were carried out 
empirically, and their impellers, upper plates and lower 
plates, nozzles and adjustment screws were the decisive 
factors for determining performance [7]. In case of 
calculating hourly flow from the meters to check their 
accuracy, the following equation should be applied to 
multiple their diameter and velocity. 


where,  Q : flow(m3 / h),           A : pipe unit area(m2) 
             V: Velocity(m / s),      D: pipe diameter(m) 
 
In case of the mechanical water meter, hourly flow was 
not used, but the integral flow was used instead in order to 
check the rotation of the impeller. Its equation is as shown in 
(2).  


where,  Q : integral flow(m3), 
          k : criteria constant(rpm / m3) 
              N: rotation speed of impeller 
 
 In this study, the final mold of the water meter was 
determined through 12 experiments to investigate the effects 
of measurement accuracy by each factor or combination of 
factors with each other. Finally, the mold for the water meter 
was completed like in Fig. 1. 
 
  
 
(a) Final Mold 
(b) Water Meter 
Figure 1.  Overview of the Water Meter 
The developed meter should transfer its data to a main 
receiving center through wireless communication. Fig. 2 
shows that a sensing and communication module can be 
added to the water meter for transmission. The module can 
be used only as a mechanical meter as shown in the left 
figure, but if necessary, the special module can be added to 
transmit the sensed data by wireless communication as 
shown in the right of Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Configuration of Smart Meter 
The sensing part of the meter adopts a L/C sensor in 
order to receive the data from the mechanical water meter on 
the bottom. Fig. 3 shows the configuration of the sensing coil 
and rotating plate. The L/C sensor is divided into two parts, 
which are metallic and non-metallic, to sense the variation of 
waves being rotated by the mechanical meter. Variations can 
finally be easily digitized and sent to remote sites.  
 
Figure 3.  Configuration of Sensing Coil and Rotation Plate 
The L/C sensor signal gives two data, as shown in Fig. 4. 
In case that the sensed level is lower than Vref(Reference 
Voltage), it emits a signal value of zero which means it is 
going through a reflection panel. In case of a higher level 
than the reference voltage, it emits a signal value of one 
which means it is going through a non-reflector. Signal 1 has 
more voltage compared to the others owing to not having a 
reflection plate. Even though signals 2 and 3 have the same 
conditions as having a reflection plate, they have different 
attenuations which can be caused by their distance, size and 
material. Thus, signal 2 in the middle of the figure shows it 
senses one even in a reflection plate. To prevent this 
situation, the reference voltage has been designed to 
automatically change in order to compensate the error by the 
distance between the L/C sensor and reflection plate. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 4.  Sensor Signal from L/C sensor 
B. Development and Performance Test of the Transmitter 
In this study, three kinds of wireless communication 
methods, 400 MHz single-band, 400 MHz multi-Band, 2.4 
GHz 
ZigBee 
were 
selected 
to 
find 
the 
optimal 
communication method by analyzing the communication 
characteristics of difficult water meter installation sites. 
400 MHz Single-band adopts the module with a central 
frequency of 424.750 MHz and 2 level FSK modulation as 
shown in Table 1. In addition, 400 MHz Multi-Band applies 
the frequency range of 424.700 MHz ~ 424.950 MHz and 
channel spacing is 8.5 KHz, resulting in a module which has 
20 channels. 2.4 GHz band ZigBee adopts the IEEE 802.12.3 
standard module with O-QPSK modulation scheme and data 
rate of 250 KBPS, as shown in Table I [8]. 
At first, these three kinds of wireless modules, two 400 
MHz band and one 2.4GHz band, are designed and 
manufactured through laboratory tests in order to guarantee 
stable transmission. Personal Data Assistant (PDA) was also 
developed with a specific inside module to receive 
transmitted data from the three modules for field testing. The 
PDA also has a special software program for monitoring data 
and analyzing communication environment from water 
meters, which makes it possible to conduct field tests with 
mobility and convenience. 
The software, based on Win CE, has been designed to 
allow for selective input data such as weather, distance, 
location and cover type. Inputted and measured data are 
saved in the database to transfer to an analytic computer 
program, by which we can know the best results among the 
three modules. In Fig. 5, an image of the PDA screen shows 
the test program to input measuring conditions and calculate 
its transmission results. The image on the left side in Fig. 5 
shows the parameter setting screen such as weather, position, 
distance, casing, and test number to do performance test. The 
image on the right side shows the results of a ping test. These 
tested data were accumulated in the database in order to 
analyze them. 
 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION 
Type 
Item 
Specification 
400 MHz 
 Single 
-band 
Front-End 
Central Freq. 
424.750 MHz 
Freq. Deviation 
2.5 KHz 
Modulation 
2 Level FSK 
Output 
Less than 10 mW  
Sensitivity 
-115 dBm 
ANT.  Gain  
Less than 2.3 dBi 
Comm. 
Method  
Front-End 
PWM 
Ext. I/F 
UART 9600 BPS 
400 MHz 
 Multi 
-band 
Front-End 
Freq. Range 
424.700 MHz∼ 
424.950 MHz 
Freq. Deviation 
2.5 KHz 
Modulation 
2 Level FSK 
CH. Interval 
8.5 KHz 
CH. Number 
20 Ch 
Output 
Less than 10 mW  
Sensitivity 
-115 dBm 
ANT. Gain 
Less than 2.3 dBi 
Comm. 
Method  
Front-End 
Manchester 
Ext. I/F 
UART 9600 BPS 
2.4 GHz 
ZigBee 
Front-End 
Freq. Range 
2.4 GHz ∼ 2.483 
GHz 
Modulation 
O-QPSK 
Data Rate 
250 KBps 
Channel Num. 
11 Ch ∼ 26 Ch 
Output 
Less than 10 mW  
Sensitivity 
-85 dBm 
Comm. 
Method 
Front-End 
SPI 
Ext. I/F 
UAT 115 KBPS 
 
    
 
Figure 5.  Operation Display of the PDA Program 
Because the industrial PDA was designed for a low 
powered wireless communications (424MHz, 2.4GHz) 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

module to receive data from smart meters, it was very easy 
to test the three kinds of developed modules by changing 
real distances, lab and open space environments, and then, 
field tests were carried out after each RF module was set to 
have the same performance. Table II shows each module’s 
electric field strength and communication length using a 
spectrum analyzer. 
TABLE II.  ELECTRIC FIELD STRENGTH AND LINE OF SIGHT   
RF Module 
Electric Field Strength 
Distance 
Remark 
2.4 GHz Zigbee 
-21.94 dBm 
640 m 
Height : 
2 m 
424 MHz Single 
-22.10 dBm 
630 m 
424 MHz Multi 
-22.06 dBm 
630 m 
 
Most of the water meter covers are made of polyethylene, 
galvanic, or iron casing, as shown in Fig. 6. Each case has its 
own propagation characteristics. They were examined by 
conducting field tests.  
 
       
        
 
(a) PE Case              (b) Galvanic Case         (c) Iron Case 
Figure 6.  Cover Types for Water Meters 
Fig. 7 shows the four installation sites in Gwang-Ju City, 
Kyeung-gi Province, South Korea. Each section has its own 
unique characteristics such as congestion, located in quite 
areas, or being nearby to main roads. Performance testing 
was done after installation of the three kinds of RF modules 
at 40 points and selecting the possible direction among the 
front, side and rear position. 
 
Figure 7.  Testbed for Performace Test 
Data and field work photos was collected into the 
database server to analyze the performance, as shown in Fig. 
8. The database was constructed using a web program for 
the purpose of making accessibility easy for authorized 
persons when onsite.  
 
 
(a) Analysis of Distance 
(b) Characteristics 
 
 
Figure 8.  Analyzing Program for the Smart Meter 
Performance results by distance and direction are shown 
in Fig. 9. The figure on the left side had no differences in 
terms of distance and direction. But the images in the 
middle and on the right side had the worse success rates in 
rear areas. This was because the water meters were installed 
in blind spots owing to building structures and relatively 
poor propagation environments.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Result of Performace Test by distance and direction 
A transmission distance comparison is shown in Fig 10, 
in which the success rate decreased as the distance became 
farther. But the success rate suddenly increased at 90m, 
which was caused by as small portion of data, 10 among 
700 data. Most of the data at 90m were measured from the 
side of the water meter, whereas only one was collected 
from the rear and it is believed to have the worst success 
rate. Each of the success rates of communication modules 
are as follow: 424Mhz Multi module was 78%, 424Mhz 
Single module was 88%, and the Zigbee module was the 
lowest at 77%.   
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
 
 
Figure 10.   Success Rate by Distance 
The transmission distance was almost similar in the 424 
MHz Multi and 2.4 GHz Zigbee modules. However, it was 
analyzed that the 424 MHz Single module was 10 percent 
more efficient than the other modules in regards to the 
transmission distance. Besides, the casing for the water 
meter was analyzed depending on the type of casing, plastic 
or galvanic. The results show that the plastic casing had a 
93% success rate and the galvanic casing had a success rate 
of 90%. Both of the casings have limited influence on data 
transmission.   
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
As the application of smart technologies is expanding in 
urban infrastructure systems, the developed smart meters for 
distribution networks can be used to operate and manage 
water supply efficiently and economically. A newly 
developed half-electronic water meter combines the 
standard mechanical water meter with an electrical signal 
transmission. Thus, it can remove some of the weak points 
of existing electronic water meters such as the risk of data 
loss, which is believed to be a major impediment of smart 
metering. 
Also, three kinds of wireless modules were tested in 
various communication environment conditions to determine 
which modules were best suited for specific terrain 
characteristics. Thus, it is expected that customized 
transmission services can be provided. Finally, this research 
will be applied to large demonstration sites in the near future. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Chowdhury, S. P. Chowdhury, and P. Crossley, "Microgrids and 
Active Distribution Networks," The Institution of Engineering and 
Technology,  pp. 1-13, 2009. 
[2] S. G. Kim, "Study of additional service for smart power meter in 
korea," The journal of electrical society, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 106-111, 
2010. 
[3] J. H. Kim and Y. G. Kim, “Implementation of remote gas detection 
system via bluetooth and CDMA,”The journal of korea coatal 
imfomation and communication,  vol 7, no. 1, pp. 443-446, 2003. 
[4] D. H. Hyun and Y. H. Yim, “Technology trend of automatic remote 
meter detection,” The journal of korea electronic wave, vol 15, no. 4,  
pp. 47-56, 2004. 
[5] Korea Water Resources Corporation, “Implementation of remote 
water meter detection by applying ubiquitous sensor network 
technology,”  K-water, 2007. 
[6] F. Arregui, E. Cabrera Jr and R. Cobacho, “Integrated Water Meter 
Management,” IWA Publishing, 2006. 
[7] G. W. Shin, S. T. Hong, and Y. W. Lee,  “Walk-by Meter Reading 
System of Digital Water Meter Based on Ubiquitous,” Journal of 
Institute of Control, Robotics and Systems, vol. 15, no. 7,  July 2009. 
[8] ZigBee Alliance, “ZigBee-2007 Layer PICS and Stack Revision 03,”  
http://www.zigbee.org/Standards/Downloads.aspx,  2008 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

