The Anatomy of IT Service Incidents 
 
Kari Saarelainen 
IT advisory 
KPMG Finland 
Helsinki, Finland 
e-mail: kari.saarelainen@kpmg.fi  
Marko Jäntti 
School of Computing 
University of Eastern Finland 
Kuopio, Finland 
e-mail: marko.jantti@uef.fi 
 
 
Abstract—An IT service is by definition “made up of a 
combination of information technology, people and processes”. 
These elements, in addition to external factors, are also the key 
components of IT service incidents. This paper presents an 
integrated model of IT service incidents. This model extends 
the concept of root cause also to latent, contributing conditions 
to an incident. Additionally, the life cycle of an incident is 
presented in the model. Unlike incidents and accidents in other 
industries, an IT service incidents has a duration. The damage 
caused by an incident is proportional to this duration. In our 
study, we show that there are events and conditions during the 
incident, incidents within incidents, which cause delays in 
service restoration.  The model is validated by a case study 
method using 15 incident descriptions to validate both the 
latent factors contributing to the direct root cause as well as 
the life cycle of an incident. The main contribution of this 
study is the incident model containing latent conditions and 
events contributing to the direct root cause and concept of 
incident within incident. The model improves the traditional 
root cause analysis and acts as a framework in IT service 
incident root cause categorization.  
Keywords—IT service management; ITIL; continual service 
improvement; root cause; categorization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Most of the vital functions are dependent on the 
availability and quality of IT services. Critical IT systems are 
often committed to deliver 99.9% - 99.999% availability 
meaning monthly downtime from 43 minutes to 26 seconds. 
At the same time, the IT service production environment is 
growing more complex. The service quality and availability 
is controlled by a set of IT service management (ITSM), risk 
and security management processes and practices, as well as 
by processes related to organizational governance. IT 
infrastructure library (ITIL) [1] is the most common 
framework for ITSM processes. There are several processes 
in ITIL, which would benefit from a comprehensive model 
of IT service incidents:  
• 
Incident trend analysis in proactive problem 
management. Incident trend analysis needs a solid 
basis for incident root cause categorization. 
• 
Availability management focuses on reliability and 
on how to put in place alternative options to ensure 
the service continues. It is crucial to recognize the 
potential areas causing unavailability. 
• 
Service level management focuses on delivering IT 
services with agreed quality. 
• 
Continual Service Improvement (CSI) is a stage in 
the lifecycle of an IT service, which identifies and 
implements improvements.  
A. Swiss Cheese Model and latent conditions  
James Reason’s Swiss Cheese Model (SCM) [2][3] 
explains the accident and incident as a result of long standing 
conditions and latent failures contributing to the unsafe act. 
The model is often described as a sequence of planes, cheese 
slices, which describe organizational levels, defenses and 
barriers of incidents. Failures (holes in cheese slices) can 
emerge at anyone of these levels. When the holes are at the 
same time in the same trajectory, the incident is likely to 
occur (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Swiss Cheese Model (SCM) of incident causation with HFACS 
taxonomy [3] 
Wiegmann & Shappell [4] showed that many incidents 
have their roots high within the organization. Decisions 
made by top level management often influence the middle 
level management, as they supervise daily operations of the 
organization. 
The 
Human 
Factors 
Analysis 
and 
Classification System (HFACS) describes the taxonomy of 
human errors as well as the causal relationship between the 
unsafe act and the latent conditions behind it (Figure 2). 
HFACS has its origin in aviation, but it has adaptations in a 
broad range of other industries. Related to ITSM, HFACS is 
discussed in the studies [3][5][6]. HFACS, however, has 
some shortcomings in general and also when applied in 
ITSM.  
• 
HFACS is a complex system. In aviation, where 
accident investigation may take weeks or months, 
complexity may be justified. In ITSM, service 
incidents are investigated in hours or days at most.  
• 
HFACS has its roots in aviation, which is visible in 
its design. A model more adapted to IT work flows 
and ITSM environment is needed [6]. 
• 
HFACS covers only human factors.  This may be 
justifiable in other industries, where human factors 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

cover 60-96% of incidents (Table I), but in IT the 
share of human errors is only 21-24%.  
• 
The concept of incident in IT differs from the other 
industries. In ITIL, an incident is defined as “An 
unplanned interruption to an IT service or reduction 
in the quality of an IT service.” When the service or 
service level is restored, the incident is over.  
 
Organizational  influences
Organizational Process
Organizational Climate
Resource Management
Unsafe supervision
Failed to Correct 
Known Problem
Planned Inappropriate 
Operations
Inadequate 
Supervision
Supervisory 
Violations
Preconditions for Unsafe Acts
Personnel factors
Condition of Operators
Environmental Factors
Technological 
Environment
Physical 
Environment
Physical/
Mental 
Limitations
Adverse 
Physiological 
State
Adverse 
Mental 
State
Personal 
Readiness
Crew 
Resource 
Management
Unsafe Acts
Violations
Errors
Perceptual Errors
Skill-Based Errors
Exceptional Violations
Routine Violations
Decision Errors
 
Figure 2.  Hierarchical HFACS taxonomy of human factor contribution on 
incidents and accidents [6]. 
TABLE I.  
PROPORTION OF HUMAN ERRORS OF ROOT 
CAUSES OF INCIDENTS IN DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES 
Industry 
Human errors 
Source 
Aviation 
70-80% 
[7] 
Maritime 
75-96% 
[8] 
Railway 
61 % 
[9] 
Healthcare 
70-80% 
[10][11] 
Pharmaceutics 
80 % 
[12] 
Nuclear energy 
80 % 
[13][14] 
Chemical industry 
60-90% 
[15] 
Telephony and Internet 
19% 
[16] 
ITSM 
18-24% 
[17][18][19][22][23] 
 
B. Other incident models and root cause analysis methods 
There have been very few studies about IT service 
incidents, 
their 
causation, 
and 
incident 
models 
or 
frameworks.  
Hinz [20] has studied causal modelling of end user 
computing. He has proposed some underlying factors, which 
increase probability of incidents with end users including 
hardware and software complexity, standardization, and 
maturity. The model, however, is limited to end user 
computing, the coverage of latent factors is rather limited, 
and leaves open the reasons to these underlying, latent 
factors.  
Hazard and operability study (HAZOP) [20][29] is a 
process for identification of potential hazard & operability 
problems caused by deviations from the intended design. It 
was initially developed to investigate chemical production 
processes. HAZOP is also used for complex software 
systems [31]. HAZOP is, however, more a brain storming 
technique for system examination and risk assessment. It is a 
general purpose technique without ITSM specific parts. The 
technique finds best the direct risks and does not encourage 
to analyze the underlying conditions increasing the risk of 
incident.  
ITIL presents 11 common root cause analysis (RCA) 
methods, which are given as examples [1]. Only two of 
them, namely 5-Whys and chronological analysis, address 
contributing causes to the direct root cause to some extent.   
5-Whys RCA method works by starting out with a 
description of what event took place and then asking ‘why 
this occurred’. The resulting answer is given, followed by 
another round of ‘why this occurred’. Usually by the fifth 
iteration, a true root cause will have been found. 5-Whys 
does not, however, give a framework, where and how to look 
for these root causes. It is also a generic method with no 
adaptation to ITSM. It does not provide explanation, why to 
choose just the fifth root cause candidate, and omit the 
others.  
Chronological analysis RCA method focuses on the 
timeline of events in order to see, which events may have 
been triggered by others. This method addresses clear, 
identified events, but misses the latent long lasting 
conditions.  Also, it does not give a framework of formation 
of incidents.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The 
research problem and methods are described in Section 2. 
The creation and validation of the incident model is covered 
by Section 3. The analysis of the findings is covered in 
Section 4. The conclusion in Section 5 summarizes the study. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The research problem in this study is: How the incidents 
in ITSM operating environment could be modelled in order 
to aid proactive problem management, root cause analysis 
and continual service improvement. The research problem 
was divided into the following research questions (RQ): 
RQ1: HFACS brings an idea of latent conditions 
contributing to the incident related to human errors. Can this 
model be extended to technology and processes? 
RQ2: What are the major differences in concept of 
incident in ITSM and in other industries?  
RQ2: How these possible differences with the concept of 
incident should be taken into account in the model?  
A. Data  Collection Methods 
Information of IT service incidents was collected in 2011 – 
2014 from incident reports provided by an IT service 
provider organization. Incidents reflected issues from 
several customers and different types of environments. 
Multiple data collection methods proposed by [21] were 
used during the study and the following data sources were 
used: 
• 
Participant observation: Meetings and discussions 
with managers, observation of service desk work. 
• 
Interviews: Interviews of roles responsible of 
services offered to customers and interviews with 
service managers and experts involved in the 
incident 
• 
Documents: Incident reports, process descriptions, 
work guides and guidelines 
• 
Records and archives: The incident report pool 
included 215 incidents. From this pool, all the 
reports with three of more identified root causes or 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

contributing events or conditions were chosen. The 
number of these analysis units was 15.  
• 
Physical artifacts: ITSM tool.  
B. Data analysis 
All the 215 incident reports were studied, and root 
causes, contributing events and conditions, and their 
sequences were extracted from the reports. In those reports, 
the direct root cause was clearly stated, if it was found. The 
other events and conditions were extracted from the narrative 
report text and other data sources described above. The 
model was build using the analyzed data and the 
fundamental ideas in Swiss cheese model and HFACS. 15 
chosen incident reports were then applied to its model.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The main contribution of this paper is a comprehensive 
model of IT service incident for proactive and reactive 
problem management and risk management. In this section, 
we first present the model with its rationale and then apply it 
to the incident reports.  
The model introduces latent factors and events 
contributing to the direct root cause. Additionally, it 
describes the lifecycle of incident containing the concept of 
incident within incident.  
A. The incident model  
1) Top level root cause categories 
An IT service is by definition “made up of a combination 
of information technology, people and processes.” [1]. These 
basic building elements of an IT service are also the major 
candidates for upper level root cause categories. Publicly 
available statistics of root causes usually omit processes, but 
add different external factors (e.g., forces of nature, 
cybercrime, etc.) to root cause categories (See Table II).  
TABLE II.  
STUDIES OF ROOT CAUSES IN IT SERVICE INCIDENTS. 
Source 
Year 
Technology 
Human 
External 
Gartner/Dataquest [22] 
1999 
67 % 
18 % 
8 % 
Enisa [16] 
2014 
66 % 
20 % 
14 % 
Ponemon [18] 
2013 
58 % 
22 % 
30 % 
Quorum [23] 
2013 
73 % 
22 % 
5 % 
 
ITSM and other processes coordinate task flows 
performed by people and technology. If the process fails, the 
direct root cause is related to people or technology, not to 
process. The flaw in the process is a contributing factor in 
the background, and this is not usually gathered in statistics.  
Figure 3 presents technology, human and external factors 
as direct root causes and processes in the background. Note, 
that the relevant process sets are different in external, 
technology and human factors. External factors are not 
controlled and managed in the same way as internal factors. 
One cannot set performance objectives or improve the 
quality of forces of nature or cyber criminals. The processes 
used to manage external factors include security, risk, 
availability and service continuity management. Architecture 
and procurement practices are unique to technology factors 
and leadership and HR processes are related to people. The 
incident root cause can be considered as a combination of 
several different factors (see Figure 3).    
The idea of contributing factors has been presented by 
Reason [2] and later refined by Wiegmann and Shappel. [4], 
although restricted to human factors and originally in 
aviation industry.  
Note that both direct causes and other contributing 
factors may be considered as root causes, which are by 
definition “the underlying causes of an incident or a problem, 
which if corrected would prevent or significantly reduce the 
likelihood of the incident’s reoccurrence” [5]. 
 
Security, risk, 
availabity, IT service
continuity management
ITSM &
business
processes
Leadership &
HR processes
External 
factors
Architecture &
procurement
Technology 
factors
Incident
Human 
factors
 
Figure 3.  According to incident model presented in this paper, IT service 
incidents are caused by human, technology and external factors often 
contributed by failures in the background processes and practises.  
2) Causal levels 
The model consists of three incident root cause levels 
with causal relationship: Direct causes leading directly to 
incident, conditions to direct causes increasing probability of 
the 
incident, 
and organizational 
processes, 
policies, 
principles and practices contributing formation of conditions 
(Figure 4). Identifying these underlying factors helps 
identifying 
improvement 
possibilities 
in 
incident 
investigation 
and 
thus 
helping 
in 
making 
process 
improvements in CSI [3]. 
a) Processes, policies, principles, practices (PPPP)  
Activities in an organization are guided by different 
processes, policies, principles and practices. In addition to 
ITSM processes, there are human resource and procurement 
policies, rewarding and motivations systems, architectural 
principles, cultural issues, etc. The category list of root 
causes in Figure 4 is not meant to be exhaustive: The 
difficulty of defining thorough category lists is visible 
already in ITIL: IT service management was handled with 10 
processes by ITILv2 (2001) [24][25], while ITILv3 (2007, 
revised 2011) uses 30 processes and functions [26].   
b) Inadequate conditions 
Failures at PPPP causes inadequate design or behavior, 
which increases the probability of an incident.  
Technology conditions: In technological environment 
failures in architecture may create complex, error prone 
systems. Flaws in risk calculations, and in availability 
management may cause non-resilient systems. Problems in 
procurement and IT operations & management may result in 
non-standard devices purchased from different sources and 
managed manually.  Financial situation may result in savings 
in personnel, tools or system redundancy. In Figure 4, the 
maturity, 
standardization 
and 
complexity, 
design, 
maintenance and suitable tools are contributing technical 
conditions.  Maturity, standardization and complexity are 
contributing technical conditions proposed by Hinz [20]. 
Other categories were extracted from the cases in this study.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

Complexity
Design
Standardization
Maturity
Maintenance
Tools
Teamwork
Supervision
Individual
Application
Hardware
Facility
Errors
Violations
OS/middle-/firmaware
External factors
Human factors
Procurement
ITSM
HR
Risc
Security
Management
Architecture
Human conditions
Technological conditions
Other
Other
Other
C: PPPP (processes, policies, principles, practices)
B: Inadequate conditions
A: Direct causes
Technology factors
 
Figure 4.  Causal levels of IT service incidents with indicative root cause 
categories in each level.  
Human conditions: Saarelainen and Jäntti [3][6] have 
studied IT service incidents in matrix organization typical in 
IT service providers. According to these results, the human 
conditions in the model have dimensions reflecting line 
management (supervision) and processes (teamwork) in a 
matrix organization as well as individual readiness (training, 
cognitive factors, mental and physical state).  
Note that not all the conditions are caused by PPPP. 
Technical devices have a measured and/or calculated mean 
time between failures (MTBF) that is one of the key 
reliability metrics within IT service availability management 
[27]. People may have mental or physical disabilities and 
behavioral features, which are beyond the control of PPPP.  
c) Direct causes 
Direct causes trigger the incident. They are usually 
reported as root causes in incident reports.  
Technology factors: Technology factors are usually 
divided in hardware and software. Software related root 
causes are often further divided in operating system, 
firmware, middleware and application. Most ITSM root 
causes belong to technology factors (Table II).  
Human factors: Wiegmann and Shappel [7] have made 
pioneering work in categorization of human errors and 
modelling contributing conditions. Their HFACS model as 
such seems to be too complex for ITSM. Having its roots in 
aviation it also needs adaptation to ITSM environment [3]. In 
this model the categories Human conditions and Human 
factors contain elements of HFACS simplified.  At “direct 
causes” level human errors are categorized as unintentional 
(errors) or intentional (violations) by HFACS.  
External factors: External factors is an umbrella term to 
all the factors that are beyond internal controls and process 
improvement efforts of the organization. Thus, they are 
managed only by security, risk, availability and IT service 
continuity management processes but not by other ITSM or 
business processes. If an external party, e.g., subcontractor 
participating in ITSM processes, it is considered non-
external in this model. External factors include, e.g., 
vandalism, cybercrime, denial of service attacks, cable theft, 
flood, wind, snow/ice, lightning, other forces of nature, etc. 
1
Time to Restore Service (TRS)
= duration of the incident = downtime
8
3
2
5
9
4
12
11
PPPP failure
Technology failure
Human error
6
10
Incident/problem management
Incident
C: PPPP (processes, policies, 
principles, practices)
B: Inadequate 
conditions
A: Direct 
causes
Incident management 
Problem management/
root cause analysis
1. Configuration management
2. Application not updated
3. Application started to fill the disk
4. Event management 
5. No systematic monitoring policies
6. Disk space monitoring not activated
7. Incident starts: Disk full, service down 
8. Incident detection late due to missing 
monitoring, incident ticked opened, 
diagnosis started
9. System repaired
10.Incident ends: Service recovered 
and restored
11.Incident ticket closed
12.Root cause analysis
 
Figure 5.  Extended life cycle of the incident nr. 9 in the text.  
The colors of background and events/conditions are as in Figure 4.  
d) Incident life cycle 
Traditionally, in other industries the incident or accident 
is over, when the damage has occurred. In ITSM, this is only 
the beginning of the incident (Figure 5) [27]. In point 7, the 
incident has taken place, in point 8 it is identified and the 
incident record is created (the ticket is opened) and diagnosis 
has started. In point 9, the system is repaired, and in 10 the 
service is restored.  The time between points 7 and 10 is 
called Time to Restore Service (TRS). This is also the 
lifetime of the incident. If the incident causes service breaks, 
this period is called downtime.  
3) Events before and during the incidents 
The original hypothesis in this paper was related to the 
actual incident and events and conditions leading to it. 
Almost 50% of the cases under study, however, contained 
events and conditions that delayed the service recovery.  
The core contribution of this paper is, what happens 
before and during the incident, and why it happens (points 1-
6 in Figure 5). Figure 5 presents one case in this study, where 
the incident was directly caused by a software bug in 
applications, which started to fill the disc (point 3). This bug 
in turn was a known bug in an outdated version of the 
software (point 2). Leaving applications as outdated versions 
is 
one 
probable 
result 
of 
immature 
configuration 
management.  Additionally, a failure occurred during the 
incident, which increased the incident duration. The 
detection of incident was delayed (time between points 7 and 
8), because the disk was not under monitoring (point 6). 
Inadequate monitoring was a probable result of immature 
event management process (point 4), which is responsible for 
detection of events, including service failures.  Usually, the 
IT service provider pays penalties stated in the service level 
agreement (SLA) according to cumulative service downtime. 
Thus, the damage to IT service provider caused by SLA 
penalties and also the damage to the customer caused by lost 
business is usually proportional to the length of the 
downtime or service degradation. By now, the focus in ITSM 
has been on direct root causes, not in contributing factors 
leading to this incident and not in factors increasing incident 
duration.  
In the current ITSM practice, incident root cause analysis 
(point 12 in Figure 5) covers usually the direct cause of the 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

incident (point 3 in Figure 5, “Application started to fill the 
disk”). In this example, the usual root cause analysis 
approach leads to root cause “software bug”. This gives a 
very moderate input to service improvement efforts. This 
study proposes that in IT service incidents root cause 
analysis should cover points 1-10. The latent, contributing 
factors leading to incident as well as contributing and direct 
factors slowing down service restoration should be covered 
in the analysis. In this example, a more extensive (points 1-
10) root cause analysis approach would possibly lead to 
recommendation 
to 
revise 
configuration 
and 
event 
management practices.  
B. Validation of the model 
The model was validated using existing incident reports. 
According to our observations, the general quality of 
incident reports was poor. 27% (N=58) of the reports 
(N=215) had no identified root cause, 46% (N=99) had one 
root cause. 27% of reports identified two or more root 
causes/contributing factors. In this study, we selected all the 
cases (7%, N=15) with three or more identified root causes 
or contributing factors. Letters A, B and C in front of 
events/conditions refer to the causality levels in Figure 4.  
 
1 
Unsuccessful disc space addition: C: Configuration 
management  -> B: Old SW version unable to repair file system 
-> A: File system got corrupted -> Incident 
2 
Network failure:  B: System was not designed redundant -> A: 
LAN Switch failure -> Incident 
3 
Unplanned service break: C: Configuration management -> 
B: unsupported HW combination -> A: network failure -> 
Incident 
4 
Unsuccessful file transmission: C: Poor instructions for testing 
in change management process description -> B: poor testing 
during the change -> A: file transfer did not work in different 
environment -> Incident -> A: no alarm of not successful file 
transfer -> Longer time to restore service (TRS) 
5 
Filled system log: A: SW error -> A: System log getting full -> 
A: Wrong info is given to operator -> A: Log is full -> Incident 
-> A: Event is not identified by monitoring -> Longer TRS 
6 
Unplanned service break:  A: Disk space limitation of the 
database was not updated, when disk space was added -> 
Incident (Disc got full) -> B: Failure in monitoring agent -> A: 
no automatic alarm generated -> Longer TRS  
7 
Unsuccessful restoration of directories: C: Configuration 
management -> B: Backup application did not support 
Windows version -> A: Long file names were not supported by 
OS but required by the applications -> Incident -> B: Access 
rights were not sufficient in troubleshooting activities -> 
Longer TRS 
8 
Problem with archive application: C: Configuration 
management -> B: Components were not updated -> A: Old 
components caused performance degradation  
-> Incident 
9 
Unplanned service break: C: Configuration management -> 
B: SW was not updated -> A: Old SW filled the disc -> 
Incident -> C: Event management -> B: No systematic 
monitoring policy -> A: Monitoring was not activated -> 
Incident is identified late -> Longer TRS   
10 Network failure: C: Capacity management -> B: Capacity of 
the redundant connections estimated incorrectly -> A: Router 
broken -> A: Overload in reserve connection -> Incident 
11 Unplanned service break: C: Capacity management -> B: 
Unexpectedly high amount of traffic -> A: Log files were filled 
-> Incident 
12 Unplanned break in fax service: C: No common change 
management with subcontractor -> B: Subcontractor changed 
the version of pdf file format -> A: Documents are not 
compatible with this version -> Incident 
13 Network failure: B: Broken fiber transmitter in redundant 
passive connection -> B: Lack of redundancy not 
communicated to the client -> A: Supervisory card failure in a 
switch on active connection -> Incident 
14 Website down: A: Network failure -> Incident -> B: Poor 
instructions -> A: Not all components were moved to another 
node in the first restoration attempt -> Longer TRS 
15 Unplanned break in SAP service: A: SW error (Application 
used all the memory) -> Incident -> B: Unclear text in the 
incident ticket -> A: Ticket routed to a wrong place -> Longer 
TRS -> A: Poor documentation -> Not all the services were 
started -> Longer TRS   
IV. 
ANALYSIS 
In the analysis stage, 15 IT service incidents were 
categorized according to the IT service incident model 
created in this study. The model was influenced by HFACS 
model, ITIL and the 215 incident reports used in this study. 
Regarding each incident, we analyzed how latent conditions 
had affected the formation of the incident, and how events 
during the incident affected restoration of service.  The 
following five lessons learnt were identified in the analysis:  
Lesson 1: Latent, contributing factors should be 
investigated already in the original root cause analysis. The 
quality of incident reports was poor for performing trend 
analysis. Only 27% of incident reports identified more than 
one root cause or contributing factor before or during the 
incident. Service improvement based on historical reports is 
challenging if the background of the incident is not opened. 
In order to identify service improvement opportunities one 
should go beyond the ordinary level of root cause 
“configuration error” or “network failure”. This is in line 
with the findings of Saarelainen and Jäntti [6]. They also 
suggest, that in order to get more accurate results the 
principle of latent, contributing factors should be used 
already in root cause analysis phase. 
Lesson 2: The interface between event management and 
incident 
management needs 
to 
be clarified. Event 
management focuses on managing automatic alerts created 
by IT infrastructure.  In our case study, in four cases out of 
seven cases having incident within incident service 
restoration was delayed because of inadequate monitoring of 
events.  
Lesson 3: Configuration management. There is a need 
for systematic configuration management. Four cases out of 
total 15 cases were affected by bugs and incompatibility 
caused by old software versions.  
Lesson 4: Duration of the incident. Incident investigation 
should cover factors affecting the duration of incidents. 
Service downtime is one key parameter affecting the 
business impact of the incident and the SLA penalties. Until 
now the focus in incident investigation has been on the root 
cause, not on the downtime.  
Lesson 5: Role of tools, people, and processes. The 
incident is often a mixture of conditions and events of all the 
above-mentioned elements added with external factors.   
During our study, we identified some patterns (multiple 
levels of causality, “incident-within-incident”) across the 
cases with causal relationships. In all of these cases there 
were at least one condition (level B in Figure 4) contributing 
to the direct cause (level A). Sometimes a poor process 
implementation (level C) was found with probable or 
apparent relationship to the condition.  
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

In almost half of the cases, we identified a new 
phenomenon, 
namely, 
“incident-within-incident”. 
This 
caused us to add time dimension in the model (Figure 5). 
This issue is addressed by ITIL indicating that change 
implementations may cause additional incidents. In our study 
we observed, that not only change implementations but also 
supporting tasks (incident detection, system repair, service 
restauration) during the incidents may trigger additional 
incidents.  
In early phases in the analysis it was very clear, that 
HFACS model focusing mainly on human factors in 
incidents was not an adequate tool for our cases. Although 
previous studies and frameworks [28] have dealt with defect 
classification schemes, they have not provided classification 
that could be used successfully in the IT industry to manage 
a wide variety of IT service incidents.  Additionally, the 
studies about distribution of top level root cause categories in 
Table II support this hypothesis. In our validation cases there 
were mixtures of process, technology and human related 
conditions and events in the very same causal link chain.   
While RCA methods in general provides a process for 
conducting root cause analysis, 5-whys a thinking pattern,  
HAZOP brainstorming process, HFACS a human-centric 
error classification, our model aims at expanding error 
classification towards a more proactive and predictive model 
that would explain formation of incidents in an ITSM 
environment.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The research problem in this study was: How the 
incidents in ITSM operating environment could be modelled 
in order to aid proactive problem management, root cause 
analysis and continual service improvement. The research 
problem was divided into the following research questions: 
Regarding the first research question (Can the idea in 
HFACS with latent factors be extended from human factors 
to technology and processes)? we found that extending the 
scope of top level incident root causes from human factors is 
a mandatory step. An incident often seems to be a mixture of 
all of these elements in different causal levels before and 
during the incident.  
Regarding the second research question (Are there major 
differences in concept of incident in ITSM and in other 
industries?) we found that the IT service incident is already 
by definition different compared to the other industries. IT 
service incidents cover service failures as well as difficulties 
that service users experience while using IT services. An IT 
service incident has duration, which is a key component in 
the business impact of the incident.   
Regarding the third research question (How these 
possible differences in the concept of incident should be 
taken into account in the model?) we found that in incident 
investigation more attention should be paid to events and 
conditions during the incident. Almost in half (7 cases of 15) 
of the incidents, we identified events or conditions that 
delayed restoring the service. As a general observation one 
can state, that business impact to the customer and SLA 
penalties by IT service provider are dependent on the 
duration of the incident. 
There are, however, certain limitations in this study. The 
amount of sample cases was rather limited, only 15 cases. In 
future studies, we aim at conducting the study with a larger 
set of service incidents. The incident reports were prepared 
without knowing the incident model. The results would be 
more reliable if the incident investigator had studied 
systematically the latent conditions according the model. The 
case study results should not be used for statistical 
generalization but these have enabled us to extend the ITSM 
theory. 
In the future work, adding probabilities to the model 
presented here may give predictive power to the model, 
especially if the probabilities and relationships are generated 
automatically 
or 
semi 
automatically 
from 
incident 
management 
records 
and 
configuration 
management 
database (CMDB). HFACS in the current format has 
limitations in ITSM environment, but an IT adaptation of 
HFACS may be useful related to human errors.  
In the course of work, the poor quality of incident 
investigation and incident reports were observed. Lack of 
deeper analysis of contributing factors behind direct root 
causes gives poor starting point to proactive problem 
management and service improvement. This study has 
potential to increase incident awareness of persons working 
in related roles in ITSM. In order to effectively remedy the 
disease, one should know the mechanism.   
The results in this study are useful for incident 
investigators and root cause analyst as well as to those 
involved in continual service improvement. This study gives 
tools to understand incidents more deeply and then fix the 
events and conditions increasing the probability of incidents.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the case organization’s 
representatives for valuable feedback and responses that 
helped us to perform this study. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

REFERENCES 
[1]  Office of Government Commerce, ITIL Service Operation. 
United Kingdom: The Stationery Office, 2011. 
[2]  J. Reason, The contribution of latent human failures to the 
breakdown of complex systems. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 
327(1241), 1990, pp. 475-484.  
[3]  K. Saarelainen and M. Jäntti, “Quality and human errors in IT 
service infrastructures - Human error based root causes of 
incidents and their categorization.” in Innovations in 
Information Technology (IIT), 2015 11th International 
Conference on. 2015. 
[4]  D. A. Wiegmann, Human error analysis of commercial 
aviation accidents: Application of the human factors analysis 
and classification system (HFACS). Aviation, Space and 
Environmental Medicine 72(11) , 2001, p. 1006. 
[5]  K. Saarelainen and M. Jäntti, “Human errors in IT services - 
HFACS model in root cause categorization, ” in International 
Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation, 2015, pp. 
340-345. 
[6]  K. Saarelainen and M. Jäntti, “A case study on improvement 
of incident investigation process, ” in System, Software & 
Service Process Improvement & Innovation 22nd European & 
Asian  Conference, EuroSPI 2015, 2015 . 
[7]  S. A. Shappell and D. A. Wiegmann, Applying reason: The 
human factors analysis and classification system (HFACS). 
Human Factors and Aerospace Safety 1(1), 2001, pp. 59-86. 
[8]  R. Hanzu-Pazara, E. Barsan., and P. Arsenie, L. Chiotoriou 
and G. Raicu, “Reducing of maritime accidents caused by 
human factors using simulators in training process, ”  Journal 
of Maritime Research, vol. V, 2008, pp. 3-18.  
[9]  F. Aguirre, M. Sallak, W. Schon, and F. Belmonte, 
Application of evidential networks in quantitative analysis of 
railway accidents. Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part O: Journal of Risk and 
Reliability, 2013, pp. 1748006X12475044.  
[10] L. Kohn  T.., J. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson, to Err is 
Human : Building a Safer Health System. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press, 2000. 
[11] S. Hunziker, A. C. Johansson, F. Tschan, N. K. Semmer, L. 
Rock, M. D. Howell, and S. Marsch, Teamwork and 
leadership in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol. 57(24), 2011, pp. 2381-2388.  
[12] R. Cintron, “Human Factors Analysis and Classification 
System 
Interrater 
Reliability 
for 
Biopharmaceutical 
Manufacturing Investigations”, Walden Univesity, Maryland, 
USA, 2015.  
[13] Managing Human Performance to Improve Nuclear Facility 
Operation 2013, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series, No NG-T-
2.7International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria, 
2013. 
 [14] S. Ziedelis, M. Noel, and M. Strucic, Human based roots of 
failures in nuclear events investigations. Internationale 
Zeitschrift Fuer Kernenergie 58(10), 2012, pp. 596-601.  
[15] K. S. N. Raju, Chemical Process Industry Safety, Tata 
McGraw-Hill Education, New Delhi, India, 2014. 
[16] C. Karsberg and C. Skouloudi, “Annual incident reports 
2014,” European Union Agency for Network and Information 
Security (ENISA), 2015. 
[17] L. Shwartz, D. Rosu, D. Loewenstern, M. J. Buco, S. Guo, R. 
Lavrado, M. Gupta, P. De, V. Madduri, and J. K. Singh, 
Quality of IT service delivery — analysis and framework for 
human error prevention. Presented at Service-Oriented 
Computing 
and 
Applications 
(SOCA), 
2010 
IEEE 
International Conference on, 2010, pp. 1-8. 
[18] Ponemon Institute Research Report, “2013 cost of data center 
outages,” Ponemon Institute, December 2013.  
[19] K. Saarelainen and M. Jäntti, Creating an ITIL-based 
multidimensional incident analytics method: A case study. 
Presented at The Tenth International Conference on Systems 
ICONS, 2015, pp. 24-29. 
[20] D. Hinz and H. Gewald, The next wave in IT infrastructure 
risk management: A causal modeling approach with bayesian 
belief networks. Presented at Emerging Trends and 
Challenges in Information Technology Management. 2006. 
[21]  Robert Yin. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 
Beverly Hills, CA:Sage Publishing, 1994. 
[22] E. Marcus and H. Stern. Blueprints for High Availability: 
Designing Resilient Distributed Systems, John Wiley \& 
Sons, Inc, New York, NY, USA 2000. 
[23] Quorum, “Quorum disaster recovery report Q1 2013”, 2013. 
[24] Office of Government Commerce, IT Infrastructure Library -
 Service Delivery. London: The Stationery Office, 2001. 
[25] Office of Government Commerce, IT Infrastructure Library -
 Service Support. London: The Stationery Office, 2001. 
[26] Office of Government Commerce, ITIL Continual Service 
Improvement. United Kingdom: The Stationery Office, 2011. 
[27] Office of Government Commerce, ITIL Service Design. 
United Kingdom: The Stationery Office, 2011. 
[28] W. Florac, Software quality measurement: A framework for 
counting problems and defects. Software Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. Pittsburgh, PA. 1992. 
[29] T. A. Klet, Hazop and Hazan: Identifying and Assessing 
Process Industry Hazards, Institution of Chemical Engineers, 
Rugby, UK, 1999. 
[30] BSI: BS IEC 61882:2001: Hazard and Operability Studies 
(HAZOP studies). Application Guide, British Standards 
Institute, UK, 2001 
[31] J. A. Mcdermid, M. Nicholson, and D. J. Pumfrey, 
“Experience with the application of HAZOP to computer-
based systems.“ Presented at Compass '95: 10th Annual 
Conference on Computer Assurance, pp. 37-48, 1995.  
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

