Knowledge-driven Vaccine Systems Engineering
Leonard Petnga
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering
University of Alabama in Huntsville
Huntsville, AL 35899, USA
Email: leonard.petnga@uah.edu
Surangi Jayawardena
Department of Chemistry
University of Alabama in Huntsville
Huntsville, AL 35899, USA
Email: surangi.jayawardena@uah.edu
Abstract—Current vaccine development approaches are ineffec-
tive in capturing, representing and reconciling domains and
disciplines knowledge and viewpoints across the vaccine devel-
opment life cycle. As a result, vaccine development is a long,
complex, and costly process that often results (when it succeeds) in
vaccines whose potency is hard to predict and efﬁcacy expensive
to preserve. State-of-the-art vaccine development approaches fail
to (1) integrate the multiplicity of stakeholders perspectives across
the Vaccine Development Life Cycle (VDLC), (2) bridge the
knowledge gap between multiple disciplines, and (3) formally
evaluate stochastic system behaviors of biological systems in a
seamless manner. This paper introduces a novel semantically-
enabled framework for knowledge and behavior speciﬁcation,
modeling and processing in vaccine systems engineering. Data
and semantic models of domains supported by sound theories
and tightly coupled with Markov Chain models of biological
systems are the cornerstone of our solution. Near future work
includes optimal vaccine matrix design and experimental vaccine
preservation systems. Looking ahead, the capabilities of the
framework – demonstrated in a vaccine preservation study – will
enable more effective, cheaper and faster time-to-market vaccines.
Keywords-Vaccine; Systems Engineering; Semantic; Ontology;
Markov Chain.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A. Problem statement
Vaccination is a cornerstone of today’s modern human
being health of all ages, preventing potentially fatal and life
crippling diseases. Successful vaccines – such as the one for
smallpox – have rid the world of a severely contagious and
potentially fatal disease. The core component of the vaccine
– the vaccine antigen – is formulated and designed to be
administered as an oral vaccine or injected subcutaneously.
Successful vaccines provide lifelong immunity and protection
of the host from contracting diseases caused by corresponding
pathogens.
The effectiveness of the immunization is contingent upon
multiple factors, including the nature and behavior of the
pathogen, the vaccine and its development life cycle, and
the host physiology. The difﬁculty in engineering, develop-
ing, manufacturing and delivering highly effective vaccines is
complicated by its variant nature, a characteristic inherent to
all biological systems [1]. In rare occasions, host physiology
coupled with genetic factors and environmental conditions can
adversely affect the vaccination outcome through immuno-
suppression or anaphylaxis (severe reactions). Stakeholders
involved in the Vaccine Development Life Cycle (VDLC) – see
Figure 1 – view the vaccine through signiﬁcantly different lens,
which makes elicitation of design requirements very difﬁcult.
For instance, researchers (e.g., Stage 1 of VDLC) are more
interested in the immunological processes at the molecular
level (antigen), while clinicians (e.g., Stage 7) are looking
for faster, more effective, accurate and less invasive delivery
tools and mechanisms. Moreover, the knowledge disconnect
between the disciplines involved – biology, chemistry, en-
gineering, manufacturing, legal, regulatory and healthcare –
makes vaccine development a very convoluted process [1].
The compounding effect of these issues contributes to
today’s situation where vaccines (1) are available for only 10%
of known pathogens harmful to human, (2) cost hundreds of
millions of dollars to develop and 8 to 10 years from research
to market with high failure rates, (3) have short shelf life
span i.e., a year or less and, (4) require costly and stringent
storage and handling conditions [2][3]. Moreover, fast genetic
mutations of pathogens of deadly ailments (e.g., HIV-1) and
environment factors have been enabling them to outsmart
researchers for years, making vaccine development for those
diseases an uphill battle. The stakes are even higher when
we consider social and cultural resistances to immunization.
Concerns about (and risks of) childhood autism, anaphylaxis,
disabilities, contraction of vaccine associated diseases (live
vaccines) and religious beliefs are among the most common
arguments against vaccination [4].
Addressing these challenges requires vaccine design and
development approaches that enable stakeholders along the
VDLC to answer both domain speciﬁc and cross-domain ques-
tions quickly, accurately and cheaply in the context of highly
stochastic and complex biological dynamics. Leading research
efforts in rational design of vaccines are piecewise and fail to
address critical methodological and knowledge gaps [5]. Built
upon the ability of the systems engineering discipline to bridge
the gap between – and integrate – disciplines and architect
systems at various levels of abstractions, the introduction of a
model based knowledge-driven framework for vaccine devel-
opment life cycle is a signiﬁcant step forward. The three pillars
of this work are that (1) formal methods must drive and support
the development of models, (2) the latter must properly capture
the depth and breadth of stochastic behaviors of biological
systems and, (3) models must be reusable, customizable and
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1. “Vee” model of the Vaccine Development Life Cycle (VDLC)
integrated at will for the purpose of the analysis at hand. State-
of-the-art vaccine development approaches are not capable of
such cross-discipline and cross-domain modeling and coverage
of the life cycle [2][3][5].
B. Project Scope and Objectives
In order to address these limitations, we aim to develop
the foundational semantic infrastructure for knowledge and
behavior speciﬁcation, modeling and processing across the full
spectrum of the VDLC. The integration of biological system
dynamic models and discipline and stakeholder knowledge
models will enable the emergence of novel architectures whose
instantiation and execution can be checked against the re-
quirements of a given application or analysis. For instance,
a researcher – in Stage 2 of Figure 1 – can make use of the
integrated knowledge models of the formulation matrix and
the stochastic model of the vaccine antigen to analyze the
performance of the selected matrix and validate the results
against experimental outcomes and incrementally reﬁne the
models accordingly. Elements of the study and its results can
be propagated to the healthcare administrator (at Stage 6) to
ensure proper handling of the vaccine in order to preserve its
effectiveness while in storage and transit. Here, the creation
and integration of knowledge and stochastic models of both
the formulated vaccine and the environment is necessary. The
healthcare professional in Stage 7 concerned with patient prog-
nostic and response to the vaccine will need stochastic models
of their physiology coupled to the one of the formulated
vaccine, integrated with the knowledge model of the delivery
protocol.
A successful implementation of this framework in full
will make these scenarios and more complex ones a reality
in the day-to-day work of stakeholders across the VDLC.
More importantly, it will enable progress toward the de-
velopment of an integrated, evolving “vaccine digital twin”
whose sound mathematical foundations provide conﬁdence in
analyses, speed up decision making (thus, time-to-market) and
help manage complexity more effectively.
Section II provides a brief review of vaccine types, mecha-
nisms and development processes in the context of systems
engineering. Section III introduces the foundations of the
vaccine development semantic framework and describes its
architecture. In Section IV, we brieﬂy highlight two research
topics currently under investigation that make use of, or
reinforce the capabilities of the semantic framework. A simple
vaccine preservation study example is presented in Section V.
We conclude this work in Section VI.
II.
VACCINE SYSTEMS ENGINEERING
A. Vaccines: Types and Development Challenges
Vaccines play a critical role in combating infectious disease
and improving overall quality of living. There are several
different types of vaccines: live attenuated vaccines (e.g., oral
polio vaccine), inactivated vaccines (e.g., injectable polio vac-
cine), subunit vaccines, toxoid vaccines, conjugate vaccines,
DNA vaccines (e.g., Hepatitis B) and recombinant viral vectors
vaccines. The differences between the types of vaccines stem
from the structure and properties of their core-component,
i.e., the antigen. A vaccine achieves immunity through a
complex process in the body and protects the host by inducing
immune mechanisms capable of rapidly controlling replicating
pathogens or inactivating their toxic components. One such
mechanism is raising antibodies against the vaccine antigen.
The development of vaccines of any type is a complex,
expensive and high-risk undertaking, as many candidates fail
in pre-clinical studies (Stage 3 of VDLC). The key to success
here lies in the vaccine’s ability to induce an effective and
sustained immune response, have minimal side effects, and
be produced cost-effectively at large scale. Because of the
complex nature of vaccine manufacturing, it is important to
be able to understand, control and/or predict the factors that
impact the efﬁcacy, stability and safety of the vaccine along
its process-engineering pathway.
B. Systems Engineering of Vaccines
The vaccine development life cycle can be represented
similarly to the well known systems engineering “Vee” model,
as shown in Figure 1. The ﬁrst stage of vaccine development
involves the selection of a candidate vaccine (exploratory
stage) from a fundamental research laboratory and its testing
using animal models (pre-clinical stage), followed by the
development of small case scale material and formulation to
make material for phases I, II and III studies (clinical devel-
opment). Phase I includes safety tests among 10-100 human
subjects to evaluate clinical responses. Then, phase II looks
at the evaluation of immune responses in 100-3,000 subjects.
Finally, in phase III, large scale studies are conducted to test
vaccine efﬁcacy and tolerance. Only vaccines that successfully
pass trials are eventually mass produced. On the right side of
the model, the vaccine is thoroughly tested before its release,
then distributed in lots, and ﬁnally administered to the host.
Three cross-cutting concerns between stages are identiﬁed:
quality/safety, preservation and potency. However, unlike tra-
ditional systems engineering “Vee” models, the concerns are
non-binding and there are no rigorous feedback mechanisms
between successive stages, nor formal requirements ﬂow down
and traceability process.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 2. Simpliﬁed architecture of the framework
III.
SEMANTIC FRAMEWORK FOR VACCINE
DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
The development of semantic architectures for VDLC is
complicated by the multiplicity of stakeholders’ perspectives
across the VDLC, the need to bridge the knowledge gap
between multiple disciplines, and formally evaluate stochastic
system behaviors of biological systems. We report in this
section on a novel semantic-driven framework that addresses
these challenges through a careful investigation, selection and
integration of technologies, theories and models from relevant
disciplines, domains and types.
A. Logic-based Semantics and Semantic Web Technologies
In order for core vaccine knowledge to be integrated, shared
and reused across the various stages of the life cycle depicted
in Figure 1, it must (1) be captured, represented in a clear,
unambiguous way with respect to the associated domain and
the context of use and, (2) lend itself to automated processing
and reasoning by machines. Thus, data must be enriched by
sound semantics to ensure accuracy of facts and inferencing.
Thanks to their sound mathematical foundations and de-
cidability as fragment of ﬁrst order logics, Description Logics
(DL) formalisms have been shown effective in tackling the
ﬁrst part of this challenge [6]. A summary of description logic
concepts constructors can be found in [7]. DLs provide the
mathematical foundations on top of which machine and human
readable ontological languages, such as the web ontology
language (OWL) can be built in a systematic way. They enable
the creation of ontologies, which are engineering artifacts
that provide explicit speciﬁcations of the intended meaning
of a vocabulary used to describe a given domain. Ontological
models provide semantic meanings that enrich the way models
can be branched and integrated across domains of knowledge
automatically. These capabilities are critical to this work given
the strong need to understand intricate relationships spanning
multiple domains and components and their ultimate affects
on the vaccine performance. In [8], we have identiﬁed and
described the necessary extensions to the basic DL, leading
to SHOIN and SROIQ DLs as appropriate logic-based
formalisms for semantic framework like the one we are intro-
ducing in this work. OWL2 DL is computationally decidable
and will support ontologies representations in our framework.
Semantic
web
technologies
integrated
with
reasoner
through Application Programming Interfaces (e.g., Jena) pro-
vide a way forward in addressing the second part of the above-
mentioned challenge [8]. Together, the eXtensible Markup
Language (XML), the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
and OWL as hierarchical layers of the semantic web technol-
ogy stack, allow for the implementation of reasoning that can
prove whether or not assertions in the knowledge base are
true or false in almost real-time (decidability). Thus, semantic
web technologies are great enablers of automated processing
and reasoning over sparse, across-domain information. In the
context of VDLC, they will organize and merge the sources for
answering biological and engineering questions using corre-
sponding semantic models (ontologies, rules and computation
extensions).
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

B. Mathematical Modeling of Systems Biology
The effective capture and representation of the behavior of
the biological systems (e.g., vaccine antigen, host physiology)
across the VDLC necessitates models that accurately capture
the essence of unfolding biological (and underlining) chemical
processes at various level of abstractions. Such models must
allow the simulation of the system behavior over time and
predict changes caused by interactions with other systems
and the environment. Modeling schemes of biological phe-
nomenons and systems emphasize various aspects such as body
metabolism, genetic networks, neuronal systems or processes
(e.g., intracellular processes). These models have been shown
appropriate for cellular level analyses and studies but they are
ineffective in capturing biological phenomenons that occur at
higher levels of abstractions (e.g., tissue, organs)[9]. Thus, we
will choose Markov models which have been demonstrated
effective in modeling and predicting the behavior of highly
stochastic biological [10] and biomedical systems [11]. Plus,
they are not domain speciﬁc and they lend themselves well
to integration through segmentation mechanism to domain
speciﬁc models. Markov chain (MC) – see top left corner of
Figure 2 – states (Si), in our framework, represent a valid
biological or chemical state with arrows between states anno-
tated with their probability of propagation. Feedback between
states and steady-states are allowed with the constraint that
all propagation probabilities at each state must sum to one
(1). Hidden Markov models extend Markov chain models and
are developed from observed system performance (e.g., lab
experiments). The resulting model is then used to further the
analysis of the system and predict future behavior.
C. Simpliﬁed System Architecture
The proposed knowledge-driven framework shown in Fig-
ure 2 makes use of logic-based semantics emulated by seman-
tic web technologies and MC to provide rigorous formalisms
to models across the VDLC. It is modular and its building
blocks are chosen and integrated depending on the needs
and requirements of a given application. The architecture is
organized into three layers as follows.
Foundation Layer (L0). The mathematical foundations
needed by architectural models reside here. Foundation the-
ories (for known cross-cutting domains such as time, physical
quantities, communication, etc.) are distinguished from bio-
logical and chemistry laws or well-accepted domain standards
(e.g., CDC Standard for Adult Immunization Practice). One
such theory is Allen Temporal Interval Calculus (ATIC), which
has been shown effective in supporting formal description and
reasoning in the temporal domain [8].
Domain Knowledge Layer (L1). The VDLC knowledge
is organized into three groups: core domains (e.g., vaccine
antigen, host), cross-cutting domains (e.g., storage condition,
vaccine schedule) and foundation domains (e.g., time, physical
quantity). Each domain knowledge is encoded in the form
of a “semantic block” made of (1) an ontology, (2) set of
rules, and (3) interfaces that enable communication between
semantic blocks and linking with computation platforms and
Markov models of system biology via customized builtin func-
tions. Data models provide the templates for input data to be
processed by the semantic block. DLs provide the formalisms
needed by core domains knowledge while theories such as
the ATIC will constrain models of some cross-cutting domains
(e.g., vaccine schedule). Requirements are captured as a cross-
cutting domain that makes use of foundation knowledge to
formally encode and process input textual requirements.
Integration Layer (L2). Bridging the knowledge gap be-
tween disciplines in the framework requires (1) the integration
of domain speciﬁc knowledge at level L1 on both the semantic
and stochastic behavior sides, and (2) linking them to emulate
system level behavior for the application under consideration.
The resulting (system) semantic graph is transformed as rules
– integrated to stochastic models of the system behavior – are
ﬁred. It can also act as semantic controller as it could encode
deﬁned system metrics whose instances could be checked
against system requirements (as constraints). We will trust the
Whistle scripting environment [12] with the controlled and
systematic assembly of the models, as well as simulation and
output generation.
IV.
WORK IN PROGRESS
The architecture introduced and brieﬂy described in Section
III is generic and high level enough to be customized for vari-
ous applications and challenges throughout the VDLC. We are
working toward its use and adaptation to tackle two important
challenges in the VDLC: determining and characterizing the
best formulation mix for a vaccine and designing experimental
vaccine preservation systems.
A. Topic 1: Vaccine Formulation Design
The challenge of retaining potency (or efﬁcacy) of the
vaccine until it is administered remains an open challenge
for researchers [13][14]. The potency of the vaccine has
to be preserved throughout the VDLC from its formulation
(Stage 2 of VDLC) to the administration (Stage 7) through
manufacturing (Stage 4) and subsequent steps. The design of
the best vaccine matrix (i.e., the formulate) able to stabilize,
preserve and improve host immune response is a multi-domain,
multi-disciplinary and complex integration problem for which
the architecture developed in this work can help address. For
each vaccine, design of experiments will help narrow down
the most effective excipients (stabilizers and preservatives)
and adjuvants from a list of over 370 substances that are
Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) [15]. Then, both
knowledge and stochastic models of selected substances will
be integrated in the framework along with the ones of the
vaccine and the pathogen. The response will be traded across
multiple objectives (e.g., potency, infectivity), conditions (e.g.,
temperature, moisture) and conﬁgurations of the mixture.
B. Topic 2: Experimental Vaccine Preservation Systems
Under the current state-of-the-art of vaccine technologies,
the most effective matrix cannot preserve it from becoming
subpotent due to inappropriate and suboptimal storage, han-
dling and transportation, especially under challenging infras-
tructural, economical and environmental conditions [16][17].
This project will build from the results from Topic 1 and
previous related work in biomedical devices [11] to analyze,
develop and verify prototype adaptive platform-based con-
tainers for vaccines handling and storage. The focus will be
on enabling and demonstrating system resilience to frequent
changes in environmental conditions such as the ones currently
observed along the vaccine supply chain [17]. Another interest
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

of the project will be to understand mechanisms through which
decisions (e.g., vaccine type, matrix elements) early in the
VDLC ultimately constraint and affect preservation platforms
(to be) used in vaccine supply chain downstream. Thus, we
plan to extend the capability of the framework introduced in
this work by integrating it with graph-based database platforms
[18].
Figure 3. Schematics of the OPV preservation experiment
V.
PROTOTYPE: VACCINE PRESERVATION STUDY
A. Experiment Set Up and Methodology
We illustrate the basic implementation and use of our
framework in a simpliﬁed Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) formula-
tion study for which the corresponding experiment is pictured
in Figure 3. The study seeks to evaluate how well given
formulations (fi) preserve the effectiveness of the OPV (live
attenuated) under stringent preservation conditions (tempera-
ture) such as the ones observed in Sub Saharan Africa. In
a simpliﬁed experimental design, a volume v of a formulated
OPV (vaccine antigen virus, VV) kept at temperature t j during
dk days, is administered to n numbers of host cells (live, green
monkey epithelial cells). The host cells are infected with the
virus for 10 mins, and the excess vaccine removed. A layer of
agarose gel is placed on top of the host cells and the cells are
incubated at 370C for 3 days. Then, the gel is removed and
the host cells is stained. Finally, dead regions of the cells or
plaques nfi
jk are counted. The same experiment is repeated for
all the formulations and for the non-formulated VV and n nf
jk
is recorded. The infectivity – i.e., how well the vaccine was
preserved by a given formulation fi– is computed as follows.
infijk(%) =
nfi
jk
nnf
jk
(1)
The framework represents the actual experiment through the
capture and modeling of core elements relevant to the study.
Simpliﬁed ontologies and rules for the biology domain (cell,
vaccine and pathogen) and the experiment domain (parameters,
set up) are created and integrated as described in Section
III. The behavior of the VV is modeled using instances of
the simple MC pictured on the top left corner of Figure 2.
The states Sp (p ∈ P = {20, 40, 60, 80, 100}) represent the
virulence of the vaccine, which can only degrade from p =
100% to p = 20% in this simpliﬁed prototype. The transition
probabilities depend on the experimental setup and they are
driven by a “degradation factor” k tf
ijk which characterizes the
ability of the system to maintain itself in a state Sp under the
given experimental setup. It’s deﬁned as follows.
ktf
ijk =

TMax − tj
TMaxtj(100 − Cfi)

dk
dMax
(2)
where Tmax is the maximum allowable exposure tempera-
ture for the experiment and Cfi ∈ (0, 100) is a coefﬁcient
characterizing the “degradation resistance” of a given for-
mulation. One such formulation for the OPV can comprise
antibiotics Neomycin and Kanamycin as preservatives and
MgCl2 as stabilizer. As indicated in research Topic 2, design
of experiments is a way forward to narrow down the list of
candidate formulations. The transitions between states ( Sp)
are computed as follows.
atf
ijk|p,q = (1 − ∆tf
ijk|p,q)kaktf
ijk
(3)
where ∆tf
ijk|p,q is the gap of virulence between a state of
virulence p and one of virulence q < p in P and k a > 0 is a
balancing coefﬁcient allowing the probabilities to sum to 1 as
per Markov Chains modeling rules. We note that atf
ijk|20,20 = 1
to capture the fact that any decrease of the virulence of the
VV below 20% is beyond the sensitivity level of our analysis
thus, not relevant. This results into a full MC model driving the
generation of the values of nfi
jk and nnf
jk that we use to calculate
the infectivity of the VV when mixed with the cell. The MC
is implemented as a built-in function linked to the rule that
determines the value of the infectivity based on the experiment
setup. Given the small size of our prototype input/output data,
there is no need to implement full data models for this instance
of the framework.
B. Results
For the prototype simulation, we select three formulations
fi with low (Cf1
= 5), medium (Cf2
= 50) and high
(Cf3 = 95) degradation resistance. Also, we assume the VV
samples are conserved at ambient (t1 = 250C) and body
(t2 = 370C) temperatures respectively, over selected periods
of duration dk
∈ (1, .., 30) days. In order to assess the
performance of our formulations, we refer to the acceptable
infectivity threshold for administration of oral polio vaccine,
which is infijk = 40% [19]. The latter is known as the “in-
fectivity threshold” below which the formulation is considered
ineffective to ensure full potency of the vaccine. Figure 4
shows the result of the simulation for t1 with TMax = 400C.
The formulations outperform each other as their C f is higher
up to the 2/3 of the maximum exposure time around d = 20
days, right before the potency baseline is crossed (around
db = 21 days for all). After that, there seems to be no
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

additional beneﬁt in higher Cf. Similar results (not shown)
are observed for t2 = 370C. This suggests that this vaccine
should be considered ineffective after 20 days of continuous
exposure to higher temperatures (t ≥ 250C), no matter the
formulation used. However, this result needs to be veriﬁed
through laboratory experiments. The results will be used to
reﬁne the model deﬁned and introduced in this work (for
the given vaccine), and will then be validated through actual
observations on selected vaccine formulations.
Figure 4. OPV infectivity simulation results at t = 250C for 3 formulations
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
An innovative, semantically-enabled framework for knowl-
edge and behavior speciﬁcation, modeling and processing for
vaccine systems engineering has been presented in this paper.
This work is motivated by the limitations of current vaccine de-
velopment approaches in capturing, representing and reconcil-
ing domains and disciplines knowledge and viewpoints across
the vaccine development life cycle in an effective manner. As
a result, vaccine development is a long, complex, and costly
process that often results (when it succeeds) in vaccines whose
potency is hard to predict and expensive to preserve. Current
limitations are compounded by the highly stochastic nature of
biological components involved (e.g., vaccines, pathogens) and
knowledge disconnect between chemists, biologists, clinicians
and the public stemming mostly from the lack of intuitive
understanding of biological components and processes. In this
work, we have shown that the implementation of a knowledge-
driven framework is a promising and feasible solution that
can result into successful vaccine systems engineering. Data
and semantic models of domains supported by sound theories
and tightly coupled with Markov Chain models of biological
systems are the cornerstone of our approach. A key beneﬁt
is the ability to represent the system at various levels of
abstractions in conformance to stakeholder viewpoints and
the problem at hand. The core capabilities of the framework
have been successfully demonstrated in a prototype vaccine
preservation study.
Bringing the beneﬁts of the framework introduced in this
work to day-to-day work of stakeholders across the VDLC
necessitates further work. This should include the reﬁnement
and validation of the framework for various vaccine types,
analyses and cross-cutting concerns (e.g., potency, preserva-
tion, safety) and various environmental conditions. Design of
experiments (as indicated in Topic 1) and actual laboratory,
production and ﬁeld assessment will be needed. Collaboration
between stakeholders (including Systems Engineers) along the
VDLC needs to be fostered in the development of domain and
discipline knowledge used by the framework. An expansion
of ongoing efforts in ontology development (e.g., vaccine
ontology) is highly suitable [20].
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Endy, Foundations for Engineering Biology, Nature vol. 438, no.
24, pp. 449 - 453, 2005.
[2]
The United Nation Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Vaccines: Handled with
Care, Division of Communication, New York, USA , 2004.
[3]
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturing of America(PhRMA),
Vaccines Factbook, PhRMA, 2013.
[4]
World
Health
Organization(WHO),
Six
miscon-
ceptions
about
immunization,
Accessible
at
:
http://www.who.int/vaccine safety/initiative/detection/immunization
misconceptions/en/ ; Retrieved: April 13, 2018.
[5]
C. Rueckert
and
C. A. Guzman,
“Vaccines:
from empirical
development to rational design”,
PLoS Pathog 8(11):e1003001.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1003001, 2012.
[6]
F. Baader, I. Horrocks, and U. Sattler,
Description Logics,
In:
Handbook of Knowledge Representation, pp. 135 - 180, Elsevier (US),
2008.
[7]
I. Horrocks and Z. Pan, “RDFS(FA): Connecting RDF(S) and OWL
DL”, IEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering, vol. 19, no.
02, pp. 192 - 206 (US), 2007.
[8]
L. Petnga and M. A. Austin,
’“An Ontological Framework for
knowledge modeling and decision support in cyber-physical systems”,
Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 77-94 (US), 2016.
[9]
B. Ingalls, Mathematical Modeling in Systems Biology: An Introduc-
tion, Applied Mathematics, University of Waterloo, CA, 2012.
[10]
C. J. Tomlin and J. D. Axelrod, “Biology by numbers: mathematical
modeling in developmental biology”, Nature Reviews; Genetics 8: pp.
331 - 340, 2007.
[11]
M. Mosteller, M. A. Austin, R. Ghodssi, and S. Yang “Platforms for
engineering experimental biomedical systems”, 22th Annual INCOSE
International Symposium (IS 2012), Rome, Italy, July 9-12, 2012.
[12]
P. Delgoshaei, M.A. Austin, and A. Pertzborn, “A Semantic framework
for modeling and simulation of cyber-physical systems”, International
Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 7, no. 3-4,
pp. 223238 (EU), 2014.
[13]
D. S. McVey, J. E. Galvin, and S. C. Olson,
“A review of the
effectiveness of vaccine potency control testing”, International Journal
for Parasitology, vol. 33, no. 5-6, pp. 507 - 516., 2003.
[14]
H. Draayer,
“Overview of currently approved veterinary vaccine
potency testing methods and methods in development that do not require
animal use”, Procedia in Vaccinology, vol. 5 (2011) pp. 171 174 , 2011.
[15]
U.S.
Food
and
Drug
Administration
(FDA),
Generally
Rec-
ognized
As
Safe
(GRAS)
food
substances,
Accessible
at
: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/fdcc/?set=SCOGS; Retrieved:
April 13, 2018.
[16]
A. Galaska, J. Milstien, and M. Zaffran, Thermostability of Vaccines,
World Health Organization, Geneva, 1998.
[17]
World Health Organization (WHO), Vaccination: Rattling the Supply
Chain,
Bulletin of the World Health Organization(WHO), vol. 89
(2011), pp. 324-325, 2011.
[18]
I. Robinson, J. Webber, and E. Eifrem,
Graph Databases: New
opportunities for the connected data, O’Reilly Media, 224 pages, 2013.
[19]
R. Wu, M.-M Georgescu, F. Delpeyroux, S. Guillot, J. Balanant, K.
Simpson, and R. Crainic, “Thermostabilization of live virus vaccines
by heavy water (D2O)”, Vaccine, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 1058 - 1063,
1995.
[20]
University of Michigan School of Medicine, Vaccine Ontology,
Ac-
cessible at : http://www.violinet.org/vaccineontology/introduction.php;
Retrieved: April 13, 2018.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

