Implementation of a Scenario-based Energy Saving Mechanism
in Smart Lighting Systems
Jung-Sik Sung, Dae Ho Kim, and Seonghee Park
IoT Research Department, ETRI
Daejeon, Korea
email: jssung@etri.re.kr, dhkim7256@etri.re.kr, pshee@etri.re.kr
Abstract—A smart lighting system solution that optimizes the
energy is required for energy saving. It should control lighting
based on time and space, and it should be context-aware. In
this
study,
we
propose
a
scenario-based
energy-saving
mechanism
based
on
the
user's
behavior
patterns
and
situations
in
order
to
reduce
significantly
the
energy
consumption compared to the conventional Light Emitting
Diode (LED) lighting in buildings. In addition, we built 10 test
bed unit spaces for our test bed that were controlled
automatically. Through evaluation, the scenario-based smart
lighting system test bed presented in this study proved to be
about 54% better than conventional LED lighting in terms of
energy saving.
Keywords- smart lighting system; energy saving; internet of
things; LED.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The proportion of energy consumption by lighting in
Korea reaches 20% [1]. In particular, the amount of energy
consumed in buildings accounts for more than 30% of total
energy consumption. As the national government prohibits
the use of incandescent lamps, replacement of incandescent
lamps and fluorescent lamps with LED lighting is increasing
[2]. By replacing the existing fluorescent lamp with LED
lighting, it is possible to reduce the energy by 30%, and
when using dimmable LED lighting, energy savings of about
50% are possible [1]. However, in order to save energy, a
smart lighting solution can be developed and popularized to
optimize energy consumption through lighting control based
on time, situation, and space to enhance user satisfaction by
supporting customized service, and suitable for the situation
instead of simply replacing with LED lighting [3]. In this
study,
we
propose
a
scenario-based
energy
saving
mechanism suitable for user 's behavior pattern and situation
in order to reduce energy consumption much more than
conventional LED lighting in the unit space of a building.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II describes the smart lighting system architecture. In
Section III, scenarios appropriate to the behavioral patterns
of each unit space are described. In Section IV shows energy
saving performance measured in each unit space. Finally,
conclusions are discussed in Section V.
II.
DESIGN OF SMART LIGHTING SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
The purpose of this study is to utilize a smart lighting
system to provide users with functional, human conformity,
emotional satisfaction and realize energy savings. For this
purpose, ten unit spaces, such as an office, a conference
room, a restroom, a hallway, parking lots, a staff lounge,
stairwells, a lobby, a cafe, and a development room (lab) are
selected, and user behavior patterns are defined for each unit
space. We constructed a test bed to control the lighting
according to each unit space and environment. The test bed
in the unit space is designed to allow the user to directly
control the lighting using the smart pad. It can also be
controlled automatically without user intervention for 24
hours based on scenarios such as environmental events,
schedule, and user behavior patterns.
Figure 1 shows a network configuration of a smart
lighting system. The management server can control the
lighting through the gateway, and the sensors transmit the
event to the management server through the gateway when
the
event occurs. In addition, power consumption
is
measured by Current Transformer (CT) sensor in each unit
space, and it is transmitted to the management server or
service servers through the metering gateway so that the
amount of power consumed in real time in each unit space
can be monitored.
III.
SCENARIO DESIGN APPROPRIATE TO BEHAVIOR
PATTERNS IN UNIT SPACE
In this study, the scenarios of 10 unit spaces for user
convenience and energy saving were defined for behaviors
and events. The behavior of each space was derived through
the survey of major act patterns by space and empirical test
subjects [4]-[6]. Table 1 shows the behavioral scenarios for
the three unit spaces, such as office, restroom, and stairwells
among 10 unit spaces. In Table 1, the main activities in the
office were defined as weekly work, lunch, and night work,
and the scenarios were designed so that the lighting of the
office could be appropriately controlled according to the
main activity. The main behaviors in the restroom were
defined as the activities, such as entrance, toilet, washing and
color temperature control according to the season. In the
stairwells, scenarios for the entrance, movement, and fire
occurrences were designed.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1.
Configuration of smart lighting system
TABLE I.
DESIGN OF SCENARIOS IN ACCORDING TO ACTIVITIES
Space
Behavior/
Event
Scenario
Office
Day work
Turn on all lights if there are occupants.
Automatically adjusts the brightness of lights
according to the amount of daylight.
Turn off all lights if there is no occupant.
Lunch
If there are occupants, dimming to 20-25% of
working time brightness.
Night work
Illuminates above occupant seat by human
body detection. (3 ~ 5m from user's spot keeps
20 ~ 25% illumination, Turn off if it is more
than 5m away from the user’s spot)
Turn off the corresponding lights if there is no
occupant.
Restroom
Entrance
Lights are illuminated by each zone through
human body detection.
Lights are turned off for each zone when no
human body is detected.
Toile
Lighting in individual partition by human
body detection when entering individual
partition.
Wash/Mirro
r
The ceiling lights and indirect lights are turned
on when washing hands or approaching the
vanity unit to see the mirror.
Four
seasons
Spring/Autumn 4000K, Summer 5000K,
Winter 3000K
Stairwells
Entrance
When a person opens the door of a stairway,
the light upstairs and downstairs including that
floor are turned on. (The brightness of the
lighting on the floor where the person is
located is 150 lux, Upper/lower floors apply
50%)
Movement
Identify the person's position and direction of
movement so that the floor in the direction in
which the person is moving gradually
becomes bright. In this case, the lighting
brightness is the same as the entrance
Fire
occurrence
If a fire is detected by a sensor, a fire alarm is
sent to the management server through the
gateway.
Detects the human body and informs the
management server through the gateway of
the position of the evacuator. The escapable
floors connected to the outside are brightly lit
at 150 lux and the other floors lit at 30 lux.
Illuminates the current number of floors on the
wall and illuminates the arrow lights to induce
evacuation.
IV.
ENERGY SAVING EVALUATION
In order to investigate the real -time power consumption
in each unit space, we measured the power consumption by
attaching CT sensors to the switchboard of the test bed.
Figure 2.
Test bed configuration for evaluation.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

We implemented the system so
that the physical
quantities (target illuminance, use time, dimming) of each
behavior can be matched as much as possible. Also, we
evaluated the energy saving rate compared to LED lighting
by measuring the energy amount satisfying the illuminance
value for each unit space. Figure 2 shows the test bed
configuration for energy saving evaluation.
Figure 3.
Real-time energy consumption monitoring in the office room.
Figure 3 shows how the management server monitors the
energy consumption measured in the office every one minute.
The dotted line represents the power consumption for the
conventional LED lighting, and the bar represents the power
consumption when controlling the LED lighting based on
behavioral
scenarios
using
the
smart
lighting
system.
Compared with real-time power consumption data of about
25 minutes, it shows 45% energy saving rate compared to
LED lighting.
Figure 4.
Anuual energy saving rate of proposed mechanism.
Figure 4 shows the annual energy saving rate for each
unit space when applying the scenario-based mechanism
presented in this study against existing LED lighting. For
each unit space, the bar graph on the left shows annual
energy saving rate when the behavior frequency is high, and
the right bar graph shows annual energy saving rate when the
behavior frequency is low.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this study, a smart lighting system test bed is
constructed for 10 unit spaces of a building to provide users
with functional, human conformity, emotional satisfaction
and realize energy savings. We defined behavior patterns
suitable for each unit space. The smart lighting recognizes
each behavior pattern, and controls lighting to suit each unit
space and environment. Each test bed has a higher energy
saving rate than the conventional LED lighting because the
lighting is systematically controlled according to each
defined pattern behavior. In particular, lobby, hallway, and
stairwells showed energy savings of more than 70%
compared to LED lighting, and on average, energy savings
of more than 54% (see Figure 4). The scenario based energy
saving mechanism in the smart lighting system suggested in
this study has high utility for energy saving while providing
user convenience.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Technology Innovation
Program (10053787, (1) Development of LED system
lighting commercializing technologies on unit area based on
scalable general purpose lighting devices) funded by the
Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (Korea).
REFERENCES
[1]
J. U. Shin, “The Efficiency of LED lighting using Intelligent
Control,”
The
Proceedings
of
he
Korean
Institute
of
IIIuminating and Electrical Installation Engineers (KIIEE),
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 4-8, Jan. 2015.
[2]
P. Waide, “Phase out of Incandescent lamps,” International
Energy Agency, Apr. 2010.
[3]
J. C. Lee and H. J. Jang, “LED Light Source and Control and
Management Lighting System IT Convergence Technology
for Energy-saving,” The Proceedings of he Korean Institute of
IIIuminating and Electrical Installation Engineers (KIIEE),
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 15-20, Jan. 2012.
[4]
J. Y. Park, J. S. Lee, C. U. Jeong, and E. J. Seo, “A Study on
the Visual Point and Preferred Lighting System by Activity in
the bedroom,” Korean Society for Emotion and Sensibility
Fall Conference, pp. 43-44, Nov. 2013.
[5]
M. J. Lee, “A Study on the Comparison of the Emotional
Experiment from Fluorescent Lamp and LED Lighting”
Journal of the Korean Institute of IIIuminating and Electrical
Installation Engineers, vol.26, no. 8, pp. 8-17, Aug. 2012.
[6]
J. H. Kim, J. K. Ko, and M. R. Cho, “A Study of Integrated
Evaluation of System Lighting and User Centered Guideline
Development-Focused on the Lighting Design Method for
Office Space-.” Journal of the Korean Institute of Interior
Design, vol.23, no. 6, pp. 78-86, Dec. 2014.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-626-2
ICONS 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems

