Towards building health systems 
 
Elaine Lawrence, Karla Felix Navarro  
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia 
{Elaine.Lawrence;Karla.Felixnavarro}@.uts.edu.au 
Jaime Andres Garcia Marin, Christian Sax 
mHealth Laboratory, iNEXT 
University of Technology Sydney, FEIT 
Sydney, Australia  
Jaime.GarciaMarin@uts.edu.au, 
Sax.Christian@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports on a series of interviews with 
three mainstream and three alternative/complimentary health 
professionals about the use of interactive technologies as a tool 
to improve the physical and mental well-being of the elderly. 
The questions are based around an Analytic Framework for 
investigating Interactive Technologies and the elderly.  Four 
balance games using the Wii were demonstrated to the 
interviewees and their opinion of the suitability or otherwise of 
these games are discussed. The chosen games did not meet with 
universal approval but did provide us with useful insights on 
how to ensure the development of appropriate games for the 
elderly. 
Keywords-interactive games; balance; elderly; healthcare. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
    The percentage of aged persons over 65 is increasing 
dramatically both in Australia and worldwide and 
unfortunately, as people age, their mental and physical 
health deteriorates and impacts negatively on their quality of 
life.  This paper specifically investigates ways in which 
Interactive technologies, namely the Nintendo Wii could 
help to overcome functional decline, maintain independence 
and preserve social connectivity and engagement among 
seniors [1]. We report here on the results of semi-structured 
interviews with six health professionals who have 
specialized in caring for the elderly and infirm. Each of the 
interviewees answered a series of questions before being 
shown a demonstration of four Wii balance games. They 
were asked to comment on the suitability or otherwise of the 
games for their clients. Our project should, in time, reveal 
(a) the potential impact of interactive computer technologies 
on client and health carer outcomes and satisfaction levels, 
(b) the potential impact of clients’ abilities to adapt to the 
introduction of new technologies, and (c) the potential 
benefits and obstacles to the application of interactive 
technologies in aged care environments, both at client’s 
homes and at aged care facilities [2] [3].  Because of word 
limit constraints this paper only addresses some of the 
comments of the interviewees. 
    Research has shown that it is vital to encourage the 
elderly and infirm to do physical and mental exercises and 
support them throughout the process in order to maintain 
good health outcomes [1] [2] [3]. Current information and 
communication technologies on assistive healthcare mainly 
focus on remote sensing using the Internet and wireless 
sensor networks for collecting health condition data of 
elderly people. Examples include the ReMoteCare system 
[4] [2] as well as the Personal Health Monitor developed at 
our university [5]. Very little effort has been made to 
support collaborative planning, implementation procedures 
for 
physical 
training 
(such 
as 
callisthenics 
and 
cardiovascular exercise), mental training and assessment 
such as described by [6]. Some further research on the use 
of the Wii for the elderly has been undertaken by [7] [8].  
    We have used an Analytic Framework based on work by 
[1] to investigate the aged population cohort, to study the 
economic and environmental factors and to help in assessing 
whether interactive technologies are useful for the elderly, 
chronically unwell and the infirm [3]. 
    In Section 2 of the paper, we provide background 
information 
on 
the 
Analytic 
Framework 
and 
the 
interviewees. In Section 3, we describe the four chosen 
games and comments by the interviewees about their 
suitability or otherwise. We discuss the findings in Section 4 
and draw our conclusions in Section 5, while pointing the 
way ahead for future research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
    The authors have modified the Analytic Framework used 
by [1] in their landmark study on Consumer Health 
Information Technologies used by the elderly, chronically ill 
and underserved. Our modifications limited the technologies 
to Interactive Game Technologies, in this case, four Wii 
games that concentrate on balance. Figure 1 below sets out 
the Analytical Framework which served as a basis for our 
semi-structured interviews and demonstrations. 
 
In July and August 2010 we conducted semi-
structured 
interviews 
with 
six 
mainstream 
and 
alternative/complimentary  health professionals who are 
used to dealing with the aged (See Table 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
 
Figure 1: Analytic Framework (based on [1]) 
 
The questions sought to establish their background in 
using exercises for the elderly (over 65); their use or non-
use of any interactive technologies with the elderly and the 
reasons; their awareness of the use of interactive 
technologies in either elderly persons’ own homes or at 
institutional care facilities; the types of exercises they 
actually used or devised and improvements or lack of 
improvements in physical and mental health outcomes. 
After each interview one of our researchers demonstrated 
the four chosen Wii balance games namely: Tightrope, 
Bubble, Skateboard and TableTilt. In one interview an 
interviewee performed the exercises.    
Professor Aged Care works with people suffering 
from Parkinson’s disease so uses a whole range of 
therapeutic activities like land  based and aqua based 
strengthening exercises, balance, agility, memory, focus 
things. For her patients recovering from stroke she uses 
rehabilitation type exercises. The only technology she has 
used is voice training [Lee Silverman Voice Therapy 
programme – LSVT] for recovering stroke patients. Her 
patients do lots of gym work with treadmills, balance 
machines, getting in and out of beds, and on and off toilets. 
They play manual games such as board, table and floor 
games to improve hand-eye coordination and arm 
movement to extend the range of movement and 
coordination.  If we actually teach somebody with 
Parkinson’s disease to dance they can stop that frozen 
movement and also the shaking movement because they are 
focussing on the neurological biofeedback of the task rather 
than the social situation. 
Feldenkrais Practitioner recently worked with the 
elderly in a Community Health Centre in conjunction with 
their Stepping [On] Programme. This program is a falls 
prevention programme run by a number of area health 
services around [NSW] that is designed to teach physical 
activity leaders how to incorporate falls prevention 
 
TABLE I.  INTERVIEWEES’ DETAILS AND PSEUDONYMS 
Pseudonym 
Details 
 
Professor Aged 
Care:  Sydney 
Hospital Researcher 
and director of 
Health and the 
Aged Centre.  
 
 
Professor of Aged and Extended Care Nursing at 
a Sydney University examining aged and 
dementia care, health technologies, models of 
aged and dementia care, health technologies and 
the aged. 
Mainstream Health Professional. 
 
Feldenkrais 
Practitioner: 
Certified 
Feldenkrais 
Practitioner in 
Sydney. 
 
 
The Feldenkrais method is designed to improve 
movement repertoire, aiming to expand and 
refine the use of the self through awareness, in 
order to reduce pain or limitations in movement, 
and promote general well-being[10]. He teaches 
Feldenkrais method to a diverse range of people 
such as those with injuries, the elderly, actors, 
athletes, or those who just want to move more 
easily. Alternative or Complimentary Health 
Professional. 
 
 
 
Physiotherapist:  for 
28 years the 
physiotherapist at 
an large Aged Care 
Centre in Sydney 
 
 
 
Responsible for assessing [the patients]. There 
are objective assessments for patients when they 
enter the facility and a care plan is then instigated 
for use by the rest of the nursing staff and also 
for the physiotherapy assistants to carry on with 
walking assistance or passive class exercises etc 
Mainstream Health Professional. 
 
 
Alexander 
Technique 
Practitioner: 
Certified Alexander 
Technique 
Practitioner in 
Sydney. Own 
Practice. 
 
 
The Alexander Technique is a subtle but 
extremely powerful re-education process that 
seeks to restore the natural physiological 
organization for posture, balance and movement 
to the human system. Deals with patients aged 
from teenagers to over 90 years old. Also teaches 
Alexander Technique at a Community College in 
Sydney. Alternative or Complimentary Health 
Professional. 
 
 
Music Therapy 
Specialist: 
Expressive Arts & 
Music Therapy 
Specialist at a 
University in 
Sydney as well as 
having a Sydney 
private practice. 
 
 
Twenty years experience in working with single 
patients and groups in movement therapy, music 
therapy and personal development. 
Alternative or Complimentary Health 
Professional. 
 
Associate Professor 
Chronic Care at a 
Sydney University. 
 
 
Self management, secondary prevention and 
weight management in cardiac and chronic 
illnesses. Cardiac and Pulmonary Rehabilitation, 
recovery and psychosocial adjustment. Women 
and heart disease. 
 Mainstream Health Professional. 
 
 
exercises into their exercise programs. They train older 
people about improving balance. She had not used 
interactive technologies but had seen the Wii used by a 
110
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

colleague for artistic purposes but not with the elderly. 
When I [first] started working with the elderly there was a 
programme developed in Melbourne called Getting 
Grounded Gracefully. The researcher [developed] it in 
conjunction with the National Research Institute on Ageing.  
They did a trial with the movements he devised to assess 
how effective they were for the elderly  and it  got a great, 
big tick [of approval]. She believed [the exercises] 
increased their confidence, enabled them to feel capable to 
leave their homes and navigate to places they need to go to 
with confidence. This decreased their feelings of isolation 
and the fear of being alone. [The exercises] improved their 
overall sense of wellbeing, because you do feel well when 
you move, and it improves their outlook.  
    Physiotherapist has worked for the last 28 years as the 
physiotherapist at an Aged Care Home in the Eastern 
Suburbs of Sydney. There are about 70 men and women 
(both low and high care) in the facility. Physiotherapist 
makes objective assessments when the patients enter the 
facility and a care plan is instigated for use by the rest of 
the nursing staff and also for the physiotherapy assistants to 
carry on with walking assistance or passive class exercises 
etc. She has not used Interactive technologies at all either in 
the Aged Care home or in her business. She states that many 
of her patients are high care and therefore she uses passive 
exercises such as helping the patient perform a stretch. She 
uses Thera Bands for resistance training (see Figure 2). 
    Alexander Technique Practitioner stated that most 
people over the age of 65 are displaying some infirmities in 
their balance. He has had considerable experience working 
through the Alexander Technique with that cohort. The 
oldest student I had came to me when he was 96 years of 
age. He was very shuffly and it took him 10 minutes to get 
up the stairs to my teaching room, but he found it very 
beneficial. He had sessions with me for 4 years and passed 
away 2 months before his hundredth birthday. Feldenkrais 
Practitioner does not actually teach people exercises but gets 
them to understand how their body is organized and how to 
release the wrong patterns that they have utilized since they 
went to primary school. He is not au fait with interactive 
technology but stated that after receiving our phone call and 
emails, he googled Wii programs and also Project Natal [11] 
and I thought ‘Wow! This is a pretty exciting field’.  I wasn’t 
really aware it existed. 
Music Therapy Specialist attended the same interview as 
Alexander Technique Practitioner as they work together on 
a number of levels. Her expertise is in the area of movement 
therapy, music therapy and personal development. Her 
comments are related specifically the Wii  
games as she actually did the exercises and these will be 
reported in Section 4. 
Associate Professor Chronic Care works in Cardiac and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation with people with a history of a  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Exercising with Thera Bands. Source: [13] 
 
 cardiac events, of varying kinds including big heart attacks, 
or heart surgery as well as very small changes so we think 
of it as secondary prevention. She does not use interactive 
technologies with her patients because the physiotherapy 
gym is nearly always hospital based and it is multipurpose. 
It has treadmills, bikes, elastic bands [Thera Bands], and 
steps for going up and down and that’s the  kind of the 
accepted thing.  She is familiar with the Wii as she has her 
own and stated the Wii is a perfect way to do home based 
exercise. Our biggest problem is getting people to Cardiac 
Rehabilitation because they must attend the gym at the 
hospital.  
  
IV. 
THE GAMES 
  As can be seen from the above our experts therefore had 
little experience in the use of interactive technologies in 
their work with the aged but Associate Professor Chronic 
Care had used the Wii herself at home. In this section we 
discuss their reactions to the Wii games. Table 2 sets out 
details of the games that were demonstrated. 
 
The Tightrope 
    Professor Aged Care felt that the Tightrope game would 
terrify the Parkinson patients as the instructions came up far 
too quickly. She did not feel it would be a problem for 
stroke patients if they were able walk independently. 
Feldenkrais Practitioner stated the Tightrope was good for 
balance and weight shifting but could be a bit confusing for 
the user as the picture is opposite to what they do e.g. the 
picture shows you one foot in front of the other; however, on 
the board your feet are apart. Physiotherapist commented 
that many of her high care patients would not be able to read  
 
 
111
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

TABLE II. GAMES DEMONSTRATED 
 
Description 
Main purpose 
 
Tightrope: Your 
avatar stands on 
the balance board 
and tries to keep 
upright.  
 
Balancing on a tightrope – use both feet side by 
side although the avatar appears to place one foot 
in front of the other. An object may appear on the 
tightrope and you must jump over it. If you do 
not reach a goal within a period of time you 
cannot move up a level. 
 
 
Bubble: The 
avatar appears in 
a bubble;  
 
navigate down a 
river safely.  
 
 
Again use of the balance board – both feet are 
used to keep steady – the avatar mirrors what the 
person is actually doing on the screen. The aim is 
to avoid  bumping into river banks.  
The longer the walk the higher the score.  
 
Skateboard: 
Avatar appears on 
a skateboard and 
must keep upright  
 
Again use of the balance board but this time the 
person must occasionally push off with a foot on 
the ground just as if he/she were on a real 
skateboard. Must avoid obstacles, jump over 
skate jumps and improve scoring. If you do not 
reach a goal within a period of time you cannot 
move up a level. 
 
 
Table 
Tilt: 
A 
ball appears on a 
Table Tilt which 
has holes on it – 
the person must 
tilt the Table Tilt 
in order to get the 
ball to flow down 
the hole.  
 
Person stands on balance board and by shifting 
weight the table tilts and the ball/s move towards 
or away from the holes. More balls and more 
holes appear so it is more difficult. If you do not 
reach a goal within a period of time you cannot 
move up a level. 
 
the instruction, however she thought the low care patients 
would find it lots of fun and she suggested they could use 
rollators (See Figure 3) to keep themselves steady. 
Alexander Technique Practitioner also mentioned that his 
patients would find this game challenging and upsetting, 
particularly if their avatar fell. He believed it was difficult to 
read and do the actions at the same time and suggested 
audio feedback. Music Therapy Specialist stated that 
falling from a tightrope between two skyscrapers is anxiety-
producing stimulus, which makes people tighten their necks 
and shoulders and sabotages their balance reflex. She did 
the 
exercises 
herself 
and 
mentioned 
that 
reading 
instructions spread across the screen may be confusing and 
less compatible with kinesthetic awareness than auditory 
feedback. Associate Professor Chronic Care felt it was a 
useful exercise because it is about balance and shifting 
weigh and commented our instructor was using his quads 
and a bit of his core. She thought this game would appeal 
more to men than women. 
 
The Bubble 
    Professor Aged Care was more impressed with this one 
stating that it would need to be much slower so they’ve got a 
chance of success. What would probably happen is they 
would probably keep hitting the side the whole time - it 
could be frustrating, worrying. They could pick up speed 
over time. Start very slowly until they get used to these 
things. Feldenkrais Practitioner indicated this game 
allows movement forwards and backwards and side to side, 
which is a good strategy. Physiotherapist thought this one 
was fun and could be easily used in the aged care facility or 
at home. She believed it could be used by people holding 
onto a balance frame or rollator for support. Alexander 
Technique Practitioner approved of this one also – the 
movement on the screen matched what the exerciser was 
doing – unlike the Tightrope. Music Therapy Specialist 
stated that the side to side movements of the body 
correspond well with the screen movements, so this would 
be good for stimulating body awareness of weight 
distribution on the feet. She criticized the technique for 
slowing down as the linking of speeding up of the image 
with leaning forward and slowing down with leaning back is 
a very unrealistic (and potentially dangerous for the elderly) 
since it does not correspond to human movement.  If the 
elderly are learning from this game to lean back in response 
to wanting to slow down it could actually lead to falling 
backward. Associate Professor Chronic Care thought this 
one was gentle and safe but would not be useful for her 
cardiac rehabilitation patients as it did not raise their heart 
rate sufficiently. She stated it was better than Tightrope as a 
starting exercise. 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Rollator for Stability( has brakes). Source: [14] 
 
 
112
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

Skateboard 
Professor Aged Care stated that her aged patients would 
not relate to Skateboarding as it is outside their experience. 
She suggested a game with a scooter or a bicycle would 
have more appeal to the elderly.  She did feel it might 
appeal to males who were in better health or those classified 
as High Functioning. Feldenkrais Practitioner decided this 
one was good for counterbalance and gave locomotion 
practice as people have to kick off from the floor from time 
to time as on a real skateboard. Physiotherapist believed 
the younger and more able of her patients would find it 
useful and fun. She indicated patients would need good 
coordination and flexibility and it provide them with 
opportunities for varied flexion and rotation. Alexander 
Technique Practitioner was not keen on this as he felt you 
could not read and operate the skateboard at the same time. 
His patients could have issues with putting their foot on and 
off the board. Music Therapy Practitioner felt this game 
most corresponds to realistic human movement simulation 
and the leaning and pushing off one needs to do on a real 
skateboard.   She too stated that elderly people may not 
have the experience or inclination to learn this skill because 
they would think it is for teenagers. She warned it would be 
necessary to be careful when first working with this one 
since turning is sometimes linked to a backward lean, which 
may be tricky for the elderly. Associate Professor Chronic 
Care felt this game was more challenging and provided a 
better workout but, although she liked it herself, she did not 
think her patients would. 
 
Table Tilt 
    Professor Aged Care endorsed this game as it required  
quite fine balance, as the participant must just move the 
table slightly. This  one would be quite relevant because it is 
slow enough to be able to achieve something. You don’t 
want to have activities that are impossible to achieve as it 
becomes too distressing for people and just give. She said it 
was a familiar game for the elderly. Feldenkrais 
Practitioner also liked this game as it was a good exercise 
which worked well for elderly persons. Counterbalance is 
necessary. Physiotherapist stated that this one was good for 
concentration and would help her patients to stay focused. 
She believed it was a fun game as well. Alexander 
Technique Practitioner did not endorse this game as he 
believed it encouraged patients to tense up and lose balance 
He stated he wants people relax and loosen up. Music 
Therapy Practitioner did not comment on the Table Tilt. 
Associate Professor Chronic Care stated that patients 
would need posture help on this one. She suggested having 
a wider walking frame around the footpad for balance 
assistance if the patient started to fall a bit. She liked this 
game for the elderly as it would be familiar. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
    As can be seen from the above section the use of the Wii 
Balance Games we selected for examination by the health 
professionals did not meet with universal approval. A 
common criticism concerned the fact that the participants 
would have to read the instructions while attempting to do 
the exercise. Many of the elderly have fading eyesight so 
this would be difficult for them. Some of the patients with 
whom our professionals worked could not read English as 
they were from a non-English speaking background. The 
use of audio instructions was suggested by some of our 
interviewees but again many elderly people have hearing 
loss so that too could give rise to problems. Training with 
the Wii games would be necessary because people do not 
like to fail or appear silly in front of their peers. 
Feldenkrais Practitioner emphasized that a lot of the 
movement strategies that she used also included getting up 
and down from the floor, because that’s what people fear, 
they fear falling and they fear that they can’t get up. So this 
reduces their confidence too. The alternative/complimentary 
practitioners concentrated more on every day type 
movements trying to get their clients to be more aware of 
their bodies and their sense of balance. Many of their 
exercises concerned getting up and down from a chair, from 
a bath or from the floor. They wanted their clients to feel 
confident in posture and balance and they could see the 
benefit of some of the Wii games.   
    It was also noted that no Interactive Technologies were 
currently in use in any of the areas in which the interviewees 
worked. They were however interested in the Wii games 
and thought that they could definitely be introduced into 
gyms and/or aged care facilities under supervision and that 
people would have to be introduced to the games slowly and 
see rewards or improvements. The mainstream professionals 
felt that many of the games would appeal more to men than 
women. They felt that the social aspect of using the Wii 
would be important. The interviewees were united in their 
opposition to the Skateboard game and commented that the 
patients would be attracted to games with which they were 
familiar e.g. Table Tilt and perhaps riding a bicycle rather 
than a skateboard. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
    In our ongoing investigation of the use of interactive 
technologies for the aged and infirm we believe that 
obtaining specific insights into how professionals look at 
balance exercises was extremely useful. We are aware now 
that reading the instructions whilst doing the exercises in 
probably not the best way for an elderly cohort. The use of a 
trainer to teach the elderly would be important as would the 
use of a rollator and/or frame to give the elderly a feeling of 
support once they were playing the games. 
    It is apparent to us that these games are more relevant to 
the young and we are currently investigating how to design 
games that are more age relevant. We also intend to 
investigate the new Project Natal [11] (now called Kinect 
[12]) when it arrives in Australia as it might prove to be 
more adaptable for the elderly cohort. One Kinect game 
called ‘Your Shape-Fitness Evolved’ serves as personal 
113
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

trainer with a variety of exercises including Yoga and could 
be a possibility for elderly users. We have commenced our 
next task of testing the games on a cohort of people over 65 
years of age to elicit their opinions and to see how whether 
their opinions accord with the professional professionals’ 
perspectives. 
     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the six interviewees for 
their insights and time. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Jimison H., Gorman P., Woods S., Nygren P., Walker M., Norris S. 
and Hersh W: “Barriers and Drivers of Health Information 
Technology Use for the Elderly, Chronically Ill, and Underserved”. 
Evidence Report/Technology Assessment No. 175 (Prepared by the 
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center under Contract No. 290-02-
0024). AHRQ Publication No. 09-E004. Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality. November 2008. 
[2] Lawrence, E., Sax, C., Felix Navarro, K. and Mu Qiao: “Interactive 
Games to Improve Quality of Life for the Elderly: Towards 
Integration into a WSN Monitoring System”. In Proceedings of The 
International Conference on eHealth”, Telemedicine and Social 
Medicine (eTELEMED 2010), St Marteens, February 2010, pp. 10-
17, doi: 10.1109/eTELEMED.2010.21.  
[3] Lawrence, E., Sax, C, Felix Navarro, K.: “Improving Health 
Outcomes for the Elderly: An Analytic Framework”. 23rd Bled 
eConference eTrust: Implications for the Individual, Enterprises and 
Society”, Bled, Slovenia, June, 2010, pp. 441 – 454, doi: 
[4] Fischer, M., Lim, Y.Y., Lawrence, E., Ganguli, L.K. and Kargl, F.: 
“ReMoteCare: Health Monitoring with Streaming Video”. IEEE 7Th 
International Conference on mBusiness, July 2008, Barcelona, Spain, 
doi: 10.1109/ICMB.2008.16.  
[5] Leijdekker, P., Gay, V. and Lawrence, E.: “Smart Homecare System 
for Health Tele-monitoring”. International Conference on Digital 
Society, IEEE Computer Society, March 2007, pp. 3-3, doi: 
10.1109/ICDS.2007.37. 
[6] Chilukoti, N., Early, K., Sandhu, S., Riley-Doucet, C. and Debnath, 
D: “Assistive technology for promoting physical and mental exercise 
to delay progression of cognitive degeneration in patients with 
dementia”, Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BIOCAS 
07), IEEE Computer Society, November 2007, pp.235-238, doi: 
10.1109/BIOCAS.2007.4463352. 
[7] Sugarman, H., Weisel-Eichler, A., Burstin, A. and Brown, R.: “Use of 
the Wii Fit system for the treatment of balance problems in the 
elderly: A feasibility study”. Virtual Rehabilitation International 
Conference, 
July 
2009, 
pp. 
111-116, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICVR.2009.5174215. 
[8] Gil-Gomez, J.A., Lozano, J.A.; Alcaniz, M. and Perez, S.A.:  
“Nintendo Wii Balance board for balance disorders”. Virtual 
Rehabilitation International Conference, July 2009, pp.213–213,  
doi:10.1109/ICVR.2009.5174251.  
[9]    IJsselsteijn, W., Nap, H.H., Poels, K. and de Kort, Y.:  “Digital Game 
Design for Elderly Users”. Proceedings of the 2007 conference on 
Future Play, May, 2007, pp. 17-22, doi: 2007 ISBN:978-1-59593-
943-2.  
[10] Strauch, R.: “An overview of the Feldenkrais Method®”. Sourced 
from: http://www.somatic.com/articles/feldenkrais_overview.pdf. 
[11]  Project Natal: “You Are the Controller”. Sourced 2nd May, 2010 from 
http://www.xbox.com/en-US/live/projectnatal/. 
[12]  Anonymous Kinect gets gamers off the couch, sends Wii 
packing,Technotes, http://www.apcmag.com, August 2010, pp. 11 
[13]   “Exercising with Thera Bands” . Sourced August, 2010 from: 
http://www.stoningtonvna.com 
[14]  Sourced August, 2010 from: 
http://www.gobilitymobility.com/Rollator.html
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

