Adapting the CO2-Compass Architecture to Further Optimize Data Generation 
Methods 
Enhancing CO2 Emission Forecasts by Minimizing the Area of Observation 
Lucas Hüer, Hans-Jürgen Pfisterer 
Faculty of Engineering & Computer Science 
University of Applied Sciences Osnabrück 
Osnabrück, Germany 
Email: {l.hueer | j.pfisterer}@hs-osnabrueck.de 
Helge Fischer, Sebastian Lawrenz 
Institute for Software & Systems Engineering 
Technische Universität Clausthal 
Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany 
Email: {helge.fischer | sebastian.lawrenz}@tu-clausthal.de 
Oliver Thomas 
Chair of Information Management & Information Systems 
University of Osnabrück 
Osnabrück, Germany 
Email: oliver.thomas@uni-osnabrueck.de 
 
 
Abstract—Climate change is one of the most important social 
issues of recent years. Every new scientific insights and political 
decisions make it clear that innovative ways of attacking the 
climate change are needed. Minimizing emissions are especially 
important in order to stop the greenhouse effect and thus a 
source for global warming. Therefore, the software of the CO2-
Compass was developed to provide a transparent overview of 
the electricity production and related CO2 emissions. 
Containing the service of a 24 hour forecast of these data, the 
CO2-Compass serves as a control tool to decide when electrical 
devices should be used from an ecological point of view. This 
paper strives to improve the existing architecture of the tool, by 
adding new sources of data collection and thus optimize the 
outcome of all offered services by the CO2-Compass. Therefore, 
the main goal of this paper is to improve the existing 
architecture of the first monomythical prototype towards a 
flexible and expandable microservice based architecture.   
Keywords-CO2 Emission Reduction; Software Engineering; 
Energy Production; Renewable Energies; Energy Transition; 
Data Warehouse; Microservices. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the wake of an undergoing energy transition, several 
parts of the German energy industry are continuously 
changing. This mainly implies a shift from centralized to 
decentralized energy production, as well as a shift from 
conventional towards renewable energy sources [1]. Moving 
towards an increased utilization of renewable energy sources 
has multiple advantages, such as security of supply due to 
unlimited sources or higher sustainability levels due to 
decreased CO2 emissions [2] [3]. However, to better facilitate 
all advantages that go hand in hand with using renewable 
energies, it is necessary to align the electricity usage of 
electrical devices with a more resource-saving energy 
production [4] [5]. Thus, electrical devices can be used at 
times in which the regenerative part of created energy is high 
and CO2 emissions are low. To determine the best time of a 
day for this scenario, the software tool “CO2-Compass” was 
created [6]. By using this tool companies, as well as 
households can get a transparent overview of the electricity 
production and CO2 emissions that go along with it. Further, 
a 24-hour-forecast will be provided to show the likely 
development of electricity production and belonging CO2 
emissions. This source of information supports a user’s 
decision when to use energy-intensive hardware (like heat 
pumps, air conditioners, charging stations or production 
machines) by determining the point of time at which CO2 
emissions of the energy production are lowest. In a first 
version of the CO2-Compass, data collection is limited to the 
aggregated information that is made available by the four 
major power grid operators in Germany (50Hertz, Amprion, 
TenneT, Transnet BW) [7]. Decentralized power supply 
information and detailed data broke down to local energy 
providers are not yet included. However, to have a reliable 
knowledge base about power generation and its CO2 
emissions, it is necessary to have as much local information 
as possible, which in turn would optimize the data in terms of 
relevance, reliability and accuracy. A growing share of 
renewables and a fluctuating, decentralized power production 
will require flexible and open interfaces in order to process 
the accruing data. In order to tackle this problem and further 
optimize the data generation of the CO2-Compass, this paper 
is tackling the following research question: 
 
What kind of changes can be made to the existing CO2-
Compass architecture to improve its data generation in 
terms of data quality while keeping it expandable? 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

To answer this question thoroughly, following structure 
will guide the reader through this article: Once a scientific 
and political background is given in Section 2, there will be 
a description of the current CO2-Compass architecture and its 
limitations in Section 3. Those limitations will then serve as 
an explanation for the refactoring of the existing architecture. 
All changes that are necessary to optimize the data generation 
of the CO2-Compass will then be described in Section 4, 
which is followed by an elaboration on the creation of 
timelines in terms of gathering data in Section 5. Once all 
changes are explained, a discussion and conclusion will 
complement this paper. 
II. SCIENTIFIC AND POLITICAL BACKGROUND  
The 21st century has so far been largely shaped by 
scientific and political discussions and decisions relating to 
climate change [8]. Government representatives from most 
countries meet regularly and reach agreements on various 
actions to protect the environment and society from negative 
consequences of the climate change. One of the biggest 
factors that has been addressed in previous climate summits 
is the emission of greenhouse gases [9]. A main objective of 
the Paris Agreement is to limit global warming to 1.5°C [10]. 
In order to curb the emission of these gases and thus to 
combat the greenhouse effect that primarily leads to global 
warming, the global community is setting ever more 
ambitious goals. The German government has, for instance, 
decided to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 40% between 
1990 and 2020 [11]; goals for the following decades are even 
more ambitious. It is therefore necessary to develop 
innovative products and services that support companies and 
consumers in reducing CO2 emissions. A promising field in 
which CO2 emissions can be vastly minimized is the 
electrical power generation [12]. The saving potential can be 
seen when looking at the development of direct CO2 
emissions per kilowatt hour of electricity related to the 
German electricity mix. Since 1990 the direct CO2 emissions 
per kilowatt hour of electricity (in g/kWh) was reduced from 
764 g/kWh to 523 g/kWh in 2016. This is equivalent to a 
reduction of 31% [12]. This reduction is explained by Petra 
Icha as follows: “If the proportion of an energy source with a 
high CO2 emission factor, such as brown or hard coal, falls in 
favor of an energy source with a lower CO2 emission factor, 
such as a renewable energy sources […] the emission factor 
of the electricity mix also decreases” [12]. In other words, 
different energy sources are associated with different levels 
of CO2 emissions. Therefore, improved transparency in terms 
of the energy mix and its forecasted development over the 
next hours is needed, to base decisions on electricity usage of 
electrical devices on the decrease of CO2 emissions. Based on 
our knowledge, there are some associations that transparently 
show the electricity mix and the associated CO2 emissions. 
Good examples of this are Agora Energiewende, 
electricityMap or KlimAktiv Consulting. However, there are 
some drawbacks when using these services and thus the CO2- 
Compass was developed in order to offer new solutions in the 
field. The CO2-Compass has two major advantages over 
potential competitors: On the one hand, there is the 
possibility of displaying the CO2 emissions per individual 
transmission network provider, which leads to more relevant 
information for individual households and companies. On the 
other hand, there is a REST interface with which the software 
can be coupled to any hardware in the form of devices and 
machines. However, in order to add new functions, interfaces 
and solutions or to optimize all existing ones, the CO2-
Compass is under continuous improvement. One of these 
improvements is the change of its architecture to increase the 
data quality. 
III. EXISTING ARCHITECTURE OF THE CO2-COMPASS 
AND IT’S LIMITATIONS  
Initially, the CO2-Compass software was developed on 
basis of the SCRUM method. By setting up, processing and 
completing 
functional 
and 
non-functional 
system 
requirements, the software was created incrementally. The 
system requirements were based on an interview with an 
expert in the field of electrical engineering. However, to 
optimize the CO2-Compass, further software-development 
methods were used. The decision to use as an agile, user 
centred approach aimed to generate a first prototype.  
 
 
Figure 1 – Initial Architecture of the CO2-Compass 
The initial architecture of the CO2-Compass consists of 
three main system-parts (see Figure 1): The Crawler, the 
CO2-Calculator and the REST API. Within a first step, the 
raw data from the European Network of Transmission 
System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E) is collected by 
a self-developed crawler at five-minute intervals, before 
being stored in a separate database. The electricity production 
data (in MW) for every high-voltage power grid operator in 
Germany (50Hertz, Amprion, TenneT, Transnet BW) and for 
Germany as a whole are now stored in this database. There 
are currently 18 different types of energy sources for 
producing electricity. After the crawler updates and collects 
the raw data from the transmission networks, the specific CO2 
values for the associated production figures are calculated by 
the CO2-Calculator. These values are also stored in the 
database and can thus be assigned to the network operator and 
the type of production. This calculation takes place for each 
individual provider in five-minute intervals and provides 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

values every 15 minutes. Furthermore, the CO2-Calculator 
creates a CO2 forecast for each production type for the next 
24 hours every day at midnight, which is also stored in the 
internal database. An integrated REST API enables public 
access to the generated data and the forecast values. This 
interface can be used in a variety of ways to couple the 
emission information with electrical devices. One example is 
the connection of the CO2-Compass to intelligent charging 
stations, which continuously query the current electricity mix 
(including the associated emission values). In combination 
with the predicted values from the forecast, charging stations 
can thus be switched in such a way that they only start 
charging when there is a low-emission electricity mix. 
However, a fast-charging option instead of the eco-friendly 
charging is still possible and customers can use an approach 
which suits them best. 
The current implementation of the CO2-Compass is based 
and limited on an input interface which collects data from 
ENTSO-E. Information about power generation and CO2 
emissions are published through their transparency platform 
at the abstract level of control areas. They hereby fulfill an 
EU Regulation, where data must be published by control 
areas. By definition, these control areas are “a coherent part 
of the interconnected system, operated by a single system 
operator” [13]. These areas usually reflect the high-voltage 
grid of a whole country (e.g., in France or Portugal) or supra-
regional network operators (e.g., in Germany the four control 
areas of the in Section 1 mentioned transmission system 
operators). Since TenneT’s geographical coverage, to name 
an example, ranges from the Danish border to the Austrian 
border (see Figure 2 and [7]), a precise indication of the CO2 
emissions of locally consumed power is hardly possible.  
 
Figure 2 – Control Areas in Germany 
One reason for this is the so called “copper plate illusion” 
(translated 
from 
the 
German 
term: 
Illusion 
einer 
Kupferplatte), which describes the problem of assuming that 
electricity producers and consumers act without restrictions, 
and can thus generate and consume electricity as they please 
without transmission bottlenecks or energy loss [14] [15]. 
However, for a lossless transmission of electricity, the power 
grid would have to be a superconducting (copper) plate - 
hence the name - which is not the case. Therefore, an 
extension of the input interfaces in order to have more 
specific, locally relevant data is needed. Those changes and 
their relevance will be presented and explained in the coming 
sections. 
IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE  
The actual state of the architecture (see Figure 1) was 
explained in the previous section. An agile procedure was 
chosen to prove the functionality of the CO2-Compass at 
short term. However, after a successful establishment of the 
prototype, the next step will be a change in the architecture to 
a more modular system, within the goal of “low coupling, 
high cohesion”. This paradigm means that modules or 
services inside the software architecture should be as self-
contained and independent as possible, and thus depending as 
less as possible on other components [16]. Based on this, 
following objectives for the architecture have been defined: 
 
1. Modular design and expandable splitting of the 
monolith and change the architecture to micro-
services [17]  
2. A clear division of components into layers to 
define security and sovereignty of data 
3. Data-driven design for analytic services 
 
The proposed architecture is shown in Figure 3 consisting 
of separated layers. On the left hand side there are various 
data sources, such as IoT-Devices and (smart) meters to 
measure the current power production and calculate related 
CO2 emissions at specific points. In addition to the ENTSO-
E database and other sources of forecast (such as local 
weather and solar radiation data) should be imported by a 
(web)-crawler. Based on this information local power 
generation which is not metered online (e.g., solar panels on 
rooftops) can be forecasted and taken into account. For all 
own and third parties’ generators in a local grid with 
measuring devices, the available data should be transferred 
via a clear defined interface into the databases. Now, based 
on these extended data collection, additional substitute values 
can be generated and processed together with metered raw 
data in the CO2-Calculator. Data integration into the data 
warehouse takes place in the Data Integration Layer. This 
layer manages the incoming data flows, filters and cleans it 
(if necessary) and transfers it into a data warehouse. Services, 
like a broker or the web crawler, receive and structure the 
data beforehand. The following Data Warehouse Layer 
stores and manages the data for all services and handles 
incoming raw data. The raw data are divided into at least two 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

different databases. The first one is the Metadata DB, which 
contains meta data and information about the data itself, such 
as the origin of this data. The Raw Data DB contains the 
values themselves (or based on the DIKW-Pyramide so 
called data [18]) that means for example the measured 
electric power (12.5 megawatts per hour at 2019-05-08 
12:35:00). 
However, even if the Metadata DB and the Raw Data DB 
are independent at first sight, they have a close relation. This 
comes out of the fact that every column with specific values 
in the Raw Data DB has a meta description in the Metadata 
DB (see Table 1).  
 
TABLE I. SMALL EXTRACT FROM TWO RAW DATA COLUMNS 
Power Volumes  
Timestamp 
12.5 
2019-05-08 12:35:00 
15.5 
2019-05-08 12:37:00 
24.4 
2019-05-08 12:39:00 
 
The associated metadata in the Metadata DB contains, for 
example, the link to the corresponding columns, the unit (here 
megawatts per hour and datetime in the format YYYY-MM-
DD HH-MM-SS), information about the sensor (time interval 
between two measuring points [here 2 Minutes]) and the 
description of the data source (e.g., metering device of a wind 
park).  
Moreover, as shown in Figure 3 the service data are 
separated from the raw data. The service data (here shown as 
Calculated Data and Substituted Data) are the data sources 
which belong to a specific service inside the Service Layer. 
This separation ensures to have a clear separation on the one 
hand and on the other hand to improve the data access 
depending on the intended use. This ensures that the 
generated data (which might be wrong when the service or 
the AI fails) does not get mixed up with the raw data.  
The Service Layer contains the modules and services for 
the application of the CO2-Compass itself. One service for 
example calculates the CO2 component of the current power 
mix (CO2-Calculation Service) and proposes services to 
generate missing data (indicated here as AI based Calculation 
Services) to increase the accuracy (see also Section 5). Via a 
REST Interface the user can then interact with the frontend 
of the CO2-Compass Application.  
In summary, it can be stated that a clearly separated but 
extendable architecture was introduced, which allows to 
extend the use cases of the CO2-Compass and to further 
develop mechanism to control and reduce the CO2 emissions. 
By introducing different layers, a high level of data security 
and a clean separation of incoming data is made possible. 
Thus, it can be differentiated easily between public non-
critical data sources like ENTSO-E and private data sources 
like smart meters. Furthermore, the Data Integration Layer 
will be designed similarly dynamic and expandable as the 
Service Layer. This enables an uncomplicated extension of 
the data warehouse with further data sources. 
V. CREATION OF TIMELINES 
To fulfill the requirements of more detailed information 
at local level, more timelines have to be implemented. Local 
data, as well as artificial data will give the necessary added 
value to have an in-depth view on a distinct power grid 
(hereafter simplified called “distribution grid”). The local 
data may be generated by measuring the power production 
like windmills or Combined Heat and Powerplants (CHPs) in 
the distribution grid. These metering devices have to be 
connected “online” and submit the data continuously. 
Missing values (see crosshatched bars in Figure 4) can be 
substituted by replacement values and discrepancies to the 
defined time patterns (e.g., hourly values instead of expected 
15 minutes) may be aligned immediately in the service layer.  
Estimating and generating artificial data opens the 
opportunity to gain a holistic view as well as compensate 
poor data quality from certain metering devices or other input 
sources. If not every power production (especially the small 
ones) or battery storages in cars or households are metered 
online a precise allocation of CO2 emissions is hardly 
possible. Even, for example, if a field of solar panels is 
equipped with metering devices, but poorly connected online, 
Figure 3 – Enhanced Architecture of the CO2-Compass 
IoT Devices 
and Meters
Forecast Data
ENTSO-E
Metadata DB
Raw Data DB
Data Warehouse Layer
Service Layer
MQTT
Web Crawler
Data 
Integration
Layer
HTTP
Broker 
Raw Data
Service Data
AI based
Calculation Service
CO² Compass
Application
CO² Calculation
Service
Substituted
Data
Calculated
Data
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

it may make sense to calculate artificial data and short-term 
prognoses based on solar radiation forecasts. It would also 
open opportunities to simplify the technical requirements and 
perform a cost-benefit consideration concerning metering in 
the context of an organically growing distribution grid driven 
by the energy transition (‘Energiewende’).  
An AI based calculation service (see Figure 5) can be 
used to generate the artificial data. It will base on AI methods 
like the recurrent network algorithm Long Short-Term 
Memory (LSTM) [19] and considers former results, non-
online metered devices which are submitted with delay, as 
well as relevant input variables (e.g., solar radiation, wind, 
energy prices or time of day) in order to train a neuronal 
network. 
 
 
Figure 5 – Generator for Artificial Data 
The output will be an estimation of produced power 
volumes and their dedicated CO2 emissions reflecting the 
characteristics of grid topologies and individual influencing 
factors in the local energy mix. Finally, the three data 
timelines containing specific CO2 emissions have to be 
weighted with allocated power volumes at the connection 
from the upstream grid, metered local power generators and 
estimated miscellaneous devices. As a result, this aggregation 
will now give a more precise, average CO2 emissions factor 
for the distribution grid in comparison to the rough proxy 
based on the ENTSO-E data. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Scientific warnings, as well as political decisions with 
regard to global problems arising from the climate change 
call for innovative solutions to minimize CO2 emissions. One 
of these solutions was developed in 2019 and is since being 
continuously improved to optimize its functions: the so-
called CO2-Compass.  
Initially, the architecture of the CO2-Compass was 
focused on basic data collection in order to transparently 
present all CO2 emissions from the power mix based only on 
the data of ENTSO-E and thus from the four big power grid 
operators in Germany: 50Hertz, Amprion, TenneT, and 
Transnet BW. However, as explained in Sections 3 and 4, the 
data quality can be improved significantly when additionally 
taking local data sources, as well as artificial data sources into 
account. While local data can be gained out of decentral 
energy sources, such as solar panels or wind parks, the 
generation of artificial data is based on calculations of 
artificial intelligence algorithms. The artificial data thus 
opens the opportunity to gain a holistic view by closing gaps 
in which no local data collection is possible due to pure 
connection for instance. These new data sources improve the 
total data quality in terms of accuracy and completeness and 
thus enable the possibility to generate more precise 
information.  
In total, a new data-driven architecture with a modular 
design has been developed, which can still be extended in 
case of future adaptions and include more and new data 
sources. Via a new separation into three layers based on 
microservices, a high level of data security and a clean 
separation of incoming data is made possible. First, the Data 
Integration Layer manages all incoming data flows, filters 
and cleans it (if necessary) before transferring it into a data 
warehouse. This is where the second layer, the Data 
Warehouse Layer, stores and manages all relevant data in 
different databases. In the final Service Layer, all transferred 
and stored data is then used for creating solutions for different 
customers.  
Future research will elaborate even further on the CO2-
Compass, its optimization potential and especially the testing 
in different environments. On the one hand, it is planned that 
the software will then act as part of a product-service system, 
by creating and utilizing interfaces with different kinds of 
electrical devices, such as charging stations or heat-pumps.
AI based
Calculation
Service
Local data
Solar radiation
Prev. artificial data
…
Time of day
Energy prices
Forecast
Artificial Data
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
08:00 08:15 08:30 08:45 09:00 09:15 09:30 09:45 10:00 10:15 10:30 10:45 11:00 11:15 11:30 11:45 12:00
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
CO2 emissions [g/kWh]
Local Data
Artificial Data
ENTSO-E Data
Aggregated and
weighted
emissions [g/kWh]
Figure 4 – Timelines with CO2 emissions 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

On the other hand, there will be additional research related 
to trigger IoT devices and to control conventional power 
generators via results of the CO2-Compass with the aim of 
minimizing the CO2 emissions to meet individual emission 
reduction paths.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was conducted in the scope of the research 
project SmartHybrid – Electrical Engineering (ID: ZW 
685003732), which is partly funded by the European 
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the State of 
Lower 
Saxony 
(Investitions- 
und 
Förderbank 
Niedersachsen – NBank). We would like to thank them for 
their support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Guidolin and R. Guseo, “The German energy 
transition: Modeling competition and substitution between 
nuclear power and Renewable Energy Technologies.,” 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, no. 60, 
pp. 1498–1504, 2016. 
[2] 
G. Resch, A. Held, T. Faber et al., “Potentials and 
prospects for renewable energies at global scale.,” Energy 
policy, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 4048–4056, 2008. 
[3] 
S. Shafiei and R. A. Salim, “Non-renewable and 
renewable energy consumption and CO2 emissions in 
OECD countries: A comparative analysis.,” Energy 
policy, vol. 66, pp. 547–556, 2014. 
[4] 
P. Finn, C. Fitzpatrick, D. Connolly et al., “Facilitation of 
renewableelectricity using price based appliance control 
in Ireland’s electricity market,” Energy, vol. 36, no. 5, 
2952_2960, 2011. 
[5] 
A. Pina, C. Silva, and P. Ferrão, “The impact of demand 
side management strategies in the penetration of 
renewable electricity,” Energy, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 128–
137, 2012. 
[6] 
L. Hüer, N. Stadie, S. Hagen et al., “Der CO2-Kompass: 
Konzeption und Entwicklung eines Tools zur 
emissionsarmen Stromnutzung,” INFORMATIK 2019: 50 
Jahre Gesellschaft für Informatik-Informatik für 
Gesellschaft, 2019. 
[7] 
K. Heuck, K. D. Dettmann, and D. Schulz, eds., Überblick 
über die geschichtliche Entwicklung der elektrischen 
Energieversorgung, Springer Vieweg, Wiesbaden, 2013. 
[8] 
G. P. Brasseur, D. Jacob, and S. Schuck-Zöller, 
Klimawandel in Deutschland: Entwicklung, Folgen, 
Risiken und Perspektiven., Springer, 2017. 
[9] 
M. Prys-Hansen, M. Lellmann, and M. Röseler, “Die 
Bedeutung der Klimafinanzierung für den Pariser 
Klimagipfel 2015,” 2015. 
[10] J. Rogelj, M. den Elzen, N. Höhne et al., “Paris 
Agreement climate proposals need a boost to keep 
warming well below 2 °C,” Nature, vol. 534, no. 7609, 
pp. 631–639, 2016. 
[11] B. Schlomann and W. Eichhammer, eds., 
Energieverbrauch und CO2-Emissionen industrieller 
Prozesstechnologien: Einsparpotenziale, Hemmnisse und 
Instrumente., Fraunhofer-Verlag, 2013. 
[12] P. Icha, “Entwicklung der spezifischen Kohlendioxid-
Emissionen des deutschen Strommix in den Jahren 1990 - 
2018,” Umweltbundesamt, 2019. 
[13] European Parliament and Council, Commission 
Regulation (EU) No 543/2013 of 14 June 2013 on 
submission and publication of data in electricity markets 
and amending Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 714/2009, 
2013. 
[14] M. Kahles, “Überprüfung der einheitlichen deutschen 
Stromgebotszone nach der Elektrizitätsbinnenmarkt-
Verordnung,” Würzburger Berichte zum 
Umweltenergierecht, no. 44, 2019. 
[15] J. Aengenvoort and H. Sämisch, “Die Illusion einer 
Kupferplatte,” https://www.next-kraftwerke.de/energie-
blog/kupferplatte-stromnetz. 
[16] S. Newman, “Building microservices: designing fine-
grained systems,” O'Reilly Media Inc., 2015. 
[17] S. Newman, “Monolith to Microservices: Evolutionary 
Patterns to Transform Your Monolith,” O'Reilly Media, 
2019. 
[18] J. Rowley, “The wisdom hierarchy: Representations of the 
DIKW hierarchy.,” Journal of Information Science, vol. 
33, no. 2, pp. 163–180, 2007. 
[19] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term 
memory,” Neural Computation (Journal), vol. 9, no. 8, 
pp. 1735–1780, 1997. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

