The Modified Cement Composite Materials for Electromagnetic Shielding and 
Stress Detections 
 
 
Steffan Pavel, Machan Ladislav, Vrba Radimir 
Department of microelectronics  
FEEC, Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
e-mail: steffan@feec.vutbr.cz, machan@feec.vutbr.cz, 
vrbar@feec.vutbr.cz 
Junek Jiri, Cechmanek Rene 
 
Research Institute of Building Materials 
Brno, Czech Republic 
e-mail: junek@vustah.cz, cechmanek@vustah.cz
 
 
Abstract — This article deals with the measurement system and 
the use of special cement composites with carbon particulates. 
The type of carbon particulates consequently determines the 
electrical properties of cement composite material. These 
materials can be used for electric heating, electromagnetic 
shielding or stress measurement. 
Keywords-smart concrete; shielding efficiency; composite 
materials; carbon fibers; stress/strain detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, characteristics of composite materials based 
on cement include also other applications of cement 
materials which could be used, among others, for 
construction of self-monitoring buildings, bridges, etc. 
Besides, monitoring the usual properties (mechanical 
stability over the period of time, environmental resistance, 
design limits or economic profitability) is beginning to 
become more important and significant for construction of 
buildings. Requirements for construction of self-monitoring 
buildings are consisted of the interconnection of more 
different fields. In our particular case it is the question of 
connecting the construction and electrical engineering. At 
the end of the practical application self-monitoring buildings 
should facilitate the construction, installation or construction 
work.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Three areas of application of composite materials 
During the current research, which is being done, it has 
been found out that the composite cement materials with 
carbon fibers allow for monitoring transients that are 
generated in the material for example due to pressure, 
tension, temperature and humidity. This is shown in Figure 
1. Electrical properties of cement composites materials can 
be affected by a suitably selected type and amount of carbon 
particles. 
The purpose is to provide complete solutions, including 
evaluation of the implemented electronic system that allows 
for obtaining and transmitting information to the user. The 
invented self-monitoring material can be used for the 
implementation of an individual measuring object [1][2]. In 
bridge structures, it is necessary to take into consideration a 
possibility of the function of the autonomous operation of 
the system. Major part of the research is focused on solving 
the problems of sensing impedance of the composite 
material which plays an important role in issues of aging 
and degradation of metallic materials due to strong alkaline 
environments. Corrosion of electrodes can be reduced by 
means of suitable corrosion inhibitors. For the corrosion 
diagnosis the accelerated model tests are used.  
For the actual application we need to know the relation 
between accelerated model test and the real environment. 
In Section 2, there is a description of measuring 
electromagnetic fields shielding. In Section 3, there is 
a description of alternative test method for the testing of 
shielding effectiveness of composite shielding materials. In 
Section 4, there is description of theoretical aspects of 
mechanism of shielding. The results of alternative 
measurement methods are in Section 5. Next Section 6 
describes response of material to stress/strain load and the 
last Section 7 is conclusions. 
II. 
EMC MEASURING OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS 
Measuring the effectiveness of electromagnetic fields 
shielding 
is 
usually 
done 
in 
an 
electromagnetic 
chamber. The measurements are used for transmitting and 
receiving antennas, test and signal generator. To receive the 
test signal, electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) receiver or 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

spectrum analyzer are normally used. Measurements are 
generally usually carried out the way that the receiver, the 
receiving antenna and the necessary cables are placed inside 
the chamber or inside the test field. Transmitter (signal 
generator) and the broadcast antennas are located on the 
outer side of the tested object. The locations of the antennas 
depend on the EMC chamber or a box. The accuracy of the 
measurement depends on the correct location and position 
of the antennas [3][4]. 
 The problem could appear when it is necessary to 
measure the shielding effectiveness of the material or the 
chamber or the box from which they are constructed. 
Especially in the development stage and in order to provide 
accurate measurements it is not possible to construct the 
whole chambers or boxes which are too big. This solution is 
expensive and also time consuming.  
 
Similar problem appears when it is necessary to know the 
shielding efficiency of the construction materials such as 
bricks, plasterboard, concrete, etc. These materials could also 
be called, especially during their development stage, 
composite materials.  
The main problems during the construction of chambers 
or boxes are caused by using the types of materials which are 
mentioned above. The chamber or box doors have usually 
the main influence on the whole shielding, in the other 
words, the doors always represent the weakest part of these 
chambers. But the construction of the doors, e.g., made from 
the concrete, is really complicated, almost impossible [7]. 
III. 
COAXIAL FLANGE 
Materials for EMI shielding are different from those of 
magnetic shielding. EMI shielding is a rapidly growing 
application of carbon materials, especially of short carbon 
fibers. This review addresses measurement methods from 
carbon fibers materials usable for EMI shielding, including 
non-structural and structural composites, colloidal graphite, 
as well as EMI gasket materials. 
 The alternative test method for the testing of shielding 
effectiveness of shielding materials is often stated in 
literature [3]. The presented coaxial test apparatus is suitable 
for thin materials like plastic or metallic board, fabric 
material, etc. This setup is not suitable for the construction 
materials (concrete, bricks, etc.) because it is very 
complicated to produce the thin concrete board with the 
maximal height thickness of around 1 mm. The modified 
test setup was produced, after analyses of commonly 
available measurement solutions and setups. Our flange was 
mainly designed for frequency range from 9 kHz up to 1 
GHz. The shape and dimensions of the flange were 
calculated for the 50 Ω input and output impedances [5]. 
 
 The design of the flange was done according to the basic 
mathematical relations [5] 
 
 
,
ln
60
1
2
a
a
Z
r
M


                                       (1)  
where 
 
ZM is the characteristic impedance of the measurement 
system (50 Ω); 
εr is the relative permittivity (in this case is equal 1, air);  
a2, a1 are the radius of the coaxial line (flange). 
 
The transition from the N-type connector to the opposite 
end of the flange has the linear shape for both central and 
external parts. This shape was chosen for the better 
fabrication. The linear shape could be optimized for the 
better impedance which especially should be suitable for 
frequencies over the 1 GHz. The central flange conductor is 
fabricated from the brass. The rest of the flange is made from 
the aluminum alloy. The flange was tightened by the torque 
wrench after the inserting the test composite and it was 
always tightened by the same value of torque. This setup 
increases the accuracy of each measurement and also 
increases the repeatability during the several measurements. 
The detailed description of the measurement chamber is 
stated in literature [7]. 
 
The measured scattering parameters of the flange itself 
are given in Figure 2. The S11 and S22 are in the whole 
range of interest under the -15 dB which refers to the good 
matching of the both test ports with the measuring system. 
The insertion losses in both directions (S21 and S12) are in 
the measuring frequency range less than 1 dB. This data 
refers to the accurate design of the whole flange. The flange 
itself will have the insignificant influence on the total 
dynamic range of the whole measurement setup. The 
dynamic range will be mainly affected by the used 
measuring devices (generator and spectral analyzer). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Measured scattering parameters of the realised coaxial flange 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

IV. 
MECHANISM OF SHIELDING 
The primary mechanism of EMI shielding is usually 
reflection. For reflection of the radiation by the shield, the 
shield must have mobile charge carriers (electrons or holes) 
which interact with the electromagnetic fields in the 
radiation. As a result, the shield tends to be electrically 
conducting, although a high conductivity is not required. 
For example, a volume resistivity of the order of 1 [Ωcm] is 
typically sufficient. However, electrical conductivity is not 
the scientific criterion for shielding, as conduction requires 
connectivity in the conduction path (percolation in case of a 
composite material containing a conductive filler), whereas 
shielding does not. Although shielding does not require 
connectivity, it is enhanced by connectivity. Metals are so 
far the most common materials for EMI shielding. They 
operate mainly by means of reflection due to the free 
electrons in them. Metal sheets are bulky, so metal coatings 
made by electroplating, electroless plating or vacuum 
deposition are commonly used for shielding. The coating 
may be on bulk materials, fibers or particles. Coatings tend 
to suffer from their poor wear or scratch resistance [6]. 
 
Absorption is usually a secondary mechanism of EMI 
shielding. For significant absorption of the radiation by the 
shield, the shield should have electric and/or magnetic 
dipoles which interact with the electromagnetic fields in the 
radiation. The electric dipoles may be provided by BaTiO3 or 
other materials having a high value of dielectric constant. 
The magnetic dipoles may be provided by Fe3O4 or other 
materials having a high value of the magnetic permeability, 
which may be enhanced by reducing the number of magnetic 
domain walls through the use of a multilayer of magnetic 
films. The absorption loss is a function of the product σrμr, 
whereas the reflection loss is a function of the ratio σr/μr, 
where σr is the electrical conductivity relative to copper and 
μr is the relative magnetic permeability. Silver, copper, gold 
and aluminum are excellent materials for reflection, due to 
their high conductivity. Superpermalloy and mumetal are 
excellent for absorption, due to their high magnetic 
permeability. The reflection loss decreases with increasing 
frequency, whereas the absorption loss increases with 
increasing frequency [6]. 
 
V. 
EMI RESULTS 
The measured scattering parameters refer to the accurate 
design of the coaxial flange. The next problem will appear 
with the prefabrication of the concrete ring as the test 
sample. This ring has to be produced with the high accuracy 
of its dimension. The example of measured shielding 
efficiency of the composite concrete material is depicted in 
the Figure 4. There is also shown the data which was 
measured with the brass disc. The shielding efficiency of the 
brass disc is the 115 dB at kHz range and around 70 dB at 
the GHz range. The shielding efficiency of the composite 
concrete material is only several dB in the range from 100 
MHz up to 1 GHz. So low shielding efficiency of the 
concrete material is mainly caused by this small thickness of 
the material (only 8 mm). Figure 3 Measured scattering 
parameters of the realized coaxial flange. 
 
Due to the skin effect, the composite material having 
conductive filler with a small unit size of the filler is more 
effective than one having conductive filler with a large unit 
size of the filler. For effective use of the entire cross-section 
of a filler unit for shielding, the unit size of the filler should 
be the same or smaller than the skin depth. Therefore, the 
filler of unit size 1 µm or less is typically preferred, though 
such a small unit size is not commonly available for most 
fillers and the dispersion of the filler is more difficult when 
the filler unit size decreases. Figure 4 shows the observed 
parameters for different types of carbon materials. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Shielding efficiency of the brass calibration test disc and the 
composite concrete test sample. 
 
Figure 4.  Shielding efficiency of the brass calibration test disc and the 
composite concrete test sample. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

VI. 
STRESS/ STRAIN MEASUREMENT  
Another usage of smart concrete is used for sensing the 
load of concrete elements and structures mainly for 
measurements which use strain gauges. A strain gauge is a 
device used to measure strain on the surface part, by means 
of mechanical stress (tension, compression, etc). In fact, the 
strain gauge measures the relative deformation. Mechanical 
stress cannot be measured directly, and thus converted from 
the measured deformation. To calculate the necessary 
knowledge of the modulus of elasticity of material under 
consideration. 
Composite material with carbon particles is sensitive to 
load changes [8]. This sensitivity is manifested by a rapid 
change of the measured impedance. Measurement was 
carried out in static mode. Gradually the load was adjusted in 
range from 0 kN to 1500 kN, after reaching a maximum, the 
sample was gradually relieved to the minimum load of 200 
kN. The characteristic diagram of impedance response for 
smart concrete measured to stress load are given in Figure 5. 
Strain properties of the composite can be evaluated by 
changing impedance. The impedance changing sensitivity 
regarding the deformation can be widely affected by a proper 
choice of concrete admixtures [8]. Generally, in all types of 
carbon admixtures, the impedance of component is affected 
by the deformation and can be used to detect the changes. 
For impedance measuring we used an excitation frequency at 
1 KHz, and an excitation voltage of 1 V (peak-peak) were 
experimentally set. Appropriately selected admixture has an 
effect on the relative size of the impedance changes 
depending on the pressure. The voltage level of the 
measuring voltage depends on used metal electrodes. For 
measuring impedance we used copper electrodes. These 
electrodes have a high resistance to corrosion in an alkaline 
environment.. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Concrete block - stress measurement 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Composite materials with carbon fibers were produce. 
Cement composite materials with admixture of carbon 
particulates, can be really used for electromagnetic shielding 
or stress sensing. The shielding efficiency of material is 
composed from several parts. The reflection loss, absorption 
loss and multiple path reflection losses are the main three 
parts of the whole electromagnetic shielding. For the 
accurate classification of the shielding efficiency of 
composite concrete material it will be necessary to measure 
each 
part 
of 
the 
whole 
electromagnetic 
shielding 
effectiveness. This measurement could be done by the 
vector network analyzer. The dependency of the thickness 
of the material and shielding efficiency could be determined 
in the harmony with measured data. The future work on 
EMI shielding will be focused on these problems and also 
on the compound of the composite concrete materials.  
Some of these materials are stress sensitive and we were 
measured them under cyclic press loading in range from 0 
kN to 1500 kN, after reaching a maximum, the sample was 
gradually relieved to the minimum load of 200 kN. The 
future work on stress measurement will be focus to increase 
the sensitivity of smart concrete materials.  
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade of the Czech Republic under the MPO ČR č. FR-
TI3/485 project. The described research was performed in 
laboratories supported by the SIX project; the registration 
number CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0072, the operational program 
Research and Development for Innovation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D.D.L. Chung, “Composite Materials“ - Second Edition, 
Springer, London, 2010, p. 349 ISBN 978-1-84882-830-8. 
[2] D.D.L. Chung, “Functional Materials“ – Vol.2 Electrical, 
Dielectric, 
Electromagnetic, 
Optical 
and 
Magnetic 
Applications (With Companion Solution Manual), World 
Scientific Publisher, 2010, p. 345 ISBN 978-981-4287-15-9. 
[3] IEEE Standard: Method for Measuring the Effectiveness of 
Electromagnetic Shielding Enclosures. EMC Society, New 
York 2006, p. 39. 
[4] J. Svačina, “Electromagnetic Compatibility, Principles and 
Methods. “ (printed in Czech) Brno University of Technology 
2001. “Join to European Union”.Volume 2, p. 156 ISBN 80-
214-1873-7. 
[5] D. Černohosky, Z. Novaček and Z. Raida, “Electromagnetic 
waves and lines. “ (published in Czech). Brno: Vutium 1999. 
p. 136 . ISBN 80-214-1261-5. 
[6] D.D.L. Chung, “Electromagnetic interference shielding 
effectiveness of carbon materials.“ Elesevier Science Ltd.: 
Pergamon (2000), Carbon 279-285. 
[7] J. Drinovsky, Z. Kejik, "Electromagnetic Shielding Efficinecy 
Measurement of Composite Materials" Measurement Science 
Review, 2009, vol. 9, No. 4, p. 109-112. 
[8] R. Cechmánek, J. Junek, B. Nespor and P. Steffan, “Carbon-
Based Composites Enable Monitoring of Internal States in 
Concrete Structures“, World Academy of Science, Engineering and 
Technology International Journal of Civil, Structural, Construction 
and Architectural Engineering Vol:8, No:10, 2014. 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

