Sensitive Information Protection on Mobile Devices Using General Access 
Structures 
 
Tomasz Hyla, Jerzy Pejaś, Imed El Fray, Witold 
Maćków, Włodzimierz Chocianowicz 
West Pomeranian University of Technology 
Szczecin, Poland 
e-mail: {thyla, jpejas, ielfray, wmackow, 
wchocianowicz}@zut.edu.pl 
Marcin Szulga 
Unizeto Technolgies SA 
Szczecin, Poland 
e-mail: marcin.szulga@unizeto.pl
 
Abstract- Mobility of users and information is an important 
feature of information systems that must be considered during 
design of sensitive information protection mechanisms. This 
paper introduces the architecture of MobInfoSec system. 
MobInfoSec is designed to be an information system that 
allows sharing documents with sensitive information using 
fine-grained access rules described by general access 
structures. The system is for users who want to use 
cryptographic data protection mechanisms to protect sensitive 
information on mobile devices with a specialized cryptographic 
module. MobInfoSec will be distributed, modular, and 
configurable cryptographic access control system to sensitive 
information that works in a public environment. The system 
will enable cryptographic protection of sensitive information in 
accordance 
with 
ORCON 
access 
control 
rules. 
The 
architecture is designed to be flexible enough, so several 
business scenarios can be implemented. The paper presents the 
MobInfoSec system, which the two main goals are to secure 
mobile information and to release the user from the obligation 
to monitor any classified information contained in his/her 
mobile device.  
Keywords-mobile device; sensitive information; access 
structure; ORCON. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobility of users and information is an important feature 
of information systems that must be considered during 
design of sensitive information protection mechanisms. 
Mobility of information causes that level of information 
protection, regardless of its location, must be the same or at 
least not lower than in other locations. Obtaining such 
property is not a trivial problem and requires creation of a 
system that will prevent leakage of access rights to certain 
information. 
Currently, information technology (IT) market does not 
offer a system that transparently enforces protection of 
sensitive information collected from various sources and 
stored on mobile devices. Moreover, the system should 
prevent its transmission to any third party without the 
originator consent. The major problem is the disclosure of 
such information to persons who are not authorized to view 
this information.  
This paper presents the architecture of MobInfoSec 
system, which will be distributed, modular, and configurable 
cryptographic access control system to sensitive information. 
The system will enable cryptographic protection of sensitive 
information in accordance with Originator Controlled 
(ORCON) access control rules [1]. A user will be released 
from the obligation to monitor any information (especially 
against unauthorized copying). The system will allow 
building confidence to software and hardware components of 
popular mobile devices available at the market.  
The MobInfoSec design takes into account the European 
Directive on Electronic Signatures and related standards 
developed by ETSI and CEN, and most representative of the 
ISO/IEC 
directives, 
recommendations 
and 
normative 
sketches available [2][3]. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 contains 
description of the key theoretical elements that are used to 
build MobInfoSec system, i.e., ORCON access control 
model and general access. Section 3 contains description of 
MobInfoSec architecture. The paper ends with summary and 
conclusions. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Originator Controlled Access Control 
The two main goals of MobInfoSec system are to secure 
mobile information and to release the user from the 
obligation to monitor any classified information contained in 
his/her mobile device. In practice, the mobile information 
should be protected and monitored in accordance with the 
ORCON requirements [1][4][5][6][7]. In this model, it is 
assumed that each resource (document) has its owner. A 
document owner has the authority to manage his/her 
documents, for example, he/she may have read, write or 
update right to his/her documents. However, the access 
control is done by an originator of the document (i.e., the 
entity which has, on behalf of the document owner, the right 
to share a document, or entity to which the originator has 
delegated that right). The owner can determine who can 
share a document, but the final decision is up to the 
document originator. It is assumed that any copy of the 
document must have the same access restrictions as the 
original document. A user with a read right to a document 
cannot share or make a copy of a document (i.e., it should be 
technically impossible).  
The implementation of ORCON rules is difficult (and on 
the IT market practically do not exists any system allowing 
to manage and secure documents according to ORCON 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

model), because in commonly used computers users has a 
wide access to operating system and memory. When the user 
has access to memory, he can access decryption key. 
However, few solutions to that problem exist. One of them, 
proposed by Yu-Yuan and Lee [1], shows that ORCON 
requirements might be enforced by a hardware-software 
mechanism provided by Secret Protection (SP) architecture 
[5][6], which protects directly Trusted Software Module 
(TSM). SP architecture consists of a trusted software 
module, operating at the application layer, and the SP 
mechanism in the system microprocessor. The authors 
present a text editor application that contains TSM 
implementing ORCON. TSM module cannot be bypassed or 
manipulated by the operating system, because of a direct 
connection with the SP mechanism. Also, Hoole and Traore 
[8] present a tool for the exchange of documents according to 
the ORCON model requirements. However, the solution uses 
only the software working in the OS environment and 
because of that, it does not provide complete security, but it 
is useful from business point of view.  
B. Access structures 
The MobInfoSec system use two main innovative 
elements to support ORCON model and information 
mobility requirements: a) a specialized cryptographic 
module for secrets protection on mobile devices, b) an 
access policy built over general access structures. The 
cryptographic module will be the source of trust and will 
support ORCON requirements. The module will protect 
directly Trusted Software Module (TSM) compliant with 
ORCON rules. In turn, the general access structures will 
allow 
generating 
appropriate 
information 
protection 
mechanisms, including group encryption schemes with an 
arbitrarily pre-defined access structure. 
An access structure [9] is a rule that defines who has 
access to particular assets in IT system. Access structures 
can be classified into structures with and without threshold 
[10][11]. 
Although 
threshold 
access 
structures 
are 
frequently used (e.g., the most familiar examples are (n, n) 
and (t, n) secret sharing schemes given by Shamir [12] or by 
Asmuth-Bloom [13]), the non-threshold structures are more 
versatile. It is especially visible when the sender of the 
information defines special decryption rules, which have to 
be met by the document recipient. 
C. General Access Structure 
Assume that 
u }
,...,
{u u,
U
n
2
1

 is a set of n participants. 
The set 
 
{
A2U
: a set of shareholders, which are 
designated to reconstruct the secret} is an access structure of 
U, if the secret can be reconstructed by any set
A
. The 
access structure 

 ,t n
 of the threshold scheme (t, n) is 
defined as follows: 


 
t
2 : A
A
U
,t n






It is easy to notice that in case of the access structure 

 ,t n
 of the threshold scheme (t, n), all users have the same 
privileges and credentials. Simmons [11] generalized a secret 
threshold sharing scheme (t, n) and gave the definition of 
hierarchical (multilevel) and compartmented threshold secret 
sharing. In an approach, in contrast to the classical threshold 
secret sharing, trust is not distributed evenly among the 
members of the participants’ set U. Multilevel access 
structures are particularly useful in organizations with a 
hierarchical structure and compartment access structures 
might be used in the cases that require the consent of various 
parties. Both structures are multilateral access structures, 
which mean that the set of participants is divided into several 
subsets and all participants belonging to the same subset 
have an equivalent role.
When it is possible to implement the access structure , 
we say that the structure is useful. An example of the access 
structures realization is the approach proposed by Benaloh-
Leichter [14]. However, the application of access structures 
to build a group-oriented decryption scheme is effective only 
when it is possible to reuse shares being in possession of 
participants. Solutions to meet this requirement are discussed 
in the work [4][15]. In this paper (Section III), the 
MobInfoSec system is based on the approach combining 
certificate public-key cryptography with general access 
structure [16][17]. 
D. Our contribution 
The main issue related to the ORCON model is of an 
architectural and implementation nature. In the case of the 
MobInfoSec system, the architecture supporting the ORCON 
model is based on the following innovative elements: 
 
a specialized SP cryptographic module; 
 
an access policy built over general access structures 
and assertions confirming permission to access 
sensitive information; 
 
a group encryption scheme, in which the decryption 
operation 
is 
preceded 
by 
a 
strong 
mutual 
authentication between the SP modules involved in 
the sensitive information decryption. 
The components mentioned above are partially consistent 
with a solution shown in [5][6]. In contrast to [5][6], 
MobInfoSec system uses a group encryption scheme based 
on a general access structure [16][17] and on a single secret 
stored in each SP module. Access structures might have 
different topologies (e.g., threshold, hierarchical) and may 
also change over time. The SP module can be used by its 
owner only after two conditions are fulfilled: 
1. all users belonging to the privileged shareholders set, 
which plays the combiner role, are authenticated 
with their SP modules. 
2. access rights authorization of the SP owner to 
sensitive information, which is going to be 
decrypted, is positive.  
III. 
MOBINFOSEC SYSTEM 
This section contains brief description of general 
MobInfoSec architecture followed by description of its 
subsystems. The subsystems are divided into three 
categories: subsystems that work on server-side of the 
system (at service provider site), subsystems that are used 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Policies and Assertions Management Subsystem
Dispatcher Subsystem
Standard Trusted Systems
Cryptographic and PKI Services Subsystem
User Subsystem
Mobile Device Protection 
Subsystem
External PKI Services 
Subsystem
External Model PKI 
Services Subsystem
External systems
use
+ Secret Protection (SP) module
+ Cryptographic Keys Repository  
+ Trusted Software
+ Trusted Storage
+ User aplication
  
+ Registry of Published Addresed Policies
+ Trusted External Distribution Server of:
- templates of addressed policies
- addressed access policies
- assertions
+ Trusted External Useres and Devices 
Distribution Server
  
+ Generator of Secured Documents
+ Trusted Registry of Public Documents
  
+ Addressed Access Policies and their Templates: 
Generator, Data Store, Trusted Server
+ Users and Mobile Devices:
Data Store, Trusted Server, Trusted Catalogue
+ Assertion (Atributes):
Generator, Data Store, Trusted Server
  
+ Cryptographic Keys Generator
+ Communication Module with External PKI Services
+ Cryptographic and PKI Services Module
  
+ PKI Model Services Server
+ Mobile Device
+ Untrusted Document Registry
  
use
use
use
use
use
flow
use
use
flow
use
use
use
External components
Server-side components
Mobile components
Figure 1.  MobInfoSec high-level architecture 
by mobile users and external subsystems which include 
services used by MobInfoSec. 
Architecture of MobInfoSec system consists of six 
logical subsystems connected with three subsystems in 
external environment (Figure 1). Physical elements of 
individual subsystems might be shared. Deployment of 
subsystems into physical elements will depend on the target 
number of documents that system will manage and on the 
existing services used by a MobInfoSec provider.  
The MobInfoSec consists of the following subsystems: 
 User Subsystem; 
 Mobile Device Protection Subsystem; 
 Dispatcher Subsystem; 
 Standard Trusted Systems; 
 Policies and Assertions Management Subsystem; 
 Cryptographic and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) 
Services Subsystems. 
A. Server-side components 
Policies 
and 
Assertions 
Management 
Subsystem 
(PAMS), Standard Trusted Systems (STS), and PKI and 
Cryptographic 
Services 
Subsystem 
(PCSS) 
will 
be 
implemented on server-side of the system, probably in cloud 
environment. Moreover, in basic MobInfoSec version 
Dispatcher Subsystem (DS) will be implemented on the 
stationary part of the system. 
1) Policies and Assertions Management Subsystem 
PAMS contains several components that provide key 
features and can be divided into three categories. The first is 
related to management of targeted access policies and their 
templates. It includes generation, storage and distribution. 
The second group of functions is related to management of 
users and mobile devices. The third category contains 
functions related to assertions (attributes) management. This 
subsystem only distributes the data to Trusted Standard 
Services and is not available directly for mobile devices. The 
subsystem stores targeted access policies and targeted access 
policies templates, users and devices information. 
2) Standard Trusted Systems 
During decryption process the user system (located on a 
mobile device) need information, for example, about other 
devices or other users’ assertions. The STS is the source of 
that information via the trusted components providing the 
following features: 
 
distribution of addressed access policies and 
assertions from PAMS to mobile devices (user 
systems); 
 
distribution of trusted devices and trusted user IDs 
to mobile devices (user systems); 
 
central users and devices authentication (e.g., MS 
Active Directory); 
 
provision of secure access to cryptographic 
services and PKI services. 
3) PKI and Cryptographic Services Subsystem 
This 
subsystem 
is 
a 
service 
provider 
for 
the 
authentication and encryption schemes. It will be integrated 
with existing PKI services.  
4) Dispatcher subsystem 
DS is used to generate targeted access policies and to 
encrypt documents with sensitive information in accordance 
with those policies. Generated policies are published in the 
repository located in STS. An encrypted document linked 
with a target access policy is published in External 
Subsystem in an untrusted document registry.  
B. Mobile components 
User Subsystem (US) and Mobile Device Protection 
Subsystem (MDPS) are two logical subsystems that are 
located in Mobile Device. 
1) User Subsystem  
US contains components that perform authentication and 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

authorization of users and mobile devices and distributes 
access policies to the mobile devices as well. Finally, US 
enforce access policy in the case of decryption. 
Additionally, in US may be located a trusted or untrusted 
(produced by external suppliers) application that presents 
the data subjected to access policy. US contains the trusted 
software configuration data set. The integrity of trusted 
applications and trusted data sets is protected by MDPS. If a 
trusted code requires using specific cryptographic keys, it 
receives them from MDPS through Secret Protection 
module. 
2) Mobile Device Protection Subsystem 
MDPS contains a dedicated cryptographic module called 
SP module. The module is a source of trust (at various 
levels depending on SP type). SP protects directly trusted 
US components implementing ORCON rules. This 
protection is possible by controlling the integrity of the code 
and configuration data. Different possible variants of 
specialized SP module are considered, including: 
 a software SP module; 
 a software SP module supported by the device 
with a built-in crypto processor  (e.g., smart card 
with a crypto processor); 
 a software token SP supported by the safety 
mechanisms built in mobile devices, e.g., laptops 
with TPM modules, tablets, and smartphones. 
SP 
module 
should 
provide: 
the 
protection 
of 
cryptographic keys; building confidence to software 
components in the device; the authentication of the mobile 
device; the protection of information exchange between the 
device and the network environment where there are other 
devices of this type. 
The whole device is managed by a trusted program 
module (Trusted Software), which has exclusive access to 
the functionality provided by SP module and to a reliable 
data storage module, i.e., TSM module. SP module should 
provide the following functionalities: 
 
TPM functionality, i.e., two keys (one for 
authentication and one for storage), the encryption 
and decryption keys from the store; 
 
registers and a code needed to verify the integrity 
(i.e., the integrity of mobile device hardware, 
system components and trusted code); 
 
the code that forces certain behaviour in the case of 
incorrect integrity verification. 
SP module must be unambiguously assigned to the 
mobile device. Moreover, in its most secure form, a transfer 
of SP to another device should be impossible. From the 
business point of view it should be permitted to reset the 
connection between SP module and mobile device, or even 
more: the ability to derive trust from one SP module to many 
devices. This means that one SP module, which is owned by 
the user, can protect all mobile devices in the local range. 
C. External components 
External PKI Services Subsystem provides PKI services, 
and External Model PKI Services Subsystem provides PKI 
services which are not available in External PKI and 
Cryptographic Services Subsystem and are necessary for the 
functioning of new algorithms and protocols. External Model 
PKI Services Subsystem is not a part of MobInfoSec system 
and belongs to its environment. 
External Systems subsystem contains untrusted mobile 
device that can be an untrusted device vulnerable for 
attempts that tamper its integrity. The mobile device is a 
platform that can be used to place dispatcher and user 
subsystems. 
Mobile 
Device 
Protection 
Subsystem 
(containing SP module) is integrated with a mobile device. 
Another system in external systems is an untrusted document 
registry. The untrusted document registry contains encrypted 
documents. It might be public http or ftp server or services 
intended to store files in a cloud, e.g., Dropbox. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main role of MobInfoSec is to secure documents 
that contain sensitive information. The system is designed to 
work in mobile environment. This is especially important 
when the most of the computer’ users use mobile devices. 
The architecture is designed to be flexible enough, so 
several business scenarios can be implemented. The system 
is intended, for example, for small companies that want to 
protect they business information, as well as for healthcare 
organization to allow physicians to work with medical 
documentation outside the healthcare site.  
The most difficult part in the creation of MobInfoSec is 
the design of Secret Protection module. From the 
information security point of view, it will better to design a 
new Secret Protection device from a scratch. However, it 
could be difficult to connect it with popular mobile devices 
and development costs would be initially too high. This is 
the reason why the system is targeted to use security 
mechanisms available in current devices or in devices that 
are easy to connect. The most difficult requirement to fulfil 
is prevention against unauthorized dissemination. This 
requirement implies that a special trusted application is 
needed for document viewing. The popular applications can 
be used, obviously after they are adjusted to MobInfoSec 
requirements and certified by a local system operator.  
MobInfoSec should achieve commercial status in 2015, 
preceded by a prototype in 2014. Current works are carried 
out in two areas simultaneously. The first area is related to 
authentication and authorization issues and the second one 
to group encryption algorithms. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This scientific research work is supported by NCBiR of 
Poland (grant No PBS1/B3/11/2012) in 2012-2015. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Yu-Yuan and R. B. Lee, “Hardware-Assisted Application-
Level Access Control”, In: P. Samarati et al. (Eds.): ISC 
2009, LNCS 5735, 2009, pp. 363-378. 
[2] NIST, “SP 800-164 Guidelines on Hardware - Rooted 
Security in Mobile Devices (Draft)”, 2012. 
[3] IETF, “RFC 6749 The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework”, 
October. 2012. 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

[4] Y. Sang, J. Zeng, Z. Li, and L. You, “A Secret Sharing 
Scheme with General Access Structures and its Applications”. 
International Journal of Advancements in Computing 
Technology, vol. 3, no. 4, May 2011, pp. 121-128.  
[5] J. S. Dwoskin and R. B. Lee, “Hardware-rooted Trust for 
Secure Key Management and Transient Trust”, In: ACM 
Conference on Computer and Communications Security 
(CCS'07), 2007, pp. 389-400. Alexandria, VA, USA. 
[6] R. B. Lee, P. C. S Kwan, J. P. McGregor, J. Dwoskin, and Z. 
Wang, “Architecture for Protecting Critical Secrets in 
Microprocessors”, In:  ISCA '05,  Proceedings of the 32nd 
Intl. Symposium on Computer Architecture, 2005, pp. 2-13. 
[7] J. Park and R. Sandhu, “Originator Control in Usage 
Control”, In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop 
on Policies for Distributed Systems and Networks, 
(POLICY’02). Washington, USA, 2002, pp. 60-67, IEEE 
Computer Society. 
[8] A. M. Hoole and I. Traore, “A Secure Document 
Management Tool for Scalable Collaborative Environments”, 
In: International Conference on Trust Management. Moncton, 
New Brunswick, Canada, (12 pages), 2007. 
[9] A. Renvall and C. Ding, “The access structure of some secret-
sharing schemes” In: LNCS vol. 1172, 1996, pp. 67-78. 
Information Security and Privacy, Eds.: Pieprzyk, J., Seberry, 
J.. First Australasian Conference, ACISP'96. 
[10] V. Daza, J. Herranz, P. Morillo, and C. Ràfols, “Extensions of 
access structures and their cryptographic applications”, 
Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and 
Computing, vol. 21, no. 4, 2010, pp. 257-284. 
[11] G. J. Simmons, ”How to (really) share a secret”, In: Advances 
in Cryptology - CRYPTO 88, LNCS 403, 1990, pp. 390-448. 
[12] A. Shamir, “How to share a secret”, Communication of the 
ACM, vol. 22, no. 11, 1979, pp. 612–613. 
[13] C. Asmuth and J. Bloom, “A modular approach to key 
safeguarding”, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 29, 
issue 2, 1983, pp. 208–210. 
[14] J. Benaloh and J. Leichter, “Generalized secret sharing and 
monotone functions”, in S. Goldwasser (ed.) Advances in 
Cryptology - CRYPTO '88, LCNS no. 403, Springer-Verlag, 
London, 1990, pp. 27-35. 
[15] C. Chum and X. Zhang, “Hash function based secret sharing 
scheme designs”, Security and Communications Network, 
vol. 6, issue 5, May 2013, pp. 584-592.  
[16] T. Hyla and J. Pejaś, “A practical certificate and identity 
based encryption scheme and related security architecture”, 
K. Saeed, R. Chaki, A. Cortesi, S. Wierzchon (Eds.), CISIM 
2013, Lectures Notes on Computer Science, vol. 8104, 
Springer-Verlag, 2013, pp. 178-193. 
[17] T. Hyla and J. Pejaś, “Certificate-Based Encryption Scheme 
with General Access Structure”, In: Cortesi, A. et al. (Eds.), 
CISIM 2012, LNCS, vol. 7564, 2012, pp. 41–55. 
 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

