A New Laboratory Equipment for Characterization of   
Smart Concrete Materials  
 
Ladislav Machan, Pavel Steffan 
Department of microelectronics 
BUT, FEEC  
Brno, Czech Republic 
machan@feec.vutbr.cz, steffan@feec.vutbr.cz
 
 
Abstract—“Smart Concrete” materials are concrete composites 
prepared according to the final application to achieve high 
electrical conductivity or strain gauge characteristics. Large 
electrical conductivity is used for heating control (protection 
sidewalks and roads from freezing). Strain properties can be 
used to measure the deformation of concrete structures 
(bridges, beams, pillars) or for weighing-in-motion of road 
vehicles. 
Keywords—smart 
concrete; 
impedance 
measurement;  
heating controll  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
“Smart materials” are drawing more and more attention 
these days. One of the most common structural materials 
used in engineering construction is cement and its mixtures 
(concrete and mortar). Cement is slightly conducting 
material, but its electrical conductance, EMI shielding 
effectiveness and wave absorbing property are very poor. In 
order to increase the ability of cement materials to conduct 
and shield EMI, additional conductive or absorbent fillings 
and loadings have to be introduced to admixture to provide 
higher EMI preventing effectiveness [1]. “Smart concrete” 
(SC) and its derivatives could be consider as a material of the 
future. Due to its attractive features, SC can be used as a 
strain-sensing element, as a resistive heating or as an EMI 
shielding. 
II. 
MEASUREMENT OF STRAIN PROPERTIES 
Strain properties of the composite can be evaluated by 
impedance changing. The impedance changing sensitivity 
regarding the deformation can be widely affected by a proper 
choice of concrete admixtures [2]. Generally, in all types of 
admixtures, the real component is not much affected by the 
deformation, on the other hand, the imaginary component is, 
and can be used to detect the changes [3]. For impedance 
measuring, an excitation frequency of 1 KHz, and an 
excitation voltage of 1 V (peak-peak) were experimentally 
set [4]. During the measurements of experimental samples, a 
necessity to a simple, relatively inexpensive and portable 
device has been raised. 
A. Construction  of  “Z-meter”  
This battery-powered device facilitates its usage in the 
experimental field. According to the aforementioned 
requirements, a block diagram of the instrument has been 
suggested. The diagram is shown in Fig. 1. The device 
function is based on 16-bit MSP430F5438 microcontroller, 
which uses RISC architecture. This microcontroller can be 
“in circuit” programmed via JTAG interface. Interface also 
allows real-time debugging of firmware, which ensures all 
device functions. A 16-level yellow Organic Light Emitting 
Diode (OLED) graphical display that has 256 x 64 pixel 
resolution is used for visualizing the measured values and 
navigating during measurement parameters setting. The 
communication with OLED display is done via Serial 
Peripheral Interface (SPI). The function of those pushbuttons 
is determined during the navigation and shown on the bottom 
part of the display. The device is equipped with a buzzer that 
warns the user of important states of the device. This feature 
is built for convenient usage of the device. An integrated 
4 Mb memory and SD card, which can be inserted into a side 
slot, are enclosed for saving the measured data. Both 
memories communicate with the microcontroller via SPI 
interface. A special circuit designed by FTDI Company 
enables USB interface connection for transferring the 
measured data into the PC. This circuit communicates with 
the microcontroller via UART.  
Moreover, the aforementioned USB is used for device 
supplying and internal Li-Pol accumulator charging. This 
feature helps to supply the device in case of necessity to 
perform outdoor measurements. The supply voltage 
supervising is maintained by a group of supply blocks 
located at the bottom part of the diagram, shown in Fig. 1. 
The charge control circuit, designed by Microchip Company, 
controls the accumulator changing, and stops it when the 
maximum voltage is reached. A buck-boost converter 
provides 3.3V for supplying the digital circuits. On the other 
hand, analog blocks are supplied by 5 V and 3 V. The 5 V 
supplying circuit is realized by charge pump. The 3 V 
supplying circuit is realized by the reference voltage source 
with minimal noise, designed by Analog Devices. The 
reference voltage 3 V is used for supplying the AD5933 
impedance converter [5].  
  
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1.  The block diagram and physical appearance of proposed Z-meter 
The 24 unused I/O pins of the microcontroller are 
attached to an expansion connector for universal use. The 
mechanical design of the proposed device is realized 
according to the following requirements: portability and 
durability. The printed-circuit boards along with the 
supplying accumulator are enclosed in the aluminum case. 
B. Impedance converter AD5933 
The impedance measuring depends on the AD5933 
integrated circuit, which permits setting the required value of 
the excitation voltage and frequency. The excitation 
frequency can be set between 1 and 100 kHz in steps of 0.1 
Hz. The impedance measuring range is 100 Ω to 10 MΩ with 
a 12-bit resolution. The communication with the circuit is 
done via the serial I2C bus. 
C. Measurement automation and data processing 
The device is equipped with a galvanic isolated external 
input that triggers the start of the measurement and 
synchronizes it with other measuring devices. Some 
measuring devices don’t have that external trigger. The 
proposed device handles that synchronization according to a 
time sequence. The measured data can either be stored in the 
device internal memory (FLASH, SD card) or transferred via 
USB interface to the PC. 
III. 
HEATING CONTROL AND MONITORING 
The aim when designing the control electronics for the 
new panel has been tempered to direct regulation of cement 
composite with carbon nanoparticles based on processes 
inside the composite material tempered. The system is 
controlled by a set of sensors located inside and outside the 
composite (tempered) panel. Sensors implemented inside the 
composite material provide immediate information on the 
status of the material, external sensors will evaluate the state 
of environment and to effectively regulate the entire system. 
Using SC as a resistance heating is a complementary 
method that needs to be investigated. The resistivity of 
concrete can be diminished by using an electrically 
conductive admixture, such as discontinuous carbon 
nanofibers, discontinuous steel fibers, steel shaving and 
graphite particles [6], [7]. Combining and changing an 
admixture ratio leads to different value of resistivity. A 
control device had to be designed to test and evaluation of 
the samples and to find the ideal admixture ratio and heating 
element pattern. 
A. Construction of temperature control unit - “RCT”  
The control unit can be divided into two parts, namely 
the power and control. Power section contains only a toroid 
transformer 230 V / 2 x 24 V (500 W), which provides ample 
power for heating elements and tempered serves to control 
the power that is supplied from the converter with high 
efficiency 3.3 V. Unit can independently control Load up to 
3 (3 tempered components) with power consumption up to 
6 A for each channel. The maximum allowable current is 
monitored as the sensor current and fuse. 
The control part consists of parts, which includes the 
control 
part 
with 
the 
microcontroller, 
high-contrast 
alphanumeric LCD display, backlit, a system of sensors to 
measure temperature, humidity and electrical power, power 
section with a converter with high efficiency, switching 
thyristors excited by optotriacs, Bluetooth Module Class 1 
terminal server (XPort) for communication over Ethernet. 
The overall block diagram and physical appearance is shown 
in Figure 2. Data is automatically saved on the SD / MMC 
card or via Ethernet to a remote server or over Bluetooth to 
other mobile devices. Choice of connection depends only on 
the user. 
 The control section provides all system functions RCT. 
MCU processes the data from sensors, switches different 
circuits, stores data on SD / MMC card, controls the 
communication with the environment and writes the current 
data on the LCD display. For sufficient computing power 
was voted an 8-bit Microcontroller Atmel ATmega128 with 
the type designation. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 2.  The block diagram and physical appearance of proposed RCT device  
RCT contains several types of sensors. To measure 
temperature of composite materials there are used three 
PTC thermistors connected to the MCU. Analog inputs for 
sensing outdoor temperature are used for accurate 12-bit 
digital sensor. Indoor temperature and humidity devices 
RCT captures digital sensor SHT11. Electric current 
flowing through each sample is scanned 20 A hall sensor. 
B. Communication 
RCT is equipped with a Bluetooth module WT11 that 
offers a range of up to 100 m. Any Bluetooth-enabled 
devices (PDAs, mobile phones) can be used to control 
RCT. Another way to check RCT is Ethernet (TCP / IP). 
Terminal server - Xport - converts data from the UART 
directly to Ethernet. XPort supports 10/100 Ethernet, built-
in web server provides a complete set of network protocol, 
security, speed and other parameters. The output of the 
XPort is brought to Ethernet Bridge module. This allows 
control over RCT grid 230 V without pulling the LAN 
cable. 
C. Data storage 
For storing data can be used for standard SD / MMC 
cards. The presence of the card is detected during system 
initialization. RCT also supports high-capacity SDHC 
cards. Data can be written in a different format of settings 
and needs. The default format is a CSV file. Output data 
can be readily evaluated using standard PC software. 
D. Working modes 
Workload management components can be tempered 
to use four different modes: 
• 
The first mode “STANDARD” allows you to 
control each channel separately. The system 
controls the temperature of each channel and 
switches 
individually 
tempered 
connected 
component, if the temperature drops below the set 
limit. In this mode, does not reflect the ambient 
temperature.  
• 
The second mode is called “COMMON”. In this 
mode, all channels driven simultaneously and 
critical temperature of the ambient temperature. If 
the temperature drops below the set level, all 
channels are closed.  
• 
The third mode is the “ECO” mode. This is the 
last COMMON mode, which is also supplemented 
by the upper and lower limits. Thus, if the outside 
temperature drops below the preset extreme (e.g., -
15 ° C), the concrete panels would no longer be 
able to effectively drowning, therefore they will 
shut down and power saving. You can also set the 
upper limits (e.g. 5 ° C), in which parts are no 
longer needed further tempered. 
• 
The fourth mode is called “SWITCH” mode, 
because there is a periodic switching (distributing) 
of energy between different parts of tempered 
parts. It can thus make better use of the overall 
device performance, or you can use a transformer 
with one secondary and acclimatized to force him 
more sections. Time can be set from 1 to 60 
seconds. 
 
In the heating / tempering carried out production of 
several types of heated parts. In their design had to take 
into account the reciprocal interaction of composite 
heating insert and the concrete member itself, and I 
address this issue in analyzing the processes that occur 
inside components. The heating panel was implemented 
copper electrodes, used to bring the necessary capabilities, 
and temperature sensors that allow evaluating the process 
inside the composite material. An integral part of the 
analysis of thermal images was a composite panel that 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 3.  Infrared photos of heated concrete panel with admixture of conductive fillings 
make it possible to precisely define the current load of 
locations composite liners. Subsequently, this area developed 
control unit. It is a three-channel digital thermostat with data 
recording (data logger) that is equipped with advanced 
features and allows remote control via Ethernet or Bluetooth, 
and data storage on an SD card. 
 
The facility has implemented a number of heating modes. 
Among the most elaborate one “ECO” mode is based on 
evaluation of environmental conditions regulates the heating 
of composite material so as to avoid unnecessary heating of 
components in a time when the power system is not 
sufficient to prove the part is tempered heat up. 
Both concrete samples include a temperature sensor 
integrated in the middle of the concrete block to provide 
precise internal temperature. Currents that flow through 
concrete samples are measured by Hall effect-based current 
sensors and controlled by 10 A relays. Together with the 
outside temperature sensor, RCT can effectively control 
dissipation power of the resistive heating and hold set 
temperatures. 
As an example, two concrete blocks were tested (Fig. 3). 
Resistance varies from 4 Ω to 6 Ω that gives output power up 
to 114 W when using 24 V voltage source. 
CONCLUSION 
A development of new laboratory instruments was 
presented in this paper, the suggested block diagram, 
realization and design of the PCBs and overall structure of 
the design. These instruments are currently used for 
laboratory measurements and characterization of smart 
concrete panels at department of microelectronics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade of the Czech Republic under the MPO ČR č. FR-
TI3/485 project, Prospective applications of new sensor 
technologies and circuits for processing of sensor signals, 
No.FEKT-S-11-16 
project 
and 
MEDTECH 
CZ.1.07/2.4.00/31.0016 from European Social Fundand 
project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Drinovsky J., Kejik Z.: Electromagnetic Shielding Efficinecy 
Measurement of Composite Materials Measurement Science 
Review, 2009, vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 109-112. 
[2] Chung D.D.L.: Composite Materials - Second Edition, 
Springer, London, 2010, p. 349 ISBN 978-1-84882-830-8. 
[3] Chung D.D.L.: Functional Materials – Vol.2 Electrical, 
Dielectric, 
Electromagnetic, 
Optical 
and 
Magnetic 
Applications (With Companion Solution Manual), World 
Scientific Publisher, 2010, p345 ISBN 978-981-4287-15-9. 
[4] Steffan, P.; Barath, P.; Stehlik, J.; Vrba, R.: The 
Multifunction Conducting Materials Base on Cement 
Concrete with Carbon Fibers. Electronics, 2008, č. b4, p. 82-
86. ISSN: 1313- 1842. 
[5] Analog Devices [online]. 2012 [cit. 2012-01-05]. Product 
Information 
AD5933. 
Available 
from: 
< 
http://www.analog.com/static/imported-
files/data_sheets/AD5933.pdf>. 
[6] Junek J., Cechmanek R., Steffan P., Barath P. Vliv uhlikovych 
primesi na elektricke vlastnosti anorganickych kompozitu 
XIIIth international conference Ecology and new building 
materials and products, 2009, Telc, 978-80-254-4447-4 
[7] Shoukai Wang, Sihai Wen and D.D.L. Chung, "Resistance 
Heating Using Electrically Conductive Cements", Adv. Cem. 
Res. 16(4), 161-166 (2004). 
 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

