Tubes and Metrics for Solving the Dilemma-Zone Problem
Leonard Petnga
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
Email: lpetnga@umd.edu
Mark A. Austin
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
and Institute for Systems Research
University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA
Email: austin@isr.umd.edu
Abstract—Our research is concerned with the modeling and
design of semantically-enabled, efﬁcient, safe and performant
cyber-physical transportation systems (CPTS). As a class of
cyber-physical systems (CPS), CPTS are characterized by a
tight integration of software and physical processes for smart-
ness, increased performance, safety and management of system
functionality. We adopt this perspective in our investigation of
solutions to the dilemma zone (DZ) problem, which currently
claims thousands of lives every year at trafﬁc intersections. In
this paper, we deﬁne and introduce new “dilemma metrics” to
solve this problem. Coupled with an innovative tubular (3D)
characterization of the decision problem that arises at the onset
of the yellow light, these metrics enable simple and actionable
decision capabilities to deal with unsafe conﬁgurations of the
system. We also set a pathway toward integrating dilemma
metrics and dilemma tubes with an ontological framework –
the latter encodes the reasoning platform supporting the broad
implementation of the algorithmic solutions resolving unsafe
conﬁgurations of CPTS, such as the ones created by the DZ
problem.
Keywords-Dilemma Zone; Metrics; Cyber-Physical Transporta-
tion Systems; Artiﬁcial Intelligence; Safety.
I.
INTRODUCTION
During the past twenty years, transportation systems have
been transformed by remarkable advances in sensing, com-
puting, communications, and material technologies. The depth
and breadth of these advances can be found in superior levels
of automobile performance and new approaches to automo-
bile design that are becoming increasing reliant on sensing,
electronics, and computing. The trend toward “transportation
smartness” is so pervasive that by next year, as much of 40% of
an automobile’s value will be embedded software and control
related components [1][2]. And yet, despite an exponential
increase in the number of software lines of code (SLOC) to
achieve these beneﬁts, accidents at trafﬁc intersections claim
around 2,000 lives annually within the US alone [3]. A key
component of this safety problem is the dilemma zone (DZ),
which is an area at a trafﬁc intersection where drivers are
indecisive on whether to stop or cross at the onset of a yellow
light.
II.
PROJECT SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES
Our research addresses challenges that are hindering the
system-level development of cyber-physical transportation sys-
tems (CPTS). Challenges that remain to be overcome include:
(1) the integration of cyber-physical systems (CPS) technolo-
gies into existing infrastructure, (2) the realization of “zero
fatality” transportation systems, and (3) the development of
formal models and credible, actionable performance and safety
metrics [5]. To this end, metrics for system safety are needed
to: (1) evaluate the operation and control of transportation sys-
tems in a consistently and systematic way (including situations
such as the dilemma zone), (2) identify, measure and predict
the effects of interconnectivity between systems components as
well as system performance, and (3) set standards and serve as
measure of effectiveness (MoEs) guiding model-based systems
engineering (MBSE) efforts.
We consider in this project the interplay among the key
players of transportation systems at trafﬁc intersections, and
the consequences of their interactions on overall trafﬁc system
level safety. This work-in-progress paper focuses on one aspect
of the problem – development of metrics to capture the
essence of these interactions, and support the characterization
of the problem and its representation using three-dimensional
dilemma tubes. Section III is a review of existing approaches
to the dilemma zone problem and their limitations with regard
to the current trend toward CPTS. Section IV introduces the
new dilemma zone metrics and their tubular representation.
Section V describes our plans for ongoing research.
III.
DILEMMA ZONE PROBLEM AND
CYBER-PHYSICALITY OF TRAFFIC SYSTEMS
Dilemma Zone: Deﬁnition and Existing Solution Ap-
proaches. Also called the twilight zone, Amber signal or
decision zone, the dilemma zone is the area at a trafﬁc
intersection where drivers are indecisive on whether to stop
or cross at the onset of a yellow light. The behavior of users
in “twilight zones” is responsible for hundreds of lives lost
and billions worth in damages at stop light intersections in the
United States [3]. Scholars distinguish two types of dilemma
zone that differ by the perspective adopted on the problem.
Type I DZ is viewed from the “physics of the vehicle” as in [6]
and [7] while Type II adopts the driver’s perspective as reported
in [8]. Both perspectives use the stop line as a reference
for their measurement as shown on Figure 1. However, the
boundaries of DZ of type II are sometimes measured with a
temporal tag (i.e., representing the duration to the stop line)
added to a probabilistic estimate [9]. In this work, the dilemma
zone will be considered in the sense deﬁned by Type I.
Past research has focused on ﬁnding ways to protect
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1. Type I & Type II Dilemma Zones and Decision Trees.
from, or eliminate, DZs using mostly a pure trafﬁc control
engineering view of the problem. These efforts have resulted in
signal timing adjustment solutions that ignore or can’t properly
account for the physics of vehicles or driver’s behaviors
[10][11][12]. In order to deal with uncertainties, other scholars
have used stochastic approaches such as fuzzy set [6] and
Markov chains [7]. For all of these traditional techniques, the
baseline of the solution can be either reduced (explicitly or
not) to a space or temporal-based dilemma zone, but not both.
Autonomous Cars and Intelligent Trafﬁc Control Systems.
Recent work, such as that found in [13] and [14] illustrates the
switch of researcher’s interest toward investigating solutions
to the DZ problem that incorporate both the car physics
and light timing, while also providing a pathway forward
for vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) interactions and integration.
These solutions will soon become a reality, in part, because
of an increased use of artiﬁcial intelligence in automating the
command and operation of both cars and trafﬁc signals. For
automobiles, many aspects of autonomy – from braking to
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

cruise control and driving functions – are in advanced stages of
experimentation. Finding ways to put smartness into vehicles
has contributed to reduced fatalities on highways mostly in
the developed world. Looking ahead, even more automation is
coming with self-driving cars [15][16].
The addition of artiﬁcial intelligence to trafﬁc signal con-
trols now makes sense due to an ability to determine the
position, speed and direction of vehicles, and adjust light
cycling times in a coordinated way to make the intersection
crossing more efﬁcient. Researchers have been developing and
testing various technologies with mixed results [17][18][19].
As a case in point, a pilot study conducted by Carnegie
Mellon University, reports a 40% reduction of intersection
waiting times, an estimated 26% decrease in travel time, and
a projected 21% decrease of CO2 emissions [19]. Tapping
into the full potential of these intelligence capabilities is hard
as: (1) most vehicles can’t currently communicate with trafﬁc
light controllers, and (2) autonomous vehicles still struggle
in operating safely in adversary weather conditions (heavy
rain, snow covered roads, etc.) and changing environment
(temporary trafﬁc signals, potholes, human behaviors, etc.).
We assume in this paper that these problems will be resolved
by ongoing research activites.
Toward Cyber-Physical Trafﬁc Management Systems. Real-
time situational awareness (e.g., trafﬁc, location, speed) and
decision, combined with vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-
to-infrastructure (V2I) communications and control are valid
and effective pathways for a solution to both congestion and
safety at intersections. As such, we fully adopt a CPS view of
the trafﬁc system with regard to the DZ problem.
The value of this perspective has already been demon-
strated by Petnga and Austin [20]. Autonomous vehicles (i.e.,
the physical system) interact with the light (i.e., the cyber
system) with the objective of maximizing trafﬁc throughput,
while ensuring vehicle crossings are safe at the intersection.
Enhanced performance and safety at the intersection have
been proven possible, thanks to the critical role of temporal
semantics in improving system level decision making. Also,
when bi-directional connections between the vehicle and light
are possible, new relationships can be established to charac-
terize their tight coupling – this, in turn, enables the various
computers in the CPTS to exchange information, reason,
and make informed decisions. These capabilities are critical
for those cases where the vehicle physics is such that they
can neither stop nor proceed without entering and occupying
the intersection while the trafﬁc light is red. Therefore, the
development of metrics for the DZ problem will greatly beneﬁt
from (and enrich) this CPTS perspective.
IV.
METRICS FOR CHARACTERIZING THE DILEMMA ZONE
PROBLEM
Safety Requirements to Decision Trees and Dilemma Met-
rics. The core safety requirement of the system car-light that
should prevail all the time at intersection can be expressed
as follows. “No vehicle is allowed to cross the intersection
when the light is red”. This is a non-functional requirement,
a hard constraint whose violation is the driving force behind
accidents at intersections. As shown on Figure 1 a) and b),
the continuous dynamic of the vehicle and discrete behavior
of the light illustrate the very different nature of both entities.
This complicates the ability of the system to satisfy the safety
requirement at the onset or in the presence of the yellow light.
Understanding the mechanisms by which system-level
safety is achieved or violated is critical in addressing the
DZ challenge. Decision trees appear to be the most suitable
analysis tool to explore the different possible paths the system
could follow and identify safe and unsafe ones. The tree shown
on the left-hand side of Figure 1 c) shows the decision tree of
the autonomous car - in the physical space - when it knows
the trafﬁc lights critical parameters at the time the decision
is made. Petnga and Austin [20][21] have shown that the
probability of the car making the right decision is higher when
it knows before hands the following: (1) Duration ΘY of the
yellow light before it turns red; (2) Vehicle stopping distance
XS, and (3) Travel duration ΘB or distance to light XB.
However, moving forward requires a deep understanding of
the interrelationships between cross-cutting system parameters
from the various domains (car, light, time, space) involved at
meta level. Also, the ability of the system to efﬁciently reason
about unsafe situations and propose a satisfactory way out is
critical.
We argue that this complexity can be kept in check by
casting the problem in dimensionless terms and setting up a
transformation ∆ = Π(Θ, X) of the initial decision tree from
the physical space to a dimensionless space. Expressing the
system decision tree in dimensionless space as a result of the
transformation Π necessitates the deﬁnition of intermediary
variables and parameters. We begin by noting that the car will
not always catch the onset of the yellow light; thus, what is
really relevant for efﬁcient decision making here is the time left
before the stop light turns red. Using the remaining duration of
the yellow light rY L, its full duration dY L and the ones of the
green and red lights ie dGL and dRL, we deﬁne the duration
of a stop light cycle C, reduced cycle CY L and cycle index k.
The short (α1) and full (α2) yellow light duration as well as
the short (β1) and full (β2) stop light indexes are also deﬁned.
The details are as follows.
C
=
dY L + dRL + dGL
(1)
CY L
=
rY L + dRL + dGL
(2)
k
=
C
CY L
(3)
α1
=
rY L
CY L
(4)
α2
=
dY L
CY L
(5)
β1
=
rY L + dRL
CY L
(6)
β2
=
dY L + dRL
CY L
(7)
We add to the aforementioned physical variables the stop-
ping duration Θ
′
B of the car – should it decide to stop – and
deﬁne the car stopping distance metric ∆S, the light-car
crossing time metric ∆LC and the light-car stopping time
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 2. Dilemma Tubes in the Dimensionless (∆) space.
Figure 3. Architecture of the trafﬁc system as a CPS.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

metric ∆
′
LC as follows.
∆S
=
XS
XB
(8)
∆LC
=
ΘB
CY L
(9)
∆
′
LC
=
Θ
′
B
CY L
(10)
All these metrics are dimensionless and serve as the key
decision points of the dimensionless decision tree shown on
the right-hand side of Figure 1 c). However, in order for us
to be able to navigate the decision tree, we need additional
information. We use the integer part function E to deﬁne n
and n
′ indexes in (11) and (12) as follows.
n
=
E
∆LC − 1
k

(11)
n
′
=
E
 
∆
′
LC − 1
k
!
(12)
They help specify the counterparts of α and β indexes
when ∆LC > 1 or ∆
′
LC > 1 as follows.
α2,n
=
k ∗ α2 + k ∗ n + 1
(13)
β2,n
=
k ∗ β2 + k ∗ n + 1
(14)
α
′
2,n
=
k ∗ α2 + k ∗ n
′ + 1
(15)
β
′
2,n
=
k ∗ β2 + k ∗ n
′ + 1
(16)
Along with (4) through (7), the values of α and β in
(13) through (16) are necessary and sufﬁcient to constraint
the dimensionless metrics ∆S, ∆LC and ∆
′
LC and render a
complete view of all possible outcomes of the decision tree in
a dimensionless space ∆. Now, we can see that there are four
possible conﬁgurations of the system for which it’s unsafe as
shown by the right-hand side of Figure 1 c).
From Dilemma Metrics to Dilemma Tubes. Each system un-
safe conﬁguration identiﬁed above corresponds to a “dilemma
tube” in the ∆ space as shown in Figure 2. For instance, (4),
(6) and (8) through (10) provide the foundational elements
for deﬁning Tube I. However, in order to fully deﬁne the
boundaries of each of the four tubes (i.e., I, II, III and IV),
we add to the parameters introduced above, the maximum
value of ∆S ie ∆Smax which is the maximum value of all
the ∆S for the system. Physically, it is determined by the
physics of the family of vehicles crossing the intersection and
the conﬁguration of the trafﬁc intersection as captured by (8).
If at any instant the system is projected to enter an unsafe
state, this situation will be materialized as a point coordinate
P∆(∆S, ∆LC, ∆
′
LC) inside a particular tube. The physical
interpretation of this phenomenon is that the autonomous car
does not have a good decision option, and will need external
help to safely cross the intersection. Scenarios that lead to
unsafe system conﬁgurations will follow Unsafe branches of
the decision tree on the right-and of Figure 1 c). While they
won’t necessary unfold in the order presented in the tree, the
result will invariably be the same, i.e., the system will be
projected to enter an unsafe state. In practice, the calculations
can be done concurrently and the location of the resulting point
coordinate relative to any of the four dilemma tubes easily
determined. However, a vehicle can only be in one of the four
dilemma tubes at a time - as they are mutually exclusive - or
in any location in the remaining part of the ∆ space i.e., a
safe region.
Knowing in which tube the unsafe state has been material-
ized is critical in determining the appropriate course of action
to prevent the occurrence of an accident.
V.
FUTURE WORK
The key driver of our research is the modeling and design
of semantically-enabled, efﬁcient, safe and performant cyber-
physical transportation systems. We are systematically working
toward the platform infrastructure in Figure 3 (customized
for the trafﬁc system). The main aspects of this effort are as
follows.
Topic 1. Architectural, ontological and reasoning infras-
tructures. The CPS perspective introduced above is translated
into an ontological architecture where the subdomains involved
in the transportation system are formally described at the
appropriate level of detail. Thus, cyber, physical and meta
domains (such as time and space) will be captured by de-
scription logic-enabled domain speciﬁc ontologies (DSO), each
with its own rules engine. Spatio-temporal reasoning supported
by appropriate implemented semantic extensions (such as
Jscience or Joda time) will enhance trafﬁc agents decision
making capabilities. For the trafﬁc system, the architectural
framework will support reasoning in the dimensionless space
and enable light reconﬁguration, should a car be heading
into a dilemma tube. The dilemma metrics introduced in this
paper will be implemented in the Integrator rules engine.
This entity (physically a smart trafﬁc controller) will be the
ultimate responsible of system level decisions. More details
on the underlying semantic platform infrastructure supporting
this architecture along with illustrative examples (ontologies,
rules, extensions. etc.) can be found in [22].
Topic 2. Scripting language support for systems inte-
gration. Bringing together the various pieces of the above-
mentioned architecture requires their bottom up integration
in an organized but systematic way. Beside the necessary
ontological integration of DSOs, we need a way to assemble
system models. Our plans are to solve this problem with Whis-
tle [23][24], a tiny scripting language where physical units
are deeply embedded within the basic data types, matrices,
branching and looping constructs, and method interfaces to ex-
ternal object-oriented software packages. Whistle is designed
for rapid, high-level solutions to software problems, ease of
use, and ﬂexibility in gluing application components together.
During the next iteration of development, Whistle will be
extended to support co-simulation, graph databases, reasoning
with ontologies and rules, and connections to external software
packages through JFMI, the Java functional-mockup interface.
Computational support will be added for input and output of
model data from/to ﬁles in various formats (XML, Open Street
Map (OSM), Java, etc.).
Topic 3. System modeling, simulation and performance
evaluation. CPTS ontological modeling with the platform
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

architecture of Figure 3 will provide insight into the reason-
ing structure needed to improve decision making at trafﬁc
intersections. It is especially important that computation and
implementation of Allen’s temporal logic and reconﬁguration
of the light behaviors are handled properly. We also need
a component-based framework that is hooked to the onto-
logical platform. The platform will be used for time-history
simulations of trafﬁc and light behaviors, and evaluation and
visualization of the dilemma metrics and 3D dilemma tubes.
Extensions of the platform to support the development and
experimentation of V2V and V2I systems will be investigated.
VI.
CONCLUSION
The purpose of this paper has been to describe a new and
innovative tubular (3D) characterization of the dilemma zone
problem, which enables quick and simple visual representation
of the state of the trafﬁc system. In traditional approaches to
the DZ problem, cars and stoplights are treated separately. Our
dilemma zone tubes result from a systems perspective where
the cars and stoplights are treated as a whole. The second
purpose of this paper has been to lay down the foundation for
integrating these metrics and the tubular representation with
an ontological framework for reasoning and decision making
support to resolve unsafe conﬁgurations of the system. The
next iteration of our work will include implementation and
scripting of CPTS simulation scenarios with Whistle.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Sztipanovits, J. A. Stankovic, and D. E. Cornan, Industry-Academy
Collaboration in Cyber-Physical Systems(CPS) Research, White Paper
August 31, White Paper, August 31, 2009.
[2]
D. Winter,
Cyber-Physical Systems in Aerospace - Challenges and
Opportunities,
The Boeing Company,
Safe & Secure Systems &
Software Symposium (S5), Beavercreek, Ohio USA, June 14-16, 2011.
[3]
D. Hurwitz,
The ”Twilight Zone” of Trafﬁc costs lives at Stoplight
Intersections, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA, March
03, 2012.
[4]
D. Shrank, B. Eisele, and T. Lomax, TTIs 2012 Urban Mobility Report,
Texas A&M Transportation Institute, The Texas A&M University System,
Texas A&M Transportation Institute, The Texas A&M University
System, December, 2012.
[5]
Energetics Incorporated, Cyber-physical Systems Situation Analysis of
Current Trends, Technologies, and Challenges, Energetics Incorporated
for the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 2012.
[6]
D. S. Hurwitz, B. H. Wang, M. A. Knodler, D. Ni, and D. Moore,
Fuzzy Sets to Describe Driver Behavior in the Dilemma Zone of
High-Speed Signalized Intersections, School of Civil and Construction
Engineering, Oregon State University, USA and Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amherst,
USA, March, 2012.
[7]
P. Li, Stochastic Methods for Dilemma Zone Protection at Signalized
Intersections, Doctor of Philosophy Dissertation submitted to the faculty
of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, VA, USA,
August, 2009.
[8]
C. V. Zeeger and R. C. Deen, Green-Extension Systems at High-Speed
Intersections, Division of Research, Bureau of Highways, Department
of Transportation, Commonwealth of Kentucky, April, 1978.
[9]
M.S. Chang, C.J. Messer, and A. J. Santiago
Timing Trafﬁc Signal
Change Intervals based on Driver Behavior, Transportation Research
Record, 1027, pp. 20-30, 1985.
[10]
P.D. Pant and Y. Cheng, Dilemma Zone Protection and Signal Coordina-
tion at Closely-Spaced High-Speed Intersections, Report FHWA/OH-
2001/12, Ohio Department of Transportation, Columbus, OH, USA,
November, 2001.
[11]
D. Maas,
Dilemma Zone Elimination,
Sacramento Department of
Transportation, Sacramento, CA, USA, 2008.
[12]
K. Zimmerman and J.A. Bonneson,
Number of vehicles in the
dilemma zone as a potential measure of intersection safety at high-speed
signalized intersections
83rd Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board Washington, D.C., USA, January, 2004.
[13]
N.G. Wassim, J. Koopmann, J.D. Smith, and J. Brewer,
Frequency
of Target Crashes for IntelliDrive Safety Systems, US Department of
Transportation – National Highway Transportation Safety Administra-
tion, DOT HS 811 381, October, 2010.
[14]
J.
Chu,
At
a
Crossroads:
New
Research
Predicts
which
cars
are
likeliest
to
Run
Lights
at
Intersections,
Accessible
at : http://newsofﬁce.mit.edu/2011/driving-algorithm-1130; Retrieved:
March 02, 2015.
[15]
Google inc., The Latest Chapter for the Self-Driving Car: Mastering
City Street Driving, Ofﬁcial Google Blog. N.p., n.d. Web. December, 20
2014, Accessible at: http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2014/04/the-latest-
chapter-for-self-driving-car.html; Retrieved : March 02, 2015.
[16]
General Motors Corporation (GMC), GM Unveils EN-V Concept: A
Vision for Future Urban Mobility, Accessible at : http://media.gm.com;
Retrieved : March 02, 2015.
[17]
Siemens Corporation,
Intelligent trafﬁc solutions
Accessible at :
http://www.siemens.com/; Retrieved : March 02, 2015.
[18]
International
Business
Machine
(IBM)
Corpora-
tion,
Intelligent
trafﬁc
solutions,
Accessible
at
:
http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/trafﬁc congestion/nextsteps/;
Retrieved : March 02, 2015.
[19]
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU),
Smart Trafﬁc Signals,
Ac-
cessible at: http://www.cmu.edu/homepage/computing/2012/fall/smart-
trafﬁc-signals.shtml; Retrieved : March 02, 2015.
[20]
L. Petnga and M. A. Austin, Ontologies of Time and Time-based Rea-
soning for MBSE of Cyber-Physical Systems, 11th Annual Conference
on Systems Engineering Research (CSER 2013), Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, March 19-22, 2013.
[21]
L. Petnga and M. A. Austin, Cyber-Physical Architecture for Modeling
and Enhanced Operations of Connected-Vehicle Systems, 2nd Interna-
tional Conference on Connected Vehicles (ICCVE 2013). Las Vegas,
NV, December 2-6, 2013.
[22]
L. Petnga and M. A. Austin, Semantic Platforms for Cyber-Physical
Systems, 24th Annual International Council on Systems Engineering
International Symposium (INCOSE 2014). Las Vegas, USA, June 30
July 3, 2014.
[23]
P. Delgoshaei, M.A. Austin and D. A. Veronica, A Semantic Platform
Infrastructure for Requirements Traceability and System Assessment
The Ninth International Conference on Systems (ICONS2014), Nice,
France, February 23 - 27, 2014.
[24]
P. Delgoshaei, M.A. Austin, and A. Pertzborn, A Semantic Framework
for Modeling and Simulation of Cyber-Physical Systems, International
Journal On Advances in Systems and Measurements, Vol. 7, No. 3-4,
December, 2014, pp. 223–238.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

