Protect Critical Information Infrastructure Systems in Financial and Healthcare 
Sectors: Actor Network Theory 
 
 
Cheng-Chieh Huang 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
d94725007@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—CIIP is not only instrumental means but also social 
relevance. Most of studies on CIIP neglect considering social 
groups that CIs or CIIs serve and social characteristics of 
technology. In this article, it proposes actor network theory to 
analyze interdependence of CIIs and CIIP policy. Finally, it 
indicates social dimension in interdependence analysis, 
government’s broker role and social-technical service system 
approach in critical information infrastructure protection 
studies. 
Keywords-critical information infrastructure protection; 
actor network theory; service systems 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Critical infrastructure protection (CIP) is currently seen 
as an essential part of national security in numerous 
countries around the world and a broad range of political and 
ad-ministrative initiatives and efforts is underway in the US, 
in Europe, and in other parts of the world in an attempt to 
better secure critical infrastructures (CIs). 
The CI delivers a range of services that individuals, and 
society as a whole, depend on. That is, any damage to or 
interruption of the CI could cause ripples across the technical 
and the societal systems. Moreover, the critical information 
infrastructure (CII) underpins many elements of the critical 
infrastructure, as many information and communication 
technologies (ICT) have become all-embracing, connect 
other infrastructure systems, and make them more 
interrelated and interdependent[1]. Critical information 
infrastructure protection (CIIP) forms new issues for policy 
research and technology studies. 
Past literature on CIP or CIIP divided into two angles, 
one from technology or system angle to discuss 
interdependence of technology, infrastructure or cyber 
security protection [2][3]. Another discusses about public-
private-partners or government role from policy research [4] 
[5].  
These studies neglect that current digital economic 
society is an interwoven socio-technical seamless web, 
consisting of heterogeneous, changing formations of actor 
networks, meanings, work practices and institutional and 
organizational arrangements [6]. They forget social groups 
that these critical infrastructures or technology serve and 
technology finally become a part of the relevant practical, 
symbolic and cognitive spaces of the actors involved [9]. 
Thus, it seems to consider social, technology or 
infrastructure simultaneously in CIIP. 
In this paper, we propose a social-technical perspective, 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) to understand the complex 
social, technology interwoven phenomenon of critical 
information infrastructures and their protection. Using ANT, 
we can get a deeper understanding of the interrelationships 
of heterogeneous actor groups and of the mediating roles 
played by humans and technologies, and the critical 
information 
infrastructures. 
Further 
implications 
to 
interdependence of critical information infrastructure, 
government involvement, and public-private-partnerships 
issues are also discussed. 
In the following section, we first review the literature of 
CIIP. Second, we review ANT Theory. Third, the financial 
and healthcare sectors of our cases are illustrated. Fourth, we 
present analysis and discussion and fifth, we identify 
contributions, limitations and suggestions for future research. 
II. 
CRITICAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
PROTECTION 
CIs are part of a larger set of services and products that 
are considered essential to the functioning of our modern 
economies and societies. These include but are not limited to 
energy, 
information 
technology, 
telecommunications, 
healthcare, transportation, water, government and law 
enforcement, and banking and finance.  
Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office (CIAO), an 
interagency office created under Presidential Decision 
Directive 63 to assist in coordinating the federal 
government‟s initiatives on critical infrastructure protection 
in US [3]. The CIAO defined infrastructure as: 
 The framework of interdependent networks and systems 
comprising identifiable industries, institutions (including 
people and procedures), and distribution capabilities that 
provide a reliable flow of products and services essential to 
the defense and economic security of the United States, the 
smooth functioning of governments at all levels, and society 
as a whole. 
Most of the CI relies on a spectrum of software-based 
control systems for smooth, reliable, and continuous 
operation. In many cases, information and communication 
83
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

technologies (ICT) have become all-embracing, connecting 
other infrastructure systems and making them interrelated 
and interdependent. These ICTs underpin many elements of 
the critical infrastructure, called Critical Information 
Infrastructures (CIIs)[1]. 
Complex and interdependence of CIs or CIIs are difficult 
to manage, even protect. Most of CIP or CIIP studies discuss 
systems of system or interlinks to protect. They define 
physical 
interdependency, 
cyber 
interdependency, 
geographic independency, logical independency to analyze 
or protect [2][3].  
These studies provide good analysis tools or methods to 
protect technology or infrastructure systems. But they forget 
the final objective of CIP or CIIP to protect people or society 
that CIs or CIIs serve not just technology or infrastructure 
themselves. And these services that technology or 
infrastructure provide are different meanings for different 
users in their different sectors or stages of usage.  
Moreover, there are different institutionally fragmented 
environments in different sectors of different countries such 
as healthcare, transportation, water and they serve different 
user groups and interests groups[1][4]. If we cannot 
understand meanings of users or interests groups of critical 
infrastructure in different sectors it serves, it is difficult for 
government representatives to persuade CEOs or CIOs of 
critical infrastructure companies to invest.  
That is, it is more meaningful to consider society, 
technology and their interwoven simultaneously in the CIP 
or CIIP studies. 
III. 
ACTOR NETWORK THEORY 
The social-technical approach encapsulates a wide range 
of perspectives and concepts. They attempt to explain the 
relationship and interactions between technology and society. 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) is one of the most 
important social-technical perspectives in recently years. It 
was developed in the sociology of science and technology 
school [10]. ANT helps describe how actors form alliances 
and involve other actors and use non-human actors 
(technology) to strengthen such alliances and to secure their 
interests. ANT consists of two concepts: translation and 
inscription. 
When an actor-network is created, consists of four 
processes of translation [11]: 
 
Problematization: The focal actors define interests 
that others may share, establishes itself as 
indispensable resources in the solution of the 
problems they have defined. They define the 
problems and solutions and also establish roles and 
identities for other actors in the network. As a 
consequence, focal actors establish an “obligatory 
passage point” for problem solution which all the 
actors in an actor-network must pass. 
 
Interessement: The focal actors convince other actors 
that the interests defined by the focal actors are in 
fact well in line with their own interests. Through 
interessement the developing network creates 
sufficient incitement to both lock actors into 
networks. 
 
Enrollment: Enrollment involves a definition of roles 
of each of the actors in the newly created actor-
network. It also involves a set of strategies through 
which focal actors seek to convince other actors to 
embrace the underlying ideas of the growing actor-
network and to be an active part of the whole project.  
 
Mobilization: The focal actors use a set of methods 
to ensure that the other actors act according to their 
agreement and would not betray. With allies 
mobilized, an actor network achieves stability. 
In addition to the four stages of translation, the process of 
inscription is critical to building networks, as most artifacts 
within a social system embody inscriptions of some interests. 
As ideas are inscribed in technology and as these 
technologies diffuse in contexts where they are assigned 
relevance, they help achieve socio-technical stability. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
A. Case Background 
This case is a three years research project to understand 
the current critical information protection status of every 
sector in Taiwan. In every year, the research project team 
will generate CIIP strategies and policy implications reports 
for government. 
In 2009, the first year of research project, the project 
team decided financial, healthcare sectors as first priority to 
examine. The project team adopted “sector roundtables 
methodology” [7] and table-top exercise to understand 
protection status and dependence or interdependence 
between sectors. 
In every sector analysis, the project team introduced four 
steps: 1. select CIIs, 2. analyze threats, weakness and 
interdependence, 3. design exercises, 4. execute table-top 
exercises and get evaluations from experts. 
Followings are the project experiences and reflection in 
financial and healthcare sectors in first year. 
B. Financial Sector 
In the financial sector, there are more than forty large 
banks and institutions in Taiwan. Most banks and institutions 
are privacy, but they are supervised by Financial Supervisory 
Commission of Taiwan government (FSCEY). Moreover, 
the most critical institutions, such as stock exchange 
institution, futures exchange institution, depository or 
cleaning institution are government funded. 
There two subsystems or mechanism that serve different 
users. One is the stock exchange system that supports the 
investors to exchange stocks or futures in the stocks or 
futures markets. The institutions and information systems 
must make sure the fair trade and the price is sensitivity to 
any crisis or news. The actors or technology system should 
response quickly to any crisis. 
 
 
 
 
 
84
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
Figure 1.  Subsystems in Financial Sectors 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISONS OF ENERGENCE AND PRIVACY ISSUES IN 
FINANCIAL SECTORS 
Institutions 
Emergence 
Issues 
Privacy 
Issues 
Banks 
Low 
High 
Clearning Hourse 
Medium 
Medium 
Stock Exchange 
Institutions 
High 
Low 
Credit Info Center 
Low 
High 
 
Another subsystem is the banking system. The banks 
provide their customers to deposit or loan. Thus, compared 
to stock exchange system, data privacy is more critical for 
the banking system than quick response. Even the cross-bank 
transaction system is shutdown; the customers still can 
withdraw money by branch of banks. 
Thus, the two subsystems represent their different 
protection angles. The stock exchange system focus on when 
and what sequences they should stop the exchange markets 
and announce to people or inventors. The banking system 
protects their data and prevents data leak from their inner 
control mechanisms. 
No matter banks, stock exchange instructions, they very 
depend on information systems. They are also very actively 
response to any events that will impact confidence of people 
or their investors. 
For financial sector, inscriptions of their CIIs are 
“confidence” and their cultures are responsively to serve 
their customers. 
Thus, 
they 
expect 
the 
electrical 
power 
or 
telecommunication could recover quickly and response the 
exactly recover time to satisfy their customers‟ expectation. 
 
 
 
C. Healthcare Sector 
 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISONS OF ENERGENCE AND PRIVACY ISSUES IN 
HEALTHCARE SECTORS 
Institutions 
Emergence 
Issues 
Privacy  
Issues 
Hospitals/Clincals 
Low 
High 
Heathcare insurance 
institution 
Low 
Medium 
 
Although in the healthcare sector, such as hospitals or 
clinics are also the service institutions to serve their 
customers. But they are less IT resources to operate because 
of most resources are invested in clinical instruments. A 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) of a hospital said, “Our IT 
problem is less IT resources. We do not have enough IT 
investments and also we do not have qualified IT people to 
join”. 
“One day, our data center flooded because of a typhoon. 
We wait for one week to get the electrical power engines to 
recover our electronic power and data center!” the CIO 
updated. Also, if some accidents that let MIS people cannot 
work, such as H1N1 infection could be a problem to run IT 
operation. 
The hospital information systems (HIS) are critical 
information systems, but it will bring just inconvenient, such 
as register or submit prescription slowly while IT breaking 
down. Also, clinical information is very important; it is the 
data protection issue. 
Other important institutions in health sector are health 
insurance institutions. There is only one health insurance 
institution in Taiwan and governed by government. While 
the healthcare insurance system is shutdown, the patients still 
can see a doctor, the hospitals or clinics can record their 
insurance numbers and issue later when the system is 
recovered. The health insurance institution holds partial 
clinical information in their database; it has some data 
privacy protection issue. 
For healthcare sector, inscriptions of their CIIs are 
“convenient”. And they spend little money on IT investments. 
V. 
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSIONS 
It summarizes different inscriptions, problems, interests 
and requirements for dependent sectors in financial and 
healthcare sectors in table III. We can understand that 
different institutions concern their interests in every sector. 
Moreover, the technical elements, CIIs also represent their 
different meanings, such as „confidence‟ or „convenient. 
Before protection policy carried out, we should understand 
relevant social groups in sectors, their meanings and social 
inscriptions of technology.  
Following sections, we discuss new insights and 
implications of CIIP from the ANT theory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stock Exchange
Systems
Traders
Cleaning House
Investors
Banks
Banks
Cross-Bank
Transaction Systems
Credit Info Center
depositors
Quick Response
Data Privacy 
85
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
TABLE III.  
ANT ANALYSIS  IN FINANCIAL AND HEALTHCARE 
SECTORS 
ANT 
Analysis/ 
Sectors 
Financial-
Stock 
Exchange 
Subsystem 
Financial-
Banking 
Subsystem 
Healthcare 
Inscription 
confidence 
confidence 
convenient 
Translation 
(problems 
and interests) 
reover market 
confidence 
quickly  
data protection 
and confidence 
smooth 
healthcare 
process, less IT 
resources 
 
A.  Social Relevance, then Protection 
Most CIP or CIIP literature focuses on analyzing 
different interdependences of CIIs in different sectors. But 
they neglect how they collaborate under their different 
interdependence or dependences relationships. 
For example, in our project experiences, the stock 
exchange subsystem in financial sector very depend on 
electrical power, and request that every shortage power 
events, the electrical power company should response 
planned recovery time quickly. 
For institutions in financial stock exchange subsystem, 
transparent and confidence information they provide to their 
investors are important in financial markets. But for the 
electrical power company, they concern not only recovery 
quickly, but electrical power stable and quality. 
Usually, the CIIs are dependent or interdependent, but 
their social concerns are inconsistent. 
Thus, how to enroll the “confidence” CIIs of financial 
sectors and “stable” CIIs of electrical power sectors is not 
only from system functional views but from the social-
technical angle. 
 
B. Redefine Government’s Role in CIIP 
It is difficult for policy makers to enroll the private 
sectors to join the critical information infrastructure 
protection actor-network. Especially, private sectors realize 
the governments want they invest in security and reliability 
beyond their normal business continuity requirements [4]. 
Moreover, what is the government‟s role in CIP or CIIP? 
From ANT analysis, the different sectors have their 
different competition environments, relevant social groups, 
social-technical configurations, and meanings. It is not 
suitable for policy makers to persuade or enroll these actors 
from only “national security” reasons or strategies. 
ANT theory argues that focal actors establish an 
“obligatory passage point” for problem solution which all the 
actors in an actor-network must pass. It means governments 
as the focal actors, should consider obligatory passage points 
for sectors or institutions to enroll. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Social-Technical Service System Apporach to CIIP 
For example, “confidence” is the financial sector‟s 
consideration to their IT investment. The policy makers 
should persuade or assist they to strength these mechanisms 
or technologies. Few resources are the problems to 
healthcare sectors, how to allocate different resources while 
crisis happened is solution to enroll healthcare sectors. 
Moreover, as our cases showed, these sectors depend on 
other sectors‟ technologies or infrastructures, but pursue 
themselves interests.  Government could provide the broker 
role or build up boundary infrastructures, to help different 
sectors to collaborate or negotiate. 
Thus, we call this kinds of relationships should be 
private-public-private partnerships. 
C. Methodology of CIIP 
Developing a comprehensive architecture or framework 
for interdependency modeling and simulation is very 
challenge. Moreover, it is difficult to resolve different sectors‟ 
problems using a single methodology or analysis tool. 
No matter what kinds of tools or methods, it should 
consider more on social-political dimensions. Moreover, 
these methods should not try to sacrifice sectors‟ or actors‟ 
interests, but how to strength or broker their interests or 
meanings. 
In summary, we propose the “Social-Technical Services 
Systems” view to guide the methods design (see figure 2). It 
provides the service system view to understand every sector 
or 
subsector 
service 
meanings, 
requirements. 
Also, 
governments or institutions can provide the broker roles or 
information system platforms to help negotiate different 
meanings, translate requirements to help every sectors 
achieve their obligatory passage points. 
 
 
 
Social-Technical Service Systems
Actors
Actors
Inter-dependence or 
dependence  of CIIs
Negotiations
Meanings
ex: financial 
stock exchange 
subsystem
ex: healthcare
convenient
quickly recover 
and response
system buffer, message translation, meanings 
negotiation or broker platform
86
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this article, we propose the actor network theory to 
understand 
complex 
social, 
technology 
interwoven 
phenomenon of critical information infrastructures and their 
protection. Through our financial and healthcare sectors 
experiences and social-technical analysis, it implicates that 
include 
social 
dimension 
in 
independence 
analysis. 
Moreover, governments should also consider sectors‟ 
interests, and play a broker role to balance or negotiate their 
different interests. Finally, we propose social-technical 
service system approach to protect critical information 
infrastructure. 
Future research, we will take more in-depth analysis of 
different 
sectors 
about 
their 
meaning, 
negotiations, 
interactions, interests, and inscriptions. Finally, we will 
design more comprehensive methods for CIIP from a social-
technical service system approach. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Brunner, E.M. and M. Suter, International CIIP Handbook 2008 / 
2009, ETH, 2008. 
[2] E. Bagheri and A.A. Ghorbani, “The State of the Art in Critical 
Infrastructure 
Protection: 
a 
Framework 
for 
Convergence”, 
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure, 2007, pp. 1-36. 
[3] S. M. Rinaldi, J.P. Peerenboom, and T.K. Kelly, “Complex Networks: 
Indentifying, Understanding, and Analyzing Critical Infrastructure 
Interdependencies”, IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 2001, pp. 11-
25. 
[4] M.B. Bruijne and M. Eeten, “Systems that Should Have Failed: 
Critical Infrastructure Protection in an Institutionally Fragmented 
Environment”, Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, 
2007, pp. 18-29. 
[5] M. Dunn, “The Socio-Political Dimensions of Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection (CIIP)”, International Journal of Critical 
Infrastructure, 2005, pp. 258-268. 
[6] R. Kling and R. Lamb, “IT and Organizational Change in Digital 
Economies: A Socio-Technical Approach”, Computer and Society, 
1999, pp. 17-24. 
[7] Dunn, M. and V. Mauer, International CIIP Handbook 2006, ETH, 
2006. 
[8] T. F. Pinch and W. E. Bijker, “The Social Construction of Facts and 
Artifacts: Or How the Sociology of Science and Technology Might 
Benefit Each Other”, Social Studies of Science, 1984, pp. 399-411. 
[9] K. H. Sorensen and R. Williams, Shaping Technology, Guiding 
Policy, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2002. 
[10] M. Callon and B. Latour, “Unscrewing the big Leviathan”, in 
Advances in Social Theory and Methodology, K. Knorr-Cetina, and 
A.V. Cicourel, Eds, London: Routledge & Kegan, 1981,  pp. 277–303. 
[11] M. Callon, “Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: 
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay”, 
in Power, Action and Belief,  J. Law, Eds, London: Routledge & 
Kegan, 1986,  pp. 197–233. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

