The Dispedia Framework: A Semantic Model for Medical Information Supply 
 
 
Romy Elze 
Department of Computer Science  
University Leipzig 
Leipzig, Germany 
elze@informatik.uni-leipzig.de 
Klaus-Peter Fähnrich 
Institute for Applied Informatics (InfAI) e.V. 
Aninsitut of the University Leipzig 
Leipzig, Germany 
faehnrich@infai.org
 
 
Abstract—The Dispedia Framework is an information system 
in the complex field of rare diseases. The goal of the system is 
to harmonize social care conditions and health care conditions 
with the focus on personalization and patient autonomy. The 
main task was to analyze the existing system of one rare 
disease and to structure and model the data in a tiered 
approach. On the basis of the Dispedia Model, we developed an 
information system that supports the information logistics 
between patients with rare diseases and other (all) players (e.g., 
doctors, therapists, and researchers). 
Keywords-Complex 
System; 
Ontology; 
Health 
Care; 
Information Model; Knowledge Mangement; Rare Disease; 
Patient Care Information System 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This work describes an approach to engineer a health 
information system in the context of service engineering. 
“Service Engineering provides methods and tools for a 
systematic and structured development of new information-
intensive service offerings and service systems [1].” The 
area of service modeling as a sub-category of service 
science includes the formal and semi-formal description of 
services. Standardized and reusable methodologies and 
models in this area are often deficient [2]. One example of a 
holistic model of integrated service systems is Böttcher’s 
Metamodel [3]. This model includes the dimensions of 
service component, product model, process model, and 
resource model. It is particularly suitable for complex, 
varied 
services 
such 
as 
IT 
services. 
Considering 
comprehensive services which are provided collaboratively, 
the information model with a systemic view as a further 
dimension should be focused on. Only if the systems of 
medical services and information are understood as complex 
systems with highly interactive contexts and agents, the 
problems can be addressed through strategies that clarify the 
patterns and interrelationships of the system [4]. 
The aim of the paper is to show how patterns and 
interrelationships in a service system of complex disease 
can be found and how the information engineering can be 
realized. In Section 2 of the paper, the complex service 
system in case of rare diseases is described. In Section 3, the 
methods of analyzing and modeling of the system are 
demonstrated. Section 4 exposes the formalization of the 
system model. The summary in Section 5 identifies the most 
important facts of the paper, and in Section 6, the 
conclusions are drawn and fields of further work are tagged. 
II. 
PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
The field of research about rare diseases is extremely 
complex because of multifaceted disease progressions, the 
involvement of many stakeholders from different sectors 
(i.e., social care, health care, therapists, and aid suppliers), 
and the high costs incurred from treatment and care. 
The knowledge of orphan diseases is primarily limited to 
a few specialized institutions [5]. This restriction often leads 
to excessive demands on the side of the medicating agents, 
who lack such specific knowledge. Activities are rarely 
coordinated centrally. Therefore, multidisciplinary care is 
still insufficient [6].  
Due to the unpredictability of the course of a rare disease, 
it is impossible to preemptively provide information or 
define processes across the whole course. Due to a lack of 
quantitative and qualitative information, the confusion is also 
high on the side of the patients. This lack is diametrically 
opposed to the goal of supporting important treatment 
decisions at an early stage of the disease by means of an 
active information policy. Complex diseases like rare 
diseases (see Figure 1 (B)) are characterized by non-linear 
processes, and information and interventions subsequently 
depend on more contextual influences of the recipient. [4]   
Simple (A)
(e.g., amputation, 
infection, dehydration)
No agreement
High agreement
Close to certainity
Far from certainity
Complex (B)
(e.g., chronic disease, 
rare disease public
health, lifestyle, 
prenatal health)
Simple (C)
(e.g., substance
abuse, diseases of
poverty, self-harm, 
fibromyalgia)
 
Figure 1: Complexity of diseases (according to [4]) 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

Figure 2. Concept Model of ALS Disease 
Additionally, Berg constitutes that with respect to these 
approaches it is a vital aspect to consider the context of 
intervention- and information recipients [7]. These recipients 
can be both patients as well as other actors of the 
heterogeneous network. The challenge is to structure and to 
qualify the information for the information recipient 
[8],[9],[10]. Therefore a “…detailed consideration of the 
disease is inseparable from a detailed consideration of the 
whole person [11]”. In the following, the methods and 
concepts for modeling such a complex topic are presented.  
III. 
ANALYSIS AND MODELING OF RARE DISEASE 
To analyze problems and processes of rare diseases, we 
chose to use the example of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 
(ALS), which is a degenerative disease of the nervous 
system [5]. To model the knowledge and relationships in the 
ALS knowledge domain, a concept map was developed as a 
starting point. The concept map [12] and the knowledge map 
[13] are procedures for the graphical representation of 
knowledge. Modeling knowledge with these techniques 
supports the qualitative and quantitative knowledge acqui-
sition. The knowledge is thereby reduced to essential 
concepts which are arranged in relation to one another. The 
concept map was formed based on the analysis of 19 medical 
records of patients and their families from books and web 
sites. After discussion with experts (e.g., Charité Campus 
Virchow-Clinic 
Neurological 
Clinic: 
http://www.als-
charite.de/; German Society for Muscle Diseases e.V.: 
http://www.dgm.org/), the first model was consolidated. 
After the evaluation of an additional 41 expert interviews, 
the holistic Rare Disease Concept Model was completed (see 
Figure 2). 
The demand for information is characteristic for the 
subject of ALS. Therefore, the model of the rare disease is 
designed with a focus on information. We distinguish 
between information for a patient, information about a 
patient, and information for stakeholders (see Figure 3).  
 
Information 
about the
Patient (R)
Information 
for the
Patient (I)
 
 
Figure 3. Information Types for Medical Information Supply 
 
The medical field differentiates between specialized 
documentations of anamnesis. Especially in rare or chronic 
diseases and in rehabilitation, complex histories must be 
documented. With respect to ALS, for example, the 
neurologist uses the Functional Rating Scale for ALS 
(ALSFRS) [14]. Furthermore, therapists such as speech 
therapists or occupational therapists use their own 
anamnesis sheets. In rehabilitation, a description concerning 
the International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

Figure 4. Dispedia Framework 
and Health (ICF) is common. In the model, the utilization of 
all possible patient descriptions is intentional. Therefore, the 
idea of Linked Data [15] is pursued. 
Modeled 
after 
personal 
consultations 
between 
professionals and patients, different information characters 
are represented. Patients not only have physical needs, but 
are also characterized by certain psychological traits. 
Patients and other parties involved in this process are 
therefore recipient types that must be categorized as specific 
information recipients. For instance, a very anxious and 
sensitive patient may be considered a special type, for 
example the patient type (3) ”sensitive”.  
A patient who is a physician by trade would presumably 
hope to receive more detailed information and would be 
considered patient type ”skilled”. A patient who is very 
active and dedicated to his health may like to obtain 
information about treatment options to pursue by himself, 
for instance, anti-thrombosis injections. The information to 
be passed on to the patient in a counseling session would be 
matched exactly to the type of information recipient. For 
example, detailed information would be given to a skilled 
recipient who was listed under information type (5) 
”skilled”. 
As shown in Figure 2, the constructed Concept Model of 
ALS Disease demonstrates the relation between the concept 
patient (1) and the term of information (5). 
IV. 
FORMALIZING SYSTEM MODEL 
The formalization of the Disease Concept Model follows 
commonly used methodologies. These methodologies 
include the analysis as described above, coding the 
knowledge, reusing existing formal ontologies, evaluation, 
and documentation [16]. The resulting formal knowledge 
representation was encoded in Web Ontology Language 
(OWL). “OWL is intended to be used when the information 
contained in documents needs to be processed by 
applications [17]”, which allows, for instance, a modular 
development of complex areas and also the re-use of 
existing knowledge bases [18]. The employment of RDF/S 
[19] and OWL [17] for a representation of the Disease 
Model architecture has various advantages. 
 
The representation of information in a coherent 
structure without a direct connection to specific 
applications. This facilitates the development of 
applications which do not focus on the information 
logistics advised by this approach. 
 
The definite identification of the conceptual and 
concrete resources due to the use of dereferenceable 
URIs. 
 
The reutilization of the concepts in applied domains 
to generate an exchange of resources without a loss 
of information. 
 
Interlinking and reification of concrete resources. 
 
The application of established resources of the 
Linked Data Web, e.g., Dbpedia [20] and PubMed 
[21]. 
To use the formal Disease Model as a re-usable 
ontology, we developed the Dispedia Ontology (see Figure 
4) hold under the domain www.dispedia.de. The name 
Dispedia is derived from the goal of the designed 
uses
Core Schema
T-Box
A-Box
Dispedia Ontology
patient.dispedia.de
Case Ontology
Classification
Ontologies
ICF
ICD
uses
www.service
ontology.org
Service Schema
uses
hc.dispedia.de
YellowPages Ontology
uses
uses
www.dispedia.de
Dispedia Schema
uses
suitable
for
ALSFRS
...
ms.dis...
als.dispedia.de
Proposal Ontology
E-Commerce
Schema
Good
Relation
schema.
org
hc.service
Ontology.org
Healthcare 
Service Schema
Matching Advice
Health Care Services and Organizations
uses
Model for Health Description, Matching Advice and Services 
Health Description
uses
:   either 
individual elements are 
integrated or the ontology 
is imported
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

knowledge base to make disease-specific information 
available and usable for humans and machines. The 
Dispedia Ontology includes the vocabulary or scheme (Core 
Ontology), the expert knowledge base (Proposal Ontology), 
the knowledge base about the patient (Case Ontology), the 
allocation of proposal information descriptions for patient 
parameters, and the concepts to interlink additional 
classifications (see Figure 4) as described above. The 
Dispedia Framework realizes the description of the whole 
person 
through 
subject-specific 
and 
user-dependent 
classifications, the modular description of disease-specific 
proposals, the integration of heterogeneous stakeholders, 
and the patient-specific allocation of information. A 
prototypical deployment of using the Dispedia Framework 
is realized on the basis of Ontowiki, a web based tool 
providing 
support 
for 
agile, 
distributed 
knowledge 
engineering scenarios [22].  
V. 
SUMMARY  
The semantic modeling of the medical information 
supply takes both the patient type and the information type 
into consideration. By taking advantage of the properties 
these types had in common, an adaptable information 
system could be developed. An application that uses the 
Dispedia Model Architecture adapted the described field of 
knowledge. The core ontology is the framework which 
includes 
describing 
classifications, 
domain 
specific 
knowledge, and matching. To manage information about the 
patient in the ALS example, the core ontology uses the 
classification ontologies ICF and ALSFRS. When using 
semantic web technologies, the modification and utilization 
of other classifications is feasible. At the same time, the 
subject of ALS information for the patient was replaced or 
amended with information for other recipients.  
The use of the available e-commerce ontology 
www.schema.org furthermore allowed the information to be 
enriched with tangible offers and the tracking of patients, 
for instance, for medical aids.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our work focused on improving the information 
logistics in the existing health system regarding ALS. The 
actual state of our approach, which was evaluated by using 
select patients with ALS and the course of the disease in 
their specific cases, combines the following different 
advantages: 
 
The reutilization of the concepts in applied 
domains. 
 
Different information providers can operate on the 
same standard using the structure given by the 
architecture concepts and their relations. 
 
The ontological model of the system can be 
expanded by interlinking and remaining flexible 
with regards to accommodating new concepts. 
 
General aspects of the health care processes for the 
disease can be represented and linked to their 
implications for the individual stakeholder. 
 
Existing knowledge bases like the International 
Classification of Disease (ICD) [23] and the 
international 
Classification 
of 
Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF) [15] can be connected 
and re-used. 
In the current state of development, we focus on 
functionalities supporting knowledge acquisition in order to 
allow the approach of Dispedia itself to evolve. Therefore, 
the integration of more usable medical classifications is 
targeted in a similar manner as the possibility of interlinking 
further proposal ontologies in addition to the actual existent 
ALS Ontology. We will pursue the idea of decentralizing 
data on the web for patients as well. After modeling the 
expert knowledge structure, the content of ALS hold under 
the domain als.dispedia.de has to be enlarged, completed 
and audited. In the same structure further knowledge bases 
about other diseases have to be developed. For the remote 
maintenance of patient data appropriate security concepts 
must be evaluated. The connectivity for cost carriers is one 
of the open investigation areas and so is the development of 
security strategies for sensitive data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Spath, et al., "Service Engineering — A Transdisciplinary 
Approach in Service Research," in Services Science, B. Stauss, et 
al., Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 41-53. 
[2] 
M. Böttcher and K.-P. Fähnrich, "Service Systems Modeling: 
Concepts, Formalized Meta-Model and Technical Concretion," 
in The Science of Service Systems, H. Demirkan, et al., Eds., ed: 
Springer US, 2011, pp. 131-149. 
[3] 
M. Böttcher, "Architektur integrierter Dienstleistungssysteme - 
Konzeption, 
Metamodell 
und 
technikraumsspezifische 
Konkretisierung," Dr. rer. nat., Institut für Informatik, Universität 
Leipzig, Leipzig, 2009. 
[4] 
C. A. Brown, "The application of complex adaptive systems 
theory to clinical practice in rehabilitation," Disability and 
rehabilitation, vol. 28, pp. 587-93, 2006. 
[5] 
J. D. Mitchell and G. D. Borasio, "Amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis," The Lancet, vol. 369, pp. 2031-2041, 2007. 
[6] 
L. K. Ng, Fary and S. Mathers, "Multidisciplinary care for adults 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or motor neuron disease," in 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, ed, 2009. 
[7] 
M. Berg, "Patient care information systems and health care work: 
a sociotechnical approach," International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 55, pp. 87-101, 1999. 
[8] 
P. J. K. O. S. E. Eysenbach G, "Empirical studies assessing the 
quality of health information for consumers on the world wide 
web: A systematic review," JAMA: The Journal of the American 
Medical Association, vol. 287, pp. 2691-2700, 2002. 
[9] 
E. M. N. M. L. S. Berland Gk and et al., "Health information on 
the internet: Accessibility, quality, and readability in english and 
spanish," JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical 
Association, vol. 285, pp. 2612-2621, 2001. 
[10] 
H. A. Taylor, et al., "Implementation of a user-centered 
framework in the development of a web-based health 
information database and call center," J Biomed Inform, vol. 44, 
pp. 897-908, Oct 2011. 
[11] 
A. Miles, "Complexity in medicine and healthcare: people and 
systems, theory and practice," J Eval Clin Pract, vol. 15, pp. 
409-10, Jun 2009. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

[12] 
A. J. Cañas, et al., "Concept Maps: Integrating Knowledge and 
Information Visualization," in Knowledge and Information 
Visualization. vol. 3426, S.-O. Tergan and T. Keller, Eds., ed: 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 205-219. 
[13] 
A. O'Donnell, et al., "Knowledge Maps as Scaffolds for 
Cognitive Processing," Educational Psychology Review, vol. 14, 
pp. 71-86, 2002. 
[14] 
J. Cedarbaum, et al., "The ALSFRS-R: a revised ALS functional 
rating scale that incorporates assessments of respiratory 
function," Journal of the neurological sciences, vol. 169, 1999. 
[15] 
WHO, "ICF The International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health," 2002. 
[16] 
M. Uschold and M. Gruninger, Ontologies: Principles, Methods 
and Applications vol. 11, 1996. 
[17] 
W3C. (2004, Februar). OWL Web Ontology Language Overview. 
Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
[18] 
R. Elze, et al., "Dispedia.de – A Linked Information System for 
Rare Diseases," in Information Quality in e-Health. vol. 7058, A. 
Holzinger and K.-M. Simonic, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 691-701. 
[19] 
F. 
E. Manola, Miller. 
(2004, Rdf 
primer. 
Available: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdfprimer/. 
[20] 
C. Bizer, et al., "Linked Data - The Story So Far," Int. J. 
Semantic Web Inf. Syst., vol. 5, pp. 1-22, 2009. 
[21] 
A. Névéol, et al., "Semi-automatic semantic annotation of 
PubMed queries: A study on quality, efficiency, satisfaction," 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 44, pp. 310-318, 2011. 
[22] 
N. Heino, et al., "Developing Semantic Web Applications with 
the OntoWiki Framework," in Networked Knowledge - 
Networked Media. vol. 221, T. Pellegrini, et al., Eds., ed: 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 61-77. 
[23] 
WHO, "International Classification of Diseases (ICD)," 2006. 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

