Still Picture Internet Broadcasting System with  
Audience-oriented Bandwidth Control for Smartphone Broadcasters 
Abstract— We propose PictCast, which is a still picture 
Internet broadcasting system with dynamic picture quality 
adjustment based on audience requests for smartphone 
broadcasters. Live Internet broadcasting services, which are 
available on smartphones are increasing. However, the 
smartphone users need to decrease data traffic because they 
perform Internet broadcasting via 3G networks. To tackle this 
issue, we propose an effective bandwidth usage by reducing 
amount of data used to the minimum corresponds to audience 
satisfaction. We study the minimum quality of still pictures 
and temporarily determine the percentage of quality 
improvement requests from audience. Then, we conduct a ﬁeld 
study during a festival at our university and find out whether 
there are pictures which the audience requires more high 
quality or not, the possibility to reduce amount of data traffic 
and what type of content the audience is interested in. Finally, 
we discuss our findings based on the result, and end up with 
the conclusion and future work. 
Keywords: Internet broadcasting; Narrowband network; 
smartphones 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Live internet broadcasting services, which are available 
on smartphones are increasing in demand, along with the 
popularization of Internet broadcasting and smartphones. 
Example of these services such as Bambuser, Qik, Stickam, 
and Ustream. 3G Internet connections are required for 
Internet broadcasting using smartphones in outdoor areas 
where wireless LAN connections are unavailable. However, 
there are also bandwidth limitations in rural areas and 
developing cities. Thus, we should consider the smartphone 
users’ broadcast in these environments because the audience 
would like to look at a place where they have not been 
before. In some cases, smartphone users cannot perform 
Internet broadcasting adequately due to lack of 3G 
transmission speeds for video streaming in real time. 
Engström [1] states that effective use of bandwidth is 
needed because the study shows delay problems with live 
broadcasting systems on mobile networks. Therefore, data 
traffic should be reduced to achieve stable Internet 
broadcasting via 3G networks without delay. Smartphone 
users frequently use LTE to stream live video in real time. 
However, cell phone carriers often restrict the upload and 
download speeds of LTE after a certain amount of data has 
been transmitted. Data traffic should be reduced as much as 
possible even if users use LTE. Moreover, cell phone 
carriers nowadays tend to shift flat-rate data services to pay-
as-you-go data services. Thus, 3G data traffic should be 
optimized to save packet communication fees. 
Our research goal is to minimize the amount of data 
traffic by effective use of bandwidth which satisfy the 
audience. 
S.McCanne [2] adjusts video quality depending on 
available network bandwidth as a method to achieve 
effective use of bandwidth. Similarly, recent research in 
mobile broadcasting have studied how to maximize 
bandwidth utilization [3]. However, these schemes may use 
redundant network bandwidth in excess of audience 
satisfaction. The quality should be determined from 
audience satisfaction point of view, instead of available 
network bandwidth. In our work, we introduce new aspect 
of dynamic quality adjustment picture with audience 
participation during the live broadcast. The amount of data 
traffic is optimized by dynamic quality adjustment which 
could change still picture quality based on audience requests. 
In the proposed system, we adjust the picture, not video 
quality to reduce data traffic as much as possible and take a 
closer look at the user interaction. For the use of pictures to 
reduce data traffic, Okada [4] realizes conferencing system 
use still pictures because it can work in a narrowband 
network. The conferencing system detects users’ eyes 
direction and assists users by changing still pictures of 
users’ faces without using videos. The use of still pictures 
has proved to reduce data traffic significantly. Moreover, 
the still picture view can be adjusted in case audience 
request for high quality picture. For future work, we will 
adjust video quality instead of picture quality. 
In this paper, we present PictCast, a prototype system of 
still picture Internet broadcasting with dynamic picture 
quality adjustment. The innovation of our research is 
audience-oriented bandwidth control based on audience 
requests. The PictCast achieves stable Internet broadcasting 
via 3G networks using still pictures instead of video and 
optimizes the amount of data traffic by allowing the change 
of picture quality based on audience requests. For dynamic 
picture quality adjustment function, first it sends the 
minimum quality picture which satisfy the audience. 
Secondly, it will retransmit picture data to the audience from 
the broadcaster after it receives a certain number of quality 
improvement requests. For the preliminary study, we studied 
and predefined the minimum quality and percentage of 
quality improvement requests from the audience. We carried 
Yuki Nakano, Yoshia Saito and Yuko Murayama 
Graduate School of Software and Information Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Iwate, Japan 
Email:{y.nakano@comm.soft.iwate-pu.ac.jp, y-saito@iwate-pu.ac.jp, murayama@iwate-pu.ac.jp} 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Voice and still picture
broadcasting 
The proposed system
Broadcaster
Audience
Voice and still picture 
broadcasting
Quality improvement 
request
Improvement of 
picture quality
3G Internet connection 
Quality improvement 
request
Improvement of 
picture quality
 
Figure 1.  System model. 
Picture server
Flash server 
Voice
Voice
Quality improvementrequest
Progressive
picture data
Picture URL
Picture
Quality improvement request
The broadcaster client
Google’s Android
Encoding voice MP3
Encoding picture JPEG2000
PC
The audience client
 
Figure 2.  System Architecture. 
out a ﬁeld study during a festival at our University. As a 
result of the study, we discussed our findings and continue 
with the PictCast project. 
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we  
show a model of our proposed system and present design and 
implementation of the prototype system. Section 3 describes 
a preliminary study. Section 4 presents the results of a field 
study. Section 5 gives some conclusions and our future work.  
I. 
PICTCAST 
Figure 1 shows the model of our proposed system. A 
broadcaster sends still pictures and voice to the audience via 
3G wireless network. The audience watches a broadcast 
program from their PC via high-speed network. The voice is 
compressed and broadcast to the audience in real time. The 
still pictures are compressed in a progressive format. To 
reduce data traffic, the broadcaster sends the still pictures to 
the audience at the minimum picture quality which is 
acceptable to the audience at first. If the audience requires 
higher quality of still pictures, they can send quality 
improvement requests to the broadcaster. The broadcaster 
then retransmits higher quality still pictures correspond to a 
certain number of audience requests. In this case, the ﬁrst 
low-quality still picture will be replace by retransmitting 
with a higher quality one. Therefore, we use progressive 
decoding, which is represent by progressive JPEG. The 
progressive decoding makes a picture gradually sharper as 
the download progresses. To apply the mechanism, the 
broadcaster can improve the quality of a still picture 
progressively without wasting transmitted picture data.  
Screen Comment Viewer
Send button Request button
 
Figure 3.  The user interface of the audience client. 
Connect button
Send button
Login button
Logout button
Screen
 
Figure 4.  The user interface of the broadcaster client. 
A. System Architecture 
We implement a prototype system which provides still 
picture broadcasting with progressive decoding. The 
prototype system consists of a voice server, picture server, 
broadcaster clients and audience clients. The broadcaster 
client sends voice and still pictures to voice and picture 
server respectively. The audience will receives voice and still 
pictures from each server. Figure 2 shows architecture of the 
prototype system. 
 
We developed the broadcaster client on a Google android 
terminal. The broadcaster client compresses voice in MP3  
format by using the LAME library. We used Red5, which is 
an open source streaming server for the voice server. The 
broadcaster client sends the compressed voice data to the 
voice server over Real Time Messaging Protocol (RTMP). 
Then, audience clients receive the voice data from the voice 
server. The audience client is implemented in Adobe Flash. 
JPEG2000 format is used for the progressive decoding. The 
JPEG2000 format provides various progressive decoding 
functions which can change resolution and compression rate 
of the picture. In this implementation, the progressive 
decoding by resolution is used. First, the broadcaster client 
sends a low-resolution still picture to the server. Then, it 
sends additional data to the server responding to audience 
requests, so that the resolution of the still picture can be 
doubled. To compress the still picture in JPEG2000 format, 
we use a library OpenCV, which can be used on Google 
android terminal. 
The picture server functions as a Web server using 
Apache. When the picture server receives a picture with 
JPEG2000 format from the broadcaster client, it changes 
from JPEG2000 to JPEG by using the OpenJPEG library. 
The picture server provides a URL for the compressed JPEG 
picture to the audience clients. The audience client shows a 
still picture, downloading it from the picture server and it 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

also has a button to send a quality improvement request to 
the picture server. When the picture server receives a certain 
number of quality improvement requests, it requests 
additional data of the picture from the broadcaster client.  
B. User Interface 
We design the user interface for both broadcaster and 
audience client. Figure 3 shows the broadcaster client user 
interface. There are two broadcasting function in the design 
of the interface. The first function allows the broadcaster to 
take a picture with a touch on the smartphone screen.  
Meanwhile, the second function allows the broadcaster to 
interact with voice and picture server. The broadcaster client  
consist of four buttons: “CONNECT” establish connections 
with voice and picture server, “LOGIN” button authenticates 
the broadcaster with picture server based on specified 
username and password to start the broadcasting session. 
“SEND” button transfer the still picture to picture server and 
“LOGOUT” disconnect user with both voice and picture 
server. These buttons will not appear when the broadcaster 
snaps a picture and it will be displayed again by pressing 
MENU button on Android. Figure 4 shows the audience 
client user interface. There is a screen with 640x480 
resolution for still picture on the layout of the interface. 
“SEND” button will send comments from client to both 
audience and broadcaster. The audience can read the 
comments on the comment view. “REQUEST” button sends 
a request for picture quality improvement to the picture 
server. Therefore, the still picture quality will be improved 
step-by-step based on audience request. 
II. 
PRELIMINARY STUDY 
We conduct a preliminary study to predefine the still 
picture minimum quality and quality improvement request 
percentage from audience. The following section describes 
the method used and its result. 
A. Method 
There are many subjective assessment methods suggested 
by 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) and 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
Radio 
communications Sector (ITU-R). We choose Absolute 
Category Rating methodology (ACR) with 5-point scale on 
total assessment time and ease of evaluation criteria. The 
ACR methodology defined by ITU-T Rec. P910. In ACR, 
subject need to evaluate the picture quality within 10 
seconds after they see the picture displayed randomly. 
Randomly ordered picture can eliminate the possibility of 
affecting the assessment by indicating the picture sequence. 
For example, a picture with medium quality will have the 
high rating if the subject watches it after the low quality 
picture. The picture quality will be given an average score 
evaluated by Mean Opinion Score (MOS). 
Besides, for the percentage of quality improvement 
request, subjects were asked on the subjective picture quality 
assessment by the question: “Would you request for a higher 
quality picture?” for all types of picture resolutions.  
TABLE I.  
THE RESULT OF THE ASSESSMENT 
 
MOS 
The percentages of quality 
improvement requests 
640x480 
4.41 
30% 
320x240 
3.20 
64% 
160x120 
2.18 
95% 
80x60 
1.56 
100% 
40x30 
1.24 
100% 
B. Environment 
We conduct an assessment following an environment 
described by ITU-R Rec. BT.500. The pictures were  
displayed on a 17-inch LCD monitor (LCD-A173KW) with 
the resolution 1024x768. Subjects performed the assessment 
at a distance of 120cm away from the display screen. 
The pictures are in JPEG format with 5 resolutions, from 
40x30 to 640x480. The size of the picture display field is 
640x480 pixels because it is a most frequently size for 
Internet broadcasting sites.  
We choose ten kinds of picture for the picture quality 
assessment which consist of person, group, painting, cat, 
paper, meal, building, tree and standard image pictures. 
"Standard Image" picture is one of the pictures standardized 
by The Institute of Image Electronics Engineers of Japan 
(IEEJ). The picture was rate by International Standards 
Organization (ISO). Those picture were selected based on 
typical categories of picture in live video broadcasting for 
mobile device over the Internet [5]. The number of subjects 
should be more than fifteen according to ITU-R Rec. BT.500. 
There are 23 university students in IPU participated in the 
assessment.  
C. Result 
Table 1 shows the result of the assessment. For the 
minimum quality of still picture, we have decided to choose 
160x120 resolution picture because of the MOS score is 
around 2.5, while for 320x240 resolution, the MOS score is 
more than 2.5 for all assessment. The MOS score of 2.5 is 
the acceptable value because it represent over 50% of 
subjects who give 3 points. Therefore, for the prototype 
system, three steps offered for the progressive decoding from 
160x120 to 640x480 picture resolution. 
Meanwhile, the percentage of quality improvement 
request for 160x120 and 320x240 resolution are above 50% 
from the audience. From the result, we temporarily 
determined a threshold for the picture quality improvement 
of 50% of the total unique users. 
III. 
FIELD STUDY 
We carried out a field study to answer the following 
questions: (1)Does the audience send requests that they 
would like higher quality pictures?; (2)Is the proposed 
system possible to reduce the amount of data traffic?; 
(3)What type of content is the audience interested in? 
We set three experimental conditions based on the 
preliminary study as follows: 1) the first low-quality still 
picture is 160x120 resolution, 2) the progressive decoding is  
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 5.  The changes in the number of the requests (a) On the first half 
of the broadcast and (b) On the second half of the broadcast. 
offered in three steps from 160x120 to 640x480, and 3) the 
broadcaster 
retransmits 
higher 
quality 
still 
pictures 
responding to the requests of more than 50% of the total 
unique users.  
A. Environment 
The festival was held at Iwate Prefectural University 
campus. We broadcast the festival scenes at various places 
around campus by using a smartphone, which is available to 
communicate up to 300kbps over the Internet. Anyone can 
view the broadcast content on the website embedded in the 
audience client. 
B. Broadcast contents 
The field study was conducted on October 28th from 
10:00 to 13:00 and from 13:00 to19:00. During the first half 
of the broadcast, we interviewed people who served food at 
the street stands. During the second half of the broadcast, we 
introduced some of the festival events such as concerts, 
onstage entertainment, and fireworks. 
C. Results 
We counted the total quality improvement requests in 
order to confirm the audience really sent the requests if they 
were not satisfied with the minimum picture quality. The 
total number of the requests was 283 on the first half of the 
broadcast and 175 for the second half of the broadcast. As a 
result, we found that the audience was not satisfied with the 
minimum picture quality and there were times when the 
audience wanted to see the pictures with higher quality. 
Moreover, we analyzed changes in the number of the 
requests. Figure 5 shows the changes per 60 seconds. From 
this figure, we found there were pictures which the audience  
wanted to see in higher quality and the audience that was not 
satisfied with 160x120 resolution sent the requests. We 
measured the amount of data traffic for the system on that 
day. We compared the proposed system with a system which 
sends still pictures only at 640x480 resolution to the 
audience in terms of the amount of data traffic. The amount 
of the data traffic for the proposed system was about 15 
Mbytes. The alternative system however required about 120 
Mbytes. We found the proposed system was able to reduce 
data traffic significantly compared to the alternative system. 
We analyzed when the audience sent requests. As a result, 
the audience sent many requests when we reported about the 
weather. For example, a picture of a puddle under the main 
stage only became high quality from the onstage 
entertainment broadcast. It is possible for weather report to 
be one of the features for this system.  
D. Issues 
A threshold value of total unique requests for picture 
quality improvement was set to 50 %. However, one of the 
audience commented, "I'm so stressed because my requests 
are often ignored". It is possible there were inactive audience 
members who just listened to the voice streaming for back- 
ground music or did not feel like aggressively sending the 
requests. Considering these inactive audience members, it  
would not be an adequate threshold to satisfy the audience. 
We should study the threshold to improve average audience 
satisfaction. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We present PictCast, which is a prototype system with 
still picture Internet broadcasting and dynamic picture 
quality adjustment functions. As a result from the field study, 
we found that there were times where the audience request 
for higher quality pictures. The proposed system was able to 
reduce data traffic and the audience interested in weather 
report. We will design a future system which can be used in 
disaster area because the audience would like to see the 
current conditions, such as Weather report and surrounding 
in that area which have a narrowband network area. 
We also found that there was a problem with the 
threshold value of total unique request for picture quality 
improvement. We will review the threshold value to improve 
the average of audience satisfaction in disaster area 
environment. For future work, we will release the 
broadcaster client on Google Play Store in order to get 
feedback on how users use PictCast in disaster area.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Engström,  G, Zoricet, O. Juhlin, and R. Toussi, “The 
Mobile Vision Mixer: A mobile network based live video 
broadcasting system in your mobile phone,“ Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Multimedia, Article No. 18, Dec. 2012, pp.18:1--18:4. 
[2] S. McCanne, V. Jacobson, and M. Vetterli, “Receiver-driven 
layered multicast,“ Conference proceedings on Applications, 
technologies, architectures, and protocols for computer 
communications, Oct. 1996, pp. 117–130. 
[3] K. Evensen,  T. Kupka, D. Kaspar, P. Halvorsen, and C. 
Griwodz, “Quality-adaptive scheduling for live streaming 
over multiple access networks,“ The 20th International 
Workshop on Network and Operating Systems Support for 
Digital Audio and Video, June. 2010, pp.21-26. 
[4] K. Okada and Y. Matsushita, “A Multiparty Conferencing 
System 
Using 
still 
pictures 
for 
Narrow 
Band 
Networks,“ Information Processing Society of Japan, vol.39, 
no.10, Oct. 1998, pp.2762-2769. 
[5] O. Juhlin, A. Engström, and E. Reponen, “Mobile 
broadcasting: the whats and hows of live video as a social 
medium,“ Proceedings of the 12th international conference on 
Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services, 
Sep. 2010, pp. 35–44. 
(b) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
51
64
76
88
100
113
128
156
169
181
193
205
217
232
253
267
279
292
304
316
328
340
352
364
(a) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
8
14
20
26
32
38
44
50
56
62
68
74
80
86
92
98
104
110
116
122
136
153
Time(min)
The number of requests
The number of audience
Request
Audience
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

