Comparison of Receiver Architecture in Terms of Power Consumption and Noise Figure 
for Cochlear Implants Application 
 
 
 
Abstract– Change in patients requirements has lead to new 
cochlear implants architecture specifications. In this paper, we 
proposed the receiver chain architecture study and design for 
new type of cochlear implants. Two receiver architectures were 
compared in terms of power consumption and Noise Figure, 
both of fundamental importance in biomedical embedded 
systems. SPICE simulations of the these architectures were 
carried out and transient results were presented for the solution 
retained. Furthermore optimization of the Low Noise Amplifier 
(LNA) 
using 
mathematical 
computations 
is 
presented, 
increasing the entire receiver performances. 
Keywords: SPICE Simulations, RF Receiver, LNA 
Optimization 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cochlear implant is a device aiming to aid severely deaf 
people to partially recover hearing (electrical description of 
cochlear implant can be found in). A prototype aiming to 
make the implant less noticeable is presented in. In this new 
cochlear implant prototype,  the transmitter is inserted inside 
the auditory canal, sending Radio Frequency (RF) waves 
(allowing reduced antenna size) to the receiver located inside 
the patient’ s skull. As the auditory canal space is limited, the 
battery size and its charge are the main limiting factors for the 
emitter design, diminishing its performances.  
  
Figure 1: Transmitter architecture (redrawn from) 
 
According to the work presented in, the Digital Signal 
Processor (DSP) that was previously located in the emitter, 
can be integrated on the receiver. This has the advantage of 
reducing the emitter consumption but on the other hand 
implies an electrical architecture reworking. The emitter has 
already been presented in  and the architecture is recalled in 
Figure 1. The input signal coming from the microphone was 
compared with a ramp reference signal to create a Pulse 
Width Modulated (PWM) signal, then multiplied by a 
2.45GHz oscillator to create the RF signal sent to the 
transmitter antenna. 
The aim of this paper is to select the receiver architecture 
fitting the most with the cochlear implants specifications and 
then to optimize its critical block in terms of Noise Figure 
and power consumption as explained in Section III. The 
receiver architectures overview is presented in Section IV, 
followed by the mathematical optimization of the LNA. Two 
different types of receiver front end architectures are then 
discussed and compared in terms of added noise and power 
consumption (Section V.), before presenting our concluding 
remarks and preferences. 
II. 
RECEIVER ARCHITECTURE 
The communication channel between the transmit- and 
the receive antenna is presented in, leading to an estimated 
received power of -87dBm, and added noise in the 
propagation channel of -95dBm. Those values were 
computed from the maximal authorized emitted power in the 
ISM band (20dBm), the attenuation in human tissue with 
corresponding dielectric constants, the ISM bandwidth 
(80MHz) and assuming a white noise distribution. This fixes 
the LNA sensitivity and is used as basis for the receiver 
specifications and architecture selection.  
The selected architecture for the receiver includes a low 
noise amplifier followed by an amplitude demodulation stage 
and a digital signal processing unit controlling the electrodes 
array, which is implanted inside the patient’s cochlea.  
Electrodes array are the most consuming part of the receiver 
(their power consumption estimation is around 50mW [4]) 
and this energy cannot be reduced for proper nerve fibers 
U. Cerasani, W. Tatinian 
University Nice Sophia Antipolis 
LEAT, Valbonne, France 
umberto.cerasani@unice.fr 
william.tatinian@unice.fr 
 
P. Ndungidi, C. Dualibe, C. Valderrama 
Université de Mons 
Mons, Belgique 
papy.ndungidi@umons.ac.be 
Fortunato.Dualibe@umons.ac.be  
Carlos.Valderrama@umons.ac.be 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

excitation. The total electronic consumption should be 
significantly lower than the electrodes array consumption to 
increase battery lifetime 
 
Figure 2 : Transmitter architecture overview, with signal outputs in color  
 
Ultra low power processors currently available in market 
consume few µW at the 1MHz working frequency [5], [6]. 
Ultra-low-energy biomedical signal processors (BSPs) are 
nowadays being developed with overall energy consumption 
around  100 pJ/cycle with a working frequency of 1MHz (a 
state of the art review can be found in [7]). Therefore more 
constraints in term of power consumption are put in the 
RF/analog electronic devices of the receiver,  which should 
not contain complex blocks for envelop detection. 
Most particularly, a high consumption would lead to an 
increase of the battery reload frequency, which is 
inconvenient for the patients. Because of low power 
constraints, power repartition between blocks becomes 
fundamental. The unique block allowed to consume more 
power was the LNA in order to decrease the total Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (SNR) of the entire receiver as explained in 
Section III. 
As presented in Figure 2, two architectures are 
investigated for the AM demodulation: a power detection 
using a mixer with the RF and LO inputs connected together 
and a coherent demodulation composed of a mixer and a local 
oscillator at the same frequency as the input signal. The 
output signal is a PWM-like waveform and is low-pass 
filtered to recover the initial signal amplitude. Linearity is not 
significant as the PWM signal maximum frequency (around 
2MHz) is substantially lower than the carrier frequency 
(2.45GHz).  
III. 
LNA OPTIMIZATION 
As a direct consequence of the Friss equation [8] 
(reminded in (1)) the Noise Factor of the entire receiver is 
greatly dependent on the LNA Noise Factor and gain. 
Consequently we decided to optimize the LNA design in 
terms of power consumption and noise figure. 
 
    	
      1
	
       1
	
 
           1 
 
Where FLNA, Fdemod and Ffilter are the Noise Factor of the LNA, 
the Noise Factor of the blocks composing each demodulating 
topology and the Noise Factor of the RC filter respectively. 
GLNA and Gdemod are the Power Gains with load of the LNA 
and the blocks composing each demodulating topology 
respectively. 
TABLE I.  : COMPONENT VALUES OF THE LNA OBTAINED BY 
MATHEMATICAL COMPUTATION 
 
Implemented 
values 
Center Frequency 
2.475 GHz 
Voltage supply 
1.2 V 
Current Consumption 
10 mA 
LL 
1.3 nH 
CL 
3.18 pF 
LM1,M2 
0.15 um 
WM1,2 
165 um 
NF 
1. 4 
LS 
0.14 nH 
LG 
14.3 nH 
 
 
Figure 3: Circuit of the Low Noise Cascode Amplifier 
 
Figure 3 shows the schematic of the implemented LNA. The 
cascode stage (M2) is used to improve input-output isolation, 
reduce the Miller effect and, consequently, increase the 
bandwidth. The resonant circuit formed by LL and CL permits 
a high gain with a low voltage supply at the frequency of 
interest. With LG and LS a narrow band input impedance 
matching is obtained. The input transistor (M1) is used in 
inductively degenerated common-source configuration.  
TABLE II: PARAMETERS OBTAINED BY MATHEMATICAL 
COMPUTATION AND WITH CADENCE SIMULATION 
 
Mathematical 
computation 
Cadence 
evaluation 
RF Frequency  
2.4GHz  
2.45GHz 
S21  
>17dB  
24.7dB 
S11  
-10dB  
-7.11dB 
S22 
-10.1dB 
-1.5dB 
NF  
<1.4 dB 
0.75dB 
Power Consumption  
13.2 mW 
11.71mW 
 
M2
M1
LL
CL
LS
LG
RFIN+VG
VCC
RFOUT
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

The width of the transistor and the other parameters of the 
circuit were mathematically computed using a similar 
development than the method presented by Thomas H. LEE
[9], minimizing the Noise Figure while optimizing power 
consumption.  
For both architecture, we evaluated the receiver 
performances using a 0.13µm RF CMOS technology.
shows the values obtained from calculation
modifications according to the target CMOS 130
process.The results of simulations are summarized in Table II.
In practice, equations used for this
derived from first order modeling (SPICE
provided general characterization of the LNA furt
by Cadence simulations (especially modifying the polarization 
of M1), explaining the improvements in Table II
terms of NF and gain. 
IV. 
RECEIVER ARCHITECTURES IMPLEMENTED
The two architectures presented in Figure 2
implemented in SPICE and they were compared in terms of 
power requirements and noise addition. The LNA and the 
filter were common to both solutions. The polariz
is not shown in the figures. 
A. Solution 1: LNA and Power Detector 
The input signal is the one received by the antenna 
(2.4GHz carrier modulated in amplitude by a PWM signal) 
and the LNA output is connected to the Local 
(LO +) as well as on the RF input of the Mixer. The Power 
Detector is therefore created using a mixer with its inputs 
connected to the same source. We designed a single balanced 
Mixer because of its low power consumption. However
the DC offset is injected directly in the RF source,
the mixer linearity [11], not of importance in our application. 
 
Figure 4: Receiver architecture solution 1 with a LNA and a power detect
he width of the transistor and the other parameters of the 
circuit were mathematically computed using a similar 
the method presented by Thomas H. LEE 
igure while optimizing power 
For both architecture, we evaluated the receiver 
CMOS technology. Table I 
calculations, after some minor 
modifications according to the target CMOS 130 nm 
process.The results of simulations are summarized in Table II. 
this optimization were 
PICE level [10]) and 
cterization of the LNA further refined 
(especially modifying the polarization 
in Table II, especially in 
S IMPLEMENTED 
The two architectures presented in Figure 2 were 
and they were compared in terms of 
power requirements and noise addition. The LNA and the 
solutions. The polarizing circuitry 
 
The input signal is the one received by the antenna 
(2.4GHz carrier modulated in amplitude by a PWM signal) 
is connected to the Local Oscillator Input 
of the Mixer. The Power 
created using a mixer with its inputs 
connected to the same source. We designed a single balanced 
Mixer because of its low power consumption. However, as 
in the RF source, it degrades 
, not of importance in our application.  
 
with a LNA and a power detector 
Figure 5: Transient simulations including the input signal, the LNA output, 
the mixer output (right) and the RC filter output (left)
 
The designed mixer has a NF of 20dB, and its output is 
directly connected to the RC filter. The simplified schematic 
of the Solution 1 is presented Figure 4 (with bias circuit 
removed for clarity reasons) and the associated transient 
simulations are presented in Figure 5.
For the test case, the PWM signal 
kHz sine wave, which was sampled at 1MHz. 
signal is represented in light blue
magnitude is low enough to make the LNA operate within the 
linear region. Removing the DC voltage, the output signal is 
represented in pink, where one can see that the ratio between 
the maximal and minimal magnitude is around 5, which is 
high enough for a further OOK demodulation. 
rising and falling times are a
result, after filtering, we obtained 
the emitted signal, where the distortions and the low output 
magnitude are mainly due to the low 
the mixer (100µA).  
The main advantage of this architecture 
two active devices (LNA and mixer) instead of three 
other solution). 
B. Solution 2: LNA, Mixer and VCO
The oscillator used is an L
frequency of 2.45GHz and
compensate the frequency shift due to temperature variations 
within the human body (presented in 
Figure 6: Receiver with mixer and VCO
 
: Transient simulations including the input signal, the LNA output, 
the mixer output (right) and the RC filter output (left) 
The designed mixer has a NF of 20dB, and its output is 
directly connected to the RC filter. The simplified schematic 
of the Solution 1 is presented Figure 4 (with bias circuit 
removed for clarity reasons) and the associated transient 
in Figure 5. 
For the test case, the PWM signal was created with a 1 
sampled at 1MHz. The RF input 
signal is represented in light blue and the corresponding 
magnitude is low enough to make the LNA operate within the 
Removing the DC voltage, the output signal is 
represented in pink, where one can see that the ratio between 
the maximal and minimal magnitude is around 5, which is 
high enough for a further OOK demodulation. The effects of 
rising and falling times are also visible on the curve. As a 
obtained a signal that corresponds to 
, where the distortions and the low output 
magnitude are mainly due to the low power consumption of  
of this architecture was the use of only 
two active devices (LNA and mixer) instead of three (in the 
Solution 2: LNA, Mixer and VCO 
is an L-C tank oscillator with a central 
and frequency control (Vtune) to 
compensate the frequency shift due to temperature variations 
presented in Figure 6).  
 
iver with mixer and VCO 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
 
Figure 7: Transient simulation of the mixer output in the second architecture 
 
The width of the NMOS of the differential pair is 210µm 
and the length is 150nm, which drives a current of 10mA. 
The Noise Figure of  the cross coupled pair was obtained with 
SPICE simulations and was found equal to 7dB. Then, using 
Periodic Steady-State (PSS) analysis, we estimated the phase 
noise, which was around -120dBc/Hz at 1MHz from the 
carrier (PWM maximal frequency).  
Transient simulation results are presented in Figure 7, where 
one can see that the output voltage magnitude of the mixer is 
much higher than in the previous architecture, at the cost of 
output oscillations due to the frequency shift between LO and 
RF. Indeed this shift is inevitable as low power constraints 
did not allow carrier recovery. Nevertheless, this distortion 
may be removed by subsequent Signal Processing. 
V. 
ARCHITECTURE COMPARISON 
The main requirements of our receiver was its low power 
consumption and a very reduced Noise Figure. Maximizing 
SNR at the receiver output (before DSP computation) is 
hence very relevant and consists on minimizing the total 
Noise Factor of the receiver.  
 
TABLE III: NOISE FACTOR AND POWER COSUMPTION 
COMPARISON 
 
Power Detector  
Mixer and VCO 
Power Consumption (mW) 
11.91 
21.4 
NF  
2.57 
2.61 
 
Total Noise Factor computation is expressed by the Friss 
formula  as previously stated in (1). 
The Noise Factors comparison for each solution are shown in 
Table III, as well as their respective Power Consumption 
estimation. 
The solution with VCO is consuming twice as much 
power as  the solution with the Power Detector. This results 
in a total extra energy of about 100mA*h per day (assuming 
that the device is activated during 8 hours per day). 
As discussed in Section II. the increase in power consumption 
of the RF front end represents between 20% to 40% of the 
power consumed by the electrodes array depending on the 
selected topology. 
As stated in Section III.B., the effect of the VCO phase noise 
is not significant compared to the frequency shift associated 
with the absence of carrier recovery in the receiver. This may 
significantly corrupt  the signal rectification as the signal 
translation into lower frequencies is followed by the RC 
filter. 
In consequence, it is authors’ belief that the first architecture 
should be preferred for this application. Optimization 
algorithms such as NSG2 presented in [12] are available and 
permits optimization of the overall architecture to maximize 
parameters of interest (still under work). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented the study and design of the receiver 
front end architecture for new type of cochlear implants. 
As the LNA block was compulsory in both the solutions 
and significantly impact the overall architecture Noise Figure, 
its optimization using mathematical computation was first 
performed before its implementation in Cadence and 
subsequent refinement. 
 Two receiver architectures were compared in terms of 
power consumption and Noise Figure, both of fundamental 
importance 
in 
biomedical 
embedded 
systems. 
The 
architecture with Power Detector was preferred for our 
application, as it consumed less and did not suffer of 
frequency shift, which could impact the signal demodulation. 
The optimization of the overall LNA and Power detector 
architecture is ongoing, using a nonlinear multi-objective 
optimization, based on the Genetic Algorithm (GA) NSGA II. 
This overall optimization may be necessary if the 
measured Noise Power inside the transmission channel would 
be greater that the estimated one, yet very close to the Signal 
Power received by the antenna.  
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] J. K. Niparko, Cochlear Implants: Principle and Practices , Second 
Edition ed. Philadelphia, USA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2009. 
[2] Y. Vaiarello, Y. Leduc, N. Veau, and G. Jacquemod, "Ultra Low Power 
Transmitter for Cochlear Implant Application," IEEE Circuits and 
Systems Society Forum on Emerging and Selected Topics (CAS-FEST), 
2011 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 622-630. 
[3] Y. Vaiarello, O. Diop, N. Veau, W. Tatinian, and G. Jacquemod, 
"Channel Modelling for Cochlear Implant Application," SAME Forum, 
2010 Sophia Antipolis, France. 
[4] A. Moctezuma and J. Tu, "An Overview of Cochlear Implant Systems," 
, University of Illinois, December 2011. 
[5] Texas Instrument. C5000™ Ultra Low Power DSPs Datasheet. 
[6] CSEM. icyflex4 Datasheet. 
[7] X. Liu et al., "Ultra-Low-Energy Near-Threshold Biomedical Signal 
Processor for Versatile Wireless Health Monitoring," IEEE Asian Solid-
State Circuits Conference, November 2012 Kobe, Japan, pp.381-384. 
[8] G. Vasilescu, Electronic Noise and Interfering Signals: Principles and 
Applications. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1999. 
[9] T. H. Lee, The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits, 
Second Edition ed.: Ed. Cambridge, 2003. 
[10] R. M. Kielkowski, and R. Kielkowski, "SPICE: practical device 
modeling". McGraw-Hill, 1995 
[11] Agilent Technologies. Presentation on Fundamentals of Mixer Design. 
[Online]. cp.literature.agilent.com/litweb/pdf/5989-9102EN.pdf, 2011 
[12] 
 
  
P. Ndungidi,  H. García-Vázquez, J. del Pino, F. Dualibe, and C. 
Valderrama, "RF specification driven by Multi-Objective Optimization 
Method," DCIS, Avignon, FRANCE November, 2012, pp. 296-297 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

