 
 
The Pervasive Fridge 
A Smart Computer System Against Uneaten Food Loss
José Rouillard 
LIFL Laboratory – University of Lille1 
59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq Cedex - France 
jose.rouillard@univ-lille1.fr 
 
Abstract — Food waste or food loss is food that is discarded or 
lost uneaten. The work presented in this paper is related to 
our researches in the field of pervasive and ubiquitous 
computing. Our “Pervasive Fridge” prototype allows users 
to be notified proactively, when a food arrives to its 
expiration date. Speech and image recognition are also 
integrated in our prototype. This system combines various 
resources in order to scan barcode, identify and store data 
related to products, with a smartphone. Later, notifications 
are sent freely to consumers by mail, SMS (with no charge) 
and pop-up, to avoid uneaten food loss. 
Keywords-Application-oriented 
system; 
pervasive 
computing; ubiquitous computing; ambient intelligence; 
fridge; barcode scanner; voice interaction; SMS; android. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Food waste or food loss is food that is discarded or lost 
uneaten. Currently, in the world, according to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
consumers waste about 1.3 billion tons of food annually. 
Consumers in rich countries waste about 222 million tons of 
food products [1]. People buy foods that are kept in fridge or 
cupboard and when products arrive at their deadline, they are 
thrown. 
The work presented in this paper is related to our researches 
in the field of pervasive and ubiquitous computing. We are 
particularly trying to find some ways to help consumers avoid 
wasting food. Nowadays, the consumers, generally less 
attentive than by the past, often do not interpret correctly the 
dates of consumption, and/or do not care about the organization 
of the refrigerator and so, do not have the time to manage their 
products. Obviously, this leads to important food losses. Our 
goal is to reduce this waste of food. As this is mainly due to 
problems of “memory”, we decided to work on solutions that 
provide easy and usable ways of doing this reminder's task, 
thanks to new technologies. We have decided to tackle two 
main parts of this problem by providing: (a) multiple ways to 
enter into the system data concerning the products, and (b) 
various notifications in order to remind important deadlines to 
users. 
We believe that smartphones can be efficiently used in this 
fight against food waste. Indeed, they are natively equipped 
with hardware (camera, microphone) and software (barcode 
reader, automatic speech recognition, etc.) that can be 
combined and easily employed in order to collect data and also 
remind important deadlines to consumers. 
The document is structured as follows: background and 
motivation of this project are explained in section two. Section 
three presents the related work on that domain. Section four 
gives an overview of our approach in order to tackle the 
emerging problems encountered. Section five describes a case 
study and our results using our developed prototype. Then, we 
conclude this paper and give our roadmap for future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
One quarter of the food produced on an international scale is 
discarded without being consumed, while more than 800 
million people suffer from hunger in the world. To the 
question “Why does so much food that could have been 
eaten get thrown away?”, the “Love food, Hate Waste” web 
site answers :  “The main reasons for throwing away food 
can be grouped in to "cooking or preparing too much" (for 
example cooking too much rice or pasta and it gets left in 
the saucepan or on the plate) or "not using food in time" - 
for example having to throw out fruit and vegetables 
because they have gone off in the fruit bowl or in the fridge, 
or not eating food before it goes past its use-by date. We 
know that there are lots of potential reasons why food might 
not get eaten in time – our plans change, we forget what 
food we have in the cupboards, we forget to freeze or chill 
something to use at a later date, we lack the confidence or 
knowledge on how to use up our leftovers – which is where 
our website can help!” [2]. 
Loss and wastage occurs on all steps in the food supply 
chain. In low-income countries most loss occurs during 
production, while in developed countries much food – about 
100 kilograms per person and year – is wasted at the 
consumption stage. 
Our 
research 
interests 
include 
human-computer 
interaction in the context of ambient intelligence. The main 
goal of our research is to find a way to model, design and 
implement computer systems to facilitate human activities.  
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
Currently, our purpose is to cross these aspects with the 
notion of "green IT", allowing the user/consumer to obtain 
relevant information in order to take adapted decisions. 
In this context, our motivation for this work is to look 
for solutions that can help consumers in avoiding the loss 
of uneaten food thanks to new technologies and smart 
devices. Thus, our research area is here clearly related to 
the field of application-oriented systems. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Trying to reduce the food waste is not a new idea. In the 
world, there are many applications that allow users to manage 
their food. In this section, we give some information about 
existing systems oriented toward this objective. We analyze the 
capabilities of each system, encountered during our study of the 
literature. We have listed below some characteristics of those 
applications.  
“Consume Within” (Iphone, 2.99$) is an application that 
helps households to reduce the amount of food they waste. 
Food items can be added to three different locations – fridge, 
freezer or cupboard – and their expiration dates set 
individually. Each entry can be accompanied by a photograph 
to identify when removed from storage. The application alerts 
users daily of the foods that are about to expire within the next 
3 days and displays them by location or as a single list [3]. In 
the same way, “Food Reminder” (Iphone, free) keeps tracks 
of 
food 
expirations 
and 
provides 
reminders 
[4]. 
“FoodScanner” (iPhone, 4.99 $) allows using the camera to 
scan UPC barcodes on foods in order to track how many 
calories are eaten throughout the day by users [5]. By using 
“Fridge Police” (iPhone, 2.99 $), it is possible to obtain, after a 
barcode scan, some information about the products (i.e., 
manufacturer, brand, size, etc.) that will be logged along with 
the “opened on” date.  The user is also prompted to take a 
quick photo of the item. Then, the item is placed in an alarm 
calendar, which can be accessed at anytime. As the items “use 
by” dates approach, users will get an automatic reminder [6]. 
“Rz Fridge Reminder” (Windows Phone 7, free) is an 
application available in English and Italian and could manage 
expire date of items stored in the fridge. Alerts are sent upon 
users choices (expire tomorrow, next week, next month, etc.) 
[7]. “Fridge Manager” is a Korean application (Android, 
free), that helps users in managing goods into their fridge with 
an alarm service [8]. With “Fridge Friend” (Android, 0.99 $), 
consumers can organize the groceries in their refrigerator and 
see which ones need to be used first. It is also possible to export 
data in a CSV (Comma Separated Value) file, which can be 
emailed to a particular destination [9]. “Fridgician” (Android, 
0.99 $) is the same kind of inventory tracking system for home 
refrigerator. It provides features such as multiple accounts on 
the same phone, or view food sorted by date, expiration, and 
name [10]. “LG smart Refrigerator” (Android, free) is an 
application that works with LG DIOS Smart Refrigerators. The 
application connected to the world's first Smart Refrigerator 
using wifi provides convenience food management. Some 
particular features related to this refrigerator are available, such 
as management food list, location management and marking 
the expiration date, remote checking system of food list, 
recommended recipes, shopping list checking and monitoring 
conditions of the refrigerator [11]. This monitoring feature is 
often used to qualify intelligent refrigerators: “An intelligent 
refrigerator is one which possesses self monitoring 
capability of food item or material with minimal or no 
human intervention.” [12]. 
Other smart systems are now embedded into refrigerators. 
For example, the “MMS Fridge” by Electrolux, the 
“Samsung's RF4289 WiFi smart fridge” (3499 $), which can 
be connected to Twitter, Pandora, Gmail, Epicurious, etc. 
and the South Korea’s “LG smart fridge” (4124 $), that 
suggest recipes, are available for consumers interested in those 
technologies.  
Numerous studies were conducted around the notion of 
smart fridge. Some researchers are focusing on the ability to 
enhance health and enable better nutrition [13] while some 
others prefer focusing on the communication matters between 
the user and the device [14]. Among the main shortages of 
current smart fridges systems, listed by [13], we particularly 
agree with the following: “The technology is too complex 
for most household users, needing more user-friendly 
interface for general users who have little or no experiences 
of using computer.” and “There is no uniformed bar code to 
record information such as expire date of the food.”  
Moreover, concerning the notification about expired 
goods, we noticed that all the systems that we have studied 
are conceived on a reactive mode. When the user asks the 
system for expired dates, it replies with a list of products. 
Obviously, if the user does not ask, he/she will never be 
notified. We are studying other ways to inform users about 
important events, and we are deeply convinced that smart 
systems have to be modelized on a proactive mode.  
It is the system itself that has to push the relevant 
information to the users, by various ways, and not the 
opposite. But according to Mike Kuniavsky, “Reviewing the 
history of the commercial fridge computer demonstrates 
both the idea's tenacity and its lack of commercial success.“ 
[15]. Indeed, it is not necessarily a good idea to propose 
always more capabilities if they do not match the user’s 
needs. For instance, “The intelligent fridge ordering food (M 
= 3.63, SD = 1.19) and the intelligent TV ordering products 
(M = 3.63, SD = 1.07) were found to be the least 
attractive.” in a study presented in [16]. 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
     
   
 
Figure 1: Scanning the barcode and obtain information about the product with Pervasive Fridge 
IV. 
OUR APPROACH 
The main subject of this work is the modeling and 
implementation of a timely reminder of deadlines and 
validity of food stored in the fridge or cupboards. To avoid 
waste, we want to have a (“green”) computer system to 
notify a smart home of the input and output of products into 
the fridge, via barcode, voice recognition or RFID tag, for 
instance. The system will also manage other aspects such as 
suggestion of recipes, depending on the ingredients 
available, allergic alerts, dietary advices, assistance to 
improve the conservation of food, etc. 
One important difference between our system and the 
ones discussed in the related work part of this paper is that 
the database used by our system is managed externally (see 
Prixing) and takes advantage of a large community of 
consumers, that can add and comment a large set of 
products. 
Our primary objective is to provide a useful, usable and 
low-cost system. We think that it is a good idea to use the 
capabilities of smartphones already daily manipulated by the 
consumers. Indeed, modern mobile phones and smartphones 
are equipped with barcode scanner, automatic speech 
recognition systems, SMS and instant message capabilities 
and could access the Internet network. So, we argue that the 
proactive mode of interaction that is predominant in our 
approach could be reached by the use of a pervasive system, 
in which the smartphone will be the core, for entering 
information and receiving notifications. 
A. Entering data about the product 
Our project name code is “Pervasive Fridge”. It refers to 
the paradigm of pervasive computing and ambient 
intelligence, but does not mean that we are working on an 
intelligent fridge. The fridge of the users remains the same 
(i.e., classic, and not connected to Internet, without barcode 
reader, etc.). It is the application that we provide for 
smartphones that leads to the notion of pervasive and 
ubiquitous computing. Our system can be used in the 
supermarket, during the shopping or, at home, during the 
storage of the products in cupboards and fridge. The 
entering data task consists in giving to the system, for each 
food, relevant information for their future management. 
Thus, name, location, category, number of items, expiration 
date, and some optional data are asked to the user for each 
product and saved in a database. 
This manipulation can be done, as traditionally, with the 
classic text/keyboard manner, but also with some more 
convenient 
ways 
with 
barcode/scanner, 
and 
voice/microphone of the mobile device.  Figure 1 presents 
some screen captures of our prototype: (a) the user actives 
the camera of the device by a simple touch on the “scan” 
button, (b) the barcode of a product is scanned and detected, 
(c) the corresponding product is searched on an external 
database, available on Internet. Once the product is 
identified, the related fields of the form are automatically 
filled and the user enters the number of items, the category 
and the deadline (i.e., the expiration date). This could be 
done textually or vocally. On Android, the Google voice 
tools are used to do so. 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
One of the key problems in such project is to choose 
between internal or external tools, in order to retrieve 
information based upon barcode data. EAN-Search [17] and 
UPCDatabase [18] are available on Internet, but they do not 
provide API (Application Programming Interface). So we 
decided to choose Prixing [19] as an external database. 
Prixing is a powerful system that retrieves the price of a 
product (not only food) according to its EAN code/barcode.  
The API of Prixing is freely usable for developers and 
currently limited to 500 requests per day, per account. The 
database contains around 180.000 food references among 
2.000.000 products. More than 700.000 products have been 
added in seven months by the people of the Prixing 
community; it represents almost 4000 products added each 
day. 
In Pervasive Fridge, the deadline of the product can be 
entered by different means: directly by text or voice, or 
indirectly, with an estimated date, depending on the 
category of the product. 
 
Figure 2: Identifying product by a photo 
As illustrated on Figure 2, with Pervasive Fridge, it is 
possible to identify a product by taking a photo of it. This 
feature is helpful in situations where foods are not marked 
with barcodes (fruits & vegetables, some bread, etc.). 
B. Notifying users about deadlines 
As we can see classically on others applications, with 
Pervasive Fridge it is possible to display, on request, the list 
of the stored products and to mention the remaining days 
before expiration.  
For example, we can see on Figure 3 that the Coca-Cola is 
still consumable within the next 9 days. The red color is 
used to indicated the expired foods (“original Collection” – 
Haagen Dasz – and “Ice cream smoothie” in our example) 
while green or orange colors indicate respectively products 
that are still eatable and products that have to be eaten very 
soon (see the colors used in Figure 4) . 
An internal reminder is also activated each day at a 
parameterized hour, while a vibration is activated on the 
device, and a pop-up invites the user to see what products 
are expired. 
 
Figure 3: List of managed products 
Moreover, we decided to propose a more proactive 
notification that can be pushed to the user, even if his/her 
mobile device is not active. This is done thanks to reminders 
programmable via Google Calendar Agenda, as illustrated 
on Figure 4. Therefore, pop-up, Email, but also SMS 
notifications can be used with Pervasive Fridge, in order to 
push to the user important food deadline messages, every 
time it is necessary, everywhere on the planet, on a 
multichannel manner. 
 
Figure 4: Google Agenda notification used with pervasive fridge 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
In order to test and evaluate the capabilities of our 
system, we used Pervasive Fridge within the following 
scenario. Thirteen different products were bought in a 
supermarket.  
These products were composed of foods and beverages. 
We tried to use barcode, voice, photo and text to identify 
products and to enter expirations dates. Thirteen products 
have been bought the 21th of September 2011. Here is the 
list of these goods, sorted by expiration deadline: a piece 
of pork (23/09/2011), a Pack choy vegetable (25/09/2011), 
a pack of Kiwis (27/09/2011), a Chinese cabbage, some 
tomatoes and bananas (28/09/2011), 4 chocolate creams 
(29/09/2011), 6 eggs (13/10/2011), a bottle of milk 
(17/12/2011), a large bottle of Coca-Cola (30/12/2011), a 
pack of beer (25/10/2012), a bottle of mineral water 
(01/03/2013) and a rice pack (06/08/2013). Five products 
have been successfully identified by scanning their 
barcode and thanks to the Prixing database: the bottles of 
water and milk, the eggs, the beers and the rice. One 
product has been successfully identified by pronouncing 
its barcode: the Coca-Cola. This operation was a little bit 
longer because it worked after a few tries and by 
pronouncing the barcode numbers, three by three such as, 
for instance: 317 – 478 – 000 – 043 – 1. 
 
Figure 5: Kiwis, identified by a photo of the product 
One product has been successfully identified by taking a 
picture of it: the pack of kiwis, as illustrated in Figure 5. 
The image recognition took a long time (around 40 
seconds) compared to the barcode scanner method (around 
2 seconds). After this image recognition phase, the system 
proposes a list of possible matching products and the user 
chooses among them the more representative, compared to 
the targeted one. The field “barcode of the product” is not 
filled, but the other fields of the form such as the name of 
the product, the category or the estimated relative deadline 
are automatically filled, if available. The six others 
products have been entered in the system by typing their 
barcode with the virtual keyboard of the Android device.  
In the following lines, we give some information about 
the reactive and proactive received notifications in this 
experiment. The reactive notification way is traditional in 
this kind of applications. It means that the user ask 
voluntarily the system about the expirations date of the food 
stored in the system. In reply, the application indicates to 
the user, with a graphical internal reminder message (see 
Figure 6) and a vibration of the device. 
 
Figure 6: Internal reminder of Pervasive Fridge 
For instance, in our tests, the 22th September of 2011, the 
Pervasive Fridge indicated two products to be eaten soon: 
the piece of pork (23/09/2011) and the Pack choy vegetable 
(25/09/2011). We see with this example that the system uses 
a notification parameter of 3 days for the vegetable 
category. The user can freely change all the notification 
parameters, and this will indicate to the system how many 
days before the expiration date he/she like to be notified. 
Figure 7 is an example of proactive notification event 
created automatically by our system in the consumer's 
Google Calendar. We used the Google Calendar Agenda 
API to indicate the channel (window pop-up, Email and/or 
SMS reminder) and the timing chosen by the user.  
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
 
Figure 7: A Google Agenda reminder event created by Pervasive Fridge 
Thus, we provided the possibility to push some important 
information to the user, even if the Pervasive Fridge 
application is not activated at the appropriate moment. 
Finally, Figure 8 presents a screen capture of a SMS 
notification received freely by the user on his/her phone. We 
strongly believe that these kind of proactive messages, 
emanating from our Pervasive Fridge system, are very 
useful in the fight against uneaten food loss. 
  
Figure 8: SMS Notification for Coca-Cola, Ice Cream and Kit Kat 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The goal of this paper was to describe the Pervasive 
Fridge system, and to explain how we can facilitate the 
fight against uneaten food loss by using ambient 
computing strategies and technologies. Our results shown 
that a proactive system is technically feasible, and that it 
can freely and easily push appropriate reminders to the 
consumers. Pervasive Fridge is an application-oriented 
system that can be used in a multimodal way (keyboard or 
voice) and with different technologies (camera barcode 
scanner, voice and image recognition). We tested our 
system with an experiment. It showed that Pervasive 
Fridge helped in (a) entering products information into the 
database, and (b) receiving relevant reminders across 
multiple channels of interaction. Our future work will be 
oriented toward the possibility to propose recipes 
according to the foods managed by our system. We are 
envisaging to propose relevant manners (with augmented 
reality for instance) to measure the necessary quantities of 
food to buy and cook, in order to avoid loss and wastes of 
uneaten food. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank Truong Vu Duy for his 
help in the prototype development, Big5media and CPER 
CIA (Contrat Plan Etat Région, Campus Intelligence 
Ambiante) for the financial support of this project and 
Prixing and IQ Engines Image Recognition for the API 
provided. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Global food losses and food waste, Düsseldorf, Interpack2011,  
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11, 
http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/ags/publications/GFL_web
.pdf 
[2] Love 
food 
hate 
waste, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11, 
http://www.lovefoodhatewaste.com/about_food_waste 
[3] Cusume 
Within, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11, 
http://www.consumewithin.com 
[4] Food 
Reminder, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11, 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/food-reminder/id430227307 
[5] FoodScanner, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11, 
http://dailyburn.com/foodscanner 
[6] Fridge Police, retrieved on 12/23/11, http://fridgepolice.com 
[7] RZ 
fridge 
reminder 
for 
wp7, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11,  
http://www.windowsphoneapplist.com/rz_fridge_reminder-a62.html 
[8] Fridge 
Manager, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11,  
http://www.appbrain.com/app/fridgemanager/com.tacademy.fridgema
nager 
[9] Fridge 
Friend, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11,   
http://www.androidzoom.com/android_applications/shopping/fridgefr
iend_xrzf.html 
[10] Fridgician, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11,   
http://www.androidzoom.com/android_applications/productivity/fridg
ician_vkoz.html 
[11] LG 
Smart 
Refrigerator, 
retrieved 
on 
12/23/11,   
http://www.androidzoom.com/android_applications/tools/lg-
smartrefrigerator_xltb.html 
[12] Gangadhar, G., Subramanya N., and Puttamadappa C., Intelligent 
Refrigerator with Monitoring Capability through Internet. IJCA 
Special Issue on Wireless Information Networks & Business 
Information System (2):65–68, 2011. Published by Foundation of 
Computer Science. 
[13] Suhuai Luo, Jesse S. Jin, and Jiaming Li “A Smart Fridge with an 
Ability to Enhance Health and Enable Better Nutrition” The 
University of Newcastle, Australia, CSIRO ICT Centre, Australia, 
International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineering, Vol. 
4, No. 2, Avril, 2009. 
[14] Samuli Pekkola, Yu You, and Mike Robinson “Telephone mobiles, 
Refrigerators, Bar Code Readers, Cameras, The Web and People” 
23rd Conference on Information Systems Research In Scandinavia 
(IRIS'23), Uddevalla, Sweden, 2000. 
[15] Kuniavsky Mike, Smart Things: Ubiquitous Computing User 
Experience Design, Elsevier, 318 pages, 2010. 
[16] Ben Allouch, S., The design and anticipated adoption of ambient 
intelligence in the home. Doctoral dissertation, University of Twente, 
The Netherlands, 169 pages, 2008. 
[17] EAN Search, retrieved on 12/23/11, http://www.ean-search.org 
[18] UPCDatabase, retrieved on 12/23/11, http://www.upcdatabase.com 
[19] Prixing, retrieved on 12/23/11, http://www.prixing.fr 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

