Multichannel Laboratory Equipment for Measurement of Smart Concrete Material 
Properties  
 
Ladislav Machan, Pavel Steffan 
Department of microelectronics 
BUT, FEEC  
Brno, Czech Republic 
email: machan@feec.vutbr.cz, steffan@feec.vutbr.cz
 
 
Abstract— “Smart Concrete” materials are cement-matrix 
composites prepared according to the final application. Strain 
properties can be used to measure the deformation of concrete 
structures (bridges, beams, pillars) or for weighing-in-motion 
of road vehicles. This article describes novel laboratory 
equipment which is designed for multichannel dynamic and 
long-period material stability measurements. 
Keywords—smart concrete; dynamic measurement; long-
period measurement 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One of the most common structural materials used in 
engineering construction is cement and its mixtures (concrete 
and mortar). Cement is slightly conducting material, but its 
electrical conductance, Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) 
shielding effectiveness and wave absorbing property are very 
poor. In order to increase the ability of cement materials to 
transfer electrons, additional conductive fillings and loadings 
have to be added. Smart Concrete (SC) could be considering 
to be a material of the future. Due to its attractive features, 
SC can be used as a strain-sensing element.  
The strain-sensing properties are achieved by a proper 
volume amount of conductive filler. In this system, the 
matrix is made of cementitious material with small amount 
of silica fumes, fly ash, and fine aggregates [1]. Different 
conductive fillers were tested considering the best strain-
sensitivity / material price ratio. Existing research proved 
carbon black and graphite particles to be the best choice in 
terms of price. The best strain-sensitivity is achieved near the 
percolation threshold of filler particles [2].  
Strain properties of the composite can be evaluated by 
impedance changing. The impedance changing sensitivity 
regarding deformation can be widely affected by a proper 
choice of concrete admixtures [3]. Generally, in many types 
of mixtures, the real component is not much affected by the 
deformation, on the other hand, the imaginary component is, 
and it can be used to detect the changes [4]. A novel mixture 
with carbon black filler has a different behavior. The real 
part of impedance is strongly affected by deformation and 
can be used for measurements. This property is profitable 
with regard to the future usage. Measuring principle can be 
simplified and power 
supply 
requirements reduced. 
Conventional DC techniques for resistance measurements 
cannot be used. Electrode system of sensing element would 
be damaged by electrolytic corrosion in this case. Square-
wave AC technique with an excitation frequency of 1 kHz 
and an excitation voltage of 1 Vp-p were experimentally set 
[5]. In the light of new knowledge about materials, a 
necessity to a simple, relatively inexpensive and portable 
device has been raised. Considering the needs of laboratory 
measurements, some requirements on a new device were 
established:   
 
AC square-wave measuring principle of resistance. 
 
Excitation frequency 1 kHz and voltage of 1 Vp-p. 
 
Eight independent measuring channels for multiple 
element sensing applications. 
 
Shunt sensing and bridge-based measuring option. 
 
Four additional channels for sensing temperature and 
humidity. 
 
Integrated memory storage device compatible with 
PC and File Allocation Table (FAT32) system for 
data logging. 
 
Battery powered.  
 
Suitable for a long-period measurements. 
 
Water and dust proof case. 
 
In Section 2, there is a description of the device. The 
block diagram is described in Subsection A and B. 
Subsection C is focused on measuring principle. In 
Subsection D, there is a mechanical design discussed. The 
measuring automation and data processing is described in 
Subsection E. In Subsection F, there are discussed the results 
of development and final measurement parameters. In 
Section 3, there is a conclusion which summarizes the results 
of work.    
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE DEVICE 
According to the aforementioned requirements, a block 
diagram of the instrument has been suggested. 
A. The block diagram of device 
The diagram is shown in Figure 1. The device function is 
based on 16-bit MSP430F5529 microcontroller, which uses 
Reduced Instruction Set Computing (RISC) architecture [6]. 
This microcontroller can be “in circuit” programmed via 
Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) interface. Interface also 
allows real-time debugging of firmware, which ensures all 
device functions. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1.  The principial block diagram of proposed device
The device is equipped with a Secure Digital (SD) card, 
which can be inserted into a side slot, for saving the 
measured 
data. 
SD 
card 
communicates 
with 
the 
microcontroller via Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) 
interface. A special feature of used microcontroller is built in 
Universal Serial Bus (USB) interface connection for 
transferring the measured data into PC. Microcontroller 
contains complete physical layer of USB communication 
device. All higher layers of protocol are implemented in the 
firmware of device. There are two basic regimes of 
operation. When a measurement is running and measured 
data are periodically stored into memory, USB device works 
in Communications Device Class (CDC) mode (virtual COM 
port emulation in operating system). By this way, it is 
possible to view a response of measured system in real-time. 
Specialized software developed together with device is able 
to receive this data and display it in a graph. It is possible to 
view a response of measured system real-time by this way. 
The second mode of USB operation is used when a 
measurement is stopped and SD card is not used for storing 
data. This mode is called Mass Storage Class (MSC). SD 
card is transparently accessible for operational system of PC 
via USB device in this case. User can download measured 
data which are stored on SD card in standard FAT32 file 
system. This behavior is common e.g. for today‘s 
Smartphones and contributes to user comfort of the device. 
There is no need to open the housing of device and remove 
the SD card from the slot for downloading measured data to 
PC. 
B. Supply voltage supervising 
The aforementioned USB is not used for device 
supplying and internal accumulator charging. The main 
supply voltage is obtained from build-in lead-acid battery 6 
V, 12 A/h. This large-capacity battery is able to supply the 
device 
a 
long 
time 
thereby 
enabling 
long-period 
measurements. USB bus supplying capability is 5 V / 500 
mA. The usage of USB bus for charging this type of battery 
would not be effective. The battery charging is provided by 
external “fast-charger” through  a build-in connector. 
The supply voltage supervising is maintained by a group 
of supply blocks depicted in Figure 2. All supply voltage 
supervising blocks are based on linear regulation principle. 
No switch current blocks were used to minimize the noise 
and ripples in supply strings. This configuration is not such a 
power effective, but a quiet supply is a big benefit for this 
application. Supply system of the device consists of a digital 
supply string, high power analog supply string and low 
power analog supply string. Digital supply string contains 
3.3 V and 5 V voltages. All digital blocks uses 3.3 V voltage 
levels (microcontroller, SD card, D/A converter). Higher 
voltage 5 V is used for signal relays, Liquid Crystal Display 
(LCD) backlight and voltage level shifter block as an option 
for possibility to connect an older type of display. High-
power analog string is used to supply a pair of high-power 
operational amplifiers OPA567. Noise sensitive analog or 
mixed-mode parts are supplied via low-power analog string. 
There are supply and reference voltages for virtual ground 
definition. 
Printed circuit board is designed considering low-noise 
layout rules. Analog and digital parts of device are separated 
into two boards. Noisy digital components are spatially 
separated from noise-sensitive analog blocks in this way. For 
even better noise properties, it is possible to cover analog 
board by shielding box. Special attention was paid to the 
design of ground surfaces. Each supply string has own 
ground surface shielding. All grounds are connected in one 
point to avoid noise induction via ground loops. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 2.  Supply voltage supervising blocks 
C. Measuring principle 
Excitation signal is digitally generated by D/A converter 
MCP4921. Output signal is amplified by the pair of high-
power operational amplifiers OPA567 connected in push-
pull configuration. One of them is connected as non-
inverting amplifier while the other is inverting. Voltage gain 
of both amplifiers is 2. Supply voltage of amplifiers is 3 V 
and virtual ground is shifted to the middle of dynamic range 
by voltage reference 1.5 V. Output current from amplifiers is 
internally limited (short circuit protection) and a shift of 
virtual ground enables the flow in both directions via 
electrical load. Shunt resistors are in series with load and can 
be (1 from 5) selected by the program of microcontroller. 
Shunts are switched by small signal relays, considering low-
noise design. Measured sample of material is connected as 
an electrical load via digitally controlled channel selection 
switch. Channels are switched (1 from 8) by small signal 
relays, too. There are two modes of operation which can be 
selected by proper combination of channel and shunt 
switches. The first measuring mode uses two-wire load 
connection. Current flowing through the load causes voltage 
drop on the shunt resistor. Voltage drop on the shunt resistor 
is 
amplified 
by 
precision 
instrumentation 
amplifier 
LMP8358 with digitally switchable gain (10, 20, 50, 100, 
200, 500 and 1000). Output voltage from this amplifier is 
sampled by 16-bit successive approximation A/D converter 
ADC161S626. Samples are taken only in steady states of 
square-wave excitation signal. Resistance is calculated from 
a known value of selected shunt resistor, gain, excitation 
voltage and result from A/D converter. In this mode, eight 
channels can be used simultaneously one by one. 
The second measuring mode offers the possibility of 
four-wire bridge connection of load. This type of connection 
helps to reduce temperature and humidity drift of measured 
material. In an ideal case, temperature and humidity changes 
act on all four elements of bridge in the same way and the 
effect on measurement vanishes. This mode does not use a  
 
 
shunt resistor (0 Ω shunt is selected). Proper setting of 
channel switch allows using four channels for bridge 
excitation and four channels for differential voltage sensing. 
Differential voltage is amplified by LMP8358 and processed 
by the same way as in the case of the first mode. Usage of 
the second “bridge mode” is under development at this time. 
A problem arises in the field of technological preparation of 
measured samples. There is a need to use four material 
elements with similar value of resistance, in bridge 
connection. In the meantime, production repeatability is not 
sufficient considering absolute value of resistance.  
In the case of the first “shunt mode”, temperature and 
humidity cause a drift in measured value. There are four 
additional 
digital 
channels 
which 
allow 
connecting 
temperature and humidity sensors, in the block diagram 
(Figure 1). Sensors can be connected via I2C serial interface. 
For example SHT21 from Sensirion Company is a suitable 
type. Addressing possibilities of serial bus are extended by 
hardware I2C switch PCA9546A. Data from sensors can be 
used for numerical compensation of drift. 
D. Mechanical design 
Dynamic measurements of samples bring problems such 
as dusty environments, mechanical vibrations, EMI 
interferences and temperature stress. Mechanical design of a 
device is based on requirements for battery powered 
laboratory 
instrument 
which 
must 
be 
robust 
and 
environmentally resistant. The device is build-in IP68 
standard plastic case with transparent cover (Figure 3). 
Under cover, there is a very well readable display panel. 
Four control buttons are placed from the front. The opposite 
side is equipped with eight connectors for measuring probes 
and four connectors for digital sensors. On the left side, there 
is the main switch and a connector for charging. The right 
side includes a water and dust proof USB connector with a 
rubber plug. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 3.  Mechanical design of device 
E. Measurement automation and data processing 
User can start to measure with predefined configuration 
by pressing the proper button. First, it is possible to choose a 
measurement mode (shunt or bridge), number of logged 
channels and measuring period. Measuring range and the 
gain of instrumentation amplifier is set automatically for 
each sample. Measuring can be paused and started again or 
stopped. When measurement is stopped a file with data log is 
saved with a specific name. During measurements, it is 
possible to add a marker to log by pressing a button. This 
feature is useful for better orientation in data log. Output of 
measurement is in standard “.csv” format. It can be easily 
processed for example in Microsoft Excel. An example of 
processed output data log from dynamical measurements is 
depicted in Figure 4. 
F. Results and final measurement parameters 
An example of processed output data log from dynamical 
measurements is depicted in Figure 4. This measurement was 
realized under conditions: 
 constant temperature and humidity, 
 concrete block size: 300 x 300 x 500 mm, 
 automatic range and gain select, 
 measurement duration: 2.5 hours, 
 three channel mode, 
 sample rate: 1s, 
 cyclic press loading: 
o 
3x 4.4 MPa till 16.6 MPa.  
o 
1x 4.4 MPa till 33.3 MPa.  
o 
3x 4.4 MPa till 16.6 MPa.  
o 
1x 4.4 MPa till 22.2 MPa.  
o 
3x 4.4 MPa till 16.6 MPa. 
o 
3x 4.4 MPa till 27.8 MPa. 
o 
3x 4.4 MPa till 16.6 MPa. 
o 
1x 4.4 MPa till 44.4 MPa (destruction). 
 
Sampled data were recalculated from absolute resistance 
values to relative changes of resistance during loading. 
Absolute values were compared with the output of 
professional impedance analyzer Agilent E4980A and 
absolute error of proposed device is 0.2%. This result is 
sufficient with regard to the current state of research. There 
is a possibility for the future improvement. On the basis of 
known internal temperature, the temperature drift of shunt 
resistor value can be numerical compensated.   
  
 
Figure 4.  Processed data output – 3 channel dynamical measurement 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
A development of new laboratory instruments was 
presented in this paper. The overall structure, including 
suggested block diagram, realization and design of the 
printed circuit boards, was described. The precision LCR 
meter E4980, which does not enable the multichannel 
measurements, can be replaced by this low-cost device.  
This instrument is currently used for laboratory 
measurements and characterization of smart concrete panels 
at department of microelectronics.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Ministry of Industry 
and Trade of the Czech Republic under the MPO ČR č. FR-
TI3/485 project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Xie, X. Shi, D. Feng, B. Kuang, and H. Li, ”Percolation backbone 
structure analysis in electrically conductive carbon fiber reinforced 
cement composites”, Composites Part B: Engineering, Volume 43, 
Issue 8, December 2012, Pages 3270-3275, ISSN 1359-8368. 
[2] H. Li, H. Xiao, and J. Ou, “Effect of compressive strain on electrical 
resistivity of carbon black-filled cement-based composites”, Cement 
and Concrete Composites, Volume 28, Issue 9, October 2006, Pages 
824-828, ISSN 0958-9465. 
[3] J. Junek, R. Cechmanek, P. Steffan, and P. Barath, “Vliv uhlikovych 
primesi na elektricke vlastnosti anorganickych kompozitu”, XIIIth 
international conference Ecology and new building materials and 
products, 2009, Telc, 978-80-254-4447-4. 
[4] D. D. L. Chung: Composite Materials - Second Edition, Springer, 
London, 2010, p. 349 ISBN 978-1-84882-830-8. 
[5] P. Steffan, P. Barath, J. Stehlik, and R. Vrba,: “The Multifunction 
Conducting Materials Base on Cement Concrete with Carbon Fibers”. 
Electronics, 2008, č. b4, p. 82-86. ISSN: 1313- 1842. 
[6] Texas Instruments [online]. 2015 [retrieved: March, 2015]. 
MSP430F5529 
datasheet. 
Available 
from: 
<http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/msp430f5529.pdf>. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

