IT Service Management in Multiple Actor Network: Service Support from Customer’s
Point of View
Antti Lahtela
Development and Steering Unit for the Local Register Ofﬁces
Regional State Administrative Agency for Eastern Finland
Kuopio, Finland
e-mail: antti.lahtela@avi.ﬁ
Marko J¨antti
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Kuopio, Finland
e-mail: marko.jantti@uef.ﬁ
Abstract—Many IT customer organizations see service support
and multiple actor network as a big challenge. Multiple actor
network may cause several types of problems between different
organizations, such as communication gaps, unclearness in roles
and responsibilities, contract related challenges, lost incidents and
conﬂicts in understanding the content of agreements between
development and continuous services. The research problem of
this study is: how IT service support can be improved from an
IT customer organization’s perspective? The main contribution
of this paper is to describe multiple actor network of IT service
support. A case study research method with a single case from
Finnish public sector was used as a main research method.
Keywords-IT Service Management; Multiple Actor Network;
Public Sector; Enterprise Architecture.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Finnish Public Sector ICT is under massive change.
The changes are based on the Government Programme of
Finland [1], which is an action plan agreed on by the parties
represented in the Government and it sets out the main
functions of the Government, also for ICT development:
•
The development of public on-line services will be
placed under the management of a full-bodied actor.
•
Clear goals will be set for productivity improvements.
•
The interoperability of public information systems will
be ensured through the use of open interfaces and
standards.
•
The implementation and effectiveness of the project
entities of the Electronic Services and Democracy
Development Programme will be evaluated.
•
Productivity in the public sector will be boosted
through better utilisation of business intelligence,
more compatible information systems, and by bringing
together information management data and procure-
ment resources data in public administration.
•
Shared use of public administration information will
be facilitated.
•
All common functions of the State ICT service centers
will be brought together.
•
To promote interoperability of information systems,
open source standards are used in public administra-
tion, which determine the compatibility of information
content and IT interfaces.
•
Enterprise architecture will be employed, utilizing
shared information platforms and shared eGovernment
platforms and eServices.
A new Public Sector ICT Strategy [2], based on the
Government Programme, has been published in year 2013 to
provide strategic guidelines for the whole IT management of
public sector in Finland. As a result of the new strategy, several
new services and organizational changes will be established,
for example a new government IT service centre in year 2014.
The implementation of the Public Sector ICT Strategy was
chaired by the Ministry of Finance of Finland as an open
process including people from public administration, business
enterprises and non-governmental organizations. The vision
in the strategy reaches to 2020, and policy approaches and
measure to the end of 2015. The vision of the ICT Strategy has
two main points where the main goals are service improvement
and public sector cooperation:
•
Services and information required by users are avail-
able and usable easily and securely.
•
Cooperation of public sector organizations, businesses
and users at the leading edge of development.
According to the Government Programme and the Public
Sector ICT Strategy, Finnish government organizations and
ofﬁcials must improve their own service production as well
as bring services on-line for citizens and corporations. The
purpose is to develop organizations’ operation more efﬁcient
and lead customers to use eServices as a primary service.
For the service improvement, a large number of organizations
are involved in managing, developing and implementing IT
services in public sector. This is mainly due the acquisition
policy that the Finnish government practices. Usually the
multiple actor network consist of following participants (Figure
1):
•
End user organization.
•
Customer.
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

•
Service provider
•
Third party service provider
The end user organization is usually the one who receives
the delivered services that the customer has ordered from the
service provider. The service provider delivers the service and
can use third party service providers to build and produce
the service. Sometimes the end user organization and the
customer are the same. The presented network is often called
as a Customer-Provider Model where the agreements of the
delivered service is made between the customer and the service
provider. After the service is delivered, continuous services
begin (service management).
Figure 1.
Example of a multiple actor network.
Much has been written about IT service management, help
desks and service desk processes. For instance, Caldeira and
Brito e Abreu [3] has studied how to use statistical methods
to learn from incident classiﬁcations. Additionally, Hochstein,
Zarnekow and Brenner [4] have provided recommendations
how to improve IT management processess based on four
case studies. One of the recommendations was to create a
company speciﬁc IT service management model. Surprisingly,
few studies have dealt with customer support in multiple actor
network. J¨antti [5] has presented a single point of contact
service model as a solution for managing support requests
between a customer, a main service provider and a third party
service provider.
There are studies that have focused on exploring challenges
in customer support. For example, the study of J¨antti, Tanska-
nen and Kaukola [6] reported incident resolution documenta-
tions, incident classiﬁcation, a lack of knowledge base and the
missing knowledge ﬂow as main challenges. Kajko-Mattsson,
Ahnlund and Lundberg [7] have presented corrective mainte-
nance maturity model (CM3) where service level management
is one of the CM3 modules. The model was tested with four
Swedish organizations. Additionally, Lahtela and J¨antti [8] [9]
have done research on IT services support both from service
provider and from customer point of view. They have studied
on challenges and problems in release management process
and in service support interface.
Many IT service organizations use IT Infrastructure Li-
brary (ITIL) to improve IT service management processes.
ITIL describes the service lifecycle that contains ﬁve core
phases: Service Strategy [10], Service Design [11], Service
Transition [12], Service Operation [13] and Continual Service
Improvement [14]. In the ITIL framework, customer support is
divided into several processes, such as incident management,
service request management, event management and problem
management.
In addition to incident management, there is a process
called problem management within IT service management
frameworks. While incident management aims to solve in-
cidents as soon as possible, the main objective of problem
management is to identify the root cause of the incidents
[13]. Thus, problem management is responsible for proactive
customer support. J¨antti et al. [15] have studied implementation
of problem management from knowledge management point of
view. Incident management and service request management
are also visible in Control Objectives for Information and
Related Technology (COBIT) [16]. COBIT is a IT governance
framework that describes IT service management processes,
metrics, roles, responsibilities and control objectives.
ISO/IEC TS 15504-8:2012 process assessment model [17]
can be used to improve the service management process
capability and maturity. This is a very useful tool for carrying
out process assessments, when the target of the assessment is
a single service management process. Compared to Capability
Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) [18], the assessment can
be done in a more light weight way because the assessment
can focus even on one process.
The Finnish Government has published several guidelines
and instructions on how government ofﬁcials should man-
age their IT. The Public Administration Recommendations
(JHS recommendations) [19] provide information management
guidelines for public administration. The JHS recommenda-
tions system aims to improve the interoperability of infor-
mation systems and the compatibility of data in them, to
facilitate process development and to make the use of existing
data more efﬁcient. The JHS recommendations are approved
by the Advisory Committee on Information Management in
Public Administration (JUHTA). JUHTA is also the head of the
Finnish public sector enterprise architecture where the enter-
prise architecture work is done by the Public Sector Enterprise
Architecture Division. The Division develops and publishes
government level enterprise architecture descriptions. For ex-
ample, the architecture description for eServices [20] is one of
the documents that is implemented for government ofﬁcials to
use as a guideline in their own architecture work.
For information security, the Government Information Se-
curity Management Board (VAHTI) [21] has established a set
of instructions for directing information security measures in
central government. Additionally, the board functions as an
organ for coordination, cooperation and preparation among
government organizations in charge of steering and developing
data protection and information security. For open data, eS-
ervices and eDemocracy, Finland has organized two separate
programs. The Open Government project [22] aims to apply
for membership in the Open Government Partnership initiative.
The Action Programme on eServices and eDemocracy [23]
develops comprehensive services for citizens, companies and
the authorities. The purpose of this program is to enhance
service quality and cost-efﬁciency in the public sector.
A. Our Contribution
This case study is a part of the results of Keys to IT Service
Management and Effective Transition of Services (KISMET)
research project at the University of Eastern Finland, School
of Computing, Finland. The main objectives of the KISMET
project are to develop, share new ideas and experiences regard-
ing IT service management in the network of organizations,
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

and strengthen the research and know-how of IT service
management in Eastern Finland. The case study was made
in cooperation between KISMET project and Regional State
Administrative Agency for Eastern Finland, Development and
Steering Unit for the Local Register Ofﬁces in year 2013.
Our contribution is to present a case from Finnish public
sector where IT service management and IT service support
are managed in a multiple actor network. The remainder of
the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the research
methods of this study are described. In Section 3, we present
the results of this study. The conclusions are given in Section
4.
II.
RESEARCH METHODS
The research problem of this study is: how IT service
support can be improved from an IT customer organization’s
perspective? The research problem was further divided into
following research questions:
•
How service level agreements (SLAs) should be de-
signed in order to support IT service management in
multiple actor network?
•
What kind of communication strategy should be es-
tablished between a customer and a service provider?
•
How service support roles and responsibilities should
be deﬁned both from a customer’s and a service
support provider’s point of view?
•
How to decrease the number of support requests
(incidents and service requests)?
•
Which issues must be taken into consideration while
creating IT agreements?
•
How to deal with organizational changes that affect
the service provider model?
A case study research method with a single case was
used as a main research method. Our case organization is a
small unit that manages IT for another organization. The case
organization’s main responsibilities include IT agreements,
IT development and IT management. The service providers
consist from different government IT service providers and
third party IT service provider companies.
Our case organization was selected for this study be-
cause the researcher had easy access to the research data.
Additionally, the case organization was a representative case
of Finnish government organization that deals with multiple
service providers and acts in different roles (customer and
service integrator for another organization).
A. Case Context
Figure 2 describes the case study context and how our case
organization is positioned from service, steering and devel-
opment perspective. The case organization is located inside
of another government ofﬁcial in a ministry administration.
The main objective of the case organization is to develop,
steer and control another government agency that provides
services for Finnish citizens. Other main stakeholders in the
case context are different ministries and agencies inside min-
istries’ administration. The stakeholders are mainly content and
substance developers. Other coordinators are the Finnish legis-
lation, strategy and IT strategy (organizational level strategies
are made in cooperation with all the context organizations),
enterprise architecture, guidelines and recommendations as
well as other architectures that effect our context.
Figure 2.
Case context.
Figure 3 shows how IT services are managed in our case.
The case organization, where the IT management is situated,
executes all the agreements with the service providers from
delivered servicers that are provided for the agency and the
end users. For example, a individual SLA is made between
case organization and every different service provider.
First, incidents and service requests are sent to the internal
IT service provider (also a government agency), which will
handle them. Secondly, the internal IT service provider can
escalate incidents and service requests to a third party service
provider depending on the case. Usually, the internal IT
service provider deals all the cases concerning to infrastructure
services (workstations, networks, usernames, etc.) and the third
party service provider deals with software services (coding,
major problems in the system, development work, etc.). In
some cases, the third party service provider can also be another
government agency.
B. Data Collection and Data Analysis
The research data was collected by using the sources of
evidence deﬁned by Yin [24]:
•
Interviews: customer, end user and service provider
interviews.
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Figure 3.
IT service management in our case.
•
Documentation: enterprise architecture descriptions,
IT agreements, service deﬁnition documents, etc.
•
Physical artifacts: access to customer’s and end user’s
IT systems.
•
Observation: participative observation in the case or-
ganization.
•
Archives and records: access to document archives of
the case organization.
The collected data was analyzed with the KISMET research
project team and a member from the case organization. A list
of identiﬁed challenges was created and each challenge was
analyzed for improvement suggestions.
The within-case analysis method was used to analyze the
case study material. Analysis of the data was based on the
following categories: SLAs, communication strategy, service
support roles, proactive service support, IT agreements, and
organizational changes.
III.
RESULTS
The main contribution of this study was to describe multi-
ple actor network of IT service support and how it can be im-
proved. The following six major challenges and improvement
suggestions from an IT customer organization’s perspective
were identiﬁed and presented based on the data analysis of
the case:
1)
SLAs
Challenge: The case organization creates individual
SLAs between every service provider. This is a
major challenge when tickets are escalated from
one service provider to another because it is almost
impossible to manage that the service process will
be executed according to the agreed service levels.
Improvement Suggestion: All the SLAs should be
collected and documented on a single document,
which
includes
an
end-to-end
service
process
description with agreed service levels. Thus, it is
much easier to monitor service levels and support
IT service management in a multiple actor network.
SLAs may cover the service level objectives, such
as target response times and target resolution times.
2)
Communication Strategy
Challenge: The communication between all the
actors of the network is difﬁcult to manage. There
isn’t any speciﬁed strategy on how to perform
communication (how, when, where and to who)
between participants. Usually, the communication is
done in a hurry without any proper plan. During the
study, we observed that the communication related to
incident resolutions was not systematic. This was a
problem especially during the diagnosis and solving
of high priority incidents and holiday times.
Improvement Suggestion: Correct information for all
the participants in a multiple actor network needs a
good communication strategy with clear escalation
points (can be implemented, e.g., into Excel ﬁle).
The strategy should include clear deﬁnitions on how
to perform communication with various actors (e.g.,
application/service,
contact
person
name,
email,
phone, holiday times and work responsibilities).
Managing the feedback, related to services, should
be part of the communication strategy. In IT service
management, managing the feedback is part of the
Business Relationship Management [11].
3)
Service Support Roles
Challenge: Who is responsible of the service?
Usually,
this
should
not
be
a
problem,
but
environment
of
different
actors
can
make
it
very challenging. It can be hard to be responsible
from a part of the service if the whole service is
developed in cooperation between many providers.
From the customer’s point of view, it can be
demanding if the end user and the customer are
different agencies. Additionally, from the perspective
of the internal service provider, which is always
the ﬁrst line support and acts as a service desk, it
is difﬁcult to coordinate services that are provided
by a third party service provider. Following roles
were identiﬁed regarding customer support: service
managers, customer service managers, developers,
process managers (incident, problem, change and
release managers), help desk and service desk
workers, specialists, end users, customers, project
managers and service owners.
Improvement Suggestion: The whole network of
services and its participants has to be described and
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

documented. Previous studies [5] have used UML
sequence diagrams to model complex interactions
between actors of customer support. In order to
document the roles and responsibilities, a service
based matrix can be used to show the different
roles and tasks for all participants. An example of
this table is given in Figure 4 to show what kind
of attributes the table can contain. The table is
presented in organizational level.
4)
Proactive Service Support
Challenge:
The
number
of
service
desk
cases
increases rapidly, because end users and the customer
report every single defect or incident to the service
desk. There isn’t any speciﬁc proactive service
support for the end users or the customer where
they could solve minor problem by themselves. This
leads to unnecessary tickets and extra work.
Improvement Suggestion:
To
promote
proactive
support, the service provider organization could
implement
a
knowledge
base
that
contains
instructions, guidelines and workarounds to known
errors.
The
service
provider
must
instruct
end
users and the customer to provide required details
on incidents and service requests, such as printer
numbers and names. For simple tasks, such as lost
passwords and new users, the service provider could
give permission for the customer to handle these
situations or automate the process of generating new
passwords. Because of every contact to the service
desk (incident or service request) leads to opening a
support request to the service provider’s IT service
management system, one should identify the types of
unnecessary requests, such as information requests
on the progress of incident resolutions.
5)
IT Agreements
Challenge:
IT
agreements
are
usually
a
stack
of
multiple
different
documents
without
clear
management. It is complicated to get a general
overview on what has been agreed about the service
as well as between development and continuous
services. Additionally, one customer might have
dozens of agreements, which may cause difﬁculties
(delay in processing) in classifying the incidents and
service requests in the service desk.
Improvement Suggestion:
IT
agreements
management
process
should
be
established
in
order to improve the management and to clarify
agreements between development and continuous
services.
This
requires
communication
between
several process managers, such as service level
management,
sales
management
and
supplier
management. Our simple model for managing IT
agreements is presented in Figure 5.
6)
Organizational Changes
Challenge:
Finnish
public
sector
ICT
is
under
constant change. The Government Program, various
productivity programs and the Public Sector ICT
Strategy
are
driving
organizational
changes
for
government ofﬁcials to save costs and to increase
effectiveness. This has a big inﬂuence for the public
sector, which struggles to improve and deliver
services for the citizens.
Improvement Suggestion:
Every
organizational
change has to go through the change management
process. Changes, that have major impacts, should
be considered as major changes that need more
careful planning and much more effort than minor
changes. For the end user, organizational change
should go smoothly without any massive impact
to the service. Correct communication between the
participants supports this.
Figure 4.
Matrix for roles and responsibilities in organizational level.
Figure 5.
IT agreements management process.
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

One major improvement suggestion, for developing op-
eration in a multiple actor network, could be the use of
the Enterprise Architecture (EA). EA is a method that helps
to describe the operational environment and to manage the
development of services as a whole [25]. The method can help
getting the big picture on how IT service management and IT
service support is established and to ﬁnd potential environment
and operational problems. The Finnish public sector uses a
EA framework called JHS 179 [19] as a recommendation for
describing their present state and future environment from
operation, information, information system and technology
point of views.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper and the included case study aimed to answer on
the research problem: how IT service support can be improved
from an IT customer organization’s perspective? The problem
was divided into six different research questions. The case
itself was build between a Finnish government agency and
its service providers. We used a case study research method
with a single case as a main research method. The within-case
analysis method was used to analyze the case study data.
The main contribution of this study was to describe a
multiple actor network of IT service support, present found
challenges and bring improvement suggestions to develop
operation in the network of customers, end-users and ser-
vice providers. The following six major challenges and im-
provement suggestions from an IT customer organization’s
perspective were identiﬁed and presented based on the data
analysis of the case: SLAs, Communication Strategy, Service
Support Roles, Proactive Service Support, IT Agreements and
Organizational Changes. The next task is to implement the
presented improvement suggestions and evaluate the results.
We also introduced a recommendation to use EA as a
development tool in multiple actor networks. Further work
could focus on studying how EA and IT service management
are related and how EA is used to improve IT service support.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is a part of the research project KISMET
at the University of Finland, Finland. KISMET is funded
by the National Technology Agency TEKES, the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and industrial partners.
This research was made in cooperation with the KISMET
project and Regional State Administrative Agency for Eastern
Finland, Development and Steering Unit for the Local Register
Ofﬁces.
REFERENCES
[1]
Finnish Government, “Programme of Prime Minister Jyrki Katainen’s
Government,” www.valtioneuvosto.ﬁ, 2012, referred 2.12.2013.
[2]
Public Sector ICT Unit, “Using services and information: A proposal
for the ﬁrst common strategy to address challenges in public sector ICT
utilisation 2012-2020,” www.vm.ﬁ, 2012, referred 2.12.2013.
[3]
J. Caldeira and F. B. e Abreu, “Inﬂuential factors on incident manage-
ment: Lessons learned from a large sample of products in operation,”
in Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, A. Jedlitschka and
O. Salo, Eds., vol. 5089.
Springer Verlag, 6 2008, pp. 330–344.
[4]
A. Hochstein, R. Zarnekow, and W. Brenner, “Itil as common practice
reference model for it service management: Formal assessment and
implications for practice,” in EEE ’05: Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE
International Conference on e-Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service
(EEE’05) on e-Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service.
Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 704–710.
[5]
M. J¨antti, “Improving Customer Support and Maintenance Processes:
A Single Point of Contact Service Model,” in Software Engineering
Techniques in Progress, 2008, pp. 261–270.
[6]
M. J¨antti, K. Tanskanen, and J. Kaukola, “Knowledge management
challenges in customer support: A case study,” in Proceedings of
the International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge
Management (eKNOW 2009).
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 78–
83.
[7]
M. Kajko-Mattsson, C. Ahnlund, and E. Lundberg, “Cm3: Service level
agreement,” in ICSM ’04: Proceedings of the 20th IEEE International
Conference on Software Maintenance.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2004, pp. 432–436.
[8]
A. Lahtela and M. J¨antti(a), “Improving it service management pro-
cesses: A case study on it service support,” in EuroSPI, ser. Communi-
cations in Computer and Information Science, vol. 99. Springer, 2010,
pp. 95–106.
[9]
A. Lahtela and M. J¨antti(b), “Challenges and problems in release
management process: A case study,” in IEEE International Conference
on Software Engineering and Service Sciences, 2011, pp. 10–13.
[10]
Cabinet Ofﬁce (a), ITIL Service Strategy.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2011.
[11]
Cabinet Ofﬁce (b), ITIL Service Design.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2011.
[12]
Cabinet Ofﬁce (c), ITIL Service Transition.
The Stationary Ofﬁce,
UK, 2011.
[13]
Cabinet Ofﬁce (d), ITIL Service Operation.
The Stationary Ofﬁce,
UK, 2011.
[14]
Cabinet Ofﬁce (e), Continual Service Improvement.
The Stationary
Ofﬁce, UK, 2011.
[15]
M. J¨antti, A. Miettinen, N. Pylkk¨anen, and T. Kainulainen, “Improv-
ing the problem management process from knowledge management
perspective,” in Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. M¨unch and P. Abrahamsson,
Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2007, vol. 4589, pp. 389–401.
[16]
COBIT 5.1, Control Objectives for Information and related Technology:
COBIT 4.1.
ISACA, 2012.
[17]
ISO/IEC TS 15504-8:2012, Information technology - Process assess-
ment -Part 8: An exemplar process assessment model for IT service
management.
ISO/IEC TC JTC1/SC7 Secretariat, 2012.
[18]
Software Engineering Institute, Capability Maturity Model Integration
for Services v1.3.
Carnegie Mellon University, 2010.
[19]
Advisory Committee on Information Management in Public Administra-
tion (JUHTA), “JHS Recommendations,” www.jhs-suositukset.ﬁ, 2013,
referred 2.12.2013.
[20]
Public Sector ICT Unit, “Enterprise Architecture in Finnish Public
Sector,” www.yhteentoimivuus.ﬁ (in Finnish), 2013, referred 2.12.2013.
[21]
The Government Information Security Management Board (VAHTI),
“Information Security Guides,” www.vm.ﬁ, 2013, referred 2.12.2013.
[22]
The Ministry of Finance Finland (b), “Open Government Project,”
www.vm.ﬁ, 2013, referred 2.12.2013.
[23]
The Ministry of Finance Finland (a), “Action Programme on eServices
and eDemocracy (SADe),” www.vm.ﬁ, 2013, referred 2.12.2013.
[24]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[25]
A. Wegmann, “On the Systemic Enterprise Architecture Methodology
(Seam),” in International Conference on Enterprise Information Sys-
tems, 2003, pp. 483–490.
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

