Scoring Methods to Enable Bespoke Portfolio Management 
 
Daniel Pashley 
Industrial Doctorate Centre in Systems 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
Email: dp13092@bristol.ac.uk 
Theodore Tryfonas, Andrew Crossley 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Bristol 
Bristol, UK 
Email: {theo.tryfonas, andrew.crossley}@bristol.ac.uk 
 
Chris Setchell 
Imetrum Limited 
Bristol, UK 
Email: chris.setchell@imetrum.com 
 
 
Abstract— To achieve competitive advantage, many companies 
need to engage and invest in Research and Development. For 
this investment to be effective, resources need to be allocated 
appropriately across all projects. However, when the portfolio 
of the company is diverse or large, this assignment can be 
challenging. Portfolio Management has been created as a 
method for companies to effectively manage new, existing and 
potential projects. Yet, these methods can introduce bias and 
subjectivity without being flexible to the pieces of information, 
or attributes that are important to the company. This work 
adds to the field by proposing three scoring methods that 
convert any attribute into a numerical representation that can 
then be used for comparison. For managers, it means that they 
can select any attributes of importance to them to allow their 
portfolio to be prioritised and have the resource allocated 
appropriately to the projects that offer the greatest promise.  
Keywords- 
Portfolio 
Management; 
New 
Product 
Development; Scoring; Prioritisation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Businesses often form their strategy around the 
development of new products [1]. This can take several 
forms including radical [2], incremental [1] and disruptive 
[3]. These different strategies lead to a number of products 
making up the company’s portfolio [4]. The difficulty for 
companies comes from selecting which of the next 
generation of potential developments should become reality 
and join the existing portfolio [5]. 
Currently there are a number of tools available to 
companies to aid this selection process including those 
presented in [6]–[8]. However, these methods introduce the 
potential for subjectivity, bias and an undue focus on 
particular attributes such as those defined by monetary 
values, when others may be of greater use to the company. 
This research and paper focus on proposing three new 
methods to evaluate potential development projects that can 
be combined to form key elements of a Portfolio 
Management process. 
During the process of identifying new development 
projects, capturing and understanding information is critical. 
Therefore, identifying the information which is most critical 
makes up a core part of this process. Utilising a process of 
identification from a company’s perspective as to which are 
the most critical pieces of information can allow for directed 
capture and review. This forms a simple process, especially 
from the small and medium sized enterprise perspective of 
limited resource [1], which can result in clear understanding 
via prioritisation of the options available to them.  
From this point, the paper takes the following structure. 
In Section 2, the background literature on the topic will be 
investigated including Portfolio Management and the tools 
that make up these methods. Next, in Section 3, the 
proposed three methods will be presented along with how 
they can be combined into a single process. Examples will 
make up part of these descriptions. Finally, in Section 4, the 
presented methods and process will be discussed before 
concluding. 
II. 
BACKGROUND LITERATURE 
Many firms rely on Research and Development (R&D) 
to achieve a competitive position within their market [2]. 
The challenge associated with this is assessing these 
opportunities [3] so the available resources can be 
distributed appropriately to ensure the selected projects can 
begin and continue. With limited resources, which is always 
a concern, effectively managing the development pipeline is 
critical [4]. This helps to maximise returns by only allowing 
appropriate projects to begin. Within business, this 
distribution of resource is a managerial decision [5]. As 
such, the decision requires the necessary attention being 
placed on planning and understanding projects.  
It is not uncommon for several options to present 
themselves at the same time or to be implemented together 
[5] alongside existing projects. However, the difficulty with 
initiating new projects originates from not knowing which 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

will be a success [3]. So the question becomes “ how to do 
the correct projects?” [2]. One approach is to use a 
conceptual funnel [6] which narrows down all potential 
projects into those with a higher chance of success. Within 
this conceptual funnel, activities such as investigation, 
evaluation and prioritising of potential projects are 
conducted [4]. By prioritising potential projects as part of 
the conceptual funnel allows for an appropriate distribution 
of resources [2] to those projects that warrant them more. 
Approaches that are used to do this are either quantitative or 
qualitative using methods that range from rigorous tests to 
social-science methods [3]. 
A prominent approach to aid in the management of 
active and potential projects is Portfolio Management [7]. 
This has been developed to coordinate multiple projects 
towards the same strategic goals [8] and is commonly used 
to manage the composition of a company’s product 
portfolio, including potential new product development [7]. 
This is commonly used in a planning capacity by managers 
or key players in an organisation [7] and ties into the 
management of the development pipeline [4]. As a part of 
this process, a primary filter can be used to draw attention to 
particular potential projects [9] based on attributes such as 
their market potential. This can aid in removing those 
potential projects that would not deliver on their promise or 
are only pitched due to internal political reasons [2]. 
Portfolio Management is a way in which information about 
potential projects is gathered and prioritised [7] such that 
only the most worthy are chosen to become part of the 
company’s product portfolio. 
There are several methods and frameworks discussed in 
literature for Portfolio Management. A method presented in 
[9] utilises scoring a potential project with respect to a 
number of criteria. However, when these same criteria are 
given to multiple people for review there is the strong 
possibility for different results to be returned due to their 
individual experience, making this highly subjective. The 
risk-reward matrix is also presented in [9] with the most 
desirable case being to have a project that is both low risk 
and high reward. Other methods include the organisation 
wide selection process in [10], the data envelopment 
analysis and balance scorecard method in [11]. Additional 
methods are also presented in [2], [3], [12].  
When using the presented methods, decision attributes 
that are commonly used are cost-benefit and cash-flow [12]. 
These are converted into a single determinant, such as Net 
Present Value (NPV) or Internal Rate of Return (IRR) [2] so 
that they can be readily compared. However, there are 
several attributes that are unable to be converted into a 
financial measure. These include risk, route to market and 
engagement opportunities; all critical aspects to understand 
in relation to a potential technology development. 
Therefore, by using only financial measures, only half the 
picture is seen [13]; whereas by using other attributes a 
more holistic view is attained. Conventionally it is not 
possible to represent certain attributes using a single 
financial measure as they are not an amount of money as 
they are more conceptual; furthermore they can be highly 
subjective.    
III. 
PROPOSED SCORING METHOD AND PORTFOLIO 
MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
Scoring has been a project selection technique since its 
origin in the 1950’s [9]. Scoring methods help to estimate 
how attractive a project is and which path to take [14]. In 
addition, these methods present sufficient rigor while not 
being overly complex to discourage use [9]. Furthermore, 
they can also accommodate non-quantitative or “fuzzy” and 
non-detailed data whilst also being customised for the 
organisation they are deployed in [9].  
To construct the proposed scoring methods, three key 
properties were identified to differentiate between types of 
attribute and therefore which method can be used to apply a 
score. These properties are Independent, Comparable and 
Bounded. Independent refers to the ability of an attribute to 
be scored in isolation, with the score it receives being in no 
way related to those before or relying on those from another 
attribute. Comparable means that the only way to effectively 
score an attribute is through comparing it to several other 
instances. Bounded relates to the possible inputs that can be 
associated to that attribute, which can be of any value but 
will always be between two points, i.e., maximum and 
minimum. 
 
TABLE I. POSSIBLE PROPERTY COMBINATIONS 
 
Combination 
Independent 
(I) 
Comparable 
(C) 
Bounded 
(B) 
1 
Y 
Y 
Y 
2 
Y 
Y 
N 
3 
Y 
N 
Y 
4 
Y 
N 
N 
5 
N 
Y 
Y 
6 
N 
N 
Y 
7 
N 
Y 
N 
8 
N 
N 
N 
 
Not all the combinations described in TABLE I are 
possible to be applied together. Combination 1 cannot occur 
due to attributes not being able to be both Independent and 
Comparable together as these properties do not align. 
Combination 2 and 4 are not possible as an Independent 
parameter, that is also non Bounded, would effectively 
change each time it is used and would therefore require 
older versions to be changed, making it none Independent. 
Finally, combination 6 and 8 are not possible as an attribute 
can be neither Independent nor Comparable, as they have to 
be mutually exclusive. This leaves combinations 3, 5 and 7. 
Each of these combinations derives to make a viable method 
of applying a score to attributes. 
 
 
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

TABLE II. SCORING METHODS BASED ON PROPERTY 
COMBINATIONS 
 
Method 
Combination 
I 
C 
B 
Absolute 
3 
Y 
N 
Y 
Balance 
7 
N 
Y 
N 
Comparative 
5 
N 
Y 
Y 
 
Each of the methods shown in TABLE II will now be 
presented along with an example demonstrating their use.  
A. Absolute 
This method is the most straight forward of all those 
proposed and is to be used with attributes that can be used in 
isolation, i.e., have no direct bearing on others. Furthermore, 
they can use a simple grading method with a series of 
criteria and associated scores where the user selects the one 
which matches the closest. Once the score is applied, it 
stands irrespective of other attributes, whether they are new 
or existing.  
Associated with each of these criteria is a Normalised 
Score on the scale desired, 1 – 5 for example. Therefore, by 
selecting the criteria that best fits with the current attribute, 
a score is applied. Each criterion then becomes the 
Normalised Score that can be applied to the attributes.  
 
The steps for this method can be summarised as follows: 
1. Define question 
2. Define range of responses  
3. Select answer from responses 
4. Value associated with response assigned as the score 
1) Absolute example 
An example for a use of the Absolute method is the 
number of geographical regions that a new product could 
enter. This could be a range between 1 – 6 for how many 
regions out of Europe, North America, South America, 
Africa, Asia and Australasia a new product could be 
marketed in. Such an example is similarly demonstrated in 
[14] who discuss the effective commercialisation required 
when selecting appropriate markets for a new product. 
Therefore by implementing this metric, they would be more 
certain of a technology to succeed in multiple markets, 
demonstrating its worth over others. An example of this 
could be as follows: 
 
“How many regions out of Europe, North America, 
South America, Africa, Asia and Australasia can the new 
technology enter?” 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
Figure 1. Example regions to enter 
 
In this case, the number of regions which the innovation 
could enter, selected via Figure 1, can be directly related to 
the score that is applied; with the more regions that can be 
entered reflecting the higher the absolute score.  
B. Balance 
The Balance method makes use of a Normalised Scale; 
this is represented by a number scale which is defined by the 
user and is the range of values that the resulting scores can 
take. An example would range between 1 and 5 with 
increments of 1; meaning the scale has five possible values 
that scored attributes can take. These points on the 
Normalised Scale then become the Normalised Scores 
assigned to the attributes.  
This method is one which is utilised when the attributes 
are unable to be scored independently and have to be 
compared to all values entered previously; an example of 
this could be the expected return from a product whereby a 
new market entry has the potential to be far more lucrative 
than current markets. Therefore to utilise this method, a 
value for the new attribute is entered by the user, and a 
comparison is then made between it and existing values. As 
the new values are unbounded, i.e., can be of any size, 
attention needs to be placed on their magnitude such that the 
values that are significantly larger or smaller are normalised.  
The balance is defined between two values with set 
increments between the Normalised Score marks. In all 
cases with this method, once there are sufficient values 
(more than one), the upper and lower bound values (5 and 
50 for example) are placed in either extreme on the scale as 
demonstrated in Figure 2.   
 
 
Figure 2. Balance method Normalised Scale 
 
Following this, for any subsequent values entered a 
series of steps are to be followed to allow for the new value 
to be placed accordingly. With the upper and lower bounds 
defined, the difference between them is calculated and 
divided by the number of steps between them. This Step 
Change value is added onto the lower bound accumulatively 
for each step until the upper bound is reached, as shown in 
Figure 3. These new step values represent what each 
attribute has to exceed to achieve a certain Normalised 
Score.  
 
         
                   
 
 
 
Figure 3. Distributed Step Change value onto Normalised Scale 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

With the upper and lower bounds set and the Step 
Change applied to each point on the Normalised Scale, any 
values entered between these points now fall onto this scale. 
For example, if a new value was added of 20, this would fit 
in between 2 and 3 on the Normalised Scale, rounding its 
Normalised Score down to 2.  
The advantage of using this method for such values is 
that it can cater for any value to be added of any size. These 
values are then distributed such that the resulting 
Normalised Score reflects their magnitude. Additionally, if a 
new value is added of significantly different size, either 
larger or smaller, the distribution of values is adjusted to 
reflect this. An example would be where a new value is 
added, which is significantly smaller, all values are re-
distributed up the scale and likewise if a value is entered of 
significantly larger size, they are re-distributed down the 
scale. A way to think of this method is by picturing a 
seesaw; when something with a much larger weight is added 
(larger value), it tilts in that direction (positive or negative) 
with respect to the difference in weight (size of value) to 
that already on it. 
 
The process for this method is: 
1. 
Define range 
2. 
Define increments 
3. 
Calculate result 
4. 
Enter result 
5. 
Assign values automatically if insufficient  
6. 
Or Else, assign minimum and maximum values 
7. 
Calculate Step Change 
8. 
Calculate Normalised Scores 
9. 
Store results 
 
1) Balance example 
An example for the Balance method is scoring costs as 
these values are unbounded and can take any size. For 
example, if common values are between £10 and £100, but a 
new value is added of £200, the magnitude of the difference 
needs to be reflected. In business it is common to conduct 
investigations 
into 
potential 
developments 
before 
conducting any further work into them, such as in the 
automotive example presented in [15]; whereby they 
analyse the costs of new automotive products before 
selecting a development path. This can be combined with 
that presented in [16], where estimating the cost of a new 
development before conducting any work, illustrates 
effective portfolio management.   
For example, a user is generating scores based on 
estimates for market size for a potential technology they 
could make. Through a simple calculation, approximate 
values for this can be calculated and entered into the 
Balance scoring method. Assume that £1m, £2m, £3m, £4m 
and £5m have already been entered as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Example Balanced method scale 
 
a. 
Entered values are shown on the top, with Normalised Scores on the 
bottom 
 
However, if there is a new potential technology that can 
be made which has a potential market of £10m; this is 
significantly higher than those already entered. By adding a 
value of £10m to those already scored, the distribution and 
the required score to reach the next score boundary changes. 
This new distribution and assigned scores are shown in 
Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Expanded example of Balance method scale 
 
Figure 5 demonstrates how the addition of a 6th, much 
larger value onto the scale results in existing values having 
to shift downwards to accommodate it. 
As can be seen, through the addition of unbounded 
scoring values such as cost or value, there can be a relative 
shift in the resulting score based on its magnitude. This can 
be beneficial, as the relative difference is important to 
demonstrate an attributes worth over the others.  
C. Comparative 
The Comparative method also makes use of a 
Normalised Scale and is used when an attribute cannot be 
treated in isolation. Furthermore, it is designed to be used 
with those attributes that are more abstract or “fuzzy” and 
therefore difficult to score directly and instead are scored by 
comparing them to others. To allow an attribute of this type 
to be graded, a simple comparison is conducted between 
several attributes. Those to be used in the comparison are 
selected to represent a spread of scores such that it can be 
conducted against all levels of result, not just a single point. 
The spread of the comparable attributes is determined by the 
range of the final normalised range of scores to represent the 
extremes and several intervals in between. In total four 
existing attributes are selected to be used for the comparison 
so that when combined with the new attribute, there is a 
total of five. If there are insufficient existing attributes to 
facilitate this number for the comparison, select as many as 
are available and in the case of one attribute assign the 
middle Normalised Score. The selected attributes, along 
with that to be scored, are arranged so a pairwise 
comparison can be conducted so that all attributes are 
compared to each other. The underlying method that 
conducts the pairwise comparison is the Analytic Hierarchy 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

Process [17]–[19], which uses a four point scale around a 
midpoint towards each attribute being compared. This 
demonstrates a graded preference to neither or one of the 
attributes. Following the completion of the comparisons, a 
maximum score of 1 is given when all five attributes are 
selected, and a score for each attribute is calculated. These 
new scores then update those held for each attribute, as they 
have been compared to a new attribute and thus their former 
calculated score is no longer valid. A method for conducting 
this pairwise comparison is shown in Figure 6, which 
utilises Microsoft Excel to present the required information 
to the user. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Example Comparison between attributes shown in Microsoft 
Excel  
a. Technology abbreviated to T 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Results from attribute comparison shown in Microsoft Excel 
 
Now that the new Analytic Hierarchy Process scores 
have been calculated relative to the newly added attribute as 
per Figure 7, the ranking for all attributes and the final 
Normalised Scale will be changed. To do this a Normalised 
Scale is used that acts with bounded upper and lower values 
and an even distribution in between where the user defines 
the overall size of the scale and the increments between the 
steps i.e., 1-5 and with a  spacing of 1. This method assigns 
values by initially (when there are insufficient values to 
occupy all spaces) entering them ranked around the centre 
of the scale until all spaces are occupied. Following this, the 
upper and lower bounds are positioned and the remaining 
values are evenly distributed between these positions, with 
the space they fall into always being rounded down to the 
lower bound to award the Normalised Score.  
This method of applying scores via an even distribution 
of values between two extremes is done due to the way the 
values being entered are bounded between 0 and 1 from the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process. 
The outline for this method is: 
1. Define range 
2. Define increments 
3. Select other paths to compare to 
4. Conduct comparison 
5. Calculate Analytic Hierarchy Process score 
6. Update results 
7. Evenly distribute on Normalised Score 
8. Update Normalised Scores 
1) Comparative example 
An example of an attribute that would require the 
Comparative method would be the risk in relation to 
developing a new technology. This type of attribute is 
something that is “fuzzy” and that is difficult to define 
explicitly in isolation and is therefore easier to compare to 
others. Such a comparison is presented by [20], [21] for 
exactly this purpose; risk is a difficult attribute to define, 
therefore it is best done through a comparison with others. 
By directly comparing multiple examples of the same 
attribute, a gauge of the risk can be created.  
In this example, the risk associated with creating a new 
technology (T5) is to be compared with those already 
analysed, with the question for this comparison being “In 
each comparison, which technologies development presents 
the most risk?”   
 
 
 
Figure 8. Example comparison of development risk shown in 
Microsoft Excel  
a. Technology abbreviated to T 
 
In Figure 8, it can be seen how the risk in the 
development of each technology has been compared. With 
the results from these comparisons, a calculation is done 
automatically to create the Analytic Hierarchy Process score 
for each technology being compared.  
 
 
Figure 9. Analytic Hierarchy Process score for Comparative method 
 
With these newly calculated scores, shown in Figure 9, 
the database containing scores for all technologies is 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

updated to reflect this change to these items. Following this, 
all values are distributed evenly on a defined Normalised 
Scale, between 1 and 5 for example, with respect to the 
largest and smallest values.  
 
Figure 10. Comparative method scale 
a. Technology abbreviated to T 
 
The scale presented in Figure 10 demonstrates how the 
scores assigned to the technologies are ranked with the use 
of a Normalised Scale. In this example, an additional 
technologies score (T6) is also added as this was previously 
calculated and not selected to be part of the comparison. 
These scores are distributed with the upper and lower scores 
first and the remaining scores in order, evenly between these 
points. 
This example shows how the Comparative method can 
be used to relate a score that can be used as a representation 
for a “fuzzy” concept such as the risk associated with a 
concept such as a new technologies development. Therefore, 
this effectively removed the difficulty in assigning a score to 
represent an attribute that reflects the addition of more 
values in the future.   
  
D. Proposed portfolio management process 
Based on the descriptions of the three scoring methods it 
can be seen how any attribute in relation to a potential 
development project can be scored to give a numerical value 
to represent it. Therefore, using these three methods, a 
process can be designed that can be used by any company to 
investigate, evaluate and prioritise potential development 
projects.  
During the identification phase, the attributes that are of 
importance to the company need to be identified. These can 
typically include cost, value to the user, risk of 
development, commercial risk, competition and route to 
market. As the scoring methods all allow for complex 
attributes to be converted into a numerical form, they can 
applied to any attribute that is important to consider. By 
identifying key attributes the investigation process into the 
potential development can be enhanced and directed. 
TABLE II can be used to align these identified attributes 
to the correct scoring method. Once the alignment to a 
scoring method has been completed, the questions, 
responses and Normalised Scales and Scores need to be 
recorded. Following this, the review is conducted based on 
the captured information as directed by the selected 
attributes.  
The scores for each attribute, relating to each potential 
development project, are aggregated to create its total score. 
These scores can then be directly compared to those relating 
to other potential development projects, as they have been 
investigated and scored using the same attributes. One way 
to conduct this comparison is by ranking the potential 
development projects by these scores, giving then an R&D 
priority. 
 
TABLE III. EXAMPLE AGGREGATE SCORES 
 
Potential development project 
Aggregate score 
Technology 2 
27 
Technology 4 
25 
Technology 1 
20 
Technology 5 
14 
Technology 3 
6 
 
A threshold value can then be used to distribute 
resources to the potential development projects that display 
the required level of promise. By using the possible 
Normalised Scores for each of the attributes, as defined 
earlier in the process, a threshold value that has to be 
achieved before resources are allocated can also be defined. 
For example, if the maximum possible score for a potential 
development project is 30, the lowest threshold value to be 
achieved could be set as 20. This would serve as an 
indication for the managers tasked with Portfolio 
Management as to which potential development projects can 
deliver the required investment and resource utilisation 
confidence before funding them further.  
 
TABLE IV. EXAMPLE AGGREGATE SCORES USING A 
THRESHOLD 
 
Potential development project 
Aggregate score 
Technology 2 
27 
Technology 4 
25 
Technology 1 
20 
Technology 5 
14 
Technology 3 
6 
 
As can be seen in TABLE IV, by using a threshold 
approach gives a clear indication to the potential 
development projects that can deliver the most confidence 
of success. The threshold of 20 is shown by the thick 
horizontal line meaning potential development projects for 
Technologies 2, 4 and 1 should be allocated resources in 
that respective order. Technology 5 and 3 do not make the 
required threshold to be allocated resource. 
This overall process of utilising the three scoring 
methods for Portfolio Management has been named the 
ABC Threshold approach. This is reflective of the three 
methods (Absolute, Balance and Comparative) used to 
investigate, evaluate and prioritise potential development 
projects with respect to the specific needs and situation of 
the company with the use of the threshold value.  
The ABC threshold approach can be outlined as follows: 
1. Identify attributes of importance 
2. Align them to the correct scoring method 
3. Conduct the review 
4. Prioritise them based on the value 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

5. Apply threshold 
The process described here is reflected in Figure 11 
which demonstrates the flow between the required stages. 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Portfolio Management process stages 
 
The ABC Threshold approach process shown in Figure 
11 highlights the simplicity of utilizing this as a method to 
investigate, evaluate and prioritise a company’s portfolio. 
This is achieved through identification of important 
information, capturing it, reviewing that which is captured, 
collecting scores and comparing to a defined threshold to 
identify the development project to proceed with, if any.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The ABC Threshold approach outlined above has 
several advantages. Firstly, the same attributes from 
different potential development projects can be directly 
compared after conversion into a numerical form on the 
same Normalised Scale. This can deliver an understanding 
of where certain developments are stronger than others. 
Secondly, it is very flexible for the company, as any 
attribute can be scored using the outlined methods. 
Therefore only the information that is important to the 
company is analysed. The approach also diminishes the 
impact of subjectivity on the final score. By defining the 
review process to be one of three methods, the results found 
from different points of view should be very similar; 
meaning the consistent results can be achieved irrespective 
of who is conducting the review. Bias and personal 
influence can also be minimised as the final score is not 
created on the basis of discussion but rather the generation 
of numerical scores. Finally, the process is reflective of the 
company’s position, as the decision threshold value can be 
set at the appropriate level. For companies with limited 
resources, such as small and medium sized enterprises [1], 
this threshold level can be increased such that potential 
development projects have to display a higher level of 
certainty of success before committing to them. 
Overall, the ABC Threshold approach can be thought of 
as a structured investigation, evaluation and prioritisation 
tool. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Portfolio Management process 
 
As can be seen in Figure 12, potential development 
projects are identified, collated and investigated, reviewed 
and then prioritised. From this prioritisation of potential 
development projects, resources can be distributed as 
required. Furthermore, additional investigations can be 
initiated for those potential development projects that fall 
short of the required threshold. Brand new potential 
development projects can also be considered at this stage to 
increase the chance of identifying viable projects.  
To manage multiple potential and actual development 
projects, Portfolio Management is used. Numerous tools, 
method and frameworks have been devised that aid in the 
investigation, evaluation and prioritisation. This is vital 
when distributing resources to those prospective projects 
that have the greatest potential.  Many existing tools, 
methods and frameworks commonly focus on monetary 
attributes or only use a fixed set; those approaches can be 
very inflexible and not truly reflective of what is important 
to the particular company. The proposed ABC Threshold 
approach to Portfolio Management allows for customisation 
by the company to the attributes that are most important to 
describe a potential development project. In addition, clear 
indications as to the development path to follow are given 
by the use of the threshold approach which can also indicate 
when additional investigation is required.  
However there are several possible considerations 
related to the ABC Threshold approach. Within a company 
setting, a system to implement the three methods is 
required; this would necessitate the correct development and 
error checking. Secondly, the required data needs storing in 
a way that is easily collected for utilisation in the scoring 
methods. Finally, as noted earlier, the set threshold can have 
a profound impact on the potential developments selected. 
Therefore the setting of the level is critical and will require 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

careful consideration and potentially trial and error to 
correctly match the given situation.  
In summary, the ABC Threshold approach gives enough 
flexibility to the company to adopt bespoke Portfolio 
Management by identifying the attributes that are most 
important to them for investigation and evaluation whilst 
being non-subjective, devoid of bias and delivering a true 
reflection of the company’s R&D position via adoption of 
an appropriate decision threshold value.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Systems Centre and the 
EPSRC funded Industrial Doctorate Centre in Systems 
(Grant EP/G037353/1) and Imetrum Limited. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. McAdam, R. Reid, and M. Shevlin, “Determinants for 
innovation implementation at SME and inter SME levels 
within peripheral regions,” Int. J. Entrep. Behav. Res., 
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 66–90, 2014. 
[2] 
M. Abbassi, M. Ashrafi, and E. Sharifi Tashnizi, 
“Selecting balanced portfolios of R&D projects with 
interdependencies: A cross-entropy based methodology,” 
Technovation, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 54–63, 2014. 
[3] 
A. D. Henriksen and A. J. Traynor, “A practical R & D 
project-selection scoring tool,” {IEEE} Trans. Eng. 
Manag., vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 158–170, 1999. 
[4] 
R. C. McNally, S. S. Durmuşoǧlu, and R. J. Calantone, 
“New 
product 
portfolio 
management 
decisions: 
Antecedents and consequences,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., 
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 245–261, 2013. 
[5] 
P. Patanakul, “Key drivers of effectiveness in managing a 
group of multiple projects,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., 
vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 4–17, 2013. 
[6] 
R. Sperry and A. Jetter, “Theoretical framework for 
managing the front end of innovation under uncertainty,” 
PICMET Portl. Int. Cent. Manag. Eng. Technol. Proc., 
pp. 2021–2028, 2009. 
[7] 
M. G. Kaiser, F. El Arbi, and F. Ahlemann, “Successful 
project portfolio management beyond project selection 
techniques: 
Understanding 
the 
role 
of 
structural 
alignment,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 126–
139, 2015. 
[8] 
M. Martinsuo, “Project portfolio management in practice 
and in context,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 
794–803, 2013. 
[9] 
R. Mitchell, R. Phaal, and N. Athanassopoulou, “Scoring 
methods for prioritizing and selecting innovation 
projects,” PICMET 2014 - Portl. Int. Cent. Manag. Eng. 
Technol. Proc. Infrastruct. Serv. Integr., no. 2001, pp. 
907–920, 2014. 
[10] 
Q. Tian, J. Ma, J. Liang, R. C. W. Kwok, and O. Liu, “An 
organizational decision support system for effective R&D 
project selection,” Decis. Support Syst., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 
403–413, 2005. 
[11] 
H. Eilat, B. Golany, and A. Shtub, “Constructing and 
evaluating balanced portfolios of R&D projects with 
interactions: A DEA based methodology,” Eur. J. Oper. 
Res., vol. 172, no. 3, pp. 1018–1039, 2006. 
[12] 
S. Coldrick, P. Longhurst, P. Ivey, and J. Hannis, “An 
R&D options selection model for investment decisions,” 
Technovation, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 185–193, 2005. 
[13] 
K. Katz and T. Manzione, “Maximize Your ‘Return on 
Initiatives’ with the Initiative Portfolio Review Process,” 
Haarvard Bus. Rev., pp. 14–16, 2008. 
[14] 
J. Cho and J. Lee, “Development of a new technology 
product evaluation model for assessing commercialization 
opportunities using Delphi method and fuzzy AHP 
approach,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 40, no. 13, pp. 5314–
5330, 2013. 
[15] 
R. Roy, S. Colmer, and T. Griggs, “Estimating the Cost of 
a New Technology Intensive Automotive Product: A Case 
Study Approach,” Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 
210–226, 2005. 
[16] 
D. R. Lairson, T. H. Chung, L. G. Smith, J. K. Springston, 
and V. L. Champion, “Estimating development cost of an 
interactive website based cancer screening promotion 
program,” Eval. Program Plann., vol. 50, pp. 56–62, 
2015. 
[17] 
E. H. Forman. and S. I. Gass, “The Analytic Hierarchy 
Process--An Exposition,” Oper. Res., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 
469–486, 2001. 
[18] 
A. Omid and S. H. Zegordi, “Integrated AHP and network 
DEA for assessing the efficiency of Iranian handmade 
carpet industry,” Decis. Sci. Lett., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 477–
486, 2015. 
[19] 
R. Ramanathan and L. S. Ganesh, “Using AHP for 
resource allocation problems,” Eur. J. Oper. Res., vol. 80, 
no. 93, pp. 410–417, 1995. 
[20] 
C. 
Raspotnig 
and 
A. 
Opdahl, 
“Comparing 
risk 
identification 
techniques 
for 
safety 
and 
security 
requirements,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 1124–
1151, 2013. 
[21] 
D. Guégan and X. Zhao, “Alternative modeling for long 
term risk,” Quant. Financ., vol. 7688, no. December 
2013, pp. 1–17, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

