Automatic Lighting Control System and Architecture 
Using Ambient Light Sensor 
Hyun-Chul Kang, Jung-Sik Sung, Seong-Hee Park, Hyun-Joo Kang, Jong-Woo Choi, Tae-Gyu Kang 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
138 Gajeongno, Yuseong-gu, Daejoen, KOREA 
Email :{kauni, jssung, pshee, hjkang,jwchoi,tgkang}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, we propose an automatic lighting 
control system and architecture using ambient light sensor, 
which is built in a lighting device. The proposed method can 
predict user preference lux value on the floor by referencing 
measured lux value on the ceiling surface with ambient light 
sensor. We also implement real time lighting automatic 
lighting control system using the ambient light sensor. An 
optimized lighting control service can be provided to users in 
the home network environments. 
Keywords- automatic , lighting control, ambient light sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the spread of LED (Light Emitting Diode) 
lighting devices, there have been many researches of lighting 
control system using various sensors for energy saving in 
office or home environments. Nowadays, it is possible to 
design and realize the intelligent lighting control system 
along with the increasing maturity of computer technology, 
network technology, control technology and embedded 
system [1]. The lighting system is one of the largest single 
consuming units, which accounts up to 26% of the total 
energy consumption of an inefficient building [2]. 
Also, it is not easy to adjust the optimal illumination 
environment for the office worker. The lighting control 
system, which provides most suitable brightness for each 
office worker is necessary by using ceiling lighting fixtures 
[3]. This paper proposes automatic lighting control 
mechanism with ambient light sensor built-in a lighting 
device for the efficiency of user-oriented home environment.  
Section II presents the automatic lighting control system 
architecture for lighting control using ambient light sensor. 
Section III describes the simulation result of data analysis 
and mechanism of the automatic lighting control system. 
Section IV provides some concluding remarks regarding our 
proposal and future work. 
II. AUTOMATIC LIGHTING CONTROL SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The automatic lighting control system architecture 
includes seven blocks. Figure 1 shows automation lighting 
system architecture for the optimized lighting control. 
External 
interface 
block 
performs 
function 
of 
communication with the application server or terminal. 
The sampling block collects the initial sampling data of 
ambient light sensor when the dimming level of the lighting 
is changed from 1 to 100%.  
 
 
Fig. 1.  Automatic lighting control system architecture 
The sampling data is used as the basis data of the self-
control mechanism. The data detection block collects raw 
sensor data and converts the extracted sensor information 
into valid ambient light sensor data. The data reasoning 
block can infer the floor surface data based on the ceiling 
surface data of the built-in ambient light sensor in the 
lighting fixture. The lighting data management block 
performs flow management of lighting data through 
application server or terminal. The monitoring block 
performs ambient light sensor data monitoring periodically. 
The lighting control block performs the optimization of 
illumination and controls the lighting device according to the 
service environment. The position of the ambient light sensor 
device is attached to the illumination. 
III. AMBIENTL LIGHT SENSOR DATA ANALYSIS AND 
AUTOMATION LIGHTING CONTROL MECHANISM 
In the simulation, the ambient light sensor is connected to 
the processor board (Micro Controller Unit) through I2C 
(Inter-Integrated Circuit) communication. The 10W~50W 
lighting device is implemented and ambient light sensor is 
embedded 
in 
the 
lighting 
device. 
The 
simulation 
environment of illumination is shown in Figure 2. The size 
of the lighting space is about 60cm * 60cm * 60cm. The 
illumination value is measured and analyzed by comparing 
the luminance data of the illuminometer (CL-200A Chroma 
Meter) and ambient light sensor. A 1 point method is used 
for the illumination measurements. In the simulation, 
dimming level of illumination increases from 0% to 100% 
stepwise. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

 
Fig. 2.  The  Illumination simulation environment. 
At the same time, the floor surface data is measured 
through the illuminometer and the ceiling surface data is 
collected by ambient light sensor. Equation (1) can be 
obtained by linear regression analysis through the simulation. 
In Figure 3, we see a comparison of the floor surface data 
with ceiling surface data from the simulation. 
 
      
  
(a) When there is some external light source.      (b) In the dark room. 
Fig. 3.  Simmulation results.  
 
U= 1.5599c + 169.12. 
(1) 
U : The floor surface data (Bottom lux)  
X : The ceiling surface data (Ceiling lux) 
 
Equation (1) is possible to obtain a formula, such as (2): 
 
U= Ac + B 
(2) 
Y: The reasoning floor surface data 
X: The measured ceiling surface data 
A (weight) = (y1-y2)/(s1-s2) 
y1: The floor surface data at the time of the minimum 
dimming level of lighting  
y2: The floor surface data at the time of the maximum 
dimming level of lighting 
s1: The ceiling surface sampling data at the time of the 
minimum dimming level of lighting  
s2: the ceiling surface sampling data at the time of the 
maximum dimming level of lighting  
B (Constant) = ((y2-y1) * s2)/ (s1-s2)) + y2 
Equation (2) predicts user preference (target) lux value 
on the floor by referencing measured lux value on the ceiling 
surface. In Figure 4 shows automation lighting control 
mechanism and architecture using ambient light sensors.  
Fig. 4.  The mechanism of the automatic lighting control system.  
The user is able to maintain the lighting environment in 
real time through automation lighting control mechanism. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We propose automation lighting control system and 
architecture using ambient light sensors in the home 
environments. In this paper, the ceiling lux data can be 
converted to the floor surface lux data, which is set by user 
automatically. Also, the dimming level of illumination can 
be switched to the target dimming level quickly by using an 
automatic lighting control algorithm. In the future, we will 
need to study the simulation and light data analysis of 
algorithms in the various spaces. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 “This work was supported by R&D program of KEIT, 
[10049014 The development of MICE-LED convergence 
content and interactive media-art of tele-Screen], [10042947, 
A development of LED system lighting engine module with 
compact sized data communication modules and driver 
IC/Processor control parts based on multi-sensor],” 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Deng-feng, B. Yun-ting, W. He, and L. Hu, "Design of 
intelligent lighting control system" Cyber Technology in 
Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems (CYBER), 2011 
IEEE International Conference ,pp.134-137, 20-23 March. 
[2] F. Kaku, et al. “Construction of Intelligent Lighting System 
Providing Desired Illuminance Distributions in Actual Office 
Environment”, Artifical Intelligence and Soft Computing 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 6114, 2010, pp 
451-46 
[3] T. P. Huynh, Y. K. Tan, and K. J. Tseng, “Energy-aware 
wireless sensor network with ambient intelligence for smart 
LED(Light Emitting Diode) lighting system control”, IECON 
2011, pp2923 – 2928, Nov. 2011. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-399-5
ICONS 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems

