Strategic Engineering as Closed Loop Approach to Address Complex Systems
Agostino G. Bruzzone 
Simulation Team, Genoa University 
Genoa, Italy 
agostino.bruzzone@simulationteam.com 
www.simulationteam.com 
Marina Massei 
DIME, Genoa University 
Genoa, Italy 
massei@itim.unige.it 
www.itim.unige.it/strategos 
Kirill Sinelshchikov 
Simulation Team 
Genoa, Italy 
kirill@simulationteam.com 
www.simulationteam.com 
Abstract— The innovative discipline defined as Strategic 
Engineering develops architectures dealing with Decision 
Making in Complex Systems. The paper proposes how to 
create a closed loop that combines Modeling & Simulation 
(M&S), Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to filter 
and elaborate Big Data, extract information, forecast impacts 
of decisions by Simulation and collect back the actual results to 
correct the models. In this sense, even the development and 
implementation processes should rely on special scientists and 
engineers able to address the complex problems by solid 
foundations in M&S and AI. Several real cases are proposed in 
the paper as example to show the potential of this approach 
and to validate the methodology. 
Keywords- Strategic Engineering; Modeling; Simulation; 
Artificial Intelligence; Data Analytics; Strategic Management,; 
Strategic Planning;  Decision Making. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since many years, the Decision Makers have to address 
complex problems with many different factors and strongly 
correlated where there is just a limited number of degrees of 
freedom available to them and where the quality of the 
decisions are related to multiple opposite target functions 
[1][2]. Nowadays this situation is even more critical due to 
several factors including globalization, increased speed and 
dynamics of Businesses and International Affairs, New 
Players and more Interconnected world [3]. 
Indeed, looking around over the world, from Geo Politics 
to Business, from logistics to marketing, it emerges that 
these kinds of problems are turning very common and 
challenging, while the environment turn to be more and more 
time sensitive [4][5][6][7][8][9]. The second effects of the 
decisions as well as the high level of interconnectivity makes 
it hard to evaluate all consequences and it emerge the 
necessity to rely on a solid and strong methodological 
approach based on quantitative techniques [10]. From this 
point of view, a new emerging discipline, named “Strategic 
Engineering”, represents a step forward able to use the state 
of art of current technologies to address Strategic Decision 
Making into an innovative way. 
This paper proposes the foundations of Strategic 
Engineering as well as case studies where it could be 
effectively used to provide a strategic advantage in decision 
making; in addition the paper highlights that the approach 
should be part of a structured advance in the field of decision 
making that include educational programs and initiatives for 
young scientist and engineers as well as for executives and 
managers. The presentation of STRATEGOS, the 1st Master 
of Science in Strategic Engineering in Italy and among first 
ones in the world, represents an important initiative that 
provides new capabilities to this context, developed in strong 
connection with major International Institutions as well as 
multinational companies. 
II.
THE INNOVATIVE APPROACH LOOKING TO RELIABLE 
TECHNIQUES IN A NEW WAY
Nowadays, in reference to complex problems, it is quite 
popular to quote the sentence that “Explanations exist; they 
have existed for all time; there is always a well-known 
solution to every human problem — neat, plausible, and 
wrong” Mencken [11]; without disrespect for this journalist, 
turning popular after 1 century, the authors have a different 
point of view, we feel that this popularity emerges due to the 
simplistic approach of current politicians while complex 
problems could have many different solutions: elegant 
solutions, simple solutions, complex solutions as well as no 
solutions [10]. Thinking back to 66 million years ago, during 
Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary, the impact of an “asteroid” 
creating the Chicxulub crater, 150km radius and 20km deep, 
had a huge impact on the Earth climate: this was a problem 
that at that time (probably even nowadays) has no solution at 
least for the living animals over the planet [12]. Moving 
forward at IV century BC, the Gordian Knot appeared 
impossible to be untied, therefore Plutarch states that 
Alexander solved it simply by a single stroke of his sword.  
In any case, simple or complex solutions are not always 
easy to implement and/or to identify; for sure to find them 
and to identify right decisions to deal with them is 
fundamental to acquire data, develop knowledge and 
understanding, evaluate consequence and to apply the 
solutions while keeping control of the situation to correct it 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

and achieve desired results. This paper keeps out of generic 
discussions and provides a description of how Strategic 
Engineering applies modern techniques to face these 
challenges. Strategic Engineering is a combined use of 
Modeling and Simulation (M&S), Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
and Data Analytics devoted to support Strategic Decision 
Making. Indeed modeling & simulation arisen since ’50, to 
address especially rocket science and supersonic plane 
engineering, therefore industrial applications emerged within 
the same decade [13]; so this approach is still pretty 
advanced even today therefore its base dates back over ½ 
century. In similar way AI (Artificial Intelligence) origins 
are quite old and even Turing’s developments emerged on 
’30 and ’40 [14]. Data Analytics dates back even to much 
older times, being used in terms of “moving average” since 
Roman times to forecast demand of wines and other goods 
from worldwide. 
Indeed, it is important to outline that these methodologies 
are consolidated, but their combined use is pretty innovative 
and could rely on new enabling technologies and conditions 
such as digitalization of companies, social networks, Internet 
of Things (IoT), Cloud Computing Capabilities, etc.  
These methods have today additional capabilities not 
only for the advances in software, hardware, algorithms and 
methods, but also for the possibility to use them in closed 
loop, collecting effects of decisions from the reality and 
using as input in machine learning and self tuning 
components as proposed in Fig 1. 
III.
APPLYING STRATEGIC ENGINEERING
In the following the authors propose some case studies as 
example of the capabilities offered by applying Strategic 
Engineering 
A.
Threat Networks and Critical Infrastructure Protection 
The 
Homeland 
Security 
issues 
represent 
pretty 
challenging environments, addressing multiple layers and 
risks related to strategic assets. In this sense, the Critical 
Infrastructures such as power grid, transportations, and data 
networks are assets that are targets to threat network and the 
development of new solutions to reduce their vulnerabilities. 
The solutions could be pretty wide in sense of approach: 
from technological solutions, usually as integrated systems, 
up to policies & doctrines as well as training and institution 
of ad hoc special teams. To develop these solutions it could 
be used also a wide spectrum of approach, from penetration 
tests (cyber or physical or combined), to training and table 
top exercise. Obviously to face these issues by a 
comprehensive approach it turns necessary to create 
synthetic worlds reproducing each different layer as well as 
their interactions to conduct virtual experiences and exercise 
[15]. Among these problems, a new popular issue is related 
to Hybrid Warfare that combines cyber & physical attacks, 
economics, diplomacy and International Relations with use 
of 
Strategic 
Communications 
(STRATCOM) 
and 
Information Operations (Info Ops) affect public opinion and 
force opponents to specific decisions [6][16][17].  
Figure 1. Closed loop use of AI, Simulation and Data Analytics to support 
decisions 
In Hybrid Warfare the attack to critical infrastructures 
could represent an effective way to obtain results and 
influence population [18][19], so it is interesting to create 
models able to reproduce the behavior of people, the social 
media and collect information from the field to evaluate if 
the consequences of decisions are properly evaluated by the 
modes. At the same time, this approach could be used to 
refine the models and to introduce Machine Learning 
capabilities. The Solution named “Threat network simulation 
for Reactive eXperience” (T-REX) was developed in this 
way and demonstrated in 2015 the capability to reproduce 
cyber physical attacks by Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) 
to a Critical Infrastructure serving 5 towns over a desert area, 
including Tank Farm, Refinery, Oil Terminal, Port, Power 
Plant and Desalination Facility (see Fig 2); it is interesting to 
state that a similar attack was conducted against the biggest 
world refinery along 2019 in similar way [20]. 
B.
System of Systems Engineering applied to AWACS 
The renew of Airborne Warning and Control System 
(AWACS) is an actual issue that deals with the development 
of a new solutions to a complex problem that is still relying 
on old technologies on both West and East. 
Up to now, big former commercial or transport planes 
have been adapted to carry large radar shaped as a 
mushroom (the radome) to discover on very long-range 
aerial and surface targets with good resolution as well as to 
support intensive and secure communications; classical 
examples are Boeing E-3C and Beriev A-50. Nowadays 
these solutions are very expensive, hard to maintain, to 
upgrade and operate. In addition, there are potential 
solutions, available today for instance based on use of 
autonomous vehicles that could reduce costs as well as 
vulnerability of the overall system through redundancy. New 
solutions could even increase coverage and responsiveness. 
In facts without human crew aircrafts could result lighter, 
more compact, reduce their consumptions and increase 
autonomy; obviously the new radar and communication 
technologies are now using different paradigms and could be 
more compact and integrated. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 2. Vulnerability Reduction on Critical Infrastructures by using 
Strategic Engineering and Simulation 
Therefore to find a reliable solution in this sense requires 
to consider many aspects such as the threats and the future 
scenario to face, the costs and reliability issues, the 
technological aspects on the platform, the technological 
aspects on radar solution, the operational modes and 
strategies, etc. 
Even Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) are including 
many different target functions that are often conflicting as 
the case of costs versus vulnerability; to properly find 
optimal solution the authors developed the “Multiple 
Interoperable Systems for joint Control of Hybrid threats 
through Intelligent Extended Fusion” (MISCHIEF) that is 
focusing on defense and homeland security with special 
attention to aerial threats and include a simple modeling of 
complex SoS (System of Systems); this solutions create a 
complex scenario and simulation models to be used for 
supporting table top exercises as well as engineering analysis 
considering electronic systems, power engineering, multiple 
platforms, operational modes as well as ground installations 
(e.g. airstrips and bases for the new AWACS). 
MISCHIEF was developed by Simulation Team as a 
Serious Game based on Modeling, interoperable Simulation 
and Serious Game  (MS2G) to be intuitive and immersive 
[21]. In this context, the different engineering solutions are 
strongly interconnected with the procedures adopted to 
employ these new assets. The case proposed is a good 
example on System of Systems Engineering (SoSE) and is 
available to support evaluation of new hypothetical airborne 
surveillance systems considering several data such as 
platform type, maximum speed, autonomy sensor ranges, 
resolution, power consumptions, reliability and availability, 
etc. 
C.
Improving Industrial Plants: Increasing Line 
Productivity, Reliability and Safety 
In modern factories and production plants, the evolution 
related to Industry 4.0 paradigm is enabling new advances. 
The proposed case is related to the Project named “Wearable 
Augmented Reality for Employee safety in Manufacturing 
sYStems” (W-ARTEMYS) where use of Extended Reality 
(XR) combining Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR & AR) 
is able improve safety and productivity in plants. This project 
allows to provide wearable solutions that rely on simple 
tablets or smartphones as well as on headsets and HololensTM
[22]. Therefore this is just the basis to create Strategic 
Engineering supports that acquiring all the information 
provided naturally and intuitively by operators and 
supervisors along production line and correlating them by 
Machine Learning could provide the based to create 
Intelligent Solutions suggesting how to react to alerts and 
how to improve quality and productivity, maintaining very 
high level of reliability and safety. The project is applied to 
hollow glass production lines, but is ongoing in parallel with 
other related initiatives over beverage bottling lines and 
frozen good industries. 
IV.
STRATEGOS AS NECESSITY
It is evident that in addition to developing new models, 
algorithms and even more combining these elements as 
integrated closed loop solution for supporting decision 
making, it is necessary to develop engineers and scientists 
with a new forma mentis relying on Strategic Engineering 
approach. From this point of view around the world, several 
new initiatives are arising such as STRATEGOS in Genoa 
University [10]. STRATEGOS is a new Master of Science 
on Strategic Engineering organized in joint cooperation 
among 
different 
Faculties 
(Engineering, 
Economics, 
International Affairs), Institutions (e.g. NATO M&S Center 
of Excellence, James Cook University Singapore Campus) 
and Companies (e.g. Accenture, Hitachi, Leonardo, Thales, 
MBDA, Rina, Seastema, Antycip Simulation, SIM4Future, 
Rulex etc.). MSc STRATEGOS is a two year International 
Program [23] that is based on 3 semesters of Lectures, 
Exercises and Labs plus a Semester of Internship working on 
a Strategic Engineering Project. The Program is active since 
2019 and it has been presented in Tucson, Logrono, Milan, 
Berlin, Rome, Singapore, Beijing, Wroclaw, Taranto to 
create an effective network on this subject. STRATEGOS, as 
new Educational Solution, addresses both young engineering 
preparation as well as executive and manager upgrades; 
indeed this is possible through the development of the 
STRATEGOS Courses side by side with STRATEGOS 
Workshops addressing specific topics and open to experts 
from Companies and Institutions. Up to now, STRATEGOS 
includes already over 70 Workshops and obtained very 
interesting results in terms of attendance and quality reports. 
It is evident that the success in diffusing and applying 
Strategic Engineering relies on the capability to interact with 
Top Level Decision Makers, so the new engineers as well as 
the manager, should learn these approach as well as the 
capability to collect from the top the needs and expectations 
as well as to guarantee trustiness on new solutions and their 
effective use. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The Strategic Engineering is a new approach that 
emphasizes the combination of AI, M&S and Data Analytics 
in closed loop getting benefits from the digitalization of the 
modern world; in this way this approach results much more 
efficient than in any past similar tentative and allows to 
filter, elaborate Big Data as well as to guarantee a continuous 
evolution and tuning of developed models based on machine 
learning support. It is evident that this approach provides 
great opportunities in a wide spectrum of application and this 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

paper proposes different cases that support both Defense and 
Homeland Security as well as Industrial Plants and new 
complex System of Systems Engineering. It is currently 
emerging a big need to develop such applications and to 
encapsulate them within the Decision Making Processes, due 
to these reasons the development of Educational Programs 
for young engineers and scientists as well as Continuous 
Education for Executive and Managers is crucial for 
guarantee success. Future competitiveness is expected to 
strongly rely on the use of these innovative Solutions and in 
their integration with different systems and processes. 
REFERENCES
[1]
K.M. Eisenhardt and M.J. Zbaracki, “Strategic decision making”. 
Strategic management journal, 13(S2) 1992, pp. 17-37. 
[2]
T.L. Saaty, “Decision making for leaders”. IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1985 (3), pp. 450-452. 
[3]
B. Wooldridge and B. Cowden, “Strategic decision-making in 
Business”. In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Business and 
Management, 2020. 
[4]
A.G. Bruzzone, M. Massei, A. Tremori, S. Poggi, L. Nicoletti and C. 
Baisini, “Simulation as enabling technologies for agile thinking: 
training and education aids for decision makers”. International 
Journal of Simulation and Process Modelling 2014, 9, 9(1-2), pp.113-
127. 
[5]
H. Garg, “Some methods for strategic decision‐making problems 
with immediate probabilities in Pythagorean fuzzy environment”
International Journal of Intelligent Systems, 33(4) 2018, pp. 687-712. 
[6]
V. Gerasimov, "The value of science is in the foresight: new 
challenges demand rethinking the forms and methods of carrying out 
combat operations ", Military Review, January-February 2016 
[7]
J.K. Levy, “Multiple criteria decision making and decision support 
systems for flood risk management”. Stochastic Environmental 
Research and Risk Assessment, 19(6), 2005, pp. 438-447. 
[8]
A. Özdağoğlu, “ A multi-criteria decision-making methodology on 
the selection of facility location: fuzzy ANP”. The International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 59(5-8), 787-803. 
2012 
[9]
F. Xiao, “A novel multi-criteria decision making method for 
assessing health-care waste treatment technologies based on D 
numbers”. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 71, 
2018, pp. 216-225. 
[10] A.G. Bruzzone, “MS2G as pillar for developing strategic engineering 
as a new discipline for complex problem solving”, Keynote Speech at 
the 
International 
Multidisciplinary 
Modelling 
& 
Simulation 
Multiconference, Budapest, September 2018 
[11] H.L. Mencken, “The divine afflatus”. New York Evening Mail (16 
Nov 1917) 
[12] P. Schulte, L. Alegret, I. Arenillas, J.A. Arz, P.J. Barton, P.R. Bown, 
T.J. Bralower, G.L. Christeson, P. Claeys, C.S. Cockell and G.S. 
Collins, "The Chicxulub asteroid impact and mass extinction at the 
Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary", Science 327, No 5970, 2010, pp. 
1214–1218. 
[13] J. McLeod and S. McLeod, “Simulation of the society”, Simulation, 
43(6), pp. 320-323 
[14] A.M. Turing, “Intelligent machinery”, Technical Report of National 
Physical Laboratory, UK, 1948 
[15] A.G. Bruzzone and M. Massei, “Simulation-based military training”, . 
In Guide to Simulation-Based Disciplines 2017, pp. 315-361. 
Springer, Cham. 
[16] V. Gerasimov, "The value of science is in the foresight ", jounral 
Voyenno-Promysh-lennyy Kurier online , February 26, 2013, 
(original version in Russian) 
[17] E. Cayirci, A.G. Bruzzone, F. Longo and H. Gunneriusson, “A model 
to describe hybrid conflict environments”. Proc. of 13th International 
Multidisciplanary Modeling & Simulation Multiconference (I3M 
2016), 26-28 September 2016, Larnaca, Cyprus (pp. 52-60)  
[18] P. Di Bella, “Present and futures scenarios and challenges for M&S 
terms of human behavior modeling”, Invited Speech at I3M2015, 
Bergeggi, Italy, September 2015 
[19] A.G. Bruzzone, M. Massei, R. Di Matteo and I. Vianello, “Innovative 
modelling of social networks for reproducing complex scenarios”, 
Proc. of I3M, Barcelona, Spain. September 2017. 
[20] J. Defterios and V. Cavaliere, "Coordinated strikes knock out half of 
Saudi oil capacity, more than 5 million barrels a day", CNN Business, 
1000 GMT, September 15, 2019 
[21] A.G. Bruzzone, M. Massei, G.L. Maglione, K. Sinelshchikov and R. 
Di Matteo, "A strategic serious game addressing system of systems 
engineering", Proc. of MAS, Barcelona, September 2017, pp. 214-
219. 
[22] A.G. Bruzzone, M. Massei, K. Sinelshchikov, F. Longo, M. Agresta, 
L. Di Donato and C. Di Francesco, "Wearable mixed reality solutions 
for industrial plants and production lines", Proc. of the Int. 
Conference on Modeling and Applied Simulation 2019, pp. 181-185. 
[23] www.itim.unige.it/strategos 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

