A Top-Down-View on Intelligent Surveillance Systems
Yvonne Fischer∗ and J¨urgen Beyerer∗†
∗Vision and Fusion Laboratory, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
†Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and Image Exploitation (IOSB)
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: yvonne.ﬁscher@kit.edu, juergen.beyerer@iosb.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—In today’s surveillance systems, there is a need for
enhancing the situation awareness of an operator. Supporting
the situation assessment process can be done by extending
the system with a module for automatic interpretation of the
observed environment. In this article the information ﬂow
in an intelligent surveillance system is described and the
separation of the real world and the world model, which is
used for the representation of the real world in the system,
is clariﬁed. The focus of this article is on modeling situations
of interest in a human-understandable way and how to infer
them from sensor observations. For the representation in the
system, concepts of objects, scenes, relations, and situations
are introduced. Situations are modeled as nodes in a dynamic
Bayesian network, in which the evidences are based on the
content of the world model. Several methods for inferring
situations of interest are suggested. Following this approach,
even high-level situations of interest can be modeled by using
different abstraction levels. Finally, an example of a situation
of interest in the maritime domain is given.
Keywords-surveillance system; data fusion; situation aware-
ness; situation assessment; probabilistic reasoning.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the operation of complex systems that include
human decision making, the processes of acquiring and
interpreting information from the environment forms the
basis for the state of knowledge of a decision maker. This
mental state is often referred to as situation awareness [1],
whereas the processes to achieve and maintain that state is
referred to as situation assessment. In today’s surveillance
system, the situation assessment process is highly supported
through various heterogeneous sensors and appropriate sig-
nal processing methods for extracting as much information
as possible about the surveyed environment and its elements.
Using these methods is, of course, an essential capability for
every surveillance system in order to be able to observe a
designated area and to detect and track objects inside this
area. The approach of collecting as much sensor data as
possible and extracting as much information as possible from
it is termed bottom-up, or also data-driven processing.
However, this approach is not useful for the situation
awareness of an operator, because his workload in inter-
preting all this information will be too high. The chal-
lenge of intelligent surveillance systems is therefore not
only to collect as much sensor data as possible, but also
to detect and assess complex situations that evolve over
time as an automatic support to an operator’s situation
assessment process, and therefore enhancing his situation
awareness. The approach of deﬁning and presenting only
relevant information about events and activities is termed
top-down processing. However, there is a need for concepts
and methrﬁd ods supporting higher level situation awareness,
i.e., methods that are able to infer real situations from
observed elements in the environment and to project their
status in the near future.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, an
overview of related work is given. As this article follows
the top-down approach, the information ﬂow in an intelligent
surveillance system is highlighted in Section III. In Section
IV, the methods of modeling situations of interest and
inferring their existence are explained. In Section V, an
example in the maritime domain is given.
II. RELATED WORK
Working with heterogeneous sensors, the theories of
multi-sensor data fusion [2] offer a powerful technique for
supporting the situation assessment process. A lot of re-
search has been done in combining object observations com-
ing from different sensors [3], and also in the development of
real-time methods for tracking moving objects [4]. Regard-
ing data fusion in surveillance systems, the object-oriented
world model (OOWM) is an approach to represent relevant
information extracted from sensor signals, fused into a single
comprehensive, dynamic model of the monitored area. It
was developed in [5] and is a data fusion architecture based
on the JDL (Joint Directors of Laboratories) data fusion
process model [6]. Detailed description of the architecture
and an example of an indoor surveillance application has
been published in [7]. The OOWM has also been applied
for wide area maritime surveillance [8].
First ideas of modeling situations in surveillance applica-
tions have been presented in our previous work in [9]. For
the situation assessment process, probabilistic methods like
hidden Markov models can be used, see for example [10].
In [11], Markov random ﬁelds are used to model contextual
relationships and maximum a posteriori labeling is used to
infer intentions of observed elements.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

However, most of the methods used for situation assess-
ment are based on machine learning algorithms and they
result in models that humans are not able to understand.
They are also strongly dependend on training data, which
are not always available, especially not for critical situations.
The contribution of this work is the modeling approach
from a top-down perspective, which tries to model situations
from a human perspective, i.e., what an operator wants to
detect, and how to link them to methods for automatic
interpretation.
III. INFORMATION FLOW IN SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
In surveillance applications, a spatio-temporal section of
the real world, a so-called world of interest, is considered.
The general information ﬂow for intelligent surveillance
systems is visualized in Figure 1, wherein information
aggregates are represented by boxes, and processes are
represented by circles. The information ﬂow is as follows.
Inference
Sensor 
Data
Learning
Analyzing
Obser-
vation
Plan
Real World
Entities
Knowledge
Concepts
&
Methods
World Model
Representatives
Figure 1.
Information ﬂow in a surveillance system represented by
information aggregates (boxes) and processes (circles).
First of all, all elements in the real world are termed
entities. By the term entity, not only physical objects are
meant, as entities can also be non-physical elements in the
real world like relations or the name of a vessel. Thus,
entities can represent observable or unobservable elements.
Sensor systems for observing the real world can be of
extremely heterogeneous types, e.g., video cameras, infrared
cameras, radar equipment, or radio-frequency identiﬁcation
(RFID) chips. Even human beings can act like a sensor by
observing entities of the real world. Observing the world of
interest with sensors results in sensor data, for example a
radar image or a video stream. Sensor data is then analyzed
by means of knowledge and the resulting information is
transferred to the world model. Analyzing sensor data in-
cludes for example the detection and localization of moving
vessels at sea from a video stream. Knowledge contains all
information that is necessary for analyzing sensor data, for
example speciﬁc signal-processing methods and algorithms
used for the detection, localization and tracking of vessels
in video streams.
The world model is a representation of entities in the
world of interest and consists therefore of representatives.
Every representative has a corresponding entity in the real
world. The mapping between entities in the world of in-
terest and representatives in the world model is structure-
preserving and can therefore be interpreted as a homomor-
phism. Speciﬁc mappings are deﬁned by concepts and are
part of the knowledge. Concepts are for example used in
the analyzing process by deﬁning how an observed vessel
is represented in the world model. As the world of interest
is highly dynamic and changes over time, the history of
the representatives is also stored in the world model. How-
ever, as mentioned before, some entities can’t be observed
directly. Therefore an inference process is reasoning about
unobservable (and also unobserved) entities by means of
knowledge. A simple inference process is for example to
calculate an object’s velocity from the last and current
position. A more complex inference process would be to
estimate if the intention of an observed vessel is benign
or adversarial. Doing this way, the world model is always
being updated and supplemented with new information by
predeﬁned inference processes.
Summing up, knowledge contains all information for
analyzing sensor data, updating the world model and sup-
plementing it with new information. Concepts are used for
the representation of real-world entities in the world model.
Characteristics of the knowledge are of course extremely de-
pendent on the application domain. Additionally, knowledge
is not static. The content of the world model can be used for
acquiring new knowledge by a learning process, for example
structure or parameter learning in graphical models.
To close the loop of the information ﬂow, the result of
an inference process could also include a plan of how to
act further in the real world. This could be an action plan
for an agent, for example to call the police, or a sensor
management plan, for example a request for more detailed
information from a special sensor.
IV. MODELING AND INFERRING SITUATIONS OF
INTEREST
Two problems are faced in this section: First, several
concepts have to be deﬁned, which means to deﬁne how the
real-world entities can be represented in the world model.
Second, the inference process has to be deﬁned, which
means to deﬁne how to reason about non-observable entities
like situations or intentions from observed entities.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Scene Z1
Object A
Properties:
…
States:
...
Object B
Properties:
…
States:
...
...
Scene Z2
...
Scene Z3
...
...
Time t
t1
t2
t3
...
Figure 2.
The concept of an object and a scene.
A. Concepts of world modeling
In this section, some basic concepts that can easily be
used for the representation of real-world entities are deﬁned.
Addressed concepts here are objects, scenes, attributive re-
lations, and situations. However, the world model can easily
be extended by deﬁning new concepts, e.g., for activities
and events.
The concept of an object is deﬁned as a physical entity of
the real world. Regarding its spatial position, an object can
be mobile, e.g., a vessel, or stationary, e.g., a land border.
An object has several attributes, which can be divided into
properties and states. Properties are time-invariant attributes,
e.g., the length or the name of a vessel. State values can
change over time and are therefore time-variant, e.g., the
position or the velocity of a vessel. As the representation
in the world model also has a memory, which means that
the past states of an object are stored, the complete history
of the observed object is always available. Furthermore,
the representation of an object in the world model does
not only include observed attributes, but also inferred ones.
For example, based on observed positions of a vessel, the
velocity can be inferred. Furthermore, attribute values can be
quantitative or qualitative. For example, the absolute position
and velocity of a vessel are quantitative attributes, and the
attribute value that a vessel is made of wood is a qualitative
one.
The concept of a scene is deﬁned as the set of all observed
and inferred object information at a point in time. A scene
can therefore be interpreted as a time-slice, consisting of
all objects and their attributes. To include the time aspect,
a sequence of scenes can be deﬁned, when the scenes are
considered at several discrete points in time. However, a
scene does not include any type of relations in an explicit
way. This means, that it is for example not explicitly mod-
eled that two vessels are close to each other. But implicitly,
of course, this relation can be inferred by the positions of
the two vessels. The concept of an object and a scene is
visualized in Figure 2.
The conﬁguration space is deﬁned by all possibly oc-
curing objects and their attributes. Thus, a scene, which is
represented in the world model, can be identiﬁed by exactly
one point in the conﬁguration space. A sequence of scenes
can be interpreted as a trajectory through the conﬁguration
space deﬁned by a series of points in time.
The concept of attributive relations is deﬁned as a state-
ment about dependencies between at least two different
attribute values of one or more objects. Similar to the
attribute values of an object, relational values can be quan-
titative, e.g., the distance of two objects, or they can be
qualitative, e.g., two objects are close to each other. Mostly,
relational values are inferred, but some can also be observed,
e.g., a measured distance by a laser. A relation can also
exist between representatives of the same object in different
scenes, e.g., the distance an object has covered between the
two scenes.
The concept of a group is deﬁned as set of object repre-
sentatives that have the same values for a speciﬁc attribute.
It is therefore a special case of an attributive relation and can
also be interpreted as an equivalence-relation on a speciﬁc
attribute value. Examples for groups are vessels that have
the same size or vessels that are all in a certain area.
The concept of a situation is deﬁned as a statement about
a subset of the conﬁguration space, which is either true or
false. A speciﬁc situation of interest exists, if its statement
was inferred to be true. Situations are therefore characterized
by qualitative attribute values and their truth is inferred
based on information in the world model. This means that
situations have a higher level of abstraction and the level of
detail included in the quantitative attribute values of objects
and relations is getting lost. The simplest situation is a
statement about qualitative attribute value of an object, e.g.,
that a vessel is made of wood. There are also situations,
which can only be inferred by observing the real world over
a period of time, e.g., the situation that a vessel is taking a
straight course.
But although situations are also characterized by informa-
tion collected over a time-period, they only exist at a special
point in time. Their existence in the next time-point has to
be veriﬁed again. However, there are a lot of dependencies
between different situations. First of all, situations can be
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Time t
t1
t2
t3
...
t4
t5
Z1
Z2
Z3
Z4
Z5
SA
1
Possible Situations A, B, C
SB
1
SC
1
SA
2
SB
2
SC
2
SA
3
SB
3
SC
3
SA
4
SB
4
SC
4
SA
5
SB
5
SC
5
...
Indirectly inferred situations
Indirectly inferred situations
Directly inferred situations
Figure 3.
A network of situations, divided into directly and indirectly inferred situations.
inferred from other situations, e.g., if a vessel is heading
in a certain direction and has a lot of peaple on board, the
inferred situation could be that the vessel is carrying refugees
on board. Furthermore, several situations can exist in parallel
or the existence of one situation can exclude the existence
of another situation. Mathematically, a situation at a time t
can be modeled as a binary random variable St, such that
St(ω) =
(
1
if ω is true,
0
if ω is false,
(1)
and ω is the statement of the situation of interest. Then,
we are interested in the probability, that ω is true, and thus
that the situation St exists at time t. We write this existence
probability as P(St = 1), or P(St) in short.
For calculating this probability, the aforementioned depen-
dencies between other situations have to be modeled. The
following two cases can be distinguished:
• Directly inferred situations: the existence probability
P(St) can be inferred directly from the information
content of a scene (or other concepts like relations or
groups)
• Indirectly inferred situations: the existence probability
P(St) depends on the existence probability of other
situations.
This also includes, that the existence probability of an
indirectly inferred situation in future can for example be
supported by the earlier existence of the situation itself,
and the existence probability of a directly inferred situation
cannot be supported over time. This concept of a network
of situations is visualized in Figure 3.
B. Inferring Situations of Interest
Due to this modeling, the network of situations can be
interpreted as a probabilistic graphical model, namely a
Dynamic Bayesian network (DBN). In a simple Bayesian
network, the basic idea is to decompose the joint probability
of various random variables into a factorized form. Random
variables are depicted as nodes and conditional probabilities
as directed edges. The joint probability can then be factor-
ized as
P(X1, . . . , Xn) =
n
Y
i=1
P(Xi|Pa(Xi)),
(2)
where Pa(Xi) is the set of parents of the node Xi. If
Pa(Xi) is an empty set, then Xi is a root node and
P(Xi|Pa(Xi)) = P(Xi) denotes its prior probability.
A DBN [4] is deﬁned as a pair (B0, 2TBN), where
• B0 deﬁnes the prior distribution P(X0) over the set
X0 of random variables, and
• 2TBN deﬁnes a Bayesian network over two time slices
with
P(Xt|Xt−1) =
n
Y
i=1
P(Xi
t|Pa(Xi
t)),
(3)
where Xi
t is a node at time slice t and Pa(Xi
t) is the
set of parent nodes, which can be in the time slice t or
in the time slice t − 1.
Note that in the deﬁnition of a 2TBN, Pa(Xi
t) is never
empty, i.e., every node in time slice t has at least one parent
node and therefore the left side of equation (2) differs from
the left side of equation (3). An example of a 2TBN with
3 nodes in each time slice is shown in Figure 4. The joint
probability distribution of a DBN can then be formulated as
P(X0:T ) = P(X0) ·
T
Y
t=1
n
Y
i=1
P(Xi
t|Pa(Xi
t)).
(4)
As we want to model a network of situations by a DBN,
the structure of the network has to fulﬁll the following
assumptions:
• Stationarity: the dependencies within a time slice t and
the dependencies between the time slices t − 1 and t
do not depend on t.
• 1st order Markov assumption: the parents of a node are
in the same time slice or in the previous time slice.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

x3
t-1
x2
t-1
x1
t-1
xt-1
x3
t
x2
t
x1
t
xt
Figure 4.
A example of a 2TBN deﬁning dependencies between two
time slices and dependencies between nodes in time slice t. Note that a
2TBN does not deﬁne the dependencies between nodes in time slice t−1.
• Temporal evolution: dependencies between two time
slices are only allowed forward in time, i.e., from past
to future.
• Time slice structure: The structure of one time slice is
a simple Bayesian network, i.e., without cycles.
For modeling the situational network, the set of situations
are divided into the set of directly inferable situations E
and the set of indirectly inferable situations S, as described
above. The state transition between two time slices satisﬁes
the Markov assumption
P(St|S0:t−1) = P(St|St−1),
(5)
and the dependencies between the directly and indirectly
inferred situations is deﬁned as
P(Et|S0:t, E0:t−1) = P(Et|St).
(6)
Due to this dependency, it is assumed that the values of the
directly inferred situations are only dependent on the values
of the indirectly inferred situations. The joint probability can
then be calculated recursively by
P(S0:T , E1:T ) = P(S0) ·
T
Y
t=1
P(St|St−1)P(Et|St).
(7)
By modeling the network of situations in this way, the
following inference calculations are possible:
• Filtering: P(St|E1:t) gives a solution to the existence
probability of a set of situations S at the current time,
• Prediction: P(St+k|E1:t) (with k > 0) gives a solution
to the existence probability of a set of situations S in
the (near) future,
• Smoothing: P(Sk|E1:t) (with 0 < k < t) gives a so-
lution to the existence probability of a set of situations
S in the past,
• Most likely explanation: argmaxS1:tP(S1:t|E1:t) gives
a solution to the most likely sequence of situations S1:t.
Due to this modeling, the existence probability of a set of
indirectly inferable situations can be calculated in a recursive
way at each point in time. A situation is represented in the
world model, if the corresponding existence probability is
larger than an instantiation-threshold. If the existence prob-
ability in the next time step is below a deletion-threshold, it
is assumed that the situation doesn’t exist any longer and its
representation is removed from the world model. This way,
it is tried to keep an up-to-date representation of the existing
situations of the real world.
V. APPLICATION SCENARIO IN THE MARITIME DOMAIN
For a representation of the world model, the OOWM-
system as described in [8] was adapted to the maritime
domain. The graphical user interface of the OOWM is
depicted in Figure 5. It shows observed vessels at the
Mediterranean Sea between the African coast and the island
of Lampedusa. Sensor observations are simulated in the
system, but they are assumed to be generated by coastal
radar systems or signals from the automatic identiﬁcation
system (AIS). In Figure 5, an observed vessel is selected
and its observed attributes can be seen on the left side of the
user interface. These are exactly the attributes that are stored
in the world model and are used for inferring situations of
interest.
Figure 5.
The OOWM system applied to the maritime domain
In the Mediterranian Sea, a situation of interest is the
detection of vessels that carry refugees on board. Based on
various statements by maritime experts, these vessels have
the following (observable) characteristics: They start from
the African coast (Tunisia or Libya), are heading towards
Lampedusa, take a direct course, and don’t send any AIS-
Signal for identiﬁcation. They are either wooden boats or
motor-boats, where the wooden boats are slower and smaller
than the motor-boats, and the motorboats often go the border,
put the refugees into the water and make an emergency call.
An example of a dynamic Bayesian network representing
the 3 situations of interest that an observed vessel is a
refugee vessel, a wooden vessel, or a motor-vessel is shown
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Figure 6. Dynamic Bayesian Network with 3 situations of interest (colored
in orange). Temporal arcs over one time slice are marked with a “1” and
colored in red.
in Figure 6. The 3 temporal arcs are pointing to the situations
of interest themselves, respectively. The resulting existence
probabilities (calculated by ﬁltering) for the root node sit-
uation (refugee vessel) over 3 time steps are visualized in
Figure 7. It can clearly be seen that due to the evidence that
has been collected over time, the existence probability of
this situation is increasing over time.
Figure 7.
Resulting existence probabilities for the situation that an
observed vessel is carrying refugees on board.
The challenges of designing the situational network are to
model the structure and to determine the parameters, i.e., the
conditional probabilities. Finally, the resulting probabilities
for different conﬁgurations have to be interpreted (e.g.,
for the speciﬁcation of the instantiation- and the deletion-
threshold), which is often not straightforward.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article the information ﬂow in an intelligent
surveillance system was highlighted and it was described
how situations of interest in surveillance applications can be
modeled by concepts. For modeling a network of situations,
the framework of dynamic Bayesian networks is suggested,
in which the values of the directly inferable nodes are based
on the content of the world model. This modeling fulﬁlls the
requirements resulting from the deﬁnition of situations and
allows the application of efﬁcient inference methods. An
example of a situation of interest in the maritime domain
was given. By extending the surveillance system with such
a module for automatic interpretation of the observed envi-
ronment it is able to support the situation assessment process
of an operator and thus enhances his situation awareness.
Future work includes an experimental evaluation of the
proposed method and an investigation on supporting the
human operator in designing a situational network without
having a detailed knowledge of the underlying method. Also
the real-time capability of the proposed method when using
a large amount of data has to be investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is partially supported by the EU-FP7-Project
WIMA2S (Wide Maritime Area Airborne Surveillance), see
http://www.wimaas.eu (last access: 11.12.2011).
REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Endsley, “Towards a theory of situation awareness in
dynamic systems,” Human Factors, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 32–64,
1995.
[2] D. L. Hall and S. A. H. McMullen, Mathematical Techniques
in Multisensor Data Fusion.
Artech House, Inc., 2004.
[3] M. Baum, I. Gheta, A. Belkin, J. Beyerer, and U. D.
Hanebeck, “Data association in a world model for au-
tonomous systems,” in Proc. of the 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intel-
ligent Systems (MFI 2010), 2010, pp. 187–192.
[4] A. Dore, M. Soto, and C. S. Regazzoni, “Bayesian tracking
for video analytics: An overview,” IEEE Signal processing
magazine, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 46–55, 2010.
[5] A. Bauer, T. Emter, H. Vagts, and J. Beyerer, “Object oriented
world model for surveillance systems,” in Future Security: 4th
Security Research Conference.
Fraunhofer Press, 2009, pp.
339–345.
[6] A. N. Steinberg, C. L. Bowman, and F. E. White, “Revisions
to the JDL data fusion model,” in Sensor Fusion: Architec-
tures, Algorithms, and Applications, Proceedings of the SPIE
Vol. 3719, 1999, pp. 430–441.
[7] J. Moßgraber, F. Reinert, and H. Vagts, “An architecture for
a task-oriented surveillance system: A service- and event-
based approach,” in Fifth International Conference on Systems
(ICONS 2010), 2010, pp. 146–151.
[8] Y. Fischer and A. Bauer, “Object-oriented sensor data fusion
for wide maritime surveillance,” in 2nd International Confer-
ence on Waterside Security,IEEE,(WSS 2010), 2010, pp. 1–6.
[9] Y. Fischer, A. Bauer, and J. Beyerer, “A conceptual framework
for automatic situation assessment,” in IEEE First Interna-
tional Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods
in Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA
2011), 2011, pp. 234–239.
[10] D. Meyer-Delius, C. Plageman, and W. Burgard, “Probabilis-
tic situation recognition for vehicular trafﬁc scenarios,” in
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 459–464.
[11] R. Glinton, J. Giampapa, and K. Sycara, “A markov random
ﬁeld model of context for high-level information fusion,” in
9th International Conference on Information Fusion, 2006,
pp. 1–8.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

