Decision Support System for Offers of Fleet Availability Services 
 
Andre Pozzetti, Ioana Bilegan, David Duvivier, 
Abdelhakim Artiba 
LAMIH UMR CNRS 8201, University of Valenciennes and 
Hainaut-Cambresis 
Valenciennes, France 
andre.pozzetti@univ-valenciennes.fr 
Barbara Matrat, Sébastien D’Arco, Sébastien Forato 
Performance Based Services, Eurocopter 
Marignane, France 
Barbara.matrat@eurocopter.com
 
 
Abstract—The growing competitiveness within the aeronautic 
industry is inspiring companies to implement and offer 
Performance-Based Services. Whilst not necessarily a new 
concept, it is relatively new to the commercial aeronautic 
industry and presents prime suppliers with difficulties in 
predicting performance, risks and associated costs when 
performing whole of life costing during a service offer bid 
competition. In this paper, we propose a research to develop a 
novel methodology for a decision support system during the 
offer of Fleet Availability Services, remaining within the scope 
of Performance Based Contracting, achieved through the use 
of modeling, simulation, and optimization. 
Keywords - Performance Services; Aeronautic; Whole Life 
Costing; Performance Based Contracting 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) increases with 
complex aeronautic systems, companies within the industry 
are undertaking various strategies to gain a competitive edge. 
This is driving aeronautic customers to focus their needs on 
performance of the acquisition and sustainability of such 
systems. Whilst performance based sub-services, such as 
Parts By the Hour (PBH), Repair By the Hour (RBH) etc., 
are well-defined and relatively well-optimized throughout 
industry and literature [1 - 4], the ability of the industry to 
optimize global services, such as Fleet Availability, are yet 
to be established, and therefore competitive advantages are 
there for those whom provide Performance-Based Services 
(PBS) ensuring fleet operability.  
Performance 
service 
methodologies, 
such 
as 
Performance-Based Contracting (PBC), or Performance-
Based Logistics (PBL), are not new concepts to numerous 
differing industries globally [5][6], however the demanding 
military and increasingly demanding civilian aerospace 
acquisition and sustainment requirements present both 
industries with a significant challenge. This is inherent in the 
design of PBC and generally results from each contract being 
different [5]. Additionally, the services, which can be 
considered as a support strategy, are completed and 
comprised of integrated discipline sectors, such as logistics, 
maintenance, and engineering support [5], [6], [7], [8]. 
Generally measured through Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) [5], [6], [9], each covering different aspects, such as 
process engineering, the maintenance of the support systems, 
and the supply chain. It is however difficult to calculate the 
impact that decisions may have whilst operating within a 
complex system, which then contributes to the uncertainty 
for operations and costs. 
The goal of this research is to develop a novel 
methodology for decision support in the offer of Fleet 
Availability Services (FAS), in the frame of Performance 
Based 
Contracting 
using 
modeling, 
simulation 
and 
optimization.  
The structure of this paper is as follows: First, we provide 
an introduction to the problem with a literature brief to both 
define, and validate the problem, and topic. The middle 
sections discuss the key objectives of the research, following 
with our proposed methodology. Finally, preliminary results 
and concluding remarks are discussed at the end of this 
paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE 
Performance Based Contracting can be considered as a 
support strategy, utilized to achieve measurable outcomes for 
a product of service. In the aerospace environment, common 
result 
areas 
involved 
are: 
Availability, 
Reliability, 
Maintainability and Supportability [5], [6], [7], [8]. 
Generally, these are interpreted as: 
• 
Availability – The availability of an aircraft at a 
point in time at a defined location. 
• 
Reliability – The measure of time between system 
failures. 
• 
Maintainability and Supportability – Engineering, 
Maintenance, Logistics and Supply Chain efficiency. 
Outcomes are comprised of integrated Key Performance 
Indicators, and are usually defined in a negotiation process 
between both parties, during both the contract tender phase 
and again throughout the contract award negotiation phase. 
For example, the Maintainability and Supportability 
outcomes, as displayed above, may be comprised of KPIs 
covering the various aspects of engineering and maintenance 
processes as well as a mixture of supply chain measures, 
such as: 
• 
Demand Satisfaction Rate 
• 
Turnaround Time on Parts Delivery 
• 
Engineering Change Requests 
• 
Design Modifications 
• 
Cannibalization, et cetera. 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

With these outcomes and KPIs, described above are well-
established and understood [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], the majority 
of literature has focus on the availability of sub-services 
rather than a fleet availability service as a complete system 
[2], [3], [4], [10]. Furthermore, little knowledge is developed 
on the various interactions within that complex system. Datta 
and Roy [10] proposed a methodology on the effect of 
customer-focused risks in cost estimates, highlighting other 
potential problems in the costing and development of 
availability type service contract. The highlighted problems 
are: 
• 
The reliability of data, 
• 
Assumptions regarding equipment failure, 
• 
Considerations of uncertainties through the system 
life-cycle, 
• 
Uncertainties of the customer’s contribution to 
performance, 
• 
Communication between the customer and supplier, 
• 
Prediction of future maintenance and the inability to 
understand the cost impact of customer risks. 
Due to the uniqueness of Performance Based Contracting 
and/or Performance Based Logistics contracts, one can 
assume that corporations are exposed to a significant amount 
of risk and potential over cost for managing, maintain and 
supporting such contracts across multiple platforms, with 
multiple customers. Consequently, a need exists to develop a 
methodology, design and implement a system for decision 
support, which may integrate the information communication 
systems environment of the supplier and customer. 
Additionally, the methodology should allow for the 
uncertainties and, in order to meet the needs for decisions in 
various scenarios, the methodology must use a multitude of 
modeling and optimization techniques. 
III. 
OBJECTIVE 
The main objective of this proposed research is to 
develop a process of decision support to achieve a 
performance goal of overall availability using modeling, 
simulation and optimization of a service delivery system in 
aeronautics. In particular, it is proposed to conduct a research 
work aimed at developing a methodology for optimizing the 
performance of services ensuring that fleets of aircrafts are 
operational. 
The preliminary step is to analyze what are the 
achievable performances of availability, given the intrinsic 
characteristics of the system and its associated support. 
Performance indicators need to be formally identified and a 
method for calculating the level of performance will be 
proposed. Next, functional architecture will be defined, 
which will provide the framework for decision support. Each 
element of the architecture will correlate with the various 
features identified as mandatory, and it is envisaged that a 
module type information system be designed:  
• 
A module allowing the collection and analysis, 
either periodic or real-time, 
• 
A module for the pre-processing of the data 
characterized by the system, 
• 
A module for the modeling phase of the defined 
problem, 
• 
A management module for optimization for 
maintenance and logistics, both strategic and 
operational, 
• 
A simulation phase will also integrate the process of 
decision 
support 
in 
the 
specific 
operating 
environment. 
The simulation will be used for non-deterministic study 
decision behavior of human operators, an essential element 
in this complex system. System architecture for decision 
support will also be developed, which is intended to be 
flexible, responsive and robust. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This research will require a multidisciplinary approach, 
comprising a variety of methodologies. Due to the evolving 
nature of a fast, highly competitive industrial environment, 
the overarching methodology employed will be considered 
as ‘learning by doing’, or ‘agile’, however more specific 
methodologies will be employed during various phases of 
this research. 
Many of the systems and processes are implemented 
across several operating entities, and are required for the 
monitoring and measurement of performance indicators, and 
therefore, constitute to an essential element in the study. The 
focus of this element is on the problem of aggregation of 
dispersed data into a central knowledge information system. 
This first step will rely on the use of the following 
methodologies: 
• 
Systems Engineering, 
• 
Data Modeling, and 
• 
Hybrid OnLine Analytical Processing (HOLAP)  
A second important step of the research is to define 
formalized models for simulation, incorporating various 
elements such as the penalties and incentives. As the 
research is conducted in partnership with Eurocopter, the 
tools utilized for any modeling, simulation, analysis and 
optimization are already pre-determined; additionally the 
methodology developed, must be compatible with existing 
technologies currently employed amongst the company. 
The third phase of work will be concerned with the 
analysis of the resulting model, so validation and feedback 
from an aeronautic perspective can be obtained. For this part, 
a 
study 
will 
be 
based 
on 
Systems 
Engineering 
methodologies, but also include comparative analysis and 
case studies with existing platforms offered at Eurocopter. 
Potential benefits of the implementation of our proposed 
methodology are suggested: 
• 
Possibility for suppliers to deliver and manage 
several types of performance services based on 
defined availability, 
• 
Possibility for both the supplier and customer to 
have a system providing traceability, monitoring and 
optimization of service delivery, and 
• 
Find the best compromise between technical 
performance as expected by the customer, and the 
commercial supply of the industrial supplier. 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

V. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Following the proposed methodology, two initial models 
were developed in one tool each, Microsoft Excel, and 
Systecon’s SIMLOX. Let us describe the Excel model as 
“Model A”, and the SIMLOX model as “Model B”. Model 
A was developed as a statistical based model, focusing on 
the breakdown of measurable time under which the aircraft 
is either considered available, or unavailable. Model B on 
the other hand, is by nature of the tool, a Discrete Event 
Simulation (DES), and focuses on the differing states the 
aircraft can be considered under each moment in time, 
which can be measured in Hours, Days, Months or Years. 
To gain an understanding of the impact of decisions 
during the development of Model A, a sensitivity analysis 
was performed on the main parameters, and added to the 
functionality of the model. Selected initial results in Figs. 1 
- 3 show the sensitivity these three input parameters have on 
model output parameter, Availability. The input data 
originates 
from 
a 
hypothetical 
emergency 
services 
operational environment for a fleet of 18 helicopters, 
covering logistics inputs (Fig. 1), unscheduled events (Fig. 
2) and additional helicopters (Fig. 3). 
 
 
Figure 1. Sensitivity of the Global Fill Rate for Repairable 
 
 
Figure 2. Sensitivity of the Time Between Unscheduled Events 
 
 
Figure 3. Sensitivity of the Availability 
 
The initial results from the current development on 
Model A demonstrate how the model can allow an expert 
user to quickly ascertain sensitivity, and therefore identify 
the key drivers for the development of Fleet Availability 
Services.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
This is a preliminary work and further development and 
analysis is required on penalty estimation and the impact 
based on the sensitivity of key parameters in the model. The 
efforts must also be replicated in Model B, however 
assumed to be more complex due to the nature of the 
SIMLOX tool. We anticipate the ability to import/export 
raw data for this step, therefore an interface and sub-tool 
must be developed for the sensitivity and impact analysis of 
Model B. 
Once these steps have been formalized, and the models 
validated with Eurocopter, the new tools and methodology 
will be tested with chosen real world case studies. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Ehrilch, 2005. “Method of Modelling and Measuring the 
Airline Spares Supply Process in line with Airworthiness 
Regulations and Aviation Standards,” Diplom Kaufmann, 
Department of Business, University of Applied Sciences, 
Hamburg. 
[2] H. Mirzahosseinian and R. Piplani. 2011. “A study of 
repairable 
parts 
inventory 
system 
operating 
under 
performance-based 
contract,” 
European 
Journal 
of 
Operational Research 214: 256-261. 
[3] M. Marseguerra and E. Zio. 2000. “Optimizing Maintenance 
and Repair Policies via a Combination of Genetic Algorithms 
and Monte Carlo Simulation,” Reliability Engineering & 
System Safety 68 (1): 69-83. 
[4] D. R. Nowicki, 2008. “Optimization Models in Support of 
Performance Based Logistics Optimization,” PhD, The 
University of Wisconin, Madison. 
[5] Aerospace System Division, 2007. “Performance Based 
Contracting Handbook - Guiding Principles and Performance 
Framework,” Defence Material Organisation, Australia. 
[6] I. Ng and N. Yip. 2009. “Identifying Risk and its Impact on 
Contracting Through a Benefit Based-Model Framework in 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Business to Business Contracting: Case of the Defence 
Industry,” In 1st CIRP Industrial Product-Service Systems 
(IPS2) Conference, Cranfield University. 
[7] R. 
F. 
Stapelberg, 
2008. 
“Handbook 
of 
Reliability, 
Availability, Maintainability and Safety in Engineering 
Design,” Springer. 
[8] M. Wetzer, G. R. Garrow, D. P. West,  P. E. Weir, and C. P.  
Newton III, (2011). U.S. Patent No. 7,895,047. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 
[9] A. Pozzetti, C. Bil, G. Clark, (2013). “Fuzzy Logic 
Application in Performance-Based Contracting Process,” In 
Concurrent Engineering Approaches for Sustainable Product 
Development in a Multi-Disciplinary Environment (pp. 303-
314). Springer London. 
[10] P. P. Datta, R. Roy, (2010). “Cost modelling techniques for 
availability type service support contracts: a literature review 
and empirical study,” CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science 
and Technology, 3(2), 142-157. 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

