Remote Monitoring System with Optical Fiber Sensors and
the Internet-Standard Protocol
Koki Fuchigami, Lee See Goh, and Norihiko Shinomiya
Dept. of Information Systems Science
Soka University
Tokyo, Japan
shinomi@ieee.org
Abstract—Services exploiting environmental information col-
lected by sensor networks are in great vogue. Even though
many sensor networks adopt wireless sensor devices, wireless
sensor networks hold the battery life problem of sensor devices.
Therefore, Optical Sensory Nerve Network (OSN) using the
hetero-core optical ﬁbers can simultaneously conduct sensing
and communications without batteries. In this paper, the data
collection method with the Internet-standard protocol in OSN is
proposed. Additionally, this paper describes a remote monitoring
system and development results of the remote monitoring system
in OSN.
Keywords—sensor network; optical ﬁber sensor; simple network
management protocol.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, information of human behaviors collected
by sensor networks has been widely used for various services.
The networks with capacity of sensing are utilized for security
purpose in houses and environmental monitoring in forests and
rivers [1][2].
Although wireless sensor devices are commonly used for
monitoring systems, they need to implement batteries in them-
selves or generate electricity by themselves with solar power
because each sensor is mutually independent. However, the
power generation is unstable and limited because the amount
of generation is inﬂuenced by climate conditions. As a result,
the wireless sensors are forced to save power by limiting
functions and communications among sensors. In order to
solve this problem, Optical Sensory Nerve Network (OSN)
using the hetero-core spliced ﬁber optic sensors (hetero-core
sensor) has been developed, and this wired sensor technology
simultaneously realizes sensing and communications with a
ﬁber [3].
This paper proposes a method to collect data in OSN and
acknowledge conditions of hetero-core sensors with Simple
Network Management Protocol (SNMP) [4]. Furthermore,
we also propose a remote sensor identiﬁcation system from
outside of OSN using a database and a web application. The
objective of this study is to remotely monitor the multiple
sensor conditions in OSN from outside of OSN.
In Section II, hetero-core sensors and the characteristics of
OSN are explained based on previous researches. Moreover,
this section proposes the identiﬁcation method of multiple
sensor conditions. Finally, remaining issues of the sensor
identiﬁcation method related to SNMP are described, and the
remote monitoring system for OSN that reduces complexity of
access from distant locations caused by SNMP is proposed in
Section III. In addition, an example behavior of the developed
system is described.
II. OPTICAL FIBER SENSOR NETWORK
This section explains the previous work related to OSN.
Furthermore, the multiple sensors identiﬁcation method with
SNMP is proposed.
A. Hetero-core Spliced Fiber Optic Sensor
A hetero-core spliced ﬁber optic sensor is utilized in OSN.
This sensor plays two roles of sensors and communications
links in OSN [5][6]. Figure 1 shows the structure of a hetero-
core sensor. The sensors can be simply fabricated by fusion
splicing. The sensors in our system are made of two kinds of
single mode ﬁbers whose diameters are 9 µm and 5 µm. The
portion consisting of a thinner ﬁber is called hetero-core part.
If the hetero-core part bends by pressure, a part of light is
lost as leakage in the hetero-core part. Therefore, pressure on
hetero-core part can be detected by measuring amount of the
light leakage. Besides, this attenuation of light from hetero-
core parts does not negatively affect data communications [7].
Figure 1.
Structure of hetero-core
sensor.
Figure 2.
Binary switch sensor.
In this paper, a binary switch sensor using a hetero-core
sensor is utilized, and Figure 2 shows the structure of a binary
switch sensor. When the button at the upper part is pushed,
the hetero-core part bends. As a result, the amount of light
leaking to outside increases, and ON/OFF status of the sensor
is identiﬁed by measuring the attenuation amount. Note that,
the sensor condition is deﬁned as ON status when the button
is pushed.
B. Optical Sensory Nerve Network
The OSN is a sensor network that is developed by adding
sensing function into Ethernet [3]. Hence, optical ﬁbers in
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

OSN are used for not only data communications but also
sensing. Because a hetero-core sensor detects environmental
information by using transmitted light in the optical ﬁber, pro-
vision of electric power is not needed for sensing. Thus, OSN
solves the problem related to limitation of sensor functions in
wireless sensor networks.
Figure 3.
Example of a monitoring space using OSN.
Figure 3 indicates an example of a monitoring space using
OSN. Sensors are embedded in walls, ﬂoors, doors, and
windows in order to gather state information, such as strain
of walls, pressure on ﬂoor, and open-close state of doors and
windows.
C. Sensor Identiﬁcation Method with SNMP
In order to identify sensor conditions in a sensor network,
SNMP is utilized [4]. SNMP is a protocol that is implemented
in general network devices to monitor and control network
devices. A network with SNMP consists of an SNMP manager
and some SNMP agents. An SNMP agent monitors a network
device and it sends device information to the SNMP manager.
The SNMP manager controls some SNMP agents, and it
receives device information from the SNMP agent. If an
exceptional event, such as a communication failure occurs,
the SNMP agent sends notiﬁcation messages called Trap to
the SNMP manager. The sensor identiﬁcation method utilizes
this notiﬁcation function to identify change of sensor states.
Figure 4 describes design of our system that identiﬁes sensor
conditions. This system contains three hetero-core sensors
named A, B, and C. When the condition of any sensor becomes
ON, the transmitted light in a ﬁber attenuates. The attenuation
is always monitored by a measuring instrument which contains
the SNMP agent function. In this measuring instrument, a
script program that is deﬁned to issue the Traps can be set.
Because attenuation of each sensor differs from each other,
the total amount of attenuation also diverge depending on
combinations of reacted sensors. There are seven patterns
of attenuation amount in total because this system has three
sensors. Attenuation amount is different in each combination,
so the program in the measuring instrument can link each
attenuation with different Trap numbers. When such an issued
Trap is received by the manager, the manager can identify
every sensor condition.
Figure 4.
System conﬁguration diagram.
Next, the identiﬁcation results of this method are indicat-
ed and evaluated. TABLE I shows identiﬁcation results of
sensor conditions. The SNMP manager distinguishes sensor
conditions by analysing the Trap number issued by the SNMP
agent. Figure 5 indicates attenuation patterns of seven sensor
combinations in decibel notation. The ﬁgure represents the
different amount of attenuation among seven sensor combina-
tions, which means that the sensor conditions are able to be
identiﬁed.
TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF THIS METHOD.
Time
Trap number
Description
10:00:00
21
Switch A ON
10:00:10
28
OFF
10:10:00
23
Switch A&B ON
...
...
...
Figure 5.
Attenuation of 7 patterns in dB notation.
III. REMOTE MONITORING SYSTEM
This section describes remaining issues of the sensor iden-
tiﬁcation method. Furthermore, this section proposes a remote
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

monitoring system for OSN as solution of the issues.
A. Remaining Issues and System Requirements
As mentioned in Section II-C, it is possible to detect sensor
conditions with SNMP. However, there are two remaining
issues to be solved when the size of the system expands, or
this system is utilized in outdoor [8].
The ﬁrst remaining issue is the remote monitoring function.
In the identiﬁcation method with SNMP, sensor conditions can
be monitored only within the OSN. However, it is assumed
that observers connect to the OSN from outside and hope to
remotely monitor the sensor conditions. Therefore, a method to
conﬁrm sensor information from remote locations is required.
In order to monitor the sensor network, the current identiﬁ-
cation method with SNMP requires Virtual Private Network
(VPN) connection and an SNMP manager software at a
computer of observers. Therefore, all network equipments
need to be adjusted for VPN and SNMP in order to get sensor
information. When a sensor network becomes larger in scale,
the installation of the settings into all equipments may impair
usability of OSN. Thus, a method to monitor sensor conditions
from remote locations without complex settings is needed.
The second remaining issue is management method of
sensor information. In the current identiﬁcation method, the
sensor information is stored in reaction time order as shown
in TABLE I. This stored data format is a text ﬁle, so it does
not have a search function, and the manipulation of data is
difﬁcult. Therefore, the identiﬁcation method does not suit for
long term monitoring. Hence, the data processing and search
function are required.
In order to satisfy the listed requirements in this section, we
have developed and designed the remote sensor identiﬁcation
system, which can provide sensor information on a web page
using a web application and a database.
B. System Overview
Figure 6.
Remote monitoring system.
Figure 6 indicates the developed system. As a solution
to the remote monitoring issue of Section III-A, text data
containing the Trap numbers and sensors reaction time are
sent to a server for sensor condition identiﬁcation without
using the SNMP manager software at a computer of observers.
In order to remove the SNMP manager software from a
computer of observes, a software that is called a conversion
program receives an issued Trap from an agent in OSN. The
conversion program creates text data contains a Trap number
and sensor reaction time, and it sends text data to a server.
Therefore, a manager software, which receives the SNMP
messages is not needed. Furthermore, observers do not need to
use VPN connections because sensor information is provided
to observers on a web page. In other words, if observers can
connect to the Internet, they can monitor sensor information
from anywhere.
Next, as a solution to the sensor information management
problem discussed in Section III-A, the database (DB) and
the web application are utilized in the developed system.
The use of the DB enables this system to manage sensor
information, and the search and process of data also become
easier. Moreover, the web application enables observers to deal
with the data easily and to monitor in a long term even without
any knowledge about DB.
C. System Components
This section explains software components of our remote
monitoring system.
1) Conversion program: This program receives an SNMP
message and converts an SNMP message to text data in a
sensor network. A trap number and sensor reaction time are
written in the converted text data for sensor identiﬁcation. This
program is executed at each time when it receives a Trap.
2) Database: The database in our system satisﬁes the
following conditions.
• Sensors may be installed in some different locations.
• Trap number and sensor reaction time need to be saved.
In order to store the sensor information to the DB, the DB
storage program is implemented in the server. This program
has following functions.
• The program checks additional sensor information from
the previous program execution. If there are any added
text data, the program generate a trigger ﬁle.
• The program stores sensor information to the DB. If
the storing process is completed, the program delete the
trigger ﬁle.
The trigger ﬁle plays a role to inform the new added text
data. The program will be automatically executed on the server
at any scheduled time. The minimum execution interval is one
minute.
3) Web application: In this system, the web application,
which works together with the DB provides the sensor in-
formation to observers on a web page. Therefore, observers
monitor the sensor information without any knowledge about
DB. Furthermore, if the observers can connect to the Internet,
they would monitor the sensor information from anywhere.
D. System Operation
In this section, the ﬂow of the system operation is described.
First, attenuation of transmitted light in a optical ﬁber
increases when the sensor becomes ON status. This attenuation
is detected by an SNMP agent, and the agent issues a Trap that
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

is unique number for each attenuation. After the conversion
program receives an issued Trap, it converts a Trap to text
data that indicate a Trap number and sensor reaction time.
This created text data are sent to the server and stored. At this
time, sensor information has not been stored in the DB yet.
Next, the process of the system is shifted the server. In the
server, the DB storage program is executed every minute. The
program checks the additional sensor data from the previous
execution. If there are any additional text data, the program
creates the trigger ﬁle in the server. When the storing process
is successfully ﬁnished, the program delete the trigger ﬁle. If
the storing process is failed, the trigger ﬁle is left. Therefore,
the data, which is not stored in the DB can be easily checked.
Finally, the web application and the DB work together and
provide the sensor information to observers on a web page.
E. Operating Results of the System
In this section, the operating results of the system are
indicated and evaluated. The sensor system used for this
operation is composed as same as the system architecture
shown in Figure 4. It was veriﬁed that all sensor conditions
are correctly monitored on a web page. Figure 7 indicates a
display example of the web page.
Figure 7.
Display example of the web page.
This system enables the observers to search information
more easily than checking all data with a list like TABLE I.
Furthermore, the observers can monitor the OSN from outside
of it. Results of this system operation indicates that state of
each sensor can be represented through our sites. For example,
the line 1 in the Figure 7 indicates the detection of switch
A reaction. The line 2 indicates the completion of switch
A reaction. Furthermore, the line 3 indicates the reaction of
the switch A and B; therefore, it is also possible to display
multiple sensor conditions by this system.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the SNMP is used to identify conditions
of hetero-core sensors in the proposed OSN. Moreover, we
proposed and designed remote monitoring system to solve the
identiﬁed remaining issues. In order to monitor the sensor
conditions from remote locations, we developed a system that
utilized the web application and the DB. The sensor conditions
can be remotely monitored on a web page by this developed
system.
In the future, we will consider the utilization of OSN
for outdoor and the construction of larger scale of sensor
networks. For example, in the ﬁeld of nursing, sensor network
informs behavioral patterns of elderly people to caregivers.
Moreover, in the ﬁeld of agriculture, farmers monitor their
scattered farmlands from remote locations. Therefore, this
system would play a role to provide some practical usages for
OSN. This system develops the capability of OSN because it
has a remote monitoring function and a database function of
sensor information. Moreover, we should increase the number
of sensors in the sensor network because only three sensors
are identiﬁed by the current system. This restriction is because
the script capacity of the agent is limited. Thus, a development
of an agent, which has no limit of the capacity is needed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 24700077.
REFERENCES
[1] Fujitsu, ”Smart Network Technology”, http://www.fujitsu.com/global/
services/solutions/sensor-network/, [retrieved: 12, 2013].
[2] P. Corke, T. Wark, R. Jurdak, W. Hu, P. Vaenia, and D. Moore,
”Environmental Wireless Sensor Networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE,
November. 2010, vol. 98, No. 11, pp. 1903-1917.
[3] N. Abe, N. Shinomiya, and Y. Teshigawara, ”A study on sensor
multiplicity in optical ﬁber sensor networks”, 24th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications
(AINA2010), Proc. April. 2010, pp. 519-525.
[4] SNMP version 3 (RFC 3411), http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3411, [re-
trieved: 12, 2013].
[5] K. Watanabe, K. Tajima, and Y. Kubota, ”Macrobending characteristics
of hetero-core splice ﬁber optic sensor for displacement and liquid
detection”, IEICE Trans. Electron, March. 2000, Vol. E83-C, No. 3,
pp. 309-314.
[6] M. Nishiyama, H. Sasaki, S. Nose, K. Takami, and K. Watanabe, ”Smart
pressure sensing mats with embedded hetero-core ﬁber optic nerve
sensors”, Materials and Manufacturing Processes, May. 2010, Vol. 25,
Issue 4, pp.264 -267.
[7] N. Abe, N. Shinomiya, and Y. Teshigawara, ”Optical ﬁber sensor
network integrating communication and sensing functions using hetero-
core spliced ﬁber optic sensors”, IEEE International Conference on
Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA2009), June.
2009, pp. 749-757.
[8] L. S. Goh, T. Ichimiya, K. Watanabe, and N. Shinomiya, ”A hetero-core
spliced optical ﬁber sensor network for remote monitoring of agricul-
tural environment”, 26th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Information Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA), March.
2012, pp. 418-422.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

