Providing In-house Support to Disabled People Through Interactive Television 
Begoña Fuentes-Merino, Miguel Ángel Gómez-Carballa, Carlos Rivas-Costa, José Ramón Fernández-Bernárdez, 
Rubén Míguez-Pérez, Manuel José Fernandez-Iglesias and Luis Eulogio Anido-Rifón 
Instituto AtlantTIC, EE Telecomunicación 
Universidade de Vigo 
Vigo, Spain 
{miguelgomez, carlosrivas, rmiguez, manolo, lanido}@det.uvigo.es, {bfuentes, jramon.fernandez}@uvigo.es
 
 
Abstract — We introduce a low-cost open platform to provide 
services targeted to disabled people and their families. This 
system is deployed using mainstream consumer electronics 
equipment and is specifically designed to provide services at 
home. The proposal goes beyond state-of-the-art tele-assistance 
to implement the broader concept of socio-sanitary care. Thus, 
the final objective of this platform is to assist disabled people 
having specific care necessities, but considering, at the same 
time, their social integration and their quality of life. This is 
achieved through a wide range of services that are dynamically 
adapted to users’ specific conditions and environments. The 
proposed solution significantly improves the quality of life at 
home of disabled people. 
Keywords – Teleassistance; socio-sanitary care; eHealth; 
disabled people; interactive television. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the past years, improvements in quality of life and life 
expectancy [1] and advances in Information Technologies 
have fostered the deployment of solutions targeted to 
disabled and elder people. Indeed, society urgently demands 
tele-assistance systems to address the needs of this 
population sector, to facilitate their integration and, 
eventually, to develop an efficient socio-sanitary system 
adapted to the present-day demographical and social 
situation. The term tele-assistance [2] refers to a wide range 
of systems used to provide remote care to old and/or 
physically challenged people to facilitate living in their own 
homes.  
This paper discusses the development of a service 
platform that deals with a new way of understanding tele-
assistance that also considers solutions to provide challenged 
and elder people better ways to become more integrated in 
society, to communicate with their families and caretakers, 
and to attend all their specific needs. Potential users of this 
platform are elderly and/or disabled people who are in a 
care-dependence situation. Because of the characteristics of 
its potential users, the system has been designed to be simple 
to use and adaptable to specific physiological user needs.  
A standard TV set was selected as the presentation and 
users’ interaction device. This decision was based on several 
reasons, including the existence of a TV set in most if not all 
potential users’ homes, which contributes to stress the low-
cost design principle and to limit users’ reluctance due to the 
introduction of a new technological system into their daily 
routines. Other relevant reason for this choice is that elderly 
and handicapped people are usually quite familiarized with a 
TV set’s mode of operation, which contributes to reduce 
adaptation and learning time. 
A further aspect taken into account when designing the 
system was the present-day economic scene and the average 
financial capabilities of this population sector. For this, we 
tried to keep implementation and deployment costs as 
reduced as possible.  
In order to design the most suitable architecture and 
software platform, we made an exhaustive analysis of several 
technologies. After this analysis, we selected a Linux-based 
Home Theater PC (HTPC) [3] as the main component at 
home connected to a standard TV set, complemented with an 
open-source media center solution,. This architecture was 
chosen because of its availability, its limited cost, and its 
support to the seamless integration of interactive services and 
the Internet, fulfilling all initial system requirements, namely 
low-cost, acceptance by potential users, modular structure 
enabling 
service 
personalization, 
reusability 
and 
extensibility. 
Regarding communications, the platform captures all 
relevant data from users and sends it through the Internet to a 
central server, which is also accessible through a web-based 
management interface. Since users utilize the TV set and a 
common interface to access the provided platform services, 
they are configured and deployed using a common remote 
management platform. To increase the range of users, the 
system integrates additional interfaces to facilitate service 
access to a wide range of physically challenged users.  
To sum up, the potential users of this innovative platform 
are elderly people or people with some kind of disability, 
who in most of the cases are in dependence situation. Users 
are provided with access to a wide range of socio-sanitary 
services through a low-cost, open, adaptable and extensible 
platform. 
Section II introduces the proposed system’s architecture, 
that is, the technical framework adopted when designing and 
integrating the various hardware and software components. 
Section III is devoted to discuss the selected service 
provision mechanisms and standards. Section IV discusses 
additional details on interface design, as this topic is 
instrumental to provide an adequate solution to our target 
audience. Finally, Section V collects the most relevant 
conclusions of this work. 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In the next paragraph, we discuss the components that 
configure our service platform and their interactions. Figure 
1 outlines the basic structure of the platform. 
A. User Hardware Platform 
To provide the TV set with the desired interactivity, 
several hardware devices were considered during the design 
phase. Among them, those that could be easily integrated in a 
living-room atmosphere were taken into account. Initially, 
game platforms were considered due to their low price, ease 
of use, wide acceptation, and the availability of next-
generation interfaces like Nintendo WiiMote or Sony Kinect 
[4][5]. However, they were discarded because of the 
difficulties faced when trying to integrate off-the-shelf and 
open components or specifically designed interface devices 
for physically challenged people.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  System Architecture outline 
 
Other devices considered were intelligent set-top boxes 
(STB) [6], that is, devices whose primary purpose is the 
reception and decoding of multimedia signals to be displayed 
in a TV set. Every state-of-the-art STB includes some kind 
of middleware that supports the development of hardware- 
and software- independent applications. However, this class 
of systems was also discarded due to the complexity of the 
software development tools available and their limited 
support for general-purpose software applications. 
The device eventually selected to be part of the final 
system is the Home Theater PC or HTPC, which is a 
personal computer specifically designed to be used as a 
multimedia reproduction device at home, using a standard 
TV set as the display unit. These devices can be defined as 
small full-fledged personal computers that give up 
processing power in favor of a noiseless, small and attractive 
system design. The main advantage of HTPC regarding our 
goals is their PC architecture, which supports system’s 
extensibility through widely available standard interfaces. 
Besides, any conventional operating system may be installed 
in an HTPC, which contributes to facilitate its extensibility 
through new applications, and they provide native support 
for remote control devices. When compared to other 
solutions, HTPC provide more features at the same cost, 
higher connectivity, and a more complete and accessible 
software development environment. In addition, advanced 
interfacing devices like Microsoft Kinect for Xbox or 
Nintendo WiiMote could also be supported by the final 
system taking advantage of the HTPC’s personal computer 
architecture. 
 
B. User Software Platform 
The software platform is based on an open source Linux 
distribution. This choice was made due to its usability, and 
the free, low-cost and open source orientation of the final 
system. 
Since final users will operate the HTPC using a typical 
TV remote, we also introduced a media center to enable full 
interactivity between the remote interfaces and HTPC 
content. Four media center solutions were examined to 
choose the most suitable one fulfilling the requirements of 
the final system, namely MythTV, Moovida, LinuxMCE and 
Xbox Media Center (XBMC). 
Moovida was dismissed due to its lack of maturity and 
the absence of a TV watching functionality or a back-end, 
and LinuxMCE was ruled out because of its complexity. 
Thus, the final choice was made between XBMC and 
MythTV. These are very similar systems, MythTV having 
outstanding TV functionalities and XBMC having greater 
extensibility. Taking this into account, and due to the fact 
that one of the main features of the final system should be its 
extensibility, XBMC was the final selection. XBMC 
supports extensibility through two mechanisms, namely 
plugins and scripts. Plugins are used exclusively to add new 
multimedia sources to the media center, while scripts allow 
the addition additional functionalities. Both MythTV and 
XBMC are supported by a large community of developers, 
and provide a comprehensive and clearly organized 
documentation, but XBMC provides an easy to use 
programming interface for developing new services written 
in Python [7], and has an intuitive and user-friendly user 
interface. Unlike MythTV, XBMC doesn't provide any 
Internet browser or a native feature to watch TV. However, 
watching TV was easily solved thanks to a MythTV script 
that can be easily integrated in XBMC, and thus used as a 
front-end for the MythTV back-end.  
Once the software and hardware components at home 
were selected, the next step consisted on their integration to 
provide a functional system supporting interactivity with the 
final user. Interconnection of the HTPC with the display 
device, i.e., the TV set, was easily supported through high-
definition multimedia interfaces (HDMI), already integrated 
in both devices. Then, we had to select and implement the 
services that will turn this platform into a socio-sanitary 
services platform. Before going further on this topic, it is 
important to remark some relevant aspects of the platform 
itself. As mentioned above, the TV set is used as the final 
presentation and interaction device. Thus, the platform is not 
a system itself, but a module of a larger distributed system 
extending the classical TV set with a portfolio of services. 
From the hardware point of view, the platform is a modular 
system extending a TV set with additional devices required 
by the services provided (e.g., web-cams, microphones, 
movement sensors, blood pressure monitors, etc.) using 
existing communication solutions like Bluetooth adapters, 
USB ports, or infrared sensors. This modular approach is a 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

key feature of the system, and contributes to limit the final 
cost of the system, as the only peripherals needed will be off-
the-shelf components in most cases. It also enables the 
possibility of adapting the final platform to any specific 
user’s needs. This is a very important aspect taking into 
account the fact that potential users of the system range over 
a wide range of situations insofar dependence is concerned. 
Another key feature of the final system is its adaptation 
capabilities to the specific needs of potential users. 
C. Network Structure 
In order to support user interaction both with the services 
provided and the outside world, to collect and retrieve 
content, and to manage user data, a typical three-tier service 
architecture was implemented and deployed. Figure 1 above 
outlines the main components of this architecture, which are 
outlined below: 
 
• 
Business logic: It is composed of a Login Server and 
an Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol-
compliant server (XMPP server) [8]. The Login 
Server provides user authentication and system 
adaptation. Users contact the Login Server to sign in 
the system. According to users’ credentials and 
profile information, access is granted to the 
appropriate services while user interfaces are 
adapted to the specific needs of each user. Other 
actions supported by this server are new users’ 
registration or service availability assessment. The 
XMPP server works as an adaptation layer to 
provide access to the actual user-oriented services 
available at the platform, both internal and external. 
The behavior of this element depends on the type of 
service accessed, as discussed in Section III below. 
• 
Client: Users access the socio-sanitary services 
offered by the system using the hardware/software 
platform discussed above. Client equipment provides 
an adapted user interface that includes the required 
interaction devices according to each service and 
user profile (e.g., TV remotes, sensors, actuators, 
biomedical equipment, etc.). Note that the platform 
is designed for disabled or elder people that may 
present any kind of disability and typically spend a 
lot of time at home watching TV. Users may access 
any service provided to them according to their 
profile. 
The 
system 
also 
provides 
a 
Web 
management interface to administrators, that is, an 
interface enabling service and system managers to 
perform their tasks and to access to all the relevant 
information about the system. 
• 
Back-end: This is an information server that 
manages data about users and service profiles. 
Relevant data may be distributed among several 
physical servers. For example, a central server linked 
to the login and XMPP servers may collect al 
relevant information needed by these servers, and 
additional servers may host the data needed by final 
services (e.g., content server in a streaming service, 
or communications management server in a 
videoconference service). 
 
III. 
SERVICE PROVISION 
Once the main structure of the system has been 
introduced, we will discuss along the next paragraphs how 
different users get access to the different services provided, 
and how they interact with each other. Different service 
provision schemes will require different communication 
methods. This is due to the fact that each service has an 
associated server, which may present specific characteristics 
that differ from the others. In order to facilitate to the reader 
the comprehension of all the communication procedures, the 
three basic service provision methods are illustrated below.  
 
 
Figure 2.  XMPP server communication 
 
The platform was designed according to a quite simple 
but functional structure. On top of this structure all kind of 
services are inserted, including monitoring, communication, 
social 
integration, 
entertaining, 
rehabilitation, 
and 
educational services. After being developed, services may be 
added to the platform in a pretty simple way. The only 
requirements for service integration are that they have to be 
written in a Python language version supported by XBMC, 
and use libraries that are compatible with XBMC. These 
services may interact with a wide range of user devices, as 
long as they communicate through a standard protocol 
implemented in the PC platform (e.g., infrared, Bluetooth, 
USB, etc.). 
Once the user has been signed in, an Extensible 
Messaging and Presence Protocol-compliant client (XMPP 
client) is automatically launched at the XMBC. The XMPP 
client requests an XMPP specific token from the login 
server, which contains the needed user information to login 
into the corresponding XMPP server.  
The User Session Management Service (USMS) is a basic 
service that is included in every platform regardless of the 
actual user needs. This service handles authentication and 
personalization, that is, it has the responsibility of checking 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

the user's identity as well as requesting the central server 
each user’s initial configuration. This information is used, for 
example, to provide a personalized graphic user interface, or 
to identify specific interaction devices needed by specific 
users. Upon users’ logout, USMS notifies every running 
service that the current user session has ended.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  External server communication. Interactive services. 
Once the user is logged into the XMPP server, service 
providers (e.g., videoconference server, medical monitoring 
equipment) and XMPP clients in other designated users’ 
premises (e.g., friends, family members, caretakers) are 
notified.  Other examples of services that require XMPP 
server notification reporting about the user's presence are 
presence control or every communication service that relies 
on the XMPP protocol to remotely communicate with other 
users. Figure 2 above outlines this scenario. 
In case the user requires access to a third-party service 
provider (e.g., Facebook or Twitter), the system provides 
direct access to the corresponding external authentication 
facilities once initial sign-in has been completed as discussed 
above (c.f. Figure 3). Once the user has completed the access 
requirements of the external service, the corresponding 
access tokens are handled over to XBMC, and further 
communication takes place directly between XBMC and the 
external server, according to the provided Application 
Programmers’ Interfaces (e.g., Facebook API). 
In case the service accessed involves the provision of 
multimedia content (e.g., a broadcast or streaming service), 
the access tokens obtained after user authentication are 
handled over both to XBMC and to the multimedia content 
server (e.g., streaming server). Thus, when the user requests 
a multimedia content, XBMC will send the previously 
collected system token to the external server to authenticate 
itself and start the exchange of information. Then, the 
multimedia server will check the validity of the token and 
initiate multimedia content transfer. Figure 4 summarizes 
this process. 
IV. 
INTERFACE DESIGN 
Due to the profile of potential users, there were some 
relevant aspects related to interface design that were taken 
into account: 
• 
People with visual deficiencies.  Most elderly people 
have some kind of sight impairment. To overcome 
this situation, special care has been taken when 
designing the look and feel of the visual interface, 
and more specifically subtitles and other textual 
information [9]. Apart from that, eye-catching colors 
were used for active elements (e.g., clickable 
buttons) as well as easily identifiable images. 
• 
People with lack of experience in the use of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies 
(ICT). Other common characteristic of the target 
population is that they are not accustomed to deal 
with new technologies. In most of the cases the use 
of this platform means their first contact with ICT. 
To address this issue, simple buttons rather than 
complex menus with many options have been used.  
• 
People with cognitive difficulties. This platform is 
oriented to provide services both to elderly people 
and people with any kind of disability, including 
cognitive ones. Thus, it is possible that some users 
have difficulties to understand and reason about 
what is shown in the interface. Text content in 
interfaces has been carefully designed using simple 
straightforward expressions, avoiding for example 
complex or very long words. 
The presently implemented interfaces are: 
• 
A general common interface, where buttons are 
displayed following a 4x4 grid pattern, which are 
accessed using the four arrow keys of a standard TV 
remote. Apart from these four elements, OK/confirm 
and cancel/return buttons have also been included 
and mapped to the corresponding standard remote 
keys. In this interface, buttons are statically 
displayed and is the user the one that navigates using 
them.  
• 
A scanning interface, which is specifically targeted 
to people with movement disabilities that make 
precise hand/arm movements difficult or impossible. 
In this case, every action and service can be accessed 
using a single button in the remote. This is achieved 
by moving buttons that rotate around the screen, 
being only one selected button at any time.  The user 
waits for the button he or she wants to activate to 
have the focus. When this interface is operated 
through a movement-sensing device (e.g., Nintendo 
WiiMote), movements of the remote are mapped to 
instructions to move the focus of the active selection 
at the screen. 
• 
Pointing interface: This interface is used in 
combination with the two interfaces discussed 
above, and is supported by the Nintendo WiiMote. It 
takes advantage of the pointer included in the 
WiiMote, which allows the selection of elements on 
the screen just by pointing at them. 
Other options are scheduled to be implemented in the 
near future, as color-intuitive interfaces based on colored 
physical switches, eye tracking interfaces, or scanning-aided 
interfaces.  
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

V. 
DISCUSSION 
Elder and disabled people’s functional limitations often 
entail, among others, limited mobility, poverty, or inadequate 
medical treatment related to over- or under-subscription.  
The solution discussed above contributes to address this 
situation in a cost-effective way. First, it helps to overcome 
limited mobility by providing communication tools with both 
family and caretakers, and users’ social environment. 
Besides, providing tools to supervise treatment or even to 
monitor users’ health status facilitates the health control of 
this population sector. Note that the service architecture 
described above enables the integration of existing remote 
monitoring solutions or online services. 
However, there are some challenges to overcome to 
guarantee the deployment of this solution. These challenges 
are technological, organizational and social. Connected 
products and services targeted to disabled or elder people 
proliferate but, apart from basic industry communication 
standards (e.g. Internet protocols, USB, Bluetooth, etc.), 
there 
are 
not 
standard 
interconnection 
higher-level 
procedures to enable the interaction among these systems 
and products. The system described above proposes a basic 
communication model based on application-layer standards, 
but the integration of specific services or product may 
require the development of the corresponding wrapper or 
adaptation layer. 
On the other side, to guarantee service availability and a 
reasonable level of functional quality, supporting personnel 
with different profiles is needed. Part of the roles intended 
for system administrators or administrators of specific 
products and services may be provided by technical 
personnel in service providers or even the social environment 
of users, but in some cases specific personnel may be 
required (e.g. a health professional to monitor the intake of 
prescription medicines for users of a remote medication 
control system). 
Finally, the introduction of these service platforms 
should not imply the further isolation at home or at nursing 
homes of users. These solutions may be seen as convenient 
technical approaches to replace the care of humans, but its 
ultimate function is to complement existing human-based 
care solutions by contributing to minimize the drawbacks of 
this kind of care (e.g. limited availability, human errors, 
fatigue, etc.) 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We have outlined the basic structure and organization of 
a socio-sanitary service platform that uses the TV set as the 
basic 
interaction 
element. We 
have 
introduced 
its 
architecture, and discussed its basic operation. 
Tele-assistance is a very active market. In a scenario 
where new projects and products proliferate, the platform 
discussed in this paper presents relevant innovative features. 
First, it successfully integrates the traditional TV experience 
with interactive services and Internet. Besides, it is a product 
that can be classified as real low-cost requiring under 300 € 
investment per home. On the other hand, the platform has 
been designed to facilitate its market introduction, since the 
only requirements needed to operate at home are a standard 
TV set and an Internet connection. These aspects contribute 
to its acceptance by potential users. An original aspect that 
differences the developed system from other similar ones is 
its architecture. The hardware configuration has a clear 
modular structure, which favors its simple extension using a 
broad range of external devices. This structure also enables 
the system to be completely customizable and re-usable. 
Indeed, both services and interfaces are automatically 
configured according to the profile of the user accessing the 
platform. Another relevant characteristic of this platform is 
its original approach to service provision, as the solution has 
been conceived as a base system on top of which diverse 
types of services can be easily deployed. The base system 
may be extended with new services and new interfaces 
specifically designed to fulfill specific user needs. 
 
 
Figure 4.  External server communication. Multimedia. 
Apart from this, the developed platform uses open 
standards and widely available devices and software 
components. To sum up, with this system we show that it is 
possible to bring new technologies closer to people that are 
not used to them, and also to utilize new technologies to 
improve the quality of life of people that is usually 
disconnected from the rest of the society. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank the support of the Spanish 
Ministry of Science and Innovation for its partial support to 
this work under grant “Methodologies, Architectures and 
Standards 
for 
adaptive 
and 
accessible 
e-learning 
(Adapt2Learn)” (TIN2010-21735-C02-01), and Xunta de 
Galicia for its partial support through the grant “ACETIC : 
ACio en Enxeñería de Tecnoloxías da Información e as 
Comunicacións” 
included 
in 
the 
“Programa 
de 
Consolidación 
e 
Estructuración 
de 
Unidades 
de 
Investigación Competitivas do SUG 2009”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations, World Population Ageing: 1950–2050. 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Division. United Nations Publications, ST/ESA/SER.A/207, 
2001. 
[2] JM. Aguilar, J. Cantos, G. Expósito, and PJ. Gómez, “Tele-
assistance services to improve the quality of life for lederly 
patients and their relatives: the Tele-CARE approach”, in 
Journal on Information Technology in Healthcare, vol 2(2),  
pp. 109–117, 2004. 
[3] D. Spinellis, “The information furnace: consolidated home 
control”, in Personal Ubiquitous Comput. vol 7(1) pp. 53–69, 
May 2003). 
[4] C. Wingrave, B. Williamson, P. Varcholik, J. Rose, A. Miller, 
E. Charbonneau, J. Bott, and J. LaViola Jr, “The Wiimote and 
beyond: spatially convenient devices for 3D user interfaces”, 
in IEEE Computer Graphics vol 30(2), pp. 71–85, March, 
2010. 
[5] P. Lukowicz, O. Amft, D. Roggen, and J. Cheng, “On body 
sensing: 
from 
gesture-based 
input 
to 
activity-driven 
interaction”, in IEEE Computer, vol 43(10), pp. 92–96, 
October 2010. 
[6] R. Peng, HY. Yu, and P. Zhang, “Software design of high 
definition set top box based on embedded linux”, in Dianshi 
Jishu (Video Engineering), vol. 34(9), pp. 52–56. Sep 2010. 
[7] M. Ludz, Programming Python, 4th edition, Sebastopol, CA: 
O’Reilly Media Inc, 2010. 
[8] P. Saint-Andre, Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 
(XMPP): Core, RFC 6120, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
2011. 
[9] F. Karamitroglou, “A proposed set of subtitling standards in 
Europe”, in Translation Journal, vol. 2(2), pp. 1–10, 1998. 
 
 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

