An Expert System for Design-Process Automation in a CAD Environment 
 
Gerald Frank 
V-Research GmbH – Industrial Research and Development  
Technical Logistics 
Stadtstr. 33, 6850 Dornbirn, Austria 
Gerald.Frank@v-research.at 
 
 
Abstract— For enterprises operating in markets, where 
customer needs can only be fulfilled with highly individualized 
products (which in turn necessitate a high degree of variety of 
lines of products), finding ways to reduce design and 
manufacturing costs is a crucial issue. This paper presents an 
expert-system approach to help solving correspondent 
challenges. The main methodology applied is to separate the 
design process into creative and repetitive tasks: Mapping the 
design logic of repetitive tasks onto a knowledge base then 
facilitates the creation of an expert system. This system 
supports engineers by automating those portions of a design 
process, which are based on repetitive tasks. Thereby, design-
task complexity is reduced und there is a significant speedup of 
up to 90 % within construction processes. Finally, such a 
system enables engineers to focus on creative, value-creating 
tasks. 
Keywords— Expert System; Knowledge-Based Engineering; 
CAD 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Companies try to fulfill customer needs. For a 
manufacturing company, this can result in an extensive 
number of assemblies and parts, in order to cover the specific 
needs of every customer. Since this approach is very costly 
regarding development and production, enterprises aim at 
optimizing their costs while still maintaining the possibility 
of satisfying their customers. 
Liebherr-Werk Nenzing GmbH (LWN) [6] is a 
manufacturer of a wide range of products including ship-, 
offshore- and harbor mobile cranes as well as hydraulic duty 
cycle crawler cranes and lift cranes. Its mission is to fulfill 
customers’ needs. While standardization is possible in many 
of its products, there are also segments which require 
adaption of the crane to specific market demands. This 
results in a partial or complete engineering of a crane. In 
particular, the design of ascent assemblies and boom boxes 
for offshore and ship cranes (see the following section 
“Business cases”) results in substantial efforts and 
constitutes a major part of the overall engineering costs. 
As a result of this situation, LWN intended to minimize 
these costs by improving the design process in close co-
operation with the industrial research centre V-Research in 
order to analyze possibilities of optimizing the development 
process and of reducing design and production costs. 
By investigating the design process of ascent assemblies 
and boom boxes, we found that the design process is mainly 
based on repetitive tasks. Consequently, designing those 
assemblies is based on a set of invariant rules that can be 
modeled and stored. The only exception is the structural 
analysis of the assemblies. The results showed that the statics 
of ascent assemblies can be represented by rules. However, 
the statics calculations of boom boxes are more complex. To 
verify static stability of these assemblies, dedicated structural 
analysis simulation algorithms have to be integrated into the 
design process.  
Furthermore, the current building blocks of the 
assemblies were analyzed. By doing so, we pointed out that a 
high amount of part variants existed, which in turn led to 
high costs. To reduce the number of part variants, we 
proposed to develop a fixed set of standardized parts, which 
is sufficient to designing all required assemblies.  
These prerequisites enabled the standardization and 
optimization of the engineering process of nearly all ascent 
assemblies and boom boxes by automating the design 
process. The result of this approach is an expert system that 
permits more efficient design of the described assembly 
types. 
This paper starts out with a short overview of related 
work. After presenting the business cases underlying our 
approach, this paper continues with a detailed explanation of 
the concept of the developed knowledge-based engineering 
(KBE) application. Then, the developed interfaces of the 
KBE-system and the resulting software framework are 
detailed. The paper closes with a short case study, summary 
and conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The result of our research was that there are product 
configurator 
approaches, 
which 
solve 
configuration 
problems automatically. 
 In the field of Artificial Intelligence, a configuration 
problem is understood as “the generation of a structure with 
predetermined properties by means of the combination of a 
certain number of objects” [4]. Bourke expands this 
definition and describes a product configurator as “[...] 
software modules with logic capabilities to create, maintain, 
and use electronic product models that allow complete 
definition of all possible product options and variation 
combinations, with a minimum of data entries and 
maintenance” [2]. 
Sabin et al. classify product configurators according to 
their concept of configuration knowledge as rule-based, 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

model-based, 
and 
case-based 
product 
configurators. 
According 
to 
them, 
each 
approach 
represents 
the 
configuration knowledge and the instances of the product to 
be configured in a different way [9]. 
In [3] Brinkop presents a list of leading providers of 
product configurators. 
The expert-system approach presented in this paper starts 
one step before product configuration: based on user-defined 
assembly functionalities and a design knowledge-base (i.e. 
not only a configuration one), all parts are first generated and 
then assembled. Furthermore, the whole design process of a 
specific product is supported: Apart from a 3D CAD model, 
production drawings, bills of material and the production 
costs are provided as well. That is, the whole engineering 
process is automated. 
 
III. 
BUSINESS CASES 
LWN defined two assembly types, which served as 
business cases for our research: ascent assemblies and boom 
boxes. Design efforts and production costs related to these 
parts were rather high.  
On the left side of fig. 1, an offshore crane is illustrated. 
For maintenance and inspection, several strategic points on 
the crane have to be easily accessible. Therefore, an ascent 
concept has to be developed, consisting of multiple ascent 
assemblies (platforms, stairs, ladders or roundplatforms). In 
the figure, they are highlighted in red. 
On the right side of the image, a ship crane is shown. For 
this crane, the boom has to be engineered to fulfill specific 
customer requirements, consisting of lifting capacity as well 
as of working and interference area. These requirements are 
derived from the ship design of the customer and allow for 
little variation. Therefore, the boom section highlighted in 
red is designed individually for each application. This type of 
boom consists of a pivot, a middle and a head section. The 
middle section, representing the second business case, 
consists of bottom, top and side plates as well as stiffeners 
and bulkheads. Their dimensions and their quantity depend 
on the results of the structural analysis. This complex 
analysis is performed based on the customers’ requirements. 
 
IV. 
CONCEPT OF A KBE-APPLICATION 
The objective of our approach is an expert system. 
According to Steinbichler [10], an expert system is a system, 
which stores and accumulates specific knowledge of 
different areas and generates solutions in a user interface to 
given problems. Leondes [7] extends that definition by 
equating the terms “knowledge-based system” (KBS) and 
“expert system”. He clarifies that a knowledge-based 
engineering (KBE) system is a subset of a KBS. According 
to Stokes [11], knowledge-based engineering can be defined 
as “the use of advanced software techniques to capture and 
re-use product and process knowledge in an integrated way.” 
To use the KBE-approach, users’ expertise has to be 
acquired and stored. The captured knowledge is then 
permanently available. Hence, the product development can 
be regarded as a holistic process. All relevant design know-
how can be extracted and mapped onto the product model 
[4]. 
Concerning the approach of this paper, KBE is based on 
an IT application of high usability that supplies and 
processes knowledge and interacts with a CAD system. The 
result is an automatically generated solution, in accordance 
with a designer’s input. The CAD system itself is completed 
with explicitly modeled knowledge in form of a 
programmable application. This knowledge contains all 
information about a product, i.e. its structure, function and 
behavior as well as its manufacturability and quality. This is 
all the data a designer has to know and to enter into a CAD 
system. 
Based on the previously explained methodologies and 
requirements of LWN, we developed a concept for 
integrating KBE-design and structural analysis. 
The concept relies on some restrictions and approaches 
which are explained in the following subsections. 
A. Influencing Factors 
To model a design process, it is necessary to investigate 
all influencing factors. Engineering of assemblies is based on 
a variety of restrictions, namely: 
• 
industrial and internal standards 
• 
statics requirements 
• 
production costs 
• 
implicit design restrictions (e.g., assembly erection 
or maintenance aspects) and 
• 
production restrictions (e.g., disposal factors) 
For example, if designing a platform, these restrictions 
are special assembly logics or platform entries conforming to 
standards. 
B. Modelling of the Design Knowledge 
To build a KBE system, the relevant engineering 
expertise has to be acquired. Our analysis showed that 
engineering processes can be differentiated into repetitive 
and creative processes. In contrast to creative processes, 
repetitive ones consist of nearly identical tasks and are 
therefore independent of creative decisions. This condition is 
necessary for modeling them as a system of rules.  
In contrast to repetitive processes, creative ones occur 
typically only once. Because of that, modeling them as rules 
within reasonable time is economically not viable.  
One of the goals defined by LWN was that a specific 
repetitive design task should always result in the same, ideal 
solution. Because of the limited ability of a human to re-
Figure 1.  Ascent assemblies and boom box (red) 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

execute cognitive tasks identically, it is important to support 
users with a tool (i.e. a software application). 
To fulfill this goal, and to capture all relevant steps for 
designing the focused-on assemblies, we conducted 
numerous interviews with engineering experts at LWN. The 
retrieved information served as a base for analyzing the 
repetitive design processes. Most of the time spent was used 
for detecting the restrictions defined in section  IV. A.  
The obtained data were prepared to be stored as rules in 
an IT system. These rules represent directed dependencies in 
a form common for expert systems, namely “IF (condition/-
s) THEN (action/-s)”, i.e. all conditions must be known and 
must be fulfilled before a rule can be applied [4]. 
The rule set can be used for arbitrary types of assemblies. 
Rules can be changed without editing the source code. In 
addition, if a full range of rules is acquired, nearly every 
form of assembly is supported. Therefore, repetitive tasks in 
designing new or adapting existing assemblies can be 
automated. This enables engineers to focus on creative, 
value-creating activities [12]. 
C. Decision support by cost optimization 
The elaborated automation algorithm follows the 
explained system of rules. To evaluate all design alternatives, 
the resulting combinatorial programming problem is based 
on standardized manufacturing costs. These costs were 
retrieved by an analytical method which analyzes bills of 
material and task schedules [13]. 
All engineering tasks, which are not covered by this 
system (e.g., structural analysis of booms) are integrated in 
the expert system by defining an interface for data exchange 
with external applications.  
Based on the defined customer parameters, e.g. 
maximum lifting capacity as well as working and 
interference area, the external applications calculate a 
weight-optimized geometry of an assembly version. 
However, due to the nature of the boom production 
processes, a weight-optimized geometry is not necessarily 
cost-optimized. Based on the resulting structure, the 
developed algorithm uses a defined set of rules to translate 
the calculated geometry into a cost-optimized structure, 
while still adhering to the boundaries of the statical 
calculation. The final result is an assembly that is cost-
optimized and statically verified. 
This algorithm guarantees an optimal design process for 
the considered assemblies. 
 
V. 
INTERFACES OF THE KBE-APPLICATION 
The above described approaches are fundamental to the 
developed expert system.  
In the following sections, the most important components 
of the application are described. 
A. Man-machine interface 
The graphical user interface is an important component 
of the developed application. This interface is used to 
exchange data between a user and the algorithm. Our focus 
was put on minimizing user input. The goal was to allow 
users to define an assembly as efficiently as possible. 
Finally, design engineers only have to provide data which 
cannot be retrieved automatically. Furthermore, they are 
supported by interactive sketches. Inputs are immediately 
visualized (see fig. 2).  
Every irregularity as to a defined process is highlighted 
by interaction dialogs. For example, if a design engineer 
defines inconsistent data, the application alerts the user. 
In addition, a user is supported by some assisting tools. 
One of them is concerned with the combination of 
assemblies: there is a wizard that visually supports the user 
to form a valid combination of assemblies (e.g., a complete 
access solution for an entire crane) (see fig. 2).  
 
B. CAD-System Interface 
1) Component Assembly 
Once an assembly is defined by the user, and, if 
necessary, the structural data are calculated, the respective 
data are then handed over to the automated design-to-cost 
algorithm. After calculating all necessary information for 
generating a 3D CAD model, the computed data is sent to a 
CAD software in an iterative way, using the application 
programming interface (API) of the CAD system. 
  
First, each part is loaded and, if necessary, the geometry 
is adapted. Then, the parts are positioned in reference to an 
existing part to ensure that all parts refer to each other. This 
is important because as a result every manual change directly 
affects all parts. For example, if a user manually changes the 
length of a part, the positions of all dependent parts are 
adjusted automatically.  
This principle has also been applied to assembly 
combinations.  
2) Production Drawings 
To complete the design process, production drawings 
have to be generated. As a consequence, the developed 
application also generates these documents automatically.  
In order to efficiently use the space available on the 
drawing sheets, the positions of all required views are 
calculated by an algorithm based on trim optimization. To 
 
Figure 2.  Example of an interactive sketch for assembly dimensions 
and an assistant wizard for assembly-combination definitions 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

ensure a good and fast solution, the concept of trim 
optimization was simplified. Each view is reduced to a 
rectangle or a combination of it, which is put at the most 
appropriate and still available position. 
After all views have been positioned, all production-
relevant dimensions and the according measurements are 
automatically added by a generic framework. This 
framework is implemented with the API, provided by the 
CAD system. It is based on a classification of dimension 
types. Dimensions can relate to  
• 
an edge 
• 
an edge to point 
• 
a point to point or 
• 
an angle. 
For every mentioned type, a dedicated positioning 
function has been implemented. 
Finally, the bill of materials is added to the drawing. 
 
C. Structural-Analysis Software Integration 
As each individual boom box requires a separate 
structural analysis, we developed a method that is based on a 
KBE-system which interacts with a structural analysis 
system (ANSYS). 
 
1) Structural Complexity of Boom Boxes 
From a statical perspective, ascent assemblies and boom 
boxes are designed to carry load. However, construction 
principles differ significantly between the two. 
Ascent assemblies contain specific components, which 
ensure the adequacy of the design according to safety and 
overall requirements of the structure. Based on these parts, 
there is a limited set of variants with a fixed geometry. As a 
consequence of that, all statically relevant components can 
be pre-calculated by using suitable software. The resulting 
parameters, e.g., the maximum load per square millimeter or 
the maximum gap to the next structurally relevant 
component, can be pre-assigned and therefore stored in rules. 
For example, the base frame of stairs consists of stringers. 
However, the main static load is carried by cantilever arms. 
In order to guarantee the stability of each assembly version, 
depending on its dimension and based on the precalculated 
statical parameters, the number and/or dimensions of these 
parts may vary.  
In contrast to the described ascent assemblies, all 
components of a boom box are structurally relevant 
elements. 
Because 
of 
the 
market-segment 
specific 
requirements and due to LWN’s commitment to fulfill them 
(i.e. to provide arbitrary lengths and loads, according to 
customer demands as to boom boxes), their dimensions 
largely vary and cannot be limited to a standard set of parts.  
Furthermore, different load scenarios have to be 
considered when designing a boom box. Because of that, a 
structural pre-calculation of every possible dimension of the 
individual components is not possible as the boom has to be 
considered as a complete system. Therefore, the statical logic 
for boom boxes cannot be mapped to simple rules regarding 
its components. Nevertheless, an integration of the structural 
analysis into an automated process is possible and has been 
realized in the scope of this project. 
 
2) Interaction with the Structural-Analysis Application 
In [6], the author defines structural analysis as follows: 
“Structural analysis is a process to analyze a structural 
system in order to predict the responses of the real structure 
under the excitation of expected loading and external 
environment during the service life of the structure.” 
A standard structural-analysis process is shown in fig. 3. 
This process works for boom boxes at LWN in a similar 
way. In a first step, the design manager of the project 
converts the customer requirements into load cases. A load 
case mainly consists of a boom position (inclination angle) 
and a load capacity. After taking into account additional 
factors, a set of load cases is generated.  
Based on this input, a simplified model is generated and 
processed by the structural analysis software (ANSYS). In 
ANSYS, the model is analyzed with all the load cases. Based 
on multiple iterations, the defining parameters of the 
components (e.g., plate thickness) are optimized.  
 
The result is an iteratively calculated optimal structure of a 
boom box. For each section, the material dimensions, part 
quantities and positions are defined. Based on these data, the 
CAD model of the boom can be generated.  
As the existing structural analysis procedure is a very 
time-consuming, complex and effort-intense process, we 
tried to simplify and increase its efficiency. In the end, we 
automated nearly all manual activities and integrated them 
into the developed KBE-system. 
To supply the structural analysis software with all 
relevant information, we developed a standardized data 
exchange format. Now, the only manual activity consists of 
defining the load cases based on customer requirements. The 
developed algorithm then transforms these data into an 
ANSYS-suitable configuration and hands them over to the 
structural-analysis 
simulation 
application. 
Once 
the 
simulation has started, no further user interaction is 
necessary. At the end of the simulation process, the structural 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Structural analysis process 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 4.  Overview of framework 
 
engineer receives all the data for double-checking. 
For returning the results to the KBE-system, an 
additional interface format was developed.  
Finally, the calculated assembly structure is statically 
optimized. The utilization of the material is maximized and 
as a result, the weight of the total structure is minimized. 
However, as stated before, a weight-optimized structure does 
not necessarily mean that it is cost-optimized. Therefore, 
based on a set of design rules, the KBE-system translates the 
data to achieve a cost-optimal solution and generates a CAD 
model as described in subsection B above. 
By employing this approach, the development process of 
a structurally complex assembly becomes significantly faster 
and more effective. This also enables LWN to react quickly 
to changes in the requirements of a customer. 
 
VI. 
OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPED FRAMEWORK 
Fig. 4 visualizes all components of the here described 
software. For data exchange, the framework provides several 
interfaces. These are prepared for assembly-independent use. 
The brown boxes in the center of the below figure represent 
the developed algorithm. Since an in-depth explanation of all 
these modules is beyond the scope of this article, we 
dispense with details. 
In order to prove the generic character of the developed 
framework, we used it for the design of the two above 
discussed business cases (ascent assemblies and boom 
boxes) as well as for houses on stilts (i.e. an illustrative case 
for an open-house day). 
 
VII. THE EXPERT SYSTEM IN PRACTICE 
As explained in the previous section, we used our 
framework for the engineering of ascent assemblies, like 
platforms. To illustrate design and functionality of the KBE-
System, fig. 5 illustrates the process of the automated design 
of such a platform. 
 First, the user defines the geometry (e. g., length and 
width) and the functionalities (e. g., entry and fixing areas) 
of the platform to be engineered. Subsequently, all data is 
submitted to the KBE-System. Using the knowledge base 
and the part building set, the developed algorithm calculates 
all parameters to generate a 3D CAD model in a CAD 
system and establishes a connection to that system. Then, 
data is transferred bidirectionally. The result is an 
automatically generated 3D CAD model, including the 
corresponding production drawings, bill of materials and the 
resulting production costs.   
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 5. Automatic platform design process 
VIII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 
For enterprises which operate in markets where customer 
needs can only be fulfilled by way of highly individualized 
products (in turn necessitating a high variety of products, 
assemblies and parts), it is crucial to find ways of reducing 
design and manufacturing costs. This paper presented a 
KBE-approach to help solving such challenges. 
From the start, the described application was developed 
towards a generic framework. While the framework was so 
far mainly used for the business cases of ascent assemblies 
and boom boxes, it is not limited to these tasks. An 
adaptation and extension towards other assemblies and 
components is possible. 
All assemblies, the design process of which is based on a 
repetitive logic, can be generated automatically. Also, if a 
part set of all necessary parts of an assembly type exists and 
if the design know-how is modeled in a rule system, a design 
from scratch is possible.  
The main challenge is to identify these processes and 
determine as well as capture the engineering knowledge they 
represent. By way of operational use of the presented 
methodology and KBE-application in its engineering 
department, LWN gained valuable insight and further builds 
on this experience in future application areas. 
By automating the creation of new assemblies and the 
adaption of existing ones, the complexity of design processes 
is well reduced and a significant speed-up is achieved. The 
engineering of ascent assemblies of an LWN offshore crane 
used to require up to 150 hours. Employing the here 
proposed software, these efforts can be cut down to 10 to 20 
percent. 
These savings in terms of cost and time were realized 
with the presented application through the following 
features: 
• 
minimized engineering costs  
• 
integration of structural analysis 
• 
extensive reduction of the engineering period 
• 
production-suitable 
CAD 
models 
(models, 
characterized by feasible dimensions, tolerances and 
adequate material attributes for manufacturing them 
[5]) 
• 
reproducibility of all created assemblies 
• 
enabled iterative engineering 
• 
storing the expert knowledge in a rule-base. 
 
IX. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper discussed results and findings of a research 
project within the K-Project “Integrated Decision Support 
Systems for Industrial Processes (ProDSS)”, financed 
through 
the 
Austrian 
funding 
program 
COMET 
(COMpetence centers for Excellent Technologies). 
 
[1] E. S. Aziz, C. Chassapis, “Engineering with computers - A 
decision-making 
framework 
model 
for 
design 
and 
manufacturing 
of 
mechanical 
transmission 
system 
development” , Springer London, 2005. 
[2] R. Bourke, “Product Configurators: Key Enabler for Mass 
Customization – An Overview”, Midrange Enterprise, 2000. 
[3] A. 
Brinkop, 
„Marktführer 
Produktkonfiguration“, 
http://brinkop-consulting.com/guide/marktfuehrer.pdf, 2012 
[4] A. Brinkop, "Variantenkonstruktion durch Auswertung der 
Abhängigkeiten 
zwischen 
den 
Konstruktionsbauteilen", 
Dissertationen zur Künstlichen Intelligenz ed. 204, Infix St.-
Augustin, 1999. 
[5] H. Brockmeyer, A. Lucko, F. Mantwil, „Entwicklung von 
wissensbasierten 
Assistenzen 
zur 
frühzeitigen 
Produktbeein¬flussung am Beispiel des Karosseriebaus“, Die 
digitale Produktentwicklung, G. Tecklenburg, expert verlag 
Renningen, 2008, p. 107 f.. 
[6] W. Kanok-Nukulchai, “Structural Analysis” in “Civil 
engineering”, K. Horikawa, EOLSS Publishers Co Ltd 
Oxford, 2009. 
[7] C. T. Leondes, “Intelligent Knowledge-Based Systems: 
Business and Technology in the new Millenium”, Springer 
London, 2004. 
[8] Liebherr-Werk Nenzing GmbH, http://www.liebherr.com/en-
GB/35267.wfw. 
[9] D. Sabin, R. Weigel, „Product Configuration Frameworks – A 
Survey“, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 13, no. 4, 1998, pp. 
42-49. 
[10] G. Steinbichler, “Methoden und Verfahren zur Optimierung 
der Bauteilentwicklung für die Spritzgießfertigung“, Thesis 
University Erlangen-Nuremberg, 2008. 
[11] M. Stokes, “Managing Engineering Knowledge: MOKA - 
Methodology 
for 
Knowledge 
Based 
Engineering 
Applications”, ASME Press, 2001.  
Article in a conference proceedings: 
[12] H. Adickes, J. Arnoscht, A. Bong, R. Deger, S. Hieber, R. 
Krappinger, M. Lenders, P. Post, M. Rauhut, M. Rother, J. 
Schelling, G. Schuh, J. Schulz, „Lean Innovation – Auf dem 
Weg 
zur 
Systematik.“, 
Aachner 
Werkzeugmaschinen 
Kolloquium ´08 – Aachener Perspektiven,  Brecher, C., 
Klocke, F., Schmitt, R., Schuh, G., Apprimus Verlag Aachen, 
2008, pp. 494 f.. 
[13] R. 
Krappinger, 
„Optimierung 
des 
Produktentwick-
lungsprozesses durch automatisierte Konstruktion“, 2nd 
Innovation Leadership Summit, WZL RWTH Aachen, 2008 
 
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

