A Service-Oriented Monitoring System of Pressurized Air in Industrial Systems  
for Energy Awareness    
Piotr Rabeko, Andrei Lobov, Jose L. Martinez Lastra 
Department of Production Engineering 
Tampere University of Technology   
Tampere, Finland 
{piotr.rabeko, andrei.lobov, jose.lastra}@tut.fi 
 
Abstract— This paper focuses on development of an indepen-
dent system dedicated to monitoring of compressed-air sys-
tems. Main focus has been put on discovery of anomalies which 
influence energy efficiency of compressed-air systems. System 
is able to recognize anomalies in an automatic manner and 
notify the user if these are discovered. These improprieties are 
leakages, pressure drops and increased humidity in the system.  
Designed system consists of hardware device which can be 
connected to any desired point of compressed-air line and is 
responsible for data acquisition and processing. System offers 
two  Human  Machine  Interfaces.  Additionally  one  of  HMIs  
exploits Web Service technology enabling major decrease in 
communication bandwidth usage. 
 
Keywords - monitoring; compressed-air; leakage; HMI; SOA  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is estimated that around 90% of manufacturers world-
wide  use  compressed-air  systems  (CAS).  In  EU,  CAS  use  
about 10% of  produced electricity. The particular countries 
energy usage of compressed-air is around 10-15 TWh an-
nually [12]. Therefore CAS are major contributors to electric 
power consumption. Kyoto Protocol obliges industrialized 
countries to significant reduction of greenhouse gasses. Key 
policy to achieve these norms is energy efficiency. Accord-
ing to [14] only 19% of the power used by a compressor can 
be transformed to usable air energy. However compressed-
air possesses appealing advantages like: safety and simplicity 
of usage, reliability, easiness of distribution and storage 
capabilities [12]. Unfortunately many CAS lack energy effi-
ciency due to many factors. The major one is said to be the 
leakage in the system, being responsible for wasting 20-50% 
of a compressor’s output.  The cost of leaks is the cost of 
energy required to balance the volume of lost air. As can be 
seen there is a huge potential of energy saving and at the 
same time cost reduction in that particular area. However 
most of the research in the field of leak detection focuses on 
pipe networks, transporting media like petroleum, gases, 
steam or water. Whereas on the plant level there is evident 
lack of means to detect compressed-air losses in a quick, 
continuous and effective manner. Additionally due to the 
stereotype that compressed-air is cheap and harmless in 
operation, many compressed air properties are not investi-
gated enough, what may lead to malfunction or destruction 
of compressed-air powered equipment. Water condensation 
or pressure drop at particular points of CAS may prove to be 
essential to monitor in order to extend equipments life cycle 
and reduce the maintenance costs. Considering that com-
pressed-air is a second after electricity energy source in most 
of the plants, there is evident shortage of methods to closely 
monitor its parameters to boost its energy efficiency. There-
fore, proposed solution will target area of monitoring sys-
tems which use compressed-air energy. Main focus will be 
put on discovery of three improprieties: leakage, increased 
humidity and pressure abnormalities. 
II. 
LITERATURE AND TECHNOLOGY REVIEW 
During the CAS lifetime, operating energy costs may be-
come five times higher than the initial investment [13]. The 
first step of saving process is to determine where the highest 
potential for saving is. As stated in [12], [13] in order to 
improve CAS performance, following measures might result 
in large savings: reduction of leaks, improved air treatment, 
avoiding over pressurizing. As can be seen there are many 
factors that can minimize the energy loss. Study in this paper 
will target three factors which can contribute to energy sav-
ings in CAS. System monitoring leaks, pressure deviations 
and dew point temperature will be developed.  
A. Losses due to leaks, humidity and pressure changes 
 The biggest contributor to losses and the same time po-
tential saving are leaks in the system. According to [12] 
leaks represent 42% of potential of energy savings in CAS. 
That figure makes it natural step to firstly tackle with leaks, 
whenever plans to decrease energy losses in CAS are under-
taken. Based on equation presented in [3] losses due to leaks 
can be directly translated into money loss. For instance one 
leak of 6mm diameter will bring around 8000€ losses an-
nually. Usually there are more leaks, which depicts a magni-
tude of possible losses. Apart from high energy losses and 
costs, leaks may contribute to fluctuations of system pressure 
- resulting in decreased efficiency or even destruction an air-
operated equipment. Additionally the supply equipment may 
suffer due to unnecessary cycling and altered run time, re-
sulting in shorten life cycle and extra maintenance. 
Besides leaks, other functionality threatening factor is the 
humidity inside air distribution system. Depending on appli-
cation of air, there is a need of diverse dryness. Air as gener-
al consists of mixture of nitrogen, oxygen and water vapour.  
Unlike nitrogen and oxygen, water vapour concentration is 
highly variable. According to the Dalton’s law the total pres-
sure of a gas is the sum of partial pressures of separate com-
ponent gases. The maximum partial pressure of water vapour 
depends strictly on temperature. Adding more vapour will 
150
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

result in condensation of water. To determine the measure of 
how much water vapour is in the gas, dew point temperature 
is used. If the air temperature drops below the dew point 
temperature, it becomes saturated and some of water con-
denses. In CAS, changing gas pressure changes dew point 
temperature. The knowledge of dew point temperature has 
significant influence in CAS as any condensation of water 
may cause improprieties in the plant. Majority of compressed 
air distribution systems are made of steel, thus any contact 
with moisture results in corrosion, which may lead to crea-
tion of leaks. Moisture as well as rust blown with air may 
affect the air-powered equipment, making it sluggish or 
damaged. Any trace of moisture could be critical in the 
processes like: paint spraying, pharmacy, food industry caus-
ing adherence of hygroscopic products. Usually dew point is 
measured after the  drying process, however possibility of 
measuring the humidity at different locations may be benefi-
cial as it may happen that part of the distribution system is 
exposed to low outside temperatures, resulting in water con-
densation. Additionally accurate knowledge can improve 
energy efficiency of desiccant dryers which decrease the 
humidity level of compressed air. In that way savings up to 
80% can be achieved in the process of air drying [4], [9]. 
Besides the previously mentioned issues also the pressure  
Affect the efficiency of the system. Pressure drops in the 
system occur mainly due to mechanical obstructions in dis-
tribution system or due to treatment of the air – in order to 
improve its quality. Usually the system should have a drop 
much smaller than 10% of compressor’s output. Drops can 
result in performance decrease of the equipment and in-
creased energy consumption [6]. While the drops due to 
mechanical constructions can be planned at the design stage, 
drops resulting from dirty and clogged filters may increase 
unnoticed. This can translate to energy and money loss. It is 
noted that pressure drop of 2 psi may result in 1% increase of 
energy costs [11]. As an example, annual cost of drop of 0.5 
bar with compressor of 75kW performance can reach around 
1300 €. More information regarding pressure drop and elec-
tricity dependency can be found in [11]. 
B. Condition monitoring 
Main monitoring paradigm incorporated in that study is 
based on concept of condition monitoring. In industry, main-
tenance is considered to be an essential tool to provide relia-
ble functioning. Maintenance can be divided into several 
categories, based on the methodologies [15]. These ap-
proaches are: breakdown, scheduled, condition monitoring, 
predictive. Condition monitoring fills the shortcomings of 
breakdown and scheduled approaches. Condition monitoring 
is a supplementary approach filling the drawbacks of sche-
duled approach and offering constant monitoring in order to 
avoid failures. It employs collection of data about certain 
part of equipment or system in order to assess if its state or 
performance is within or likely to remain in predefined lim-
its. It mainly concerns with failures which may influence any 
kind of physical property and have evolutionary nature. That 
maintenance regime is existent in many fields ranging from 
machinery to fluid applications. According to International 
Foundation for Research in Maintenance it applies to more 
than 80% of maintenance [1]. 
C. Leak detection methodologies 
The variety of mediums distributed in pipelines makes 
the discovery of improprieties like leakage, existent in a wide 
range of fields. Most of the focus in research is usually put in 
areas where any leakage may pose a threat to life to envi-
ronment. These include big scale piping systems transporting 
petroleum or gas. In a smaller scale there are industrial sys-
tems which may use equipment powered by steam or com-
pressed air. However methodologies dealing with CAS leaks 
usually limit to simple and not always fully reliable solu-
tions. Although following methods deal with varied distri-
buted mediums, the detection principles may be applied to all 
of them in most of cases. The division of leak detection me-
thods can be found in [17]. Amongst the used methods are: 
negative pressure, acoustic, mass balance, flow or pressure 
change observation. Advantages of negative pressure are: 
useful for long distance distribution systems; offers possibili-
ty of localizing the leak as described in [8]. However that 
method requires computationally demanding processing. 
Acoustic method is usually conducted with the use of hand-
held, ultrasonic acoustic detectors [2]. Although widely used, 
it has significant drawbacks like: device needs to be in a 
close range from the piping system; checks are performed 
periodically which does give the opportunity for leak devel-
opment between periods. Widely used leak detection method 
is based on mass balance equation. Despite simple principle, 
it requires constant measurements of other parameters which 
affect the gas mass. Interesting comparison of negative pres-
sure and mass balance are shown in [8]. Flow or pressure 
change observation methods rely on principle that high 
change of flow or pressure signifies a leakage. It offers easi-
ness of implementation. Based on one point of measurement 
the assessment of flow abnormalities can be performed. 
Research work presented in [10] utilizes that concept. Dy-
namic model methods are based on fundamental understand-
ing of the underlying physics of the process. Extensive ex-
planation can be found in [16]. Although some of the pre-
sented concepts have been used for monitoring leaks in CAS, 
most of them are utilized in applications which deal in trans-
portation of fluids over long distances. That shows the need 
of a system monitoring compressed-air applications. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Sensor selection 
Discovery of leak can be performed having the know-
ledge of actual flow of air in the CAS. Therefore appropriate 
flow sensors had to be selected. It has been quite challenging 
task due to varied operational principles. Each of them has 
their pros and cons depending on the application. The first 
division results from measured value type. There are mainly 
two types: mass and volumetric flow sensors. Besides indi-
cating different units, their operating principles are different. 
Under the volumetric group, there can be found sensors 
based on differential pressure, positive displacement and 
velocity principle. The mass flow meter group differentiates 
151
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

two operating principles: Coriolis and thermal. The advan-
tage of volume flow meters is its low cost, big versatility on 
the market, applicability varied fluids. Although the volume 
flow devices are a common choice in industry, they possess 
unwanted property - temperature and pressure dependency. 
Fluctuation of these parameters results in changing gas den-
sity and viscosity. When that occurs, the previously set cali-
bration point will no longer be valid and the measurement 
will not be accurate. As the designed system is supposed to 
be applicable in varied environments, selected sensor is 
based on mass flow measurement principle. Mass flow me-
ters in contrast to volume flow meters are relatively immune 
to changes in inlet temperature and pressure – which is the 
biggest advantage. Mass flow meters based on thermal prin-
ciple are more available on the market and at cheaper cost. 
Sensor has been chosen from Festo offer. Important factors 
that influenced the selection were:  wide selection of ranges, 
price and freedom of installation. Quite often flow sensors 
have a restriction of place of installation. They had to be 
placed in laminar-flow regions, making installation demand-
ing. Festo sensors due to their construction let the flow go 
through the bypass channel that generates laminar flow, 
where the sensing element is located. Considering required 
applicability of designed system in different scenarios, sen-
sor should cover widest range possible. Festo sensors dis-
cover flow from 0.1 up to 5000 l/min. Best solution would be 
to choose one sensor that covers big range. However each of 
offered sensor covers some portion of 0-5000 l/min range. In 
order to cover widest range possible, two sensors have been 
selected: model SFAB covering range from 0.5–50 l/min and 
SFAM with range of 50-5000 l/min. Due to the big differ-
ence in sensors channels diameter, they were connected in a 
parallel connection. Series connection would result in signif-
icant obstruction of flow. However that decision resulted in 
additional signal processing. In parallel connection total flow 
is sum of two sensors outputs. Due to varied diameters there 
are differences in proportion of flow that is coming through 
sensors channels. Thus when either one of the sensors falls 
out of the range, other one needs a measurement correlation 
factor to compensate particular constant proportion of flow 
that is coming through the other channel. Otherwise, when 
both sensors cover the range, total flow is a sum of SFAB 
and SFAM sensors. Correlation factor has been found with 
help of Matlab tool – curve fitting. Quadratic equations ap-
peared to be accurate enough.  
Main objectives while choosing humidity sensor were: 
measurement range, accuracy, long-term stability, operating 
pressure and cost. In terms of precision, sensors based on 
chilled mirror principle are considered to be most accurate. 
However the cost is several times higher than sensors based 
on other principles. Therefore sensor based on capacitive 
measurement principle has been chosen. Although capacitive 
sensors cannot be compared in their performance to chilled 
mirror ones, they offer measurements accurate enough for 
industrial needs. Selected sensor, SF52 model is offered by 
Michell Instruments. It measures relative humidity. In order 
to obtain dew point temperature the values of relative humid-
ity are correlated to reference dew points confirmed with a 
NIST-traceable (National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology) chilled mirror hygrometer. The biggest advantage of 
this method is that the cost of such a sensor is several times 
lower than the one based on the chilled mirror methodology. 
The selection of pressure sensor has been mainly moti-
vated by cost and accuracy. There is very rich offer of pres-
sure sensors on the market. Decision has been taken to find 
the pressure sensor from the same vendor that flow sensors 
were obtained, i.e. Festo. Selected sensor is a SDET type and 
offers maximum range measurement up to 10 bars. 
B. Data acquisition – event driven model 
Traditional approach in industrial monitoring applica-
tions is based on the pull paradigm. This communication 
scheme is based on the periodical polling of relevant data 
from hardware I/O devices. Drawback of that approach is 
high bandwidth usage as unnecessary requests are made in a 
short time interval in order to keep high accuracy. On the 
other hand, increasing the interval to relieve the communica-
tion link load, results in increase of update latency.  Polling 
approach is thus inefficient as it may happen that observed 
data is at constant level for long period but data is polled 
anyway. Solution for decreasing the bandwidth usage could 
be using a contrasting approach - push paradigm. In that 
approach information is sent in form of event from the con-
troller to other endpoints (for instance HMI). Event can be 
defined as occurrence of a happening of interest, which could 
be change of input value. Event-driven paradigm is much 
more efficient in terms of bandwidth usage as only relevant 
data is transmitted. Additional benefit of using event model 
is that neither the event nor the subscriptions to them are 
dedicated for specific endpoints. Such a design increases the 
interoperability, making the separation of communication 
from computational part more evident. Due to that, integra-
tion of low level devices into higher level system is easier 
and no additional drivers are needed to communicate. Event-
ing functionality is part of Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA) and particularly its implementation – Web Services 
(WS). Used controller enables usage of WS through DPWS 
(Device Profile for Web Services) specification. 
C. Discovering compressed-air anomalies 
Following the main concept of condition monitoring, sys-
tem is supposed to perform constant observation and an-
nounce any abnormalities in CAS, before their magnitude 
grows to level generating major energy losses or endanger-
ing equipment or process. After reviewing common practices 
in leak detection most of them include usage of distributed 
sensors in order to perform mass balance calculation. Addi-
tionally quite many of them incorporate computationally 
demanding algorithms. Due to requirement of mobility, 
system designed for this thesis is able to give one point of 
measurement thus distributed sensor approach cannot be 
considered. All data processing is planned to be done at the 
controller level thus any computationally demanding algo-
rithms are restricted. Therefore the leakage discovery me-
thods implemented in that project will base on flow observa-
tion, relying on principle that change of flow value from 
previously obtained reference band will signify a leakage.  
152
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
Figure 1. a) Range observation and  b) process observation algorithm 
 
Same principle will be applied for detecting abnormali-
ties in pressure and humidity level. First step of monitoring 
is to collect healthy conditions of the observed system. After 
that, system will monitor any deviations from obtained data. 
First of applied approaches for monitoring is based on obser-
vation operating ranges. This approach is not process based, 
thus does not need any additional signals from observed 
system. More details related to the algorithm can be found in 
Figure 1a. The method of obtaining reference value of the 
dew point temperature has been decided to be put manually 
by the user. Motivation of that decision was fact that in order 
to discover dangerous level of humidity in CAS, there is a 
need of measurement of ambient temperature. System at 
current stage of development does not have a temperature 
sensor included, thus value of surrounding temperature is put 
by the user. If dew point temperature of compressed-air will 
approach set reference point, alarm will be set. Based on 
obtained normal operating conditions, alarms are set. System 
has two types of adjustable alarms: low and high. Algorithm 
defined for alarms is a loop constantly comparing current 
data from sensors with calculated thresholds. Each alarm 
indicates one of the anomalies. If flow alarm is triggered it 
indicates higher than usual consumption of air - which an-
nounces leakage in observed system. Any deviation from 
pressure normal working conditions notifies either about 
pressure drop - which could result in air-operated device 
malfunction - or notify about over pressurizing equipment - 
which could result in devices destruction. In case when dew 
point temperature reaches set point, alarm will inform about 
serious possibility of condensation of water in the air distri-
bution system. Second monitoring approach is process 
oriented and mainly focuses on observation of flow. In in-
dustry, many operations are repetitive due to automation of 
the processes. It could be pick and place performed by robot 
or work performed by cylinder. Taking under account repeti-
tiveness of certain operations, particular amount of air is 
consumed during such an operation. This value can be a 
ground for monitoring possible leakages in the CAS. Any 
deviation would indicate higher consumption of air during 
the process which is result of leakage. After observation is 
started from Java HMI level, system waits for trigger indicat-
ing beginning of the observed process. After that, two con-
secutive measurements of flow are done with a predefined 
Start
Send current 
values of sensors 
to Java H MI
Set  m axim um  
values to zero
   Has stop 
observation button 
been activated?
Read flow and 
pressure
If data from 
sensors > max 
value
M ax value = data 
from sensors
Yes
  
Is pressure from 
sensor < m in    
pressure
m in pressure = 
data from 
pressure sensors
Activate alarms
Stop
Send m ax observed values 
to Java HM I
Yes
No
Yes
No
M in pressure = 
data from 
pressure sensor
No
S tart
Is start cum ulative 
learning button 
pressed ?
N o
j = j+ 1
P revious_ value=0
Tim e _prev= 0
Currrent_value= 0
T im e_curr=0
Sum =0
Yes
H as observed 
process started ?
Previous_value = read data from  sensor
Tim e_prev = tim e of m easurem ent   
Yes
w ait 
Current_value = read data from  sensor
Tim e_curr = tim e of m easurem ent   
sum = sum + (0.5 x (previous _value+ current_value)*(tim e_curr - tim e_prev))
previous_value = current_value
tim e_prev = tim e_curr
H as observed 
process finished ?
N o
total_sum = total_sum + sum
Is stop cum ulative 
learning button 
pressed ?
N o
A verage consum ption = total_sum /j
S end event w ith average consum ption value
Yes
Y es
N o
a) 
b) 
153
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

delay between them. By knowing the values of flow at those 
particular instances, integration can be performed in order to 
obtain consumption value in liters. Due to controller limita-
tion, trapezoidal rule has been used to approximate definite 
integral. It is particularly accurate when integrating periodic 
functions over their periods, which is the case. Algorithm on 
which process oriented observation is based can be found in 
Figure 1b. Monitoring system is informed when the observed 
process starts and ends by means of messages send from 
controller responsible for observed process. More details on 
that operation will be presented in implementation section. 
After the average consumption value for process is calcu-
lated, observation is performed. Leakage is discovered by 
comparing the previously calculated average consumption 
with current process consumption. User similarly to normal 
operating range method specifies the thresholds of two 
alarms. Any deviation from usual consumption reaching the 
alarm zone will be notified to the user and considered as 
leakage in CAS. Additional features, helpful in monitoring 
process are total consumption information and leakage di-
ameter estimation value. Former one accumulates each, 
calculated process consumption together. Leakage diameter 
approximation is based on transformation of equation for 
volumetric flow escaping through the leaks described in [7].  
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
A. Hardware implementation 
All the components i.e. four sensors, controller, in order 
to constitute one unified, independent system, have been 
placed in a cabinet. From the user perspective such a system 
should be in a sense a “black box” with an interface to con-
nect to it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Hardware part of the system 
 
As can be seen in Figure 2 that aim has been achieved. 
System  can become part of compressed distribution line in 
an easy manner thanks to two push-in 10mm pneumatic 
connections .Thanks to its Ethernet based communication it 
can also very easily become either part of underlying com-
munication layer or be connected directly to PC to gather 
process information in a straight forward manner. 
B. Software implementation 
All  processing  of  the  data  gathered  from  the  sensors  is  
done at the controller level. Due to that and the implementa-
tion of Web Service (WS) technology, bandwidth usage can 
be reduced. S1000 (by Inicotech) controller which has been 
selected for that project offers Web browser interface, as 
well as WS capabilities. Web based access enables imple-
mentation of the logic as well as all necessary configurations 
independent of any additional software.  There were two 
stages related to programming and configuration of the con-
troller. First one included logic programming in Structured 
Text (IEC 61131-3) and is responsible for processing sensors 
data. Second one focused on configuration of the WS in 
order to properly communicate with external applications – 
in this case Java HMI. Configuration required definition of 
eight events and six input messages. Events are generated 
asynchronously, depending on the predefined rules and send 
to interested parties. Inputs are dedicated for HMI to com-
municate with controller. Each message is actually an XML 
message including specific data and appended as SOAP 
Body content when transferred to interested subscribers. 
Some events have been grouped together in order to decrease 
the bandwidth usage. For instance, alarm values and sensor 
measurement is encapsulated in one event instead of two 
separate ones. Next step included creation of a WSDL (Web 
Services Description Language) file. WSDL file is a lan-
guage providing description on how to interact with particu-
lar service. Next and final step included implementation of 
HMIs. Decision has been taken to develop two independent 
HMIs. First one would be controller based, accessed through 
Web browser. Motivation for that approach has been: firstly 
exploiting HMI creation capabilities of the controller, se-
condly allowing easy access to monitoring system through 
Web browser. Second HMI has been developed as a Java 
standalone application. Its aim was to investigate SOA ap-
proach. Moreover it enabled development of additional func-
tions which would not be possible at the controller HMI. As 
depicted in Figure 3, controller-based HMI consists of sever-
al graphical elements. There are three gauge components 
enabling live preview of current readout from sensors. Next 
to them there are alarm lights indicating two types of alarm: 
green - normal working condition and red -alarm. After spe-
cified  period of observation has elapsed, normal working 
conditions in terms of operating ranges as well as proper 
process oriented consumption of air, are calculated. User can 
see those limits in form of two tables. They represents nor-
mal condition range observation results, values obtained in 
process oriented observation. Average value depicts average 
consumption after observation stage. Current value informs 
about consumption in latest process. Total value represents 
total consumption of air start-up monitoring system. In case 
154
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

any leak is discovered its approximated size will be dis-
played in the leak parameter.  
 
 
Figure 3. Controller based HMI 
The main core of Java HMI is based on open source Java 
API for developing HMIs. However it has been highly mod-
ified in order to implement SOA and specific functions. 
Controller has already defined service thus in order to use it, 
HMI needs to be able to comply with Devices Profile for 
Web Services (DPWS). Thus the HMI has been built on top 
of Java Multi Edition DPWS Stack (ver.0.9.7) which imple-
ments the DPWS specification [5]. JMEDS enables creation 
of the client which can discover and use services available in 
the network. Application discovers specific services availa-
ble on the network on the start-up. Application offers several 
functions which are accessed through the tabs. First of all, 
two types of observation and learning normal working condi-
tions: range and process oriented approach.  
 
Figure 4. Java HMI 
Two alarm states: low and high. Two real-time visualiza-
tion of the parameters: gauge and bar chart types. Trend 
charts offering historic preview of parameters like: flow, 
pressure dew point and consumption. Parameters like aver-
age, last cycle and total consumption as well as leak diameter 
estimation. Additionally HMI offers alarm log as well as data 
recording to spreadsheets. All of information is exchanged 
by means of events. Both presented HMIs are independent. 
V. 
RESULTS 
Monitoring system has been tested at automatic manufac-
turing line. Main operation performed on one of cells, was 
loading and unloading products on the pallets by a robot, 
using suction grippers. This gave the opportunity to monitor 
transient conditions of the compressed air. 
A. Event-based communication 
System uses eight different event types. Some events are 
more frequent than the others. These are particularly events 
including real-time information. Events are generated by 
sampling two consecutive values with predefined delay. If 
the deviation at these time instances is bigger than prede-
fined threshold, event is published. During the tests it ap-
peared that changes of delay and threshold affect the amount 
of generated events quite significantly. First approach as-
sumed short sampling interval and small deviation. However 
what occurred during tests was high amount of unnecessarily 
published events increasing the load of the network. Second-
ly this approach did not work with slow, long term changes 
of parameter where deviation was not rapid. In order not to 
overload network with high event rate and at the same time 
make system sensitive for long term changes (where the 
function of change over time is not steep) additional program 
has been added which samples the sensors inputs with much 
longer time interval. Manipulation of the deviation threshold 
between two time samples in both programs highly affects 
the number of events as well as sensitivity. In case of short 
sampling program, threshold has been set to higher values – 
in this case rapid and significant changes will be discovered. 
In case of long term sampling, small deviation threshold has 
been set to ensure that less significant changes are reported 
to the HMI. Proposed approach reduces amount of events, 
increasing the bandwidth and at the same time notifies user 
of system status in a reliable manner. Table 2 presents results 
related to bandwidth.  
 
            Table 2. Bandwidth usage results 
 
Download 
Upload 
Max rate 
108.8 KB/s 
25.2KB/s 
Average 
3KB/s 
700 B/s 
One event 
20.4 KB/s 
4.6 KB/s 
B. Compressed-air anomalies discovery 
First test phase focused on how well method for obtain-
ing normal working conditions by assessment of operational 
ranges, will succeed in case of simulated anomalies. 
Primary test concentrated on discovery of the leakage in 
CAS. Leak has been simulated by installing a valve with 
4mm tubing at several different locations. Leakage discovery 
resolution is dependent on value of set thresholds for alarms 
– and especially the low alarm. Tests have shown that lea-
kage of less than 1 mm in diameter will be detected with 
threshold of 5 % deviation from obtained reference range. 
Setting the value of warning alarm less than 5% may result 
in creation of sporadic false alarms. Repeatability of detec-
tion was very high. As leaks in industrial environments are 
never completely unavoidable it may be reasonable to set 
155
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

higher alarm thresholds – when repair due to magnitude of 
leak will be profitable. In case of pressure drop discovery 
this method’s approach also proved to be successful. In case 
of tested environment, robot’s pick and place operation 
created drop of around 0.6 bars. Thus the normal range has 
been at level from 6.2-7.4 bars. After obtaining the range, 
pressure has been decreased at the cell compressed-air inlet. 
Simulated decrease has been around 0.1 bars from usual 
conditions. Setting the low alarm threshold to 2%, reported 
the loss of pressure accurately. Due to the nature of com-
pressed air, pressure drops may vary with time thus at least 
5% threshold should be set for low alarm in order to avoid 
false alarms. Both sudden and long term pressure drops were 
discovered. For instance, high deviations have been discov-
ered over a week observation in pressure level, which re-
sulted in improper functioning of one of robot grippers. 
Similar successful results have been obtained with notifica-
tion of high humidity level of the compressed-air. Due to the 
difficulty of adding extra humidity in to the compressed air 
or moving the testbed into much colder environment other 
approach have been conducted. Firstly the dew point refer-
ence value has been set when the compressed-air pressure 
was low. After that line pressure has been steadily increased 
– causing the dew point to steadily rise, according to Dal-
ton’s law. Alarms have been correctly triggered whenever 
humidity has reached alarm threshold.  
Process oriented method observed pick and place robot 
operation using suction gripper. To notify monitoring system 
where the process starts and stops, controller responsible for 
observed process sends SOAP messages. After many process 
cycles, average consumption standard deviation has been at 
level of 0.178, which proves that measurement accuracy is 
high. System detected leaks of diameter around 0.5mm. This 
approach gives more accurate results than the previously 
described method, mainly due to the fact that is based on 
accumulated consumption during period of time and not on 
direct reading of flow measurement. Previous approach 
might periodically produce false alarms for instance when 
the thresholds are inappropriately set.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Created system proved to be reliable tool in monitoring 
of compressed air anomalies. System announces deteriora-
tion before it affects functionality. Due to that, CAS is kept 
at high energy efficiency level. As the system monitors in an 
autonomous manner, supervision can be performed from 
remote location. System exhibits high accuracy, thus even 
small improprieties can be detected. Monitoring methods 
give possibility to monitor with and without knowledge of 
any process. Due to its design system is easy to connect to 
existing compressed-air and communication network – mak-
ing it independent from underlying infrastructures. SOA 
model reduces amount of transferred data. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Beebe, Condition monitoring, Elsevier , 2004. 
[2] 
B. Capehart, Encyclopedia of energy engineering and technology, 
CRC Press, 2007. 
[3] 
Energy Tips – Compressed Air, Compressed Air Tip Sheet #3, U.S. 
Department of Energy, 2004. 
[4] 
Dewpoint Measurement in Compressed Air Systems, Vaisala, 2001. 
[5] 
http://www.ws4d.org (accessed: November 2010) 
[6] 
Improving Compressed Air System Performance, a Sourcebook for 
Industry, U.S.Department of Energy, 1998. 
[7] 
D. Kaya and P. Phelan. “Energy conservation in compressed-air 
systems.” International journal of energy research, 2002, pp. 837-849. 
[8] 
J.C. Martins and P. Seleghim, “Assessment of the Performance of 
Acoustic and Mass Balance Methods for Leak Detection in Pipelines 
for Transporting Liquids.” Journal of Fluids Engineering , vol. 132, 
iss. 1, 2010 
[9] 
B. McDuffee, Increase Compressed Air Plant Efficiency, Vaisala, 
2006. 
[10] Z. Nakutis, “An approach to pneumatic cylinder on-line conditions 
monitoring.” MECHANIKA. Nr.4(72), 2008, pp. 41-47. 
[11] Pennington, Jason, and Madhukar Puniani. “It pays to give energy 
management a thought.” 2009. 
[12] P. Radgen and E. Blaustein, Compresses Air Systems in the European 
Union, LOG_X Verlag GmbH, 2001. 
[13] R. Saidur, “A review on compressed-air energy use and savings.” 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2010, pp. 1135-1153 . 
[14] H. Shanghai, “Improving Energy Efficiency of Compressed Air 
System Based on System Audit”. Berkeley Laboratory, 2008. 
[15] I. Sherrington and T. Spring “Condition monitoring as a tool to aid 
compliance with ISO 14000.” Tribology and Interface Engineering 
Series 2005, pp. 295-304. 
[16] V. Venkatasubramanian, “A review of process fault detection and 
diagnosis.” Computers and Chemical Engineering, 2002, pp. 293-346 
[17] J. Zhang, Designing a Cost Effective and Reliable Pipeline Leak 
Detection System. REL Instrumentation Limited, 1996. 
156
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

