Metamorphic Thinking in Cartesian Systemic Emergence 
Marta Franova, Yves Kodratoff 
LISN, UMR9015 du CNRS & INRIA Saclay 
 Bât. 660, Orsay, France 
e-mail: marta.franova@lri.fr, yvekod@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Cartesian Systemic Emergence (CSE) is a theory 
developed in order to formalize the process of a human 
creation relative to particular problem-solving systems. Its 
final aim is to enable to design (semi-) automated tools that 
favor this creation. The creation process considered here 
concerns the context of informally specified systems and 
working 
with 
underspecified 
notions 
in 
incomplete 
environments. The aim of this paper is to show that this non-
standard research approach is epistemically justified. In 
particular, the paper focuses on justifying inspiration-
conduciveness 
of 
the 
CSE-experiments-generation-and-
handling process relative to the invention of primitive notions 
needed in order to create the intended problem-solving system. 
Keywords— Cartesian Systemic Emergence; Symbiotic Recursive 
Pulsative Systems; Metamorphic Thinking; deductive-like 
problem-solving systems; systems design methodologies. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The design of a problem-solving system S is usually 
based on the well-known ‘divide-and-conquer’ strategy. 
Such a particular design can thus be expressed as a paradigm 
(called here P1-paradigm) represented by the paradigmatic 
formula 
∀ pb ∃ st solves(st,pb) 
(P1) 
in the following sense: Some already existing different 
tools Ti are recognized (maybe after a relevant adaptation) as 
suitable for solving a subset Pbi of the set {pb}. An adequate 
modular composition of these different tools Ti (or, rather the 
systems sti obtained from each of these tools) then 
constitutes (a subset of) the system st. 
Instead of this usual modular approach, in this paper, we 
consider a system design paradigm represented by the 
paradigmatic formula 
∃ S ∀ pb solves(S,pb). 
(P2) 
Relying on this paradigm (called here P2-paradigm), the 
intention is to build a system S that solves all problems in the 
same way. This means that such a system S is not built as a 
modular composition of independent sub-systems. An 
obvious question is: 
How to design S? 
(1) 
Cartesian Systemic Emergence (CSE) introduced in [15] 
attempts to answer this question for particular systems 
(specified in Section II.D). CSE is a generalization of 
c1. the experience acquired in an exploration of the genesis 
of ancient deductive systems [11], 
c2. the experience acquired in the design of a P2-system 
(i.e., a system that is built relying on P2-paradigm) for 
Program Synthesis of Recursive Programs Specified by 
Formal Specification in Incomplete Domains – PS for 
short [14], 
c3. the experience acquired from an original construction of 
ack [17] and a study of its computation process [16], 
c4. the experience coming from the use of Descartes’ 
method [10] for PS mentioned in c2. 
These experiences confirm that the experiments-
generation-and-handling process belongs to the important 
topics to be considered before a P2-design (i.e., before the 
design of a P2-system).  
The primary goal of CSE experiments is the invention of 
primitive notions needed in order to create the intended P2-
problem-solving system. In particular, we are concerned with 
the creation of Symbiotic Recursive Pulsative Systems 
(SRPS) intended as P2-problem-solving systems (see Section 
III.F of [18]). One of the suitable P2-design strategies for the 
experiments-generation-and-handling is called Resonance 
Thinking (RT) [18]. RT is based on a particular ‘oscillation’ 
between P2-paradigm and a simultaneous consideration of 
the formulas (P1) and (P2). We call RT-oscillation this 
process. This paper will justify that RT-oscillation is an 
inspiration-conducive one, i.e., it provides useful ideas 
concerning the parts of an intended P2-system S. The 
justification presented is ‘epistemic’ in the sense that it 
follows mainly from the active knowledge of c1. This paper, 
therefore, presents a minimal knowledge description 
necessary for building such an active knowledge. We say 
that knowledge is active when it is acquired through its 
active (re-) construction requiring the same effort as its first 
construction. We call ‘Metamorphic Thinking’ the particular 
‘epistemic justification’ constructed here. It is on-purpose 
created for and in the framework of CSE. As a by-product, 
the epistemic justification presented in this paper provides 
also an epistemic justification for CSE as a non-standard, but 
justified, scientific way to do research in the context of 
informally 
specified 
systems, 
while 
working 
with 
underspecified notions in incomplete environments. Such a 
justification is necessary as many modern computer 
scientists and experts usually lack epistemic knowledge 
related 
to 
creating 
‘from 
scratch’ 
new 
scientific 
pluridisciplinary theories.   
The paper is structured as follows. Section II contains the 
fundamental notions used in this paper. Section III presents 
Metamorphic Thinking. Section IV briefly discusses related 
work, some applications and challenges. We conclude the 
paper in Section V. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

II. 
FUNDAMENTAL NOTIONS 
Roughly speaking, the goal of CSE is to formalize 
strategic aspects of human creation of informally specified 
symbiotic deductive-like problem-solving systems. In this 
section, we recall three terms by which this goal is 
expressed, namely 
• 
informal specification,  
• 
symbiosis, and 
• 
deductive (deductive-like problem-solving) systems. 
Since, in the CSE-context, the rigorous definitions of 
these terms are highly interdependent (more precisely, they 
are symbiotic), let us give first a rough description of their 
meaning. Such imprecise descriptions might then also be 
exploited in modular contexts. 
An informal specification of a system is a description of 
this system that is somewhat vague, i.e., what it means or 
what the words in this description exactly mean may be 
unclear or even it may seem absurd or impossible to achieve. 
The symbiotic nature of a system parts means that, if even 
only one of these parts is eliminated, not only the system 
collapses but also all the other symbiotic parts collapse as 
well. Deductive-like problem-solving systems are systems 
that are defined exactly by their corresponding axiomatic 
system. We now will provide more precise descriptions of 
these notions.  
A. Informal Specification  
Let us consider the sentence: “Knife without a blade, for 
which the handle is missing.” In a usual context, we may 
agree with the claim that this sentence is absurd [9]. 
However, we can consider another context in which this 
sentence represents an informal specification of an object to 
be constructed. Indeed, a surgeon may express a desire for a 
perfect cutting tool exactly by this sentence. The absence of 
a blade expresses his desire to cut with an unbelievable (for a 
knife) precision. The absence of a handle expresses his desire 
for a guarantee that this perfect ‘knife’ is out of reach for an 
incompetent person. Considering thus the words ‘knife’, 
‘blade’ and ‘handle’ not as words with their usual ‘material’ 
meaning, but as underspecified words with the desired 
relevant ‘characteristics’ meaning, we obtain that a laser is a 
convenient solution for the surgeon’s wish. An informal 
specification thus expresses a goal that may seem 
unachievable though, in fact, it implicitly contains a strong 
intention to reach this goal as much as possible. Of course, it 
is accepted in advance that some reasonable trade-offs may 
arise in order to reach this goal.  
In the framework of CSE, an informal specification of a 
system is thus a description of this system by a sentence in 
which occur terms that are not yet exactly defined; they are 
underspecified. When considered out of a particular context, 
such a description, i.e., informal specification, may even 
seem absurd (as we have seen above for the ‘knife-without-
blade-…’ specification) or the goal specified by it may seem 
impossible to reach (as might be argued, for instance, for a 
goal expressed by P2-paradigm). The meaning of these 
terms, in which a particular given informal specification is 
expressed, will evolve during the system construction. In 
other 
words, 
depending 
on 
some 
constraints 
and 
opportunities that will arise during the construction of the 
system, the meaning of the terms used in the starting 
specification will evolve and will make a part of the solution. 
The initial ambiguity of terms occurring in a given informal 
specification is eliminated by the provided solution. The 
evolution of these terms will also bring an exact specification 
of the context to be considered. Thus, in order to work with 
an informal specification, we must agree (and be aware) that 
the definitions and the exact context (or interpretation) are 
not given from the start, as it is usual for contemporary exact 
sciences. Therefore, in order to consider research working 
with informal specifications as a justified part even of 
contemporary exact sciences, this paper presents some 
arguments that have to be taken into account. The notion of 
‘epistemic justification’ described in the next sub-section 
helps us in this task. 
B. Epistemic Justification  
As [23], p. 22, states, “justification is at issue only where 
something is untoward; there is prima facie violation of a 
norm or expectation that constrains action.”  
There are two facets of such a violation when working 
with informal specifications and underspecified contexts 
(frameworks, 
interpretations) 
in 
contemporary 
exact 
sciences.  
The first facet concerns the necessity to consider 
‘fruitful’ as well as ‘luminous’ experiments. As Bacon states 
in [2], fruitful experiences are concerned with the research 
starting from already rigorously defined ‘building blocks’ 
(definitions, 
tools, 
strategies, 
frameworks). 
However, 
luminous experiences express the fact that, in order to reach 
a goal, all the building blocks have to be created, usually 
from scratch. From a technological point of view, it means 
that fruitful experiences aim at improving on an existing 
technology 
(this 
is 
called 
‘innovation’ 
in 
modern 
vocabulary), while luminous experiences aim at inventing a 
new technology (Bacon calls this ‘progress’ – a term that 
modern science tries to forget, as can be illustrated by the 
contemporary mutilated perception of creativity denying the 
possibility of creation from scratch [8]).  
The second facet concerns the necessity to understand 
and accept a somewhat unusual kind of verbal expression 
(communication) when working with informal specifications 
and underspecified contexts. In other words, if we want to 
persuade an audience about a reasonable and realizable 
character of a goal that seems absurd or impossible to 
achieve (as it may seem for a system creation via P2-
paradigm), we need to better specify a particular 
interpretation context (or, referential context) in which this 
goal has to be understood. In other words, we need to 
dissolve the rigidity of usual expectations (relying 
exclusively on a limiting ‘logical exact reasoning’) of the 
audience that constrains and impedes upon action oriented 
towards ‘rigorous creativity’. In other words, as we have 
done for the above ‘knife-without-blade-…’ specification, 
we need to be convincingly ‘talkative’ in order to dissolve 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

such rigidity. This ‘talkative’ character is typical of the 
argumentation in which one relies on ‘recusation’ instead of 
‘refutation’. To our best knowledge, such a kind of 
argumentation took place already in Francis Bacon’s work 
[3] [1]. As stated on the fourth cover page of [3], refutation 
supposes a common ground on which the discussion starts. 
In contrast to this, recusation starts from scratch by building 
a new unusual ground in which the discussion will start and 
take place. In other words, in refutation, we are concerned 
with the same ‘measure’ (roughly speaking, a measure is 
here a system of measurement, i.e., an exact specification of 
the context and the tools to be used) and we are refuting a 
usual ‘order’ (roughly speaking, an order is here a way how 
we use these tools) by specifying some weaknesses or 
incoherencies of this order. We then introduce small 
improvements of (or in) this order or we suggest a 
completely new order in the same measure. Inversely, in 
recusation, we do not rely on an already known and agreed 
upon existing measure, but we introduce a new measure with 
a relevant order. In a standard ‘logical’ measure, there is no 
possible order which would allow us to consider some 
absurd goals as realistic goals. Therefore, the recusation here 
consists in specifying a new ‘rigorous creation’ measure in 
which these goals become realistic. Of course, we need to be 
concerned with the reliability of this new measure (see [23], 
p. 33-36). A method (or a measure) is reliable provided it is 
used in ‘normal conditions’. ‘Normal conditions’ are those 
for which the method (or measure) was designed for. This 
means that the condition of intentionality is heavily present 
[23], p. 33. It is known (see [20], for instance) that 
intentionality cannot be present in formal logical reasoning 
in other way than as the ‘intention of a formal manipulation’. 
This is the first point where our ‘recusation’ of the 
‘impossibility’ of P2-goal (i.e., of creating a system built via 
the P2-paradigm) starts. Namely, our intention is to create a 
measure (i.e., a referential rigorous context) in which 
creating P2-systems is realistic. (Our intention is not a formal 
manipulation.) It is known that when people do not share the 
same intention there is little or no possibility to reach a 
common agreement (see the first paragraph of [10]). Since 
we are in a scientific context, we have a slight advantage that 
lies in dissimulating the notion of intention by employing the 
notion of hypothesis instead. In other words, we may ask our 
audience to ‘study’ with us our hypothesis of a possibility to 
consider our P2-goal as a realistic goal. Nevertheless, there 
exists a serious problem. Namely, in this particular case, the 
‘study’ of our hypothesis is nothing but a construction of a 
referential rigorous context (i.e., a measure) in which 
creating a P2-system can be considered as a realistic goal. 
This ‘study’ requires from each one of the audience to 
employ the same effort, the same ‘tools’ and to have a strong 
‘intention’ to create a solution for this goal. As we know, 
scientists do not usually share this vision of ‘study of a 
hypothesis’. This is why, in agreement with [23] and [27], 
we call our justification ‘epistemic’ in order to express 
explicitly the requirement to rely on the same intention, the 
same tools and the same effort.  
Epistemic justification is usually concerned with truth-
conduciveness [23]. In other words, in the traditional sense, 
epistemic justification is concerned with the verdict ‘true’. 
Note that, here, we are not concerned with ‘verdicts’. We are 
concerned with the question: 
How we can create a reasonable system that solves 
all the problems in the same way. 
(2) 
We are not questioning whether this is possible. We 
simply have a strong intention to create such a system. In 
other words, we expect to have to make a few reasonable 
trade-offs in our process and we are decided to provide all 
the effort and ingeniosity necessary to create a system that 
solves all the problems in the same way. Since we are 
preoccupied here with ‘How?’ (see (2)), the verdict ‘true’ is 
of no interest during the creation process. However, in order 
to find an answer to (2), we are concerned with the 
‘inspiration-conduciveness’ of a particular experiments-
formation in the process of a particular system that solves all 
the problems in the same way. The notions of symbiosis and 
of deductive-like problem-solving systems presented just 
below will allow us to refer to this topic in Section III.  
C. Symbiosis 
In the process of a search for an answer for (2), we need 
to be aware of a particular interdependence, called here 
symbiosis, of the parts of some existing systems developed 
by humankind. By symbiosis, we understand a composition 
of several parts that is vitally separation-sensitive and, by 
vital separation-sensitivity of a composition, we mean that 
eliminating one of its parts has three possible consequences. 
It may be a complete destruction or a non-recoverable 
mutilation or uselessness of the remaining parts. This implies 
that the divide and conquer strategy, as well as analysis and 
synthesis, are inappropriate tools when creating and 
observing symbiotic systems. Symbiosis is therefore 
different from synergy, since synergy is a mutually profitable 
composition of elements that are not destroyed nor mutilated 
by separation.  
A well-known picture (available on the Internet) may be 
used for an intuitive understanding of what we mean by 
‘destruction’ in our definition of symbiosis. It is the ‘Young 
Girl-Old Woman Illusion’ (YGOWI) as given, for instance, 
in [29]. The symbiotic parts, however, do not necessarily 
need to coincide in the final symbiotic object as it is in 
YGOWI. From a systemic point of view, symbiosis of a 
system is embodied by the vitally separation-sensitive 
interdependence of all the notions and the parts of this 
system. This shows up by a ‘circular’ character of the 
definitions in the following sense: Consider two notions n1 
and n2 describing two symbiotic parts of a system S. Then, 
the definitions of these notions look schematically like 
Def(n1) = description_in_terms_of(…,n2, …) 
(3) 
and  
Def(n2) = description_in_terms_of(…,n1, …). 
(4) 
For instance, if we want to give the instructions to draw 
the YGOWI to a painter that has never seen such a kind of 
illusion, we must describe the ‘young girl’ of this illusion by 
referring also to the ‘old woman’ in the picture, and vice 
versa. We shall introduce the symbol ♦ to denote a symbiotic 
composition. Then, we shall represent symbiotic systems 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

with the help of a particular systemic representation. For 
instance, for YGOWI we have the symbiotic representation  
YGOWI = Young_Girl  ♦  Old_Woman, 
(5) 
where 
Old_Woman = Old_Woman  ♦  Young_Girl 
(6) 
and 
Young_Girl = Young_Girl  ♦  Old_Woman. 
(7) 
This concrete representation illustrates that symbiotic 
descriptions are usually considered as fallacious. 
Note that mathematical recursion is a particular case of 
circular definitions that are accepted. However, (5) illustrates 
that, in general, (3) and (4) are not an instance of recursion. 
This means, that symbiotic descriptions are not fallacious, 
they only represent a complexity for which the usual analysis 
(such as modular thinking) is inappropriate.  
A non-trivial example of a symbiotic system the parts of 
which are programs can be found in Section VI. of [18]. 
The next section presents Deductive Systems as scientific 
objects where symbiosis is present. We will show that while 
a manipulation (or use) of a particular deductive system does 
not require the awareness of the presence of symbiosis, the 
creation of a deductive system does require symbiosis.  
D. Deductive-like Problem Solving Systems 
Since deductive systems are a natural illustration of 
systems that ‘think of everything’ in the same way, or rather 
that try to capture by a compact finite formulation all true 
statements of a particular domain (thus ‘thinking of 
everything true’ in a particular unified way), explaining what 
we mean by a deductive system is important. By Deductive 
Systems (DS), we understand a particular kind of axiomatic 
systems in the sense that these systems formalize, in a 
compact finite way, the knowledge about a Real-World 
Situation (RWS) with the aim to handle this knowledge in an 
efficient uniform way. In our work, the notion of DS is 
always related to a particular RWS (i.e., an intended 
interpretation). DS are therefore different from the usual 
formal systems for abstract considerations.  
Peano’s Axiomatic Definition (PAD) of NAT and 
Euclid’s Geometry (EG) are the best-known examples of DS. 
As it can be illustrated by the evolution of PAD and EG, a 
formalization of an RWS leading to a DS consists in a 
‘selection’ of essential primitive notions and axioms 
representing the essential relationships among these notions. 
Primitive notions are the notions that are not defined 
with a help of previously defined notions. Before a full 
formalization of an RWS, the meaning of these notions is 
informally specified by a large experience in RWS which 
shows that they are useful and essential for considering 
RWS. For instance, if we consider NAT, a large experience 
shows that the primitive notions in a formalization of NAT 
are not only 0 and Suc, but NAT as well. In particular, we 
cannot (or do not know how to) provide a clear description 
of what we mean by natural numbers by referring to other 
already defined notions. Indeed, when defining NAT, we 
need to refer simultaneously to 0, Suc and NAT themselves. 
Similarly, we cannot specify what means 0, for instance, 
without referring to Suc and NAT. In other words, (3) and 
(4) adapted here for these three primitive notions have to be 
considered (as will be described by formula (8) just below). 
This illustrates that the primitive notions of a DS are, a 
priori, symbiotic.  
Thus, axioms of a DS express the statements about the 
relationships among the primitive notions. The essential 
particularity of these relationships is that, together, they 
provide a definition of all primitive notions. In other words, a 
particular primitive notion is not defined by a particular 
axiom: all axioms are symbiotically necessary in order to 
provide a clear description (and thus a definition) of the 
meaning of a particular primitive notion.  
We said above that primitive notions of a DS are not 
defined with a help of previously defined notions. However, 
all primitive notions, say p1, …, pn, are defined 
simultaneously, each depending on all the other primitive 
notions, by simultaneous considering all axioms of the 
system. Thus, (3) and (4) can be written in the form 
Def(pi) = AXIOMS(p1,…,pi, …, pn), 
(8) 
where ‘AXIOMS’ denotes all DS-axioms considered 
simultaneously. This also means that all primitive notions are 
of the same, essential, importance. Therefore, no primitive 
notion plays a secondary (or auxiliary) role. 
Note that, to the best of our knowledge, the symbiotic 
character of the primitive notions and the axioms of a DS has 
never been mentioned before in the literature. 
Since the primitive notions of PAD and EG are 
symbiotic, their axioms could not be determined via (P1). 
The axiomatic constructions of both these systems were 
determined via (P2), since in both cases the aim was to 
obtain one global system describing the respective RWS. In 
general, a DS can be represented as a result of an attempt to 
proceed with a particular P2-paradigm, namely 
∃ DS ∀ Truth covers(DS,Truth). 
(9) 
Here, ‘covers’ means that a ‘Truth’ is either an axiom of 
DS or it can be deduced from axioms of DS. 
We shall now informally describe what we mean by a 
deductive-like P2-symbiotic system. 
By a deductive-like problem-solving system we mean a 
system such that its primitive notions are specified 
informally and the essential relationships among them, 
expressed by a finite number of axioms, provide their exact 
definition. 
In our work, we consider deductive-like problem-solving 
systems S that have the property:  
S(S) = S. 
(10) 
Formula (10) is known as the Ouroboros equation [26]. 
For a human-created system S, (10) can be seen as the final 
form of a particular evolutive process, that we shall call here 
Ouroboros process, represented by 
lim
n→∞ 
Sn+1(Sn)     = S,
  
(11) 
where S0 is an initially given informal specification for S. 
In this process, S creates itself (from its own informal 
specification). This is why, we characterize a problem-
solving system that verifies the Ouroboros equation as a 
Generator of assets (usually, a solution to a problem is an 
asset) that is an asset (since S is a solution to a problem as 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

well) that self-generates (i.e., it provides a solution to its 
own creation). Another way to express this is by saying that 
such a generator of assets is a symbiotic part of its own 
creation.  
Therefore, it is important to understand that, from a 
practical point of view, to go from S0 to S1 is the most 
complex task, since this step already must  
• 
anticipate (and thus allow) the whole evolution (11), 
• 
have a solid and efficient strategy for specifying the 
primitive notions of S1 and their symbiosis expressed 
by the resulting axioms, 
• 
incarnate all methodological fundamentals related to 
the creation of P2-deductive-like problem-solving 
systems. 
In our future work, we will show that the Ouroboros 
process is a particular form of pulsation (presented in [18]).  
Metamorphic Thinking guarantees that these three 
conditions are satisfied in CSE. More precisely, CSE is 
created so that these conditions do hold. Note that (11) can 
be also seen as a process of reaching a consensus in multi-
agent systems [35]. This thus relates to the process of 
creating a pluridisciplinary fundamentals theory enabling 
symbiotic collaborations (see Section VI. of [18]) that are 
able to reach such a consensus for their aimed project. CSE 
aims 
exactly 
to 
become 
such 
a 
pluridisciplinary 
fundamentals theory. 
III. 
METAMORPHIC THINKING 
The role (and the name) of MT is best understood in the 
context of the three remaining CSE parts, namely Symbiotic 
Thinking (ST), Resonance Thinking (RT) and Pulsative 
Thinking (PT). With respect to the symbiosis of primitive 
notions and axioms of deductive systems, ST means that we 
focus on the creation of primitive notions and axioms that are 
symbiotic procedures. Resonance Thinking means that 
during such a creation we focus on experientially induced 
inspirations that are oriented towards the P2-paradigm. PT 
means that we handle incompleteness of our real-world 
perception relying on the evolving creation pulsation model 
of deductive systems. In other words, these parts express the 
three essential characteristics of building a deductive system. 
In contrast to this, MT expresses the fact that the formulation 
of CSE is heavily determined by the explicit emergence of 
CSE in the process of the creation of a particular Program 
Synthesis system [12]. In other words, the experiences in 
creating this PS-system and the ‘crystallizing’ process of the 
CSE final structure have been symbiotically intertwined.  
The information presented in this paper completes a first 
tour of an informal presentation of ST (presented in [19]), 
RT (presented in [18]) and PT (presented in [17]). The 
symbiotic structure of CSE requires such an unusual 
presentation (according to modern scientific standards).  
This paper focuses on the epistemic justification of 
relevant inspiration conduciveness of CSE experiments. This 
justification consists in taking into account, simultaneously 
• 
the 
specifically 
oriented 
presentation 
of 
fundamental notions presented above in Section II, 
• 
our previous descriptions of ST, RT and PT 
mentioned just above. 
This means that a self-containing exhaustive presentation 
of MT is out of reach of a short paper, since it requires a 
global exhaustive description of CSE. More exactly, a global 
exhaustive description of CSE is a ‘definition’ of MT. This is 
illustrated already by the YGOWI example illustrated above, 
where we have seen that, in order to define Young Girl, we 
have to consider simultaneously the whole context, i.e., (5), 
the ‘definition’ of Old Woman, i.e., (6) and the ‘definition’ 
of Young Woman, i.e., (7). More formally this is described 
above by (8). Therefore, our future work aims at  
• 
providing such a global presentation of CSE,  
• 
illustrating the advantages of CSE parts (i.e., ST, 
RT, PT and MT) in a PS context, and  
• 
presenting Ouroboros process as a particular form 
of pulsation.  
Note that an Ouroboros process has already been 
explicitly illustrated in [13] while creating the CSE-like 
method called Créativité Formelle (Formal Creativity). 
IV. 
RELATED WORK / APPLICATIONS / CHALLENGES 
Since the main particularity of CSE is focusing on 
‘creating from scratch’, there seems to be no other approach 
aiming at the same task. Moreover,  
• 
focus on epistemically justified creation instead of 
skilfull observation,  
• 
focus on P2 instead of P1,  
• 
autopoiesis, and  
• 
considering symbiosis  
are the main differences of CSE in comparison with 
several approaches such as [4] [5] [6] [7] [21] [22] [24] - 
[26] [28]. 
We have previously given more detailed descriptions of 
differences and sometimes even suggested a possible cross-
fertilization of other scientific disciplines and works with our 
approach as follows. In [18], we show how CSE and 
Michie’s Ultra-Strong Learning [34] further elaborated in the 
works like [32] [33] might be fruitfully cross-influenced. In 
[18] [19] we illustrate how some unconscious cognitive 
processes, as the so-called Conceptual Blending [30], can be 
compared to a conceptually similar, but a conscious 
particular creative process as described by CSE. We 
illustrate also how research on cognitive processes of the 
human brain might follow the Ouroboros process. In [18] we 
compare CSE with some works on General Systems Theory 
and on Multidisciplinary Design. As the need for CSE 
became evident in PS, in [31] we compare some classical 
research works in PS with our application of CSE to this 
field.  
However, we may consider CSE (through Ouroboros 
process) as an inspiration for creating ‘perfect security’ 
systems that do not break but evolve with each attack to a 
stronger version. A similarity of this idea can be seen also 
with mutations of Covid virus the main intention of which 
might be seen as ‘living eternally’.  
The main challenge of CSE is to underline the 
impossibility of replacing symbiotic collaborations by the 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

usual synergic ones. Moreover, it is necessary to underline 
the need for accepting a non-standard, but epistemically 
justified way of doing and evaluating the research in the field 
of CSE creation. A non-trivial example of consequences of 
an attempt to replace a symbiotic collaboration by a synergic 
one can be found in Section VI. of [18].  See also the note at 
the end of Section II.D above.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper provides the last missing part in a presentation 
of a whole set of all the symbiotic parts of Cartesian 
Systemic Emergence constituting the foundation of a 
particular kind of scientific creativity necessary for 
developing 
Symbiotic 
Recursive 
Pulsative 
Systems. 
Moreover, this paper implicitly provided the basic principles 
for achieving a project aiming at implementing this particular 
scientific creativity. 
CSE brings a progress to modern science at least on three 
points: 
 it justifies P2-creation of SRPS, 
 it shows that P2-creation requires its own particular 
kind of presentation, collaboration and evaluation, 
and 
 it shows the inadequate character of the present 
intellectual property law still unable to protect this 
atypical kind of long-term research [13]. 
We hope that this first informal global (even though not 
exhaustive) presentation of CSE will stimulate the scientific 
community to explore more actively the potential of CSE in 
several, possibly new and on purpose created domains, 
namely whenever dealing with security constraints in any 
kind of innovative thinking.  
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Bacon, The wisdom of Ancients (La sagesse des anciens), Vrin, 
1997.  
[2] F. Bacon, Novum Organum, P.U.F, 1986. 
[3] F. Bacon, Rrecusation of philosophical doctrines (Récusation des 
doctrines philosophiques), P.U.F, 1987. 
[4] L. von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory, George Braziller, 1969. 
[5] J. L. Blizzard and L. Klotz: A framework for sustainable whole 
systems design, Design Studies 33(5), 2012, pp. 456–479. 
[6] F. Charnley and M. Lemon: Exploring the process of whole system 
design, Design Studies 32(2), 2011, pp. 156-179. 
[7] J. A. Crowder, Multidisciplinary Systems Engineering: Architecting 
the Design Process, Springer, 2018. 
[8] M. Csikszentmihaly, Creativity - Flow and the psychology of 
Discovery and invention, Harper Perennial, 1996. 
[9] O. De Rudder, Aperto libro ou le latin retrouvé, Larousse, 1989. 
[10] R. Descartes, Discourse on the Method,  in R. Descartes, translated by 
J. Cottingham, R.Stoothoff and D. Murdoch: Philosophical Writings 
of Descartes, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 111-151. 
[11] M. Franova, Deductive Systems, a work presented at the national 
competition (SVOC) of research work of Czechoslovakian university 
students in section: Epistemology, logic and philosophy, Bratislava, 
1980. 
[12] M. Franova, An Implementation of Program Synthesis from Formal 
Specifications, in Y. Kodratoff, (ed.), Proceedings of the 8th 
European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, August 1-5, Pitman, 
London, United Kingdom, 1988, pp. 559-564. 
[13] M. Franova, Créativité Formelle: Méthode et Pratique - Conception 
des systèmes "informatiques" complexes et Brevet Épistémologique, 
Publibook, 2008. 
[14] M. Franova, Cartesian versus Newtonian Paradigms for Recursive 
Program Synthesis, International Journal on Advances in Systems and 
Measurements, vol. 7, no 3&4, 2014, pp. 209-222. 
[15] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, Cartesian Systemic Emergence - 
Tackling Underspecified Notions in Incomplete Domains, in O. 
Chernavskaya and K. Miwa (eds.), Proc. of COGNITIVE 2018: The 
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies 
and Applications, ISBN: 978-1-61208-609-5, 2018, pp. 1-6. 
[16] M. 
Franova, 
Trace 
of 
computation 
for 
ack(3,2), 
https://sites.google.com/site/martafranovacnrs/trace-of-computation-
for-ack-3-2 (Retrieved: 03/2021). 
[17] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, Cartesian Systemic Pulsation – A 
Model for Evolutive Improvement of Incomplete Symbiotic 
Recursive Systems, International Journal On Advances in Intelligent 
Systems, vol 11, no 1&2, 2018, pp. 35-45. 
[18] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, Cartesian Systemic Emergence and its 
Resonance Thinking Facet: Why and How?, International Journal On 
Advances in Systems and Measurements, IARIA, 2020, International 
Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, issn 1942-261x, 
Volume 13 (Number 1 & 2), pp.11-25. 
[19] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, Symbiotic Thinking … for Cognitive 
Modeling as Well, in C. Sennersten and O. Dini (eds). : COGNITIVE 
2020, The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive 
Technologies and Applications ; ISSN: 2308-4197, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-780-1, IARIA, ThinkMind, October 2020, pp. 7-12. 
[20] J. Y. Girard, Le champ du signe ou la faillite du réductionnisme,  in 
T. Marchaisse, (dir.): Le théorème de Gödel, Seuil, 1989, pp. 145-
171. 
[21] H. Kopetz, Simplicity Is Complex: Foundations of Cyber-physical 
System Design, Springer, 2019. 
[22] J. L. Le Moigne, La théorie du système général, théorie de la 
modélisation, P.U.F, 1984. 
[23] J. Leplin, A theory of epistemic justification, Springer, 2009. 
[24] M. S. Levin,  Modular system design and evaluation, Springer, 2015. 
[25] A. Reichel, Snakes all the Way Down: Varela's Calculus for Self-
Reference and the Praxis of Paradise, Behavioral Science 28(6), 
November 2011, pp. 646 - 662. 
[26] J. Soto-Andrade, S. Jaramilo, C. Gutiérrez and J.C. Leletier, 
Ouroboros avatars: A mathematical exploration of Self-reference and 
Metabolic Closure, in T. Lenaerts, M. Giacobini and al. (eds.), 
Advances in Artificial Life ECAL 2011: Procs. of the 11th Europ. 
Conf. on the Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, The MIT 
press, 2011, pp. 763-770. 
[27] R. Swinburne, Epistemic justification, Oxford University Press, 2003. 
[28] C. S. Wasson, System Engineering Analysis, Design, and 
Development: Concepts, Principles, and Practices, Wiley-Blackwell, 
2015. 
[29] E. W. Weisstein, Young Girl-Old Woman Illusion, From MathWorld 
- 
A 
Wolfram 
Web 
Resource. 
(Retrieved: 
03/2021) 
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/YoungGirl-OldWomanIllusion.html. 
[30] G. Fauconnier and M. Turner, The Way We Think: Conceptual 
Blending And The Mind's Hidden Complexities, Basic Books, 2003. 
[31] M. Franova, Cartesian versus Newtonian Paradigms for Recursive 
Program Synthesis, International Journal on Advances in Systems and 
Measurements, vol. 7, no 3&4, 2014, pp. 209-222. 
[32] S. Muggleton, D. Lin, and A. Tamaddoni-Nezhad: Meta-interpretive 
learning of higher-order dyadic datalog: predicate invention revisited, 
Machine Learning 100; 2015, pp. 49-73. 
[33] S. Muggleton, U. Schmid, C. Zeller, A. Tamaddoni-Nezhad, and T. 
Besold, Ultra-Strong Machine Learning: comprehensibility of 
programs learned with ILP, Machine Learning 107, 2018, pp. 1119-
1140. 
[34] D. Michie, Machine learning in the next five years, Proceedings of 
the third European working session on learning, Pitman, 1988, pp. 
107-122. 
[35] Y. Shang, A combinatorial necessary and sufficient condition for 
cluster consensus, Neurocomputing Volume 216, 5 December 2016, 
pp. 611-616. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

