Examining Challenges in IT Service Desk System and Processes: A Case Study
Marko Jäntti
University of Eastern Finland, School of Computing
Software Engineering Research Unit
P.O.B 1627, Kuopio, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@uef.ﬁ
Abstract—The adoption of IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
framework is a challenging task for many IT service provider
organizations. Many government organizations in Finland have
also started to use ITIL and need help in conﬁguring tools and
deﬁning processes. The research problem of this study is: What
types of challenges exist in the IT service provider’s customer
support? The main contribution of this paper is to present
challenges on IT service support of Finnish Tax Administration.
Keywords-incident management; service support; IT service.
I. INTRODUCTION
Many IT service provider organizations consider the im-
provement of IT service management processes as a difﬁcult
and challenging task. Typically, the process improvement is
based on the processes and methods of the IT Infrastructure
Library (ITIL). ITIL is the most widely used IT service
management framework consisting of a set of best practices
for managing IT services.
The service management section of the ITIL version
2 consists of two parts [1]: 1) Service Delivery (Service
level management, IT ﬁnancial management, availability
management, capacity management, IT service continuity
management) and 2) Service Support (service desk function,
incident management, problem management, change man-
agement, conﬁguration management and release manage-
ment). The ITIL version 3 emphasized the service lifecycle
thinking and introduced ﬁve core books: Service Strategy
[2], Service Design [3], Service Transition [4], Service
Operation [5] and Continual Service Improvement [6]. The
recent update 3.1 did not introduce very radical changes to
Service Operation processes. However, the Service Strategy
book was completely rewritten.
There are several factors that might prevent an effective
process improvement. First, the companies have to use
external ITIL consultants in providing training for their
employees. These consultants know the ITIL framework and
IT service management concepts very well but have lim-
ited knowledge on the existing business concepts, methods,
tools, services, and the structure of service desk groups.
Second, inadequate or too complex IT service management
tools shall slow down any IT service management process
improvement initiative. Third, lack of process culture and
process thinking is very common phenomenom among IT
companies. ITIL is a process oriented framework. Thus, the
ITIL implementation team should be well-trained and have
excellent process improvement and change management
skills. Finally, lack of management support for ITSM project
may cause that an organization do not allocate enough re-
sources for the process/tool improvement. Besides allocating
enough resources for improvement work, the management
has to motivate and reward people who pass ITIL certiﬁcate
exams and participate in IT service management work.
Shariﬁ et al. [7] have explored why ITIL implementations
fail. They list at least the following factors: Spending too
much time on complicated process diagrams, Not creating
work instructions, Not assigning process owners, Concen-
trating too much on performance, being too ambitious,
allowing departmental demarcation, ignoring or eviewing of
the ITIL every time, and not memorizing ITIL books self.
Mohamed et al. [8] have integrated knowledge management
elements to the IT service management. Moreover, Lahtela et
al. [9] have explored how to measure IT service management
processes ín practices.
Peppard categorizes information system and technology
(IST) services into four categories [10]: Application ser-
vices are services that are delivered via software applica-
tions. Operational services maintain the IT environment
including installation services for hardware and software,
change management, and problem shooting services. Value-
enabling services increase the value of of information assets
(e.g. consulting, system design, and help desk). Finally,
infrastructure services focus on creating an effective IT
infrastructure including, for example, security and capacity
issues. Bardhan et al. [11] state that IT services have aspects
such as the high degree of involvement by people in delivery
and that they are more or less intangible.
In order to improve IT service management processes,
organizations can use various IT service management frame-
works, such as the Control Objectives for IT and related
Technology (COBIT) framework [12], Microsoft Operations
Framework (MOF) [13], Kapella’s Framework for Incident
Management and Problem Management [14], IT Service
Capability Maturity Model [15] or IT service management
standard ISO/IEC 20 000 [16].
More and more academic studies are being published
in the ﬁeld of IT service amanagement, such as incident
management problem management [17], success factors in
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

ITIL implementations [18]. The main contribution of this
paper is to describe the challenges regarding IT service
support and maintenance of Finnish Tax Administration.
The results of this study might be useful for service man-
agers, service desk managers and IT service management
process managers. The remainder of the paper is organized
as follows. In Section II, the research methods of this study
are described. In Section III, challenges in service desk tool
and processes are presented. Section IV is the analysis of
ﬁndings. The discussion and the conclusions are given in
Section V.
II. RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
This case study is a part of the results of KISMET
(Keys to IT Service Management and Effective Transition
of Services) project. The research problem of this study is:
What types of challenges exist in the IT service provider’s
customer support?
According to Yin [19], a case study is "an empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within
its real-life context". Eisenhardt [20] deﬁnes a case study
research as "a research strategy focusing on understanding
the dynamics present within single settings". The settings in
this paper mean the customer support environment of Tax
Administration. A case study research method with a single
case was used to answer the research problem. Figure 1
describes the research settings of the case study. The study
was carried out in Finnish Tax Administration’s Kuopio unit.
Figure 1.
The research settings of the case study
A. The Case Organization and Data Collection Methods
In Finland, taxation is carried out mainly by four orga-
nizations: Ministry of Finance, Tax Administration, Cus-
toms Finland and TraFi (Trafﬁc safety agency). Our case
organization is the Information System Management unit of
Finnish Tax Administration that provides IT services (e.g.
desktop services, service desk) to the tax administration
staff. The organization had 5336 fulltime employees in 2010.
The organization used a phased approach for implementing
service management processes. In the ﬁrst phase, the focus
was on incident management and the ITIL-based service
desk service was launched in Spring 2011.
The case study was carried out in August-October 2011.
In order to increase the quality of the case study, case
study researchers can use three important principles of data
collection: 1) using multiple sources of evidence: three re-
searchers participated in data collection from several sources
2) creating a case study datastore (a case study diary) 3)
maintaining a chain of evidence (linking observations to data
sources). The following sources of evidence were used:
• Documentation from the case organization (e.g. inci-
dent management process description, service support
metrics, ITSM tool user guide, service catalogue, ser-
vice area, event management material, error handling
guide).
• Archives (service classiﬁcation schema, incident and
service request records)
• Interviews/discussions (discussions in work meetings
between a research team and the case organization,
informal coffee table discussions with service support
workers, email conversations with process managers)
• Participative observation (proces improvement meet-
ings and workshops (CSI workshop 27 September) and
ITSM process trainings (45 minutes ITSM Introduction,
3 hour Basics of ITSM) organized by the KISMET
research team)
• Fysical artefacts: Service desk tool, intranet
B. Data Analysis Method
A within case analysis technique [20] was used to analyze
the collected case study data. Researcher triangulation was
used in data analysis. Three case study researchers partic-
ipated in the data collection and analysis. The within-case
analysis focuses on examining cases carefully as stand-alone
entities before making any generalizations.
III. CHALLENGES IN IT SERVICE DESK
We used KISMET (Keys to IT Service Management
Excellence Technique) model as a process improvement
tool. The model consists of the following seven phases:
Create a process improvement infrastructure, Perform a
process assessment, Plan process improvement actions, Im-
prove/Implement the process based on ITSM practices,
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Deploy and introduce the process, Evaluate process improve-
ment and Continuous process improvement.
In this paper, we focus on the ’Perform a process assess-
ment’ phase and present the customer support challenges
that were identiﬁed during the phase:
• Challenge: Classiﬁcation of support requests in the
service desk requires clariﬁcation Improvement sug-
gestion: Clarify the options in ’Reason for Contact
Request’ ﬁeld of the incident record. Make the dif-
ference between service requests and incidents visible.
Service area and the type of of support requests should
be different ﬁelds. Collect concrete examples of both
incidents and service request for training purposes.
• Challenge: Customers are not able classify support
requests correctly Improvement suggestion: Remove
the classiﬁcation option from sucustomers and simplify
the submission of support requests.
• Challenge: It is difﬁcult to identify repeating inci-
dents from the service desk system. Improvement
suggestion: Mark the repeating incidents (for exam-
ple, create an additional ’check box’ type data ﬁeld
to an incident record: Repeating incident = x). Use
the ’Relate Cases’ function to establish relationships
between similar cases. Create a problem record based
on a repeating incident.
• Challenge: The interface between incident manage-
ment and problem management does not work. People
do not understand the difference between incidents and
problems. Improvement suggestion: Train employ-
ees to open a problem record. Establish a simple-to-
understand guidelines for problem management includ-
ing triggers for problem management.
• Challenge: Service desk workers record several cases
under one incident. Improvement suggestion: Train
service desk workers to record cases in such a way
that one incident record includes only one issue.
• Challenge: Improvement ideas are not recorded sys-
tematically into the service desk system. Improvement
suggestion: Improvement ideas should be sent to a
Continual Service Improvement team or Change Man-
agement team.
• Challenge:
Lack
of
Conﬁguration
Management
Database
(CMDB).
Improvement
suggestion:
Establish a Conﬁguration Management process that is
responsible for updating, maintaining and managing a
Conﬁguration Management Database (CMDB).
IV. ANALYSIS
Regarding the service desk we observed during the study
that the service desk tool supports the implementation of IT
service management well. The organization had invested in
automatizing the handling of service requests and electronic
forms were well exploited in service request management.
Regarding incident management roles, we observed that
roles and responsibilities and incident management activities
were deﬁned in the process description and they followed
the IT service management terminology. The organization
had assigned a well functioning team (2-3 persons) for con-
ﬁguring the IT service management tool. Detailed process
descriptions had been created for ITSM processes. Regard-
ing the results, it has to be mentioned that the organization
had focused on service desk and incident management in
the ﬁrst phase of process improvement cycle (starting from
Spring 2011). Therefore, the remaining ITSM processes,
such as change management and problem management, were
inmature.
Many of the challenges seemed to be related to classiﬁ-
cation of support requests. Service desk workers indicated
that users and customers have problems in classifying re-
quests but nobody had measured the number of incorrectly
classiﬁed requests. Our research team reported to the case
organization that the service area requires changes and that
the using the service desk system should be as simple as
possible for customers.
It was not a surprise that the organization had problems
with problem management. This challenge has been noted
also in our previous studies. Some service desk workers had
classiﬁed the case as a “problem” when the problem was
one of the options in Reason for Contact ﬁeld. Crucial for
problem management would be recording information on
which incidents are repeating incidents and thus sources of
problems.
Another challenging area was the continual service im-
provement that consists of three main areas: measurement,
reporting and management of improvement ideas. Organi-
sation needed a model how to handle service improvement
ideas in a more systematic way. One possibility would be
to assign development ideas to change management team
that would open a Request for Change. Interfaces between
processes seemed not to work wery well in practice, for
example, between incident management and conﬁguration
management, change management, and event management.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This paper aimed to answer the research problem: What
types of challenges exist in the IT service provider’s cus-
tomer support? The main contribution of this study was to
explore how a service desk tool and the support process
was improved in Finnish Tax Administration and describe
the identiﬁed challenges in incident management.
The key challenges we identiﬁed in service support were
related to classiﬁcation of support requests both from ser-
vice desk workers’ viewpoint and customers’ viewpoint,
understanding the differences between incident and problem
management processes, identifying the sources of problems
and interfaces between service management processes.
This case study included certain limitations. First, data
were collected by using solely qualitative research methods.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

Quantitative methods could have provided a richer view on
the organization. However, the qualitative case study method
suits well to research business process related challenges
in organizational context. Second, the case organization
was a partner of the software engineering unit’s research
project and thus not randomly selected. Third, this study
included only one case organization’s one service area.
Further research could explore the IT service management
challenges in other service areas of the case organization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is based on research in KISMET project
funded by the National Technology Agency TEKES, Eu-
ropean Regional Development Fund (ERDF), and industrial
partners.
REFERENCES
[1] OGCb, ITIL Service Delivery.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2002.
[2] OGC, ITIL Service Strategy.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2007.
[3] OGCb, ITIL Service Design.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2007.
[4] OGCc, ITIL Service Transition.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2007.
[5] OGCd, ITIL Service Operation.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2007.
[6] OGCe, ITIL Continual Service Improvement. The Stationary
Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[7] M. Shariﬁ, M. Ayat, A. A. Rahman, and S. Sahibudin,
“Lessons learned in itil implementation failure,” in Informa-
tion Technology, 2008. ITSim 2008. International Symposium,
vol. 1, Aug. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[8] M. Mohamed, V. Ribiere, K. O’Sullivan, and M. Mohamed,
“The re-structuring of the information technology infrastruc-
ture library (itil) implementation using knowledge manage-
ment framework,” The Journal of Information and Knowledge
Management Systems, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 315–333, 2008.
[9] A. Lahtela, M. Jäntti, and J. Kaukola, “Implementing an
itil-based it service management measurement system,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Digital
Society.
St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles: IEEE Computer
Society, February 2010, pp. 249–254.
[10] J. Peppard, “Managing it as a portfolio of services,” European
Management Journal, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 467–483, August
2003.
[11] I. Bardhan, H. Demirkan, P. Kannan, R. Kauffman, and
R. Sougstad, “An interdisciplinary perspective on it services
management and service science,” Journal of Management
Information Systems, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 13–64, 2010.
[12] COBIT 4.1, Control Objectives for Information and related
Technology: COBIT 4.1.
IT Governance Institute, 2007.
[13] Microsoft,
“Microsoft
operations
framework,”
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc506049.aspx,
September 2010.
[14] V. Kapella, “A framework for incident and problem manage-
ment,” International Network Services whitepaper, 2003.
[15] F. Niessinka, V. Clerca, T. Tijdinka, and H. van Vliet, “The
it service capability maturity model version 1.0,” CIBIT
Consultants&Vrije Universiteit, 2005.
[16] ISO/IEC 20000, IT Service Management, Part 1: Speciﬁcation
for service management.
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7 Secretariat,
2005.
[17] M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Corrective maintenance maturity model:
Problem management,” in ICSM ’02: Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM’02).
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2002, p. 486.
[18] W.-G. Tan, A. Cater-Steel, and M. Toleman, “Implementing
it service management: A case study focussing on critical
success factors,” Journal of Computer Information Systems,
vol. 50, no. 2, 2009.
[19] R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[20] K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,”
Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

