Systems Governance in Joint Military Acquisition Requirements 
Generation: A Systems Thinking Approach 
 
                           Jack Goldberg 
 
                                     Mo Mansouri 
                 Stevens Institute of Technology 
                             Stevens Institute of Technology 
                      Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA  
 
 
      Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA 
 
         email:  jgoldbe3@stevens.edu  
                 
 email: mmansour@stevens.edu 
 
Abstract—Acquisition latency has been a topic of interest 
for both systems researchers and the United States government. 
Using a systems thinking approach, we argue that current 
reform efforts for the Joint Capabilities Integration and 
Development System (JCIDS) wrongly focus on process 
improvement when latencies are more closely tied to 
inadequate systems governance. 
Keywords-systems thinking; systems dynamics; acquisition; 
governance. 
  
I.       INTRODUCTION 
House Armed Services Committee report 116-120 
ordered an assessment of the timeliness of the Joint 
Capabilities Integration and Development System (JCIDS) 
in creating and validating requirements documents for the 
US military [1]. JCIDS, the process by which military 
capability gaps are addressed and turned into requirements 
documents, has been marred by inefficiencies, thus 
prompting the assessment. It takes far too long for warfighter 
effectiveness. As a result, military services have opted to 
pursue alternate capability development pathways, notably 
the Middle Tier of Acquisition (MTA), as a way to rapidly 
prototype solutions and circumvent JCIDS entirely. This is 
problematic, as JCIDS is meant to ensure interoperability 
between service branches. Joint operation is an increasingly 
important function of the US military and breakdowns can 
prove catastrophic. 
In summary, JCIDS consists of a series of document 
writing and review activities that result in a validated 
document that can be used to request proposals from private 
military contractors. Military services submit their capability 
requirement documents to JCIDS which, along with 
representatives from other services, review it to make sure 
the capability is interoperable across the joint warfighter. 
The submitting service may adjudicate comments offered by 
the reviewers. After a series of reviews and rewrites, a 
validated requirement document emerges that describes a 
military system that will maintain interoperability. 
The system was developed in response to the 
interoperability failures in the joint military effort in the early 
2000s. For example, the case of the Second Battle of 
Fallujah, or Operation Al Fajr (November - December 2004), 
highlights the danger of interoperability breakdown. During 
this episode, Army and Marine forces were working together 
to destroy enemy targets in the city. However, the two forces 
struggled to communicate with each other due to 
incompatible communication technologies: the Army used 
radios while the Marines primarily used Internet chat like 
Microsoft Chat [2].  
The governance issues in JCIDS perpetuate a distrust of 
the JCIDS process. Service branches refuse to engage with 
JCIDS because they do not believe that their capability gaps 
will be addressed fast enough. 
Using a systems thinking approach, we fully characterize 
JCIDS and its issues related to process latency. By 
considering the whole of JCIDS and its relation to other 
systems, instead of breaking it down into its constituent 
parts, we capture a richer depiction of the system. We argue 
that the latencies in JCIDS are not a result of a poorly 
designed process, but rather come from less obvious forces 
like misaligned incentives or poor organizational culture. 
Thus, we believe that the House Armed Services Committee 
is misled in requesting a review of the process and not the 
actual sources of latency. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, we present a literature review that addresses the use of 
systems thinking as well as other research on military 
acquisition. In Section III, we describe the methodology used 
for this work. In Section IV, we describe and map the 
relevant stakeholders of JCIDS. Section V makes account of 
the value adding processes in JCIDS. Next, Section VI 
analyzes the shaping forces of JCIDS. Section VII presents 
two conceptual models, a systemigram and systems 
dynamics representation of JCIDS. In Section VIII, we 
synthesize the information into an analysis of the system as 
a whole. Then, in Section IX, we contextualize the analysis 
within the topic of systems governance and JCIDS latency. 
Finally, in Section X, we offer concluding remarks and 
suggest future research. 
 
II.       LITERATURE REVIEW 
Systems thinking has been useful in assessing many 
complex systems. Boardman et al. use a systems thinking 
approach to characterize enterprise resilience in maritime 
system of systems [3]. The approach is also amenable to 
different scenarios and at many different levels of 
abstraction. Along with maritime systems, systems thinking 
has been used to develop a framework for energy behavior 
in smart cities [4].  
Relevant to this work, systems thinking has also been 
used to analyze military acquisition. Assidmi et al. use a 
systems thinking approach to incorporate human-centered 
factors into projections of cost growth in weapon system 
acquisitions [5].  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

Finally, the concept of governance is very relevant to 
systems thinking as emergent behavior is influenced by 
governance structures. Systems thinking is used to identify 
four domains that impact public trust in healthcare: medical 
errors and malpractice lawsuits, the roles of third-party 
beneficiaries in medical lawsuits and the conflicts presented 
on mass and social media, the public trust of healthcare 
services, and the healthcare quality improvement efforts [6]. 
These public health outcomes are dependent on systems 
governance. Research on systems governance is still in its 
infancy and lacks a robust literature. 
We seek to enrich the literature by providing a systems 
thinking analysis of governance within a complex enterprise 
system. We use JCIDS as a case study in our work.  
 
III.       METHODOLOGY 
We use a combination of document analysis and 
interviews to pursue our systems thinking approach. Much 
of the details on the operation, including the required 
documents and reviews, of JCIDS were taken from the 
JCIDS manual, Manual for the Operation of the Joint 
Capabilities Integration and Development System [7]. 
Next, we conducted a series of unstructured interviews 
with acquisition experts. The interviews were coded for 
common themes. The insights from the interviews were 
critical in the development of our systems thinking analysis. 
The interviews help in developing an understanding of 
JCIDS that is not addressed in official documents, like 
sources of latency or collaborative culture. 
 
IV.       STAKEHOLDERS 
First, we identify the stakeholders in JCIDS. These actors 
are the most important in shaping the behavior of the system. 
Fig. 1 lists these stakeholders, their relationship to JCIDS, 
and a description. 
 
              TABLE 1. NOTABLE STAKEHOLDERS IN JCIDS. 
 
Name 
 Type 
             Description 
Gatekeeper 
Active 
The key facilitator of JCIDS and the 
first to receive documents from the 
sponsor. 
FCB  
Active 
The Functional Capabilities Board is 
a review body that is dedicated to a 
particular area of military capability.   
JROC 
Active 
The Joint Requirements Oversight 
Committee is the ultimate approval 
body in JCIDS. 
Sponsors 
Active 
The sponsor of an acquisition project 
drafts the JCIDS documents. 
 
A key consideration is how the stakeholders interact with 
each other. The behaviors of the stakeholders are shaped by 
their personal incentives. The incentives can cause 
reinforcing behavior or mitigating behavior. These 
interactions define the emergent behaviors of a system and 
ultimately shape the success of the system. In terms of 
JCIDS, a hierarchical military system, there are prescribed 
behaviors. Fig. 2 illustrates the stakeholder interactions that 
occur in JCIDS. 
Figure 1. Stakeholder interaction map within JCIDS. 
V.       VALUE ADDING PROCESSES 
Next, we address the idea of added value in JCIDS. First, 
we will consider the factors that add value to JCIDS. These 
things help JCIDS accomplish its goal of efficiently 
validating requirements documents. 
 
A. Information Technology 
Information technology facilitates the requirement 
validation 
process. 
JCIDS 
staff 
use 
Knowledge 
Management/Decision Support (KM/DS) to coordinate and 
archive requirements documents. However, the KM/DS 
system often has missing and incorrect data points. 
 
B. Training 
Training is key in empowering JCIDS personnel. 
Knowing how to write and comment on requirements 
documents results in quicker validation times because less 
adjudication will be needed. 
 
C. Experience 
Similar to training, experience empowers JCIDS 
personnel. Experience within JCIDS makes JCIDS staff 
more knowledgeable about document writing and also 
reduces confusion. Experienced personnel knows exactly 
how JCIDS is supposed to operate. Yet, there is rapid 
personnel turnover in JCIDS. 
 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

D. Warfighter Goal Clarity 
When warfighter goals are clearly defined, JCIDS 
approval bodies can easily determine whether an acquisition 
project is necessary. In this situation, acquisition projects 
will not even be pursued if they do not align with warfighter 
needs. 
The purpose of JCIDS is to add value to the military 
acquisition system. After considering the variables that add 
value to JCIDS, we consider the things that JCIDS adds 
value to. 
 
E. Warfighter 
JCIDS is supposed to address capability gaps and 
enhance joint capability. This will result in better outcomes 
on the battlefield 
 
F. “Little a” Acquisition 
Considering the output of JCIDS is the input of 
contracting, better defined projects help with project 
contracting. Well defined requirements are useful for 
contractors that are making bids. 
 
VI. 
 SHAPING FORCES 
JCIDS operates in a well-defined environment. It is a part 
of the US military acquisition ecosystem, which consists of 
itself, budgeting, and “little a” acquisition. Because it is so 
well bound, it is relatively easy to identify the shaping forces 
of JCIDS. We start by identifying the internal forces that are 
not explicitly mentioned in the JCIDS manual, but still 
impact acquisition outcomes. 
 
A. Culture 
Organizational culture is important in determining 
acquisition outcomes. One facet of culture is risk tolerance. 
JCIDS, a risk averse organization, will take a considerable 
amount of time in making sure requirements documents are 
very well defined. Further, a culture of complacency in 
JCIDS does not inspire innovation. Personnel are satisfied 
with the latencies within the system. 
 
B. Collaboration 
Collaborative design is commonplace in the private 
sector. It shapes project outcomes by incorporating multiple 
perspectives throughout the design process. There is not a 
uniform practice of collaboration in JCIDS. The Army 
utilizes Cross-Functional Teams [8] while the other services 
are less collaborative. These differences in collaborative 
structure impact acquisition timelines. 
After analyzing the internal shaping forces of JCIDS, we 
move onto the forces that affect the environment that JCIDS 
operates in, and induce action. These forces influence either 
the inputs to JCIDS or help dictate what an output looks like. 
 
C. Adversarial Developments 
Adversarial developments refer to the changes in threats 
to US security. This can be the emergence of a new threat, 
like an antagonistic state, or a new capability among existing 
US enemies. These developments inspire a reaction by the 
US military, which ultimately results in a JCIDS process. 
 
D. Innovation 
Private sector or academic innovation pushes the state of 
the art, and results in a military capability gap. Many US 
adversaries can adopt innovation very quickly as well, 
further hindering the US’s warfighter capability. Thus, 
innovation spurs acquisition and, thus, JCIDS. 
 
E. Political influence 
Acquisition can have political value for a great number 
of reasons. First, politicians have an interest in national 
security. They should want to protect the safety of 
Americans. Acquisition can be useful in accomplishing that. 
Second, there are economic incentives for a lot of politicians. 
Acquisition can employ a lot of people in a politician’s 
district. A politician may also be interested in acquisition 
oversight, which will force accountability in JCIDS. Political 
pressure can speed up the JCIDS process but is only used in 
certain, advantageous, cases. 
 
F. Budgeting 
Budgeting is a major shaping force in JCIDS because 
acquisition projects cannot be realized if there are no funds 
available to finance them. In fact, there is an affordability 
analysis built into the JCIDS process.  
 
VII. 
CONCEPTUAL MODELS 
We develop conceptual models to further our 
understanding of the system and how system governance 
impacts JCIDS effectiveness.  
The following systemigram, displayed in Fig. 2., creates 
a series of narratives concerning JCIDS. The systemigram 
was created to help visualize the nature of a system [9]. The 
main line of the diagram shows the standard story whereby 
capability gaps are developed into validated requirements 
documents. Yet, there are also peripheral narratives 
regarding innovation, personnel, and leadership that are key 
in JCIDS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. JCIDS systemigram. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

Finally, Fig. 3 illustrates the system dynamics of JCIDS. 
It shows how different aspects of JCIDS reinforce and 
balance each other. The United States and its adversaries are 
in an effective arms race for better capabilities, which is only 
balanced by budgeting restraints. Therefore, acquisition 
speed is a key military priority, which is hindered by the 
latency of JCIDS. 
 
 
Figure 3. JCIDS systems dynamics. 
 
VIII.      SYSTEMS ANALYSIS 
Our systems thinking analysis illustrates why JCIDS is 
ineffective in validating requirements documents. At a high 
level, warfighter needs require that JCIDS operate quickly; 
troops on the battlefield need acquisition to quickly fulfill 
capability gaps. The US military needs to adopt innovation 
at the same rate as their adversaries in order to maintain a 
tactical advantage. Yet, acquisition processes are the subject 
to oversight. The American public and Congress demand 
fiscal responsibility. This results in regulation and policy that 
slows down JCIDS. Requirements documents require a lot of 
reviews to ensure that the acquisition is necessary, so funds 
are not being misused. The pressures to be fast and deliberate 
at the same time are at odds with each other. This reality puts 
JCIDS in a precarious position. It cannot adequately satisfy 
both stakeholders, and often fails both. 
In a system with opposing forces, an equilibrium is often 
reached. JCIDS operates in a unique environment because 
there are limited resources in the form of budgeting and the 
government is a monopsonist in purchasing military 
equipment. So, the oversight bodies, including Congress, 
exert the most influence on JCIDS. Therefore, the 
equilibrium favors the stakeholders who want a deliberate 
process. Yet, it is the service branches that are actually 
interacting with the system by creating requirements 
documents. 
At a lower level, JCIDS does not have governance 
structures in place to facilitate rapid development of 
requirements documents. There is very little collaboration in 
the development of these documents, which could speed up 
the process. There is also an inadequate infrastructure for 
information technology; data collection is insufficient and 
often inaccurate [10].  
Considering the contradictory influences in JCIDS, 
service branches often circumvent the process by using the 
Middle Tier of Acquisition. This acquisition track gives 
sponsors the ability to rapidly prototype and field capability 
without dealing with JCIDS. The faster acquisition time and 
reduced oversight has made MTA an attractive option. The 
threat of interoperability failure remains in MTA, but the 
consequences are delayed, which makes sponsors discount 
them. 
 
IX.      SYSTEMS GOVERNANCE 
A crucial result of the inadequate governance of JCIDS 
is a lack of trust in the system. The opposing forces of speed 
and oversight in JCIDS indicate why there is a lack of trust 
among stakeholders. If JCIDS cannot field materiel fast and 
cheap enough, then sponsors will place their trust in other 
acquisition processes, like MTA, that will deliver 
capabilities much faster, even at the expense of 
interoperability. 
An important consideration in addressing stakeholder 
trust in JCIDS is the incentives of the constituent 
stakeholders. Each part of the system has their own incentive 
and will try to maximize their own interest. Considering 
JCIDS has stakeholders from all service branches, joint staff, 
legislative bodies, and more, there are many agents pulling 
the system in their direction. With increased competition for 
resources and influence, stakeholders may develop a distrust 
of the system. 
Furthermore, personnel development shortcomings, 
which are caused by lack of training and scheduled personnel 
rotations, hinder the development of trust among 
stakeholders. Since JCIDS staff and service level 
requirements 
officers 
are 
frequently 
leaving 
their 
departments, there is no opportunity for services to develop 
a trusting relationship with JCIDS. This problem is 
magnified when leadership turns over, as their policies are 
abandoned upon leaving. 
 
X.      CONCLUSION 
We lay out a comprehensive analysis of JCIDS. The 
system is best understood by its relationships to the whole 
rather than taking apart its components. Through the systems 
thinking approach, we describe the critical stakeholders, 
value adding processes, shaping forces, and conceptual 
modeling of JCIDS. 
The purpose of this work is not to suggest solutions for 
improving JCIDS. Rather, we seek to holistically 
characterize the problems in JCIDS. Often the true root of a 
problem is not the most visible. Our systems thinking 
analysis highlights some of the factors that are hindering 
JCIDS that may normally be overlooked, especially by those 
in power who have the ability to enact change. Our analysis 
shows that the latency in JCIDS is not wholly a result of 
poorly designed processes, but the culmination of poor 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

systems governance including the misalignment of 
incentives, lack of technological infrastructure, and 
personnel shortcomings. 
Future research should analyze possible solutions to 
overcome JCIDS inefficiency. Scenario analysis and surveys 
can help ground this conceptual analysis.   
While it is not a well-known system, JCIDS is incredibly 
important in American society. It determines how American 
troops are equipped and impacts the public’s tax burden. 
Understanding and improving this system is crucial to 
American interests both at home and abroad. 
 
REFERENCES  
 
[1]  House of Representatives Rept. No. 116-120, at 176-177 
June 
19, 
2019, 
Available: 
https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/116th-
congress/house-report/120/1  [last access April 2022]. 
[2]  M. Matthews, “Operation AL FAJR: A Study in Army   and 
Marine Corps Joint Operations”, Army Command and general 
Staff Coll Fort Leavenworth KS Combat Studies Inst, 2006, 
Available: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA454930 [last 
access April 2022].  
  
[3]  M. Mansouri, B. Sauser, and J. Boardman. “Applications of 
systems 
thinking 
for 
resilience 
study 
in 
maritime 
transportation system of systems”, The 3rd Annual IEEE 
Systems Conference, pp. 211-217, 2009. 
[4] N. Khansari, H. R. Darabi, M. Mansouri, and A. Mostashari. 
“Case study of energy behavior: Systems thinking approach”, 
The Annual IEEE Systems Conference (SysCon) Proceedings, 
pp. 373-376, 2015. 
[5] L. Assidmi, S. Sarkani, and T. Mazzuchi. “A systems thinking 
approach to cost growth in DoD weapon systems”, IEEE 
Systems Journal, vol. 6 no. 3, pp. 436-443, 2011. 
[6] P. Kaewkamjonchai et al., “A systems thinking approach to 
understanding public trust in healthcare services and doctor-
patient relationship in the contexts of medical errors”, 
ResearchSquare. Preprint. Oct 05, 2020. [last access April 
2022] 10.21203/rs.3.rs-77431/v1 
[7] Department of Defense, “Manual for the Operation of the Joint 
Capabilities Integration and Development System”, 2018, 
Available: 
https://www.acq.osd.mil/asda/jrac/docs/2018-
JCIDS.pdf [last access April 2022] 
[8] D. A. Reisinger. "Cross-Functional Teams for the Future." 
Army Law. 2020: 92. 
[9] B. Clegg and J. Boardman, "Process integration and 
improvement using systemic diagrams and a human-centered 
approach.", Concurrent Engineering 4.2: pp. 119-136, 1996. 
[10]  Government Accountability Office. “Joint Staff Lacks 
Reliable Data on the Effectiveness of Its Revised Joint 
Approval 
Process”, 
2021, 
Available: 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-104432.pdf, [last access 
April 2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

