 
A Systems Approach to Parking Assist System: 
Investigating Test and Verification Methodology 
 
Celine Haugan Lia 
Mo Mansouri 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
USN 
USN 
Kongsberg, Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
Email: 238356@usn.no 
Email: Mo.Mansouri@usn.no 
Abstract—This paper explores the parking assist system 
technology and how it has evolved over the years. It investigates 
the different types of subsystems and components that go into 
this small, yet complex system inside a vehicle and why this 
technology is needed. The system decomposition examines how 
everything is linked together and why all the subsystems and 
components are necessary for the system to function. The test 
and verification consider current test methods and explore 
existing equipment and software, especially for these cases. 
After discussing potential system requirements, a systems 
approach inclusive of both CATWOE (Customer, Actor, 
Transformation, World View, Owner, Environment) analysis 
and Systemigram methods is used to map out and get an 
overview of the system and its stakeholders. This paper presents 
a new approach to the way of looking at the parking assist 
system because taking all stakeholders and looking at the bigger 
picture is not considered in common practice. In a common 
analytical approach, engineers tend to focus on a separate part 
of the system without considering its interactions with the 
environment. Hence, looking at this problem from a systemic 
perspective is novel and constructive for this industry in the 
future. 
Keywords—Systems Thinking, PAS (Parking Assist System), 
ABS (Anti-lock Braking System), Systemigram, CATWOE. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The roads are becoming increasingly busier and have 
been for many years and parking a vehicle in certain 
situations can be stressful no matter how experienced the 
driver is. Looking back in history, the first cars on the market 
were a lot smaller than the current design and were nowhere 
near as many vehicles on the road as we see today. 
Particularly in cities, the parking spaces can be tight and 
difficult to get into, however people are dependent on parking 
spaces. More people, more vehicles and tighter spaces 
unfortunately cause an increase in accidents. This happens 
not only on the roads, but in other places like parking lots and 
parking garages where the view around the vehicle is limited 
and the randomness of human behavior is responsible for a 
large percentage of accidents. 
Parking assist technology has been around for many years 
and the first mainstream car to feature rear parking sensors 
was the Toyota Prius, although Toyota already had 
introduced ultrasonic back sensors as far back as 1982. The 
next technological development within the parking systems 
was the surrounding-view parking monitors/cameras, which 
Nissan first developed and introduced in 2007. The very first 
rear park assist system (semi-autonomous parking) was 
introduced in 2003 and has since then evolved into 
autonomous parking that is one of the latest features within 
parking technology [1].  
II.  BACKGROUND AND SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Looking into the modern car parking technology, one of 
the newest features that have been around for a few years is 
the semi-autonomous and autonomous parking assist system. 
The parking technology has evolved a lot over the last 20 
years from when the rear parking sensors first were 
introduced. Today, most of the large car manufacturers 
provide parking assist technology in their new cars, or at least 
as a feature option that can be bought.  
Although the parking assist system is small, it is a very 
complex system within the vehicle. There are many 
subsystems and components that must cooperate for the 
system to work as it should. In general, automatic parking 
systems consist of three main components: the target position 
designation, path planning and path tracking by active 
steering [17]. The subsystem includes sensors, cameras, 
control center, computers, and user-interface, to mention 
some. There are 3 main sensors used in modern parking 
system technology: 
• 
Ultrasonic 
sensor 
(most 
common) 
– 
Emits 
soundwaves that humans cannot hear. 
Measures the distance using D =0.5 x Time x Speed 
of sound. 
The speed of sound varies in different temperatures 
and humidity; therefore, the car has temperature 
sensors that can compensate.  
• 
Electromagnetic sensor – Emits radio waves at certain 
frequency. These reflect back when they hit an object 
and reach the car at a different frequency. The car is 
then able to detect the change in frequency and 
calculate the distance.  
• 
Radar – Located behind the bumper bar at each corner 
of the car pointing out towards the side. Used for rear 
cross traffic alert.  
 
Having eyes all around the car has become more common 
in newer cars as well. Reverse view camera, front camera and 
wide-angle camera on the wing mirrors are stitched together 
to produce a top view of the car and surroundings. This is also 
known as a 360-degree camera or birdsview [2].  
The most used ultrasonic sensors only work from 3-5 
meters from the car, whereas radar can go further down the 
road. Reverse Autonomous Emergency Braking (AEB) is 
usually implemented into the system and activates when there 
is an obstacle too close that the sensors detect or if the radar 
detects a moving vehicle or pedestrian [2] [10]. 
From the moment the parking assist system has been 
activated, it starts collecting data and calculating the needed 
distances. It also detects any obstacles via cameras and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

sensors as well as taking over the steering system. The 
cameras and sensors act as transmitters and receivers. These 
signals go into the computer, which then calculates the 
distance from objects etc. [8]. 
III. PROBLEM CONTEXT 
Over the years, cars have been getting bigger. Also, traffic 
and the number of vehicles on the road have increased over 
many years. There is a high demand for parking spaces and 
parking lots. Parking lots are where one of five motor vehicle 
accidents happen in the US. Some of the accidents happen 
between two cars crashing, however most of the accidents 
involve pedestrians walking in the parking lot. Some of the 
top causes of parking lot accidents includes drivers entering 
a parking lot and keeping an eye on a spot, not focusing on 
the surroundings such as other cars, pedestrians, or obstacles. 
Another reason is drivers who must back out of their spot, not 
being able to see all the surroundings. Pedestrians and other 
moving vehicles are at that point in the driver’s blind zone 
[4].  
Statistics from National Centre for Statistics and Analysis 
(NHTSA) from the year 2007 illustrate numbers of non-
traffic fatalities and injuries (Figure 1). 
  Figure 1. NHTSA Non-traffic fatalities and injuries 2007 [4]. 
 
A safe and reliable parking assist system can provide a 
securer and less stressful parking experience for the driver 
and help avoid accidents and damages to other cars, 
obstacles, and people nearby. Sensor and radar systems 
provide the driver with ‘eyes’ surrounding the car that easily 
will alert or activate emergency brakes in unforeseen cases 
and human behavior. The test, verification, and validation of 
all the subsystems and the parking assist system as a whole 
need to be thoroughly executed to provide a reliable system 
for the user.  
IV. SYSTEM DECOMPOSITION  
There are many components and subsystems that have to 
work together in order for the autonomous/semi-autonomous 
parking assist system to complete its task. There are various 
conditions the system must fulfil: 
• 
Detect obstacles in the surrounding environment. 
• 
Measure and estimate the distance to obstacles. 
• 
Provide a planned route to park. 
• 
Provide a real-time display to the driver during the 
parking sequence [5]. 
 
 These conditions are done by separate interconnected 
subsystems, as seen in Figure 2.  
 
 
               Figure 2. Components of the Parking Assist System [5] 
 
According to Szadeczky-Kardoss and Kiss, the ABS 
sensors assembled on the vehicle detect the displacement of 
the wheels on the car. Furthermore, this data can be used to 
calculate an estimated position and orientation. This 
estimated state is then used by the mapping and controller 
modules. For the map to be developed, additional data is also 
required about the environment.  Ultrasonic sensors (most 
commonly) are used to measure the distance to nearby objects 
and obstacles. Based on this data, a map can be assembled to 
near accuracy [5]. 
Throughout the path planning, a reference path is 
calculated, which connects the initial and the desired final 
configurations. In this path planning stage, there are certain 
constraints that need to be taken into consideration. This can 
be collision avoidance and the non-holonomic performance 
described in the model. Ultimately, the tracking control 
algorithm is used to track the reference path [5].  
In Figure 3, the system environment for the parking 
system is illustrated. The inputs are sensor data that contains 
information on the vehicle state. For example, vehicle speed, 
steering position and information from environmental 
sensors that register objects on the right and left side of the 
vehicle. In terms of output, the system possesses an interface 
to the vehicle actors where the vehicle steering angle and 
velocity will be set [9]. 
                           Figure 3. System Environment [9] 
V. TEST, VERIFICATION AND VALIDATION 
Testing, verifying, and validating the parking assist 
system is one of the most important steps in the process of 
product development. This is where the subsystems and the 
system are tested to see if it fulfils the requirements or if 
certain things need to be improved. This step can also involve 
the safety of the product and determines the acceptable level.  
A.   Parking Assist Test Company (VBOX Racelogic) 
VBOX Racelogic is a company that provides equipment 
for the manufacturers to make sure the parking assist system 
can be easily tested and validated. Using a VBOX 3i 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

datalogger, RTK base station and survey trolley a parking 
space can be marked out and plotted to more than 2 cm 
accuracy. This makes an exact resemblance of the space 
which then can be uploaded to the VBOX test suite 
(Software) where the parking assist test can be configured 
and run. Another feature is that the user can set defined pass 
and fail conditions in the system to fit the user conditions. 
The parking space only needs to be mapped out once, 
meaning the test can be run multiple times in the same space 
and variations can be minimized more easily [6]. 
When the test is running, real-time data can be seen on the 
screen, as shown in Figure 4. It illustrates the cars outline, the 
closest point of contact, as well as the pre-marked parking 
space. This gives the user an instant insight to the pass and 
fail status of each test, saving valuable testing time. 
               Figure 4. VBOX Test Suite Park Assist [6] 
B.  BMW X5 Parking Assist Test 
The parking assist technology is one of the best 
technologies within parking features existing today. The 
technology has been around since 2015 and BMW, 
Mercedes-Benz, Tesla and Volvo have all introduced 
autonomous parking assist [1]. 
Looking into BMW’s parking technology, a test on the 
parking features for a BMW X5 xDrive30d was performed 
by Paul Maric [2] where he went through all the features and 
put the system to test in an empty parking lot, using suitcases, 
himself and two other cars as obstacles. The two cars made it 
possible to create different scenarios like parallel parking, 
perpendicular and remote parking.  
During these tests, the system is tested in its entirety, not 
each subsystem separately. When testing the perpendicular 
parking, the two extra cars were parked within the lines 
leaving one parking spot in between them. The car then drove 
slowly past the empty spot to estimate the size. After passing 
the spot, the car will either alert the driver that the spot was 
too small, or big enough, so the parking operation can 
commence. In this case, the spot was big enough. If the driver 
accepts, the car will automatically set itself to the reverse or 
drive and park within the lines. At this point, all the sensors 
are active and the driver should not do anything apart from 
hovering over the break as an emergency if something were 
to happen. The driver also gets a 360-degree view of the car 
from above, also known as birdsview, making it easy to see 
how the parking is going and that the car will be parked 
within the lines.  Once the parking is complete, the car will 
alert the driver on the screen and the assisted car parking is 
complete.  
Very similarly to the perpendicular parking, the parallel 
parking begins by measuring up the space in between two 
vehicles and the car will alert the driver if the space is 
suitable. The driver can then accept and start the parking 
sequence where the car then automatically will set itself into 
the needed gear and make its way into the space without 
hitting any of the other vehicles. If something was to interrupt 
the parking sequence whilst its running, for example a 
pedestrian walking behind the car, the parking will be paused 
and resumed when the obstacle is outside of the path.  
As Paul Maric mentions, the exit assist may be needed in 
many cases when the parallel park feature has been used to 
get the vehicle into the spot. Similarly, starting the other 
parking assists, one selects exit assist, and it will have the 
driver confirm the direction of exit. The system will the 
reverse the car to clear room for the car in front, then drive 
out of the spot until the driver can take over [2]. 
Individual tests for the subsystems can also be performed. 
Regarding a senor test on a vehicle, a simple multimeter test 
can be used. Other practical tests can also be performed easily 
by putting the sensors to the test. Normally, objects are placed 
in certain locations then a scanning tool is used to see if the 
object is being correctly detected [7]. Placing an obstacle in 
front or behind the car and driving towards it will show if the 
sensors pick up on the obstacle in time and how the sensors 
beep at different distances.  
Understanding how the system works can reduce the 
diagnostic times. Also, knowing what part of the system to 
test will help prevent installing parts that do not fix the 
problem and make the repair or improvement cheaper and 
quicker [3]. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
Systems thinking gives the industry a new opportunity to 
see the bigger picture and seeing the system with all 
perspectives and stakeholders involved. When looking at the 
parking assist system, the main goal for this system is to park 
without hitting anything and park in a sufficiently large spot. 
For the system to work and reach its goal, we need reliability 
and accuracy.  
The goal seems like a simple case to solve, and that may 
be if all the impacting factors are at the perfect state. This is, 
however, very rare and unlikely in a real-life situation. What 
makes the whole situation so complex is the randomness and 
human behavior that occurs. A case scenario could be driving 
on one of the busiest streets in Oslo wanting to parallel park 
along the street. In this case, we do not have an empty parking 
lot where nothing can go wrong. We have randomness and 
human behavior. There are cars everywhere, trams and tram 
tracks, buses and people and pets walking all over the place. 
This means there are many unforeseen situations that can 
occur and effect the parking assistance system. What happens 
if a person walks behind the car when parking? What happens 
if a car behind drives too close during an active parking 
sequence?  
What would be some of the potential test criteria or 
requirements to have a successful and reliable product?  
• 
Perform parallel and reverse parking without hitting 
anything. 
• 
Measure and determine a suitable parking spot that 
will fit the car and allow room to exit and enter the 
car. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

• 
Park within a time limit of 30 seconds (for example) 
from accepting and activating the parking. 
• 
Emergency breaks in case of unforeseen behaviour. 
• 
Perform parking assist on the exit of the parking spot. 
• 
Provide clear instructions to the driver during the 
parking procedure.  
Examining the types of components in the system, in 
order to fulfil these criteria, the sensors may not need to be 
the absolute best and most expensive to complete the same 
tasks. To perform a parking operation, all the subsystems 
must cooperate to achieve the goal and if the components are 
good enough to fulfil the set requirements with a reasonable 
margin, it should be acceptable. 
VII. SYSTEMS THINKING APPROACH 
A.  CATWOE from company perspective  
 
The CATWOE approach illustrates the different actors 
and stakeholders and their perception on a topic. In this case, 
the CATWOE approach is done from the company’s 
perspective. This approach is from the systems thinking 
framework [16]. Perspectives are representations of an 
individual’s truths based on their knowledge of the world, and 
we use multiple forms to contextualize and communicate 
these perspectives (i.e. verbal, written, graphical) [16]. Using 
the CATWOE approach can give an overview of what to 
focus on and perhaps a clearer understanding when making 
certain decisions and what to prioritize. An example could be 
making a user-interface that is so complicated that only 
software engineers would understand it. The user-interface 
could be very good; however, it is then important to 
remember who the customers are, who in this case are the 
drivers. The assumption should be that the divers are not 
software engineers, and the user-interface needs to be user 
friendly and easy to understand and comprehend for anyone.  
TABLE I. CATWOE COMPANY PERSPECTIVE 
ASPECT 
DESCRIPTION 
CUSTOMERS – who are the 
beneficiaries/victims?   
Drivers. 
ACTOR(S) – who are the 
implementers?  
The car manufacturers 
(software, electronics, and test 
department). 
TRANSFORMATION – what does 
the system do? What are the inputs 
and what transformation do they go 
through to become the output? 
Signals and communication 
between different subsystems.  
 
WORLD VIEW – what point of 
view justifies its existence to the 
customers?  
What point of view makes this 
system meaningful? 
The big picture and its impact. 
Verify the subsystem. 
Validation of system that it 
works as it should.  
OWNER – who has the authority to 
change the system?  
 
Authorities like DMV 
(Department of Motor Vehicle 
in USA), DVLA (Driver and 
Vehicle Licensing Agency in 
England) or Biltilsynet in 
Norway can set requirements. 
ENVIRONMENT – What are the 
external constraints? 
 
Guidelines, rules, and regulation 
in the traffic. Randomness and 
human behavior. 
    Customer - Drivers would be the main customers of this 
product and will be most beneficial for them as they are the 
direct users. The general system technology would, however, 
be technology that car manufacturers would want to get and 
interoperate into their line of products to improve the overall 
performance and possibilities, and also keep up with the 
technological development. 
Actors - The car manufacturers are the ones responsible 
for implementing the system and making sure the system 
works and fulfils certain criteria before being released into 
the final product stage. Within the car manufacturer structure, 
there are many departments, meaning the software and 
electrical department mostly will oversee implementing and 
assembling the system together. In addition, they will be 
working with the test department to perform tests that verify 
and validate the different subsystems, then also improve the 
system if needed. The Department of Motor Vehicles, or 
Biltilsynet in Norway, are not implementers but may, 
however, set requirements as to how safe the system must be. 
Transformation - The main transformation for this 
system will be signals. The whole system is made up of 
sensors, radars, modules that calculate distance and a 
computer. Simply broken down, one example can be the 
sensor measuring the distance to the car behind it. This data 
is sent to the computer which then sends this to the brake 
system. The brake system can then perform an action of 
breaking when the car reaches a certain point. 
World View – The world view aspect investigates what 
point of view justifies its existence to the customers and the 
meaningfulness of the system. For this case, verifying the 
subsystem and validating the car assist system and making 
sure it works as it should and fulfils the requirements is what 
justifies its existence to the customer.  
Owner – The owners of the system or the authorities that 
have the power to influence or change the system in the case 
of car parking assistance is the DMV (Department of Motor 
Vehicles in USA), DVLA (Driver and Vehicle Licensing 
Agency in England) or Biltilsynet in Norway, to mention a 
few from different countries. They have the authority to make 
changes or set requirements and constraints to the system, if 
needed.  
Environment – some of the external constraints for the 
system are guidelines, rules, and regulation in the traffic. 
Another external constraint can be randomness and human 
behavior. 
B. Systemigram 
The term “Systemigram” is derived from “Systemic 
Diagrams,” and has been used to “bring context to the 
meaning of togetherness” [11] [13] [14]. A system diagram 
or Systemigram will be used to map the parking assist system. 
This systems thinking tool is used to explain the interactions 
between several, interrelated elements and is a great tool to 
get an overview over all the elements and decompose 
complex systems [12]. The Systemigram was developed by 
Boardman and provides a powerful tool for the analysis of 
systems first described in written form [15]. In this diagram, 
the mainstay is displayed with the dark and light green 
bubbles and the path lines are thicker than the rest. The 
mainstay shows the main steps in the process and shows how 
it goes from a PAS test to a verified PAS product. See Figure 
5. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The PAS technology is, as mentioned, a small system. 
However, car manufacturers have prioritized this technology 
and kept developing it together with the overall vehicle, but 
why? As explained in the problem context, a large percentage 
of accidents happen in parking lots and parking garages, not 
only to other vehicles, but people. Developing a smart 
parking assist systems in vehicles can help reduce the number 
of accidents, if not avoid them all together.  
The tests and verification of these systems are done 
thoroughly and there are even companies that produce 
specific equipment and software for the testers or users to get 
a good overview and insight in every stage of the parking 
process. The new modern-day cars are full of parking sensors, 
radars and, in most cases, also equipped with 360-degree 
cameras and much more technology and features, such as 
Reverse AEB (Autonomous Emergency Braking), reverse 
assist, remote parking etc. Having all these features activated 
would reduce the risk of accidents as the car would pick up 
on everything the driver does not see, and even emergency 
brake, if needed.  
The parking assist system technology has been and will 
be around for a long time. Looking at how much this small 
and complex technology has evolved since 2003 when the 
first rear parking sensors were introduced, it is safe to say it 
will not stop at semi- or autonomous parking assist and will 
be evolving into technology and new smart solutions we have 
not even thought of yet.  
       The purpose of this paper is to propose a new way of 
looking at a complex system. Using systems thinking 
approaches as CATWOE and Systemigram, we can look at 
the system with more perspective and with the involved 
stakeholders. Although each component and subsystem are 
important, they can give the system a new view when looking 
at it with a wider perspective and seeing the whole system. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gautam, "A Brief History of Car Parking Technology - Get 
My Parking Blog.", 2019. [online] Get My Parking Blog. 
Available at: <https://blog.getmyparking.com/2019/04/08/a-
brief-history-of-car-parking-technology/> [Accessed 30 June 
2021]. 
[2] P. Maric, "How do parking sensors work? Parking tech, radar 
& remote hands free explained!", 2020. [online] Youtube.com. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uDpaB_1kIdA> 
[Accessed 9 July 2021]. 
[3] Rts.i-car.com, "Understanding The Park Assist System.", 2017. 
[online] Available at: <https://rts.i-car.com/collision-repair-
news/understanding-the-park-assist-system.html> [Accessed 9 
July 2021]. 
[4] D. Moore, "Parking lot accidents: statistics, causes, and 
liability 
- 
MyParkingSign 
Blog.", 
2021. 
[online] 
MyParkingSign 
Blog. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.myparkingsign.com/blog/parking-lot-
accidents/> [Accessed 6 July 2021]. 
[5] E. Szadeczky-Kardoss and B. Kiss, "Path Planning and 
Tracking Control for an Automatic Parking Assist System", 
2008. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225220433_Path_
Planning_and_Tracking_Control_for_an_Automatic_Parking
_Assist_System> [Accessed 6 July 2021]. 
[6] Zen Micro Systems. 2020. "Park Assist - Zen Micro Systems. 
" 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.zenmicrosystems.co.in/park-assist/> [Accessed 
10 August 2021]. 
[7] Rts.i-car.com. 2016. "Typical Calibration Requirements For 
Park Assist Sensors. " [online] Available at: <https://rts.i-
car.com/collision-repair-news/typical-calibration-
requirements-for-park-assist-sensors.html> 
[Accessed 
10 
August 2021]. 
[8] S. Gautam, "Smart Parking Assist Explained: How it Works - 
Get My Parking Blog. ", 2020. [online] Get My Parking Blog. 
Available 
at: 
<https://blog.getmyparking.com/2020/06/26/smart-parking-
assist-explained-how-it-works/> [Accessed 12 August 2021]. 
[9] O. Buhler and J. Wegner, "Automatic Testing of an 
Autonomous Parking System using Evolutionary Computation. 
SAE Technical Papers," 2004. [online] Available at: 
Figure 5. Systemigram of the PAS 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267402961_Auto
matic_Testin_of_an_Autonomous_Parking_System_Using_E
volutionary_Computation> [Accessed 9 July 2021]. 
[10] G. Voinea, C. Postelnicu, M. Duguleana, G. Mogan, and R. 
Socianu,, "Driving Performance and Technology Acceptance 
Evaluation in Real Traffic of a Smartphone-Based Driver 
Assistance System. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health", vol. 17, no. 19, p.7098, 2020. 
[11] R. Haugen and M. Mansouri, "Applying Systems Thinking to 
Frame and Explore a Test System for Product Verification; a 
Case Study in Large Defence Projects. " INCOSE International 
Symposium, vol. 30, no. 1, pp.78-93, 2020. 
[12] C. Witte and M. Mansouri, "Analyzing the effects of 
connecting Norway's remote communities to large cities using 
the Systems Thinking approach," INCOSE International 
Symposium, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 1219-1234, 2020. 
[13] J. Boardman and B. Sauser, "Systems Thinking: Coping with 
21st Centurty Problems." 2008, Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & 
Francis / CRC Press. 
[14] M. Mansouri, B, Sauser, and D. Boardman. "Applications of 
Systems Thinking for Resilience Study in Maritime 
Transportation System of Systems.", 2009. 
[15] R. Edson, "Systems Thinking. Applied. A Primer. ", 1st ed. 
ASysT, p.21, 2008. 
[16] B. Sauser, M. Mansouri and M. Omer. "Using Systemigrams 
in Problem Definition: A Case Study in Maritime Resilience 
for Homeland Security. Journal of Homeland Security and 
Emergency Management", vol. 8, no. 1, 2011. 
[17] H. Jung. "Semi‐automatic parking slot marking recognition 
for intelligent parking assist systems. The Journal of 
Engineering", no. 1, pp.8-15, 2014. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

