Improving Change Management Systems and
Processes
Marko J¨antti, Juha Niskala
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
P.O.B 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@uef.ﬁ
Abstract—IT service change management aims to ensure that
new services and changes to services will be deliverable and man-
ageable at the agreed cost and service quality. Change manage-
ment is an attractive research topic due to its complicated nature
(broad scope, a large number of interfaces, many instances). Our
research exploits the best practices of IT Infrastructure Library
(ITIL) framework. The research problem of this study is: Which
factors should be taken into consideration while implementing
IT service change management systems and processes? The main
contribution of this paper is to present results of a case study
with a Finnish IT service provider organization that provides
ICT and medical technology services in Finland. Our results
consist of identiﬁed functional and data requirements for a change
management module within an IT service management system
as well as practical implications for change management process
implementation. The case study was carried out as a part of a
research project that focused on improving Service Transition
processes.
Keywords—IT service; change management; change; process
I.
INTRODUCTION
IT service change management aims to ensure that new
services and changes to services will be deliverable and
manageable at the agreed cost and service quality. According to
the IT Infrastructure Library Glossary [1], an IT service change
can be understood as” addition, modiﬁcation or removal of
anything that could have an effect on IT Services and the scope
should include all IT services, conﬁguration items, processes,
documentation etc.”
There are four key challenges related to IT service change
management. First, change management occurs in many or-
ganizational levels. Top management has to deal with totally
different types of changes (typically strategic changes incl.
changes to a service portfolio and supplier changes) compared
to the changes carried out by operative management (changes
to service components, technologies and tools). Second, even
in operative change management, there are several types of
changes that need to be processed through different change
models. Third, IT service organizations often seem to lack
the comprehensive understanding what is a change, how does
it differ from daily operative activities, service requests and
error correction work. Fourth, the interface between release
management and change management often remains unclear.
Release management activities are performed in order to im-
plement the change. After the the release management process
has delivered a release that can contain one or several changes,
change management is responsible for organizing the Post
Implementation Review meeting. The challenges may exist in
relating changes to releases.
In our study, the goal is to improve change management
based on the process improvement frameworks that support
IT service change management. The most widely used best
practice framework for IT service management is IT Infras-
tructure Library (ITIL) that describes the service lifecycle with
ﬁve stages: Service Strategy [2], Service Design [3], Service
Transition [4], Service Operation [5] and Continual Service
Improvement [6]. In addition to ITIL, there is a well known IT
governance framework COBIT that deﬁnes control objectives
for the change management process [7]:
•
Develop and implement a process to consistently
record, assess and prioritise change requests.
•
Assess impact and prioritise changes based on busi-
ness needs.
•
Assure that any emergency and critical change follows
the approved process.
•
Authorise changes.
•
Manage and disseminate relevant information regard-
ing changes.
There are several international standards that IT service
provider organizations may use to benchmark their processes.
ISO/IEC 20000-1:2010 Part 1: Service management system
requirements [8] and ISO/IEC 20000-2:2011 Part 2: Guidance
on the application of service management systems [9] are
descriptive standards that deﬁne requirements for IT Service
Change Management. In the ISO/IEC 20000, change manage-
ment is visible in several areas, such as in:
•
Planning and implementing new or changed services
(All service changes should be reﬂected in Change
Management records.)
•
Service reviews (The service provider and customer(s)
should hold service reviews, at least annually and
before and after major changes.)
•
Change management (The change management pro-
cesses and procedures should ensure that changes
have a clearly deﬁned and documented scope; only
changes that provide business beneﬁt are approved,
changes are scheduled based on priority and risk;
changes to conﬁgurations can be veriﬁed during
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

change implementation; and the time to implement
changes is monitored and improved where required.)
The recently published ISO/IEC TS 15504-8:2012 process
assessment model [10] provides a systematic framework to
measure change management capability.
Much has been written about change management from
traditional software engineering and IT management perspec-
tive. The study of Sauv´e et al. [11] provides a formal method
to automatically assign priorities to changes by exploiting
a Business-Driven IT Management (BDIM) approach and
state that risks associated with changes can be calculated
and changes prioritized in an automatic fashion. The most
interesting part of their study is the description of the service
level agreement (SLA) clauses related to changes (in their
case, any security-related RFC costs 1000 USD/hour until the
change is implemented). We are also interested in our research
to explore more deeply the change-related SLAs.
Hagen and Kemper [12] have proposed an algorithm for
the automated detection of conﬂicting IT change plans. The
detection was done based on an object-oriented Conﬁguration
Management Database. Machado et al. [13] have investigated
how change activities can be grouped together forming atomic
groups of activities by using Business Process Execution
Language (BPEL). Release management is an important sub-
process of change management. Release management has
been examined by several studies. J¨antti and Sihvonen [14]
have examined the patch and release management activities
in Finnish IT service provider organizations. Van Der Hoek
and Wolf [15] have explored requirements for release manage-
ment. Jansen and Bringkemper [16] have presented common
misconceptions about product software release management.
Furthermore, Jokela and J¨antti [17] have identiﬁed challenges
in release management process by using product portfolio
management perspective in energy domain.
The research gap can be identiﬁed in change management
from IT service management perspective. Signiﬁcantly more
academic studies are needed to investigate how IT service
provider organizations carry out change management activities,
measure the performance of change management, and assign
roles and deﬁne responsibilities to perform the process.
This study was conducted during Keys to IT Service
Management and Effective Transition of Services ( KISMET)
research project where one of the industrial partners was
interested in change management process improvement. The
research problem of this paper is: Which factors should be
taken into consideration while implementing IT service change
management systems and processes? The main contribution of
this study is to
•
show functional and data requirements for change
management systems,
•
present observations from a change management pro-
cess improvement pilot, and
•
provide lessons learnt from change management pro-
cess improvement.
The results of this study can be used to improve change
management systems and processes of IT service provider
organizations. The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. In Section 2, the research methods of this study are
described. In Section 3, we present the results of the study.
Section 4 aims at analysing the ﬁndings of the study. The
conclusions are given in Section 5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
The research problem of this study is: Which factors should
be taken into consideration while implementing IT service
change management systems and processes? The research
problem was divided into the following research questions:
•
Which data ﬁelds should be included in the Request
For Change (RFC)/change record?
•
What are the beneﬁts of change management process?
•
How change management activities are carried out in
the case organization?
•
Which roles are related to change management?
•
Which interfaces does the change management have
with other ITSM processes?
A. The Case Organization and Data Collection Methods
Our case organization ITSM Ltd (we use a ﬁctive name to
maintain the anonymity of the case) is an IT service provider
company that provides ICT and medical technology services
for municipalities and and public health care sector. Our case
organization has around 220 employees. The case organization
uses ISO/IEC 20000 IT service management standard as a
management framework for IT services and service manage-
ment processes. This case study focused on IT service change
management. The topic of study was selected by the case
organization’s representative.
The following data collection methods/sources were used
during the study:
•
Documentation (change management process descrip-
tion)
•
Archives (change request records, service request
records)
•
Interviews/discussions (change managers, develop-
ment manager, product/service managers)
•
Participative observation (observation period in the
case organization, 2 weeks; a change management
workshop for product managers, 2 hours)
•
Physical artefacts (access to the organization’s in-
tranet, demonstrations of a change management tool)
The research team established a case study datastore to
manage the material received from the case organization and
the material created by researchers. The research team focused
on analyzing the documentation and comparing it to IT service
management best practices rather than ﬁnding errors. The
deviations that the team found were reported to the case
organization’s representatives. According to Yin’s [18] case
study principles, we established a chain of evidence between
data sources and ﬁndings. We also created a case study
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

datastore for the team’s internal use. The datastore proved out
to be a valuable tool when we created the case study report to
the case organization.
A combination of action research and case study research
methods was used as a main research method. It is especially
important that action research involves a team that includes
both researchers and subjects as co-participants in the enquiry
and change experiences on the chosen topic [19].
Baskerville [19] deﬁnes action research as a two-stage
process. In the diagnostic stage (Stage 1), the researcher and
the subjects of the research perform a collaborative analysis
of the social situation. In our study, collaborative analysis
refers to joint meetings with the case organization’s change
management specialists, change managers, and a development
manager. In these joint meetings, the current state and the
target state of change management was discussed. In the
therapeutic stage (Stage 2), collaborative change experiments
are performed. This stage focuses on introducing changes and
studying the effects of changes.
Action research suits well to situations where the goal is
to improve working practices and ﬁnd solutions to existing
business problems. The research team did not work only
as an external observer but also created material for the
change management process. Action research methods were
supplemented by case study methods. According to Yin [18],
a case study is ”an empirical inquiry that investigates a
contemporary phenomenon within its real-life context”. We
used an exploratory case study with a single case design.
B. Data Analysis
The case study data was collected and analyzed by three
researchers using a within case analysis technique [20] that
focuses on analyzing each case stand-alone before making any
comparisons. Research ﬁndings were validated with the case
organization’s change manager and development manager and
discussed in the workshop with product managers that played
change manager roles. The case study report was produced
after the case study ﬁndings and was delivered to the case
organization’s contact persons. This paper documents only part
of the ﬁndings and research questions that were captured in
the case study report.
III.
IT SERVICE CHANGE MANAGEMENT - STUDY
FINDINGS
We used KISMET (Keys to IT Service Management Ex-
cellence Technique) model as a process improvement tool. The
model consists of the following seven phases: Create a process
improvement infrastructure, Perform a process assessment,
Plan process improvement actions, Improve / implement the
process based on ITSM practices, Deploy and introduce the
process, Evaluate process improvement and Continuous pro-
cess improvement. The KISMET model provided researchers
a roadmap for the process improvement work.
In this section, we provide a summary of the case study
results. We shall start with the functional and data requirements
for a change management system.
A. Functional requirements for a change management system
During the study, the functional requirements were identi-
ﬁed to improve the existing change management system. The
case organization had an old ticketing system that had been
created (exceptionally) within the organization. We collected
requirements from discussions with a change manager and
development manager and edited the comments to match
ITSM terminology. The following list captures the functional
requirements that we identiﬁed:
•
The system should enable easy reporting of changes
by any employee.
•
The system should enable separating development
ideas from service requests and incidents.
•
The system should enable categorization of changes
(major, minor, emergency).
•
The system should provide appropriate reports to the
change management actors (e.g., number of imple-
mented and failed changes by type and time period;
throughput times for changes by change type).
•
The system should enable linking incidents, problems
and service requests to change records.
•
The system should be able to maintain the change
history (change log).
•
The system should have a relationship to the Con-
ﬁguration Management System to enable collecting
information on faulty/vulnerable/resource consuming
conﬁguration items.
•
The system should be able to support Change Advi-
sory Board (CAB) meetings and provide CAB mem-
bers actions for reviewing, accepting or rejecting
change requests.
B. Data requirements for a change management system
The following data requirements were identiﬁed for the
change management system. Data requirements were captured
by analyzing the speciﬁcations of existing ITSM system and
comparing it to other ITSM tools and ITSM best practices.
•
Unique identiﬁer
•
Date of creation
•
Change requestor’s information
•
The target of the change
•
Trigger of the change
•
Title of the change request
•
Description of the change (what do you want to
change, what kind of user groups are affected by the
change)
•
Service Area
•
Reason for change
•
Estimated impact of the change
•
Change category (standard, normal, emergency, major)
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

•
Schedule, required resources and costs
•
Change priority (low, normal, urgent)
•
Change effects (affecting a single user, department, or
entire organization)
•
Recovery Plan
•
Impact assessment (resources, capacity, costs and ben-
eﬁts)
•
CAB decisions and recommendations
•
Accepted/rejected date
•
Change status
•
The authorization date
•
Estimated completion date
•
Due date of change (Business opportunity window)
•
The actual date of change introduction
•
PIR meeting
•
PIR evaluation data
•
Closure code (success, canceled, abandoned, post-
poned, implementation)
C. Roles related to the change management process
We observed that change management roles were well
visible in the change management process description. The
change manager was also responsible for maintaining the pro-
cess description document. The following roles were identiﬁed
based on the change management process description:
•
Change manager (monitors change requests and im-
plementation of changes, ensures that the process ﬁlls
its outcomes and purpose, ensures that the process
ﬁlls the requirements of ISO/IEC 20000, performs
continual service improvement)
•
Change proposer (a customer, service desk or a spe-
cialist identiﬁes a need for a change)
•
Change processor (monitors change requests and
queues, records change request details in the ticket,
if the change proposer has not done it, carries out a
preliminary assessment and classiﬁes the change re-
quest, calls the CAB, is responsible for implementing
the change and Post Implementation Review(PIR))
•
Problem manager (responsible for emergency changes
during ofﬁce hours, calls the CAB meeting)
•
Application Team duty ofﬁcer (responsible for emer-
gency changes outside ofﬁce hours, calls the CAB
meeting)
•
CAB, Change Advisory Board (evaluates the effects
of the change, makes decisions on changes)
•
Change Implementor (implements the change by uti-
lizing release management and conﬁguration manage-
ment, records change history)
D. Improving the change management process
During the study, the research team provided the case
organization with a list of suggestions how improve the change
management process. Before we present improvements, we
have to note several positive ﬁndings on the organization’s IT
service management. First, processes were in good shape. Each
process had been clearly and consistently documented and
given a responsible person (process manager). Service manage-
ment employees seemed to be well committed to continuous
learning and improvement. We witnessed open information
sharing on current challenges (ITSM tools and processes) and
that they had been trained how to identify process problems
and learn from failures. Some of employees reported that
getting a training certiﬁcate or an ITSM standard should not
slow down the learning and that there is always something to
improve. Employees also indicated that management is well
committed on improving service quality.
Improvement suggestions/challenges were related to the
following parts of change management (the source of an issue
is presented in parentheses: Documentation (Do), Archives
(Ar), Interviews/Discussions (InD), Participative observation
(Po), Physical artefacts (Pa)).
•
Post Implementation Reviews for changes (Pa, InD,
Ar)
•
Increasing awareness of change management practices
by organizing Process Manager forums (InD)
•
Evaluation and estimation of the changes (Po: Change
management workshop)
•
Information sharing on change management through
a centralized datastore (InD).
•
Deﬁning interfaces between change management and
other ITSM processes as well as IT project manage-
ment (Do, Po, InD)
•
Deﬁning the change management metrics (Do, Pa,
InD)
In almost all of our process improvement case studies, we
have observed a need for clearly deﬁned interfaces between
IT service management processes. This case revealed the need
to deﬁne the interface also between change management and
project management. This interface is very interesting from the
following reasons: First, implementing a change as a project
allows the service provider organization to better charge the
customer for the work required to achieve objectives of the
change. Second, because the size and the complexity of the
changes varies, there is a need for guidelines and models
that help the organization decide how the change shall be
completed. The change can be completed in several ways: as
a project, as a normal change or as a hybrid model that is
coordinated by a business relationship manager until there are
project resources available.
Figure 1 shows the interface between project management
and IT service management in the context of non-standard
change.
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Fig. 1.
Interface between project management and IT service management
Fig. 2.
The draft version of the PIR form
IV.
ANALYSIS
The data analysis was carried out by using within case
analysis technique that focuses on creating a rich view on the
case organization’s behavior before making any conclusions.
Each data source was analyzed from the viewpoint of research
questions. In this section, we provide the analysis of ﬁndings
in the form of lessons learnt. The following lessons learnt were
derived from the study.
Lesson 1: Conduct Post Implementation Reviews for
changes. Post Implementation Review group should meet
after the change implementation and evaluate the success of
change (causes, goals, improvement suggestions) and perform
a detailed investigation for failed/unsuccessful changes. Dur-
ing the study, we created several templates to assist change
management tasks. Figure 2 shows the Post Implementation
Review form that should be ﬁlled in the PIR meeting in case
of a failed change.
Lesson 2: Increase communication on change manage-
ment practices by organizing Process Manager forums. In-
terviews showed that process managers need discussion forums
to discuss on process practices and make them more uniﬁed.
One of the interviewees reported: The challenge is to get daily
work and processes together. In addition to CAB meetings, one
could organize change management meetings where change
managers and specialists that are related to managing changes
could share experiences on change management practices and
tools.
Lesson 3: Change evaluation. The change manage-
ment workshop highlighted the importance and complexity of
change evaluation. A participant of the change management
workshop stated: The most challenging part in change man-
agement is to estimate the scope and the effects of changes.
The evaluation of change is equal to risk estimation. The
change management system should support the decision mak-
ing, for example, showing the dependencies between service
components and modules. Here, the conﬁguration management
database plays an essential role.
Lesson 4: Identiﬁcation of changes. An interview with
one of the process managers revealed that employees need
guidelines how to identify changes/requests for change and
how to separate them from other requests, such as service
requests. Interviewees also addressed the need for practical
level ITSM training.
Lesson 5: Centralized place for change management
guidelines. According to our observations, information on the
change management was stored in separate locations, which
made it difﬁcult to get an overview how process is executed
and monitored. A solution could be to establish an intranet site
for change management guidelines and reports. Additionally,
we suggested that communication channels to change man-
agement ofﬁce should be clearly visible for employees, such
as in the form of an email address (cmo@company.com). The
change management ofﬁce should also communicate its service
offering for the organization’s employees, for example, which
change management training is available.
Lesson 6: Deﬁne change management interfaces
During the study, we found that the case organization’s
change management process had relationships with conﬁg-
uration management, service request management, business
relationship management, service level management, release
and deployment management, IT ﬁnancial management, secu-
rity management, and availability and continuity management.
The interface with project management had been mentioned
in the change management process description but required
clariﬁcation. Thus, we provided a visual description of the
interface.
Lesson 7: Measuring the performance of change man-
agement
A typical challenge in IT service management is how to
measure the performance of ITSM processes. A good starting
point is to identify critical success factors, key performance
indicators and metrics. For example,
•
Critical success factor: Service quality and protection
of the service.
•
Key performance indicator: Percentual decrease in
failed changes.
•
Metrics: Number of failed changes.
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

We observed that most of the change management metrics
were documented in form of KPIs: Decrease in number of
defects due to unauthorized changes, decrease in number of
failed changes, decrease in SLA breaches due to changes,
decrease in number of urgent changes, better pre-estimation
of changes. Our suggestion was to deﬁne metrics that the
process and tools support. For example, if one would like to
use ’decrease in number of failed changes’ as a KPI, one has
to know exactly the number of failed changes. Additionally,
there must be clear rules and criteria what is a failed change.
This leads to deﬁning limits and allowed tolerances, for
example, a change becomes a failed change when a change
implementation exceeds the estimated budget with more than
10 per cent. Our ﬁndings support some of the earlier studies
in change management such as the study of Sauv´e et al. [11]
that indicated the need of careful planning of change-related
SLAs. In our study, we also identiﬁed that it is challenging
to create SLAs for error corrections that usually go through
problem management process. While change management is
often discussed in the contect of organizational changes and
software change management, this paper focused on innovative
aspect of change management: IT service change management
which is important topic for any IT service company. While
designing a change management system, it is not enough to
focus just on internal requirements (functions and data). One
should also take into account the external metrics, such as
usability, availability and user satisfaction.
V.
CONCLUSION
The research problem of this study is: Which factors
should be taken into consideration while implementing IT
service change management systems and processes? By using
case study and action research methods, we performed a
study in an IT service provider organization and focused on
exploring IT service change management from a tool and
process perspective. As key results, we presented functional
and data requirements for a change management system,
beneﬁts that the organization has received from improving
change management, and roles and responsibilities within
change management.
The key improvement ideas we identiﬁed were related to
organizing frequent Post Implementation Reviews both for suc-
cessful and failed changes, classiﬁcation of changes, deﬁning
change management interfaces both with service management
processes and project management.
This following limitations are related to our study. First,
data were collected from manager level representatives during
a relatively short time period (2 weeks). Although we managed
to get a rich set of material (5 interviews, informal discussions,
15 documents, 7 observation periods) time should be spent
on the data collection and analysis to increase the amount
of observation and interviews. Data collection and analysis
of employee level information could have provided richer
viewpoints to the research topic. Second, we used a single case
design in this study. We agree that this causes generalization
difﬁculties for our results. However, case studies and action
research studies do not have to lead statistical conclusions.
Instead, they can be used to improve the theory. Here, we
focused on contributing to IT service management and change
management theory. Further research could explore in more
detail the interfaces between IT service management processes
and IT project management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is based on research in KISMET project funded
by the National Technology Agency TEKES (no. 70035/10),
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), and industrial
partners.
REFERENCES
[1]
IT Service Management Forum, “Glossary of terms and deﬁnitions,”
Technical Report, 2007.
[2]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(a), ITIL Service Strategy.
The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[3]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(b), ITIL Service Design.
The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[4]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(c), ITIL Service Transition.
The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[5]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(d), ITIL Service Operation.
The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[6]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(e), ITIL Continual Service Improve-
ment.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[7]
COBIT 5, Control Objectives for Information and related Technology:
COBIT 5: Enabling Processes.
ISACA, 2012.
[8]
ISO/IEC 20000:1, Part 1: Service management system requirements.
ISO/IEC JTC 1 Secretariat, 2010.
[9]
ISO/IEC 20000:2, Part 2: Guidance on the application of service
management systems.
ISO/IEC JTC 1 Secretariat, 2011.
[10]
ISO/IEC TS 15504-8:2012, Information technology - Process assess-
ment -Part 8: An exemplar process assessment model for IT service
management.
ISO/IEC TC JTC1/SC7 Secretariat, 2012.
[11]
J. Sauve, R. Santos, R. Reboucas, A. Moura, and C. Bartolini, “Change
priority determination in it service management based on risk exposure,”
Network and Service Management, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 178–187, 2008.
[12]
S. Hagen and A. Kemper, “Towards solid it change management:
Automated detection of conﬂicting it change plans,” in Integrated
Network Management (IM), 2011 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium
on, 2011, pp. 265–272.
[13]
G. Machado, F. Daitx, W. da Costa Cordeiro, C. Both, L. Gaspary,
L. Granville, C. Bartolini, A. Sahai, D. Trastour, and K. Saikoski,
“Enabling rollback support in it change management systems,” in
Network Operations and Management Symposium, 2008. NOMS 2008.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 347–354.
[14]
H.-M. Sihvonen and M. Jantti, “Improving release and patch man-
agement processes: An empirical case study on process challenges,”
Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering
Advances (ICSEA 2009), vol. 0, pp. 232–237, 2010.
[15]
A. van der Hoek and A. L. Wolf, “Software release management for
component-based software,” Softw. Pract. Exper., vol. 33, no. 1, pp.
77–98, 2003.
[16]
S. Jansen and S. Brinkkemper, “Ten misconceptions about product soft-
ware release management explained using update cost/value functions,”
in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Software Product
Management.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006,
pp. 44–50.
[17]
K. Jokela and M. J¨antti, “Challenges and problems in product port-
folio release and deployment management,” in Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management
(ICSSSM12).
Shanghai, China: IEEE, 2012.
[18]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[19]
R. Baskerville, “Investigating information systems with action re-
search,” Commun. AIS, p. 4.
[20]
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” Academy
of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

