 
 
3D Visualizations for Supporting Social Awareness in Learning Communities 
 
Ekaterina Prasolova-Førland 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Trondheim, Norway 
e-mail: ekaterip@idi.ntnu.no 
 
 
Abstract - Establishing and nurturing vibrant learning 
communities is seen as a highly complex process. An important 
concept in this context is that of social awareness. In this paper, 
we discuss supporting social awareness by 3D visualization of 
social networks, activities and resources. We compare social 
awareness support provided by virtual environments of Active 
Worlds and Second Life, outlining directions for future work.  
Keywords-3D visualizations; social awareness; 3D virtual 
worlds; learning communities 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The goal of this research is exploring the possibilities of 
3D visualizations for supporting social awareness in 
learning communities. Communities are fluid and emergent 
[1], as opposed to well-defined groups. It might therefore be 
difficult for community members to get an overview of the 
existing social structures, activities and available resources 
in a learning community. This is a problem because 
awareness of, e.g., experience distribution and social ties 
creates occasions for knowledge sharing, facilitating search 
for cooperation partners. On the opposite, lack of this 
awareness creates continuous breakdowns in the flow of 
knowledge and, as a consequence, impacts negatively on 
learning. We use the term social awareness to indicate 
awareness of the social situation in a group or community in 
a shared environment, which can be physical, virtual or 
both. This awareness includes knowledge on learners’ 
resources, activities and social connections. We distinguish 
between short-term and long-term, synchronous and 
asynchronous social awareness [2]. 
There are various mechanisms for promoting social 
awareness in everyday life, like chance encounters, message 
boards, verbal and non-verbal cues [3]. These techniques are 
not always sufficient due to a number of reasons, such as 
physical distances between the students, social fears and 
inhibitions and available spaces that are not optimal for 
meeting, working and information sharing. Various 
groupware tools have been used to promote awareness, 
overcoming the limitations of everyday modalities of 
interactions, including Twitter, Facebook, Skype and other 
[4]. Still, these tools mainly focus on supporting already 
established groups and networks rather than fluid 
communities [5]. 
3D virtual worlds have promising potential for 
supporting social awareness in learning communities. There 
are a number of reasons for that. First, 3D visualization is a 
powerful tool for supporting understanding of complex 
concepts, including social aspects, and is widely used in 
educational context [2, 6]. Second, 3D virtual worlds provide 
a constructivist and flexible learning environment where 
learners can collaboratively construct their understanding by 
exploring, building and sharing their experiences with peers 
and forming the environment according to the current needs 
of the learning community. Third, 3D virtual worlds provide 
a social arena where students, teachers and other 
stakeholders can meet and interact overcoming distances and 
different time zones, allowing supporting social awareness in 
a synchronous manner [7]. 
On the longer term, virtual spaces become a container of 
artifacts used by the users for their daily social and 
educational activities, and traces left by community members 
as a result of their participation. The places that serve as 
triggers and repositories of community memory in real life 
cannot serve as a permanent reference for community 
members since such places cannot be accessed any time and 
because the memories they keep have to be replaced 
regularly due to the limited amount of available space. The 
use of virtual places, on the other hand, allows such places 
with traces to be saved before they are cleaned up or 
removed, in this way supporting long-term/asynchronous 
social awareness [8, 9]. 
In this paper, we will discuss how to 3D visualizations 
can be used to support social awareness. The discussion will 
be illustrated by 2 case studies performed by the author in the 
virtual environments of Active Worlds [10] and Second Life 
[11]. By comparing social awareness support provided by 
these 2 environments, as well as alternative approaches, we 
outline directions for future work. 
 
II. 
SUPPORTING SOCIAL AWARENESS WITH 3D VISUALIZATION 
IN ACTIVE WORLDS AND SECOND LIFE 
Example 1 (Active Worlds). In order to support social 
awareness, we have created a virtual world called Viras in 
the virtual world of Active Worlds [10]. Viras is based on the 
metaphor of ‘Archipelago’: a virtual world consisting of sea 
and islands and groups of islands (Fig. 1). We have arrived at 
this metaphor after analyzing various spatial metaphors used 
in educational virtual worlds, trying to combine different 
features in one system in order to achieve sufficient 
flexibility [2, 8]. One of the goals behind this metaphor was 
to re-create the way in which communities and groups 
naturally are created and developed. Islands represent groups 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
and individuals, their constellations into archipelagos are 
communities, and the links, bridges and roads serve as 
connections between them. Also, we wanted to create a 
landscape with a high degree of overview, especially from 
the ‘bird’s-eye view’, of the existing structures by clear 
distinction of borders and units of community building 
against the ‘sea’ background, thus promoting awareness of 
the community development. In addition to visualizing the 
social structures, the resources and activities of the 
community members are visualized in the virtual places 
where these activities take place (Fig. 2) 
Example 2 (Second Life). The second example is a 
Virtual Research Arena being constructed at the Virtual 
Campus of Norwegian university of Science and Technology 
in Second Life [11], presenting a number of research projects 
performed at our university as well as student projects (Fig. 
3). The virtual research arena serves as a meeting point for 
the communities of students, researchers and general public, 
sustaining awareness of research activities in these 
communities. It has been used as a venue for a number of 
community events, such as a science fair, international 
seminars and project presentations (Fig. 4). While 
developing the Virtual Research Arena, we have explored 
innovative ways of capturing, storing and mediating 
community knowledge through 3D creative visualizations 
and role-plays. The 3D constructions capturing the 
knowledge and experiences acquired by different generations 
of students and researchers will be stored in a virtual ‘project 
gallery’ constituting the community repository [9]. 
This repository and the community meeting areas contain 
a number of boundary objects that have been collaboratively 
created in order to facilitate the exchange of ideas between 
communities of students, researchers and practitioners. These 
boundary objects contribute to establishing a common 
ground, shared understanding and vocabulary among 
community members by to a significant degree taking 
advantage of visual symbols, interactive elements and 
aesthetics elements [9].  
In Table 1, we provide an overview and compare social 
awareness mechanisms in Active Worlds and Second Life 
(based on the presented 2 studies), along the dimensions of 
learner, place, artifacts, following a characterization 
framework developed earlier by the author [2]. 
 
 
Figure 1. 3D visualization of social structure of a learning community as 
‘Archipelago’ 
 
Figure 2. A virtual place with visualizations and traces of students’ 
discussions and activities. 
 
Figure 3. Virtual Research Arena as 3D visualization of a learning 
community’s activities and research projects 
 
Figure 4. Examples of 3D visualizations of community’s activities: Virtual 
Science Fair, exhibition booths presenting research projects and seminars 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
The overview of social awareness mechanisms in Table 
1 shows that Second Life in general provides equivalent or 
better support. For both virtual environments, usefulness for 
long-term social awareness support depends on the extent of 
usage and applies to active users only. Short-term awareness 
can only be supported with a relatively large amount of 
users online, and to a limited degree. This discussion raises 
a number of issues in connection with the suitability of 3D  
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
TABLE 1. COMPARING SOCIAL AWARENESS SUPPORT IN ACTIVE WORLDS AND SECOND LIFE
Active Worlds (Viras/Archipelago) 
Second Life (Virtual Campus/Virtual Research Arena) 
Learner 
 
• 
Virtual environment provides rich possibilities for conveying of awareness information and identity expression 
through creation of places and artifacts  
• 
Virtual environment provides alternative means of communication and conveying of awareness through chat and 3D 
content brainstorming, 3D movement and manipulation of 3D artifacts and places  
• 
Limited selection and rotation of avatars makes 
identification of users and conveying of short-term 
social awareness difficult. From AW version 4.2, 
some avatar customization features are provided 
• 
Complexity of movement and communication in 
3D space limits the use of existing awareness 
mechanisms 
• 
Search for collaboration partners with needed 
resources is complicated, especially due to the fact 
that Active Worlds consists of a number of un-
connected universes 
• 
Extensive possibilities for avatar (appearance and clothing) 
modifications, such as in in-built avatar editor and 
acquiring avatar features on the Linden market makes 
possibilities for social awareness support more prominent 
• 
Second Life features such as advanced camera movement, 
Skype-like, mini-map and teleportation features facilitate 
exchange of awareness information, but it is still restricted 
• 
Second Life’s in-built search possibilities makes search for 
collaboration 
partners, 
i.e., 
members 
of 
different 
communities, easier. Additional search elements can be 
implemented by scripting, i.e., ‘virtual project gallery’ [9]  
Place 
 
• 
Flexibility of building is beneficial for awareness and allowed fast development of the world 
• 
Uncritical use of provided facilities for flexible building may limit creativity and thus awareness expression 
(especially uncritical buying of pre-made objects in Second Life) 
• 
A repertoire of places of different types is beneficial for social awareness, allows a quick creation of an initial set of 
places and mediation of a range of activities (especially pre-made objects in Second life, commercially available and 
provided in the virtual campus and virtual research arena [9]) 
• 
3D places can convey awareness of activities and learners by keeping traces and by mediating activities in a way, 
similar to real-life (though leaving traces is restricted due to rights and property managements) 
• 
Place structures are useful for visualizing social structure on the group level  
 
• 
Existing flexibility of building is still not fully 
sufficient for reflecting social structures on the 
community level with the increased size of the 
world 
• 
The additional complexity associated with leaving 
traces explicitly and still limited repertoire of 
places makes other tools more appropriate in a 
number of tasks  
• 
The appearance (Archipelago) can serve as a 
distraction for learning activities 
• 
In-built map features provide a comprehensive overview of 
community development.  Still, such development and its 
flexibility is strictly limited by land ownership and building 
rights issues 
• 
Leaving of traces is restricted by rights management 
mechanisms, but adjustments are possible through 
programming. Repertoire of places is rather extensive, with 
a variety of free and for-sale objects in the universe  
• 
The appearance of a science fair and campus provides an 
appropriate atmosphere for learning and research activities, 
but at the same time serves as an informal socializing place 
Artifact 
 
• 
3D artifacts provide rich possibilities for conveying awareness information about learners and their activities, 
communication and activity mediation in a visual, symbolic and ‘real life’ way 
• 
The effort associated with expressing awareness information in 3D artifacts makes other tools more preferable in some 
cases 
• 
The functionality associated with 3D artifacts does 
not cover the whole range of user needs  
 
• 
Second Life has extensive functionality for programming 
and designing artifacts, including integration with external 
tools such as Sloodle, but the associated complexity makes 
it rather difficult to use in some cases 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
 
virtual worlds in general for social awareness support and 
learning facilitation, compared to other tools. 
 For example, support for finding collaboration partners 
in 3D virtual worlds may for the moment appear less 
straightforward compared to the more traditional ‘yellow 
pages’/database approach [12] and social media such as 
Facebook and Twitter. Generally, simpler text-based 
communityware applications can in some cases be more 
efficient for exchange of information and ‘matchmaking’ of 
community members [13]. At the same time, as shown by 
our results and in the related literature, 3D virtual worlds 
can provide possibilities the ‘traditional’ tools cannot give. 
This includes 3D visualization of both awareness-related 
and educational information and an alternative arena for 
social and learning activities [2, 8, 9]. The facilities 
provided by the ‘traditional’ tools, can with some effort be 
integrated with the virtual worlds, e.g., more effective 
operations on documents. An example is the Sloodle 
initiative that focuses on integrating functionalities of 
Moodle learning management system and Second Life [14]. 
Therefore, 3D virtual worlds can potentially provide nearly 
all functionalities necessary for performance of central 
social and learning tasks. However, these functionalities 
must be provided in a more user-friendly and effective way 
than is possible with most existing virtual worlds at the 
moment. 
We believe that appropriate support for social 
awareness, especially in an educational and research 
context, could be obtained in the context of virtual research 
arenas like the one described in Section II, where students 
and researchers can participate in sharing and collaborative 
elaboration of scientific content. Such virtual research 
arenas contribute to increasing awareness of ongoing 
research projects by visualizing activities and resources 
available at the corresponding research groups, thus 
facilitating search for collaboration partners. By presenting 
research results in a visualized and interactive way, it could 
be popularized and presented to a wider audience in a more 
appealing manner. In addition, such virtual research arenas 
can be accessed by the students, researchers and general 
public at no cost across distances and different time zones.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have focused on 3D visualizations of 
learning communities and associated resources, activities 
and social networks, comparing support for social 
awareness provided by virtual environments of Active 
Worlds and Second Life. We have also shortly discussed the 
advantages and disadvantages of 3D visualizations for social 
awareness support compared to alternative approaches. In 
order to provide adequate support for social awareness, 
there is a need to overcome the identified limitations of 3D 
virtual worlds. To fully exploit the strengths of different 
technologies, a hybrid solution will probably be optimal. 
Future 
work 
will 
therefore 
include 
developing 
a 
comprehensive framework and guidelines for 3D dynamic 
visualization of social structures and processes in a learning 
community. Additional issues to consider will include 
augmenting 3D virtual worlds with other awareness tools 
(e.g., mobile devices, social media etc.) and combining 3D 
visualizations for educational and social purposes. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many thanks to Mikhail Fominykh, Monica Divitini and 
Leif Martin Hokstad for their contributions to research 
presented in this paper.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Wenger, Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and 
Identity. Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
[2] E. 
Prasolova-Førland, 
"Virtual 
Spaces 
as 
Artifacts: 
Implications for the Design of Educational CVEs", Special 
issue on "Cyberworlds and Education" in The International 
Journal of Distance Education Technologies (JDET), 2(4):94-
115, Oct-Dec. 2004. 
[3] A. Huxor, “The Role of the Personal in Social Workspaces: 
Reflection on Working in AlphaWorld”. Collaborative Virtual 
Environments., Springer-Verlag London Ltd, 2001. 
[4] C. Gutwin, S. Greenberg, & M. Roseman, "Workspace 
Awareness in Real–Time Distributed Groupware: Framework, 
Widgets and Evaluation”. Proc. HCI 1996, London, UK, 
Springer–Verlag, 1996, pp. 281–298. 
[5] E. Prasolova-Førland and L. M. Hokstad,  "Supporting 
Learning Communities through a Lifecycle in a Serious 
Games Context: Requirements for Social Tools", Proc. 
Computers and Advanced Technology in Education (CATE 
2009), November 22-24, 2009, St. Thomas, US Virgin 
Islands, ACTA Press, 2009 
[6] M. Czerwinski, M. van Dantzich, G. G. Robertson, & H. 
Hoffman, “The contribution of thumbnail image, mouse-over 
text and spatial location memory to web page retrieval in 3D”. 
Proc. Interact 1999, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1999, pp. 163-170. 
[7] S. Clark & M. L. Maher, “The Role of Place in Designing a 
Learner Centered Virtual Learning Environment”, Proc. 
CAAD Futures 2001, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 2001. 
[8] E. Prasolova-Førland, "A Repository of Virtual Places as 
Community Memory: an Experience of Use", Proc. ACM 
SIGGRAPH International Conference on Virtual Reality 
Continuum and its Applications in Industry (VRCAI 2004), 
Singapore, 16-18 June 2004, pp. 225-228. 
[9] M. Fominykh and E. Prasolova-Førland: "Virtual Research 
Arena: Presenting Research in 3D Virtual Environments," 
Proc. the 2nd Global Conference on Learning and Technology 
(Global Learn Asia Pacific), Melbourne, Australia, March 28-
April 1, 2011, Chesapeake, VA: AACE, 2011, pp. 1558-1567. 
[10] ActiveWorlds: www.activeworlds.com (retrieved: Dec 2011) 
[11] Second Life, www.secondlife.com (retrieved: Dec 2011) 
[12] M. S. Ackerman & C. Halverson, “Considering an 
Organization’s Memory”, Proc. CSCW 1998, November 14-
18, Seattle, Washington USA, pp. 39-48. ACM Press, 1998. 
[13] M. Koch, “Community Support in Universities – The 
Drehscheibe Project”, Proc. Communities and Technologies 
(C&T 
2003), 
Kluwer 
Publishers, 
Amsterdam, 
The 
Netherlands, 2003, pp. 445-464.  
[14] Sloodle, http://www.sloodle.org/moodle/ (retrieved: Dec 
2011) 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

