 
Operational Management Using Wake-on-LAN 
 
 
                              Yeongkwun Kim                                                                       Injoo Kim 
                        School of Computer Sciences                                                        Department of Computer & 
                          Western Illinois University                                                                Information Science 
                                  Macomb IL, USA                                                                      East-West University 
                              email:Y-Kim2@wiu.edu                                                                  Chicago IL, USA 
                                                                                                 email: injoo@eastwest.edu 
 
 
Abstract - Remote access is a valuable way to access 
network resources. Wake-on-LAN (WoL) is a well-known 
technology commonly used for external remote access. In this 
work, we implement an operational supporting system to 
perform key operations such as security checks including virus 
scanning, software modifications/updates, amongst others. 
Such functions are all dependent on WoL to access remote 
systems. 
    Keywords-operational management; virus scan; remote login; 
WoL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The WoL (Wake-on-LAN) has widespread use as a 
networking protocol that enables clients to wake up all 
computer systems remotely [1]. It allows administrators to 
perform system maintenance even if the user has turned off 
the computer. Appropriately applied, it is valuable for 
administrative activities such as security patch delivery and 
framework maintenance as well as for diminishing overall 
energy utilization. Since it permits administrators to turn on 
computers remotely, turning off computers while they are 
not being used does not have any negative effects on system 
management. It might be particularly helpful for academic 
institutions or organizations/companies with huge networks 
to have the option to turn on computers remotely, where the 
option to turn on all computers within a reasonable 
timeframe is not viable. WoL is an independent platform, 
requiring explicit adjustments of the hardware and software 
to operate appropriately. Most desktop hardware and 
operating systems such as Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, 
and Linux support WoL. In this paper, we present the 
preliminary findings of our implementation of the 
operational support system based on the WoL. The rest of 
this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
related work, Section III describes the WoL, and Section IV 
addresses the network setup. Section V draws the conclusion 
and briefly indicates future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
      Stefanovic et al. [1] used WoL to save time on business 
processes by turning on and having computers ready for 
employees when they arrive. Depending on the working 
hours of each employee, they measured how much the 
machines used the network. Although they did make use of 
remote access, they did show that it was possible to turn on 
users’ computers depending on the working hours of each 
employee. This provides important foundation for possible 
improvements that can be made by enabling remote access.  
 
III. 
WAKE-ON-LAN 
WoL [2]-[4] is implemented utilizing an extraordinary 
network message called a magic packet. A magic packet has 
the MAC address of the destination computer. The listening 
computer waits for a magic packet routed to it and afterward 
initiates the system wake-up. The magic packet is sent on the 
data link or layer 2 in the OSI (Open System 
Interconnection) model and communicated to all NICs 
(Network Interface Cards) utilizing the network broadcast 
address. In order for WoL to function properly, the MAC 
address of the destination computer is required. The MAC 
(Medium Access Control) address can be distinguished on a 
nearby local network by utilizing simple commands, such as, 
ipconfig/ ifconfig. It is difficult to track down the MAC 
addresses of a group of PCs in a huge network by hand. 
Thus, we send the magic packets to the destination by 
providing the MAC address. The magic packet basically 
contains the destination computer's MAC address 255 (FF 
FF FF FF FF FF) that will be sent to the destination 
computer. The magic packet will be only checked for the 
MAC address and a complete protocol stack will not parse it. 
So, it can be sent as any network and transport-layer 
protocol. A link-oriented transport-layer protocol like TCP 
(Transmission Control Protocol) is not appropriate for this 
purpose because it requires a functioning connection to be 
formed before sending client information. 
IV. 
NETWORK SETUP 
We set up our network topology to simulate a multi-hop 
cross-subnet network with two arrangements of virtual PCs, 
each having their subnet. Furthermore, the router-to-router 
association is likewise viewed as its own subnet, making it a 
multi-hop network. Since network routing is done point to 
point, the number of routers does not matter, and thus we can 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

include more hops or subnets without influencing the results. 
The network topology model was created utilizing GNS3 
(Graphical Network Simulator-3) [5]. Table 1 shows subnet 
masks & IP configuration. Figure 1 shows the model 
network configuration. 
 
                                              
 
TABLE 1.  SUBNET MASK AND IP CONFIGURATION 
 
   
Router1 
Router2 
PC1 
PC  2 
PC 3 
Windows server 
Kali linux server 
Interface0 
10.1.1.1 
20.1.1.1 
10.0.0.6 
20.0.0.7 
20.0.0.8 
10.1.1.118 
20.1.1.50 
Interface1 
2.1.1.1 
2.1.1.2 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
   
 
       
 
 
Figure 1.  Model network configuration 
 
 
 
 
      The following procedure describes the communication 
from PC1 to PC2 in the WoL network in our simulation: 
 
1. Switch1 holds the MAC address of the PC1 and 
Switch2 holds the MAC addresses of PC2 & PC3 
2. When it pings 20.1.1.7(PC2) from PC1(10.1.1.6), 
the IP goes to the network gateway 10.1.1.1 which 
is the IP address of Router 1 
3. Router 2 advertises its own network (20.1.1.2/24) 
and broadcasts it to other Routers  
4. when Router 1 receives 20.1.1.0/24 network 
information, it checks for the shortest path and the 
advertising Routes it has.  
5. Since Router 1 has the network path of the 
destination ones, Router 1 sends the network 
(20.1.1.0/24) to Router 2. 
6. Router 2 receives the IP address of 20.1.1.7/24 
from PC1 of Router 1 and sends it to the Switch 2 
port of PC2.  
7. Switch 2 receives IP address 20.1.1.7. Switch 2 
holds the MAC address of PC2. Now the Switch 2  
sends the received packet to the PC2 based on the 
MAC address. 
 
 A.    Advantage of Using WoL 
 
Any office files and equipment can be accessed remotely 
with the described WoL setup. This setup is more useful for 
network administrators or IT people who are working 
remotely, as it enables full access to a computer despite 
being remote. When it is combined with the correct set of 
remote tools, WoL technology can be used as a possible 
remote approximation of being in the office. 
 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

B. Disadvantage of Using WoL 
 
       There are some security concerns when utilizing this 
technology. First, most WoL compatible adapters do not 
distinguish between which PC is sending the magic bundle. 
This means that anyone on a network with a good and 
compatible IP address can possibly remotely access the 
computer. Thus, such a technology should be handled with 
additional network security provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
       Although WoL is a generally mature technology, 
numerous associations and organizations do not execute it 
due to confinements. In this work, we implemented a simple 
operation management to perform important functions such 
as security patch delivery and framework maintenance by 
utilizing WoL. Given the developing nature of this 
technology, future research is needed to do more 
simulations to increase robustness because our work is still 
premature stage. We will also discuss with the IT 
department to apply our system to the live network. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
   Mr. C. R. Dendi assisted with simulations of operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] M. Stefanovic, D. Przulj, M. Vukmanovic, and S. 
Ristic, “Mutual Impact of High Computer Network      
Utilization and Business Processes”, International 
Scientific Conference on Industrial Systems, 2007. 
[2] Jithin, “What is SYN Flood attack and how to 
prevent it?”, https://www.interserver.net/tips/kb/syn-
flood-attack-prevent/, 2016, [retrieved: March 2023]. 
[3] Sheetg09, Mestew, Aczechowski, Dougeby, “How to 
configure Wake on LAN in Configuration Manager”,  
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-
us/mem/configmgr/core/clients/deploy/configure-
wake-on-lan, 2022, [retrieved: March 2023]. 
[4] CISCO, “How to configure the router to minimize a 
Denial 
of 
Service 
(DOS) 
attack”, 
https://community.cisco.com/t5/security-
documents/how-to-configure-the-router-to-minimize-
a-denial-of-service-dos/ta-p/3117624, 
[retrieved: 
March 2023]. 
[5] GNS official website, “GNS-3 download” 
https://www.gns3.com, [retrieved: March 2023]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

