Authoritative Authors Mining within Web Discussion Forums 
 
Kristína Machová, Michal Sendek 
Dept. of Cybernetics and Artificial Intelligence 
Technical University of Košice 
Košice, Slovakia 
kristina.machova@tuke.sk, michal.sendek@student.tuke.sk 
 
 
Abstract—The paper is focused on authoritative users of some 
web discussion searching and their authority measure estimation. 
The paper describes design of a method for authority calculation 
for all discussants of some selected web discussion forum. The 
designed method can be used in the process of web authority 
mining.  This method involves both the conversational content 
mining and the conversational structure mining. The resulting 
implementation can be used for simulation of a dynamic change 
of the authority measure of social web users. The implementation 
of the presented method can be used by some firm or other 
organization for searching authorities (experts) in a special field, 
in the case, when the organization needs some experts – 
employees from this field and so such implementation can be 
used for preselecting on some position in the organization.  
Keywords-authority identification; web mining; conversational 
content; conversational structure; discussion forums 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the Web has become the phenomenon of our 
age. Mainly the social web and its platforms (chats, discussion 
forums, blogs and so on) enable interactions between actors. 
The actor, within this paper, is a web user, who has added one 
or more contributions to a given web discussion and so 
participated in the conversational content creation. Such web 
user is also called a contributor within this paper. Within these 
interactions, web users (contributors) communicate and 
influence each other. This communication creates so called 
conversational content, which is an important source of large-
scale databases of information about knowledge, opinions, and 
attitudes of particular users. These data offer many possibilities 
for web mining from conversational content, conversional 
structure and from conversional web usage. The social web 
mining can be focused on different analysis tasks: 
 
Social networks analysis 
 
Opinion analysis 
 
Safety issues analysis 
 
Authority analysis 
The social net analysis is usually focused on some social 
network structure analysis from the point of view of searching 
suitable metrics for dynamic analysis, prediction of changes in 
social networks, developing algorithms for social networks 
monitoring, dynamic visualization of social networks, research 
of social networks and their time characteristics. The social net 
analysis represents mining from conversional structure. 
The opinion analysis is concerned with the classification of 
some web discussion to positive or negative opinion in an 
automatic way. The summarizing information about positivity 
or negativity of major part of users opinions about some object 
(a product, person, event, organization, etc.) can be obtained 
without necessity to read all discussions and can be useful in 
the course of a decision making process. The opinion 
classification represents mining in conversational content. 
The safety issues analysis comprises two subtasks: theme 
modelling and authorship identification. Conversational content 
can be a source of some information connected with safety 
issues, for example suspicious activities and identification of 
authors of the conversation about these subtle themes. 
The authority analysis represents the identification of 
authorities of some web discussions. The contribution of the 
paper is the design of a method for the authority identification 
using web mining from a conversational content and also from 
a conversional structure. There are no known approaches to 
authority identification from conversational content, which 
would be compared with our solution. The most known 
approaches determine the authority degree only from the 
conversation structure [1][3][9]. Our approach is not based on 
Natural Language processing (NLP) and it is not based on 
some known information retrieval algorithm as well.  
The contributions of the paper are the following: at first the 
list of authorities of a given web discussion, ordered according 
to their estimated measure of authority, at second simulation of 
dynamic changes of the measure of these authoritative web 
users. Authority identification can be used in various real 
situations. For example some web user searches for some 
authority, which is able to give him/her some advice or 
information for decision making support. Another example – 
some Information Technology (IT) organization needs 
specialists - authorities in the given fields and is able to offer 
them an interesting position. The paper is related to the 
conference topics, especially to the track “Complex systems – 
Simulation and data mining” because: at first, the resulting 
implementation can be used for simulation of a dynamic 
change of the authority measure of social web users and at 
second, the designed method can be used in the process of data 
mining, especially for web authority mining. 
Section II discusses various types of web authorities. The 
analysis of various kinds of discussion forum contributors is 
introduced in Section III. Our design of the approach to 
authority estimation is described within Section IV and next 
Section V presents the refined model of authority estimation. 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Section VI is concerned with dynamic changes of the estimated 
authority of related social web users. 
II. 
AUTHORITY ANALYSIS TYPES  
An authority is reputable competence of some person, 
society or organization to affect somebody. Authoritative 
opinions and attitudes have been approved in real situations. 
The authority can be informal and formal.  
The informal (natural) authority is a person with naturally 
authoritative behaviour. Other persons are willing to respect 
informal authority. Such authority is the result of a personal 
profile, capability, adequate self-confidence and social 
activities, which ensure the status for a person – authority. In 
the field of authorities, a mechanism of associating dynamics 
and psychology can be found. The people, who let an authority 
to lead them, enforce the weight of this authority. 
The formal (functional) authority is a person, which other 
persons do not want to respect, but they have to. Such authority 
is the result of a position, title or function of some person 
within an organization (an arbiter, teacher, politician and so 
on). The formal authority can be at the same time the informal 
one as well. The formal authority can sometimes change 
his/her status. A leader could require submission, although his 
authority is missing honesty, braveness, predictability and 
ability of quick decision making. 
Different problems can be formulated in the field of 
authority searching within the Internet. We can search for 
friend authority, for influence authority or for authority within 
a given web discussion or a given social network. The friend 
authority is a user with great number of relationships with other 
users of the Web. The influencer authority is a person, who 
impresses others because of his/her opinions and knowledge on 
some subject. Our attention was after all concentrated on the 
problem of searching for authorities within web discussions. 
We took into account the number of relationships - 
communications between web discussion contributors (mining 
in the structure of web) as well as the strength of influence in 
the form of estimation of opinion impression – influencer 
authority (mining in the content of web). 
A. Searching for Authorities within Given Field of Research 
The problem of authorities searching was solved by a 
method for searching scientific papers of a given research field 
within the Association for Computing Machinery Digital 
Library (ACM-DL) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) database. Consequently, we have found 
authorities between citations presented in the reference part of 
the searched papers. The Tag Cloud method was used for our 
results visualization. This approach can be used also for 
authoritative sources searching. This approach has been 
implemented and the application was named “Tag Cloud 
Authority” (TCA). The expected input of the system is a key 
word or a key phrase characterizing the given research field. 
The system searches for relevant documents within the ACM-
DL and IEEE databases. All authors who have been mentioned 
in the reference part of each selected paper are considered. The 
authority degree of an author is increased if he/she is the first 
author mentioned in the processed reference. The complication 
is variability of citation standards. Many institutions create 
their own standards or let authors to choose the form of 
references. 
The orientation on the first author simplifies the processing 
of selected documents and it has the following interpretation. 
The first author has usually the greatest share (portion) on the 
paper creation so he/she is the highest authority from the co-
authors.  The authority degree of a particular author represents 
the number of his/her publications citations related to the given 
research field. More information about this approach can be 
found in [4].  
B. Searching for Authorities within Web Discussions 
But, the main attention of this paper is on the analysis of 
authorities within web discussion forums. Each social web user 
can establish the discussion on some theme which is interesting 
for him/her. Other actors can add their contributions to this 
theme. Many people can adjoin this discussion but not all of 
them are experts in the discussed field. It is very important to 
let us be influenced only by authoritative contributors of the 
discussion forum. Thus, the recognition of authorities within 
the contributors is a matter of principle.  
III. 
WEB DISCUSSION  FORUMS 
Users of the Internet can play roles of producers of web 
content within various platforms of the social web. The 
attention of this paper is focused on discussion forums. 
Discussion forum represents the area on a web page, which is 
created by the given page owner interactively. In the case the 
discussion on some theme is established (see Figure 1), other 
users can express their opinions within their contributions to 
the given theme.  
These contributions (“Cont 1”,  … , “Cont n” in Figure 1) 
create the discussion forum, which can be represented by a 
graph – an acyclic tree (in the right part of Figure 1). 
People have various reasons for contributing to some 
discussion forum. Great majority of contributors are people, 
who want to find answers on their questions or want to obtain 
informed advices from more experienced people for decision 
making. They expect truthful information. These contributors 
create a core of discussion but they are not very authoritative 
ones, and so not very interesting for us.  
A smaller group of contributors are actors, for whom the 
discussion is the opportunity to express their knowledge, to 
ensure about truth of their ideas or to revise their opinions. 
These users access to the discussion seriously, add only truthful 
information, and join discussion only when they are acquainted 
with the topic. They are really authoritative contributors and 
they are interested to be distinguished from the other actors. 
Therefore, an approach for these contributors identification was 
designed. For these identified authorities, a measure of their 
authority should be estimated. This authority value should be 
represented by a numerical value. Design of this numerical 
value - estimation of the authority is presented in the Section 
IV. 
The last group of contributors is the group of troublemaking 
actors. They are provocateurs, who are not reputable and they 
only seek for an opportunity to present their opinions on web 
discussions. They often contribute not truthful information, 
invoke conflicts and they want to present their significance. 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

They usually degrade all web discussions. These actors are not 
authoritative. They should be eliminated from the discussions. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tree representation of a discussion forum. (‘Cont’ represents a 
contribution. Arows lead from a contribution to all reactions on this 
contribution. ) 
The elimination of unsuitable contributions can be provided 
in the web discussion control. There are two ways for 
discussion control: manual and semiautomatic. Manual 
discussion control is made by a moderator. The moderator 
checks each new contribution from the point of reliability for 
the given discussion, law-breaking, whether it is not abusive 
and so on. Only suitable contributions are consequently added 
to the web discussion. This kind of discussion control is time 
consuming and difficult mainly in the case of discussions with 
great amount of contributions. Thus, semiautomatic discussion 
control was designed. It uses programs, which filter unsuitable 
contributions with the aid of words recognition. All 
contributions, which are denoted by such program as faux or 
abusive, are redirected to the moderator to decide about 
deletion of the contribution from the given discussion. There is 
another way for this problem solving. The moderator can 
enable actors to denote improper and abusive contributions by 
a special mark and this marking causes an automatic 
redirection of the contribution to the moderator for evaluation. 
It enables to integrate all actors of the web discussion into the 
process of discussion control. The combination of these three 
approaches creates so called the three level discussion control. 
It can 
ensure 
nearly 
zero occurrences of 
improper 
contributions. Faux and abusive contributions are forbidden 
because they can damage good reputation of some firm or 
organization. But, negative and serious contributions are 
accepted. 
IV. 
DESIGN OF THE AUTHORITY ESTIMATION 
The controlled web discussions can be used for opinion 
mining and authorities mining. The results of opinion mining 
can be a part of information, which is necessary for authority 
estimation.  
A. Opinion Mining 
The Opinion mining was used for acquisition of opinion 
polarity of all contributions of the web discussion. These 
opinions polarities were used for one parameter of a function of  
authority estimation named “polarity matching”.  
A web discussion carries a lot of information, for example 
various themes, opinions and attitudes concerning to various 
objects (a product, political situation, book, film, physician and 
so on). Actors who have created some discussion but also other 
actors who simply have the similar problem as the given 
discussion is about, want to know the whole opinion of all 
contributors to the given theme. If the discussion consists from 
a great number of contributions, reading the whole discussion 
is time consuming process. There arises the need of automatic 
classification of the web discussion to positive or negative 
opinion. This classification has to be based on classification of 
each particular contribution to positive or negative opinion. 
More about opinion mining can be seen in [2][7][8]. Opinion 
classification can be used in those fields where the aggregation 
of a large amount of opinions into integrated information is 
needed. The input to opinion classification can be represented 
by a large amount of conversational content (e.g., content of a 
discussion forum, blog, chat and so on) and the output of the 
classification is summary information about opinion polarity. It 
was solved also within our previous works [5]. This aspect of 
conversational mining – opinion mining of particular 
contributions – was used in our design and application of 
authority estimation (authority mining – Subsection IV.B) in 
the form of “polarity matching” parameter (Subsection IV.C). 
B. Authority Mining 
The search for authoritative web users within some web 
discussion represents mining within data about the web 
discussion as a whole. We are interested not only in 
contributions’ content but also in the structure of the whole 
discussion.  
The authority is related to contributors not to contributions. 
Thus, from the beginning it is necessary to collect all data 
about one contributor together. This process is illustrated in 
Figure 2. It can be seen in this figure, that all information 
(selected values) about the “Author A” is completed within 
first item of all selected values repository. 
The authority value estimation was designed as a function 
of particular selected parameters. These parameters were 
chosen, because they have influence to authority identification. 
This function was designed to be composed from two parts: 
primary part and secondary part.   
The result of the process of authority estimation of all 
discussion actors is the rating of authorities ordered in a 
descending way, which should indicate: 
 
contributors 
who 
showed 
the 
best 
knowledge 
concerning to the given theme, 
 
contributors who invoked most reactions, 
 
contributors who initialized diversion from the given 
theme most often. 
Testing of this approach was oriented on web discussions, 
which contain more than 30 contributions, their contributions 
are not too short, which have more than one level of reactions, 
their discussion is controlled and they support creation of 
discussion trees. The implementation of this approach has been 
designed in such way, which enables using it for any theme. 
Thus, two different themes in two different web discussions 
were chosen for testing. The first one was a technically 
 
 
 
  
Discussion 
establishing  
Cont 1 
Cont 2 
Cont 3 
Cont 4 
Cont n 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
reaction 
on 
 reaction 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

oriented discussion about Windows7 and the second one was a 
discussion about TeleVision (TV) serial “Neighbours”. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The process of authority estimation from the discussion forum 
(DF). The human-shape figures represent rated authorities. 
C. Design of the Function for Authority Estimation 
Our design of the function for authority calculation has the 
following parameters: 
 
Number of discussion contributions (NC) of the given 
contributor. It seems, that somebody who understands 
the theme (authority) will contribute to the discussion 
more often than other actors. A specific group of 
contributors are users, who are not so knowledgeable 
but they use to join discussions to put questions and to 
learn from answers. They are valuable contributors, 
because they shift the discussion on higher levels. 
 
Number of reactions (NR) on the contribution(s) of the 
given discussant. This parameter represents the number 
of reactions which support or negate a statement of the 
user, whose authority is examined. It is assumed, that 
more authoritative contributor could evoke higher 
number of responses and more reactions. 
 
Number of occurrences on the bottom level (NBL) of 
the 
discussion 
tree. 
The 
contributor, 
whose 
contributions are located on the bottom level of the 
discussion tree, usually has added the exhaustive 
commentary which answered all questions. This kind 
of contributors can be authoritative. 
 
Polarity matching (PM). Within this parameter, the 
whole polarity of all contributions of the given actor is 
compared with the polarity of the whole web 
discussion. The polarity of particular contributions was 
determined 
using 
the 
Opinion 
Classification 
Application (OCA) [6]. This application uses the 
highest degree of positive polarity equal to 3 and the 
most negative contribution is marked by -3 degree. The 
greatest difference between the polarity of all users 
contributions and the polarity of the whole discussion 
can be 6. The polarity matching in the form of value 
from the interval <0, 3> is interpreted as an agreement 
between polarity of discussant’s opinions and opinion 
of the whole discussion. Similarly, polarity matching in 
the form of value from the interval (3, 6> is interpreted 
as a disagreement.  Greater authority should be 
assigned to the users, polarity of whose contributions 
agrees with polarity of the whole discussion. The less 
authority should be assigned to actors with significant 
opinion disagreement between their opinions and 
overall discussion opinion. 
 
Position in the discussion tree (PT) expresses the 
number of all levels of the discussion tree the 
contributions of the user are situated in. Each level is 
considered only once regardless the number of 
contributions on this level. Exactly, PT is the ratio of 
this number and the number of maximal possible 
occurrences of contributions in the discussion tree. 
 
Words number (WN) represents ratio of all words 
within all discussant’s contributions to all words of the 
whole discussion. 
All these parameters, taking separately, indicate rather 
chatty contributors than authoritative ones. But, taking them 
together as one entity, the emergency phenomenon arises. This 
phenomenon can indicate the authoritative contributors.      
The first three parameters (number of contributions, 
number of reactions and number of occurrences on the bottom 
level) create the primary part of actor’s authority value, which 
influences final authority value in a significant way. The 
primary part has greater weight in the process of authority 
estimation. The last three parameters (polarity matching, 
position in the tree and words number) create the secondary 
part of actor’s authority value. The secondary part serves on 
precise tuning of the authority value of very similar authorities 
or is used for refining this value to prevent the case, when the 
primary parts of the authority value of different actors are the 
same.  
We have experimented with a function for authority 
estimation in the form of a simple sum of all selected 
parameters. But, the final precision was very low (from 10% to 
20%). The precision was counted as a ratio of the number of all 
correctly stated authorities (by our application in comparison 
with an expert opinion) to the number of all recognized 
authorities by our application (including these authors, which 
the expert do not consider as authorities). Equation (1) 
represents the design of the function for estimation of the 
Authority of the Contributor (AC). 
 
AC = 4NC + 2NR + 4NBL + PM + PT + WN

The greater weight was connected with those parameters, 
which appeared more significant during the testing phase. In 
this case, the testing precision was higher (54.8% for technical 
domain and 52.6% for real life domain) but not overly 
satisfying. So this function was refined to the following one 
(2): 

AC = 4NC2 + 2NR3 + 4NBL + PM + PT + WN      
  
  
  
 
 
 
AuthorA 
AuthorA 
AuthorA 
AuthorB 
AuthorB 
AuthorC 
AuthorZ 
DF 
 
   
Process of 
particular 
values 
calculation 
    
      
    
      
   
      
Selected values 
Rating 
esti-
mation 
Rating of 
authorities 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

In this case, the testing precision was more satisfying (77.4 
% in technical domain and 80.7 % in real life domain).  Testing 
was provided in technical and life domains. Technical domain 
was represented by web discussions on the theme Windows 7 
(http://www.verejnadiskusia.sk, 
http://www.kulman.sk 
and 
http://www.warxtreme.eu).  Life domain was represented by 
web discussion on the TV serial story “Neighbours” 
(http://www.warxtreme.eu). 
   This form has been implemented. The implementation 
provides final rating of authoritative users, what is illustrated in 
Figure 3. This rating is situated in the left dialog window. This 
window obtains names of web discussion actors. These names 
are followed by numbers, which represent their authority 
values. 
V. 
REFINED MODEL OF THE AUTHORITY ESTIMATION 
The refined version of the function for authority calculation 
has been developed. Within this new version logarithmic 
functions were used. In addition, two new parameters were 
involved into our method of authority estimation:  
 
Number of reactions of the contributor (NRC) 
represents the number of reactions of a given 
contributor on contribution(s) of other discussants. 
 
Frequency (F) represents the number of the given 
contributor reactions within a time period. 
The result was a modified model of the contributor 
authority estimation (3):  
AC = 5(1+log10(NC))+13(1+log10(NR))+15(1+log10(NRC)) 
+(1+log10(NBL))+3(F+PT+WN) 
 
  (3) 
This modified model of the authority estimation has been 
tested on three various discussion forums related to the 
following themes: 
 
The TV “PLUS” discusses about moderators’ 
authorities according to the number of their “likes” on 
the Facebook. 
 
The presentation of a well known Slovak politician has 
been accepted inconsistently. 
 
Rockets, air attacks and sirens. Near east region drifts 
toward conflicts. 
The results of these tests are presented in table 1. 
VI. 
DYNAMIC CHANGE OF THE AUTHORITY 
Within our research, the dynamic change of the authority 
value was considered as well. It is an important aspect, related 
to authority identification. Somebody, who is searching for 
authorities in some given field, wants to know a dynamic 
change of the estimated authority value of candidates on 
authority in recent time. 
A natural tendency to increase or decrease the strength of 
the estimated authority according to activities of the given user 
– discussant within a web discussion forum has to be 
considered. Any user of our application would like to have 
actual information about contributors to the given discussion 
forum. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The implementation of the designed method of authority 
estimation with the resulting rating of authoritative actors. 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF THE AUTHORITY ESTIMATION TESTING 
Theme of the Discussion Forum 
Precision 
Authority and the number of “likes” 
0.94 
Slovak politician 
0.96 
Rockets, air attacts and sirens 
0.93 
 
The approach to dynamic authority (DA) determination can 
be modelled by (4): 
             DA = (AC - D)T*P                        (4)  
Where: 
AC is authority of the contributor according to (3) 
D is dynamic change according to (5) 
T is time characteristics, which represents the value of the 
percentage of authority change. It represents increasing or 
decreasing of the authority on the basis of his/her activity 
within particular day. 
P is penalty (P = 1 for the number of banned contributions  
from interval (-∞;0>, P = 0.5 for the number of such 
contributions  from interval (0;2> and P = 0 for the 
number of deleted contributions  from interval <2; ∞)).  
AND
D
2*log
1
7,1



Where: AND is the average number of days of web 
discussion continuance. 
The visualization of the dynamic authority for 5 the most 
authoritative contributors is illustrated in Figure 4. You can 
see, that the authority value of some contributors is rising, but 
authority of some is degreasing during a period of seven days. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper introduced the novelty approach to authority 
estimation of actors of web discussions and implementation of 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

this approach, which provides the resulting rating of 
authoritative actors. The resulting implementation is able to 
simulate the dynamic change of the authority measure of social 
web users. This approach has been implemented in the 
programming language Java and in the development 
environment NetBeans IDE. The results of this implementation 
were valuable, but they were connected with selected domains 
from a real life and from a technical world. The novelty of this 
approach is in estimation of an authority on the base of various 
parameters obtained not only from the structure but also from 
the content of the conversational content.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The dynamic authority of the five most significant contributors. 
Each of them has its own color. 
The presented approach can be used for refining the process 
of opinion classification of some web discussions to positive or 
negative opinion. Within known approaches to opinion 
classification of the whole web discussion, the resulting 
classification to positive (negative) opinion is made when there 
are more positive (negative) contributions in this discussion 
and each contribution has the same weight within creation of 
the resulting polarity. The novelty approach could multiply the 
positivity value “1” (negativity value “-1”) of the given 
contribution with the weight represented by the estimated 
authority value of the contributor, who is the author of the 
given contribution.  
The authority identification can be used also by common 
people, who are interested in some web discussions because of 
decision making about some purchase, a holiday destination 
choosing and so on. They can obtain information about 
authorities and consequently put a question directly to the most 
authoritative actors of the web discussion. The presented 
application of authority identification can be used also by 
organization searching for skilled and valuable employees. The 
organization can establish some professional discussion and 
consequently appeal on persons interested in this work position 
to join the established web discussion concerning to key 
problems and tasks, this organization has to face up, or to key 
technologies, 
this 
organization 
uses. 
Final 
rating 
of 
authoritative actors of this established discussion can serve as 
the result of preselecting. Or simply, a responsible person of 
this organization can search for authoritative actors on various 
web forums, which are focused on technologies and tasks, 
which are concerned to this organization. Thus, the research in 
the field of authority identification has big importance for the 
future.  
In future, we would like to refine the model of the authority 
identification to achieve higher precision. We tend to test our 
implementation in an extended web space. Also, we would like 
enrich possibilities of dynamic analysis of the web actor 
authority change.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented in this paper was supported by the 
Slovak Grant Agency of Ministry of Education and Academy 
of Science of the Slovak Republic within the 1/1147/12 project 
and the 1/0663/14 project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Bouguessa, B. Dumoulin, and S. Wang, “Identifying 
authoritative actors in question-answering forums – the case of 
Yahoo! answers,” Department of Computer Science, University 
of Sherbrooke, Quebec, CA, 2008, 1-9. 
[2] Y. Choi and C. Cardie, “Learning with compositional semantics 
as structural inference for subsentential sentiment analysis,” 
Proc. of the EMNLP 2008, Conference on Empirical Methods in 
Natural Language Processing, 2008, pp. 793-801.  
[3] B. Dom, I. Eiron, A. Cozzi, and Y. Zhang, “Graph-based 
ranking algorithms for E-mail expertise,“ Proceedings of 8th 
ACM SIGMOD Workshop on Research Issues on Data Mining 
and Knowledge Discovery (DMKD’03), 2003,  pp. 42-48.  
[4] S. Kmet and K. Machova, ”Web authorities estimation within 
the given domain,” Department of Cybernetics and Artificial 
Intelligence, Technical University, Košice, 2012, pp. 0-71. 
[5] K. Machová, “Opinion analysis from the social web 
contributions,“ 
Computational 
Collective 
Intelligence 
– 
Technologies and Applications. Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence Vol. 6922, No.1, Springer – Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 356-365, ISSN 0302-9743. 
[6] K. Machová and M. Krajč, „Opinion classification within thread 
discussions on the web,“ Proc. of the 10th annual international 
conference Znalosti 2011, Stará lesná, 31.1.2011 – 2.2.2011, 
Publisher: FEI Technická univerzita Ostrava, Czech Republic, 
2011, pp. 136-147, ISBN 978-80-248-2369-0 (in Slovak). 
[7] M. Taboada, J. Brooke, M. Tofiloski, K. Voll, and M. Stede, 
“Lexicon-based methods for sentiment analysis,” Computational 
Linguistics, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2011, pp. 267-307. 
[8] M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, G. Paltoglou, D. Cai, and A. Kappas, 
“Sentiment strength detection in short informal text,” Journal of 
the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 
Vol. 61, No. 12, 2010, pp. 2544-2558. 
[9] J. Zhang, M. S. Ackerman, and L. Adamic, “Expertise networks 
in on-line communities: structure and algorithms,“ Proceedings 
of the 16thACM International World Wide Web Conference 
(WWW’07), 2007, pp. 221-230. 
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

