Development of an Accelerator Safety System  
Using IEC 61508 and Design Pattern  
Hao Zhang, Elder Matias 
 
Canadian Light Source Inc. 
University of Saskatchewan 
Saskatoon, Canada 
hao.zhang@lightsource.ca, elder.matias@lightsource.ca 
 
 
Abstract—For particle accelerator facilities, Access Control 
and Interlock Systems (ACIS) are required to protect 
personnel from radiation hazards associated with accelerator 
operations. As an early adopter of IEC 61508 standard for 
safety system development, the Canadian Light Source, Inc. 
(CLS) faced several challenges in how to design engineering 
processes around the standard that reflected the safety 
requirements as well as the domain specific environment that 
we were working within. This industrial report outlines some 
of the challenges, considerations, and decisions on the adoption 
of IEC 61508 into a research facility like CLS. By following 
these principles and methods, overall Safety Integrity Level 
three (SIL-3) has been achieved. One contribution the CLS 
made in the adoption of IEC 61508 is that, applied design 
pattern approaches to domain specific safety algorithms like 
those used in ACIS. This paper outlines the introduction of 
design pattern approaches in CLS. A CLS developed design 
pattern is given as an example. 
Keywords-IEC 61508; ACIS; Design Patterns 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Historically, accelerator safety systems relied on relay-
based interlock systems. As safety-rated Programmable 
Logic Controller (PLC) equipment became available in the 
market, it has been widely used for industrial safety systems.  
However, until very recently, the use of safety rated PLC 
equipment in accelerator safety systems has been rare.  
Accelerators built over the past five years have started to 
adopt safety rated PLC equipment primarily intended for the 
process control industry.  CLS was an early adopter of such 
equipment. 
Within the accelerator research and medical therapy 
community, the industry consensus has been that IEC 61508 
[1] forms the basis of best practice, and this has resulted in 
wide adoption of this standard with specific examples 
including:  
- 
Synchrotrons: 
ALBA 
Synchrotron 
[2], 
and 
Diamond Light Source [3]. 
- 
Accelerators: Large Hadron Collider (LHC) of the  
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) [4], 
Jefferson Labs’ Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator 
Facility (TJNAF) [5], Mégajoule Laser Program [6], and 
ISIS spallation neutron source [7]. 
- 
Medical Accelerator Facilities: Heidelberg Ion 
Therapy Facility [8], and Selective Production of Exotic 
Species (SPES) [9]. 
When applying the IEC 61508 standard to the design of 
the Access Control and Interlock Systems (ACIS) for CLS 
accelerator, the special contexts of the accelerator 
environment need to be taken into considerations. To address 
these considerations, a design pattern approach is introduced 
into the system life cycle for the CLS ACIS system.  
Conventional software engineering techniques have 
embraced the concept of design pattern over the past two 
decades. However, these approaches have seen limited use in 
safety critical systems design [10].  Some recent work has 
focused on very generic design patterns [11] [12]. Yet, we 
are not aware of these approaches being applied to domain 
specific algorithms across the entire IEC 61508 life-cycle.  
The following lists some key points and considerations 
when adopting design pattern approaches in CLS ACIS 
design: 
a) 
Unlike other systems, in the case of accelerator 
access control and interlock, some common safety scinarios 
repeat themselves from one accelerator zone to another. In 
this contxt, we see pattern as a valuable tool in the design of 
ACIS. In this design approch, the ACIS algorithm involves 
a series of design patterns that provide general solutions to 
the common recurring situations for accelerator access 
control and interlock. 
b) 
Though all lockup zones operate in similar 
manners, there are different variations based on the number 
of entrieis, exits, lockup stations and search paths.The ACIS 
design patterns provide a set of templates or guidelines with 
the flexibility that the patterns can be altered to fit specific 
design needs for individual zones.  
c) The hazard analysis, design, verification and 
validation procedures must be able to effectively manage 
and deal with both the generic issues in common safey 
situations and special cases and exceptions for individual 
zones in an effective way.  Here, again, the extended 
concept of design pattern provides a good solution. 
The motivation of this industrial report is to give an 
overview of major aspects of CLS ACIS with the following 
two emphases: 
1) 
The application of IEC 61508 principles, methods, 
and processes in the design and development of the CLS 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

ACIS. Some of the challenges, considerations, and decisions 
on the adoption of this industrial standard into a research 
facility like CLS will be outlined. By following these 
principles and methods, overall SIL-3 rate, as defined in [1], 
has been achieved for the ACIS. 
2) 
The adoption of design pattern methods in the CLS 
ACIS design. By using patterns in ACIS design, we are able 
to create reusable solutions for common accelerator safety 
scenarios, promote software reuse, and save time in the 
design and engineering stages. 
In Section II, additional background is provided on 
aspects of regulatory context, the development process and 
requirements of the system, and the considerations and 
practices for CLS to establish system boundaries. Section III 
gives details of the major safety functions for the ACIS. 
Sections IV, V, and VI, cover the aspects of hardware, 
software, and interface of ACIS, respectively. A short 
introduction to the validation and verification procedure is 
given in section VII. Section VIII identifies possible future 
works for improvement. 
 
II. 
BACKGOUND 
A. Application Context 
The Canadian Light Source (CLS) facility consists of two 
accelerators in series used to take electrons from rest to 2.9 
GeV, the electronics are then deposited into a high current 
storage ring.  Synchrotron light (covering a wide spectrum 
from visible to hard x-ray) is extracted from the storage ring 
and used to perform experiments on suite of independent 
beamlines covering a wide range of science from advanced 
materials, to environmental and life sciences. 
Particle accelerators can produce hazardous levels of 
radiation if not appropriately shielded during operation.  This 
is usually accomplished through the use of shielding and a 
safety system that ensures that staffs are not present during 
normal operation.  Due to safety considerations, a systematic 
systems engineering process needs to be adopted, and 
tailored to provide sufficient flexibility for use in a research 
organization such as the CLS.  
In CLS, ACIS is used in restricted areas to protect 
personnel from radiation hazards. The ACIS controls access 
to the accelerator hall and tunnels during accelerator 
operation to ensure staffs are not present when the 
accelerators are in operation.  These areas are divided into 
lockup zones, which contain the Linear Accelerator (Linac), 
Linac-to-Booster Transfer Line (LTB), the Booster Ring 
(BR), the Booster-to-Storage Ring Transfer Line (BTS), and 
the Storage Ring (SR).  Lockup zones are locked up 
independently, each having its own Emergency off Stations 
(EOS), Door Interlock Switches (SWDI), Lockup Stations 
(LUS), zone lockup lights (ZLL), and horns (HRN). 
This system adopts a two-level, redundant protection 
mechanism, which consists of two independent chains, one 
is governed by a PLC system rated SIL-2 as defined by [1], 
and a relay based hardware logic to provide diversity for 
major safety functions. Overall, the ACIS requirement is for 
SIL-3. SIL-3 is achieved by the use of the two independent, 
redundant, fail-safe systems that are SIL-2 certified. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Safety System Development Process. 
 
B. Regulatory Context 
  CLS holds a Particle Accelerator Operating Licence 
(Class IB) issued by the Canadian Nuclear Safety 
Commission (CNSC); as a result, the definition of internal 
process is left to the CLS to define and propose with the 
CNSC providing regulatory oversight.  
C. Safety System Development Process 
In the past, when accelerator facilitates designed safety 
systems, the common approach was to simply scale up the 
rigor used in the design of their non-safety critical systems, 
and try to make the system as fail safe as possible.  Over the 
past decade and a half, there has been an increasing interest 
in the community in the adoption of broader industrial 
standards and certified equipment, more specifically IEC 
61508.  CLS was one of several facilities that were early 
adopters of IEC 61508.   
The above Figure 1 shows the Safety System Develop 
Process. As illustrated in Figure 1, the CLS safety system 
development process starts with the Hazard and Risk 
Analysis [1]. The mitigation measurements identified by the 
Hazard and Risk Analysis are then allocated to different sub-
systems, 
which 
includes 
administrative 
procedures, 
preventive measurements, and safety systems. Those 
allocated to the safety system become the basis of design 
requirements and specifications. Once detailed requirements 
are 
generated 
and 
documented, 
the 
design 
and 
implementation can be carried out.   Testing and validation 
are performed in all development stages. Respectively, 
integration and unit testing verify the design meets the 
requirements, and the installation is done as the design. 
D. System Boundaries 
Establishing system boundaries is critical in this type of 
environment.  The main control for the CLS facility has in 
excess of 600 control computers working with 50,000 to 
100,000 data points.  Clearly, generating system boundaries 
between safety systems, equipment protection systems, 
critical control functions developed by the facilities, and 
Implementation 
Development 
Integration 
Testing 
 
Requirements 
Specification 
Hazard Analysis 
 
Design 
 
Unit 
Testing 
 
 
Development/ 
Installation 
System 
Validation 
 
 
Testing 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

systems modified by outside researches and users to meet 
their specific experimental needs are important.  
A strong emphasis is placed on high system cohesion and 
minimizing inter-system coupling within the design.  After 
ten years of evolution of these systems, we have found it 
necessary to periodically revisit the boundaries and adjust the 
allocation of requirements based on evolving system 
requirements. 
The primary accelerator control system is implemented 
using a distributed 
control 
system platform called 
Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System 
(EPICS) [16].  EPICS was originally developed at Los 
Alamos for the control of particle accelerator and has gain 
wide acceptance within the accelerator and nuclear physics 
community.  However, it is not suitable for implementation 
of the safety functions directly.  Care is taken to ensure that 
the system boundaries between the ACIS system and the rest 
of the control system are failsafe. 
E. Hazard Analysis 
The ACIS development process starts with the Hazard 
and Risk Analysis to identify the hazards and their causes,  
and to list appropriate mitigations needed to achieve a 
tolerable risk level. The document issued was used as input 
to the following development stage. 
IEC 61509 [1] defines several alternative risk analysis 
tools/techniques.  On most CLS safety projects the As-Low-
As-Reasonably-Practical (ALARP) technique is used [1]. 
Using a qualitative as opposed to quantitative process 
appears to be the best practice for CLS, especially given the 
unique nature of some of the limit custom designed 
components that are used in some of the systems.  Special 
care has been needed in doing the Hazard and Risk Analysis 
to try to identify anticipated changes in ensuring that the 
design does not preclude potential future experimental 
programs.  
This process involves conceptual design review to 
determine if there are hazards intrinsic to the design, human 
factors task analysis to understand how operators and users 
interact with the systems., simulation and desktop walk-
throughs to examine any potential failures at each stage 
using hazard guide words, in the forms of one-one 
interviews 
with 
stakeholders 
or 
a 
structured 
meeting/workshop driven by keywords.   
For some common hazards found in the accelerator 
operation context, basic design pattern concept is also 
applied in the Hazard and Risk Analysis process. We 
express each of such hazards in a generic way when 
analyzing the hazards posed by a generic hazardous 
situation; this allows us to subsequently examine special 
cases that may exist in specific applications of the pattern. 
Within the hazard analysis the mitigation is identified 
for each hazard to bring the residual risk to an acceptable 
level. 
F. Design Requirements 
The mitigations identified in the Hazard and Risk 
Analysis are then allocated to the sub-systems and refined to 
generate design requirements for the ACIS. Other internal or 
external guidelines, such as human factor guideline [13] and 
Canadian Electrical Code were also incorporated as 
requirements in this stage.   A design manual is generated to 
document all requirements. Lockup zone layout drawings 
are generated to capture detailed requirements and design 
information. The drawings show zone configurations, 
lockup paths, and all safety components, which were all 
identified and numbered. The ACIS layout drawings make 
an IO count possible and will be used as the input 
documents for generation of engineering details in the 
following design phases. 
III. 
SAFETY FUNCTIONS 
The ACIS provides four major functions: secure, lockup, 
annunciation, and interlocking. As described in earlier 
sections, the system consists of two separate chains, each 
having their own inputs and outputs. The PLC chain 
provides all four functions; the relay chain provides 
redundant functions in safety critical aspects of secure and 
interlocking.  
A. Secure 
A lockup zone is secured only when all the doors are 
closed and none of the EOSs is pressed. The secure function 
is implemented independently in both chains. 
  Limit switches are used to monitor door position. Each 
door has two physically independent switches for signalling 
the two separate chains.  
  An EOS consists of an emergency off button, a reset 
button, and three mechanically interlocked and latching 
contacts - two normally close contacts for signaling the two 
chains and one normally open contact for activating a local 
red LED when the EOS is pressed. If the emergency off 
button is pressed, all contacts remain latched and the red 
LED remains on until the reset button is pressed. 
  The accelerator is interlocked if any of the zones are not 
secured. The redundant design ensures even component in 
one chain fails, the other still functions to interlock the 
accelerator. 
B. Lockup 
  A zone is considered locked up only when the lockup 
sequence, designed by the CLS Health Safety and 
Environment (HSE) department specifically for each 
individual zone, has been performed successfully in this 
particular zone. Two inspectors are required to perform the 
sequence, which involves walking through a prescribed path 
within certain time limit to ensure every part of the zone is 
inspected in a timely manner. 
  LUSs are installed in selected locations to ensure the 
path is followed and the process is timed. Each LUS has a 
lockup button for signalling the PLC chain, and a green 
LED to provide visual indication to the inspectors.  
As an administrative procedure, the lockup sequence is 
performed by inspectors and redundantly verified by the 
PLC. As the complexity of a system increases, so does the 
potential to introduce errors and possibly hazards. 
Implementing the multiple sequences in hardware is more 
likely to introduce error and potential hazards than it is to 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

provide extra protection. Therefore, lockup function is 
implemented only in the PLC chain.  
C. Annunciation 
Horns and flashing lights are positioned in the zones and 
control room to provide audible and visual annunciations to 
personnel in those areas. 
D. Interlocking 
The accelerator is interlocked from both chains through 
multiple permissive channels to avoid single failure point. 
When the accelerator is interlocked the radiation source is 
removed and the system falls to the safe state. 
Figure 2 shows the implementation of safety functions of 
Secure, Lockup, and Interlocking. 
 
  
 
 
PLC
Digital 
Input 
Module
  
 
24 VDC 
Rely Chain 
LUS 1
LUS N
EOS 1
EOS L
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
PLC
Digital 
Output 
Module
 
24 VDC
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
24 VDC
24 VDC
24 VDC
24 VDC
Permissives 
interlock Linac
Permissives 
interlock Linac
Door M
Door 1
.
.
.
 
Figure 2.  Implemetation of Secure, Lockup, and Interlocking 
IV. 
ACIS HARDWARE  
A. PLC Configuration 
  Siemens AS414-4H processor was selected for the 
CPU. With the fault-tolerant run-time license installed on 
the processor, the built-in fail-safe run-time logic is 
activated. Password protection is also activated to protect 
the processor from re-programming. 
SIL-3 certified modules with internal diagnostics and 
redundant circuitry are used for field Inputs/Outputs (I/O).  
These modules are installed in remote I/O stations 
communicating with the CPU over Profibus using the 
PROFISAFE protocol. Fibre-optic cable is used for data 
link. This configuration is based on accepted practice for 
SIL-3 applications. The protocol is deterministic and 
failsafe when used with failsafe hardware.   The use of 
distributed I/O via fibre-optic cable provides electrical 
decoupling of the system, thus avoiding problems associated 
with running signals over long distances. Given potential 
problems with ground loops, Electromagnetic Interference 
(EMI) noise and signal degradation using conventional 
means, this architecture is more reliable and safe. 
B. Field Wiring 
Some of the field wirings are located in the basement 
Linear Accelerator (Linac) hall, where leaking underground 
water at certain locations can cause problem. For this 
reason, National Electrical Manufacturers Association 
(NEMA) Type 4 rated enclosures were carefully chosen for 
PLC panels, junction boxes, EOSs, and LUSs to achieve 
water protection. For the same reason, field instrumentations 
are wired using water-proof multi-conductor armoured 
instrumentation cables, which run in dedicated conduit with 
distinct color and not shared with other systems or 
equipment. All field components are Canadian Standard 
Association (CSA) approved. 
Extended design pattern concept is also adopted for the 
wiring design. Standard patterns associated with common 
sensor types and their common combinations are identified, 
and optimized wiring templates are developed. These 
patterns repeat themselves over and over for each common 
sensor type and combination and are generated using 
automated scripts in AutoCAD. 
C. Operator Interface  
The principle operator interface is based on the use of 
hard-wired operator panels.  Some discrete I/O points are 
provided from the safety system to the EPICS based control 
system. 
V. 
ACIS SOFTWARE 
The PLC programming toolset is Siemens SIMATIC 
Manager, using Continuous Function Chart (CFC), a 
graphical language involving interconnecting elementary 
Function Blocks (FB) to implement control logics. 
A. Design Pattern Based Program Sturcture 
The concept of design pattern was first introduced in the 
field of architecture [14] and later has been adopted in other 
disciplines, especially software domain [15]. A design 
pattern involves three major elements: context, problem and 
solution [14].  Generally speaking, a design pattern is a 
solution to a commonly reoccurring problem in a given 
context.  
In CLS ACIS design, several design patterns have been 
developed. These design patterns include the Zone Lockup 
design patter, the Major-Fault design pattern, and the All-
Clear design pattern, each provides solution to a common 
ACIS problem. In this section, the Zone Lockup design 
pattern is used as an example to illustrate how design 
pattern approaches are used in CLS ACIS design.  
For CLS lockup zones, although each of them are 
different in layout and geographical size, and contains 
different numbers of ACIS components, with different 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

lockup paths designed individually; the types of ACIS 
components in each zone are limited to a common set 
including Emergency Off Stations (EOSs), Lockup Stations 
(LUSs), Door Interlock Switches (SWDIs), Zone Lockup 
Lights (ZLLs), and Horns (HRNs), and the lockup sequence 
and interlock logic for all zones follow the same principles. 
Locking up an individual zone, and interlocking the 
accelerator based on zone lockup status, is a recurring 
problem in the context of CLS accelerator operations. A 
well-designed, optimized, and thoroughly tested set of best 
practices should be standardized to provide reusable 
solution to this problem. This formed the basis for design 
pattern based program structure. 
The Plant View function under the Siemens SIMATIC 
Manager provide an ideal tool to support design pattern 
based program structure. In Plant View, the software is 
structured hierarchically following the actual lockup zone 
layout. A folder is assigned to each zone, and each zone 
folder has three CFC charts, known as the standard zone 
charts. The names of the standard zone charts comply with 
conventions as follow: 
 
ZONE<ID>_EOS 
 
ZONE<ID>_DOORS 
 
ZONE<ID>_LOCKUP 
       In the above naming convention, <ID> is a generic 
descriptor, when assigned to a specific zone, the real zone 
ID number should be used instead. 
       The ZONE<ID>_EOS chart contains codes to monitor  
EOS inputs of this zone and provide EOS status output to 
the ZONE<ID>_LOCKUP chart. The ZONE<ID>_DOORS 
chart monitors SWDI inputs of all doors and gates in this 
zone 
and 
provide 
shielding 
status 
output 
to 
the 
ZONE<ID>_LOCKUP chart.  The ZONE<ID>_LOCKUP 
chart monitors inputs from zone LUSs and incorporated 
these inputs with the inputs from the other two charts to 
perform 
lockup 
sequence 
and 
provide 
outputs 
to 
annunciation and interlock modules.  
     In each of the standard zone charts, standard ACIS FBs 
are used to handle functions associated with generic 
components and process. All these ACIS FBs are developed 
in 
CLS, 
and 
have 
been 
thoroughly 
tested. 
The 
implementation details of FBs can be hidden from 
programmers who are new to ACIS design. For a 
programmer to use these FBs, all he or she needs to do is,  
choosing the right types and numbers of ACIS FBs based on 
the actual zone situation, and making interconnections 
between the inputs/outputs of component and process FBs .  
The zone folder, standard charts, and standard ACIS FBs, 
as a whole, defines the structure of the Zone Lockup design 
pattern. As a template and a set of guidelines for the zone 
lock up problem, the design pattern is generic in nature, 
however, when instantiated, can accommodate differences 
and variations from zone to zone. 
In a sense, the Zone Lockup design pattern encapsulates 
the initial ACIS designers’ time and expertise to a reusable 
standard solution for the zone lock up problem. Therefore, 
the future designers need not to reinvent the wheel, and thus 
helps to lower cost and save time for future ACIS 
development. And reuse of well tested pattern also increases 
the reliability and continuity of the system as a whole.  
B. Failsafe Code  
Safety critical codes are developed using TÜV-certified 
function blocks from S7 Fail-Safe Systems Library to 
ensure fail-safe feature. All failsafe codes are assigned to 
Organizational Block (OB) 35 by default and are executed 
cyclically every 100ms in runtime. 
  Siemens allows developers to create their own standard 
or failsafe FBs. In CLS, FBs for typical ACIS functions 
were developed in earlier projects and a CLS ACIS block 
library are created to save them. As mentioned in earlier 
section, those ACIS FBs play an important role in the 
implementation of design pattern based program structure. 
C. Simulation 
The ACIS program had been tested thoroughly using 
Siemens software simulator, PLCSIM, before it was 
downloaded to the CPU for on-line testing. Since the system 
involves only On/Off variables, software simulation is 
sufficient to test the control logic. 
D. Real-time Requirements 
Based on the PLC cycle time, and execution time for the 
logic blocks, a spreadsheet is used to calculate the algorithm 
executive time and verify that the real time performance of 
the system can be achieved. 
E. Version Control 
For safety system software, it is critical to ensure correct 
version is loaded onto the processor. Siemens S7 F system 
provides safety program signature to uniquely identify a 
particular state of the safety program. Generally speaking, a 
32-bit number known as the signature is generated across all 
the fail-safe blocks of the safety program at the end of the 
compilation phase. 
   In CLS, a commercial version control software called 
MKS Source Integrity [18] is used for version control. 
Versions of the ACIS program at different development and 
maintenance stages are saved in the MKS repository. With 
the signatures as identifiers, the correct version can be easily 
located for download. 
VI. 
EPICS INTERFACE 
Currently, a limited number of discrete digital I/O 
channels are used to provide an interface between the ACIS 
and the EPICS system, with the EPICS based control system 
not performing a direct safety function. 
The EPICS software is implemented in C/C++ running 
on either Real-Time Executive for Multiprocessor Systems 
(RTEMS) [17] or Linux based computers.  The process 
variables from acquired by EPICS can be displayed to the 
operator as well as being feed into a central alarm 
management system for the entire facility. 
An expected future enhancement is to feed both the 
ACIS and other high speed control interlocks into a custom 
sequence of events record to provide more accurate first 
fault indicator information. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

VII. VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION 
Validation and Verification (V&V) procedures are 
developed to examine if the operation of the ACIS within 
specifications as outlines in requirements and design 
documents. The overriding approach to the testing 
methodology is a meticulous and exhaustive series of tests 
to ensure that the system operates as required. The V&V 
document was developed by staffs who were not involved in 
the design process to assure independence. The V&V 
procedure is executed by HSE department, which was 
independent of the responsibilities for the design of the 
system.  Any modifications to the system after the V&V 
will cause the V&V procedure being updated and the V&V 
has to be performed again. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
As an early adopter of IEC 61508, we faced several 
challenges in how to design engineering processes around 
the standard that reflected the safety requirements as well as 
the domain specific environment that we were working 
within.  The use of design patterns played an important role 
through the entire process in being able to effectively and 
efficiently design these systems.   
Tighter integration between the ACIS and EPICS is 
required to more effectively provide operational staff with 
the ability to accurately understand the sequence of events 
on an accelerator machine trip.  There is currently a 
simplified sequence of events recorder in use for the Storage 
Ring (SR); however, this needs to be expanded.  It is 
expected that such as system will require the use of high 
speed electronics. 
Work is also underway in developing methods to 
streamline the verification and validation process, where 
testing is targeted separately at both the generic pattern that 
is reused as well as those aspects of the pattern that have the 
potential to be incorrectly implemented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Research described in this paper was performed at the 
Canadian Light Source, which is supported by the Canadian 
Foundation 
for 
Innovation, 
Natural 
Sciences 
and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada, the National 
Research Council Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research, the Province of Saskatchewan, Western Economic 
Diversification Canada, and the University of Saskatchewan. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  International Electrotechnical Commission, IEC 61508, 
“Functional Safety of Elecronic/Programmable Electronic 
Safety-Ralated 
Systems" 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission, Geneva, 1998 
[2] D. Fernandez-Carreiras et al., "ALBA, the PLC based 
protection system," in Proc. ICALEPCS 2009, pp. 397-399, 
Kobe, Japan, 2009. 
[3] M. C. Wilson and A. G. Price, "Development of the Diamond 
Light Source PSS in conformance with 61508," in Proc. of 
ICALEPSC2011, pp. 1289-1292, Grenoble, France, 2011. 
[4] P. Nanin, "IEC 61508 experience for the development of the 
LHC Functional Safety Systems and future perspectives," in 
Proc. of ICALEPCS 2009, pp. 400-402. , Kobe, Japan, 2009. 
[5] K. Mahoney and H. Robertson, "Jefferson Lab IEC 
61508/61511 safety PLC based safety systems," in . Proc. 
ICALEPCS 2009, pp. 394-396., Kobe, Japan, 2009. 
[6] J. C. Chapuis, J. P. Arnoul, A. Hurs, and M. Manson, "The 
Laser Megajoule Facility personal safety system," in Proc. of 
ICALEPCS 2011, pp. 1070-1072, Grenoble, France, 2011. 
[7] D. J. S. Findlay et al., "ISIS upgrade – a status report.," in 
Proc. HB2006, pp. 20-23, Tsukuba, Japan, 2006. 
[8] S. Scheloske, S. Hanke, and J. Mosthaf, "Overview of the 
personal protection System at the Heidelberg Ion Therapy 
Facility," in Proc. of PCaPAC08,  Ljubljan, Slovenia, pp. 88-
90, 2008. 
[9] G. Bassato et al.,"Safety requirements in SPES control 
system: preliminary design," in Proc. of ICALEPCS09, pp. 
585-587, Kobe, Japan, 2009. 
[10] A Armoush., E. Beckschulze, and S. Kowalewski. “Safety 
assessment of Design Patterns for safety-critical embedded 
systems” in Proc. 35th Euromicro Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications pp. 523-527.    DOI 
10.1109/SEAA.2009.12, Paras, Greece, 2009 
[11] S. P Kumar, P. S. Ramaiah, and V. Khanaa, “Architectural 
patterns to design software safety based safety-critical 
systems.” in Proc. ICCCS11, pp. 620-623,  Odisha, India 
[12] J. Rauhamäki1, T. Vepsäläinen1, and S. Kuikka1 “Functional 
safety system patterns.” in Proc. VikingPLoP 2012, pp. 47-68, 
Saariselkä, Finland 
[13] M. McKibben, “CLS human factors workscope”, 0.1.1.1, Rev 
1, 2008, unpublished 
[14] C. Alexander, “A pattern languge : twons, buildings, 
construction.” Oxford University Press, New York, 1977 
[15] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides. “Design 
Patterns: element of resusable object-oriented software.” 
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, USA, 1997 
[16] http://www.aps.anl.gov/epics/ [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[17] http://www.rtems.org/ [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[18] http://www.mks.com/ [retrieved: December, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

