Out-of-Step Protection System Testing by Means of Communication Network 
Emulator 
 
Antans Sauhats, Aleksandrs Dolgicers, Andrejs Utans, Dmitrijs Antonovs, Gregory Pashnin  
Riga Technical University  
Faculty of Power and Electrical Engineering 
Riga, Latvia 
e-mails: {sauhatas@eef.rtu.lv, dolgicers@eef.rtu.lv, utan@eef.rtu.lv, dantonov@eef.rtu.lv, pashnin@gmail.com} 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the testing methodology for 
out-of-step protection system operation validation. The 
protection under consideration is a wide-area measurement-
based system that consists of several parts: intelligent 
electronic devices, GPS measurement synchronization and 
communication network. The entire protection system must be 
tested in the laboratory before installation on site. The problem 
is, that communication network is hardly available at the 
laboratory testing stage and, at the same time, the 
communication network is a critical part of the system, which 
directly influences the entire system operation. To overcome 
this problem, the communication network emulator was 
elaborated that allows to test the entire protection system in 
real-time and in the presence of various, potentially vulnerable 
conditions. 
Keywords-out-of-step regime (OOS) protection; wide-area 
measurement 
system; 
wide-area 
protection 
testing; 
communication network time delay; communication network 
emulator 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A modern power system is a very complex structure 
comprising a huge number of equipments. A power system is 
a subject to a whole range of disturbances, contingencies and 
equipment faults that should be eliminated as soon as 
possible in order to guarantee power system reliable, secure 
and effective operation [1]. Power system protection’s 
functions are accomplished by means of protection and 
automation devices. It is possible to subdivide all types of 
protection and automation systems on two separate groups:  
1. Local protection and automation devices, whose 
main task is to protect only one of the power system 
objects (generator, transformer, transmission line, 
substation buses). This type of devices uses only 
locally obtained measurements (voltages and 
currents) to accomplish the object protection task; 
2. Wide-area protection and automation systems, 
whose task is to mitigate contingencies, which, if 
ignored, may lead to power system instability and 
blackouts. These types of protection systems use the 
information from several, geographically distant, 
power system points. High speed communication 
channels used for real-time information exchange 
between the local devices comprising the wide-area 
protection.  
Wide-area protection structure can be presented like on 
Fig. 1. The protection system consists of several elements: 
Intelligent Electronic Devices (IED) - local devices that 
measures voltages and currents (U, I), pre-process 
measurements in vector polar or rectangular form and 
exchange 
the 
information 
by 
means 
of 
digital 
communication network [2][6]. Because the physical 
distance between devices may be too large, the dedicated 
point-to-point communication channels are not always 
available. In this case, the private communication network is 
used for data exchange where switches and multiplexers are 
access points to the virtual communication circuits. Virtual 
communication circuits define the logical connection 
between network clients but the actual data path is defined 
by the current state of the network and several paths possible 
for one and the same logical connection.  
IED
IED
IED
switch
switch
switch
IED
switch
Communication 
network
U,I
U,I
U,I
U,I
switch
Virtual
 circuits
GPS synchronization
 
Figure 1.  Wide-area protection structure. 
To be able to process the measurements of such 
widespread system, the measurement synchronization should 
be accomplished. Global Positioning System (GPS) 
disciplined time sources are used for measurement 
synchronization. Each IED device receives one pulse per 
second (1pps) signal from substation GPS receivers [13]. 
Thus, all measurement are synchronized within several 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

microseconds and supplied with appropriate time tags when 
transmitted through communication network. Unlike the 
local protection system, the reliability of wide-area 
protection systems is highly dependent of the performance 
and reliability of each element, comprising the system. To 
guarantee the effective and trouble-free operation of the 
whole system, the extensive testing should be carried out and 
all possible functional problems should be identified, 
preferably, at the system design and laboratory testing stage. 
 The reminder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 provides background information about out-of-step 
regime in power system and describes the out-of-step 
protection system structure and operation principles. The 
protection system operation in real-time along with the 
influence of the communication network time delay is 
analyzed in Section 3. Section 4 describes the methodology 
of protection system testing using a communication network 
emulator. Conclusion is drawn in Section 5. 
II. 
OUT-OF-STEP REGIME IN POWER SYSTEM 
A power system is always a subject to small or large 
disturbances and equipment faults. Local faults, such as 
short-circuits, are successfully mitigated by means of fast 
disconnection of the faulted object from the healthy grid. But 
regimes do exist in power system that can lead to much 
worse consequences than the local equipment faults because 
of their influence on the stable operation of the power 
system. Generally, this type of regimes arises as a result of 
power generation/load imbalance. One of such hazardous 
regimes is the Out-of-Step (OOS) regime. When generated 
power cannot be successfully delivered to the load (because 
of the transmission line limited capacity or short circuit) or, 
conversely, there is insufficient power (because of the 
sudden loss of generation or excessive load), then some part 
of the system generators start acceleration/deceleration in 
response to the generation/load imbalance. As a result, part 
of the power system operates asynchronously (loss 
synchronism) with the remaining part. Fig. 2 shows typical 
voltage and active power waveforms (effective values) in 
OOS regime. The situation may become even worse because 
of the uncontrolled load shutdown in response to the voltage 
deeps near the power swing electrical center. To avoid 
equipment damage and widespread power outages, the OOS 
protection should take appropriate control actions: 
1. Try to restore generation/load balance of the system 
(add generation capabilities or remove excessive 
load); 
2. In case the first step was unsuccessful, the power 
system should be split in several parts with a goal to 
preserve power balance within each peninsula. When 
the power balance within each part is achieved, the 
power system restoration should be accomplished by 
the system operator. 
The OOS relaying principles are well-known and 
described [10][11]. At least, several electrical quantities 
(measured or derived) can be used for power swing 
detection: power, currents, impedance and impedance rate of 
change, power swing center voltage. 
 
Figure 2.  Out-of-step regime waveforms. 
The primary reason of the OOS regime is generator (or 
group of generators) pole slip with respect to the rest of the 
system. Fig. 3 shows the generators rotors angle variation for 
stable (a), and unstable (b) power system conditions  
 
(a) 
 
 
 
   (b) 
Figure 3.  Generators rotor angle variation for stable (a) and unstable (b) 
power swing.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
-350
-300
-250
-200
-150
-100
-50
-0
50
100
150
s
deg
[SC15]   MACHINE : GEN1     ANGULAR POSITION  Unit : deg
[SC15]   MACHINE : GEN2     ANGULAR POSITION  Unit : deg
0
2
4
6
8
10
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
-0
10
20
30
40
50
s
deg
[SC7LoadUP]   MACHINE : GEN1     ANGULAR POSITION  Unit : deg
[SC7LoadUP]   MACHINE : GEN2     ANGULAR POSITION  Unit : deg
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
-0
500
s
MW
[OOSUFLS_SK_RTU]   ACTIVE POWER : LINE X0873811-Q069911 -1  Unit : MW
[OOSUFLS_SK_RTU]   ACTIVE POWER : LINE X0876021-Q069992 -1  Unit : MW
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
100
200
s
kV
[OOSUFLS_SK_RTU]   VOLTAGE AT NODE : Q069992   Unit : kV
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
48
49
50
s
Hz
[OOSUFLS_SK_RTU]   MACHINE : SKHY509  SPEED  Unit : Hz
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

IED1
IED2
switch
switch
Communication 
network
U1
GPS synchronization
~
~
U2
G1
G2
Power system network
U1
φ1
U2
φ2
control action
 
Figure 4.  OOS protection system structure. 
The generators electromagnetic force (EMF) vectors 
angle difference value can serve as an indicator of OOS 
regime. Direct measuring of the generators EMF vectors 
hardly available, but, the closest available approach is to 
measure the voltage phasors at the nearest (electrically) 
nodes. The simplified (with two generation sources G1, G2) 
OOS protection system structure is shown in Fig. 4. Local 
devices IED1 and IED2 measure the voltage phasors U1, U2, 
calculates the voltage phasors angles 1, 2 and exchange 
with information through the communication network. Each 
IED calculates the angle difference ∆  = 
1 - 
2 and 
recognize the OOS regime if three conditions are met: 
1. The angle difference exceeds the system stability 
angle setting (derived from the results of power 
system regimes simulation): 
1
const
2. The rate of change of the angle difference does not 
exceed the value of const2 (this condition allows to 
distinguish OOS regime, when voltage angle 
changes smoothly, from the short circuit regime, 
when voltage angle can change abruptly): 
2
/)
(
const
dt
d
3. The negative sequence voltage does not exceed 
const3 setting value (this conditions allows to 
distinguish the OOS regime, which is three-phase 
balanced regime, from all others unbalanced 
regimes): 
3
2
const
U
When ∆  starts approaching to the const1 value, the 
OOS protection should issue the command for load shedding 
or launch additional generation resources. If ∆  still 
increases and exceeds the value of const1, then the command 
should be generated to split the power system in 
predetermined place. 
III. 
OOS PROTECTION REAL-TIME OPERATION ISSUE 
It should be noted that distributed measurements and 
control systems are already in use in power system utilities. 
The Wide-Area Measurement System (WAMS) is an 
example of such system [4]. WAMS structure is very similar 
to the one presented in Fig. 1, except that instead of IEDs, 
the Phasor Measurement Units (PMU) are used across the 
system. PMUs are placed in critical power system points [2]. 
Each PMU calculates line frequencies, voltage and current 
phasors and streams those data over the communication 
network, along with the associated GPS time tags. Data from 
PMUs are collected in power system utility dispatch center 
and can be used to create wide-area visibility across the 
power system in ways that let grid operators understand real-
time conditions, see early evidence of emerging grid 
problems, and better diagnose, implement and evaluate 
remedial actions to protect power system stability [3]. 
Several publications [4][5][7][8] dedicated to PMU real-time 
application for protection and control tasks. Wide-Area 
Monitoring, Protection and Control systems (WAMPAC) 
can cope successfully with relatively slow processes like 
inter-area oscillations, state estimation, under frequency load 
shedding, power system restoration after islanding. Typical 
PMU provides output data at rate 10-50 samples per second 
(for 50 Hz system) [7]. For the proposed OOS protection 
system, it is mandatory to trace not only the angle value, the 
voltage phasor rotation should also be tracked with, at least 5 
electrical degree resolution (Fig. 5). This requirement could 
be fulfilled with a signal sampling rate of 500-1000 samples 
per second (depending on the implemented algorithm), that 
significantly exceeds the PMU output data rate. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

U1
U2
Δφ
 
Figure 5.  Voltage phasors sampling. 
One more factor should be taken into account. WAMS 
can not be used in the absence of GPS synchronization, but 
OOS protection should be operable (possibly, with reduced 
precision) even if the GPS measurement synchronization is 
not available at the moment. In the absence of 
synchronization, the data transmission time delay, introduced 
by the communication network, can be calculated and taken 
into account before the angle between voltage phasors is 
calculated. The time delay calculation is based on well-
known ping-pong method [12] and the result is valid only if 
transmitting and receiving time delays are equal (Fig. 6).  
IED1
IED2
Td
t1
Δt
t2
t3
t4
0
0
1
1
Td
 
Figure 6.  Time delay calculation using ping-pong method. 
Then, the measurement synchronization could be 
achieved 
in 
assumption 
that 
time 
delays 
of 
the 
communication network are symmetrical (5). The data 
transmission time delay Td is 
/)2 2
3
1
( 4
t
t
t
t
Td
Time difference ∆t between IED1 and IED2 sampling 
instances is 
Td t2
t
All time marks: t1, t2, t3 and t4 are local and devices attach 
these local times to the data frame when data exchange 
processed. 
Thus, 
devices 
can 
synchronize 
their 
measurements and are operable even without GPS 
synchronization. Time delay asymmetry will introduce an 
error in time delay calculations and this error will lead to 
additional angle error between voltage phasors. To mitigate 
this effect, IEDs automatically rearranges their settings to 
less sensitive. Despite the fact that the protection system will 
operate with lower precision, the system is still capable to 
detect OOS condition and take appropriate control action. 
The degree of device settings sensitivity should conform to 
two requirements: 
1. Reliable operation of the protection for the majority 
of possible OOS regime scenarios; 
2. Avoidance of false operation for all possible OOS 
regime scenarios. 
Protection blocking was implemented to fulfill the 
second requirement - protection will be blocked if 
communication time delay exceed the maximal theoretically 
possible time delay for a given communication network. 
Then, a set of experiments should be carried out to be sure 
that the first requirement is also fulfilled. 
IV. 
OOS PROTECTION SYSTEM TESTING 
Any complex control system should be tested to validate 
the correctness of the implemented algorithms and to define 
the value of system operation reliability and robustness. This 
is especially true for protection and automation systems, 
whose correct and reliable operation largely determine the 
entire power system operation. Testing procedures for the 
local protections can be successfully accomplished in the 
laboratory, prior the device installation on site. Testing of the 
OOS protection system under consideration is much more 
complex task because not only each element of the system 
should be tested. Interaction of individual parts and correct 
operation of the entire system in the presence of various, 
potentially vulnerable conditions, should be checked. OOS 
protection system consists of three main parts: IED units, 
GPS synchronization system and digital communication 
network. It should be mentioned, that validation of the 
system operation on the site could be problematic because 
system elements are widespread geographically. Correct 
functioning of the system should be considered under several 
conditions: presence/loss of GPS synchronization, short-term 
unavailability of the communication channel, transmitted 
data integrity violation, operation of the system with 
different data transmission rates, communication time delay 
volatility and time delay asymmetry. The communication 
network is a critical element of the system and, at the same 
time, it is hardly available at the laboratory testing stage.  
Testing of the considered protection system using 
simulation and modeling technique will not give us the 
valuable results because of the several reasons: 
1. Inappropriate level of details/unavailability of IEDs 
models. 
2. Communication network topology and hardware 
environment not always defined at the laboratory 
testing stage. 
3. Each element of the system can be a subject to 
malfunction due to the hard-to-find programming 
errors, which can not be simulated. 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

4. Protection system under consideration is a real-time 
application and assumes that each element of the 
system should operate in real-time. 
An emulator of the Digital Communication Network 
(CNE) was developed and produced to overcome the 
problems of protection system testing in real-time. In 
contrast with a typical communication network simulator, 
CNE is not hosts/data packets oriented device. Also, the 
device operation principle is not communication protocol- 
dependent. 
CNE 
emulates 
communication 
network 
parameters and states that can potentially affect the 
protection system performance and reliability. CNE is a 
dedicated, microprocessor based device, which internal 
structure and principle of operation presented in Fig. 7. The 
input data are sampled and stored inside the memory buffer 
which is organized in a manner of first-in first-out (FIFO) 
register. The entire contents of the FIFO memory is shifted at 
one position prior each next sample. The size of the memory 
buffer N defines the time delay ∆t between data input and 
data output moments (6). The data transmission time delay is 
N Fclk
t
/
Two dedicated memory buffers per communication 
channel were implemented to provide full duplex data 
exchange. To minimize the jitter effect between the input and 
output signals, the signal sampling frequency Fclk should be 
significantly greater than data transmission rate Fdata (7):  
Fdata
Fclk
1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1
1 1 1 1 0 0
Data shift
N – size of the memory FIFO
Input signal sampling
Output signal
Communication interface
Data in
Communication interface
Data out
Microprocessor
Sampling and memory 
buffer shift control
PC communication
Device setting
 control
 
Figure 7.  CNE principle of operation. 
Device settings are controlled by means of PC with 
appropriate software. User can control the communication 
time delays for each communication channel and in both 
directions independently. One of possible features of the 
device is operation on a basis of predefined scenario: short-
term communication interruptions, introducing random 
errors in transmitted data, abrupt variation of time delays. 
The structure of OOS protection system testing using 
CNE is presented in Fig. 8. After OOS condition simulation 
by means of power system regimes modelling software (ATP 
[14], Eurostag [15], ETAP [16]), the data are uploaded into 
Relay Test Systems (RTS) and analogue signals can be 
replayed in real time. At least several tens scenarios of OOS 
regime should be generated to fulfil the requirement of 
reliable testing. Then, analogue signals (3-phase voltages) 
are supplied to each IED and replayed by means of RTS - 
Freja300. 
IED1
IED2
IED3
Communication network 
emulator (CNE)
GPS synchronization
Relay test system 
(Freja300)
U(3-phase)
Relay test system 
(Freja300)
Relay test system 
(Freja300)
U(3-phase)
U(3-phase)
GPS 
receiver
 
Figure 8.  Laboratory testing of the OOS protection system. 
IED measurements as well RTS output signals are 
synchronized by means of GPS receiver. Data exchange 
between devices is accomplished through the CNE that 
emulates time delays of the communication network 
according with predefined scenario. In Fig. 9, we can see an 
example of one of the experiments.  
 
Figure 9.  OOS protection system testing example. 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

CNE abruptly increases the time delay at time 2.05 s and 
change it back at 2.08 s. Protection operation blocking 
observable within this time interval in response to time delay 
variation. This testing structure allows test the whole system 
in real-time and in close-to-real conditions. After extensive 
testing, the conclusion is drawn about the validity of 
protection system settings as also about the entire system 
operation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
A secure and reliable operation of the power system is 
largely determined by correct operation of the protection 
relay systems. Appropriate testing of relay systems was 
always performed to evaluate relay reliability, conformance 
of the settings as also to validate various algorithmic issues, 
implemented 
in 
relays. 
Relay 
testing 
methodology 
significantly changes with an introduction of wide-area 
measurements and wide-area protection systems, because 
several additional components can influence the entire 
protection system reliability. The GPS measurement 
synchronization and communication networks now become 
the critical links and protection system should be tested for 
several, potentially 
vulnerable, 
conditions. 
Typically, 
communication network is hardly available to perform the 
wide-area protection system testing in laboratory. At the 
same time, it is possible to define communication network 
parameters, which directly influence the protection system 
reliability. The communication network emulator was 
developed and created to provide the OOS protection system 
testing in the laboratory. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. J. Moore, “Power system – Protection,” London: The 
Institution of Electrical Egineers, 1995. 
[2] A. G. Phadke, “Synchronized phasor measurements in 
power systems,” IEEE Computer Applications in Power, 
vol. 6, pp. 10 –15, April 1993. 
[3] A. G. Phadke, J. S. Thorp, and K. J. Karimi, “State 
estimation with phasor measurements,” IEEE Transactions 
on Power Systems, vol. 1, February 1986, pp. 233-238. 
[4] NERC (North American Reliability Corporation), “Real-
time 
application 
of 
synchrophasors 
for 
improving 
reliability”, 
www.nerc.com/docs/oc/rapirtf/RAPIR%20final%20101710
.pdf. [retrieved: December 2013].  
[5] E. O. Schweitzer, A. Guzmán, H. J. Altuve, and D. A. 
Tziouvaras, “Real-time synchrophasor applications for 
Wide-Area 
Protection, 
Control, 
and 
Monitoring,” 
http://www.google.lv/url?q=https://www.selinc.com/Work
Area/DownloadAsset.aspx%3Fid%3D6388&sa=U&ei=Ho
mlUoi2E6bNygPN84CwDQ&ved=0CCAQFjAA&usg=AF
QjCNFk6xRLyW-FRX9aNB4GfDv4mhvDiw 
[retrieved: 
December 2013]. “ 
[6] J. Bertsch, C. Carnal, D. Karlson, J. McDaniel, and Khoi 
Vu, “Wide-area protection and power system utilization,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 93, Issue 5, May 2005, pp. 
997-1003.  
[7] B. Singh, N. K. Sharma , A. N. Tiwari , K. S. Verma, and 
S. N. Singh, “Applications of phasor measurement units 
(PMUs) in electric power system networks incorporated 
with 
FACTS 
controllers,” 
International Journal 
of 
Engineering, Science and Technology, vol. 3, no. 3, 2011, 
pp. 64-82. 
[8] B. Bhargava and A. Salazar, “Use of synchronized phasor 
measurement system for monitoring power system stability 
and system dynamics in real-time,” IEEE Power and 
Energy Society General Meeting - Conversion and 
Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, July 
2008, pp. 1-8. 
[9] M. Begovic, D. Novosel, D. Karlsson, C. Henville, and G. 
Michel, “Wide-area protection and emergency control,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 93, no. 5, May 2005, pp. 
876-891. 
[10] Power 
Swing 
and 
Out-of-Step 
considerations 
on 
transmission lines, IEEE PSRC WG D6,  http://www.pes-
psrc.org/Reports/Power%20Swing%20and%20OOS%20Co
nsiderations%20on%20Transmission%20Lines%20F..pdf, 
[retrieved: December 2013]. 
[11] D. A. Tziouvaras and D. Hou “Out-of-Step protection 
fundamentals and advancements,” Schweitzer Engineering 
laboratories, Inc. Vacaville, CA USA Daqing Hou 
Schweitzer Engineering Laboratories, Inc. Boise, ID USA. 
[12] M. G. Adamiak, Dr. W. Premerlani, and G. E. Alexander, 
“A new approach to current differential protection for 
transmission lines,” GE Corporate GE Power Management 
Research and Development Malvern, PA Schenectady, NY, 
Protective Relaying Committee Meeting October 22-23, 
1998 Portsmouth, NH. 
[13] White paper – data communication in substation 
automation 
system, 
WP-1004HE 
– 
Part4, 
Time 
synchronization 
in 
substation 
automation, 
http://belden.picturepark.com/Website/Download.aspx?Do
wnloadToken=c816280d-b9d5-433f-815a-
da4fbc61714f&Purpose=AssetManager&mime-
type=application/pdf, [retrieved: December 2013]. 
[14] Alternative Transient 
Program, http://www.emtp.org/, 
[retrieved: December 2013]. 
[15] Eurostag, http://www.eurostag.be/, [retrieved: December 
2013]. 
[16] ETAP, http://etap.com/index.htm, [retrieved: December 
2013]. 
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

