An Intelligent Cloud-based Home Energy Management System Based on Machine 
to Machine Communications in Future Energy Environments 
 
Jinsung Byun*, Insung Hong*, Zion Hwang**, and Sehyun Park* 
*School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea 
**College of Culture and Teacher, Hyupsung University, Hwaseong, Korea 
E-mail: jinsung, axlrose11421@wm.cau.ac.kr, zhwang@uhs.ac.kr, shpark@cau.ac.kr  
 
 
Abstract— 
Recent 
advances 
in 
machine-to-machine 
communication technologies facilitate location/context-aware 
home energy management system that can provide predefined 
services. Such systems can establish the context model about 
the structural situations and the interrelations between 
dynamic events and services. These systems also can reason the 
adaptive services according to the policy construction and user 
requirements. However, due to their architectural limitations, 
the recent systems are not so flexible with respect to system 
scalability and availability. The important issues, such as the 
enhancement of the personalized service, the energy-aware 
service prediction of the multi situations, and the scalability of 
the various service domains, have not been adequately 
considered in the recent researches. Therefore, this paper 
proposes an intelligent cloud-based home energy management 
system (CHEMS), considering these issues. We employ cloud 
computing methods to deal with problems that the existing 
systems have. Cloud computing technologies can help the 
existing HEMS to deal with a large amount of computational 
and storage resources required to use enormous energy 
management data effectively. We implemented CHEMS in the 
test bed and conducted an experiment to verify the efficiency of 
the proposed system. The results show that the proposed 
system reduces the service response time up to 39.4 percent. 
Keywords-cloud computing; home energy management 
system; machine to machine communications; pattern learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart grid technologies have changed the electricity 
infrastructure more efficiently. These technologies help both 
electricity provider and consumer to improve energy 
efficiency and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 
optimizing power generation, transmission, distribution, and 
management. HEMS is composed of a wireless sensor 
network (WSN), a smart meter, a smart distribution panel, a 
integrated management server, and a smart actuator. They 
collect a variety of information and optimize energy 
efficiency [1]. The conventional HEMS systems have 
focused on standby power reduction and pattern analysis of 
power consumption. 
Context awareness indicates the concept that computers 
can sense and react based on their environment. With the 
increasing demand for a personal environment service (PES), 
context-aware systems have been implemented in various 
places.  In recent years, these systems have been gradually 
applied to HEMS to improve energy efficiency. These 
systems can offer context-aware services to users with regard 
to the analysis of information about the circumstances. 
However, the conventional systems spend excessive resource 
and long-term pattern analysis time, since they have to gather 
and store a lot of contexts and data for reasoning. 
The widespread availability of embedded sensors (e.g. 
smart meters or monitoring sensors) for ubiquitous 
computing is increasingly supporting complex HEMS 
applications and services. Modern embedded sensors are 
especially well-suited to leverage information about a user’s 
situations because they are often integrated with the mobile 
devices that facilitate obtaining detailed and meaningful 
descriptions of a user’s situation. However, large-scale usage 
of embedded sensors will lead to the emergence of a 
complex 
organization 
system 
which 
requires 
huge 
computing resources. Furthermore, an increase in the 
embedded sensors will lead to the great rise of machine-to-
machine (M2M) communications over wired and wireless 
links.  
To deal with these problems, we propose a novel home 
energy management system (HEMS), i.e. intelligent cloud 
based home energy management system (CHEMS). Cloud 
computing is an emerging technology aimed to provide 
computing and storage services over a network [2]. Thus, 
cloud computing is widely applied to various applications 
and systems, such as a multimedia delivery service or other 
novel services that require high-performance processing 
capability [3]. Cloud computing technologies can help the 
existing HEMS to deal with a large amount of computational 
and storage resources required to use enormous energy 
management data effectively. Our design goals for CHEMS 
are:  
1. Automated deployment and management of virtual 
infrastructure in the cloud:  CHEMS employs cloud 
computing concept to provide home energy management 
services. CHEMS takes a dynamic description of a service, 
which encapsulates service’s requirements. Thus, according 
to this dynamic description of a service, CHEMS can easily 
deploy and manage virtual infrastructure in the cloud.  
2. Pattern-based learning for optimal control: Accurate 
reasoning based on user’s living/power consumption patterns 
can reduce heavy event processing since it helps to find out 
the period when only devices are needed to be activated with 
respect to user’s living/power consumption pattern. While 
dynamically generating the policies and service patterns with 
respect to the energy and service states, CHEMS can 
minimizes the energy and system resource consumption.  
3. Light-weight middleware support: We present the 
light-weight middleware which supports the energy-aware 
services. The proposed light-weight middleware is based on 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

the learning mechanism which analyzes the schedule and 
activity of users, and also the power consumption state of 
devices. By grouping similar context models and pattern 
clustering based on user life styles, CHEMS facilitates the 
effective pattern learning. Then, it dynamically reconfigures 
the middleware on the devices that support load-balanced 
ubiquitous push services. 
4. Extensibility and scalability: As new kinds of sensing 
devices, data sources, and new user activity patterns are 
continuously becoming available, the system is easily able to 
extend the service coverage to support more users. Moreover, 
the interface of the proposed system shouldn’t be limited to a 
specific type of sensor connectivity. We developed a light-
weight middleware and its self-configuration schemes which 
allow an embedded device to be reconfigured with respect to 
its new environment.  
Furthermore, based on its pattern generation, distributed 
service reasoning and service prediction, it seamlessly offers 
the personalized and localized energy management services 
to residents with higher service satisfaction.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Home Energy Management System 
HEMS is an emerging technology which monitors, 
analyzes and controls devices such as heating, ventilating, 
and air conditioning (HVAC) system to reduce power 
consumption and CO2 emissions.  
Many researchers proposed the ZigBee based HEMS 
systems [4]-[6]. These systems controls and monitors home 
appliances. In these papers, especially ZigBee (IEEE 
802.15.4 standard) technology was used for implementation 
of HEMS, due to low-power and low-cost features of ZigBee 
technology. On the other hand, Son et al [7] presented 
HEMS based on power line communication (PLC). Zhao et 
al [8] presented a building energy management system 
(BEMS) by using a multi-agent decision-making control 
methodology. Nguyen et al [9] dealt with advanced load 
management strategies for BEMS. This paper suggested a 
real-time control using wireless sensor network. Wei et al 
[10] 
proposed 
an 
adaptive 
home/building 
energy 
management system (A-HEMS/BEMS) for managing power 
consumption by using the convergence of heterogeneous 
sensor/actuator networks. Mineno et al [11] proposed the 
system framework for building energy monitoring and 
analysis system based on the packet data network.  
B. Electricity Smart Meter 
A smart meter is an advanced metering device that can be 
used to measure energy consumption and can communicate 
this information to other devices. The smart meter is the 
most 
important 
component 
of 
advanced 
metering 
infrastructure (AMI) that connects HEMS and a smart grid 
that optimize the production, distribution, and consumption 
of electricity [12].  Kung et al [13] proposed a fuzzy-based 
adaptive approach to measure electric power, and also RMS 
(root mean square) voltage and current using a genetic 
algorithm (GA). Benzi et al [14] presented the definition of a 
local interface for power meters and the specific 
architectures for a proper consumer-oriented implementation 
of a smart meter network. Silva et al [15] proposed a data 
mining framework for the exploration and extraction of 
actionable knowledge from data generated by electric power 
meters. On the other hand, security is an important issue in 
the design of the smart meter. Kim et al [16] suggested a 
secure 
smart-metering 
protocol, 
considering 
several 
important aspects of security and authentication such as key 
management, secure transmission, and device authentication. 
III. 
INTELLIGENT CLOUD-BASED ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM 
The current intelligent HEMS can provide smart services 
such as a user-centric service based on context-awareness, a 
power distribution service based on demand forecasting, or 
an autonomous energy management service based on the 
M2M communications. The provision of these intelligent 
HEMS will lead to the usage of enormous computational and 
storage resources as mentioned above. To deal with these 
problems, we propose a novel home energy management 
 
 
Fig. 1. Overview of intelligent Cloud-based Energy Management System (iCHEMS). 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

system i.e. CHEMS. In this section, we present the overall 
system architecture of CHEMS. 
A. Overview of CHEMS 
Fig. 1 shows an overview of CHEMS which consists of 
an intelligent cloud-based management server (iCMS) and an 
intelligent cloud-based metering device (iCMD). The main 
features of our system are as follows:   
1) CHEMS uses cloud computing methods to process 
complex tasks that require enormous computational and 
storage resources.  
2) CHEMS has the capability to manage local renewable 
energy.  
3) CHEMS should consider energy reduction by the 
optimization of sensing, processing, and transmission of 
M2M nodes. 
4) CHEMS provides users with user-friendly location- 
and situation-based push energy management services in 
order to enhance user interaction and energy efficiency.  
B. Architecture 
Fig. 2 illustrates the system architecture of iCMS. iCMS 
needs to be reconfigured to allocate additional or release 
unneeded resources and appropriately reorganize the 
deployed software, hardware, middleware components. 
iCMS consists of three architectural layers: application layer, 
management layer, and cloud infrastructure layer.  
1) Application layer: This layer creates the instances of 
energy management service model. This layer plays a role in 
service analysis, service decision, service creation, service 
configuration, and service management. This layer includes 
all components related to applications which run in the cloud. 
This layer consists of a service manager, a consumer profiler, 
a service repository and a standard interface.  
 Service manager analyzes requested services and 
interprets the service requirement of a consumer’s 
request. When the service is requested, the service 
manager determines which system resources are 
suitable and how many system resources are needed.  
 Consumer profiler gathers the information about the 
consumer (e.g. user or device). The information 
contains 
user’s 
preference, 
location, 
energy 
consumption, etc.  
 A user requests a service and the system provides a 
service through standard interface. 
2) Management layer: This layer controls the process 
related to the provision of cloud and context-aware services. 
This layer consists of a context manager, a service scheduler, 
a VM manager and a configuration manager. 
 Context manager gathers information about the 
circumstances and manages this information.  
 Service scheduler determines resource entitlements 
for the allocated VMs. In other word, the service 
scheduler determines when VMs should be added or 
released to meet the service requirement.  
 VM manager consists of an accounting manager and 
an energy monitor. The accounting manager checks 
the actual resource usage and accounts for the cost. 
The energy monitor analyzes energy consumption of 
VMs and physical resources. It enables iCMS to 
perform the energy-efficient resource allocation.  
 Configuration manager controls all the essential 
parameters related to the system configuration. These 
parameters include the size of the virtual resources, 
the cloud infrastructure provider to use, or the 
software component. 
3) Cloud infrastructure layer: This layer controls and 
manages the hardware/software resource in the physical level 
resource. This layer applies virtualization technology to hide 
the characteristics of the physical resources. This layer also 
should consider security issues caused by cloud computing. 
This layer consists of VMs, a virtual machine monitor, and a 
security manager. 
 VMs dynamically run and stop on multiple physical 
resources.  
 Security manager guarantees confidentiality, integrity 
and authentication. It provides strong isolation.  
 
 
Fig. 2. Architecture of iCHEMS (iCMS and iCMD). 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

 Virtual machine monitor observes the availability and 
state of VMs. 
The physical resource is composed of the physical level 
resources such as computing, storage, power, and network 
resources.  
On the other hand, iCMD consists of an application layer, 
an adaptive configuration manager, and a hardware 
management layer. The application layer is mainly used for 
service analysis, service decision, service creation, service 
configuration, and service management like the application 
layer of iCMS. The adaptive configuration manager controls 
and manages the rule-update process. The administrator 
modifies or updates the rules through the administrator 
mode of the iCMD. The hardware management layer has the 
role of managing the various hardware modules such as a 
metering IC, a ZigBee tranceiver, a display driver, etc.  
C. Cloud Service Based on Situation-Awareness 
Fig. 3 shows a sequence diagram for provisioning a cloud 
service according to the situational and environmental events 
in iCMS. The light-weight middleware operates the learning 
mechanism and predicts the personalized service with regard 
to the policy modification and the energy management. The 
sequence diagram divides into two independent parts that is 
context management part and cloud management part.  
1) Context management part: The iCMS receives 
contexts about an environment and situations such as power 
consumption and a user’s movement through the iCMD. The 
context manager then analyzes and categorizes the gathered 
contexts and situation event to make them meaningful 
information and stores them in the knowledge repository. On 
the other hand, the pattern manager performs reasoning task 
(through the inference engine), pattern correlation task 
(through the pattern correlator), and pattern generation task 
(through pattern generator). The pattern is generated based 
on the user’s situations, the power consumption, and the 
service history. This pattern is used for the provision of 
energy management based on prediction to the local use. 
This generated pattern is stored on the knowledge repository.  
2) Cloud management part: The cloud computing is an 
important property of this system. The user requests energy 
management service through a mobile device.  The proposed 
platform interconnects the heterogeneous devices and 
networks for scalability and interoperability. When a user 
moves to another location, this middleware verifies the 
meaning events and predicts the pattern-based service. The 
intelligent device creates the passive events and offers active 
service, called push service, to user based on the 
interconnection. The procedure of the cloud management 
part is as follows. 
First, the user sends requests for a service to iCMS. This 
request is passed to the service manager. The service 
manager requests the service repository to send the service 
profiles which include a service requirement (i.e. required 
virtual resources).  
Second, the service manager transmits the service 
profiles to the service scheduler to perform the scheduling i.e. 
resource entitlements. The service profiles are passed to the 
service scheduler that employs this information to request the 
virtual infrastructure creation.  The service scheduler 
requests the knowledge repository to send information about 
the VMs (e.g. availability and state of the VMs). When 
receiving this information, the service scheduler determines 
resource entitlements for the allocated VMs. That is, it 
determines when VMs should be added or released to meet 
the service requirement. 
Third, the service manager transmits the service profiles 
to the configuration manager to perform the configuration 
according 
to 
the 
infrastructure’s 
conditions. 
The 
configuration 
manager 
manages 
all 
the 
essential 
configuration parameters, such as the size of the virtual 
resources, the cloud infrastructure provider to use, or the 
software component parameters. The configuration is 
composed of three processes which are pre-configuration 
(VMs are configured before they are started), post-
configuration (VMs are configured after they are started), 
and re-configuration (VMs are configured as a result of 
topological changes). To perform these configuration steps 
of a component, the configuration manager retrieves the 
 
 
Fig. 3. Sequence diagram of provisioning cloud computing servcie. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

related configuration description from a knowledge 
repository, and performs the configuration. 
In this section, we will show a simple service scenario to 
explain interoperation among both multi iCMDs and 
between iCMD and iCMS. Fig. 4 shows interoperation flow 
of a simple home energy management service scenario. 
1) Rule reconfiguration: Alice enters the room. iCMD1 
detects and recognizes Alice through interaction between 
iCMD1 and Alice’s handheld ZigBee transceiver. iCMD1 
then requests iCMS to transmit user/location-specific rules. 
When receiving the requests from iCMD1, iCMS retrieves 
the requested rules from the knowledge repository and sends 
the user/location-specific rules to iCMD1. iCMD1 then 
updates database and transmits these user/location-specific 
rules to adjacent iCMDs.  
2) Environment 
configuration according to 
user 
preference and location characteristics: Alice walks towards 
HDTV in order to watch a movie and turns on the HDTV. 
iCMD5 performs rule-based reasoning and determines a 
service. It then creates a service instance.   
3) Clustering for intelligent energy management: 
According 
to 
the location-aware 
clustering, 
iCMDs 
interconnects with iCMDs which are located in same 
location. When an iCMD detects the user movement or the 
energy consumption, the iCMD requests the cooperation of 
energy management service to clustered iCMDs.  
4) operation in power-saving mode: If iCMD1 perceives 
that Alice goes out the room, the iCMD1 sends all the 
iCMDs a command message to operate in power-saving 
mode. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Fig. 5 shows a prototype and a hardware block diagram 
of iCMD. Same hardware components as reference [17] are 
used except for the micro controller unit (MCU). In this 
paper, the 8-bit MCU instead of the 16-bit MCU is used as 
the main processor, because of the reduction of the 
production cost. A 250 kbps/2.4 GHz ZigBee transceiver 
module is used for communication. The metering circuit is 
used for measurement of the power consumption and 
monitoring the power state. The power group consists of the 
SMPS and power regulation circuit. A variety of information 
such as power, voltage, and current as well as temperature 
and humidity is displayed through the LCD display unit. The 
relay plays a role in shutting off the standby power and 
remote control. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS 
A. Test-bed 
We deployed CHEMS in the real home service test bed 
to estimate its efficiency. We analyzed the proposed 
mechanism according to various scenarios at real homes and 
enhanced the correctness of the proposed system according 
to user activity patterns and service scenarios. The results 
presented in the following were collected from 1 month 
dynamic experiment, where 20 iCMDs and various 
appliances (TVs, VCRs, humidifiers, microwave ovens, air 
conditioners, PCs and etc.) in our test bed. We tested three 
 
Fig. 5. Prototype of ICMD; (a) PCB layout, (b) prototype, and (c) 
hardware block diagram 
 
 
Fig. 4. Interoperation flow of a home energy management service scenario. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

types of power control systems in the experiment 
environment. 
B. Experiment and Results 
Headings Fig. 6 shows the service response time by the 
number of requested service for home energy management. 
The results show that the proposed system reduces the 
service response time up to 39.4 percent. Even though the 
number of requested service increases, the proposed system 
maintains certain levels of delay of the home energy 
management due to resource allocation through iCMS. The 
proposed system gradually decreases the slope of the service 
response time according to the efficient management of 
metering data, and resource allocation and configuration. 
However, stand-alone iCMD rapidly increases the service 
response time due to the overhead from the increasing 
number of metering data and control messages. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
We designed and implemented CHEMS considering new 
trends of HEMS which require interoperable user-centric 
services to the green home domains. We utilize a cloud 
computing concept to deal with various problems of the 
existing systems. We implemented and evaluated the 
proposed system in the real home test bed. The results show 
that the proposed system reduces the service response time 
up to 39.4 percent. We are planning to implement efficient 
authentication and authorization mechanisms for the reliable 
service domain interconnection and pattern generation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MKE (The Ministry 
of Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the ITRC 
(Information Technology Research Center) support program 
(NIPA-2012-H0301-12-4004) supervised by the NIPA 
(National IT Industry Promotion Agency) and by the Human 
Resources Development program (No.20104010100570) of 
the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and 
Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government 
Ministry of Knowledge Economy. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  D. Niyato, L. Xiao, and P. Wang, “Machine-to-machine 
communications for home energy management system in smart grid,” 
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 53-59, April 
2011. 
[2] W. Zhu, C. Luo, J. Wang, and S. Li, “Multimedia Cloud Computing,” 
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 59-69, May 
2011. 
[3] Y. Wei and M. B. Blake, “Service-Oriented Computing and Cloud 
Computing: 
Challenges 
and 
Opportunities,” 
IEEE 
Internet 
Computing, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 72-75, Nov.-Dec. 2010. 
[4] K. Gill, S.-H. Yang, F. Yao, and X. Lu, “A zigbee-based home 
automation system,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., vol. 55, no. 2, 
pp. 422-430, May 2009.  
[5] D.-M. Han and J.-H. Lim, “Design and implementation of smart 
home energy management systems based on zigbee,” IEEE Trans. 
Consumer Electron., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1417-1425, Aug. 2010. 
[6] D.-M. Han and J.-H. Lim, “Smart home energy management system 
using IEEE 802.15.4 and zigbee,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., 
vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 1403-1410, Aug. 2010. 
[7] Y.-S. Son, T. Pulkkinen, K.-D. Moon and C. Kim, "Home energy 
management system based on power line communication," IEEE 
Trans. Consumer Electron., vol.56, no.3, pp.1380-1386, Aug. 2010. 
[8] P. Zhao, S. Suryanarayanan, and M. G. Simões,, “An Energy 
Management System for Building Structures Using a Multi-Agent 
Decision-Making Control Methodology,” IEEE Industry Applications 
Society Annual Meeting (IAS), pp. 1-8, Oct. 2010. 
[9] N.-H. Nguyen, Q.-T. Tran, J.-M. Leger, and T.-P. Vuong, “A real-
time control using wireless sensor network for intelligent energy 
management system in buildings,” IEEE Workshop on Environmental 
Energy and Structural Monitoring Systems (EESMS), pp. 87-92, Sept. 
2010. 
[10] C. Wei and Y. Li, “Design of energy consumption monitoring and 
energy-saving management system of intelligent building based on 
the Internet of things,” International Conference on Electronics, 
Communications and Control (ICECC), pp. 3650-3652, Sept. 2011. 
[11] H. Mineno, Y. Kato, K. Obata, H. Kuriyama, K. Abe, N. Ishikawa, 
and T. Mizuno, “Adaptive Home/Building Energy Management 
System Using Heterogeneous Sensor/Actuator Networks,” IEEE 
Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), pp. 
1-5, Jan. 2010. 
[12] H. S. Cho, T. Yamazaki, and M. Hahn, “Determining location of 
appliances from multi-hop tree structures of power strip type smart 
meters,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 2314-
2322, Nov. 2009. 
[13] C.-H. Kung, M. J. Devaney, C.-M. Huang, and C.-M. Kung, “Fuzzy-
based adaptive digital power metering using a genetic algorithm,” 
IEEE Trans. Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 
183-188, Feb. 1998. 
[14] F. Benzi, N. Anglani, E. Bassi, and L. Frosini, “Electricity Smart 
Meters Interfacing the Households,” IEEE Trans. Industrial Electron., 
vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 4487-4494, Oct. 2011. 
[15] D. D. Silva, X. Yu, D. Alahakoon, and G. Holmes, “A Data Mining 
Framework for Electricity Consumption Analysis From Meter Data,” 
IEEE Trans. Industrial Informatics, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 399-407, Aug. 
2011.  
[16] S. Kim, E. Y. Kwon, M. Kim, J. H. Cheon, S. Ju, Y.-H. Lim, and M.-
S. Choi, “A Secure Smart-Metering Protocol Over Power-Line 
Communication,” IEEE Trans. Power Delivery, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 
2370-2379, Oct. 2011. 
[17] J. Byun, I. Hong, and S. Park, “Intelligent Cloud Home Energy 
Management System Using Household Appliance Priority Based 
Scheduling Based on Prediction of Renewable Energy Capability,” 
IEEE Trans. Consumer Electorn., vol. 58, no. 4, Nov. 2012
 
 
Fig. 6. Comparison of the service response time. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

