Smart Chair for Mitigation of Skin Pressure Ulcers 
Miguel Gomesa, Pedro Rebelob, Vitor Vaz da Silvac  
a,cElectronics Telecommunication and Computer Dpt. ISEL/IPL – Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa  
Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal 
bESTeSL – Escola Superior de Tecnologia da Saúde de Lisboa, 
Instituto Politécnico de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal 
cCTS – Centre of Technology and Systems, 
UNL – Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica, Portuga 
e-maila: miguelfpgomes.92@gmail.com 
e-mailb:pedro.rebelo@estesl.ipl.pt 
e-mailc:vsilva@deetc.isel.ipl.pt 
Abstract—Pressure Ulcers are still a great health problem, even 
in developed countries, that usually appear in impaired 
individuals as result of long periods of immobilization. It is 
estimated that the European prevalence rates range from 8.3 % 
to 22.9 % in hospitalized patients and is estimated that this kind 
of wounds represent 2 % of the European budget for primary 
health care. To mitigate this problem, a working device was 
built in order to assess the microclimate created between a sited 
individual and where he is sited on. To that end, the device was 
composed by pressure, temperature and humidity sensors, 
controlled by a microprocessor that made all the data 
management, sending it wirelessly to a platform on the Internet 
that stores all the information acquired, having also a user 
interface that shows up the data. 
Keywords-Pressure; Ulcer; Sensors; Ischial; Smart Seat. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Pressure Ulcers (PU) are injuries located at the top layer of 
the skin, and/or at its underlying tissues, as consequence of an 
ischemic process and tissue necrosis. They are normally 
chronic wounds frequently related to long periods on hospitals 
where most of their time patients happen to be on a laying 
position, compressing the soft tissues between a bony 
prominence and the external surface of the body.  
The pressure ulcers can be classified according to the 
National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (NUPAP) [1] and the 
European Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (EPUAP) [2] grades, 
where 4 stages can be defined and each stage can provide a 
different standard for treatment and prevention for  pressure 
ulcers: 
Stage 1 – Non-blanchable erythema at skin: In this stage, 
the skin is intact only with the presence of a located erythema 
(usually associated to a bony prominence) [1]. 
Stage 2 - Partial loss of skin thickness: Dermis partial loss 
of thickness [1]. 
Stage 3 - Full loss of skin thickness: At this third stage, the 
tissues lose their total thickness. The ears, occipital region, 
nose cane and malleoli does not present subcutaneous tissue, 
so the PU are more superficial at these zones [1]. 
Stage 4 – Full loss of tissue thickness: At this stage, the full 
loss of tissue thickness can lead to an exposed bone, tendon or 
muscle, yet, the depth, depends on the wound’s anatomical 
location[1]. 
 
A. Risk factors on Pressure Ulcer creation 
The pathologic conditions that lead to PU are 
multifactorial and integrate several pathogenic ways; 
moreover, the individual’s weakness (generally on elder 
individuals) can be one catalyser of this whole process. 
The risk factors can be divided into intrinsic and extrinsic 
factors: Extrinsic factors create skin damage through external 
conditions, while intrinsic factors are related physiological 
and body function factors [3], [4]. 
1) Extrinsic factors: 
Between all the extrinsic factors, excessive pressure forces, 
friction, shear forces, and excessive humidity are considered 
the most important and more likely to lead to skin wounds and 
PU development [5].  
a) Pressure: A long duration pressure at soft tissues 
between two surfaces (usually between a bony surface and 
rigid surface), generates a pressure higher than that of the 
surface capillary vessels, creating occlusion on these vessels 
and consequently tissue hypoxia, and ischemia, which can 
lead to an ulceration process [6]. The human organism 
response to this situation of excessive compression is the 
frequent change of position, relieving this way the compressed 
zone, re-establishing the blood flow [6]. 
b) 
Shear forces: Shear forces happen when two 
surfaces slide over each other. Relating to PU, shearing forces 
are created by the gravity felt upon the body, pulling it down, 
and at the same time there is a force, parallel to the body, 
creating a resistance to the gravity force, and these two forces 
combined create a friction and shear forces at the individual’s 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

skin [4]. This kind of forces are usually related to incorrect 
body transfers and mobilization on impaired individuals [5]. 
c) 
Humidity: is the chemical change on skin’s pH, 
alternating the epidermis’s resistance, making it more likely 
to develop wounds created by other factors [6][10]. 
2) Intrinsic factors: 
These kinds of factors are directly related to body structure 
and its function; more precisely the immobilization, 
sensibility malfunctions, gender, age, nutritional state, 
incontinence and a bad tissue perfusion rate can trigger the PU 
development [7]. 
 
Some systems for mapping the pressures felt under a seated 
individual’s body can be found on the market, and those 
systems usually provide a visual perception for the pressure 
felt under the bony prominences relatively to other body 
segments with greater amount of soft tissues. Those systems 
have great utility when choosing an efficient wheelchair 
cushion, or even to find the best position to the seated 
individual (in terms of anterior/posterior and side leaning) so 
an effective pressure relief can be achieved. Although those 
mentioned systems have great utility, their lack of interaction 
with the wheelchair user and attendant makes those systems 
less useful, as they are not designed for a whole day of 
utilization. Our concept is a system that not only monitors the 
pressure under the individual’s body all day long, recording 
the values, but also monitors the microclimate generated 
under the seated individual, warning the attendant if any risk 
values are being reached, and with all this information, 
measures can be taken in order to prevent wounds to appear. 
 
This work is divided in five sections, such as section I, 
where an introduction to the studied problematic have been 
made; section II explains the architecture of the study, and the 
approach to the study, and the materials used in the study are 
present in section III. Section IV and Section V present the 
discussion of the problematic and the solutions found on this 
study, and the conclusion respectively. 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE 
Our approach to solve this positional issue consists of a 
smart electronic seat; a chair that monitors the environment 
that is created between the seated individual and the base of 
the chair, in order to quantify the values of pressure, 
temperature and humidity that may represent a risk to skin 
integrity, and also a response for the necessity to mobilize an 
impaired individual that lacks that capacity. 
This smart seat collects data that is processed and stored in 
a server, and warns the attendants identifying which of their 
patients has a risky environment underneath, and needs to be 
mobilized in order to shift weight to another body part (most 
of the times the pressure is transferred to the back if the 
chair/wheelchair has a tilt in space option). The system 
architecture can be seen bellow on Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. System configuration with the chair system being in contact with 
the server by wireless and can be accessed by smart devices through internet 
connection. 
The architecture of this work, seen on Figure 1, uses the 
chair explained above as the centre piece of the whole data 
acquisition and processing system. After the data acquired by 
the sensors embedded in the seat, a microprocessor manages 
the data processing by reducing its noise with a low pass filter, 
and sends that data by Wi-Fi through an internet connection 
to the BlueLab IoT system where it is stored [8]. The stored 
data can then be retrieved and displayed graphically for user 
comprehension. The system is scalable as the replication of 
the smart chairs on the same location can be achieved by the 
same internet connection and different chair ids. Each chair is 
identified within the BlueLab IoT system as a different station. 
If needed, geographically different locations can be monitored 
by the same access to the BlueLab IoT system. Furthermore, 
each chair can send an alarm (SMS) to the attendant that will 
aid the sitting person in finding a new position. The system 
would be suitable for users from every ethnicity, gender 
weight and age, as the sensors provide absolute values for 
temperature humidity and pressure, and those values will be 
compared with the surrounding environment. 
III. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The hardware used on each seat is composed by a 
microcontroller, Analogue to Digital Converters (ADC), 
batteries, and several sensors for temperature, pressure, and 
relative humidity. The sensors are set on a mat and it is called 
the shieldboard. 
Microcontroller: is a NodeMCU lolin V3, designed by 
Espressif Systems, with a processor Tensilica L106 32-bit, 
speed at 80~160 MHz, flash memory of 16 Mb. It has also 
ESP8266 communication built in for internet connectivity 
with 802.11 b/g/n protocol. The whole microprocessor itself 
has a current consumption between 10 uA and 170 mA with a 
3.3 V voltage supply. This microcontroller was programmed 
with Arduino IDE V1.8.9, and the program stored within the 
microcontroller’s flash memory. Executed whenever the 
microcontroller starts up, sampling the sensors every 3 to 30 
seconds; the sampling rate will be defined in future by the 
results. The sampled data is sent over the Wi-Fi connection. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

The program can also emit an alarm that will result on the 
sending of a SMS by the BlueLab IoT system.  
Sensors and Shieldboard: for monitoring the micro-
environment created between the individual’s body and the 
surface where he is sited; two kinds of sensors are used: 
Resistive Pressure Sensor, and Digital Temperature and 
Humidity Sensor. For pressure quantification, three FSR 406 
(Force Sensing Resistor), from Interlink sensors with size 
43.69 x 43.69 mm, and a sensitivity range from 0.1N to 100 
N [9]. The sensors surface area is wide enough to cover all the 
skin area that lies under the ischial bony prominence. The 
location of the three sensors is designed to be adaptable to the 
“wearer “, as the sensors can be easily repositioned to be right 
under the bone tip. In the main configuration, two sensors are 
placed under each ischial bone, and the remaining sensor is 
placed further front to the first ones, this way, this third sensor 
records the pressure under the thigh, as a reference for the 
values of the first two sensors. The temperature and humidity 
sensors were placed in way that one of the sensors stays under 
the person to monitor the environment created at the zone that 
is expected higher values of temperature and humidity, and 
the second sensor were placed outside the shiedboard, in order 
to monitor the values of temperature and humidity of the 
surrounding environment for the person. This way we can 
have both quantified results for the microclimate under the 
person and also relative results, depending on the surrounding 
environment. This configuration is schematized on Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Seat sensors: PE1, PE2, and PD13 are pressure sensors, while TH1 
and TH2 are temperature and relative humidity sensors. 
Regarding temperature and humidity sensors, two sensors 
were used: model DHT11 from Vellemam manufacture [10] 
with temperature range from 0 to 50 degrees (+/- 0.2 degrees 
error), and a relative humidity range from 20% to 90% (+/- 5 
RH error). These two digital sensors provide the temperature 
and relative humidity of the environment created bellow the 
individual’s body, and their disposition on the shieldboard 
above the chair’s seat can be seen on Figure 2. The main 
objective with the integration of these two sensors is to 
quantify the values of temperature and relative humidity, in 
order to understand the influence that the body heat and 
moisture has on the ulcer development that makes the tissues 
more vulnerable and susceptible to become damaged. 
The DHT11 has one digital pin for both input and output 
1-wire communication. It is connected directly to one of the 
GPIO (General Purpose Input Output) pins. 
The number of sensors can be increased, and with that in 
aim the I2C communication protocol is used for the ADC. 
Module ADS 1115 with 16-bit resolution is used in a module 
from Adafruit [11] directly connected to the appropriate GPIO 
pins. The module has 4 ADCs one for each pressure sensor. 
To power the smart chair device, two 2600 mAh @ 3.37 V 
batteries each with a 5V converter, connected in parallel, are 
able to supply up to 5000 mAh @ 5V. As the system itself 
consumes around 170 mA, the batteries should maintain the 
system active for around 29 hours, which is enough for a 
whole day use, as they should be charged every day. 
As a proof of concept, an experiment was performed with 
the following phases: 
A – 3 min of no pressure applied to the shieldboard, 
B – 5 min of person sitting still, 
C – 40 min of sitting person relaxed, 
D – Sitting person repositioning; pressure pattern change, 
E – 40 min of sitting person relaxed, 
F – 3 min of no pressure applied to the shieldboard. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
An experiment was performed to evaluate the use of the 
shieldboard and to identify the different circumstances of the 
sitting subject by analysing the data logged through the 
BlueLab IoT system. The collected data is presented as a 
graph on Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Pressure, temperature and relative humidity values from the 
experiment. 
The graphical representation of the data presented in Figure 
3 has on its X axis the sample sequence of the data frames; 
consecutive samples are 30 s apart. The Y axis has three 
different scales: on the left the resistance value, R, which is 
proportional to the pressure exerted on the sensors (PD1, PE1 
and PE2), on the top right temperature between 20 and 40 ºC 
for sensors (T1 and T2), and on the bottom right the relative 
humidity 0 to 100% for the humidity sensors (H1 and H2). At 
PE1 
PE2 
PD1 
TH1 
shieldboard 
TH2 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

the top of the graph letters A to F represent the different phases 
of the experiment. 
Sensors T1 and H1 are ambient sensors and their values are 
almost constant as they represent the condition of the room. 
Sensors T2, H2, PE1, PE2, PD1 are positioned on the 
shieldboard under the sited person. 
Results show a rapid increase in temperature of the seat and 
a gradual increase of the humidity under the seated person, 
reaching values that may result in a microclimate dangerous 
to the top layers of the skin, if this condition remains through 
time. Pressure signals show that the sensors are sufficiently 
sensitive to capture unnoticed movements of a person sitting 
still. Some of those variations in pressure, for example around 
sample 550, may indicate a change of position of the 
individual; an unintentional repositioning as the conscious 
repositioning occurred in D. In D missing values of T2 and H2 
are NaN (not a number) probably due to fault contact of the 
sensors during the repositioning. The fact that temperature and 
humidity present high values, indicate a dangerous 
microclimate to the skin that can lead to ulceration, and the 
recorded values at the time of mobilization 34.8 degrees and 
77% humidity, and those values endanger skin integrity. 
Temperature and humidity kept increasing with time reaching 
the max values of 35 degrees Celsius and 95% humidity, 
values that can be highly dangerous to skin and can lead to 
ulceration, if there is no mobilisation. The pressure felt under 
the ischial tuberosity is expected to be greater that the felt on 
the thigh [12], and the results have also corroborated that fact.  
Although the system proved to be functional, there is still 
room for improvement, as the sensors used may be more 
accurate in order to improve the data acquisition on the bony 
tip of the ischial tuberosity, and also the environment. The 
possibility to link the system to a module on a power 
wheelchair could be an important improvement for user to 
change its own position in situations where no attendants 
would be around. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The device proved to be functional as it is able to record 
the microclimate generated under a seated individual, 
indicating values of pressure, temperature and humidity as 
direct data. It is also possible to indirectly know if for example 
the person has fallen as it can be identified by absence of 
pressure on the sensors, and such event can be immediately 
sent to the attendant (by SMS for example). Storing data 
online enables the use of several stations where each can be 
associated to a smart chair, and the acquired data can be linked 
to the person who is using the chair. This is helpful in a 
scenario where multiple patients are being treated at the same 
time as in hospitals and nursing homes, once the attendant will 
be warned to change the patient’s position, and therefore, 
distribute the pressure location felt on the body, creating a 
relief and preventing the appearing of pressure ulcers. 
Also, other events can be monitored, like the sudden 
absence of pressure, that can indicate that the patient have left 
the chair without permission or has fallen off the chair. 
For future studies, the creation of a predictive algorithm 
could be an important improvement for the prevention of PU, 
and the whole system could be that way much more intuitive 
and effective. Force Sensors should also be increased in 
quantity in order to cover more body surface and relate the 
pressure felt at some location to the forces applied to the forces 
registered to the other sensors, having that way a relative 
pressure from one location regarding the surrounding areas. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. E. Edsberg, J. M. Black, M. Goldberg, L. McNichol, L. 
Moore, and M. Sieggreen, “Revised National Pressure 
Ulcer Advisory Panel Pressure Injury Staging System,” J. 
Wound, Ostomy Cont. Nurs., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 585–597, 
2016. 
[2] 
G. W. Cherry, “The European Pressure Ulcer Advisory 
Panel: A Means of Identifying and Dealing with a Major 
Health Problem with a European Initiative,” in Science 
and Practice of Pressure Ulcer Management, London: 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 183–187. 
[3] 
M. Stephens and C. A. Bartley, “Understanding the 
association between pressure ulcers and sitting in adults 
what does it mean for me and my carers ? Seating 
guidelines for people , carers and health & social care 
professionals,” J. Tissue Viability, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 59–
73, 2018. 
[4] 
D. A. Hobson, “Comparative effects of posture on 
pressure and shear at the body-seat interface,” J. Rehabil. 
Res. Dev., vol. 2, no. 4, 1992. 
[5] 
D. Menezes, “Do risco ao desenvolvimento de Úlceras 
por Pressão : a realidade de um serviço de medicina,” 
Universidade de Coimbra, 2015. 
[6] 
R. Almeida and S. Maia, “Úlceras de pressão: Prevalência 
e Caracterização em Hospitais na Região Norte de 
Portugal,” Universidade Católica Portuguesa do Porto, 
2012. 
[7] 
P. Chiari, C. Forni, M. Guberti, D. Gazineo, S. Ronzoni, 
and F. D’Alessandro, “Predictive factors for pressure 
ulcers in an older adult population hospitalized for hip 
fractures: A prognostic cohort study,” PLoS One, vol. 12, 
no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2017. 
[8] 
V. Vaz da Silva, “BlueLab IoT, a Universal Software 
Platform for IoT Data Acquisition Devices,” i-ETCISEL 
Acad. J. Electron. Comput., no. IoT as a Field Revolution-
Special Issue 2018, p. ID-4, 2018. 
[9] 
Interlink, “Force Sensing Resistor 406.” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.interlinkelectronics.com/fsr-406. 
[Accessed: 14-Feb-2020]. 
[10] 
Velleman, “Digital Temperature and Humidity sensor.” 
[Online]. Available: 
https://www.velleman.eu/products/view/?id=435536. 
[Accessed: 14-Feb-2020]. 
[11] 
Adafruit, “ADS 1115.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.adafruit.com/product/1085. [Accessed: 14-
Feb-2020]. 
[12] 
E. Kwong and G. Pang, “Development of an Intelligent 
Seat for the Alleviation of Pressure Ulcers,” BMEiCON 
2018 - 11th Biomed. Eng. Int. Conf., pp. 1–5, 2019. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

