Complexity-based Thinking in Systems Intelligence for Systems Resilience 
 
Roberto Legaspi 
Transdisciplinary Research Integration Center 
Research Organization of Information and Systems 
Tokyo, Japan 
E-mail: legaspi.roberto@ism.co.jp 
Hiroshi Maruyama 
Department of Statistical Modeling 
The Institute of Statistical Mathematics 
Tokyo, Japan 
E-mail: hm2@ism.co.jp
 
 
Abstract— We posit that our models and approaches in 
systems resilience persistently demonstrate fragmented and 
dispersed knowledge because we fail to fully perceive the 
complexities of our systems and the situations that daunt them. 
We argue for a systems intelligence that has complexity-based 
thinking at its foundation. Complexity-based thinking involves 
methodological pluralism, law of requisite knowledge, and 
complexity absorption. The system integrates knowledge from 
heterogeneous sources, namely, massive information data 
points, expert and experiential knowledge, and perceptions of 
human sensors. As new facts are continuously derived with 
incoming evidence, the intelligent system self-improves its 
knowledge. With the synergism of heterogeneous knowledge, 
the emergence of new intelligence is possible. The integrated 
knowledge may expose unstated assumptions, reconcile 
inconsistencies and conflicts, and elucidate ambiguities in 
complex system behavior. The integrated knowledge is also 
aimed to influence the course of system vulnerabilities, 
destructive perturbations, and critical systemic changes. 
Keywords-complex systems; intelligent systems; complexity-
based thinking; systems resilience. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although we have achieved significant advances in 
science and technology, human and economic losses due to 
disasters, accidents, social upheavals, and humanitarian 
crises remain significant. We believe that the reason for this 
is that we have yet to fully perceive the complexities of our 
world and life systems. Their nature is indeed complex, i.e., 
nonlinear, spanning multiple simultaneous temporal and 
spatial scales, and with large interdependencies among parts, 
which make it almost impossible to decompose them into 
independent processes [1]. Such behaviors may cause one 
situation, albeit due to a small stress or shock, to become 
critical and trigger other events in a cascading fashion such 
that the different situations within the propagation enhance 
themselves to criticality. Their heightened complexity can 
also pave the way for hazards that are extreme, unknown, 
unforeseen, or ill defined to impact the social, physical, 
environmental and technological dimensions simultaneously.  
Consider for example the tortilla riots in Mexico in 2007 
that was indirectly caused by a seemingly disconnected event 
– Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Zolli and Healey [2] recounted 
the events: Katrina disrupted 95% of oil production in the 
Gulf for several months that led to the price surge of 
American gasoline. This surge spurred investments in the 
alternative ethanol, which has corn as primary ingredient. 
Mexican farmers found themselves competing with the 
euphoria of ethanol investment bubble and with the US corn 
being dumped on Mexican markets at almost 20% less 
production cost. These interrelations and interdependencies 
between systems, namely, the oil rigs in the energy system, 
Katrina of the ecosystem, corn of the agricultural system, 
global trade system, and the social and political systems of 
US and Mexico, resulted to a rich world-energy (barrel of oil 
of nearly $140) being in direct competition with poor-world 
food (skyrocketed cost of corn). Each individual shock might 
have been felt by some sectors individually, but no one 
would have predicted the coincident crises in energy, 
finance, and food, as well as the confluence of shocks [3]. 
Another example, as recounted by McCracken [4], is the 
fragmented knowledge that if were connected could have 
helped predict the events of 9/11: At the time of 9/11, any 
clear predictive knowledge of an attack was absent – vital 
indicative information that in combination could have served 
as a warning were scattered in isolated stovepipes in the 
CIA, NSA, FBI, and State Department. Hence, analysts 
across these agencies had only fragments that did not help 
prevent the loss of nearly 3,000 lives and 6,000 more injured, 
tons of rubble and steel that obscured eight city blocks for 
almost nine months, and a shock to pertinent US financial 
markets. Only after did the intelligence community piece 
together the indicators of the large-scale attack on US soil. 
In the presence of daunting complexities, our systems 
need to be resilient. Resilience is the ability of a system to 
persist, adapt, or transform in structure and function in the 
midst of even large shocks and stresses that come from a 
range of hazards [1]. With looming world crises, resilience 
has rapidly found itself at the top of the global development 
agenda [5]. It is the case, however, that our shortcoming to 
comprehend the complexities of our systems leads to our 
models of, and approaches to, systems resilience to 
persistently demonstrate linear, fragmented and dispersed 
knowledge. Such limited knowledge prohibits the acquisition 
of a complete and coherent view, which only adds to the 
uncertainty problem. Our models do not demonstrate the 
critical links and interdependencies that mesh our world and 
life systems. Our approaches are intimidated by the task of 
elucidating our hyper-connected systems. These lead to our 
shallow understanding of the nature of systems complexity. 
Hence, we argue in this paper for a systems intelligence 
that has complexity-based thinking at its foundation. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

Primarily, complexity-based thinking accepts the notion that 
our knowledge can only be limited and bounded. But instead 
of surrendering to this shortcoming, complexity-based 
thinking seeks new ways to redefine the limitation threshold 
and further enlarge the boundary of knowledge. Complexity-
based thinking involves methodological pluralism, law of 
requisite knowledge, and complexity absorption. To embody 
this thinking, our system acquires (i.e., represents and infers) 
and integrates knowledge from heterogeneous sources, 
namely, massive information data points, expert and 
experiential knowledge, and perceptions of human sensors. 
With the synergism of diverse knowledge, the system opens 
itself for the emergence of new intelligence in the face of 
daunting complexities. The integrated knowledge is aimed to 
expose 
hidden 
assumptions, 
reconcile 
conflicts 
and 
inconsistencies, and elucidate ambiguities in complex system 
behavior. More importantly, the integrated knowledge may 
be used to sense, make sense of, and shape the course of 
impending, on-going or ensuing system vulnerabilities, 
destructive perturbations, and critical systemic changes.  
Our paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
argue for resilience thinking to be complexity-based 
thinking, and elucidate in Section III the framework of our 
multi-dimensional 
intelligent 
system 
that 
embodies 
complexity-based thinking. We then discuss in Section IV 
the broad impact of the system’s integrated knowledge. 
Finally, we conclude in Section V. 
II. 
RESILIENCE SHOULD BE COMPLEXITY-BASED  
Gilpin and Murphy [6], while citing Richardson and 
Cilliers [7], explained that in the midst of numerous schools 
of thought within the complexity sciences, three broad 
approaches have emerged, namely, reductionist, soft, and 
complexity-based. They differentiated these three as follows. 
Reductionist complexity science uses a limited number of 
universal laws to characterize natural reality. Its problem, 
however, is that in emphasizing universal commonalities, it 
hides in the abstraction the individual system idiosyncrasies. 
Second, soft complexity science distinguishes between social 
reality and the natural world, and therefore rejects the 
application of complexity, which is a theory that originated 
in nature, to the social realm unless done metaphorically. 
However, it has been known that society exhibits complexity 
[8]-[10], and that the social and the natural are linked 
[11][13]. Complexity-based thinking, however, distances 
itself from any pursuit of exact knowledge or universal 
absolutes and deals with the fact that our knowledge is 
bounded, and we can only seek this boundary in whatever 
way possible and suitable [6].  
We believe that resilience thinking should be complexity-
based thinking. Complexity-based thinking, as pointed out 
by Gilpin and Murphy [6], adheres to the notion that 
“complex matters demand a methodological pluralism” [9, 
p.12]. Because knowledge can only be partial and bounded, 
pluralism provides several elucidations of a phenomenon. 
This roots back to Ashby’s law of requisite variety, which 
states that by having diverse response mechanisms available 
to the system, the system is able to compensate a larger 
variety of perturbations [13]. Gilpin and Murphy also echoed 
Cooksey’s compelling point, i.e., complexity-based thinking 
seeks “diverse avenues for discovering what may end up 
being a multiplicity of answers that are differentially 
sensitive to and grounded in specific circumstances, 
conditions, people, times, and places” [14, p.84]. Similarly, 
in resilience thinking, by making available to the system a 
diversity of mechanisms to sense, make sense of, and 
respond to situations, the system is able to be resilient to a 
larger variety of shocks and stresses. 
We believe that complexity-based thinking also includes 
the law of requisite knowledge, which states that a system 
must not only be dependent on a variety of available 
response mechanisms but must also know which one to 
select and how [15]. Otherwise, the system would have to try 
out actions blindly, which would consequently compromise 
its resilience. Therefore, in managing the resilience of a 
system against shocks and stresses, increasing the variety of 
its actions must be accompanied by the increase in the 
capacity to choose the best action. 
Lastly, complexity-based thinking involves complexity 
absorption. As explained by Gilpin and Murphy [6], 
complexity-based thinking not only prefers the diversity of 
options, as well as tolerance for their possibly conflicting 
representations, there is also the ability to adapt, as well as 
self-organize, as fresh knowledge is captured, generated or 
re-created in order to modify an existing goal or drop it for a 
new goal. In other words, there is a paradigm shift from 
fragmented, individual and controlling views to a complex 
adaptive system view that enables capture, creation and 
refinement of knowledge. 
III. 
SYSTEMS INTELLIGENCE FRAMEWORK 
We detail in this section the various aspects of our 
intelligent system, as shown in Figure 1, with complexity-
based thinking at its foundation. We then relate these aspects 
in the succeeding section to the processes of sensing, making 
sense, and shaping system-related complexities.  
First, we need to distinguish between data, information, 
knowledge, and intelligence (which in our case refers to 
artificial intelligence) [6][16][17]. Data is a stream of facts 
about entities and events that are situated in a sequence. We 
can imagine everything in the world as represented by data 
points. We are surrounded by a massive amount of data that 
is “getting ever vaster ever more rapidly” [18, p.1]. What we 
have is a digital universe that is huge, and continuously 
increasing exponentially [19]. Information consists of data 
related to a given context [20]. It is descriptive as it 
demonstrates patterns that have sense [21]. Knowledge is the 
collection of information that has been proven useful in a 
given context [21]. Knowledge involves the appraisal of the 
information of its relative significance [20] using one’s 
experience, values, insights and expertise [22][6]. Data, 
information, and knowledge lie along this continuum [20][6].  
Intelligence, however, is a process. It involves learning 
and applying knowledge in order to respond to changing 
contexts. Our system is intelligent since it performs the 
acquisition, integration, and application of knowledge. 
Furthermore, as new data and information come in, the 
system’s knowledge should improve based on new evidence, 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

 
Figure 1. Complexity-based systems intelligence framework for systems resilience 
hence, it learns new knowledge and does it incrementally. 
This makes our system suited for complexity – as Friedrich 
Engels wrote, “that the world is not to be comprehended as a 
complex of ready-made things, but as a complex of 
processes in which the things… go through an uninterrupted 
change of coming into being and passing away.” [23, p. 44, 
italics in source]. Our system is also intelligent since it 
involves sensing (acquiring), making sense (integrating) of, 
and shaping (applying knowledge) itself or its situation. 
Sensing involves physical and social sensors obtaining data 
and information. The process of making sense involves 
predictive modeling, situation analysis and awareness, 
anticipation, as well as providing actionable information. 
Shaping is influencing and changing the course of the 
situation and the way the system adapts to its environment. 
A. Complexity Thinking Is Methodological Pluralism 
In light of the above, our goal is to realize an intelligent 
system that can infer and integrate heterogeneous knowledge 
from three varied sources, namely, massive mostly non-
structured data or Big Data, expert and experiential 
knowledge, and public perceptual knowledge sourced by 
citizen sensors. While the last two are contextualized 
knowledge, the intended knowledge has yet to be derived 
from the first. The intelligent system must cull through 
massive data points, theoretical and empirical evidences, and 
human perceptions that are made available through the 
Internet of Things (IoT) where data and technology are 
democratized, i.e., available to as many people as possible.  
IoT extends Internet connectivity beyond desktop and 
mobile computers to a diverse range of sensors (e.g., 
physical ambient sensors that include UAVs and satellites), 
machines (e.g., from coffee makers and washing machines 
to jet engine components), and devices (e.g., mobile and 
wearable devices) that we can think of that communicate 
and interact with the external environment and to each 
other. According to Intel, the IoT world is growing in a very 
fast pace, i.e., from two billion in 2006, 15 billion in 2015, 
to a projected 200 billion by 2020! [24]. 
1) Big Data  
The digital universe is ever expanding as millions of 
data points from diverse sources are created every second 
from heterogeneous sources. The World Wide Web is 
basically an open world where information of various kinds 
are sent, uploaded, downloaded, and received. Web contents 
are created and duplicated rapidly and continuously. 
Crawlers or scrapers can be written to extract data stored 
deep in the Web Our mobile devices have powerful 
computing sensors and software that allow us to collect data 
about our physiology and mobility. It also allows us to log 
our daily activities that include fitness routines, web 
searches, online transactions, and interactions in social 
media platforms and micro-blogging sites, among others. 
Furthermore, ubiquitous ambient sensors [25] can also offer 
a wide range of possibilities for gathering large volumes of 
data that are human-related (e.g., displacements of millions 
of refugees), environmental (e.g., earthquakes, tsunamis, 
climate and weather changes, and changing landscapes). 
There are also the massive multiplayer online games that 
have become unprecedented tools to create and validate 
theories and models of social and behavioral dynamics of 
individuals, groups, and networks within large communities 
[26]. Enterprises may collect billions of real-time data 
points on products, resources, services, and stakeholders, 
which can provide insights on collective perceptions and 
behaviors, as well as resource and service utilizations. There 
are also data that public bodies produce or collect, which 
include geographical information, statistics, environmental 
data, power and energy grids, health and education, water 
and sanitation, and transport. There are the systematically 
acquired and recorded census data about households and the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

services (e.g., health and medical, education, water, waste 
disposal, electricity, evacuation, and daily living-related 
programs) made available to them. 
2) Specialized Knowledge  
Carpenter et al. [3] stated that we have the tendency to 
wrap our minds around the computable and ignore the non-
computable aspects of systems complexity. To account for 
the non-computable, they admonished considering a wide 
range of perspectives. They clarified why our society should 
put value not only on expert models, since they also 
emphasize narrow, segregated and domain-dependent views, 
but also look at instances where perceptions of experience-
filled individuals, although lacked in formal education, led to 
breakthroughs. They cited several cases: crucial information 
from hunters and loggers prompted new approaches that 
saved the giant jumping rat in Madagascar from their sudden 
demise, and information from indigenous fishermen saved 
endangered bumphead parrotfish. 
Complex problems may have many solutions that may 
differ in the required execution to obtain the quality of the 
desired outcome [3]. Hence, a diverse team of experienced 
individuals is more suited than a team of expert solvers [27]. 
3) Perceptual Knowledge of Human Sensors  
 We adopt the definition of perception as the process in 
which we actively and purposefully [28] acquire, organize, 
recognize, and interpret the sensory information we receive 
in order to make sense of what we perceive [29][30]. 
Perception therefore allows us to take in all, or part of, the 
sensory information presented to us and transform them into 
something meaningful [31]. Perception also includes how we 
respond to the information we receive [31]. An input to our 
perception triggers in us a psychological (i.e., cognitive and 
affective) response, and on the basis of this response, we 
perform an action [32]. Our individual differences dictate the 
difference in our perceptions, which can explain why 
individuals and communities respond differently despite 
being presented with the same facts, conditions, support, 
assurance, resources, and other forms of stimuli [33]. 
Perceptual knowledge on resilience can be provided by, 
or obtained from, individuals who are physically on the 
ground, i.e., those who are directly experiencing the situation 
(e.g., war, refugee migration, pandemic, radiation leaks, etc.) 
such as the members of the affected community, local 
government, law enforcers, first responders, and disaster 
managers, and from those who are virtually on it, i.e., those 
who are not in the affected area but have a good view of the 
situation as seen on TV, Internet, and social media. Armed 
with their mobile devices and sensors, these individuals will 
relay all information they perceive, as well as add their own 
analyses, sentiments, and judgments as they deem necessary. 
B. Law of Requisite Knowledge 
1) Knowledge Acquisition  
Our focus is on data that are made available publicly and 
online through the IoT, and accessed freely for the common 
good. For example, if satellite imagery credibly shows troops 
massing outside a village, the people of that village can be 
informed so as to flee, or if necessary, respond with violence 
to save their lives [34]. There have been advocacies for data 
and technology to be democratized, i.e., to be made available 
to as many people as possible, including the grassroots 
population, and not just to those who are inherently, or were 
made to assume, to be in a position to use them (e.g., 
governments, international organizations, multi-national 
companies, and Internet giants, among others) [34]. History 
has demonstrated how ordinary people achieved resilience 
when empowered by technology and big data [4][35]. 
Furthermore, having more data openly available will 
encourage public participation to achieve novel and 
innovative solutions to societal challenges. 
From structured data stored in spreadsheets and relational 
databases, Internet-based technologies have allowed the 
collection of unstructured data. For example, the company 
Digital Reasoning (www.digitalreasoning.com) estimates the 
unstructured data created per day to be 2.5 quintillion. 
Unstructured data does not follow the traditional database 
field formats nor adheres to a formal data model. This 
includes video, audio, images, graphics, and sensor signals, 
as well as partially formatted or semi-structured data, 
including text-based documents (e.g., word processing, 
PDFs, emails, blogs, wikis, tweets, web pages, and web 
components) and documents with self-describing elements 
such as tags and markers (e.g., XML and HTML). While 
structured data is organized in a database format and are 
readily accessible by search algorithms, the irregularities and 
ambiguities in unstructured data make its representation, let 
alone its comprehension by the machine, difficult.  
Expert knowledge, which is organized and scientifically 
validated, 
mostly 
appears 
in 
scholarly 
publications. 
Experiential knowledge, however, is commonly unpublished 
in the literature since they are hard to express, specify, and 
scientifically validate. Consider tacit knowledge, for 
example, which highly depends on personal character traits 
that it cannot be subject to accurate communication [6]. 
Social computing, however, can help design platforms for 
diverse problem solvers to articulate and collaborate their 
perceptions, and incorporate them in a repository of 
evidences of what may or may not work in a situation [33]. 
Similarly, perceptions of citizen sensors are unstructured 
knowledge that populates traditional and social media in the 
form of meaningful texts, videos, photos, and audio. 
The difficulty with data acquired from various sources is 
that they tend to be heterogeneous in terms of their spatial 
and temporal aspects, data collection modalities, structure 
type (structured, semi-structured or unstructured), data type 
(hard physical data vs. soft data), and in sensor outputs with 
different resolutions and sampling rates. Data preprocessing 
should therefore be carried out, the result of which will be a 
set of features that can characterize the various entities of 
interest. This is certainly a non-trivial task. If the varied data 
are commensurate, then raw signal data can be easily 
combined (e.g., using Kalman filtering) [36]. If not, 
extracting the common features may involve further data 
transformation, such as filtering out noises and outliers, data 
alignment (remove any positional or sensing geometry and 
timing effects from the various data), common spatio-
temporal referencing, and data association (determine which 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

object is associated to which event) [37]. Metadata may also 
be generated to describe the heterogeneous data [36]. 
Artificial intelligence is needed to transform data to 
knowledge. The first step is knowledge acquisition (and not 
information acquisition as it is only a means to this end), 
which involves a lot of processes to transition from bytes to 
usable patterns and meanings. We use the term “acquisition” 
to refer to various approaches to obtain knowledge from 
data. Knowledge representation [38] is one of the central and 
most important concepts in artificial intelligence that 
constructs formalisms (e.g., semantic nets, ontologies, 
systems architecture, logic rules) that will make complex 
systems easier to design and implement. It represents 
information about the world in a machine-understandable 
form that a computer system can utilize for complex 
problem-solving tasks. Knowledge inference [38] refers to 
acquiring new knowledge from existing facts based on 
certain rules and constraints that are made understandable 
through knowledge representation. Automated reasoning 
(e.g., inference engines, theorem provers, and classifiers) is 
the mechanism behind inferring new knowledge by applying 
existing facts and logic rules [39]. A similar concept is 
knowledge discovery, which was borne out of data mining 
and describes the process of automatically searching through 
large volumes of data for patterns that can be considered 
knowledge. 
2) Knowledge Integration  
Once knowledge is inferred from these varied sources, 
the next step is to weave them together. Knowledge 
integration will involve inferring knowledge relationships 
among hugely varying domains into a coherent structure 
while revealing hidden assumptions and reconciling areas of 
conflicts, inconsistencies, and uncertainties. It should 
describe how domain-specific concepts are interrelated for 
transdisciplinary problem and solution formulation. It must 
be able to synthesize micro-level, individualized and 
domain-dependent 
knowledge 
to 
contextual 
systemic 
knowledge. The integration of knowledge from diverse 
sources should not lead to vague generalities, but rather to 
become effective in enhancing knowledge. This task is 
difficult and remains an open research area. 
Knowledge integration involves weaving the diverse 
knowledge into coherent networks, hence, a knowledge 
network. Paperin et al. [40] provide an excellent survey of 
previous works that demonstrated how complex systems are 
isomorphic to networks and how many complex properties 
emerge from network structure rather than from individual 
constituents. Representing the integrated knowledge into 
coherent networks can be accomplished by using network 
and dynamic graphs theories and models. 
Another aspect of knowledge integration is to incorporate 
new incoming knowledge into existing prior knowledge [41]. 
This allows the body of knowledge to grow incrementally. 
This is also a non-trivial task as new and existing knowledge 
may interact in unanticipated ways that may demand 
significant changes to the developing knowledge [41]. 
 
 
 
3) What Kind of Knowledge?  
We aim for our system to infer knowledge that can be 
used to describe the complexity of our hyper-connected 
systems, the endogenous and exogenous forces that influence 
them, and their interactions. We believe that the Five 
Aspects Taxonomy [42] provides a good coverage of the 
essential aspects of the complexity, which our intelligent 
system needs to be knowledgeable of.  
The taxonomy is conceived for the engineering of socio-
technical systems that exhibit complexities in multiple levels 
(i.e., components, subsystems, systems, and system of 
composite systems) and dimensions (aspects). The five 
aspects include: (a) structural – elaborate hierarchical or 
layered network arrangement of system components that 
demonstrate couplings and dependencies in multiple scales; 
(b) behavioral – variances in system responses to different 
stimuli; (c) contextual – environmental circumstances in 
which the system exists; (d) temporal – various system 
properties, dimensions and needs may change over time 
together with the dynamic environment in which it exists; 
and (e) perceptual – stakeholder perceptions of the system 
and the environment that embeds it, which may change with 
context shifts and cognitive constraints and biases. 
We can imagine the knowledge network as consisting of 
nodes that represent entities, such as system components 
(and subcomponents), as well as endogenous and exogenous 
factors. The edges depict their interactions as per the Five 
Aspect Taxonomy. 
C. Complexity Absorption 
As per above, knowledge integration can be defined as 
the process of incorporating new information into existing 
knowledge, which may require modifying the existing 
knowledge to accommodate the new knowledge and/or 
modifying the new in light of the existing knowledge 
[41][43]. Integration of knowledge from various knowledge 
sources can result in novel knowledge on how to solve a 
problem. Knowledge integration can also help unmask the 
uncertainty created by the multiple sources of knowledge. 
The argument for knowledge integration is also present 
in resilience as evidenced by Bohensky and Maru [43]. 
Complexity and uncertainty management in socio-ecological 
systems can benefit from integrating diverse types of 
knowledge. Also, collaborations that facilitate integration of 
diverse perceptions lead to socio-ecological resilience [3]. 
Our intelligent system is aimed to integrate and preserve 
heterogeneous knowledge for triangulating for the truth, 
continuously track incoming and on-going information as 
well as evolving circumstances and conditions, and aid the 
system to better self-organize as it acquires new knowledge, 
adapts with new functions, and transforms to new goals. 
New facts should be continuously derived, and incoming 
evidence should be used, to improve current knowledge 
repositories. Hence, knowledge will be learned incrementally 
by our system. Our system, with its synergistic integration of 
knowledge, may lead to the emergence of increasing 
intelligence in the midst of complexity. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

IV. 
SENSE, MAKE SENSE OF, AND SHAPE COMPLEXITY 
With the network of connected and evolving knowledge 
about systems and their complexities in terms of structure, 
behavior and context, and how they are perceived, to be 
changing over time as derived from heterogeneous sources, 
what then can we use this knowledge for? Again, to sense, 
make sense of, and shape system behaviors when faced with 
complexities that can threaten the existence of the system. 
Sensing involves detection, whereas making sense 
involves recognition and identification. Detection is similar 
to when an alarm goes off at home; we know that something 
has occurred but we may not recognize what it is. 
Recognition happens when the alarm is matched with a 
known reference, already known pattern, or learned 
category, e.g., the alarm matches either a gas leak or possible 
burglary. Identification is when we go down to the kitchen 
and finds out that the gas leak indicator is also blinking. 
There were cases, however, that the alarm did not go off 
when it should. Indicators leading to 9/11 were pointing to 
an imminent large-scale attack on US soil [4]. The alarm did 
not go off because the consequence then of these indicators 
were not clear, the US intelligence community had only 
fragments, and there was no actionable information that was 
presented [4]. The increase of the price of tortilla by 400% 
easily set off the alarm of a food riot in the streets of Mexico, 
but no one could have predicted that Hurricane Katrina 
indirectly, but significantly, caused it [2]. Other examples are 
provided by Robertson and Olson [34]: When the social web 
during Iran’s postelection crisis in 2009 was datamined, 
shifting perceptions in terms of awareness, advocacy, 
organization, mobilization, and eventual action and reaction 
were unmasked; the data visualization at that time of the 
Iranian blogosphere revealed a dramatic increase of user 
population with religious orientation; and the examination of 
microblogs related to Arab Spring revealed that socio-
economic terms (e.g., housing, income and minimum salary) 
were most relevant in 2010, but in 2011, tweets were related 
to corruption, revolution, and freedom. The alarm did not go 
off in these instances because it was not set to detect the 
proxy indicators of upcoming dramatic system changes and 
there was no inter-related set of knowledge regarding a 
multiplicity of factors. 
How then can the knowledge network be used for 
sensing and making sense? The following can only be 
possible with the connected multi-dimensional knowledge 
present in the integrated knowledge network: 
• Describe the emergence of system-wide properties. In the 
sciences and arts, emergence is a process whereby 
systemic entities, patterns, and regularities arise through 
interactions among smaller or simpler entities that 
themselves do not exhibit such properties. Individual 
idiosyncrasies get lost as the components become tightly 
coupled and dependent. However, since our system will 
track the historical transitions of bytes to integrated 
knowledge, we theorize that it can also describe the 
evolution and emergence of system properties.  
• Perform anomaly detection. After using intelligent 
algorithms to determine systemic “habitual” (i.e., normal, 
routinely 
behavior) 
patterns, 
anomaly 
detection 
techniques can then be used to detect what is out of the 
normal, which can include proxy indicators or digital 
alarms of upcoming changes [34]. 
• Resolve conflicting information from same or different 
sources. When platforms are made open for humans (and 
intelligent artifacts alike) to contribute information, it is 
possible that conflicting information are received due to 
cognitive biases, perceptual errors, or communication 
differences. For example, social media can generate a ton 
of interests in seconds, but can also warp and disperse the 
true information (at times intentional, e.g., tampering 
data, spreading rumors) into thousand fragmented pieces. 
With our methodological pluralism, it is possible to 
perform multi-dimensional corrections and validations to 
eliminate the false positives. 
• Perform “unsaid-knowledge” analytics. We introduce 
this term to refer conceptually to mining for knowledge 
that cannot be explicitly stated since it depicts intuition, 
common sense, wisdom, and culture-based assumptions – 
those that are hard to quantify and measure but have 
proved essential to identifying anomalies. It also includes 
tacit knowledge that is abstracted by our understanding 
and difficult, if not impossible, to codify or transmit [6]. 
• Perform descriptive and predictive analyses [44]. 
Descriptive analysis is to mine past knowledge that are 
connected and related physically, semantically and 
conceptually to explain what has already happened and 
why it happened. Predictive analysis is forecasting future 
outcomes across various scenarios or situations. 
Sensing technologies can provide support, but, unlike 
shaping, they do not necessarily change the system state. 
Early warning systems, for example, can help people get out 
of the way of an inevitable disaster, whether or not they 
change the course of events. The knowledge network is 
aimed to provide actionable strategies that will convert 
sensing to shaping, which can be achieved as follows: 
• Perform prescriptive analytics. The aim of prescriptive 
analysis is to identify which decision and response will 
lead to the optimal or most effective result given a 
specific set of objectives and constraints [44]. The 
challenge for a truly strong prescriptive capacity is great. 
One that is formidable, for example, is determining the 
optimal path to the desirable regime where the potential 
paths are possibly thousands, each with its own set of 
multiple candidate divergences. Without the algorithms 
to find the optimal path efficiently, the required 
computing resources can become detrimental [1]. 
• Guide the planning and implementation of a creative 
chaos [45]. The idea is to use the knowledge network to 
simulate system shocks that can propel the system into 
the vortex of change. It is efficient and effective to scan 
for situations that can force latent problems to surface 
than design the system to not fail, which, paradoxically, 
only makes the system more vulnerable and less resilient.	 
Furthermore, by introducing chaos into the system, not 
only do we prepare the system to be adaptive to failures, 
but also to bring out opportunities for innovation since 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

chaos would break tight couplings only to give way to 
new and previously unknown effective connections. 
Incidentally, the Five Aspect Taxonomy is a frame to 
comprehend 
facets 
of 
innovation 
strategies 
and 
communicate emerging technologies [42]. 
• Infer a theory of lever point [46]. A lever point is known 
as that critical point within the system where applying a 
little change can make a big difference and a small shift a 
big change. At that point the behavior of the complex 
system changes fundamentally. 
• Infer theories of system openness and modularity and 
their trade-offs [47]. Modularity can help contain ensuing 
disasters by compartmentalizing. However, too much 
compartmentalization can prevent aid from moving in 
and out of the system from various sources. Also, too 
much openness can transmit harmful shocks, as in 
financial collapse, pandemics, and invasive species 
migrating easily across similar and connected landscapes. 
• Perform complexity mapping. Provide real-time mapping 
of the events and feedback loops occurring during 
complex situations. The ability to monitor the behaviors 
of social, physical, environmental and technological 
systems in real time make it possible to understand where 
models, plans, policies and programs are failing and to 
make necessary adaptations. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Resilience can be enhanced and sustained by integrating, 
rather than fragmenting and dispersing, knowledge about the 
complexities of our systems. Mastering a more holistic 
understanding of our systems will shed light on their 
couplings, temporal and spatial boundaries, interaction 
behaviours, and emerging irregularities or inaccuracies, as 
well as proven or plausible alternative resilient strategies. 
We argued that the fundamental difficulty in managing 
resilience is the complexity that characterizes our systems. 
We then argued for managing resilience by realizing an 
intelligent system whose intelligence framework is based on 
complexity thinking. The result is an integrated knowledge 
of systems complexity, which is automatically inferred from 
heterogeneous data about the nature and contextual 
interaction behaviours of our systems. With this integrated 
knowledge realized, our systems can better meet head-on the 
so-called unknown unknowns or uncertain uncertainties. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Legaspi and H. Maruyama, “Meta-theory and machine-
intelligent modeling of systemic changes for the resilience of 
a complex system,” in Proc. Tenth International Conference 
on Systems (ICONS 2015), IARIA, L. Koszalka and P. 
Lorenz (eds.), ThinkMind Digital Library, 2015, pp. 102-111. 
[2] A. Zolli and A. M. Healy, Resilience: Why Things Bounce 
Back. New York, NY: Free Press, July 2012. 
[3] S. R. Carpenter, C. Folke, M. Scheffer, and F. Westley, 
“Resilience: Accounting for the noncomputable,” Ecology 
and Society, vol. 14, no. 1, article 13, 2009. 
[4] J. McCracken, “In the shadow of 9/11,” Rare Events: Can We 
Model the Unforeseen? Sigma, vol. 10, no. 1, T. B. Fowler 
and M. J. Fischer (eds.), Noblis, 2010, pp. 30-35. 
[5] L. Jones and T. Tanner, “Measuring 'subjective resilience': 
Using people's perceptions to quantify household resilience,” 
Working paper 423, Overseas Development Institute, July 
2015. 
Available 
online 
via 
ODI: 
http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-
assets/publications-opinion-files/9753.pdf 
(accessed 
on 
2016.01.11). 
[6] D. R. Gilpin and P. J. Murphy, Crisis Management in a 
Complex World. Oxford, NY: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
[7] K. A. Richardson and P. Cilliers, “What is complexity 
science? A view from different directions,” Emergence, vol. 
3, no. 1, 2001, pp. 5-22. 
[8] J. A. Tainter, The Collapse of Complex Soceities: New 
Studies in Archaeology. Cambride, UK: Cambride University 
Press, 1988. 
[9] P. J. Richerson and R. Boyd, “Institutional evolution in the 
holocene: The rise of complex societies,” in The Origin of 
Human 
Social 
Institutions, 
W. 
G. 
Runciman 
(ed.), 
Proceedings of the British Academy, vol. 110, 2001, pp. 197-
204.  
[10] P. Ball, Why Society is a Complex Matter: Meeting Twenty-
first Century Challenges with a New Kind of Science. Berlin 
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag, 2012. 
[11] A. Jentsch, H. Wittmer, K. Jax, I. Ring, and K. Henle, 
“Biodiversity: Emerging issues for linking natural and social 
sciences,” GAIA - Ecological Perspectives for Science and 
Society, vol. 12, no. 2, June 2003, pp. 121-128. 
[12] P. Dickens, “Linking the social and natural sciences: Is capital 
modifying human biology in its own image?” Sociology, vol. 
35, no. 1, February 2001, pp 93-110. 
[13] R. W. Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: 
Methuen, 1956. 
[14] R. W. Cooksey, “What is complexity science? A contextually 
grounded tapestry of systematic dynamism, paradigm 
diversity, theoretical electicism,” Emergence, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2001, pp. 77-103. 
[15] F. Heylighen, “Principles of systems and cybernetics: An 
evolutionary perspective,” in Cybernetics and System ’92, R. 
Trappl (ed.), World Science, Singapore, 1992, pp. 3-10. 
[16] T. R. Kuhn, “Knowledge and knowing in organizational 
communication,” in The SAGE Handbook of Organizational 
Organization: Advances in Theory, Research, and Methods, 
Third Edition, Section IV, L. L. Putnam and D. K. Mumby, 
and K. J. Krone (eds.), SAGE, 2014, pp. 481-502. 
[17] A. G. J. MacFarlane, “Information, knowledge and the future 
of machines,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society A, vol. 361, 2003, pp. 1581-1616. 
[18] The Economist, “Data, data, everywhere: A special report on 
managing information,” February 27, 2010. Available online 
via EMC: https://www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/ar-
the-economist-data-data-everywhere.pdf 
(accessed 
on 
2016.01.11). 
[19] V. Turner, D. Reinsel, J. F. Gantz, and S. Minton, “The 
digital universe of opportunities: Rich data and the increasing 
value of the Internet of Things,” IDC iView, April 2014. 
Available 
online 
via 
IDC: 
http://idcdocserv.com/1678 
(accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[20] H. Tsoukas and E. Vladimirou, “What is organizational 
knowledge?” Journal of Management Studies, vol. 38, no. 7, 
November 2001, pp. 973-993. 
[21] A. MacFarlane, “Information, knowledge and intelligence,” 
Philosophy 
Now, 
Oct/Nov 
2015. 
Available 
online: 
https://philosophynow.org/issues/98/Information_Knowledge
_and_Intelligence (accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[22] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working Knowledge: How 
Organizations Manage What They Know. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press, 1998. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

[23] F. Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical 
German Philosophy, 1946. First published in 1886 in Die 
Neue Seit, vol. 4 and 5. 
[24] Intel, A Guide to the Internet of Things Infographic. 
Available 
online 
via 
Intel: 
http://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/images/
iot/guide-to-iot-infographic.png (accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[25] S. 
Poslad, 
Ubiquitous 
Computing: 
Smart 
Devices, 
Environments and Interactions. Wiley, 2009. 
[26] K. J. Shim, N. Pathak, M. A. Ahmad, C. DeLong, Z. Borbora, 
A. Mahapatra, and J. Srivastava, “Analyzing human 
behaviour from multiplayer online game logs: A knowledge 
discovery approach,” in Trends and Discoveries vol. 26, no. 
01, H. Chen and Y. Zhang (eds.), 2011, pp. 85-89.  
[27] S. E. Page, Diversity and Complexity. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2011. 
[28] P. J. Lang, "The varieties of emotional experience: A 
meditation on James–Lange theory," Psychological Review, 
vol. 101, no. 2, 1994, pp. 211-221. 
[29] W. H. Ittelson, H. M. Proshansky, L. G. Rivlin, and G. H. 
Winkel, An Introduction to Environmental Psychology. New 
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1974. 
[30] D. L. Schacter, D. T. Gilbert, and D. M. Wegner, Psychology 
(2nd Edition). New York: Worth, 2011. 
[31] T. Gärling and R. G. Golledge, “Environmental perception 
and cognition,” in Advances in Environment, Behavior, and 
Design, vol. 2, E. H. Zube and G. T. Moore (eds.), 1989, pp 
203-236. 
[32] R. G. Golledge, “Environmental cognition,” in D. Stokols, I. 
Altman, (eds.) Handbook of Environmental Psychology. New 
York: Wiley, 1987. 
[33] R. Legaspi, H. Maruyama, R. Nararatwong, and H. Okada, 
“Perception-based Resilience: Accounting for the impact of 
human perception on resilience thinking,” Proc. 2014 IEEE 
Fourth International Conference on Big Data and Cloud 
Computing, December 2014, pp. 547-554. 
[34] A. Robertson and S. Olson, Sensing and Shaping Emerging 
Conflicts: Report of a Workshop by the National Academy of 
Engineering and United States Institute of Peace Roundtable 
on Technology, Science, and Peacebulding. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press, 2013. Available via USIP: 
http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/Sensing_And_Shaping
_Emerging_Conflicts.pdf (accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[35] P. Meier, “How to create resilience through big data,” in 
iRevolutions: From Innovation to Revolution. Available 
online: http://irevolution.net/2013/01/11/disaster-resilience-2-
0/ (accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[36] D. L. Hall and J. M. Jordan, Human-Centered Information 
Fusion. Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2010. 
[37] J. Roy, “From data fusion to situation analysis,” Proc. 5th 
International Conference on Information Fusion, 2001. 
[38] R. Davis, H. Shrobe, and P. Szolovits, “What is knowledge 
representation?” AI Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, 1993, pp. 17-33. 
[39] L. Tari, “Knowledge inference,” in Encyclopedia of Systems 
Biology,  W. Dubitzky, O. Wolkenhauer, K.-H. Cho, and H. 
Yokota (eds.), 2013, pp. 1074-1078. 
[40] G. Paperin, D. G. Green, and S. Sadedin, “Dual-phase 
evolution in complex adaptive systems,” Journal of the The 
Royal Society Interface, vol. 8, no. 58, 2011, pp. 609-629. 
[41] K. Murray, Learning as Knowledge Integration, Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Technical Report TR-95-41. Department of 
Computer Sciences, University of Texas, Austin, November 
1995. 
[42] D. H. Rhodes and A. M. Ross, “Shaping socio-technical 
system 
innovation 
strategies 
using 
a 
Five 
Aspects 
Taxonomy,” 
2010. 
Available 
online:  
http://seari.mit.edu/documents/preprints/RHODES_EUSEC10
.pdf 2015.12.31. 
[43] E. L. Bohensky and Y. Maru, “Indigenous knowledge, 
science, and resilience: What have we learned from a decade 
of international literature on “Integration”?” Ecology and 
Society, vol. 16, no. 4, article 6, 2011. Available online: 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol16/iss4/art6/ (accessed 
on 2016.01.11). 
[44] Ernst and Young Global Limited, “Big Data: Changing the 
way businesses compete and operate – Insights on 
governance, risk and compliance,” April 2014. Available via 
EY: 
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/EY_-
_Big_data:_changing_the_way_businesses_operate/$FILE/E
Y-Insights-on-GRC-Big-data.pdf  (accessed on 2016.01.11). 
[45] H. Maruyama, R. Legaspi, K. Minami, and Y. Yamagata, 
“General Resilience: Taxonomy and strategies,” Proc. IEEE 
2014 International Conference and Utility Exhibition on 
Green Energy for Sustainable Development (ICUE), IEEE 
Press, March 19-21 2014, pp. 1-8. 
[46] J. H. Holland, Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds 
Complexity. USA: Perseus Book, 1995. 
[47] S. R. Carpenter et al., “General resilience to cope with 
extreme events,” Sustainability, vol. 4, 2012, pp. 3248-3259. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

