The Systems Approach to Rethinking the
Gender-Equality Paradox in STEM in the Context
of Norwegian Educational System and Workforce
Evelina Anita Iversen
Department of Science and Industry systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
Kongsberg, Norway
evelina.a.iversen@gmail.com
Mo Mansouri
Department of Science and Industry systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
Kongsberg, Norway
Mo.Mansouri@usn.no
Abstract—Gender equality in Science, Technology, Engineer-
ing, and Mathematics (STEM) has been an ongoing concern
of policymakers and researchers. The equality issues of socioe-
conomic systems are inherently complex due to their dynamic
nature and many tightly coupled variables. These initial condi-
tions of the systemic gender issue inspired the authors of this
paper to apply the systems multistakeholder approach to this
topic. The goal is to show that it is possible to assess and
organise the dynamic behaviour of the agents influencing the
mechanics of women’s choices. The authors chose Casual Loop
Diagrams (CLD) as a visualisation tool. Firstly, the paper focuses
on socioeconomic factors that affect adolescent girls’ willingness
and ability to pursue a STEM-related education and career. It has
been shown that the problem is multifaceted; hence, the decision
has been made to focus on the mechanisms that influence college
enrollment. Furthermore, the authors considered the geopolitical
context with Norway in focus. The paper also outlines the choice
dynamic and suggests that relatable female representation can
increase gender parity in STEM. Finally, it has been shown that
CLD might be a useful modelling tool for the multidisciplinary
team working on solving systemic issues. CLD has the capability
of bringing a middle ground between policymakers, neurologists,
social scientists and other specialists required to analyse the issue
thoroughly.
Index Terms—Complex systems, education, gender studies,
STEM.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the most prominent intentions of The Sustainable
Development Goals is to promote fighting inequality and
discrimination all around the globe. This issue is specifically
targeted in ”Goal 5 - gender equality”. There, among other
ambitions, is to ”ensure women’s full participation [...] in
decision-making” [4]. Since engineers and other representa-
tives of STEM-related workforce play a great role in the shap-
ing of humanity’s future by making decisions on technology
in ”a response to societal needs” [2], it is worth analysing
women’s representation in this social group. One could argue
that isolating a block of society to perform gender-related
analysis can narrow the scope of issues of inequality.
Nevertheless, since human interaction has a high level of
complexity, it is rather unlikely that isolation would eliminate
the effects of society as a whole. Therefore, to reduce the
complexity of the system and the issue discussed in this
paper, it can be a good starting point to focus on one social
group. First, however, close attention must be paid to the
problem’s cultural, socioeconomic, and geographic factors.
That will be the main focus of Section I. The rest of this paper
is organised as follows. Section II illustrates the modelling
process of the mechanics of choice associated with STEM-
related higher education. In Section III, the authors elaborate
on the relationships visualised in the previous section while
indicating a possible intervention. In conclusion, Section IV
addresses the value of the systems multistakeholder approach
and covers suggestions for further work.
A. Women’s under-representation
Since resolving women’s under-representation in STEM-
related education and workforce is an issue that is often
brought up on a systemic level, one could argue that it is
evident that governments and industries are the stakeholders
of this problem. Indeed, it is evident that a larger pool of
trained professionals will positively affect the economy. That
is because engineering and science, in general, are rapidly
developing fields, which are often understaffed [3].
Educational institutions and research centres are motivated
to employ more women since they bring their unique per-
spective to the projects. As an example, one could mention a
rather famous ”Seat belt design case”, where male researchers
created the guidelines, which did not take into consideration
gender-influenced anatomical differences [1].
On the other hand, some groups would oppose introducing
more women in STEM. Those groups might be promoting
”conservative gender roles,” where women either engage in
unpaid labour in their households or are employed in tradi-
tionally female jobs. Other groups could be against female
representation since that would increase competition, making it
harder to receive higher achievements. It is difficult to dismiss
the existence of these undeniably misogynistic opinions, even
though they are less prominent in the geographical context of
this paper compared to other countries (see I-B1).
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

1) Statistics in Norway: Statistisk Sentralbyr˚a (Statistics
Norway) has recently published data on higher education
enrollment in the country. The document [7] shows that 60.2%
of all applicants in 2021 are women. However, they represent
only 30.9% of all junior students at STEM faculties. It has also
been mentioned that engineering educational institutions expe-
rienced a slight decrease in women’s representation (−0.9%),
balanced by a significant increase in maritime technology
(+7%).
The recent statistics can be perceived as discouraging,
particularly if one would take into consideration an arti-
cle published by Norges Ingeniør- og Teknologorganisasjon
(Norwegian Engineering and Technological Organisation) [6],
where they call for more female representation and point out
that only 26% of STEM-workplaces are taken by women.
B. Willingness and ability
Since pursuing a certain educational- and career path is
guided by a choice of an individual, one can take freedom to
condense factors contributing to that particular decision into
two groups: individual’s willingness and their ability (see Fig.
1).
One can assume that under-representation of women in
Fig. 1. Casual loop - best case scenario
STEM fields is due to their intellectual inability, rooted in bio-
logical inferiority. Even though one can find this point of view
as admittedly false, Harvard University president Lawrence
Summers once ”suggested that innate biological differences
may help explain why men have more career success in science
and mathematics than women” [8]. This claim currently has
little neurological support. Nevertheless, the statement can in-
dicate the cultural atmosphere in some educational institutions.
That atmosphere, which feeds on degrading stereotypes about
women, is one of the reasons women are not willing to pursue
a career in STEM, which reinforces male representation in the
field (see Fig. 2). Fortunately, women’s science performance
concerning their male colleagues has been covered in other
research articles that yielded contrary findings [9]. However,
those studies alone cannot affect gender bias significantly
enough to attract more women.
1) National gender-equality paradox: In 2018, Stoet and
Geary [9] published an article where they analysed relative
academic strengths of adolescent girls and boys concerning
Fig. 2. Casual Loop - stereotype reinforcement
the probability of pursuing STEM educational path. It has
Fig. 3.
Gender equality and sex differences vs intraindividual science
performance
been found that in ≈ 66% of countries studied in the paper,
girls performed at least similarly to boys. Additionally, ”in
[...] all countries more girls [...] were capable of college-
level STEM study than had enrolled” [9]. To quantify gender
parity, one often refers to Global Gender Gap Index (GGGI).
In the countries where GGGI is high political, economic,
and educational opportunities between men and women are
relatively equal. In those countries, girls often outperform boys
in sciences interindividual, but simultaneously are less ready
to pursue STEM education-path (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 ).
Therefore a natural question arises: ”if GGGI is high (their
will is free) and women’s intellectual abilities are similar to
men’s, why are women still under-represented in STEM in
Norway?” One can argue that the analysis of this issue is three-
sided. Firstly, one must understand why they are unwilling
to pursue a STEM educational path; secondly, they are not
fulfilling their studies and not following through with their
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

Fig. 4. Gender equality and sex differences vs women’s prosperity relative
to men
careers. Furthermore, lastly, why they change career paths.
Since those three topics require isolated studies, the paper will
continue with a case on college enrollment to provide a higher-
quality analysis.
One then may attempt to structure information through
Systems Thinking techniques and visualise the cause-result
chains in a Casual Loop Diagram (CLD). A possible outcome
of this procedure is represented in Section II together with
reasoning behind factors chosen for dynamic assessment.
Then, one can allocate loops that require intervention and
propose a solution that benefits gender parity in STEM. The
discussion and possible interventions can be found in Section
III.
II. MODELING
Modelling the gender-equality in STEM in Norway was
performed by relying on, among other resources, research
published by Ida Marie Andersen on factors that influence
the education pathway [5].
The analysis will be built on the further development of
CLD represented in Fig. 1.
A. Parental influence
Ida Marie, in her paper, mentioned that parental influence
is an essential factor of career and educational path choice
for adolescents. The probability of a girl pursuing a STEM
career is higher if she has a caregiver that has a job in that
field. However, it is essential to point out that this analysis
does not consider the relationship issues between a girl and
her caregiver. Hence, in the best-case scenario, a caregiver or
a parent increases the willingness of their child to pursue a
career in STEM through encouraging and personal example.
Then, engagement of a child will excite a caregiver, creating
a reinforcement loop (Fig. 5).
Parental influence also affects a girl’s academic perfor-
mance, since they probably can help with homework and con-
tribute to the general understanding of STEM-related syllabus,
thus promoting the ability of a girl to choose a technical path
in the future (see Fig. 6).
Fig. 5. Parental influence (willingness) - reinforcement loop
Fig. 6. Parental influence (ability) - reinforcement loop
1) Immigrant background: The work in [5] shows that par-
ents who emigrated to Norway from other (non-Scandinavian)
countries have an additional influence on their children: boys
and girls. That point is supported by [9], where girls from
countries with lesser general gender equality than in Norway
are represented in STEM programs almost as often as boys.
Fig. 7. Immigrant background (parents) - reinforcement loop
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

B. Gender bias - the reinforcement loop
Previous topics and loops that have been covered showed
mechanisms that can positively affect a girl’s decision when
choosing a STEM-related career. The issues that can affect
that decision negatively are generally rooted in gender bias
(see Fig. 8). Interestingly enough, this destructive tendency
is found both in women and men in the field. It has also
Fig. 8. Misogyny reinforcement loops
been found that peer pressure in the context of general upper
secondary education in Norway can swing girls away from
engineering and mathematics since a STEM career path is not
surrounded with the same amount of prestige as, for example,
studies in Business and Administration, or Healthcare (see
Fig. 9). Unfortunately, girls’ unwillingness to pursue STEM
Fig. 9. Peer pressure prestige loop - balancing
careers feeds into stereotypes, reinforcing gender bias and lack
of representation, making it a vicious circle.
C. Governmental support
The Norwegian government encourages women to enrol
in STEM-related colleges and faculties by granting them
additional points, thus, increasing their ability to compete for
school places. It is important to point out that this support
system is a part of the general gender-equality policy. This
policy also gives men the same points for applying to female-
dominant education paths. However, after interviewing some
of their female colleagues in STEM, the author of this paper
discovered that most of the women do not want to receive
those points in the first place since that could suggest that
they are less deserving of their current position than their male
colleagues (see Fig. 10).
Fig. 10. Governmental policies - balance loop
III. DISCUSSION AND POSSIBLE INTERVENTIONS
It is possible to argue that fewer parameters negatively
affect women’s abilities than their willingness. Paradoxically,
stereotypes and gender bias are at the root of those issues,
even though Norway is considered one of the most gender-
equal countries. That can be caused by a lack of comfort for
women in the industry since there are very few success stories
with female role models. And even if there is a success story,
it is usually far beyond the reach of a ”normal girl,” since we
more than often refer to Maria Skłodowska Curie or Valentina
Tereshkova as an example of female triumph, which can be
sometimes hard to associate with.
It is commonly known that usually, any hate, including
misogyny, is fired by arrogance (willing and unwilling). One
way to fight it is educating society on the topic by casting
light on women studying and working in STEM with comfort
- without sacrificing their identity to a male-dominated field.
Additionally, one would want these women to be more relat-
able and reachable to adolescent girls than super-successful
women in STEM, like Curie.
The authors propose that the positive dynamic can be
encouraged by celebrating differences at workplaces and
schools. Even though the industry is still overwhelmingly
male-dominated, it can still be achieved even through minor
changes. For example, one could end a practice of calling
women in STEM ”one of the boys” or expecting them to
behave more masculinely not to be seen as an outcast. One
could also encourage behaviours and activities that are usually
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

perceived as feminine. That would arguably reduce the effect
of bias since male colleagues would have a chance to interact
with women in their comfort zone and learn from them.
Fig. 11. Final Casual Loop Diagram
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Figure 11 shows the resulting CLD diagram, where one can
see the attempt to visualise the mechanics of choice related to
higher education in Norway. The resulting model demonstrates
that complex socioeconomic issues can be structured under-
standably for specialists from different fields. That is a critical
finding since continuing to build on the CLD STEM paradox
model requires intervention from a multidisciplinary team with
their knowledge of other agents affecting women’s choice of
educational path. In the future, one might reiterate existing
CLD to learn more about the mechanisms of bias and gender
stereotypes. That can include widening the model’s scope
and including some of the system’s agents in the modelling
process. Authors indicate that gradual holistic changes can
be beneficial to make a STEM career path more attractive
for women. For example, these interventions can focus on
increasing the awareness of relatable female representation in
the field.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Bert, ”3 reasons gender diversity is crucial to science”, Elsevier
Connect, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.elsevier.com/connect/3-
reasons-gender-diversity-is-crucial-to-science.
[Accessed:
07-Mar-
2022].
[2] H. Sladovich, Engineering as a social enterprise. Washington, DC:
National Acad. Pr, 1993.
[3] M.
Dahl,
”Continued
high
shortage
of
labor”,
Metal
Supply
[Fortsatt
høy
mangel
p˚a
arbeidskraft],
2022
.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.metalsupply.no/article
/view/792477/fortsatt hoy mangel pa arbeidskraft.
[Accessed:
07-
Mar- 2022].
[4] Project
Everyone,
”Goal
5:
Gender
equality
-
The
Global
Goals”,
The
Global
Goals,
2022.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.globalgoals.org/goals/5-gender-equality/.
[Accessed:
07- Mar- 2022].
[5] I. M. Andersen, ”Diversity in the Academy - Higher education in the
face of a complex reality” [Mangfold i Akademia – Høyere utdanning
i møte med en kompleks virkelighet], Oslo and Akershus University
College, 2014. (HiOA Tema-utgivelser 2014, nr.2.)
[6] A. Berger, ”Women’s Day March 8: - More girls should become
engineers” [Kvinnedagen 8. mars: - Flere jenter bør bli ingeniør], NITO,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nito.no/aktuelt/2022/3/vi-trenger-
flere-kvinnelige-ingeniorer/. [Accessed: 07- Mar- 2022].
[7] Samordna Opptak, Hovedopptak til høyere utdanning ved universiteter
og høgskoler juli 2021 [Main admission to higher education at univer-
sities and colleges July 2021], 2021.
[8] Nature Neuroscience, ”Separating science from stereotype”, Nat. Neu-
rosci., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 253-253, 2005.
[9] G. Stoet and D. Geary, ”The Gender-Equality Paradox in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education”, Psychological
Science, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 581-593, 2018.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

