ISA-95 Tool for Enterprise Modeling 
Dazhuang He, Andrei Lobov, Jose L. Martinez Lastra 
FAST Lab, Department of Production Engineering 
Tampere University of Technology 
P.O. Box 600, 33101, Tampere, Finland 
{Dazhuang.He, Andrei.Lobov, Jose.Lastra}@tut.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Enterprise information modeling is one of the major 
challenges for system integration in Factory Automation. 
Different standards exist to model information. This paper 
describes 
ISA-95 
Tool 
that 
is 
developed 
based 
on 
internationally-used industrial standard ANSI/ISA-95. The 
tool makes it easier to automatically integrate product 
information with a production system. Up to the knowledge of 
authors, so far only ad hoc solutions were developed following 
ISA-95, which were failing to support in general the modeling 
of manufacturing systems. The tool can be used for production 
order specifications. An overview on ISA-95, B2MML 
(Business 
to 
Manufacturing 
Mark-up 
Language) 
and 
structures as SIIS (Software Intensive Industrial System) are 
described in the paper, which are followed by tool description 
and case study.   
Keywords- B2MML; ISA-95; Enterprise modeling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The information flow in industrial systems grows in 
terms of amount and structural complexity. At the moment 
factory information system implementation follows ad hoc 
solutions that may be based on some of the standards, i.e. 
ISA-95 or CAMX [1], but lack to have an adequate tools 
support for information modeling. The developing tendency 
of industrial systems shifts towards SIIS where software 
essentially influences to the design, construction and 
deployment  of  these  systems.  GAO,  known  as  U.S.  
Government Accountability Office, attributes the poor 
success degree [2] of building software intensive systems to 
the management [3], in detail, ERP (Enterprise Resource 
Planning) and MES (Manufacturing Execution System) 
levels. From modules to methodologies, from languages to 
services, during last two decades an extensive research is 
performed to interconnect different enterprise systems and 
refine the SDLC (System Development Life Cycle).   
For example, SOA (Service-Oriented Architecture) is a 
paradigm developed for organizing and utilizing distributed 
capabilities under different ownership domains [4]; OPC 
was designed to provide a common bridge for Windows 
based software solutions and process control hardware; the 
mechanism of loose coupling keeps different part of one 
system maintained own functionalities with communicating 
through well-defined interfaces [5]. 
ISA-95 developed by the Instrumentation Systems and 
Automation Society (ISA) defines a complete functional 
model for enterprise-control use as a reflection of an 
organizational structure of functions which can be replaced 
addressing different demands of the enterprise.  
Following ISA-95 standard, this paper presents a tool 
that allows modeling of enterprise information. The tool can 
be used to allow adaptation to any specific demands of the 
enterprise. The models can be extended. The tool is 
demonstrated on manufacturing line producing mobile 
phones, where it is used to represent order information. 
The paper is organized as follows: next section gives 
short introduction to ISA-95 standard and B2MML that 
provides XML representation for ISA-95, which is important 
for interoperability of IT systems at factories. Third section 
describes the tool. The use case is presented in fourth section 
that is followed by conclusions. 
II. 
THE ISA-95 STANDARD & B2MML 
A. The ISA-95 Standard 
ISA-95 is originally a US standard which has been 
adopted as an international one under IEC/ISO 62246. As 
currently envisioned, the ANSI/ISA-95 series will consist of 
the 5 parts under the general title, Enterprise-Control 
System Integration: 
x 
Part1:Models and terminology 
x 
Part2:Object model attributes 
x 
Part3:Activity models of manufacturing operation 
management 
x 
Part4:Object models and attributes of manufacturing 
operations management 
x 
Part5:Business to Manufacturing transactions 
The latest versions of Part 1, 2 and 3 are released on 
2010 while part 4 and part 5 are still under standardization. 
In this article, second latest version of ISA-95 and B2MML 
(v4010) were selected as a stable combination for their 
compatibility. 
As a structured standard, ISA-95 includes 3 main 
information areas of producing products, capabilities, and 
actual production. Besides, the standard provides a reference 
model for system organizing, allocating business to the 
different systems and information flow between systems [6].  
UML (Unified Modeling Language) models are used in 
the development of the tools following ISA-95. The 9 object 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

models, 86 objects and a whole set of attributes defined in 
ISA-95.00.02 are extensions to the information models 
defined in ISA-95.00.01.  
The structure and the frame allow users of addressing 
own information inheriting the relationship between 
information blocks (known as classes in Object Models). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Part of Equipment Object Model for FASTory Line. 
In an example of Equipment Object Model for the case 
study (Section IV), FASTory Line, the information of  
problem domain concepts such as “State Buffer”, “Pen 
Feeder”, 
“Conveyor” 
is 
well 
classified 
and 
the 
generalization between “Equipment Class” and them is also 
kept.  In order words, standard UML models can be 
extended to fit the problem domain (Fig. 1). 
The tool to be introduced in next part - “ISA-95 Tool” 
serves as an interface with all the classes beyond and under 
problem domain defined in ISA-95.00.02. In majority of the 
industrial systems, the problem domain consists of 4 
models:  
1) 
The personnel object model describes human 
resources defining different classes of personnel. 
2) 
The equipment object model is 
structured 
similarly--the 
object 
model 
supports 
specifying 
requirements for different equipment classes.  
3) 
The material model describes raw materials, 
intermediate products, and finished products.  
4) 
A process segment is one step/task/unit of work 
that must be performed to complete a product. 
The five other object models defined in ISA-95.00.02 
beyond problem domain are production capability model, 
process segment capability model, product definition 
information model, production schedule model, production 
performance model. 
 
B. B2MML 
With  a  set  of  XML  schemas  written  using  the  World  
Wide Web Consortium's XML Schema language (XSD), 
B2MML is treated as a complete XML implementation of 
ISA-95. The .xsd templates implement the data models in 
the ISA-95 standard. The final information carrier of ISA95-
Tool will be an .xml file following B2MML’s .xsd template 
[7]. 
From the perspective of an SDLC, the link of support 
phase [8] in ISA-95 is still weak. This is reflected in the lack 
of tools and platform based on the standard. This stage of 
conceptualization greatly demands specific visualization to 
increase engineers’ efficiency on familiarizing and using this 
standard. Part III of this article depicts “ISA-95 Tool” as one 
solution addressing this demand. 
III. 
INTRODUCTION TO ISA-95 TOOL  
As mentioned in the previous part, there is a lack of 
visual-operating software as support phase for practical 
application of ISA-95`. The acknowledge degree still stays 
in the combination of models and attributes, which increases 
extremely the difficulty of application of the standard. 
As one solution to the problem, “ISA-95 Tool” defines 
”order” as the core concept and information carrier 
functioning in Manufacturing, Operation and Control level 
(level 3 in ISA standard family) and Business Planning and 
Logistics  level  (level  4  in  ISA  standard  family)  [9].  The  
process starts when the order is received from a customer 
and then transferred between system managers, analysts and 
operators. The process ends up with creating and 
transferring an .xml file to line controller that based on 
product needs should generate a production recipe. The 
recipe can be formalized in Business Process Execution 
Language (BPEL) [10]. 
However, system demands may vary from factory to 
factory and so not all models are necessary to keep the 
process running in a practical industrial use.  
The  first  phase  presented  as  a  frame  allows  users  to  
select models by their demands (Fig. 2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Model-selection phase of ISA-95 Tool. 
The tool will list attributes and text fields under selected 
models (Fig. 3). The definitions of the attributes in the 9 
models come from a minimum set of industry-independent 
information. The attributes are extensions to the object 
information model defined in ISA-95.00.01 and thus are 
 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

part of the definition of terms. The attributes and models 
define interfaces for enterprise-control system integration. 
 
Figure 3.  Attributes information phase of ISA-95 Tool. 
An order list with information as Order ID and 
production start time can be created in third phase. A single 
cycle for all the operations in an order can be completed by 
pressing “Start” button (Fig. 4).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Order-checking phase of ISA-95 Tool. 
After the operations cycle, an .xml file collecting inputs 
will be created by the tool and transferred to controllers at 
the production line level.  
This is done by adding values to an existing .xml file 
template. As mentioned, from v02 of B2MML, .xsd files are 
available as part of the packages released by WBF (The 
Organization for Production Technology). The template here 
is created following .xsd file format. Little changes as adding 
root elements to .xsd files are required if the format 
transformation is completed by an xml software. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY: FASTORY LINE 
A. FASTory Line 
FASTory-Line is an assembly line used for research 
purposes in FAST Lab, Tampere University of Technology 
(Fig. 5). In order to simulate the production (due to costs 
reasons), drawings of components and products are created 
by robots. The main advantage is that, different drawings of 
components are used to simulate parts of the assembly and 
different colors for increasing the complexity of the systems 
as well as production customization. As a result, there is no 
need disassemble ready products, however the actual robots 
need to perform pick and place operation and follow unique 
sequence depending of the variant of the product. 
 
Figure 5.  
FASTory Line 
The drawing consists of 3 components: frame, screen 
and keyboard, 3 different formats for each component and 3 
different pen colors (red, green and blue) for each format 
thus the product has 729 variants altogether. All the drawing 
robots can take the task of drawing any part. It is also 
possible to make the complete mobile phone or finish only 
one part to bring larger flexibility of the line. The material 
to be used in the production will be paper and pens.  
 
Figure 6.  Cell-phone simulation. 
B. Modified version of “ISA-95 Tool”—“FASTory GUI” 
FASTory line is a typical production line with strong 
demands on models in problem domain, mainly for 
equipment model, personnel model and material model. The 
traditional solution with “ISA-95 Tool” is to choose 
problem domain models in first phase, to fill attributes 
forms in second phase before final order is created. 
However, a different scenario is presented below as an 
alternative solution.  
“FASTory GUI” is developed as a modified version of 
“ISA-95 Tool” being optimized for FASTory Line. Starting 
from the action flow, the user set input by choosing radio 
button groups and making selections in combo boxes in the 
first phase (Fig. 7).  
Instead of text-fields, the material information is 
represented directly in the form of component formats. The 
volume of the ink in different colors changes as the user 
chooses different cell phone formats and colors. The product 
segment information in accordance with the choice will be 
displayed in a table simultaneously. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 7.  Cell-phone format selection phase of FASTory GUI. 
After confirmation, the user can check the information 
as production segment rules, production schedules and even 
a preview of the cell-phone product (Fig. 8). The user adds 
orders list after the correction of the mistakes (if any). 
 
       
 
Figure 8.  Production Segment Information phase of FASTory GUI. 
The same as with “ISA-95 Tool”, if the order does not 
reach the requirement, the user can delete unwanted order in 
monitoring tab or exit the procedure by cancelling the 
orders. 
Also, an .xml file collecting user’s choices and carrying 
order information will be created and transferred to line 
level controllers. Again, here an alternative method is 
presented instead of feeding values to .xml templates.   
In an SIIS as FASTory Line, not all data are in top level 
of importance, which means only part of information can 
keep the system processes running. Another reason on 
reducing the amount of the information is that irrelevant 
elements, null elements and long headers increase workload 
and difficulty for line controllers on information analysis. 
Here a minimum set of elements are chosen from the 
template artificially and an example of this has been tested 
on FASTory GUI. An example of a part of the .xml code 
looks as follows:  
 
<amount>99</amount> 
<time>Tue 
Sep 
20 
12:58:58 
EEST 
2011</time> 
 <Formats> 
 <frameFormatColor="1">1</frameFormat> 
 <screenFormatColor="0">0</screenFormat>  
<keyboardFormatColor="1">1</keyboardFormat> 
</Formats> 
 
As depicted in this scenario, the formats and colors are 
represented by integers in elements and attributes; the 
programming solution reduces the time needed analyzing 
and extracting information from files. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The ISA-95 standard is an important basis for the 
development connecting control system and enterprises. 
B2MML is selected as implementation language for the 
standard to allow interoperability of industrial IT systems. 
“ISA-95 Tool” allows visualization of the models and 
attributes staring from abstract concepts, refining and 
placing them into practical industrial use. FASTory tool is a 
specialized version based on “ISA-95 Tool” taking 
FASTory Line as a study case. It is also a good example of 
how “ISA-95 Tool” can be extended to fit factories, 
enterprises in different size and types as separate solutions, 
though it is already sufficient and powerful enough working 
as an independent tool. 
The further development and research can focus on the 
modeling of production performance that can be checked 
after at least one single process segment and return 
information back to ISA-95 models. Thus an .xml file 
containing performance model information is needed and 
can be generated as a result of feedback information coming 
from line and low-level controllers. This addition will 
require some changes on current web service interface 
between the tool and the controllers of the line.  
Another issue is that majority of targeted users of current 
software products on ISA-95 application are “solution 
architects”, “analysts”, and “engineers” but not the managers 
who do not have flexibility to update the model or change 
the schedule. This indirectly increases the operating 
requirement even if there are no problems other than the 
format and the access of the information. Thus an extra step 
could be added transferring created .xml file to .xls file. The 
format of an Excel table which avoids the specific 
knowledge requirements of B2MML is considered for the 
future work. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
CAMX Reference, http://gocamx.com/camx, Great Technologies 
Collaborations, Inc. (retrieved: January, 2012) 
[2] 
R. N. Charente, “Why Software Falls,” IEEE Spectrum,vol. 42, no. 9, 
pp. 36-43 
[3] 
P. I. Sosnin, "Conceptual solution of the tasks in designing the 
software 
intensive 
systems," 
14th 
IEEE 
Mediterranean 
Electrotechnical Conference (MELECON 08), pp.293-298, 5-7 May 
2008, doi: 10.1109/MELCON.2008.4618450 
[4] 
“Service 
Oriented 
Architecture 
(SOA)”, 
OASIS, 
http://xml.coverpages.org/soa.html (retrieved: January, 2012) 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

[5] 
L. Kerschberg, "The role of loose coupling in expert database system 
architectures," 5th International Conference on Data Engineering, pp. 
255-256, 6-10 Feb 1989, doi: 10.1109/ICDE.1989.47222 
[6] 
I. M. Delamer and J. L.Martinez Lastra, “Factory Information 
Systems in Electronics Production”, Tampere University of 
Technology, ISBN 978-952-15-1937-6, 2006 
[7] 
ANSI/ISA-95.00.02-2001, “Enterprise-Control System Integration 
Part2: Object Model Attributes”, ISA, 2001 
[8] 
J.W. Satzinger, R.B. Jackson, and S.D. Burd, “Object-oriented 
Analysis & Design with the Unified Process,” Thomson, ISBN 0-619-
21643-3, 2005 
[9] 
ANSI/ISA-95.00.03-2005, Enterprise-Control System Integration Part 
3: Activity Models of Manufacturing Operations management, ISA 
2005 
[10] J. Puttonen, A. Lobov, and J.L. Martinez Lastra "An application of 
BPEL for service orchestration in an industrial environment," IEEE 
International Conference on  Emerging Technologies and Factory 
Automation, (ETFA 08)., pp. 530-537, 15-18 Sept. 2008, doi: 
10.1109/ETFA.2008.4638450 
 
 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-184-7
ICONS 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems

