Detection And Protection Against Unwanted Small UAVs 
 
Igor Tchouchenkov, Florian Segor, Rainer Schönbein, 
Matthias Kollmann, 
Fraunhofer Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and 
Image Exploitation IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
e-mail: {igor.tchouchenkov, florian.segor, 
rainer.schoenbein, matthias.kollmann}@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
 
Abstract—The market for small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs) is growing fast. Based on increasing reliability, 
accessibility and decreasing operational restraints these 
systems become more and more used in different areas of 
application. Besides the benefits of this development, an 
increasing number of more or less hazardous incidents with 
small UAVs can be noticed. Accidents or the misuse of these 
technologies do lead to dangerous situations – from simple 
mishaps 
over 
illegal 
activities 
like 
spying 
or 
drug 
transportation up to the possibilities of terroristic actions. To 
deal with this development a concept of a new Low Altitude 
Air Surveillance Control (LASC) system is developed. Based 
on 
heterogeneous, 
distributed 
multi-sensor 
networks 
embedded into a capable and application oriented modular, 
adaptable and scalable backend system, the LASC concept 
addresses detection, localization, tracking and classification or 
identification of small UAVs providing interactive threat and 
risk assessment as well as suggestions for adequate counter 
measures. 
Keywords-UAV; air surveillance; multi-sensor network; 
threat protection; modular. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are an 
emerging technology with a great potential to disruptively 
change our lives. They have by far exceed the capabilities of 
the niche products of remote controlled models with their 
ability in terms of payloads, flight duration and ranges, auto 
pilot capabilities, automated collision protection and video 
transmission capabilities. Leveraged with new technologies 
(e. g. high capacity battery packs, low energy consuming 
motors and small-sized high computing power) the small 
UAVs have started exceeding entertainment domain while 
entering more and more applications [1][2][3] (surveillance, 
reconnaissance and rescue, video production, logistics, etc.). 
This development has been boosted by a constantly rising 
commercial market for UAVs providing broad accessibility 
and diversity at a low cost scale. 
As always, each technology comes along with drawbacks 
and potential for abuse and this is in particular true for small 
UAVs. With their inherent risk of crashing causing damage 
and harm to people, each business application has to be 
assessed seriously in terms of security issues and constraints. 
Furthermore, with the broad availability and low cost aspect  
Thomas Bierhoff, 
Atos IT Solutions and Services, Paderborn, Germany  
e-mail: thomas.bierhoff@atos.net 
Mark Herbold 
Atos Nederland B.V., Utrecht, Netherlands  
e-mail: mark.herbold@atos.net 
 
 
of UAVs, a common and unforeseeable use of this 
technology is expected in the private sector. This will in turn 
demand for new legal laws, rules and enforcement 
technologies [4][5] to keep the low altitude air space save 
and controlled. 
 In this article, detection technologies for small UAVs are 
described in Section II, as well as the concept of a new Low 
Altitude Air Surveillance Control (LASC) system in Section 
III. The paper is closed with a final discussion in Section IV.  
II. 
DETECTION TECHNOLOGIES FOR SMALL UAVS 
Taking the established national and international airspace 
control as an archetype, the simplest solution for detecting 
and identifying a small UAV would be the mandatory 
introduction of a standardized identification friend or foe 
(IFF) system deployed in all UAVs. If this IFF provides the 
capability to broadcasts the current position, altitude, 
heading and speed together with a unique identifier, the 
integration of these systems into the lower airspace would be 
easy. But the standard IFF systems are not applicable on 
board of small UAVs, and the number of small UAVs is 
growing rapidly. Moreover, such a technology can only be a 
part of the solution as it provides no functionalities to deal 
with illegal activities. To establish a safe and secure lower 
airspace, additional technologies that do not rely on the 
cooperation of the traffic are of major importance. 
Small, relatively slow and low flying UAVs as we know 
them today can be either detected by searching their 
electronic, acoustic, thermal or visual signature or by using 
active sensors like radar or lidar to search for anomalies that 
might be operating UAVs. 
Video based airspace surveillance within the optical as 
well as the infrared spectrum is a promising approach. 
Existing commercial solutions rely mostly on easy change 
detection algorithms and basic data fusion [6]. Fraunhofer 
Institute of Optronics, System Technologies and Image 
Exploitation (IOSB) has done comprehensive research on 
robust computer vision algorithms allowing the detection and 
primary classification of different flying objects in real time 
[7]. But this approach comes with challenging requirements 
– especially for urban areas. The whole complicated low 
altitude airspace need to be continuously observed without 
knowing the number, the size and the distance of a small 
UAV to be safe detected and separated from other eventually 
moving objects. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

Sound pattern emitted by UAVs are also representing a 
promising 
source 
for 
detection 
and 
classification. 
Microphones combined with digital signal processing using 
matched digital filters adjusted to the characteristic sound 
frequency spectrum can unveil an approaching UAV [6]. The 
approach vector can be identified by the alignment of 
directional microphones and lead to distance estimation by 
signal strength or triangulation. 
Communication detection of UAVs is very promisingly 
and partially already in application [8]. Every remote 
controlled UAV needs up-/downlink to the ground control 
station. Control commands are sent to the UAV and sensor 
data like position, system state and in particular the payload 
data (video signals in most cases) are sent back. If the typical 
frequency 
bands 
are 
monitored, 
characteristic 
communication can be identified and transmission can be 
extracted. The information can be used to do a rough 
classification of the UAVs type. In conjunction with 
triangulation capabilities of cooperating sensors, position and 
heading of a detected UAV can be determined as well. But 
these technologies will fail if the UAV is operating 
autonomously. More sophisticated technologies detecting the 
electromagnetic background radiation emitted by the 
electronic equipment of the UAV could provide a promising 
approach, but such systems do not exist. 
Radar technology is always tailored to its application 
scene (e.g., detection range, size of object, material, etc.). It 
is insensitive to environmental conditions (poor visibility, no 
light at night time, rain, fog, etc.) and therefore applicable in 
almost any environmental situation. Long range air 
surveillance radar operating at 1 to 2GHz (L-Band) for range 
<400km and large objects (>10m) are not suitable for the 
LASC system as UAV’s small size, its low EM-wave 
reflecting composite material and low flying altitudes.  
More suitable radar technologies are found in the K- and 
Ka-Band with frequencies between 20 and 40 GHz as far as 
in the W-Band (60 - 120 GHz). But a robust detection and 
recognition of small UAVs with radar are still a topic of 
research. Applied in urban areas, reflection by infrastructures 
and building are representing the major challenge for 
development of appropriate radar surveillance systems. In 
addition, a usage of many radar systems in urban areas can 
be problematic because of their radiation. Lidar seems to be 
a promising solution as it can provide a comprehensive three 
dimensional image of the surroundings allowing to precisely 
locate and in some cases to identify an airborne object, but 
the range of these sensors is too short. 
III. 
LOW ALTITUDE AIR SURVELLANCE AND CONTROL 
CONCEPT 
Most approaches or commercial available systems rely 
on a single sensor technology. Derived from the possible 
detection methods these systems are developed with the aim 
to get the best possible solution based on the capabilities of 
the selected single sensor type - in the best case aligned with 
an additional secondary sensor for a better detection rate. But 
all sensor technologies do have their advantages and 
disadvantages and a capable sensor can totally fail or become 
unsuitable if the situation changes. 
The protection concept is normally centralized and 
focusing on the single sensor system itself. But systems for 
UAV detection and defence require solutions covering 
different spotting directions which often cannot be covered 
by a single deployed sensor. A multiple application of a 
sensor is not suitable if the technology is not using a control 
centre that is logically linked to the sensor system. 
Additionally, the detecting is not sufficient if no adequate 
countermeasures are timely provided. On the other hand, 
some countermeasures can be unsuitable and even dangerous 
if a detected UAV is not classified or identified. 
To cope with these aspects, the new LASC system 
concept was developed in a joint project between AToS SE 
and Fraunhofer IOSB. 
The air space beyond the 500m is already been in control 
by conventional air traffic control mostly based on long-
range radar technologies, so the major objective of a LASC 
system is the monitoring of the today uncontrolled air space 
below 500m with a special focus on urban areas. In order to 
guarantee seamless information exchange (e.g., some UAVs 
may enter the high altitude air space and endanger the air 
traffic), LASC system must be integrated into conventional 
air traffic control. 
The common workflow of LASC is shown in Figure 1. 
The LASC system continuously monitors the air space with 
multiple sensors. Once a sensor detects a flying object, the 
system will try to locate it (e.g., by triangulation of signals 
from many sensors) and ensure tracking by orchestrating 
multiple sensors. Once the location and tracking is 
established, the backend system of LASC will carry out the 
(possible interactive) classification and if applicable the 
identification of the detected object. Once this is executed, 
the LASC backend system starts the evaluation of the 
drone’s authorization to fly through the current air space 
corridor. If no authorization is given, system will prepare 
reaction options considering the current situation, estimated 
threat classification and risk assessment (disturbing, illegal 
or endangering). The LASC system provides decision 
support to a human operator who is in charge of selecting 
and initiating the counter measures. All activities that do not 
need necessarily the interaction with the operator must be 
automated to a high degree in order to guarantee a real time 
execution and to enable high scalability in terms of multiple 
events. 
 
Figure 1. Common workflow of the LASC system 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

Depending on the application, the area of the surveillance 
is scalable by adding further sensor- and counter measure 
devices to the LASC systems or new sub-systems. 
Distributed LASC system can contain both mobile and 
stationary LASC sub-systems. This modular approach 
provides a broad field of application ranging from a single 
building to an entire suburb air surveillance. Therefore, a 
multimodal sensor network based on the technology stack 
recapitalized in chapter II must cover a certain part of the 
controlled air space providing day- and night time operations 
and coping with bad visibility conditions. 
The next step after UAV detection is its classification 
based on sensor signal evaluation and its identification by 
IFF signals broadcasted by the UAV (if available). Once 
identified, the LASC system needs to reconcile the 
information with a LASC central UAV flight register to see 
if the UAV’s flight is registered/allowed and further 
information is given covering payload, mission, flight path, 
destination and operator. If the UAV is registered, its flight 
register record must be updated by current position, altitude, 
speed and time stamp for consistent tracking. If there is no 
suitable record found in the LASC register, a new one must 
be created with all available information (e.g., ID with 
current position, altitude, speed and time stamp). In order to 
approve UAV flight authorization, its position must be 
mapped to pre-defined air space corridors, which will show 
permanent or temporarily valid restrictions or prohibitions. 
This is essential because different UAVs may have different 
air space transit rights (e.g., police UAV may enter the 
corridor which it prohibited for other participants). The last 
step of monitoring flight operations is the continuous 
tracking and updating the LASC register’s records. Once a 
UAV is leaving the observation area of a sensor or a LASC 
system, it might enter another one. The hand-over of such 
tracking must be supported by the LASC intelligence, which 
provides analysing and predictions of flight path and 
identification of sensors which might detect the UAV soon. 
The second objective of the LASC system is the 
downstream 
air 
space 
regulation 
enforcement 
for 
unauthorized UAV. Therefore, the violation of the air space 
must be unveiled, which must trigger a threat and risk 
analysis to determine suitable reaction. Based on the 
classification of risks and the availability of interception 
capabilities in reach, the LASC decision support must 
provide human operators with suitable enforcement and 
interception solutions. As the interception is near always 
related to potential collateral risks [9], it always needs to be 
initiated and controlled by a human operator. Therefore, the 
operator needs access to the sensors (e.g., video/IR camera) 
of the LASC system to leverage assessment of the situation 
and to gain a reliable decision base. A usage of geo-
referenced situational awareness (e.g., showing locations of 
and distances to critical infrastructures in reach) facilitates 
the work of the operator considerably. All this needs to be 
integrated into the control centre of the LASC system to 
ensure a convenient use even in dangerous situations. 
The major challenge of the LASC interception operation 
is the avoidance of collateral damages. Military interception 
solutions for low-altitude flying objects (e.g., lasers, shells or 
rocket defence systems) are not acceptable in urban areas. 
The “soft” interception techniques (like communication 
based mission distortion and interruption) need to be 
researched and integrated into the LASC solution. Another 
challenge is real time ability. In case of an abuse, the UAV 
might take off near its destination reducing reaction time 
drastically down to seconds. Therefore, most LASC system 
functionalities must be automated by delivering alerts and 
decision support to the operator within few seconds. 
The common system design and major building blocks 
for a LASC system providing comprehensive monitoring, 
intelligence and interception functionalities are depicted in 
Figure 2.  
Smart Sensor Node
Sensor device
Motion control
Processing Unit
Storage
TCP/IP based 
unified communication
Smart Interception Node 
Sensor device
Motion control
Processing Unit
Counter-measure 
device
TCP/IP based 
unified communication
TCP/IP based Unfied Communication Layer (Wired-Ethernet, WiFi, 3G/4G)
LASC Administration
LASC Intelligence
LASC Operation
System Monitoring 
Client
Analytics Store
Configuration 
Workbench
TCP/IP based 
unified communication
Automated Incident 
Management
Joint Air Picture
Data Fusion & Analytics
Shared Coalition 
Data Base
Flight Operation 
Register
Rule Engine & 
Decision Support
Command & Control Centre (C3)
Mobile App for Tablets/SmartPhones
(Mobile)
LASC Planning 
Workbench 
Remote 
Control
Reconnaissance
by sensors 
Situational Awareness by
 interactive maps
Maps & Alerts
Communcation
Field devices
...
Figure 2. System concept with major building blocks 
A field device of the LASC system contains the 
distributed network of smart sensor and interception nodes. 
The appropriate choice of the technology used by the nodes 
is strongly depending on the application and the 
environmental constraints (free space and the line of sight, 
electromagnetic or acoustic disturbances, realistic estimation 
of possible hazards, etc.). So deploying various sensors and 
interception technologies in a multimodal approach must be 
considered because different technologies can cooperate and 
extend their capabilities among each other during a parallel 
operation. 
Smart sensor nodes are distributed on appropriate places 
across the observed area and equipped with data storage and 
processing units to pre-process sensor raw data using specific 
algorithms and embedded system technology. This will 
decrease the data volume to be transmitted to a ground 
station by far, as only derived data in case of an event needs 
to be transmitted. The derived information, analyzed data 
and detected events are provided via web services hosted in 
the sensor node and end-to-end secured (SSL, VPN) TCP/IP 
based communication channels. In addition, remote control 
and diagnose of components of each smart node is also 
enabled through the web services. 
Smart interception nodes are also distributed across the 
observed area, placed stationary on buildings, infrastructures, 
balloons or mobile on vehicles (cars, UAVs, etc.) to provide 
appropriate interception capabilities. The interception nodes 
are based normally on the same subcomponents as the sensor 
nodes except that the data storage is replaced by a counter 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

measure device. The sensor device, deployed in the 
interception node, in conjunction with a processing unit will 
enable automatic interception process preparation and 
support – it is especially important by multiple simultaneous 
threats. 
Beside the field devices, the LASC system will contain 
three further major building blocks covering the domains 
administration, intelligence and operation.  
The LASC administration block covers all kind of tools 
to configure, monitor and maintain the LASC system 
infrastructure and its components. It uses automated system 
monitoring and observation clients, which enable the survey 
of the operational state of sensor and interception nodes, 
allow load balancing of the intelligence platform and support 
the configuration of the intelligence itself (e.g., setup of 
analytics chains). Another important part of the LASC 
administration is the planning workbench, which provides 
simulation-based design support for arranging the sensor- 
and interception node network across a defined area in order 
to achieve a certain degree of air surveillance performance.  
The LASC intelligence is the core block of the entire 
system. Its major task is the fusion of information from the 
sensor network and appropriate fast data analytics and 
complex event processing to provide a real time joint air 
picture (JAP) of the observed area. The JAP uses the 
georeferenced visualisation of all detected and tracked UAVs 
including all restricted and/or prohibited air areas. Utilizing a 
coalition shared database and the flight operation register, 
the LASC tries to identify a detected UAV automatically. If 
this fails, the LASC intelligence classifies the UAV and 
provides all available information (first of all video streams) 
for manual identification by a human operator using decision 
support tools. Once an air space violation is unveiled, an 
automated incident management provides available options 
for the operator to react appropriately to the incident. This 
incident manager utilizes a rule engine including pre-defined 
decision trees, risk assessments and potentially applicable 
counter measure nodes in reach. Once the LASC intelligence 
platform is deployed on virtualized server infrastructure, its 
service-orientated architecture provides enough performance 
to handle big amount of sensors (>1000), process their data 
in real time and provide all kind of information to multiple 
authorized operators. 
The last building block presents the operation clients of 
the LASC system, which can be distinguished into stationary 
or deployable command and control centres (C3) and mobile 
apps supporting mobile access to the LASC intelligence 
information system. It can be developed, e.g., based on 
AMFIS ground control station [10]. All clients are 
connecting to the LASC intelligence platform via secured 
end-to-end 
encrypted 
(VPN, 
SSL) 
TCP/IP 
based 
communication channels and utilize its web service 
provision to access data and control. Once an incident is 
detected, alerts are shown or sent to operator and other 
responsible persons. The operator can request not only 
decision support from the LASC intelligence, but also real 
time video streams from optical sensors in the reach. All 
counter measure activities can be initiated and controlled by 
the C3 client software and are sent via the LASC intelligence 
control proxy to the selected interception node. 
For mobile solutions, client apps running on smart 
phones and tablets are provided to inform responsible 
persons about incidents in the near environment and/or 
transmit instruction for further action. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The LASC system concept includes multi-sensor 
detection, localization, tracking and classification or 
identification of small UAVs and their payloads integrated in 
a scalable distributed system. LASC system provides fast 
interactive threat and risk assessment as well as selection 
possibilities for adequate counter measures supported by a 
user-friendly interface. 
The scalable architecture of the distributed LASC system 
has open interfaces wherever it is possible and includes data 
analysis and fusion modules, coalition shared database as 
well as interactive visualization and decision support 
components. The LASC system must be integrated into 
conventional air traffic control to prevent possible incidents 
because of intersecting air spaces. 
In the next steps, major components of LASC as well as 
the system framework will be developed. 
REFERENCES  
 
[1] J. Vasagar. Finanical Time. DHL to use ‘paracelcopter’ 
drones 
for 
delivery. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c00bd8e2-44ad-11e4-bce8-
00144feabdc0.html#axzz3RtVgsK6d 2014.09  
[2] Wikipedia. Amazon Prime Air. [Online]. Available from: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Prime_Air 2013.12 
[3] P. Molina, et. al., ”Drones to the Rescue,” InsideGNSS 
Journal, pp. 37-47, July 2012. 
[4] F. Lardinois. FAA proposed rules to open sky to some 
commercial 
drones. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://techcrunch.com/2015/02/15/proposed-faa-rules-will-
open-the-sky-for-some-commercial-drones-but-delivery-
drones-remain-grounded 2015.02 
[5] Federal Aviation Administration. Overview of small UAS 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/rulemaking/media/02
1515_suas_summary.pdf. 2015.02 
[6] DeDrone. Multi-Sensor Drone Warning System. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.dedrone.com/en/dronetracker/drone-detection-
hardware 2015 
[7] Fraunhofer IOSB. Experimental setup for object recognition 
and 
tracking. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.iosb.fraunhofer.de/servlet/is/24431/ 2015.10 
[8] DDC LLC. The Basic Drone Detection System. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ddcountermeasures.com/products.html 2015.05 
[9] I. 
Tchouchenkov, 
F. 
Segor 
and 
R. 
Schönbein, 
“Einsatzmöglichkeiten und Abwehr kleiner unbemannter 
Fluggeräte,” POLIZEI-heute, 2012, Nr. 3, pp. 74-79. 
[10] A. Bürkle, F. Segor, M. Kollmann, R. Schönbein, “Universal 
Ground Control Station for Heterogeneous Sensors,” In 
Journal On Advances in Telecommunications, IARIA, 2011, 
Volume 3, Numbers 3 & 4, pp. 152–161. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

