Improved Performance of a Microstrip Antenna Array  
Using a tree structure patch fed by electromagnetic coupling  
 
Tomader Mazri  
The signals, systems and components laboratory  
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Fez, Morocco  
Tomader20@gmail.com  
 Fatima Riouch  
The microwave laboratory  
 National Institute of Posts and Telecommunications 
Rabat, Morocco  
riouch@inpt.ac.ma 
 
Najiba El Amrani  El Idrissi  
The signals, systems and components laboratory  
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Fez, Morocco  
elamrani.naj@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of this investigation is to improve the 
performance of a microstrip antenna array using a tree structure 
patch supplied by electromagnetic coupling. This array is 
considered as a first step to design an adaptive microstrip antenna 
for UMTS use. The patch distribution structure used in this 
experiment allowed a great improvement of gain, directivity as well 
as the adaptation level of the studied array. The following work was 
done between the signals, systems and components laboratory of 
FST-Fez and the microwave laboratory of the National Institute of 
Posts and Telecommunications. 
Keywords—microstrip 
antenna 
array; 
electromagnetic 
coupling; adaptive microstrip antenna; tree patch distribution 
structure. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The UMTS (Universal Mobile Telecommunications 
System) is the cellular standard for mobile telecommunication 
systems of the third generation [1]. It has been adopted 
worldwide by 1998 but its service has been delayed due to the 
implementation costs. 
Its special feature is the simultaneous transmission of voice 
and data with higher rates than those permitted by previous 
generations. 
The development of these systems requires technological 
advances in electronic components, computer software, coding 
techniques and antennas. 
Indeed, the antenna is one of the key points of wireless 
network since it represents the last link in the chain that allows 
emission, transmission and reception of the signal and 
therefore the information contained in it [1]. 
The ultimate goal of this work is designing an adaptive 
microstrip 
antenna 
for 
base 
stations 
of 
UMTS 
telecommunication networks, to improve the cover.  
To reach this purpose, the parameters of our antenna 
(resonant-frequency, geometry and bandwidth) will be 
considered for an UMTS application.  
The circuit will be made with FR4, a commonly used 
material for the manufacture of printed circuit with the 
following characteristics (thickness: 1.6 mm εr: 4.5 and tgδ: 
0.02). 
II. 
FEEDING BY ELECTROMAGNETIC COUPLING 
In Section 2, we will introduce the electromagnetic 
coupling between radiating elements in a printed antenna array, 
and we will discuss the different types of this coupling. 
A. Introduction to electromagnetic coupling between 
radiating elements 
 The electromagnetic interferences between radiating 
elements in a printed antenna array, is expressed by the 
modification of the surface currents distribution. This 
phenomenon, called coupling, depends on the antenna type and 
the distance between its elements. The coupling between two 
printed periodical antennas has a great importance in the design 
of antennas arrays, because it may cause a change in the 
radiation pattern. 
The current flowing in each antenna induces currents in the 
all other antennas, whatever they are supplied or not. 
The mutual coupling is due to the simultaneous effects of 
radiation in free space and the propagation of surface waves. 
This is an important criterion which should be considered 
while calculating array characteristics. 
The theoretical calculation of mutual coupling depends on 
the antenna type and the distance between its elements. 
Jedlicka and Carver have studied experimentally the effect of 
coupling between patch antennas for circular and rectangular 
geometries [2]. Different methods have been presented to 
calculate the coupling coefficient between microstrip antennas. 
44
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
They were proposed by various authors such as Sindora, 
Pénard, Pozar, et al. [3]. 
B.  Coupling in the E plan and the H plan 
The radiation patterns are usually represented in two 
orthogonal planes "E plane and H plane", in relation to the 
principal direction: 
- E Plan: location of space points where the radiated electric 
field is contained in this plan. 
- H   Plan: location of space points where the radiated 
magnetic field is contained in this plan. 
 
Furthermore, two coupling types are distinguished: 
- Horizontal coupling or coupling in the E plan: This means 
coupling between two elements in the same substrate, along the 
x direction with a Se coupling separation. All the W widths of 
the patches (in the Y direction) have the same size. 
- Vertical coupling or coupling in the H plan, along the y 
direction with a Sh coupling separation. The L lengths of 
patches (in the direction of x) are identical. 
III. 
TREE STRUCTURE AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE ARRAY 
PERFORMANCES 
The aim of this work is to improve the performances of a 
microstrip antenna array of a circular shape by choosing a tree 
patch distribution structure. To illustrate the improvement 
through the comparison of findings, we will present first the 
basic array results. 
The simulation will be performed using the ADS tool 
“Advanced Design System”. The substrate used for this 
simulation is FR4 for a resonant frequency of 2GHz. 
A. The studied array 
Our studied array “Fig. 2” consists of eight circular patches 
supplied by microstrip lines and adapted using coplanar 
notches [4]. 
The connecting lines should be sized to be adapted to 50 
Ohms at the input of the array. Wilkinson dividers were 
integrated in order to obtain an impedance of 100 Ohm at the 
entrance of the patches [5]. 
 
 
Figure 2.   Microstrip array antenna with eight elements circular. 
The values of the different parts of the patch and the 
connecting lines are: 
a = 20.70mm.  
b = 34.00mm. 
c = 15.40mm. 
w =  1.25mm.  
s =   4.40mm. 
The adaptation quality of an antenna is defined by giving 
either its characteristic impedance (usually 50 ohms) or its 
reflection coefficient; Figure 3 shows its value for our array of 
eight patches at 2 GHz. 
 
 
Figure 3.   Reflection coefficient of the microstrip array antenna with eight 
circular elements (GHz). 
The simulation results show an adaptation coefficient of -12 
dB. Concerning the array characteristics, we can see 9dB 
directivity, a gain of 8dB and an effective angle of 86 degrees 
 
Figure 1.    Electromagnetic  coupling between patches antennas in the E 
plane and H. 
45
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
“Fig. 4”. This array allows a bandwidth of 90 MHz. It also 
presents an electromagnetic coupling in the H plane. 
 
 
Figure 4.   Characteristics of the microstrip antenna array with eight elements 
circular. 
B. The array with a tree structure 
We have been inspired for this structure by YAGUI-UDA 
antenna. The eight patches supplied by microstrip lines 
represent the radiator element, and the patches supplied by 
electromagnetic coupling represent the director element of the 
antenna. 
In this simulation our array has been developed by 
introducing circular patches arranged in a tree structure and 
supplied by electromagnetic coupling “Fig. 5”. This array 
presents an electromagnetic coupling in the E and H planes. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Microstrip antenna arrays with a tree structure.  
For this structure, the simulation results give an adaptation 
coefficient of -15 dB “Fig. 6”, and the array is characterized by 
a directivity of 12 dB, a gain of 11.4dB and an effective angle 
of 46 degrees “Fig. 7”. This array allows a bandwidth of 140 
MHz. 
 
Figure 6.  Reflection coefficient of microstrip antenna arrays with tree 
structure. 
 
Figure 7.   Characteristics of the  microstrip antenna array with a tree 
structure. 
The radiation pattern is given by the Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8.   Radiation pattern of the antenna array with a tree structure. 
46
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
Our network consists of a linear distribution of patches 
where the appearance of side lobes that have the same level. If 
these lobes hamper the application, the solution is simply to 
apply a law of amplitude weighting to reduce their levels. We 
also note that we have a directive main lobe and this is 
consistent with the results given by the computer (Figure 7). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
The experiments performed until now have allowed an 
improvement of performances of our microstrip array antenna 
by using a tree structure patch supplied by an electromagnetic 
coupling. The simulation results show an adaptation coefficient 
of -15 dB, and the array is characterized by a directivity of 
12dB, a gain of 11.4dB and an effective angle of 46 degree. 
This network will form the basic network of our application; 
more precisely it will be the pointing network of users. Indeed 
it will be developed in order to have the opportunity to change 
its angle depending on demand. So as a perspective, we will 
integrate the intelligent function of our network and improving 
the bandwidth to meet the need for a UMTS application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Bencheikh, H.Griguer, A. Hazaoud, A. Najid, and P.Muhlethaler ' 
studies parametric and experimental of the Bi-bandpatch antennas with 
filter for  the basic stations needs’, TELECOM and JFMMA 2005, pp. 
165-169.  Rabat,  Morocco 23 to 25 March 2005. 
[2] 
L. Chouti ‘Contribution to the study of rectangular printed antennas dual 
band and multi band considering the coupling effect 'thesis argued in 
2009. University Mentouri-Constantine, Faculty of Science Department 
of Electronic Engineering. 
[3] 
P. R. Haddad and D. M. Posard "Anomalous mutual coupling between 
microstrip antennas", IEEE Transactions on Antennas and Propagations, 
Vol. 42, N°. 11, pp. 1545-1549, November 1994. 
[4] 
T. Mazri, N. El Amrani, F. Riouch, M. Drissi , and E. Marzorf 
‘Adaptation Improvement of a circular microstrip antenna by using 
notches‘ TELECOM and JFMMA 2009, pp. 65-66. Agadir, Morocco 12 
to 14 March 2009. 
[5] 
T. Mazri, N. El Amrani, and F. Riouch ‘Simulation of a microstrip 
antenna  for adaptive  array use UMTS’OPTIQUE 2010, pp. 122-125. 
Tangier, Morocco 21 to 23 April 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

