Autonomous Disaster Information System for Local Residents 
A Preparation to the Earthquake Disaster of the Metropolitan Area 
 
Yuichi Takahashi 
System Development Group 
foreach ltd.  
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: yt@4each.biz 
Sakae Yamamoto 
Department of Management Science 
Tokyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: sakae@ms.kagu.tus.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— It has been pointed out that when people lack the 
information needed in the event of a disaster, such as a 
disastrous earthquake, this could lead to social chaos, 
including unwanted rumors and outrages, or could disrupt 
rescue and relief activities. In Japan, by law in principle, self-
help or mutual assistance is required immediately after a 
disaster, and local residents are required to make judgments 
for action on their own. In our prior study, we established and 
evaluated a service infrastructure with an autonomous wireless 
network, aiming at providing services to collect and deliver 
disaster information, which will be required by local residents. 
The system consists of many small sub systems. These sub 
systems are robust for collecting disaster information because 
they are small and simple. An authorized user can register 
information using one of the sub systems that is working 
correctly. Asynchronously, they search another sub system via 
wireless network, and then they communicate to each other in 
order to exchange information they have. As a result, the 
information will be shared within a wide area by those 
processes like a bucket brigade. In this study, we improved and 
extended the system so that it may meet more nearly actually. 
Keywords-earthquake; 
disaster 
victims; 
distributed 
autonomous system; wireless network 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the event of a disaster, such as a disastrous earthquake, 
information provision is effective in preventing chaos at the 
scene. Therefore, timely and accurate information collection 
and delivery services are essential [3][4]. 
In Japan, by law in principle, self-help or mutual 
assistance is required immediately after a disaster, and local 
residents are required to make judgments for action on their 
own. Although disaster information systems are gradually 
being organized at the municipal level, actual emergency 
evacuation areas and essential information for local citizens 
are still not sufficiently ready for provision at this stage [5]. 
These services allow prompt rescue and relief activities and 
appropriate information delivery to local residents. Thus, it is 
urgent to establish a system to enable these services. The 
systems proposed so far are ones with Internet or mobile 
phone connections or with ad-hoc wireless LAN networks 
[6][7].  We call such systems communication channel 
dependent systems, which require communication channels 
or establish communication channels between clients and 
servers via an ad-hoc network. From the perspective of an 
information 
service, 
such 
systems 
that 
accumulate 
information in PDAs and send it via an ad-hoc network when 
a communication channel is established are also regarded as 
communication channel dependent systems. 
There are two issues of concern regarding this system: 1) 
the system is not available until a communication channel is 
established, and 2) as users access the server to gain 
information, 
the 
intense 
access 
may 
lower 
server 
performance or cause communication channel congestion. In 
prior study, we would like to propose an approach to resolve 
these issues. As it is difficult to generalize the situations of 
earthquake disasters, we set the following assumptions: (a) 
assuming a strong earthquake of approximate magnitude 7 in 
a residential area, (b) all the lifelines including electricity and 
communication channels stopped functioning, (c) lines for 
land phones and mobiles are congested and not working, and 
(d) the proposed system (hereafter called “the system”) can 
be preliminarily placed. 
II. 
METHOD 
In order to resolve the above issues, we placed servers, 
which store information, closed to users in prior study [1][2]. 
By doing this, the system can run without a communication 
channel established, and the service can be continuously 
provided even with a narrow bandwidth. Since disaster 
information system users, such as local residents, shelter 
authorities, rescue and relief crews, and municipal 
employees are diverse and geographically dispersed, 
multiple servers are required to meet the condition in which 
servers must be placed close to users. Each server must hold 
information and be synchronized with each other. Also, they 
must independently run, communicate with each other, and 
dynamically detect others in case some are damaged in a 
disaster.  
The service infrastructure consists of many small sub-
systems. Each of these systems independently provides 
information collection and delivery services. Also, these 
sub-systems can autonomously work together with other 
sub-systems to exchange information. By appropriately 
allocating sub-systems within a region, regional information 
is continuously shared, which can solve the issue of 
information shortages in a disaster. We adopted general 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

consumer hardware products that are supposed to work 
approximately 72 hours with batteries. Though each 
hardware product itself is not robust, they are all 
independent so even if some of them are damaged, they do 
not affect others. Also, as it is allowed to dynamically add 
sub-systems, damaged ones can be easily replaced to 
immediately recover the entire service. 
The network configuration of this system is illustrated in 
Figure 1. The system is formed by a group of small servers 
(hereafter called nodes) with server abilities and dynamic 
communication functions. Each node can function as a web 
server and allows clients (e.g. PCs and PDA) to connect to 
register or browse information. Nodes also detect others 
within the communication range to synchronize information. 
With these functions, the system can still work as an 
integrated unit even when part of the hardware is damaged 
in a disaster. Figure 2 illustrates the hardware configuration 
of the nodes. We selected only devices that can function 
approximately 72 hours with either dry-cell or rechargeable 
batteries. In addition, dedicated PCs can be equipped with 
server functions for information entries. This means that 
users can initiate the registration of information even if no 
communication channels are established. 
However, in previous studies, there were still some issues 
such as: 
a) The synchronization of the information was often 
delayed, 
b) The distance between nodes with a vertical interval 
which can be communicated is short. 
This study improves the following points: 
a) Improvement of the node detection logic and the 
information synchronizing logic, 
b)  Using two types (vertical no directivity and 
horizontal directivity, wide directivity) of anntena in 
order to be fit to our target area. 
 
sconce
sconce
sconce
sconce
sconce
evacuation center
relay node
relay node
relay node
relay node
relay node
evacuation center
Figure 1  Whole image of the system: all nodes search another sub system, and then they communicate to each other in 
order to exchange information they had. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

III. 
RESULT 
By 
the 
first 
improvement, 
the 
delay 
in 
the 
synchronization of the information was decreased.  
A. Node Detection Method 
Each node executes the following procedures by a timer 
process in every minute. 
1. The node scans APs (: Access Points) in range, and 
makes a list of available APs. Then the node selects a 
suitable AP (: Access Point) using an ESSID filter 
pattern and the connection history list. 
2. The node connects to the selected AP. Then a server 
connected to the AP via Ethernet, gives IP address to 
the Wi-Fi client of the node (Figure 3). 
3. The node calculates the IP address of the server from 
the given address of Wi-Fi client. Then the node 
executes synchronization program with the server. 
4. The node disconnects from the AP, after the 
synchronization program finished. 
 
Notebook PC
w/ WiFi Client
WiFi Access Point
w/ Anntena
(no horizontal directivity)
Small Server
w/ WiFi Client
WiFi Access Point
w/ Anntena
(wide directivity)
CPU : Intel Atom D510 (1.66GHz)
Memory : DDR2-2GB
SSD : 30GB
Micro SD 2GB (for system)
Node Type A
Node Type B
Figure 2  Elements of the nodes 
Node2
Node1
Access 
Point
Small 
Server
DHCP
Server
DHCP
Client
Application
Server
Log
Data
Wi-Fi
Client
192.168.2.X
Ethernet
192.168.1.1/24
Access 
Point
Small 
Server
DHCP
Server
DHCP
Client
Application
Server
Log
Data
Wi-Fi
Client
192.168.X.X
Ethernet
192.168.2.1/24
Network of Node2
Figure 3 Network between the nodes  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

B. Data Synchronization Method 
Applications on the server such as registration of 
someone’s safety, update the database table using special 
driver. The driver updates both of data and log tables. The 
log table contains node id, sequence number, operation type 
(create/update/delete), table name, update time and the data. 
Synchronization process is a client server model. The client 
makes list of the holding data as array of the range of the 
sequence numbers and the node name. Then the client sends 
the list to the server. The server finds and sends back the 
data that the client doesn’t have. The server executes same 
process as the client, if the list sent by the client contains 
entries the server doesn’t hold. While this process is 
executing, the client becomes a server.  
By the second improvement, the system will become the 
form of being suitable for use in actual evacuation areas. 
Moreover, in a simulation, it carries out as a result for the 
layout planning of nodes, by using three-dimensional 
(instead of two-dimensional) geography data and taking the 
characteristic of antennas (Figure 4) into consideration. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
By those improvements, the system will be more 
practical. At present, the functions are well working in the 
field. However, only four nodes were evaluated at actual 
evacuation area. In order to deploy the system for real 
disaster, evaluations are needed with more nodes at wider 
actual evacuation area. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Takahashi, D. Kobayashi, S. Yamamoto, “Disaster 
Information 
Collecting/Providing 
Service 
for 
Local 
Residents”, In Proceedings of the 1st international conference 
on Human interface and the management of information: 
interacting with information - Volume Part II (HCII'11), 
Gavriel Salvendy and Michael J. Smith (Eds.), Vol. Part II. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp.411-418.  
[2] Y. Takahashi, D. Kobayashi, S. Yamamoto. “A Development 
of Information System for Disaster Victims with Autonomous 
Wireless Network”. In Proceedings of the Symposium on 
Human Interface 2009 on Human Interface and the 
Management of Information. Information and Interaction. Part 
II: Held as part of HCI International 2009, Gavriel Salvendy 
and Michael J. Smith (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 855-864. 
[3] O. Hiroi, et.al, Disaster information and social psychology, 
Hokuju Shuppan, Tokyo, 2004, p.177 
[4] O. 
Hiroi, 
et 
al, 
Hanshin-Awaji 
(Kobe) 
Earthquake 
investigation report in 1995-1, Institute of Socio-Information 
and Communication Studies, the University of Tokyo, 1996 
[5] S. Yamamoto, The Providing Disaster Information Services in 
Ubiquitous Days, Journal of the Society of Instrument and 
Control Engineers, vol.47, no.2, 2008, pp.125-131 
[6] N. Fukuwa, H. Takai, J. Hida, Intercommunications system 
“AnSHIn-system” and mobile disaster information unit 
“AnSHIn-Kun”, AIJ J. Technol. Des. No.12, 2001, pp.227-
232 
[7] Y. Takahashi, Y. Owada, H. Okada, and K. Mase, “A wireless 
mesh network testbed in rural mountain areas,” The Second 
ACM International Workshop on Wireless Network Testbeds, 
Experimental Evaluation and Characterization, 2007, pp.91-
92 
Figure 4 Vertical no directivity and horizontal directivity, wide directivity 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

