Challenges in Functional Testing on the Way to Automated Driving
Steffen Wittel∗, Daniel Ulmer∗ and Oliver B¨uhler∗
∗Steinbeis Interagierende Systeme GmbH, Esslingen, Germany
Email: {steffen.wittel,daniel.ulmer,oliver.buehler}@interagierende-systeme.de
Abstract—The transition to automated driving poses a major
challenge for the automotive industry in the ﬁeld of functional
testing. In current vehicles, the automobile manufacturers are
not yet taking full responsibility for the driving maneuvers
automatically performed by the vehicles. This will change with
automated driving, which means the temporary or complete loss
of the human driver as a fallback level in trafﬁc situations that
cannot be handled by the vehicle software. During the automated
driving, the automobile manufacturers have the responsibility for
the vehicle behavior until the handover of the vehicle control to
the human driver. The handover requires a reasonable warning
period in which the automated driving is to be maintained.
Depending on the distraction, the human driver needs some time
to perceive the trafﬁc situation and to react appropriately. The
warning period will grow due to the increasing automation of
driving tasks, which allows the human driver to focus her or his
attention on non-driving activities and no longer on a permanent
monitoring for an immediate intervention in case of a system
malfunction. Extensive testing activities are therefore required
to verify the functionality and the safety of the vehicles. This
paper presents a systematic approach for the functional testing
of automated driving. Especially, the spectrum of possible trafﬁc
situations, which the vehicles might be getting into, and the test
process have been taken into account by the approach.
Keywords–Automated Driving; Automotive Testing; Functional
Testing; Test Process.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As published in [2], about 94 % of the road accidents
are caused by the human driver due to carelessness, wrong
decisions or incorrect performing of driving maneuvers. The
human driver is therefore the main cause of the majority of
all road accidents and thus offers the greatest potential to
improve the trafﬁc safety. Thereby, the driving automation
can contribute to the trafﬁc safety by relieving the human
driver or taking over partial or complete driving tasks for
the longitudinal and lateral control of the vehicle in as many
driving scenarios as possible.
The term ”automated driving” or ”autonomous driving” is
used in many different meanings. Several institutions, e.g., the
Germany Federal Highway Research Institute (BASt), the US
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA), the
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), as well as the German
Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA), have classiﬁed
the different levels of driving automation. In this paper, the
driving automation levels according to SAE J3016 [1] are used:
No Automation: The system does not take over the vehi-
cle control with the exception of short-term interventions of
emergency functions in critical trafﬁc situations. The human
driver is fully responsible for the vehicle.
Driver Assistance: The vehicle is controlled either in the
lateral or longitudinal direction by the system. The human
driver controls the remaining direction, while she or he has
to monitor the behavior of the vehicle and has to intervene
immediately in case of a critical situation.
Partial Automation: The system controls the longitudinal
and lateral direction. The human driver has to monitor the
behavior of the vehicle and has to intervene immediately in
case of a critical situation.
Conditional Automation: The vehicle control is done in the
longitudinal and lateral direction by the system. The human
driver has to react within a reasonable time after a warning by
the system.
High Automation: The system controls the longitudinal and
lateral direction, and has to handle all trafﬁc situations, even
if the human driver does not react appropriately.
Full Automation: The system has to handle all trafﬁc
situations.
With the increasing automation of the driving tasks, the
automobile manufacturers are taking over more and more
responsibility from the human driver and thus for the driving
maneuvers automatically performed by the vehicles as shown
in Table I. While the ﬁrst safety assistance systems, like
the Electronic Stability Control (ESC) [3] or the Antilock
Braking System (ABS) [3], only supported the driver to cope
with critical situations, the advanced driver assistance systems
that are nowadays on the market additionally provide comfort
functions for speciﬁc driving scenarios. But until now, the
automotive manufacturers were able to use the human driver as
a fallback level in a case where the system could not handle the
situation. With each step in the direction towards automated
TABLE I. OVERVIEW ABOUT THE DRIVING AUTOMATION LEVELS BASED ON SAE J3016 [1].
Name
Functions
Monitoring
Controlling
Fallback
Responsibility
No Automation
None
Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
Driver Assistance
Some
Human Driver
System / Human Driver
Human Driver
Human Driver
Partial Automation
Some
Human Driver
System
Human Driver
Human Driver
Conditional Automation
Some
System
System
Human Driver
Automobile Manufacturer / Human Driver
High Automation
Some
System
System
System
Automobile Manufacturer
Full Automation
All
System
System
System
Automobile Manufacturer
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

driving, the operating hours, as well as the time until the
takeover of the vehicle control, is increased and in consequence
the period of time for which the automotive manufacturers are
responsible for the vehicle.
Current testing activities do not adequately take into ac-
count the large number of different environmental conditions
and timing behaviors, which occur in the real road trafﬁc.
They are primarily used to test representative driving scenarios
previously selected by test methods. A dynamic variation of
the test scenarios is usually performed on rare occasions and
if only in narrow limits. But the reality shows that two test
drives carried out on different days between the same starting
point and destination can have signiﬁcant differences. They
differ in the number of road users and their driving behaviors.
Moreover, different weather conditions cause varieties in the
information provided by the sensors and the driveability of the
road. In both cases, the vehicle has to reach the destination
complying with the road trafﬁc regulations without endanger-
ing occupants or other road users.
The approach presented in this paper takes into account the
spectrum of possible trafﬁc situations the vehicles might be
getting into. Therefore, it proposes a prioritization during the
test execution by dividing the system behavior into a functional
and a temporal part. Moreover, it recommends an optimization
of the test process to overcome with the huge number of tests
cases expected for the testing of automated driving.
The following section shows the related work. Section
III evaluates the weaknesses of human drivers in the road
trafﬁc and shows how driving automation can play a part in
contributing to trafﬁc safety. Finally, Section IV presents the
challenges of the automobile manufacturers to ensure a safe
operation of automated driving.
II.
RELATED WORK
The national research project with the name ”PEGASUS”
[4], founded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Energy (BMWi) in conjunction with automotive companies,
suppliers, small and medium-sized companies and research
institutes from Germany, should provide standards for the
automated driving to close essential gaps in the ﬁeld of testing
and the release of vehicles. Among others, the research project
should answer the questions, which requirements must meet
self-driving vehicles, how can the safety and reliability of these
systems be demonstrated and what role does the human factor
play in the future. As published by the project [4], new and
uniform quality standards and methods are necessary for the
accreditation of automated driving functions. The project goal
is to establish generally accepted quality criteria, tools and
methods. Moreover, scenarios and situations shall be provided
for the release of automated driving functions, as well as
procedures for the testing. The main objectives of the project
are:
a)
Deﬁnition of a common approach in the testing of
automated vehicle systems in the simulation, at test
benches and in real-world environments
b)
Development of a continuous and ﬂexible tool chain
for the testing of automated driving
c)
Integration of the tests in the development process at
an early stage
d)
Creation of a test method for automated driving
features across manufactures
While so far the complexity and performance of the vehicle
were limited by the hardware, the embedded software, as well
as the development and test process, now seem to be the
limiting factors as elaborate in [5]. The report predicts that
the distribution of the functionality over several components
leads to a level of testing beyond the economical and temporal
feasible possibilities. Thus, the authors see the testing of such
systems, which have to work in all possible trafﬁc situations,
as one of the highest technical hurdles. The report shows that
there is a lack of metrics, which represent the system and allow
a comparison between different systems.
According to [6], driving automation can bypass current
risks, but can also lead to new risks, which do not exist so
far. The paper shows that ”demonstrating safety of automated
driving in advance of introduction is nearly impossible”.
Thereby, they illustrate that the necessary number of kilometers
to demonstrate the safety of a system cannot be provided
economically by real test vehicles due to the complexity of
the possible trafﬁc situations. The statement is based, among
others, on the assumptions that the number of kilometers
cannot be driven in the available time for testing and that
the testing must be repeated after changes in the software or
hardware.
III.
ROAD ACCIDENTS
Over the years, the number of road accidents rose with
the increasing number of road users in Germany as shown in
Figure 1. But this did not lead to an increase in the number
of injured or dead people in road accidents. The technical
progress in passive and active safety systems of vehicles
signiﬁcantly contributed to the mitigation of the road accidents
Figure 1. Statistic about road accidents in Germany over a period of 50
years [7].
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

and personal injuries. Safety systems, which already belong
to the standard equipment of almost all new vehicles on the
market, prevent road accidents or reduce their impact. Thereby,
driving automation helps to eliminate weaknesses of human
drivers by ﬁnding appropriate reactions in critical situations.
As explained in Section I, the human driver is the main
cause of the majority of road accidents. The road accidents
statistic [7] shows mistakes of human drivers in Germany,
which led to road accidents that were reported to the police.
These are mainly the accidents with serious consequences.
Minor road accidents with material damages only or minor
injuries are not covered by the statistic, because they are
usually not reported to the police. A list of common areas in
which mistakes made by an improper driving of human drivers
can be categorized, is presented in the following as provided
by the Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany:
a)
Use of the road
b)
Speed
c)
Distance
d)
Overtaking
e)
Driving past
f)
Driving side by side
g)
Priority, precedence
h)
Turning, U-turn, reversing, entering the ﬂow of trafﬁc,
starting off the edge of the road
i)
Improper behavior towards pedestrians
j)
Stationary vehicles, safety measures
k)
Failure to observe lighting regulations
The list shows the complexity of road trafﬁc and the potential
mistakes of a human driver. In addition to the human driver,
other road users are usually in the surroundings and their
misbehavior must be taken into account as well. According
to [8], driving in a dynamic environment is subject to a
variety of cognitive demands of the human driver. The human
driver has to correctly perceive relevant objects and events,
interpret them, and derive his or her actions from them. It
is also necessary to recognize new circumstances and make
appropriate adjustments well enough in advance.
When looking at the road accident statistic of Germany as
visualized in Figure 2, it is noticeable that the risk potential
varies according to the street location. Within villages or
towns, road accidents occur due to the accumulation of road
users or confusing trafﬁc situations. There are a lot of different
reasons for road accidents in urban environments, which can
be seen at the large number of road accidents (14.5 %) that
could not be assigned to one of the major causes. In non-urban
environments, there are ﬁrst focus areas that are the result of
the increased velocity in comparison with urban environments.
With more than 30 percent of all road accidents in non-urban
environments, leaving the carriageway is the most common
reason. On freeways, the human driver is confronted with a
simpler road characteristic, which limits the number of causes
for road accidents. Almost half of all road accidents on the
freeway are rear-end collisions.
The number of road facilities and seriously injured people
in urban environments (14.5 %) represent in total a lower per-
centage than in non-urban environments (25.7 %) or freeways
(19.1 %) as illustrated in Figure 3. But the absolute values
show that most of the people are seriously injured or even
killed in towns and villages. A majority of them are pedes-
trians or cyclists, who hardly have any protection to mitigate
the consequences of the road accidents. On freeways, which
represents only a small percent of the entire road network of
Germany, road accidents with injured persons occur relatively
often in relation to urban and non-urban environments in spite
of simpler road characteristics. This can, however, be explained
by the high usage of freeways, which is for Germany about
one third of all kilometers driven.
IV.
CHALLENGES
For current advanced driver assistance systems available on
the market, the automobile manufacturers are not yet taking
full responsibility for the driving maneuvers automatically
performed by the vehicles. This also applies to emergency
functions like the Collision Mitigation System, which are
usually to intervene only in case of critical situations. The
interventions of the emergency functions are limited in time
and thus their effects on the moving vehicle are also limited.
During the usage of the comfort functions, the human driver
Figure 2. Summary about road accidents in Germany in 2015 [7] separated by the street location: a) urban environments b) non-urban environments c)
freeways.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

Figure 3. Summary about personal injuries caused by road accidents in Germany in 2015 [7] separated by the street location: a) urban environments b)
non-urban environments c) freeways.
has to monitor the vehicle and to immediately take over the
vehicle control in case of an unexpected system behavior. In
the event of damage, she or he is fully responsible and not
the automobile manufacture. Extensive test activities are per-
formed, particularly in the premium segment, at test benches
and with test vehicles to make sure that the human driver is left
out as often as possible. Thereby, a balance between safety and
availability must be found by the automobile manufactures.
With automated driving, the automobile manufacturers are
responsible as soon as they allow the human driver to be
distracted towards the environmental conditions. Especially,
the period of time until the human driver has taken over needs
a closer look. Within this period of time, automated driving
has to be maintained by the system. This means, e.g., that a
takeover just before a collision, in which the driver has no
possibility to avoid the collision, is not a suitable measure for
handing over the vehicle control. Depending on the degree of
distraction and the complexity of the current trafﬁc situation,
the necessary time until the takeover differs. In addition,
characteristics of the human driver, e.g., the age and the mental
state, play an essential role in the time required for the takeover
of the vehicle control. The automobile manufacturers must
assume that an appropriate time, which is expected to be in
the double-digit seconds range [9], will be required after the
notiﬁcation.
The degradation of the functionality in case of automated
driving is built on the assumption that the system knows
its state and its operating limit at all times. On the basis
of the current system state and the exact characteristic of
the operating limit [10], the system can decide when and
how it comes into a safe state in the event of a fault. A
certain tolerance between the operating limit and the actually
used limit for the degradation ensures thereby the robustness
of the system, even if there are deviations due to certain
tolerances of individual components. But in practice, it is
difﬁcult to determine any operating limit in advance for all
trafﬁc situations and to specify procedures to a safe system
state that do not endanger the passengers or other road users.
Moreover, the system has to predict its state to have enough
time to react appropriately to a trafﬁc situation that may only
happen because of changes of the environmental conditions.
The previous sections argue that automated driving has the
potential to save lives, which requires a correct operation of
the system at all times and in any trafﬁc situation without
an immediate available human fallback level. State of the art
test methods [11][12] are based on the approach that a certain
selection of the system input represents the complete input
range. Examples of such test methods are the Boundary Value
Analysis, Equivalence Class Analysis and the Classiﬁcation
Tree Analysis. These approaches on the system input can
reduce the number of tests tremendously. To apply such an
approach, it is necessary that the test method divides the system
input into classes in which the test object is expected to show
the same response independently of the value taken out of the
class. However, the classes are usually derived from the system
requirements. Both, the requirement process and the derivation
of the classes are human tasks and are therefore error-prone. In
complex implementations with a large number of parameters,
there might be branches implemented, which cannot be seen
in the requirements. Even with systematic testing, it is sure
that not every input pattern is tested, which can results in
a misconduct of the system. As a worst case scenario, this
misconduct can lead to a road accident, if it is either not
compensated by the system itself or recognized and corrected
by the human driver. Since the human driver is assumed to be
distracted, the system either has to avoid such trafﬁc situations
or has to be able to cope with them, if they are in the period
of time before the vehicle control is taken over.
According to [13], the test aim is transformed into an
optimization problem in which the input of the test object
creates the so called search space. The search space is a
numeric representation for the possible stimulations that can
be applied to the test object to obtain a response. For the
obtaining of a speciﬁc system response, it is necessary to
stimulate the system with the corresponding input pattern from
the search space. The other way round, a speciﬁc input pattern
from the search space causes a speciﬁc response of the system.
Since automated driving algorithms are time variant, it is not
sufﬁcient to test only static input patterns, but also variations
of the test scenarios that differ over the time. Changes in
the timing of the input sequence can affect the system, e.g.,
feedback control loops. The same input sequence with a
different timing might lead to a different response of the
system. For this reason, it is proposed that the search space
shall be divided into the following two parts:
a)
Functional behavior
b)
Temporal behavior
The consideration of the temporal behavior adds another
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

dimension to the functional system input many times over.
However, the proposed separation between the functional and
the temporal behavior allows a prioritization during the test
execution. Thus, it is possible to test the functional behavior
of the system at ﬁrst followed by the testing of the temporal
behavior. Especially, the temporal behavior is important for
systems that are time-variant or have memories as explained
in [14]. For this kind of systems, the times, e.g., at which a
vehicle performs a speciﬁc action, are crucial factors.
Given the expected number of tests cases derived from the
system input, a manual creation of the test cases is unfeasible.
Common sense is that test case generators must be used for
the test creation. The usage of test case generators multiplies
the number of test cases, but not necessarily increases the
quality of the tests or the covered search space. Generated
test cases, which are redundant or outside the operating limit
of the system, do not contribute to the improvement of the
system. Hence, test case generators shall be optimized to focus
on the relevant parts of the test object. Having said that, from
a coverage point of view, many test cases are needed. It is to
be stated that an execution of these test cases is only feasible,
if the test execution is fully automated. This requirement is
valid to both test generation and test execution. In contrast to
today’s available test case generators, which mostly leave the
speciﬁcation of the expected system response to the testers,
they must be able to provide the system response based on
the generated stimulation even for complex systems. But also
the handling of the test execution takes a lot of time, if
the allocation of the test cases to the test resources is not
automated. A huge number of generated test cases require
the corresponding amount of test resources, which can be
optimized without human interaction. In summary, it can be
said that the usage of test case generators leads to the following
requirements:
a)
Approaches to effectively use the test case generators
for the automated driving domain
b)
Test resources that are fully automated to increase the
throughput
c)
Scalable test resources to cope with the number of
generated test cases
d)
Test case generators that also provide the expected
system behavior for the evaluation
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Already today, automation facilitates the driving and helps
to reduce or even eliminate risks caused by human drivers.
In contrast to emergency functions, which only intervene in
critical trafﬁc situations for a short period of time, the latest
comfort functions temporarily take over the lateral and lon-
gitudinal control of the vehicle for speciﬁc driving scenarios.
However, the human driver has to monitor the vehicle during
the whole time to be immediately available as a fallback level
in case of a system malfunction. The responsibility for the
vehicle and possible damages lies with the human driver. With
further steps in the direction of automated driving, the automo-
bile manufacturers will have to assume the responsibility for
the driving maneuvers automatically performed by the vehicles
until the handover of the vehicle control to the human driver.
Automated driving, which does not endanger the passen-
gers or other road users, can only be achieved, if the system
recognizes its misconducts in case of failure well enough in
advance to reach a safe state. To do this, it is necessary that the
system knows its state and its operating limit at all times taking
into account possible tolerances of the components. Moreover,
the system has to predict its state to have enough time to react
appropriately to a situation.
Automation of driving only has the potential to improve
the trafﬁc safety, if a correct operation of the system is
ensured at all times and in any situation. Common test methods
are based on human tasks and therefore error-prone. Even a
systematic testing of the system does not allow that all possible
combinations and timings of the system input can be tested and
thus no misconduct exists. Thus, it is proposed by the presented
approach to separate the functional and the temporal behavior
of the system to enable a prioritization during the testing.
A mostly manual test process is unfeasible for automated
driving due to the expected number of test cases required
for the testing. Thus, the presented approach demands test
resources that are fully automated to increase the throughput
and scalability that compensate the increased test volume.
Moreover, it further demands specialized test case generators
for the automated driving domain that provide the expected
system behavior for the evaluation based on the generated
stimulation. Overall, an effective testing is necessary to cope
with the challenges of automated driving.
It is left for future work to provide test methods, which
have high search space coverages and can be used for an effec-
tive testing of the system behavior in different trafﬁc situations.
Furthermore, metrics are needed to obtain information about
the system performance and the environmental conditions
encountered during the test drives. It is thereby assumed that
a single metric has no signiﬁcance and that comparability
can only be achieved by using several independent metrics
if possible.
REFERENCES
[1]
SAE International, “Automated Driving - Levels of Driving Automation
are Deﬁned in New SAE International Standard J3016,” 2014, [On-
line]. Available: https://www.sae.org/misc/pdfs/automated driving.pdf
[retrieved: March, 2017].
[2]
NHTSA’s National Center for Statistics and Analysis, “Critical Reasons
for Crashes Investigated in the National Motor Vehicle Crash Causation
Survey,” 2015, [Online]. Available: https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/
Public/ViewPublication/812115 [retrieved: March, 2017].
[3]
A. Zanten and F. Kost, Handbook of Driver Assistance Systems:
Basic Information, Components and Systems for Active Safety
and Comfort.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, ch.
Brake-Based Assistance Functions, pp. 919–967. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12352-3 40
[4]
German Aerospace Center, “Research Project PEGASUS,” URL: http:
//www.pegasus-projekt.info [retrieved: March, 2017].
[5]
Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO, “Highly Auto-
mated Driving on Freeways - Industrial Policy Conclusions (”Hochau-
tomatisiertes Fahren auf Autobahnen
Industriepolitische Schlussfol-
gerungen”),” 2015, [Online]. Available: http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/
DE/Downloads/H/hochautomatisiertes-fahren-auf-autobahnen.html [re-
trieved: March, 2017].
[6]
H. Winner, W. Wachenfeld, and P. Junietz, “(How) Can Safety
of Automated Driving be Validated?” 2016, [Online]. Available:
http://www.fzd.tu-darmstadt.de/media/fachgebiet fzd/publikationen 3/
2016 5/2016 Wi Wf Ju ViV-Symposium Graz.pdf [retrieved: March,
2017].
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

[7]
Federal Statistical Ofﬁce of Germany, “Road Trafﬁc Accidents -
2015 (”Verkehrsunf¨alle - 2015”),” 2016, [Online]. Available: https:
//www.destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/TransportVerkehr/
Verkehrsunfaelle/VerkehrsunfaelleJ2080700157004.html
[retrieved:
March, 2017].
[8]
D. R¨osler, “The relevance of trafﬁc elements in driving situations
deﬁnition, measurement, and application,” Ph.D. dissertation, Chemnitz
University
of
Technology,
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://nbn-
resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:ch1-201000403
[9]
Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft e.V., “Takeover
times in highly automated driving - Compact accident research,” 2016,
[Online].
Available:
https://udv.de/en/publications/compact-accident-
research/takeover-times-highly-automated-driving
[retrieved:
March,
2017].
[10]
A. T. Kleen, “Controllability of partially automated interventions in
vehicle guidance (”Beherrschbarkeit von teilautomatisierten Eingriffen
in
die
Fahrzeugf¨uhrung”),”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://publikationsserver.tu-braunschweig.de/receive/dbbs
mods 00056694
[11]
O. B¨uhler, “Evolutionary functional testing of embedded systems for
distance-based automotive driver assistance functions (”Evolution¨arer
Funktionstest von eingebetteten Systemen f¨ur abstandsbasierte Fahreras-
sistenzfunktionen im Automobil”),” Ph.D. dissertation, University of
T¨ubingen, 2007.
[12]
I. Jovanovic, “Software Testing Methods and Techniques,” in The
IPSI BgD Transactions on Internet Research, 2009, pp. 30–41.
[Online].
Available:
http://tir.ipsitransactions.org/2009/January/Full%
20Journal.pdf
[13]
F. Rothlauf, Optimization Problems.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin
Heidelberg,
2011,
pp.
7–44.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72962-4 2
[14]
S. Wittel, D. Ulmer, and O. B¨uhler, “Automatic Test Evaluation for
Driving Scenarios Using Abstraction Level Constraints,” in The Eighth
International Conference on Advances in System Testing and Validation
Lifecycle, 2016, pp. 14–19. [Online]. Available: http://www.thinkmind.
org/index.php?view=article&articleid=valid 2016 2 20 40023
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

