Telemetric Data Visualization of Vehicle’s Crew in Geographic Context 
 
Pavlina Nudzikova 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science  
VŠB - TUO 
Ostrava, Czech Republic 
pavlina.nudzikova@vsb.cz 
Petra Rajmanova 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science  
VŠB - TUO 
Ostrava, Czech Republic 
petra.rajmanova@vsb.cz 
 
Abstract - The work is focused on information systems and 
design of web applications that visualize telemetric data and 
track of vehicle in geographic context. All the measured values 
and actual location are shown on maps provided by Google. 
For this purpose, a web application was designed and 
implemented. This application is able to show data of vital 
functions in real-time (electrocardiography, heart rate, 
respiration, oxymetry, etc., as an example of future needs) and 
basic information about the vehicle, such as location of the 
vehicle, temperature of interior, acceleration, etc. Collection of 
data in database with appropriate tools for its acquisition and 
indication is the aim of the work described in this article. This 
is starting point for post-processing and data analysis for 
specialists and experts. 
Keywords - Biological signal; Telemonitoring, GPS; GIS; 
ASP.NET; MySQL. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 If we talk about the means of transport, everyone would 
agree that the most important value is the vehicle’s location 
in this particular context. It would be useful if the 
geographical coordination was drawn into map on computer 
and thanks to this you will obtain some important 
information, such as driver’s vital signs, and crucial data 
about the vehicle itself. 
 
Figure 1.  Concept of designed application. 
Let us consider an information system that allows us 
vehicle tracing in real-time, to show current biological data 
of driver and important data about the vehicle itself for each 
particular time interval. In the other words, for the current 
vehicle’s position on the map, there will be shown following 
measured health-status values, such as breath rate, heart rate, 
temperature or ECG curve, in the system. Of course, for 
somebody, these details could be insignificant, but for 
doctors, paramedics, or similarly educated people it could 
represent very important information. In addition to this, 
other 
information 
obtained 
from 
accelerometer 
and 
gyroscope could be provided. This information should be 
indicative of the fact that, for example, particular vehicle had 
an accident. The usage of such information system is quite 
extensive, both for fire-fighters, racing drivers, professional 
drivers, etc., and moreover, it is not necessary to use the 
system in cars only.  
Section II reports the state of the art, following by three 
sections covering theory of the data sources (biological 
signals in Section III, geographic informations in section IV, 
vehicle and its parts usage technological data in section V). 
In the VI section there is described application design. Then 
there is measurement and data collecting chain description 
section. Software solution is presented in section VIII where 
are used components described. Section IX shows working 
user interface with a few examples. The last section of this 
article contains list of used technologies with appropriate 
description. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Nowadays, it is possible to buy interesting Global 
Positioning System (GPS) trackers that are able to record 
position and work with these data offline or online. Real-
time behaviour, integrated into a single embedded system 
and openness of these solutions might be a problem.  
Another problem could also occur with operating parameters 
of monitored cars that are often very specialized and 
manufacture-oriented. Currently, there is a lot of work on 
current status of the driver [2], [3], who has major impact on 
the road traffic. 
The aim of this work is to present an embedded platform 
that would enable collecting data from the heterogeneous 
resources and make the real-time visualization of data. The 
department of cybernetics and biomedical engineering 
created several prototypes (Kaipan Voltage) of electric cars 
in 2009-2012 with industry partners from the Czech 
Republic (see Fig. 8). 
 The next step was to implement an experimental system 
for above mentioned problematic areas. 
We prepared solutions for all the data collection and 
processing that provide interesting results in improving 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

safety of car driving with crew’s interaction, looking for 
driver’s stress factor   and dynamics of load during driving. It 
is open source solution in a strong experimental phase where 
the driver is depersonalized at that time. It means that the 
work is oriented on data measurement, transmission and 
processing. 
In [4], an embedded sensor system that collects 
physiological data, such as electrical activity of heart muscle, 
heart rate, breath rate, temperature and mechanical data as 
acceleration with built-in sensors, was designed. The 
acquired data are transmitted to the vehicle via Bluetooth 
communication interface. The data visualization is designed 
for Personal Digital Assistant (PDA). This application is 
usable for both, for displaying sensor data in real-time and 
for recording measured data to internal memory of PDA or 
to some other data medium. 
Application for PDA was designed in [7]. The PDA is 
used for displaying actual values of process variables – 
actual speed, average speed, distance, battery’s voltage and 
current, hydrogen fuel cells voltage and electrical motor 
current.  It is also connected to programmable controller by 
serial communication link. 
On the other hand, our work can indicate the vehicle 
location on the map, together with driver’s biological signals 
in real-time. This is the advantage because we are able to see 
where the vehicle is at any given time and what the driver’s 
vital signs are, at the same time. The acquired data are 
transmitted to database via GSM (originally Group Spécial 
Mobile) network. 
III. 
BIOLOGICAL SIGNALS 
Biological signal (biosignal) is a signal that is used in 
biology and medicine to represent information about the 
observed biological system (human body). These signals 
may be courses of electrical voltage, variable magnetic 
fields, changes in chemical concentration, mechanical 
motions, sounds, temperature changes, etc. We can record 
those signals as results of spontaneous activity of biological 
system (native signals), or as results of any intentional 
stimuli (evoked signals, provocation, etc.) [1, 2, 4]. The most 
often measured biosignals are: 
 
ECG 
 
Blood pressure (invasive or non-invasive 
measuring method) 
 
SaO2 / plethysmography 
 
Parameters related to breathing 
 
Temperature 
 
Analysis of anesthetic gases 
A.  Electrocardiography (ECG) 
ECG is diagnostic method used to capture and record 
electrical activity of heart. It is basic method for examination 
in cardiology. It allows us to detect any abnormal heart 
rhythms 
(called 
arrhythmias), 
ischemic 
changes 
in 
myocardium, check effectiveness of cardio drugs, etc. The 
entire activity of heart is accompanied by emergence of an 
electrical 
signal. 
The 
graphic 
record 
is 
called 
electrocardiogram (ECG). Signals are sensed by electrodes 
placed on patient's skin. Any disorder of production or 
distribution of nerve impulses can affect not only the 
mechanical activity of heart, but also the shape of electrical 
signal. [3] 
B. Heart Rate 
Heart rate is one of basic and most frequently monitored 
physiological data, especially in clinical medicine, work and 
sports medicine. It is an accurate indicator of activity and 
performance of heart. Heart decreasing below certain limit 
or increasing above certain limit,  or even irregular 
changes might indicate serious disturbance in the activity of 
heart, so called arrhythmia. 
Pulse is a pressure wave which is caused by expulsion of 
blood from the left ventricle into aorta, from where it spreads 
to other arteries throughout the entire body. In medicine, 
series of these waves correspond to cardiac rhythm and heart 
rate. The heart rate indicates the number of beats of heart 
within one minute. 
C. Respiratory 
Respiration is a process of gas exchange between an 
organism and environment. During normal calm breathing an 
average adult breathes 6-7 litres of air per minute and the 
respiration rate is 12-14 breaths per minute. The respiration 
rate is evaluated mainly on the basis of other measured 
biological signals. For example, it can be evaluated from 
electrocardiogram that is modulated in the rhythm of 
breathing. Respiration is affecting and closely related to 
ECG records, e.g., it affects the change of amplitude of ECG.  
D. Body Temperature 
Measurement of body temperature is one of the oldest 
methods in medical diagnostics. We differentiate between 
contact and contactless temperature measurement of human 
body. In contact methods, the measuring device is 
(thermometer or only its sensor) directly touching the tissue 
whose temperature is measured. The heat is transferred from 
the tissue to the thermometer, directly by this contact. The 
opposite way is the contactless method where heat 
transmission from the tissue to the thermometer passes 
through the surrounding environment. 
The body temperature of each individual person varies 
over the day, and it is usually higher in the evening. The 
temperature can be increased due to physical activity, mental 
effort, after a meal or, using certain drugs, and the height of 
temperature (even humidity of the surrounding environment) 
can impact.  
E. Oxymetry 
There are two ways of blood oxygen saturation 
measurement – invasive and non-invasive. Oxygen is 
transferred physically into the blood, dissolved in blood 
plasma, 
and 
chemically 
bound 
to 
blood 
pigment 
haemoglobin. Four oxygen molecules can bind themselves 
into one haemoglobin molecule. This creates oxy-
haemoglobin, the reaction is reversible and repeatable. 
Within the chemical bond 70-times more oxygen is 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

transferred than in physical dissolution. Oxygen is 
transported primarily by chemical bonds. 
The amount of oxygen transferred by chemical bonds is 
expressed by blood oxygen saturation SaO2 (in arterial 
blood) and SvO2 (for venous blood). Their units are given in 
%.  
IV. 
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM 
The concept of Geographic Information System (GIS) is 
commonly used to refer to computer-based systems for 
processing geographic data, presented mainly in the form of 
various maps. The advantage of GIS in comparison to 
common maps is that it consistently separates functions of 
the maps, the storage of geographic data and their 
presentation, and adds even more options, such as spatial 
data analysis. Then the same data can be easily updated, 
analyzed and represented in different ways, so it can satisfy 
different user requirements at much lower need for 
compromise. 
 
Figure 2.  Flowchart GIS. 
V. 
VEHICLE DATA 
As well as human biosignals determine their health 
status, information about vehicle can also determine its 
characteristics and its condition. The overview of health 
status of vehicle’s driver together with the characteristics and 
location of vehicle displayed on the map at the same time 
allow us to track these important parameters and to take 
actions if it is necessary. 
A. Location of the Vehicle 
The most important information about vehicle is 
definitely its location [5, 8]. The latitude and longitude of 
vehicle can be determined by using GPS coordinates. This 
information is obtained from the GPS module installed in the 
vehicle. 
B. Temperature of Interior 
Another important variable is the interior ambient 
temperature since changes occurring in the environment 
temperature are affecting thermoregulation of human body. 
The change of ambient temperature has high serious impact 
on human body and it can result even in overheating or 
hypothermia. 
People belong to warm-blooded animals in which the 
core temperature of inner body is kept at 37° at normal 
conditions. Maintaining of temperature is possible only if the 
heat production in equilibrium dispense. This is done by 
system that is able to control body temperature by various 
thermo regulation mechanisms – (thermoregulation). Body 
temperature depends on the generation of heat and on other 
the external and internal factors. 
C. Accelerometry 
Accelerometry is a method of sensing acceleration using 
accelerometer’s sensors. Accelerometers are used to measure 
acceleration. Generally, acceleration characterizes the rate of 
velocity change of mass point or the entire system of mass 
points in time. 
D. Gyroscope 
Usage of gyroscope is another way how to measure 
movement in space, change of position and angle or rotation. 
Gyroscopes are well known and used for measuring and 
determining the change in position or rotation in a 
perspective of any object to which they are attached. The 
gyroscope is a device for navigation and direction. Actually, 
it is the flywheel; heavy wheel rotating on bearings with 
little friction. The rotating flywheel has momentum, so that 
its axis without external forces is kept in the same direction. 
It means that it is a device that can determine its 
orientation in space (flywheel never changes its position 
during the rotation and thus gives information about the 
orientation of the vehicle in space). Gyroscopes are widely 
used for measuring angular velocity in units of degrees per 
second (° / sec), for example, to see how quickly the 
measured object is rotated. 
VI. 
APPLICATION DESIGN 
The application will display biosignals that are gathered 
by the sensor systems. Signals will indicate the driver's 
health and the current load of his organism together with the 
signals reporting the status of the vehicle. These signals are 
quite important since we know where the vehicle is, how the 
driver’s body reacts in different situations, and in the case of 
health problems an immediate assistance can be provided. It 
should be noted down that all these values are gained from 
devices that are placed on-board of the vehicle. 
 
Figure 3.  Data procesing. 
First of all, the process of acquiring and processing data 
in general is described there. Then data processing will be 
particularly described in the application. 
In Figure 3, there can be seen the whole process of 
communication. Data obtained from the modules located in 
the 
vehicle 
using 
GSM 
(or 
Universal 
Mobile 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Telecommunication System) are transmitted via internet to 
central location (data-centre). In data-centre, servers and 
applications are located. Then, on these servers data are 
processed and stored in database. The application is finally 
accessing those processed records and performs and offer 
further necessary operations (calculations, visualization, 
etc.). 
VII. 
MEASUREMENT CHAIN 
Measurement chain consists of three basic blocks, 
namely, remote devices, server, and the client. These 
individual blocks communicate with one another via Internet 
network. 
 
Figure 4.  Measuring chain for the acquisition, processing and displaying 
data. 
A. Remote Devices Block 
This block contains modules for data measurement. In 
our case it will include GPS module that allows us to get 
information about where the vehicle is located. We could use 
Smartphone for localization and some other information, 
such as acceleration, but free applications did not meet our 
requirements. It is necessary that the data string contained to 
have a unique identification key. 
Then sensors for measuring biological signals by which 
data indicating the driver's vital signs are obtained. Finally, 
sensors for measuring vehicle’s data are needed. These 
sensors can be selected according to the purpose 
(temperature inside, temperature outside, tire pressure etc.). 
There is an attempt to make the application universal as 
much as possible for different usages so that it is necessary 
to choose the measured data (sensors). 
It is possible to use it generally, but this work was 
focused on the vehicle Kaipan Voltage. 
B. Server block 
This block contains a service called "Listener", then 
relational database and robust applications implemented 
using ASP .NET framework [6]. 
Listener service allows us to listen to the particular server 
port and to have connection handling of one or more clients. 
The purpose of this is to receive pre-process data- streams. 
This means that data is not only received and stored into 
selected database “telemetriedb” but there is parsing of data 
performed to the individual data segments on beforehand. 
With such prepared records, we can then proceed with 
further processing and examine these in the application. 
Data are stored in the standard MySQL database called 
telemetriedb. The database uses standard web interface 
phpMyAdmin for access to database. Communication with 
the DB is using the SQL query language. 
Both blocks, the remote devices and the server, are 
communicating as client-server. The remote devices 
represent the client in the meaning of the network 
architecture and the server block is obviously the server. 
Protection of personal data is not necessary because we 
do not indicate sensitive information. That would point out 
on a concrete user. Database is secured with password. 
C. Client Block 
The final block is the client. It is representing user 
application (user interface) and it is the only thing from the 
whole solution that the user will be able to see and work 
with. The goal was to create application’s user interface as 
much clear and intuitive as possible, and in the way to have 
good view of the current health status of driver. On the 
welcome page, there is user guidance what applications you  
are allowed to see and what operations can be performed 
there. 
VIII. SOFTWARE SOLUTIONAPPLICATION DESIGN 
A. Listener Service 
Service "Listener" is used for receiving and parsing data 
strings that come from each device. After Listener service 
starts, first it initializes required data and begins to run an 
infinite loop that waits for a client connection. The algorithm 
flowchart is shown in Figure 5. 
When the device or client connects to the server (Listener 
service), a new thread is created. This thread is handling the 
processing, the requirements of any particular client. The 
thread is waiting for receiving data from the client. When the 
data are received, it converts them from a stream to a text 
format, the received data "received telegram" starts to 
process. Then, the data are stored in database. After that 
based on IMEI identifies the device type (which type of 
device was sent). Based on the type, it begins with parsing of 
the data. Once data are parsed to an object, then the object is 
stored into database. 
B. Data Sending 
Due to the unavailability of functional devices that could 
send real data directly to the server, we were forced to 
simulate this data. The concept of simulated data is very 
simple. 
For the data that describes biological functions of driver 
and vehicle data (NOT its position) a simple simulation tool 
based on limited random values that create artificial data 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

strings (received telegrams) was created. Those data strings 
are sent to the service Listener. 
To be able to display the vehicle's path, it was needed to 
simulate the whole track. The values of its trajectory are 
gradually stored in data string (received telegram) as well. 
This is sent towards the server, as well. 
START LISTENER SERVICE
AND INICIALIZATION OF 
SETTINGS
READ AN INCOMING STREAM
CREATION A RELATION WITH THE 
DATABASE AND SAVE TO INCMING 
TELEGRAM
DETERMINE TYPE OF INCOMING DATA
PARSING STREAMS ACCORDING TO ITS 
TYPE
SAVE PARSED DATE TO DATABASE
NEW CONNECTION 
TO IP:PORT
THREAD CREATED 
PROCESSING NEW 
SESSION
FINSH THREAD
WHILE TRUE
 
Figure 5.  Flowchart Listener service. 
C. Loading Map 
Maps are implemented by busing the Google Maps API 
that allows us to load the maps into the web application 
using JavaScript. In this work, we use the Google Maps API 
v3, that is free and available for non-commercial purposes. 
IX. 
USER INTERFACE 
Here, one can see how the application looks like and 
what its functions are. In Figure 6, we can see a part of the 
application that could be interesting for the end-users. Tabs 
Car, Car type, Contact persons and Equipment are used for 
user’s communication with the database. It is a user-friendly 
interface for users who are not aware of SQL query language 
since the data can be inserted, edited or deleted directly in 
the 
web 
application 
by 
simple 
mouse 
clicking. 
 
Figure 6.  Edited data from the database in application. 
For example, in Figure 6, there is shown contact person 
tab where you can add or delete a new contact person. There 
is also a selection box for the license plate that can help the 
user find contact persons related to the particular registered 
vehicle. Other tabs are designed in very similar way, 
everything straight and easy for the end users. 
The most important part of the application is shown, if 
you open the Maps tab. It is practically the main part of the 
application that allows the user to view vehicle on the map, 
and displays all the driver’s important biosignals and the 
current information about the vehicle. 
 
Figure 7.  Edited data from the database in application. 
X. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
One of the main parts and the most essential task of this 
work was to design and create database that stores all data 
and is able to process them later. For this purpose, MySQL 
database was used because its function adequately covers the 
requirements of the problem. When using an application 
together with using all the client devices huge amounts of 
data that limit the processing speed and could clogging up 
the database are stored. Therefore, it was necessary to solve 
automatic or manual data clean-up that are no longer 
required, and solved by the application itself. To redeem the 
adequate processing speed of the application, the individual 
procedures were highly optimized within the database 
(creating additional indexes for parameters that could be 
searched out of the data). 
Once this important task was resolved, it was decided 
what data are needed to be registered ( in what format they 
should be obtained), it was necessary to design and create a 
service called “Listener”. This service was created by using 
the Microsoft .NET Framework as a service for Windows 
OS (the server). Its main task is to listen to a specific IP 
address and port. These parameters can be easily changed 
because it is possible to use the service in any network, on 
any server where software tools (Microsoft Framework & 
IIS) are available. Service can receive and handle multiple 
concurrent connections (called threads) simultaneously. 
Unfortunately, there is fixed International Mobile Equipment 
Identity (IMEI) parameter set up that is used to differentiate 
the device type, the service that should react appropriately 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

and find out the type of communication. In practice, this 
means that the distinction between the types of devices is 
made on the basis of fixed IMEI. In other words, according 
to the IMEI chain the service will recognize that it is, e.g., 
GPS module and for that purpose there is set particular 
parsing routine. However, this can be removed by expanding 
data structure that would allow detecting the type of device 
based on IMEI automatically. 
For the visualization of map data, the GIS system from 
Google, available for free, was used. More specifically, the 
"Google Maps API v3" were used where the application is 
written in ASP .NET with JavaScript and C# programming 
language. For the visualization elements, "chart.components" 
were used. We have chosen the type of graphs that can 
display static charts only. The application allows users to 
view route of one selected vehicle (however it is possible to 
switch among vehicles). Route is drawn in false-colours 
according to driver’s body temperature. 
It is possible to view the measured data in the given time 
points, for both the car and the driver, and also in every point 
of measurement along the route. It is also possible to display 
the information panel where graphs of the measured values 
related to time are. 
The application can be further improved and expanded. 
First of all, the expansion of visualization with providing of 
information about other parameters (e.g., engine temperature, 
vehicle speed, etc.) could be. Then, there can be 
implemented feedback between the vehicle and the 
visualization part which would enable automatic detection 
and response to changes in essential signal characteristics.  It 
might be needed to use dynamic graphs that could display 
the transparent visualization of biological data, as well. 
Another important improvement could be auto-call, the pre-
defined contact person in case of sudden changes in vital 
signs or during an accident.  To react on the current world 
trends, creating of suitable application for mobile phones 
with the Android OS or Apple iOS, which could allow 
drivers to check their vital signs and conditions of their cars 
directly in their vehicle, would be useful. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
The main goal of this work was to create an application 
for displaying Telemetric Data of vehicle’s crew at map 
background. Since we did not have any devices that would 
generate real data and send them to the database server, the 
data were simulated. 
This work follows [4] and is extending it by the amount 
of captured data. Not only information about drivers are 
captured, but also vehicle's data. All the values are displayed 
on the map then. 
The system was created to show biometric and operating 
data on the map. For testing purpose, the system was 
designed for electric Kaipan. It shows information about 
crew’s health status during vehicle testing. System is used 
for ergonometric measurements of vehicle’s prototype 
during driving tests. The system is able to interconnect 
telemetric data and crew’s biometric data together for 
prototype of electric vehicle Kaipan Voltage and shows 
joined data in geographic context. The result is that driver’s 
subjective feelings are extended by objective measurement 
data. 
 
Figure 8.  Kaipan Voltage prototype. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by project SP2013/168, named 
"Methods of Acquisition and Transmission of Data in 
Distributed Systems" of Student Grant Agency (VSB - 
Technical University of Ostrava). 
This work is also supported by project SP2013/135, 
named "Control of technologicals systems with OAZE 
providing an independent sustainable development of 
complex systems" of Student Grant Agency (VSB - 
Technical University of Ostrava). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Rozman, “Electronic devices in medicine,” 1st ed, Praha: 
Academica, 2006, pp. 321-330. 
[2] Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, “IEEE Colloquium 
Monitoring of Driver and Vehicle Performance (Ref. No.1997/122),” 
April 1997. 
[3] CM. Yang, CC. Wu, CM Chou and TL. Yang, "Vehicle driver's ECG 
and sitting posture monitoring system," Information Technology and 
Applications in Biomedicine, 2009. ITAB 2009. 9th International 
Conference 
on, 
November 
2009, 
pp. 
1-4, 
doi: 
10.1109/ITAB.2009.5394321. 
[4] T. Otahalova, Z. Slanina, and D. Vala, “Embedded sensors system for 
real time biomedical data acquisition and analysis,” 11th IFAC/IEEE 
International Conference on Programmable Devices and Embedded 
Systems, vol. 11, May 2012, pp. 261-264, ISSN: 14746670, ISBN: 
978-390282314-4. 
[5] Z. Slanina, V. Kasik, and K. Musil, “GPS synchronisation for FPGA 
devices,” 
11th 
IFAC/IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Programmable Devices and Embedded Systems, vol. 11, May 2012, 
pp. 337-340,  ISSN: 14746670, ISBN: 978-390282314-4. 
[6] V. Kaczmarczyk, P. Fiedler, R. Stohl, and Z. Bradac, “Electric 
vehicles charger as a part of home area networ,” 11th IFAC/IEEE 
International Conference on Programmable Devices and Embedded 
Systems, vol. 11, May 2012, pp. 180-185,  ISSN: 14746670, ISBN: 
978-390282314-4. 
[7] J. Koziorek and Z. Slanina, “Control system for the prototype of 
hydrogen powered car,” WSEAS Transactions on Systems, vol. 4, 
December 2005, pp. 2454-2458, ISSN: 11092777. 
[8] J. Ahrems, “ Appraisal of feasibility of using vehicle-to-vehicle 
communications for safe passage of unsignalled road intersection 
under varying conditions,” 12th IFAC Conference on Programmable 
Devices and Embedded Systems, vol. 12, September 2013, pp. 84-89, 
doi: 10.3182/20130925-3-CZ-3023.00019. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

