Chaotic-based Security for Near Field Communication
in Internet of Things Devices
Colin Sokol Kuka
Department of Electronic Engineering
University of York
Heslington
York YO10 5EZ
United Kingdom
sk1759@york.ac.uk
James Chandler
The City of Liverpool College
Liverpool L3 6BN
United Kingdom
James.Chandler@liv-coll.ac.uk
Mohammed Alkahtani
University of Liverpool
Liverpool L69 3BX
United Kingdom
m.alkahtani@liverpool.ac.uk
Abstract—The security of wireless systems has become a growing
challenge resulting from the expansion of the Internet of Things
(IoT) into everyday life. Despite the many advantages driving
the adoption of IoT devices, their proliferation increases the
surface susceptible to advanced attacks that aim to misuse their
resources and cause interruptions, delays, losses and degradation
of the offered services in IoT. This paper introduces a chaotic
transmission for Near Field Communication (NFC) Topology,
based on the Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) systems. Traditional
WPT circuits are based on inverters to create an oscillation for the
transmitter coil. This results in systems relying only on software
security. Therefore, we have introduced this topology which
adopts chaotic encryption for NFC security. Furthermore, the
proposed system is immune to Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attacks.
The simulation results and tests prove the functionality of the
chaotic WPT based on the Chua‘s diode and their synchronisation
between transmitter and receiver. The chaos generated is sampled
by an electronic board and can be used for cryptography coding
based on Python. The application for this system is a new NFC
digital code for accessing the IoT services.
Keywords–Cryptography, Chaotic transmission, Digital key,
High Security, Chua diode, Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attack im-
mune, Near Field Communication (NFC), Wireless Power Transfer
(WPT), Internet of Things (IoT).
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the product of recent
developments in energy and cost-efﬁcient computing and
cloud/wireless infrastructure. The IoT has been a major driver
of scientiﬁc, technological, economic, and social change 1. IoT
also comes with a set of requirements [1]: ultra-low power
consumption for long-term autonomous operation without the
ability to recharge the battery; the need to communicate
with other devices; the need to operate efﬁciently in harsh
environments; and the ability to withstand malicious cyber-
attacks (including both: remote attacks mounted through net-
work connections and physical attacks by adversaries) [2].
Our everyday lives are intertwined with modern cryptographic
schemes. The majority of available cyber-defenses are based on
securing electronic systems’ software or their communication
interfaces [3].
Most everyday IoT devices use the Near-Field Communi-
cation (NFC), which is a recent short-range communication
system that can be used for anything from physical access
control to contactless payments [4]. The NFC transponder is
the most important part of the device because it enables data
to be read and written. There are several different types of
NFC tags, each with its own form, scale, and construction
material, but they all fall into two categories [5], [6]. One
group is the active NFC, in which the system uses its own
power source, which is normally a long-lasting battery. The
other type is passive, which means they don’t have their own
energy source and instead rely on the electromagnetic ﬁeld
produced by the transponder [7], [8]. To relay information over
a short distance, NFC uses electromagnetic induction between
two loop antennas at a particular frequency. The data is stored
in tiny microchips (or tags) and sent to readers within a certain
physical range [9].
NFC devices using the WPT operating principle rely on
the resonance by magnetic means of an alternating current
in coupled LC circuits. In near-ﬁeld, the mutual inductance
at high frequency of both antenna coils acts as a loosely
(roughly) magnetically coupled transformer, where energy is
magnetically induced and propagated from the primary to the
secondary coil. For short-range tasks such as a gap of few
centimetres, the working frequency of the resonant circuit is
generally in the range from 10 kHz to a few MHz [10], [11].
In this work, we present a WPT topology with advanced
security capabilities based on the Chua‘s diode. The circuit
exhibits a typical two attractor chaotic behaviour. Thanks to
this unique non-linearity, it is possible to adopt a mutual
authentication key based on the last state and its subsequent
encryption and decryption. Furthermore the WPT system is
immune to man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks.
The memristor or Chua‘s diode is a circuit element based
on the electrical charge q and the magnetic ﬂux ϕ. Its con-
stitutive relationship is theorised by Prof. Leon Chua [12].
This device can create chaos from the well known Chua‘s
circuit shown in Fig. 2. Memristors with their non-linearities
are properly integrated into existing electronic circuits to create
several new chaotic behaviour circuits [13], [14] as depicted
in Fig. 3. Dynamic behaviours, such as chaos and hyper-chaos
[15], [16], coexisting multiple attractors [17], [18], hyper-
chaotic multi-wing [19], [20] and hidden attractors [21], [22]
have been studied and analysed by numerical simulations and
hardware experiments.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1. Example of IoT devices used in everyday life which rely on the
NFC and the WPT techniques.
In this work, we therefore propose a low power Chua‘s
diode circuit architecture for WPT systems. The system has the
quality of transmitting power and data wirelessly. In addition,
the system has the ability to achieve the highest level of
encryption due to the chaotic behaviour. One of the biggest
advantage for this system is the low power consumption. The
rest of the document is organized as follows. The wireless
power transmission circuit and encryption and decryption
capabilities are shown in the next section. In Section III,
there is an analysis of the WPT based on memristor. System
functionality and simulation results are presented in Section
IV. Finally, Section V concludes the document.
II.
WIRELESS POWER TRANSFER AND CHUA‘S DIODE
Near Field Communication (NFC), which is commonly
used in smartphones as presented in Figure 1. The NFC are
also used contactless credit cards and digital keys, is a special
form of WPT device that is very sensitive to the problem of
cryptography [23], [24]. NFC is a low-bandwidth, two-way
wireless communication technology that uses electromagnetic
induction to transfer data between devices separated by up to
ten centimeters. Internal user data on access cards and digital
keys is encrypted by software and stored in a computer. The
Hash function has historically been used to encrypt data. This
form of algorithm is well-known and subject to a number
of attacks easily accessible through the Internet [25]–[27].
This conﬁdential information must be secured by an internal
electronic system in high-security applications. We present an
NFC device based on a chaotic communication between two
circuits in this paper. By adopting this technology, there are
three major advantages:
•
Ability to develop chaotic behaviour.
C2
+
-
RE
VLC
VM
C1
L
iM
Figure 2. Traditional Chua‘s circuit
Figure 3. Typical chaotic behaviour waveform of the voltages in the inductor
(a) and capacitor in a XY mode representation (b).
•
Avoid man-in-the-middle (MitM) attack.
•
Provides less power consumption than transistors or
switches.
In this way, the WPT device with Chua diode can create
highly encrypted security without the use of external circuits to
drive their synchronisation. It is not based on a tamper-proof
algorithm. The developed waveform is chaotic and is based
on the state variables’ most recent state. Every time the device
reads from the memristor, the internal state of the memristor
changes to a new point of stability that is completely random
and unrelated to the previous one.
There is no such method in the literature [28]. The cryp-
tography suggested in the reference [29] is based on a shift
in transmission frequency that knocks out other receivers. The
frequency and correspondence with the receiver are generated
by causal variation of the capacitor array according to the algo-
rithm for maximum power output. The transmitted power can
then be packed with various frequencies and delivered to the
receiver in a predetermined time interval. Nonetheless, discrete
algorithm adjustments, ﬁnite choices, and simple cloning affect
these types of switched capacitor cryptography. In contrast,
the memristor has been successfully used in imaging and
communication encryption, achieving the highest degree of
encryption. Circuit instability is crucial in deciding on chaotic
encryption and decryption in a chaotic model of memristor-
based cryptography. A user key, for example, has a chaotic
generation of sequences because its initial values triggered
the chaos of the memristor circuit. Encryption and decryption
was built from this series. As a result, WPT technology and a
chaotic memristor-based circuit can be used together.
A. Wireless Communication
Figure 4 depicts a WPT device made of memristors. Since
the inductor is a reciprocal inductance the memristive Chua’s
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

CMR
VM_R
CMT
LT
CT
LR
CR
Magnec 
Flux
+
-
VIN
VLC_R
+
-
VM_T
VLC_T
RE_T
RE_R
Figure 4. Symmetric Chua circuit proposed in the article.
TABLE I. PARAMETERS OF THE SYSTEM PROPOSED.
Parameter
Transmitter
Receiver
Value
C1
CMT
CMR
6.8 nF
C2
CT
CR
68 nF
RE
RT
RR
2.18 kΩ
L
LT
LR
8 mH
M
4 mH
circuit introduced has been strengthened. The system is totally
symmetric with two copies of the Chua circuit, as shown in
Fig. 4. The above circuit produces an oscillation that may
result in equilibrium, disorder, or instability. The parameter
values shown in Table I have been considered in reference to
a memristive Chua’s circuit. As can be shown, the inductors
have a value of 8 mH, which is lower than the typical value
of 12 mH in Chua memristive circuits due to the use of
the mutual inductance of the coupled circuits. The current
ﬂowing through LT , the transmitter coil, generates a magnetic
ﬁeld around it, with some of these magnetic ﬁeld lines going
through the receiver coil, resulting in reciprocal inductance.
Since the square root of two equal values is the same as one
single value, when the inductances of the two coils are the
same and equal, LT and LR are equal to L, the reciprocal
inductance between the two coils would equal the value of
one single coil, as shown:
M = k
p
LT LR = kL
(1)
where k denotes the coupling coefﬁcient as a fractional number
between 0 and 1, with 0 denoting no inductive coupling and 1
denoting complete or maximum inductive coupling. Since one
coil induces a voltage in the next, the transmitter L induces
a voltage V in the receiver, and vice versa. The oscillation of
the circuit is not possible with more than one receiver at the
same time because it will create an over mutual inductive M
load as shown in the equation below.
(
vin
R = LR
dLR
dt + M dLT
dt
vin
T = LT
dLT
dt + M dLR
dt
(2)
Using these relationships, lower inductances can be used
than in Chua’s circuit, and the circuitry’s symmetry allows
the chaotic behaviour to be transmitted. The transmitter and
receiver would have the same resonant frequency:
f0 =
1
2π√LCT
=
1
2π√LCR
(3)
When the values in Table I are used, the result is 6.8 kHz.
It is important to note that high efﬁciency is not needed for
this application. The receiver only requires a small amount
of power to begin its own oscillation and the chaotic actions
needed for encryption.
B. Memristor state variables
Moreover, it is crucial to demonstrate that the device has
no difference when compared to the typical Chua’s diode
circuit equations. When both sides of the system are in close
proximity to each other, they must be capable of engaging in
disorderly actions. The circuit’s behaviour is derived from the
classic third order Chua circuit by adopting the ideal voltage
regulated active memristor shown in Fig. 5. Since the two
circuits are symmetric, we will only look at the transmitter
in this study. For the study, we call CMT = C1, CT = C2 and
LT = L in series with a resistor (resistance of the coil) R0. Let
us consider that the state equations are obtained by computing
the currents through the two voltage at the capacitors and the
voltage across the inductor and remembering that i1 = C1
dv1
dt
, i2 = C2 dv2
dt and V3 = L di3
dt . We obtain:





dv1
dt =
1
C1 [(v2 − v1)G − f(vd)]
dv2
dt =
1
C2 [(v2 − v1)G − iL]
di3
dt = − 1
LT [v2 − R0i3]
(4)
where the f(vd) is the diode function:
f(vd) = Gbv1 + 0.5(Ga − Gb)[|v1 + Bp| − |v1 − Bp|]
(5)
To plot these equations,, usually we are sizing the time,
voltages, and currents by RC2, Bp, and BpG, respectively.
Assuming the variables τ =
t
RC2 , x =
v1
Bp , y =
v2
Bp and z =
i3
GBp , we obtain the following dimensionless state equations:





dx
dτ = α(−x + y − f(x))
dy
dt = x − y + z
dz
dt = −βy − γz
(6)
where α = C2
C1 , β = R2C2
L
and γ = RR0 C2
C1 . These are
the typical equations for the Chua circuit computed in almost
all computer simulators analysing the chaotic behaviours.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

+
-
+
-
U1
U2
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
a)
b)
c)
Figure 5. Chua‘s diode (a) typical I-V characteristic (b) and the equivalent
circuit used in this article.
TABLE II. Circuit Parameters in reference to the Chua‘s diode equivalent
circuit.
Circuit Parameters
Resistor
Value
Resistor
Value
R1
220 Ω
R4
22 kΩ
R1
220 Ω
R4
22 kΩ
R1
2.2 kΩ
R4
3.3 kΩ
III.
COMMUNICATION SEQUENCE
In this Section, we list all the steps and a ﬂowchart of
the new chaotic NFC procedure. The system is described as
a door opening mechanism but can be adopted in all the IoT
applications mentioned above such as payment.
A. NFC procedure proposed
Memristor-based chaotic cryptography system model con-
sists of two parts shown in Fig. 4, which are two symmetrical
Chua‘s circuits, Transmitter and Receiver respectively. In a
typical Chua circuit, the initial condition is applied on the
Capacitor CT from external digital source. Therefore, in the
LT CT and LRCR there is a connection to A/D or D/A
converters. According to the cryptosystem model shown in
Fig. 6, the process of chaotic encryption key data generation
for opening an access door is described as follows:
1)
The high security lock has a database of customers
and each lock has in internal memory the ID of the
customer.
2)
The digital key or Access Card has an internal ID
encrypted by the last Memristor chaotic status.
3)
At the attempt to open the door, the lock and digital
key (Receiver) are connected to each other. Both
Memristors will develop a chaotic behaviour.
4)
The chaotic behaviour generated in the transmitter
circuit depends on the receiver status because it
induces a voltage in the transmitter coil and conse-
quently giving a new initial condition VIN. In this
way, the security lock’s digital logic can immediately
recognise the authenticity of the user decrypting the
data received.
5)
If the Memristor status of the digital key is the same
as the last status check, the digital logic can convert
data. Otherwise, the receiver will bring the transmitter
Memristor into a state with unknown variables, and
hence the lock will be prevented from opening.
Figure 6. Flowchart of the entry system described in steps.
6)
When the WPT system has reached an End Of
File, both digital logic stages will disconnect the
Memristor storing their last status.
Furthermore, any attempt to forge the digital key or smart-
phone would leave an indelible mark, as it will cause the
memristor internal status for the authentication key to change
irreversibly to an unexpected value from which their is no way
to derive the previous value. True, the electronic system can be
duplicated, but the internal value of the memristor can never
be estimated, and there is no algorithm that can do so.
IV.
SYSTEM PERFORMANCE RESULTS
The system has been simulated with the advanced soft-
ware NI multisim 14.2 with commercial devices and Labview
functionality. The coils are designed as coupled inductors
with a variable coupling factor. In order to start the chaotic
behaviour memristors develop the chaotic waveform following
the Chua’s memristive circuit. The key design speciﬁcations
and parameters are listed in Tables I and II. The whole
system has been veriﬁed showing a chaotic behaviour. The
time plot can only partially give an understanding of the
chaotic behaviour, therefore the system has been plotted with
an oscilloscope in X-Y mode. We have shown the waveforms
in the receiver as XY plot in 0.2 V/div and 1 V/div in Fig.
7 for VMR vs VLCR , respectively. In Fig. 8 is shown VMR
vs iLCR in XY mode in 1 V/div and 1 V/div, respectively. In
Fig. 9 is shown the vLCR vs iLCR in 0.2 V/div and 1 V/div,
respectively.
The synchronisation of the phase portraits of the chaotic
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 7. Receiver VMR vs VLCR shown in XY mode in 0.2 V/div and 1
V/div, respectively.
Figure 8. Receiver VMR vs iLCR shown in XY mode in 1 V/div and 1
V/div, respectively.
Figure 9. Receiver vLCR vs iLCR shown in XY mode in 0.2 V/div and 1
V/div, respectively.
attractors are fully synchronised as shown in all the plots of
the transmitter (left) and the receiver (right) in Fig. 10.
A. Experiment
A prototype of the system has been built, as shown in
Figure 11, on two different electronic breadboards which
are jointed by a transformer representing the two coils. The
memristor model has been built using the the ideal voltage
regulated active Chua‘s diode introduced in Figure 5. The
physical design of the memristors and the coils require ad-
vanced manufacturing technology which is outside of the scope
of this article. In place of the coils a 6 mH 1:1 transformer
has been used (resulting in a total inductance of 12 mH). The
chaotic behaviour developed by the system is visualised on the
transmitting side using a Tektronix 465 analogue oscilloscope
and at the receiver with a Voltcraft digital storage oscilloscope
and is in accordance with our simulations.
Figure 10. Synchronisation of the phase portraits of a chaotic attractor:
voltage in the inductor VLC referred to the memristor voltage VM in the
transmitter (a) and receiver(b) coil; current in the inductor iL referred to the
memristor voltage VM in the transmitter (c) and receiver (d) coil; the
memristor voltage VM referred to its internal voltage status V0 in the
transmitter (e) and receiver (f).
Figure 11. The prototype transmitter highlighted in orange, the receiver in
red and the coupling transformer in blue.
For the IoT application, we have sampled the waveforms
and used the Arduino Firmata library and Python to record the
data on a host PC and an online service, as shown in Figure
12. In this way the chaotic behaviour is available online. The
chaotic data is used in a Python code by using Flask libraries
and HTML Python. We have created a database and webpage
by using Python and sampling data by arduino.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The security of the new electronic and Internet of Things
devices has become a great challenge. The data protection of
these devices are only based on the web or on well-known al-
gorithms and software. Therefore, the unique behaviour of the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 12. Use of Python and use chaotic encryption for web resources.
Chua‘s diode has attracted a lot of research studies and interest
in developing new encryption characteristics. Furthermore, the
memristor in a modiﬁed Chua’s circuit is able to facilitate
power and data transmission, provided that the inductors are
mutually coupled. For this reason, we created two symmetrical
Chua circuits able to transmit chaos. This new technique is an
interesting solution, due to the fact it can be used to implement
near-ﬁeld wireless communication and encryption using a true
random number generator. We are introducing an innovative
implementation of the Chua circuit, which is applied in the
NFC. In the article we have not mentioned the algorithm used
in Python.
Future work will be focused on improving the data encryp-
tion and the realisation of multi-coil synchronisation, because
they show a great and interesting advantage in comparison with
the traditional Chua‘s circuit.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Minoli, K. Sohraby, and B. Occhiogrosso, “Iot considerations, re-
quirements, and architectures for smart buildings—energy optimization
and next-generation building management systems,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, 2017, pp. 269–283.
[2]
I. Stellios, P. Kotzanikolaou, M. Psarakis, C. Alcaraz, and J. Lopez, “A
survey of iot-enabled cyberattacks: Assessing attack paths to critical in-
frastructures and services,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 20, no. 4, 2018, pp. 3453–3495.
[3]
F. Restuccia, S. D’Oro, and T. Melodia, “Securing the internet of things
in the age of machine learning and software-deﬁned networking,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 5, no. 6, 2018, pp. 4829–4842.
[4]
A. Dohr, R. Modre-Opsrian, M. Drobics, D. Hayn, and G. Schreier,
“The internet of things for ambient assisted living,” in 2010 seventh
international conference on information technology: new generations.
Ieee, 2010, pp. 804–809.
[5]
V. Coskun, B. Ozdenizci, and K. Ok, “A survey on near ﬁeld commu-
nication (nfc) technology,” Wireless personal communications, vol. 71,
no. 3, 2013, pp. 2259–2294.
[6]
G. Jain and S. Dahiya, “Nfc?: Advantages, limits and future scope,”
vol, vol. 4, 2015, pp. 1–12.
[7]
F. Di Rienzo, A. Virdis, C. Vallati, N. Carbonaro, and A. Tognetti,
“Evaluation of nfc-enabled devices for heterogeneous wearable biomed-
ical application,” IEEE Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation, vol. 4,
no. 4, 2020, pp. 373–383.
[8]
I. Yoon and H. Ling, “Investigation of near-ﬁeld wireless power transfer
under multiple transmitters,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters, vol. 10, 2011, pp. 662–665.
[9]
Y. Sun, S. Kumar, S. He, J. Chen, and Z. Shi, “You foot the bill!
attacking nfc with passive relays,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
2020.
[10]
J. I. Cair´o, J. Bonache, F. Paredes, and F. Mart´ın, “Reconﬁgurable
system for wireless power transfer (wpt) and near ﬁeld communications
(nfc),” IEEE Journal of Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation, vol. 1, no. 4,
2017, pp. 253–259.
[11]
S. Kuka, K. Ni, and M. Alkahtani, “A review of methods and challenges
for improvement in efﬁciency and distance for wireless power transfer
applications,” Power Electronics and Drives, 2019.
[12]
R. Barboza and L. O. Chua, “The four-element chua’s circuit,” Inter-
national Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos, vol. 18, no. 04, 2008, pp.
943–955.
[13]
T. Matsumoto, “A chaotic attractor from chua’s circuit,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Circuits and Systems, vol. 31, no. 12, 1984, pp. 1055–1058.
[14]
Q. Xu, Q. Zhang, B. Bao, and Y. Hu, “Non-autonomous second-order
memristive chaotic circuit,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 21 039–
21 045.
[15]
B. Bao, T. Jiang, Q. Xu, M. Chen, H. Wu, and Y. Hu, “Coexisting
inﬁnitely many attractors in active band-pass ﬁlter-based memristive
circuit,” Nonlinear Dynamics, vol. 86, no. 3, 2016, pp. 1711–1723.
[16]
A. L. Fitch, D. Yu, H. H. Iu, and V. Sreeram, “Hyperchaos in a
memristor-based modiﬁed canonical chua’s circuit,” International Jour-
nal of Bifurcation and Chaos, vol. 22, no. 06, 2012, p. 1250133.
[17]
Q. Xu, Y. Lin, B. Bao, and M. Chen, “Multiple attractors in a non-
ideal active voltage-controlled memristor based chua’s circuit,” Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals, vol. 83, 2016, pp. 186–200.
[18]
J. Kengne, Z. Njitacke Tabekoueng, V. Kamdoum Tamba, and
A. Nguomkam Negou, “Periodicity, chaos, and multiple attractors in a
memristor-based shinriki’s circuit,” Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Nonlinear Science, vol. 25, no. 10, 2015, p. 103126.
[19]
P. Zaiping, W. Chunhua, L. Yuan, and L. Xiaowen, “A novel four-
dimensional multi-wing hyper-chaotic attractor and its application in
image encryption,” Acta Physica Sinica, vol. 63, no. 24, 2014, p.
240506.
[20]
H. Wu, Y. Ye, B. Bao, M. Chen, and Q. Xu, “Memristor initial
boosting behaviors in a two-memristor-based hyperchaotic system,”
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, vol. 121, 2019, pp. 178–185.
[21]
B. Bao, H. Bao, N. Wang, M. Chen, and Q. Xu, “Hidden extreme
multistability in memristive hyperchaotic system,” Chaos, Solitons &
Fractals, vol. 94, 2017, pp. 102–111.
[22]
M. Chen, M. Li, Q. Yu, B. Bao, Q. Xu, and J. Wang, “Dynamics of
self-excited attractors and hidden attractors in generalized memristor-
based chua’s circuit,” Nonlinear Dynamics, vol. 81, no. 1, 2015, pp.
215–226.
[23]
P. Pourghomi and G. Ghinea, “A proposed nfc payment application,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.2828, 2013.
[24]
M. Q. Saeed and C. D. Walter, “Off-line nfc tag authentication,” in
2012 International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured
Transactions.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 730–735.
[25]
D. Sch¨urmann, S. Dechand, and L. Wolf, “Openkeychain: an architec-
ture for cryptography with smart cards and nfc rings on android,” Pro-
ceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies, vol. 1, no. 3, 2017, pp. 1–24.
[26]
V. Coskun, K. Ok, and B. Ozdenizci, Near ﬁeld communication (NFC):
From theory to practice.
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[27]
N. Ramya, U. Sandhya, and L. Gayathri, “Biometric authentication
to ensure security in epassports,” in 2018 International Conference on
Communication, Computing and Internet of Things (IC3IoT), Feb 2018,
pp. 342–346.
[28]
C. S. Kuka, Y. Hu, Q. Xu, and M. Alkahtani, “An innovative near-ﬁeld
communication security based on the chaos generated by memristive
circuits adopted as symmetrical key,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 2020, pp.
167 975–167 984.
[29]
Z. Zhang, K. T. Chau, C. Qiu, and C. Liu, “Energy encryption for
wireless power transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
vol. 30, no. 9, Sep. 2015, pp. 5237–5246.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

