Solving Challenges in Mental Healthcare Considering Human Factors
Nynke Meijer
Behavioural Management and Social sciences
University of Twente
Enschede, The Netherlands
n.j.meijer@student.utwente.nl
Mo Mansouri
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, USA
mo.mansouri@stevens.edu
Onur Asan
School of Systems and Enterprises
Stevens Institute of Technology
Hoboken, USA
oasan@stevens.edu
Abstract—The mental healthcare sector is coping with several
complexities, like long access times and low trust of clients. In
this paper, we investigate the causes of and possible solutions for
these complexities, while considering human factors. The six root
causes are overtreatment, low situational awareness of planning
staff, cherry-picking, unusable procedures, limited mental care
knowledge among General Practitioners (GPs), and heterogeneity
of clients. To solve these, establishing a collaboration between
different care providers is important. Additionally, a new digital
system could improve the situational awareness of therapists and
planning staff. In developing and implementing these measures, it
is important to take into account the stakeholders and to evaluate
the ideas regularly to ensure acceptance, usability, usefulness, and
trust.
Keywords—mental healthcare, human factors, access times,
waiting lists, overtreatment, collaboration, situational awareness,
trust.
I. INTRODUCTION
Access times in mental healthcare are a persistent problem,
while waiting for treatment can worsen the client’s condition,
especially in this sector. In the Netherlands, the maximum
acceptable access times are bounded by the so-called ‘Treek-
norms’. In the mental healthcare sector, care providers and
health insurers agreed on a Treeknorm of four weeks between
the application and the initial consult and an additional ten
weeks between this consult and the start of the treatment.
However, these norms are often exceeded [1], reducing the
satisfaction and trust of the clients. This is a complex problem
to solve because many stakeholders are involved and many
factors, such as overtreatment [2], low situational awareness of
planning staff, and limited knowledge of General Practitioners
on mental care providers [3], impact this problem.
In this paper, we investigate its causes and possible solutions
by analysing the mental healthcare system and creating a
framework of this system showing the relationships between
the factors that affect the problems of the long access times
and low trust of patients. Using this framework, we develop
a plan for effectively implementing these solutions. For this
study, we build on the knowledge that is already used in other
healthcare sectors and apply it to the mental healthcare sector.
Additionally, we carefully consider human factors, which are
especially important in a socially-oriented system like mental
healthcare.
In Section II, we present related work from other healthcare
subsystems. In Section III, we describe a summary of the
causes of the long access times and the low trust of clients, as
well as the relationships between these causes. In Section IV,
we more closely investigate the six root causes and propose
solutions to them. Finally, we conclude the work in Section V
by proposing solutions and directions for further research.
II. RELATED WORK
In a study on a care program for older adults with dementia
and depression in the United States, researchers showed that
it is crucial for caregivers to build a relationship with their
clients. This way, they can establish trust, which is important
because it creates an openness that enables mental support.
Additionally, a problem that appeared in this study was that
staff used workarounds because not all systems were usable.
Therefore, they sometimes needed to do duplicate work.
Furthermore, scheduling was a complex task and did result
in suboptimal schedules, which also result in a waste of time
[4].
Scheduling challenges in combination with human factors
are the subject of more studies. Guinery et al. [5] state that in
service provision it is important to not solely aim for efﬁciency
because this will increase ‘failure demand’. Failure demand is
unnecessary demand, so unnecessary work. Instead, they look
at the whole system and suggest several access strategies, like
pre-booked appointment scheduling or home visits. Different
clinics can use different strategies because the choice for
appointment strategies is always based on a trade-off. Guinery
et al. also suggest that nurses can sometimes take over a task
from a specialist to create more capacity. Further, in schedul-
ing, it is important to take human factors into account. This
way, human errors can be prevented. For instance, considering
staff fatigue levels in scheduling can signiﬁcantly reduce these
levels [6]. Additionally, taking into account human factors,
like the nurses’ skills or their compatibility, can strengthen
the teamwork, causing the staff to work more efﬁciently [7].
An algorithm for scheduling staff, in their case in operating
rooms, while taking into consideration the staff’s wellbeing,
is designed by Roland et al. [8]. They show the possibility
to simultaneously focus on ﬁnancial and human resources.
For scheduling, Discrete Event Simulation could be used as
well. This technique can provide insights into the workload
and quality of care, while still being a simulation instead of a
test in a real environment. So, this is a cost-effective and safe
way to evaluate changes in the planning strategy [9].
The aforementioned studies touch upon some important
factors to consider when designing a health care system. We
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

should pay attention to them when investigating the causes
of the complexities in the mental healthcare sector specif-
ically. For instance, also in mental healthcare, staff having
workarounds can indicate that the system is not designed prop-
erly. Additionally, solutions that are used in other healthcare
sectors should also be investigated in the mental healthcare
sector. For instance, the pooling of capacity that Guinery et
al. [5] suggest regarding nurses, could also be a solution in
mental healthcare. We use these lessons in the remainder of
this paper to apply them to the mental healthcare sector.
A. Planning and scheduling in mental healthcare
Next to the literature on human factors in scheduling
challenges, we also reviewed the literature on planning and
scheduling techniques in the mental healthcare sector. A study
by Carey et al. [10] in Australia suggests that letting clients
determine when and how often they need an appointment
can be equally effective and more efﬁcient than the current
system in which the practitioners determine the frequency
and number of appointments. This patient-led appointment
scheduling system seems to have the same health outcome,
but with fewer appointments. Therefore, it can reduce access
times. However, to know if these results also apply for
the Netherlands, additional research is needed, because of
the different culture and ﬁnancing system. Additionally, this
scheduling solution includes care-related considerations that
should be taken into account.
Van den Berg-Vreeken [11] reduced access times for a
mental health organisation in the Netherlands by creating a
blueprint schedule to provide clarity regarding whether there
are vacant appointment slots. Furthermore, the study modelled
the process as a Markov Decision Process to determine which
patient types should be assigned to which practitioner types.
This is a useful method for organisations in which some
practitioner types form a bottleneck, whereas the other types
have sufﬁcient capacity.
Other initiatives to reduce access times in mental healthcare
include the study of Weaver et al. [12], in which the Toyota
Production System was used to let employees cooperate in
identifying improvement possibilities in the organisation. As
a result, the number of phone calls needed before the ﬁrst
appointment was reduced, thereby reducing wasted capacity,
which enabled shorter access times. Jones et al. [13] reduced
access times by a so-called ‘triage day’. Instead of spending
much time reviewing the referral letters to determine the
treatment plan, the paper introduced the use of a triage day
in which many real-life intakes are performed. Next to a
reduction of the access times, this also reduced the no-show
rate. The relation between these two variables was shown by
Gallucci et al. [14], who observed that among clients with
access times of at most seven weeks, reducing access times
reduces the no-show probability. Orme and Boswell [15] in
turn studied the factors that inﬂuence pre-intake drop-out rates,
such as age, access time and gender.
B. Planning and scheduling in healthcare
In healthcare in general, more research is done on planning
and scheduling. For instance, cyclic appointment schedules can
be used to cope with a ﬂuctuating demand of scheduled and
unscheduled patients while balancing access and waiting times
[16]. Further, distributing the capacity among clients with
different urgencies is studied by Zhou et al. [17]. They used
a nonlinear mixed-integer programming model to distribute
scarce MRI capacity fairly while also considering revenue.
This situation differs from the situation in mental healthcare
organisations, because rejecting clients would harm their rep-
utation. Patrick and Puterman [18] also consider patients with
differing urgencies, but without the option of rejection. They
show that in case the capacity is not much bigger than the
average demand, scheduling patients at the latest acceptable
moment, eventually in overtime, results in a schedule that
manages the difference in urgency best with regard to the
access times. However, if the capacity is much lower than
the average demand, as is the case in many mental healthcare
organisations, this will result in enormous overtimes. At an
online operational level, Sch¨utz and Kolisch [19] used an
iterative dynamic programming model to decide whether to
accept or reject a request while maximising the expected proﬁt,
which can also be the health outcome. The outcomes of the
model were stored in a lookup table and used in a Discrete
Event Simulation (DES) to evaluate the effects. Additionally,
the authors compared the performance of the model to the
performances of four heuristics.
Capacity allocation is also studied by Zhou et al. [20], who
developed a multi-objective stochastic programming model for
the allocation of ward capacity. They solved this model using
DES and linearised the model to be solvable by several algo-
rithms, among which is an ϵ-constraint algorithm. A method
to manage a general practitioner’s workload was introduced
by Zander et al. [21]. They used Integer Linear Programming
models to determine which new patients a practitioner should
accept to keep his expected workload balanced with his
capacity, considering the age and number of past visits of the
patients. Further, Elkhuizen et al. [22] studied reducing access
times by ﬁrst eliminating the backlog by adding temporary
capacity and afterwards keeping the access times low by
adding structural capacity.
Finally, Bikker et al. [23] reduced access times for cancer
patients by designing blueprint schedules for doctors to al-
locate the capacity to the several treatment types. They did
this by ﬁrst optimising the schedule using an integer linear
programming model that considered the static parameters and
thereafter evaluating the schedule using DES to include the
dynamic parameters.
C. Planning and scheduling in unstable systems
In the mental healthcare sector, demand structurally exceeds
capacity, meaning the system is unstable. Other systems deal-
ing with instability are the kidney allocation system and the
US public housing system. Bandi et al. [24] created a method
to determine the access times in these kinds of systems to
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

give more clarity to patients and people that are waiting for a
house. Bassamboo and Randhawa [25] designed an alternative
to the First Come, First Served (FCFS) policy in overloaded
systems. Based on the amount of time a customer already
waited, they predict his willingness to wait longer. Using this
information in a scheduling policy, they reduced the queue
length, abandonment ratio and access time. Stolyar and Tezcan
[26] also created a model to determine which customer to help
next. Their model bases this choice on the customer-speciﬁc
reward. To the best of our knowledge, no studies are performed
on reducing access times in unstable systems in which balking
of clients is not common.
To summarise, we found that in the mental healthcare
sector only limited research is performed on planning and
scheduling. In the healthcare sector in general, more research
is done, but these studies assume stable systems or reject
demand that exceeds the capacity. Therefore, they do not treat
the difﬁculties that mental healthcare organisations are facing
regarding the long waiting lists and access times. We have
not found studies considering unstable systems when reducing
access times.
III. THE PROBLEM
To analyse the problems and their causes in mental health-
care, we created the problem cluster shown in Figure 1. The
issues addressed in the ﬁgure are extracted from literature, the
news and from our observations and conversations in a Dutch
mental healthcare organisation. In the ﬁgure, we can see that
all problems lead to the ﬁnal problem of a low trust of clients,
which is a serious issue, as Heiden et al. [4] show. When we go
back in the causal chain, we see that this low trust is caused by
the long access times and by the fact that a client is treated by
many different therapists [27]. The causes of the long access
times are overtreating [2] on the one hand and low situational
awareness of planning staff on the other hand, because the
low situational awareness causes a less efﬁcient use of the
available capacity. Additionally, the fact that a client meets
many therapists is caused by the heterogeneity of the clients
and the limited knowledge of General Practitioners on mental
care providers [3]. Furthermore, both the long access times and
the high number of therapists might be caused by procedures
that are not easily usable [4], a cause which needs more re-
search and can differ between mental healthcare organisations,
and by “cherry-picking”, which means that some mental care
providers choose to only treat clients with easy problems while
referring more complex cases to bigger organisations [28]. The
different causal factors do also interrelate. For instance, we
see that the fact that many therapists treat the same client
causes work to be performed in duplicate, which increases
the workload, which already is very high [29]. This in turn
motivates staff to leave, which causes that clients again get a
new therapist. In the end, we observe six root causes. These
are the causes that we should take a closer look at.
IV. SOLUTIONS TO THE SIX ROOT FACTORS
To solve the challenges mental healthcare is facing, we
should investigate the six root problems and generate solutions
to them.
A. Overtreating
Overtreating occurs if clients are treated for an unnecessar-
ily long time. It might be that there is no suitable treatment
for the client, but therapists do not like giving up on their
clients. In other cases, the therapist might continue treatment,
while the client may already be recovered [2]. In this case,
the therapist can be too careful and worried about a possible
relapse of his client.
To reduce overtreating, ﬁrstly, it is important that therapists
are aware of their possible tendency to overtreat. This can be
done by comparing the average client cycle times of different
therapists. In doing this, it is important to take into account
differences between clients, because some disorders are easier
to treat, while others are more complex and unpredictable.
Additionally, in comparing therapists, it is important to con-
sider privacy issues. Therapists that turn out to overtreat might
feel attacked if it is noticed and this can affect their working
ethos. So, it is important to create a safe environment in which
therapists feel they can learn from each other and in which
it is appreciated if they are open about their weaknesses.
In an environment like that, development, improvement and
growth can be realised. Secondly, reducing overtreatment can
be realised by handing clients over to a General Practitioner
when they are in a stable condition. To encourage this transfer,
a close collaboration between the practitioner and the therapist
is important [30].
B. Low situational awareness among planning staff
The low situational awareness among planning staff results
in gaps in the practitioners’ schedules. In multi-therapist
practices, the therapists might need to notify the planning staff
themselves when one of their clients has ﬁnished his treatment
process. If the therapist does not immediately do this, no new
client from the waiting list will be scheduled, which results in
gaps, and therefore time waste. We can distinguish three levels
within situational awareness: perception, comprehension and
projection [31]. In this case, the main problem can be classiﬁed
as a comprehension problem. The manager knows the relation-
ship between the manual work, the planning and the gaps in
the schedules, but just does not know the current situation.
Therefore, the planning staff can also not project the current
situation to the future, which is a projection problem. So, it is
important to make sure the current situation is comprehended
to enable planners to create a suitable schedule for the next
weeks. This can be done, for instance, by creating a system
that automatically notiﬁes the planners if a therapist can take
a new client. Another solution is to create reminders, for
example in the form of a monthly email or a poster, to remind
the practitioners to notify the planners. This can increase the
situational perception of the practitioners. However, with this
solution, there is a risk of alarm fatigue. Therefore, automation
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 1. Mental healthcare problem cluster
is more likely to be effective. Nonetheless, the system should
be developed with care and evaluation and participation of
stakeholders should be part of the design process to ensure
the system is effective.
C. ”Cherry-picking”
The practice of cherry-picking among care providers can
be explained by its ﬁnancial attractiveness. Namely, up to
the end of 2021, due to the national care funding system,
short treatments with a high chance of success were more
proﬁtable than lengthy treatments with less or slower success.
The advantage of this system was that care providers had
an incentive to provide a high quality of care and limit
overtreatment. However, it is hard to fairly benchmark care
providers based on their success because mental diseases are
all different and cover a wide range of complexities. Therefore,
the chances of success differ much and it is not desirable
that clients with more complex problems are not helped. To
give providers an incentive to stop cherry-picking, the national
care funding system should be adapted or legislation should
require care providers to accept more clients with complex
problems. The ﬁrst, however, appeared to be difﬁcult because
objections related to cherry-picking were made against the
national care funding system without success [32], because
the Dutch Healthcare Authority stated that care providers are
allowed to specialise in certain treatments. Nonetheless, since
2022 a new national care funding system is in place, which
promises to make cherry-picking less attractive [33]. Forcing
care providers to accept more clients with complex problems is
difﬁcult to implement because it would complicate the referrals
that are needed when it turns out another provider offers a
more suitable treatment for a client.
D. Unusable procedures
The fact that therapists might deliberately or instinctively
use workarounds for procedures indicates that these proce-
dures are not well-aligned with the needs of the therapists
or clients. This misalignment can be observed, for instance, if
procedures are performed on paper instead of on the computer
or if procedures are even totally ignored. Some reasons for
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

working on paper instead of in a computer program can be
that the computer program is difﬁcult to use or that it has
ﬂaws. Additionally, working on a computer can feel more
impersonal, while working on paper seems to offer more
ﬂexibility [4]. Another workaround can be that therapists
who use standardized questionnaires reword the questions
[4]. This indicates that the questions might not be formu-
lated correctly. This can either cause incorrect answers of
clients if they misinterpret the question or it might hinder
correct comparisons between clients of different therapists.
These incorrect comparisons are then caused by the fact that
researchers think the questions are standardized, whereas, in
reality, the clients answered different questions because their
therapists reformulated them. Additionally, workarounds can
be used if the staff simply does not understand the procedures
well enough to use them. All in all, it would be useful to
further investigate which procedures are not usable enough
and how considering human factors can improve the usability
and usefulness of these procedures. This can either be done
by adapting the procedures or by training staff. Although
training staff can seem the easiest solution, it might just be
extinguishing the ﬁre. Creating an intuitive, useful system will
be more effective if it is possible [34].
E. Limited knowledge among General Practitioners
If General Practitioners (GPs) do not know what mental
healthcare providers have to offer, it is hard for them to refer
their patients to the most suitable therapist. Therefore, clients
might end up at the wrong therapist, where they will be on the
waiting list for several weeks. After that time, they have an
initial consult in which it turns out they should be referred to
another therapist. There, the waiting process starts again. This
is not desirable. We again ﬁnd that a low situational awareness
is at the heart of the problem. The perception of GPs is
insufﬁcient. To solve this issue, we could train GPs. However,
the downside of this is that it improves the situation just
temporarily, because the options for mental care are evolving
and changing. Instead, in Limburg, a region in the Netherlands,
a regional triage panel has been established. People from
different backgrounds, ranging from several mental health
organisations to the local government, together decide which
organisation is most suitable to help the client [28]. This way,
knowledge is combined, a client has a higher likeliness of
being referred to the most suitable organisation and his access
times at less suitable therapists are reduced.
F. Heterogeneity of clients
Mental difﬁculties are very heterogeneous. They cover a
wide spectrum of symptoms and they evolve in many different
ways. Therefore, it is not always clear which treatment will be
successful. So, in the end, clients are treated by many different
therapists. Each unsuccessful treatment lowers the clients’ trust
in the care system. In addition, the fact that they need to
tell their situation repetitively to their new therapists is not
beneﬁcial for their satisfaction with the system. The reduction
of trust should be minimised because trust is important in
mental care [4]. If clients do not trust their therapists or their
treatment, the treatment will be less successful, because trust
is needed to encourage honesty and effort of the clients, which
increase the chance of success.
However, the heterogeneity of clients is uncontrollable.
Nonetheless, mental health specialists could develop so-called
‘care paths’. These are standardised treatment plans for several
different mental issues. Clients might not ﬁt perfectly within
these standardised paths, but the paths can still help in decision
making. They can roughly show which therapy or medication
a client should receive, after which the therapist can adapt
the plan to the speciﬁc client. At a later stage, even artiﬁcial
intelligence could be used to suggest care paths for a client.
However, both with and without artiﬁcial intelligence, the risks
of under- and overtrust by therapists should be acknowledged
[35]. These risks could be dealt with, for instance, by mo-
tivating or forcing therapists to ﬁrst come up with a plan
themselves that they can later check against the standardised
path. However, this increases the workload. Instead, therapists
could be encouraged to ﬁrst choose a care path, which saves
time, and then adapt the care path to the needs of their speciﬁc
client, which decreases the chance of overtrust. Whether this
indeed pays off should be evaluated carefully.
V. CONCLUSION
The mental healthcare sector is coping with several com-
plexities, like long access times and low trust of clients. In this
paper, we outlined several causes and their interdependencies.
The six root causes are overtreatment, low situational aware-
ness of planning staff, cherry-picking, unusable procedures,
limited knowledge among GPs, and heterogeneity of clients.
These factors should be addressed to reduce workloads and
access times and to increase clients’ trust and satisfaction.
A. System development
To address the issues mentioned previously, it would be
useful to create a system to improve situational awareness
among therapists and planning staff. The system should keep
track of the number of clients of therapists and it should
notify the planning staff when they can assign a new patient
to a therapist. Additionally, this system could compare the
average client cycle times of different therapists to make
therapists aware of their possible tendency to overtreat clients.
Furthermore, standardized care paths, and eventually artiﬁcial
intelligence, can be included in this system to support decision
making. Hereby, the risk of over- and undertrust should be
considered. Additionally, in designing such a system, it is
important to let stakeholders participate in the design process
and to prototype and evaluate the system repetitively to ensure
that it is usable. This way the system is more effective and
therapists are more likely to accept the system instead of
developing workarounds that can cause duplicate work or
errors.
B. Collaboration
Additionally, the mental health sector can beneﬁt from
collaboration between care providers. A regional triage panel
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

can help to improve the success of the ﬁrst referral of clients
and a close collaboration between therapists and GPs can
encourage a timely handover of the client from the therapist
to the GP. In both approaches, trust among the stakeholders
is crucial. Therefore, it is important they participate and think
along in establishing these collaborations.
C. Future research
Some other aspects should be investigated further. It would,
among others, be useful to investigate which procedures are
not functioning properly. This can be done by observing
whether staff uses workarounds. If procedures turn out to be
unusable, projects can be started to improve the procedures.
Hereby, user participation is important to ensure the proce-
dures serve their purpose.
Finally, it would be useful to study whether and how the
national care funding system could be further adapted to avoid
cherry-picking, while still enabling to refer patients to other
care providers if needed.
REFERENCES
[1] Vektis, ”Factsheet Wachttijdinformatie ggz [Factsheet Waiting time in-
formation ggz]”, https://www.vektis.nl/intelligence/publicaties/factsheet-
wachttijdinformatie-ggz, retrieved: June, 2021.
[2] K. Kraaijeveld and R. Lomans, ”De ggz in 2025: Vergezicht op de
geestelijke gezondheidszorg [”The ggz in 2025: Vision on the mental
healthcare sector]”, 2020.
[3] F. Verhulst, ”Einde aan ’GGZ-jungle’: Nieuw platform moet zorg bij
psychische klachten gaan stroomlijnen [End of the ’GGZ jungle’: New
platform should streamline care for psychological complaints]”, BN
DeStem, 2021.
[4] S. M. Heiden, R. J. Holden, C. A. Alder, K. Bodke, and M. Bous-
tani, ”Human factors in mental healthcare: A work system analysis
of a community-based program for older adults with depression and
dementia”, Applied Ergonomics, vol. 64, pp. 27-40, 2017.
[5] J. Guinery, S. Brown, M. Berglund, and K. Scales, ”The inﬂuence of hu-
man factors on access and scheduling of primary care services. Advances
in Production Management Systems”, Innovative and Knowledge-Based
Production Management in a Global-Local World, pp. 547-554, 2014.
[6] R. -C. Lin, M. Y. Sir, E. Sisikoglu, K. Pasupathy, and L. M. Steege,
”Optimal nurse scheduling based on quantitative models of work-related
fatigue”, IIE Transactions on Healthcare Systems Engineering, vol. 3(1),
pp. 23-38, 2013.
[7] M. Hamid, R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, F. Golpaygani, and B. Vahedi-
Nouri, ”A multi-objective model for a nurse scheduling problem by
emphasizing human factors”, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechan-
ical Engineers, Part H: Journal of Engineering in Medicine, vol. 234(2),
pp. 179-199, 2020.
[8] B. Roland, C. Di Martinelly, F. Riane, and Y. Pochet, ”Scheduling
an operating theatre under human resource constraints”, Computers &
Industrial Engineering, vol. 58(2), pp. 212-2020, 2010.
[9] S. M. Qureshi, N. Purdy, A. Mohani, and W. P. Neumann, ”Predicting
the effect of nurse-patient ratio on nurse workload and care quality using
discrete event simulation”, Journal of Nursing Management, vol. 27(5),
pp. 971-980, 2019.
[10] T. Carey, S. Tai, and W. Stiles, ”Effective and efﬁcient: Using patient-
led appointment scheduling in routine mental health practice in remote
Australia”, Professional Psychology: Research and Practise, vol. 44(6),
pp. 405-414, 2013.
[11] S. van den Berg-Vreeken, ”A policy approximation of a Markov decision
process for scheduling clients in an outpatient mental healthcare clinic”,
2021.
[12] A. Weaver et al., ”The Impact of System Level Factors on Treatment
Timeliness: Utilizing the Toyota Production System to Implement Direct
Intake Scheduling in a Semi-rural Community Mental Health Clinic”,
The Journal of Behavioral Health Services & Research, vol. 40(3), pp.
294-305, 2013.
[13] E. Jones, C. Lucey, and L. Wadland, ”Triage: a waiting list initiative
in a child mental health service”, Psychiatric Bulletin, vol. 24(2), pp.
57-59, 2000.
[14] G. Gallucci, W. Swartz, and F. Hackerman, ”Impact of the Wait for
an Initial Appointment on the Rate of Kept Appointments at a Mental
Health Center”, Psychiatric services, vol. 56(3), pp. 344-346, 2005.
[15] D. Orme and D. Boswell, ”The pre-intake drop-out at a community
mental health center”, Community Mental Health Journal, vol. 27(5),
pp. 375-379, 1991.
[16] N. Kortbeek et al., ”Designing cyclic appointment schedules for outpa-
tient clinics with scheduled and unscheduled patient arrivals”, Perfor-
mance Evaluation, vol. 80, pp. 5-26, 2014.
[17] L. Zhou, N. Geng, Z. Jiang, and X. Wang, ”Combining revenue and
equity in capacity allocation of imaging facilities”, European Journal of
Operational Research, vol. 256(2), pp. 619-628, 2017.
[18] J. Patrick and M. Puterman, ”Reducing Wait Times through Operations
Research: Optimizing the Use of Surge Capacity”, Healthcare policy,
vol. 3(3), pp. 75-88, 2008.
[19] H. Sch¨utz and R. Kolisch, ”Capacity allocation for demand of differ-
ent customer-product-combinations with cancellations, no-shows, and
overbooking when there is a sequential delivery of service”, Annals of
Operations Research, vol. 206(1), pp. 401-423, 2013.
[20] L. Zhou, N. Geng, Z. Jiang, and X. Wang, ”Multi-objective capacity
allocation of hospital wards combining revenue and equity”, Omega
(United Kingdom), vol. 81, pp. 220-233, 2018.
[21] A. Zander, S. Nickel, and P. Vanberkel, ”Managing the intake of
new patients into a physician panel over time”, European Journal of
Operational Research, vol. 294(1), pp. 391-403, 2021.
[22] S. Elkhuizen, S. Das, P. Bakker, and J. Hontelez, ”Using computer
simulation to reduce access time for outpatient departments”, Quality
and Safety in Health Care, vol. 16(5), pp. 382-386, 2007.
[23] I. Bikker, N. Kortbeek, R. van Os, and R. Boucherie, ”Reducing
access times for radiation treatment by aligning the doctor’s schemes”,
Operations Research for Health Care, vol. 7, pp. 111-121, 2015.
[24] C. Bandi, N. Trichakis, and P. Vayanos, ”Robust Multiclass Queuing
Theory for Wait Time Estimation in Resource Allocation Systems”,
Management Science, vol. 65(1), pp. 152-187, 2019.
[25] A. Bassamboo and R. Randhawa, ”Scheduling Homogeneous Impatient
Customers”, Management Science, vol. 62(7), pp. 2129-2147, 2015.
[26] A. Stolyar and T. Tezcan, ”Shadow-routing based control of ﬂexible
multi-server pools in overload”, Operations Research, vol. 59(6), pp.
1427-1444, 2011.
[27] J.
Maas,
”Vertrouwen
is
h´et
instrument
van
de
hulpverlener
[Trust
is
the
main
instrument
of
the
health
care
provider]”,
https://www.zorgwelzijn.nl/vertrouwen-is-het-instrument-van-de-
hulpverlener/, retrieved: March, 2022.
[28] Weg van de Wachtlijst, ”Regionale triagetafel voor verwijzingen naar
de specialistische GGZ [Regional triage table for referrals to spe-
cialised GGZ]”, https://wegvandewachtlijst.nl/regionale-triagetafel-voor-
verwijzingen-naar-de-specialistische-ggz, retrieved: June, 2021.
[29] M.
van
Wijk,
”Arbeidsmarktproﬁel
van
zorg
en
welzijn
[Job
market
proﬁle
of
the
healthcare
sector]”,
https://www.cbs.nl/nl-
nl/longread/statistische-trends/2020/arbeidsmarktproﬁel-van-zorg-en-
welzijn?onepage=true, retrieved: March, 2022.
[30] R. Meliesie, ”‘Warme overdracht’: continu¨ıteit van zorg, afgestemd
op de patient [’Warm transfer’: continuity of care, tailored to the
patient]”,
https://wegvandewachtlijst.nl/warme-overdracht-continuiteit-
van-zorg-afgestemd-op-de-patient, retrieved: June, 2021.
[31] M. R. Endsley, ”Situational awareness analysis and measurement”,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates., 2000.
[32] J. M. T. Hautvast, ”Beslissing op bezwaar - ongegrond (1144449)
[Decision on appeal - unfounded (1144449)]”, 2019
[33] H. Maassen, ”Bekostiging ggz gaat op de schop [GGz funding is
going to be changed]”, https://www.medischcontact.nl/nieuws/laatste-
nieuws/artikel/bekostiging-ggz-gaat-op-de-schop.htm, retrieved: March,
2022.
[34] A. L. Russ et al., ”The science of human factors: separating fact from
ﬁction”, BMJ Quality & Safety, vol. 22(10), pp. 802-808, 2013.
[35] O. Asan, A. E. Bayrak, and A. Choudhury, ”Artiﬁcial intelligence and
human trust in healthcare: focus on clinicians”, Journal of Medical
Internet Research, vol. 22(6), 2020.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

