BioWallet: A Biometric Digital Wallet
E. Benli, I. Engin, C. Giousouf, M. A. Ulak
Faculty of Computer and Informatics
Istanbul Technical University
34469, Maslak, Istanbul, Turkey
{benliel, engini, giousouf, ulak}@itu.edu.tr
Ş. Bahtiyar 
Department of Computer Engineering
Boğaziçi University 
34342, Bebek, Istanbul, Turkey
serif.bahtiyar@boun.edu.tr
Abstract— People have used digital currencies to meet their
online payment requirements in a more convenient, cheaper,
and secure way. The currencies have been stored in digital
wallets, where security is a significant challenge. In this paper,
we propose a model that uses biometric methods to secure
digital currencies within wallets. The proposed model improves
both usability and security of payment transactions carried out
with digital currencies, which are stored in wallets, by using
fingerprints of users.
Keywords- Digital currency; security; wallet; biometric.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, modern societies have become more connected
than
ever
with
the
help
of
recent
communication
technologies. The connections have affected daily lives of
people that have changed our habits. One of the most
significant
changes
is
our
payment
behavior,
where
payments shift from cash to digital money. This shift offers
new benefits to corporations because the digital payment
solutions
have
become
more
global.
Therefore,
the
willingness to use such solutions has increased dramatically.
Particularly, the research area of digital currencies has been
given considerable attention. A digital currency is a currency
that has neither physical representation nor belongs to a
country. Nevertheless, it still has a value and allows
individuals to make purchases or transactions with various
amounts. For instance, the daily exchange of bitcoin may be
$2 and $5 million USD. Recently, there are approximately
$100 million bitcoins on the market [1].
The main issue about digital currencies is security. One
of the significant challenges is the storage security of digital
currencies
that
affects
the
anonymity
of
transactions.
Existing storage systems have security vulnerabilities. This
fact reduces the usability of digital currencies, which
prevents the increase of online payment transactions. Some
digital currency providers collaborate with third party
security vendors to straighten the anonymity of transactions
by enhancing security and trust. On the other hand, this
approach does not provide complete trust since there is
always a suspicion around what kind of security the third
party provides related to the anonymity of transactions. This
reduces trust in conventional digital currencies. Actually,
some financial institutions use different security mechanisms
to protect customers’ data with the help of additional security
mechanisms in the online environment, such as mobile and
Web applications.
Wallets store digital currencies from where users obtain
an address to use in order to make transactions. Simply, the
sender must know the receiver’s address in order to achieve a
bitcoin transfer. Most of the time, third party organizations
provide these addresses. Since the organizations can monitor
transactions and they have all the critical information about
users, anonymity and trust issues related to digital currency
usage remain.
Most of the time, digital wallets are associated with
specific
hardware
properties
of computing
devices
to
improve the security of the wallets for ensuring anonymity
and trust. However, security usability is a challenge in those
cases. For instance, if the device is lost, it is very hard or
impossible to reach the coins within the wallet. Our
motivation in this paper is the lack of usable security
mechanisms that extend anonymity and trust for digital
currencies. In this paper, we propose a conceptual model for
securing credentials within digital wallets by using biometric
methods. The model uses biometric sensors to reach
biological properties of the users to increase usability.
Particularly, we use data from fingerprint sensors to improve
security usability of digital wallets for bitcoin like digital
coins.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II explains digital currencies and security. In Section
III, we present our solution, BioWallet. Section IV is about
the analysis of the proposed solution. Section V is devoted to
conclusions and future works.
II.
SECURITY AND DIGITAL CURRENCIES
There are various digital currencies, such as Bitcoin [1],
Dogecoin [2], Mastercoin [2] and Litecoin [2]. Crypto
currency is also used to refer to these currencies, since they
have cryptographic properties. Bitcoin is a well-known and
well-accepted digital currency. It is a distributed and open
source digital currency system [1]. Bitcoin was designed by
Satoshi Nakamoto in October, 2008. It addresses some
crucial challenges, such as anonymity, double payment
problem and illegal use of money. However, it does not
provide a complete solution to these challenges [2][3].
Therefore, new digital currency systems similar to Zerocoin
[1][4] have been developed.
Zerocoin [1], which was developed by Miers, solves
some specific problems found in Bitcoin. It brings partial
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

anonymity to transactions by hiding the senders’ identity, but
not the amount and the receivers’ identity [4]. In addition,
Zerocoin [1] tried to solve the double pay problem to ensure
the integrity of digital currency systems. Although the
structure of Zerocoin solves the double payment problem, it
reduces the performance.
Ben et al. have introduced Zerocash [4] to solve the
performance and anonymity problems of Zerocoin. They
created DAP (Decentralized Anonymous Payment) scheme.
Zerocash decreases the time of verification until 6 ms and
hides the receiver identity by using DAP [4].
One of the most important parts of the digital currencies
is wallets, since they allow users to store their bitcoins and
transfer them whenever and wherever they desire. Although
these wallets make the transaction process less challenging,
they may be unprotected against thieves. For example,
consider a user who is using a mobile bitcoin wallet to make
his/her transactions. Someone can easily take that mobile
device for a limited amount of time and send an amount of
bitcoins to another bitcoin wallet account. The reason of this
problem is the usage of traditional wallet systems that are
working with just a password such as BlueWallet [9].
Therefore,
it
is
obvious
that
a
strong
authentication
mechanism is required for these wallet systems, especially
for the people who desire to have it.
Hence, the biometric authentication systems are getting
more common worldwide. Therefore many payment systems
are shifting from traditional authentication methods to
modern approaches like fingerprint, face recognition, ear
recognition, and retina scan [6]. In personally identifiable
authentication systems that contain critical data of the users,
it is crucial to provide a strong access control mechanism to
prevent unauthorized accesses to the confidential information
related to financial information.
Bitcoin
like
cryptocurrencies
still
have
security
challenges. In 2011, intruders stole 25.000 bitcoins [1] that
means
we
still
have
no
strong
access
control
for
cryptocurrencies. On the other hand, Zerocoin has attempted
to solve the double pay problem, which is one of the most
essential challenges. In order to solve this problem, bigger
sized spend proofs are used. As the block chain keeps the
spend proofs, it may result in deployment problems [7]. In
order to maintain the anonymity, Zerocoin uses zero-
knowledge proof [7].
The protection of wallets where users keep their digital
properties,
such
addresses
and
keys,
is
a
significant
challenge. Password based authentication methods are the
common way to protect current digital wallets. On the other
hand, passwords are prone to many attacks or simply they
may be stolen. For instance, someone may make coin
transactions from these wallets by taking possession of the
passwords or device of the user.
Recent researches show that to get secret keys and
passwords from a mobile device is a very easy process.
Researchers have accomplished this using an ordinary
magnetic probe to get the private key of some wallet
applications [8]. This shows how vulnerable existing digital
wallets are. One of the best ways to avoid this kind of
problems is using biometric authentication methods, such as
fingerprint and retina scan. [9].
BioWallet offers a new method for the specified problem.
Bitcoin users can protect their information on storage by
using the fingerprint based access control of BioWallet.
Specifically, users need to enroll their fingerprints for the
initial installation of the wallet. Moreover, a user must verify
her fingerprint in every transaction. BioWallet improves the
security of Zerocash that offers pure anonymity. We believe
that the proposed solution extends the security of digital
currency systems, particularly for crypto currencies.
III.
BIOWALLET
One of the most useful methods to authenticate users is to
use their biometric information. Almost all systems allow
users to use their biometric information in terms of hardware.
Additionally, the security of biometric methods is a proven
fact [10][11][12].
In our model, users initially register their biometric
credentials to the system. The information gathered from
users is encrypted with 1024 or 2048-bits RSA (Rivest,
Shamir, Adleman) keys and it is kept in server in order to
protect the data. Figure 1 shows our model about secure
registration process using fingerprint.
Fig. 1. Information gathering of users.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

Below are the abbreviations we used in the encryption
process.
After registration, in order to allow users to send bitcoins,
we have two approaches. In the first approach, a user is
authorized for a predetermined time (i.e. 10 minutes). In this
manner,
users
are
allowed
to
accomplish
multiple
transactions without approving their identities. However, it
may be vulnerable against some attacks.
In the second approach, a user provides its identity for
each transaction she initiates. This makes it harder for an
attacker to steal coins. Figure 2 explains the flow of this
approach. Here, we use two-phase authorization system in
the model. In this way, we eliminate potential vulnerabilities
emerged from using only biometric information.
During the process of sending bitcoins, a standard public
key encryption is used. However, if a user loses his/her
credentials (i.e. losing phone or logging out from the
application), then he/she also loses the related keys.
When the user registers onto the system, a public-private
keys pair is created. Then, the keys are sent to the server
after encrypting them with a predetermined public key. The
private key that is used to decrypt the encrypted public-
private keys of user are kept on the server. Therefore, no one
is able to reach the keys of the user.
A user may lose his/her device and he/she obtains a new
device, where the user installs the wallet. When the user
gives his/her credentials (username and password) and the
answer of the security question, the system creates a new
private and public key for the user. Since the server has the
old encrypted version of private-public keys of the user and
the private key to decrypt them, the system automatically
sends the bitcoins left in the old account of the user to the
new created account.
IV.
ANALYSIS OF BIOWALLET
We compare BioWallet with existing wallets to show the
advantages of the proposed solution. The first wallet system
that we compare with BioWallet is BlueWallet. BlueWallet
is a hardware device that uses Bluetooth technology. The
device is a little mobile hardware box which contains input
and output screens [9].
The most similar product is Case which is a bitcoin
wallet that offers complete security in a hardware component
that allows to spend or transfer bitcoins [13]. They claim that
they do not save users’ fingerprints directly in their database,
but rather that the fingerprint patterns are stored and that
helps to authenticate a user. The main lack of the product
may be that it does not give chance to its users to reacquire
their money when the users somehow lose them. Besides,
Case uses a piece of hardware for performing all bitcoin
operations. On the other hand, BioWallet uses a device built-
in fingerprint scanner to scan fingerprints and keeps them on
operating system. Therefore, it does not need any additional
hardware but the smart phone that supports fingerprint scan.
There are many digital wallet systems, which store
Bitcoin
like
cryptocurrencies
by
using
only
software
solutions on Android or iOS. These options ensure diverse
usage of personal smartphones as a digital wallet. The
biggest advantage of mobile application wallets against any
other wallet types is the availability when a user needs it. On
the other hand, if there is no screen lock or another
protection mechanism on smartphones, thieves can steal the
smartphone
and
access
any
critical
information.
For
example, one of the well-known wallet applications is
Bitcoin Wallet. Although Bitcoin Wallet has some useful
features like QR Code (Quick Response Code) scanning and
more than one bitcoin receive address support, it does not
have any security barrier against reaching the application
except a single password.
Fig. 2. Two phase authentication system
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

BioWallet protects the digital assets and transaction
process with two-phase authentication system that employs
fingerprint
and
password
authentication.
Additionally,
BioWallet does not store any fingerprint data online to be
able to preserve privacy. All personal data are stored locally.
Based on the personal needs of a user, private and public
keys can be stored at the cloud server in an encrypted way
except fingerprint data. When users need to use a new
device, the system sends user's money to the new device.
Thus, digital wallet users can continue to use their digital
money from the new device.
There is another kind of wallet for performing digital
currency activities. It is called Web wallets where users can
directly reach it from Web browser. Ordinary Bitcoin clients
require at least 14 GB disk capacity and they need many
hours to complete synchronization with block chain. Owing
to Web wallets, no need for these requirements anymore.
However, this kind of wallets are vulnerable from the server
side. For example, 923 BTCs (Bitcoin) were stolen from
OzCoin system [14].
TABLE I.
SUMMARY COMPARISON OF BIOWALLET AND OTHER WALLETS
Wallet Name
Fingerprint
Authentication
Mobile Support
Basic Wallet
Operations
Easy Transfer
Software
Solution
BioWallet





BlueWallet





Case





Bitcoin Wallet





Web Wallets





Desktop Wallets





The last type of bitcoin wallets is desktop wallets.
Desktop computers are safer than mobile computers or
systems against physical theft. Moreover, almost all desktop
computer systems have a system password at the beginning.
Thus, fingerprint protection is not really solving security
issues on personal computers when compared with the
smartphones. That’s why BioWallet is primarily created for
mobile platform users. We compare BioWallet and other
wallets in Table I.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Password
based
authentication
mechanisms
are
inadequate for the protection of currencies within digital
wallets. In this paper, we propose a solution that uses
biometric methods to secure coins within digital wallets. A
user can easily guard her digital coins by using BioWallet
with her fingerprints that will extend the usability of digital
currency.
As a future work, we will implement BioWallet.
Moreover,
we
have
been
working
to
integrate
other
biometric methods to BioWallet, such as retina and face
recognitions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Turkish State Planning
Organization
(DPT)
under
the
TAM
Project,
number
2007K120610.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Miers, C. Garman, M. Green, and A. D. Rubin, “Zerocoin:
Anonymous Distributed E-Cash from Bitcoin,” in 2013 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2013, pp. 397–411.
[2]
F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, "Bitcoin and Beyond: A
Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies," in
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 3,
pp. 2084-2123, third quarter 2016.
[3]
S. Barber, X. Boyen, E. Shi, and E. Uzun, “Bitter to Better —
How to Make Bitcoin a Better Currency,” in Financial
Cryptography and Data Security, A. D. Keromytis, Ed.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 399–414.
[4]
E. Ben-Sasson et al., “Zerocash: Decentralized Anonymous
Payments from Bitcoin,” 349, 2014.
[5]
http://www.coindesk.com/data/bitcoin-daily-transactions/.
[Accessed: 18-Nov-2016].
[6]
N. L. Clarke and S. M. Furnell, “Authentication of users on
mobile telephones – A survey of attitudes and practices,”
Computers & Security, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 519–527, Oct. 2005.
[7]
C. Garman, M. Green, I. Miers, and A. D. Rubin, “Rational
Zero: Economic Security for Zerocoin with Everlasting
Anonymity,” in Financial Cryptography and Data Security, R.
Böhme, M. Brenner, T. Moore, and M. Smith, Eds. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 140–155
[8]
D. Genkin, L. Pachmanov, I. Pipman, E. Tromer, and Y.
Yarom, “ECDSA Key Extraction from Mobile Devices via
Nonintrusive Physical Side Channels,” in Proceedings of the
2016
ACM
SIGSAC
Conference
on
Computer
and
Communications Security, New York, NY, USA, 2016, pp.
1626–1638.
[9]
T. Bamert, C. Decker, R. Wattenhofer, and S. Welten,
“BlueWallet: The Secure Bitcoin Wallet,” in Security and
Trust Management, S. Mauw and C. D. Jensen, Eds. Springer
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 65–80.
[10] V. Matyás Jr. and Z. Ríha, “Biometric Authentication -
Security and Usability,” in Proceedings of the IFIP TC6/TC11
Sixth Joint Working Conference on Communications and
Multimedia
Security:
Advanced
Communications
and
Multimedia Security, Deventer, Netherlands, 2002, pp. 227–
239.
[11] “Android
6.0
APIs
|
Android
Developers.”
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.android.com/about/versions/marshmallow/a
ndroid-6.0.html. [Accessed: 12-Nov-2016].
[12] “RSA
Laboratories
-
Has
the
RSA
algorithm
been
compromised as a result of Bernstein’s Paper?” [Online].
Available:
http://www.emc.com/emc-plus/rsa-
labs/historical/has-the-rsa-algorithm-been-compromised.htm.
[Accessed: 19-Nov-2016].
[13] “Case - The world’s most secure and easy-to-use bitcoin
wallet.” [Online]. Available: https://choosecase.com/faq.html.
[Accessed: 18-Nov-2016].
[14] A. Gervais, G. O. Karame, V. Capkun, and S. Capkun, “Is
Bitcoin a Decentralized Currency?,” IEEE Security Privacy,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 54–60, May 2014
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-547-0
ICONS 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems

