Validation of a Failure-Cause Searching and Solution-Finding Algorithm in 
Production based on Complaint Information from the Use Phase 
Validation using an industrial example from the field of precision machining and cold forming 
 
Nadine Schlüter 
University of Wuppertal 
Product Safety and Quality 
Engineering 
Wuppertal, Germany 
Email: schlueter@uni- 
wuppertal.de 
Marius Heinrichsmeyer 
University of Wuppertal 
Product Safety and Quality 
Engineering 
Wuppertal, Germany 
Email: heinrichsmeyer@uni-
wuppertal.de 
Fynn Kösling 
University of Wuppertal 
Product Safety and Quality 
Engineering 
Wuppertal, Germany 
Email: fynn.koesling-hk@uni-
wuppertal.de 
 
 
Amirbabak Ansari 
University of Wuppertal 
Product Safety and Quality 
Engineering 
Wuppertal, Germany 
Email: aansari@uni-
wuppertal.de 
 
Abstract — Nowadays, constantly increasing demands on 
products lead to great opportunities, but also major challenges. 
Complaint management, in particular, is also affected by this, 
as the high complexity of products and production systems can 
often lead to failures. In connection with digitalization, 
companies face the challenge of having to handle complex and 
extensive information. In the field of complaint management, 
not only the amount of information increase but also the 
number of sources, channels, formats, etc. While the 
companies act more and more globally and digitally, the 
complaint management in German mechanical engineering is 
still predominantly carried out manually. In order to improve 
the processing time and the analysis of complaints, as well as to 
implement the automated processing of complaint information, 
the fundamental research project FusLa [funding code: SCHL 
2225/1-1] funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) 
was launched. The aim is to develop an algorithm that 
automates the evaluation of relevant complaint information 
from different types of complaint texts. This paper evaluates 
the functionality of the algorithm in the context of a validation 
example from the field of precision machining and cold 
forming. 
Keywords-Algorithm; Complaint Management; Business 
Process Re-Engineering for Manufacturing; Decision Support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the increasing internationalization of our time, the 
complexity of products and their producing companies is 
constantly increasing. The need for a higher individualization 
of products inevitably leads to new challenges for the 
company's 
requirements 
management, 
as 
product 
requirements become more and more complex [1]. Although 
this increases the opportunities on the market, it also means 
that the failure risks increase significantly. Therefore, a 
direct relationship exists between the complexity of a 
product and the failures that occur. An increasing number of 
complaints automatically accompanies an increasing number 
of failures. Complaints mean additional costs for a company, 
which have to be minimized in the context of increasing 
complexity. 
To eliminate failures and thus avoid complaints, 
companies rely on different approaches, including the 
software-supported 8D report. However, these approaches 
show numerous weaknesses when it comes to dealing with 
the complexity that prevails in production systems. There is 
no model integration that enables the traceability of causes of 
failure within the production system. To process the flow of 
information generated by complaints and master the 
complexity of the production system it is necessary to use a 
model approach. For this particular problem, the current 
approaches, as demonstrated in section II, reach their limits 
or do not yet focus on complaint management. In order to 
solve this problem, an algorithm based on the current state of 
the art was developed [2] and validated in the industry. In the 
following section II, this paper deals with the current state of 
the art and examines which findings have been gained in 
science as well as in industry with regard to failure-cause 
searching 
and 
solution-finding 
based 
on 
complaint 
information. Within the framework of this paper, future-
oriented approaches will mainly be considered and examined 
for interfaces to the topic. Section III describes the developed 
algorithm with its functions and methods as well as the 
applied validation. Finally, the results of the validation 
carried out previously are being used for an evaluation in 
section IV. Moreover, it gives an outlook for upcoming 
research fields. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Considering the field of science, there are some research 
projects that focus on failure-cause searching and solution-
finding in production systems. However, it turned out that 
these research projects either are not related to complaint 
management, do not function algorithm-based and thus are 
not automated, or just subjective evaluations take place. At 
this point, some of the already published works of the 
research group Product Safety and Quality Engineering can 
be referenced, which have already dealt with this topic and in 
which the current state of science and technology has been 
analyzed in detail. These include the ICONS 2019 Paper [3]. 
In addition, the state of the art was examined in detail in the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

GQW Paper 2019 [4] for the probing as well as in the 
QMOD 2019 Papers [5] for the prioritization and in [6] for 
the failure cause localization of the algorithm. In this paper, 
the focus shall be on the future-oriented approaches and 
validation of the algorithm in the sense of an extension of the 
previous publications. These are explained and examined in 
the following. Especially at the present time, the relevance of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) for the processing of large 
amounts of information is increasing. However, a distinction 
must be made between AI, big data, and Machine to 
Machine communications (M2M) [7]. AI has the goal to 
enable cognitive-like functions of a machine to analyze and 
interpret data and to solve problems on this basis. It is, 
therefore, a better fit for decision making [8]. The purpose of 
big data, however, is to process and analyze large amounts of 
data and a large variety of data in order to achieve a specific 
result. That means that the potential of AI in the area of 
complaint management is enormous in order to be able to 
react to failures and eliminate them. AI could develop the 
possibility to learn from known complaint information in 
order to be able to exert a preventive effect and prevent 
future complaints. In order to analyze how far the current 
future-oriented approaches are when dealing with the 
mentioned problem, some service platforms were examined 
and evaluated for this purpose. The investigated platforms 
are IBM Watson Compare & Comply [9], Apache Spark 
[10], Amazon Comprehend [11], Microsoft Analytics 
Platform System [12], Google BigQuery [13], PrediCX [14], 
CEMax [15], and Adobe Analytics [16]. All these platforms 
work based on machine learning. They are able to identify, 
structure, analyze, and evaluate information in text sources. 
This would also make them suitable for processing 
complaint texts if they were programmed for this purpose. 
However, the evaluation of the platforms showed that the 
analyzed platforms are currently not able to perform a 
comprehensive failure-cause search and solution-finding in 
production based on information from the use phase.  
However, it is necessary to develop such applications in 
order to deal with the ever-increasing complexity of 
production systems.  In order to enable the use in complaint 
management, concepts are needed that define how the 
service platforms are to deal with complaints and which 
information is relevant. At the same time, such a concept can 
provide the procedure for failure-cause search and solution-
finding for the platform. 
III. 
FUNCTIONALITY AND VALIDATION OF THE 
ALGORITHM 
The algorithm for failure-cause search and solution-
finding was developed after the acquisition of various 
requirements regarding the current state of science and 
technology. These requirements led to the fact that the 
algorithm had to consist of the following modules: 
 
information probing of complaint information [4] 
 
prioritization of complaint information [5] 
 
localization of failure-causes [6] and 
 
solution-finding for failure-causes. 
A. Functionality of the Algorithm 
As can be seen, the complaint information from the use 
phase of the product is accessed and filtered within the 
information probing, so that only the relevant information is 
being used further. Relevant information can be, e.g., 
product names, company name, technical drawing number, 
etc. That information is then being used by the algorithm to 
determine across several dimensions within the prioritization 
which complaint has the highest priority. Thereby necessary 
resources, such as time, personnel or costs can be used in the 
best possible way for the failure-cause localization. The basis 
for failure-cause localization is a previously developed 
model of the corresponding production system. Here, 
correlations between the essential views of the production 
systems are stored according to the eDeCoDe model 
(enhanced Demand Compliant Design) developed by Winzer 
[17] and Nicklas [18]. These views can be, e.g., components, 
functions, processes, persons or requirements. An example 
of such a model of a production system is shown in Figure 1 
below. This Figure visualizes all relationships of R1.2, i.e., 
requirement 1.2 has relationships to the other requirements, 
functions, processes, persons, and components.  
 
Figure 1. Example of a model of a production system according to [17]. 
With the help of this model, the algorithm is able to make 
assumptions based on probabilities about which part of the 
production system is responsible for the failure that led to the 
complaint. Once the cause of the failure has been localized, a 
possible solution will be found by pointing out the necessary 
measures. This is based on the STOP principle, whereby 
substitutional, technical, organizational and person-related 
measures can be offered [19]. Once the measure has been 
determined, it is up to the producing company to implement 
it, adapt it, or not use it at all. Due to the focus of the paper, a 
more detailed description of the algorithm is deliberately 
omitted. A detailed explanation of the theoretical concept of 
the algorithm can be found in the papers IEEE QR2MSE [2] 
and ICONS 2019 [3] published by the research group 
Product Safety and Quality. After the theoretical concept was 
completely developed, the algorithm was programmed with 
Microsoft Office - Visual Basic Application (VBA) and 
turned into a usable software. In section B of this chapter, the 
validation using an industrial example is described and 
evaluated in detail. 
P1 Turning
P1.1 Grab
P1.2 Positioning
P1.3 Rotate
P1.4 Deburring
Pe1 Operator
C1 Machine CNC13
F1 Turningfunction
R1 Requirements of the turning process
R1.2 Diameter OK
(unfulfilled requirement)
R1.4 Roundness OK
R 1.7 Concentricity OK
I1 Material
I2 Order
I5 Machine settings
Agenda:
F = Function
C = Component
R = Requirement
P = Process
Pe = Person
= Related to
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

B. Validation in Industry 
The validation in the industry is used to determine 
whether the algorithm provides meaningful information and 
assessments and how the different quality of the complaint 
information affects the results of the algorithm. At this point 
in the project, only the feasibility of the theoretical concept 
and also the effect of the quality of complaints on the result 
of the algorithm have been examined. A long-term study to 
measure the performance of the algorithm has not yet been 
carried out but is planned for the future. While the current 
validations were only carried out based on a requirement 
evaluation, the time, cost and personnel expenditure of the 
algorithm should also be measured and evaluated as 
parameters in the coming months. This should also 
contribute to the reproducibility of the results and 
transparency of the evaluation. Starting with the validation, 
the company of the industry example will be presented. In 
order to preserve the anonymity of the company and to 
protect internal know-how, all company-related information 
was deliberately concealed. The validation was carried out 
using the example of a company in the field of precision 
machining and cold forming. This area is used among other 
things for the production of strain-hardened and cold-formed 
parts, e.g., shafts or spindles, which are predominantly 
manufactured for the automotive industry. This industrial 
example is noteworthy because the complaint handling is 
subject to the high standards of the automotive industry. This 
demonstrates that the algorithm can meet such high 
standards. In order that the algorithm can carry useful results 
for the failure cause searching and solution-finding, it was 
first necessary to create the appropriate information basis. 
This means that first, all necessary customer information, 
product information, or order information had to be localized 
and then a model of the production system had to be created 
and also prepared for access as part of the evaluation. In this 
paper, this process is referred to as "preparation for 
validation". This is essential because it cannot be assumed 
that a company has all the necessary information in the 
required format. 
 
1) Preparation for Validation 
The preparation of the validation was divided into three 
steps. In the first step, all information systems of the 
company were examined for available information about 
customers, products, and orders. Since the company used 
very different systems for the respective information, the 
required information was prepared by the algorithm in Excel 
sheets and compiled for evaluation. This meant that it was 
not necessary to program the interfaces for each specific 
information system. However, at this point, it should be 
noted that for the practical implementation of the algorithm 
in industry, exactly such an interface to the existing 
information systems of the respective company must be 
programmed and set up by software developers. After the 
successful mapping of the information systems, in a second 
step, a model of the socio-technical production system with 
the eDeCoDe approach was developed. Besides the use of 
existing documents (e.g., technical drawings, test plans) and 
the discussion with the process managers of the company as 
well as the testing, this industrial example offered the 
possibility to go through all processes for the claimed 
product systematically with the production manager. It 
allowed to link the requirements, components, functions, and 
persons. This not only contributed to a better understanding 
of the connections within the company but also showed that 
the company was very interested in the implementation. The 
correlations between the elements were mapped using 
Design Structure and Domain Mapping matrices. The result 
of the collaboration was a production system that comprised 
69 requirements for a product under complaint, 21 functions, 
22 processes (25 inputs/11 outputs) as well as 11 
components and 9 persons involved. With the acquisition of 
the production system and the associated system elements, 
the third step in the preparation of the validation could take 
place. This clearly defined the relationships between the type 
and importance of the failure and the previously collected 
requirements. This step is necessary in order to determine for 
the algorithm which type of failure is the non-fulfilled 
requirement and what significance this non-fulfillment has. 
In order not to manipulate the result of the algorithm with 
regard to the evaluation of a non-fulfilled requirement, the 
definition of the relationships was discussed based on 
documents (e.g., Failure Mode and Effects Analysis) and in 
conversation 
with 
the 
company's 
experts 
(e.g., 
production/complaint management). The result of this 
elaboration is two matrices for the correlations between the 
requirements to be fulfilled and the type of failure as well as 
the significance of the failure. After the three steps for the 
preparation of the validation had been completed, the actual 
validation of the algorithm could take place. The validation 
was based on a very detailed customer complaint relating to 
an unfulfilled requirement for the SGW product. The SGW 
product is usually installed in passenger cars and is a critical 
component of safety. In this case, the complaint text was 
available in digital form so that it was possible to transfer the 
complaint text to the intended surface within a few seconds 
(Figure 3). 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 2. Complaint text of the product SGW according to [20] 
2) Information probing of the complaints 
Based on the present complaint text, the algorithm 
recognized the first and last name, organization, and address 
of the customer and transferred them, as shown in Figure 3, 
to the fields provided for this purpose in the surface of the 
information probing.  
 
 
Figure 3. Information probing of the complaints of the product SGW 
according to [20] 
With the help of this information, the algorithm filled in 
the other fields within the interface. In addition to collecting 
the date information, the algorithm was also able to identify 
relevant complaint information relating to the product. The 
algorithm not only correctly examined its name but also its 
number, group, and drawing details. The number of products 
delivered could also be determined via the interface to the 
ordering system and entered in the field provided for this 
purpose. Despite the more detailed failure description in the 
complaint text, this step showed that the algorithm could not 
assign exactly which unfulfilled requirement was actually 
involved. Although the algorithm recognizes the product and 
thus assigns all recorded product requirements to the 
unfulfilled requirement field as a selection, this is not an 
automated process. In addition, the user must manually select 
which requirement was actually not fulfilled. The 
background of this problem is the lack of standardization of 
the complaint texts. With the execution of the first step of the 
validation, the second step started. 
 
3) Prioritization of the complaint 
In order to check how the prioritization is influenced by 
the quality of the complaint text, two prioritizations were 
performed based on the previously prepared complaint 
information, as shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. Prioritizing the complaint of the product SGW according to [20]. 
The gathered information was used to prioritize the 
complaint. For this, the algorithm calculates different 
dimensions. How this calculation is carried out is described 
in detail in [5]. In order to investigate how the quality of the 
complaint text affects the prioritization, dimension 2 and 3 
were evaluated completely in the first step and incompletely 
in the second step. The second prioritization deliberately 
deleted information from the fields "ABC Classification", 
"Due Date" and "Amount of complaint products". The 
algorithm calculates and uses the reference value of 5.00 in 
Dimension 2 and Dimension 3 for missing information as 
you can see in Figure 4. This changes the dimension values 
and weightings. This has both advantages and disadvantages. 
On the one hand, it enables the algorithm to enter a 
dimension value and a weighting. This becomes critical 
when the influence of missing information becomes so great 
that an initially less relevant complaint becomes a complaint 
with high priority. In the worst case, this could lead to 
companies making incorrect decisions about the order in 
which complaints are to be processed and thus not using 
resources (personnel & time) in a targeted and meaningful 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

manner. The solution to this problem also lies in the 
standardization of complaint texts. 
 
4) Failure-cause localization of the complaint 
Since the localization of the causes of the failure is 
carried out similarly to the prioritization on the basis of the 
collected, relevant complaint information, the phase was 
repeatedly reviewed on the basis of a complete and an 
incomplete information basis. In this case, the unfulfilled 
requirement was deliberately deleted from the corresponding 
field in Figure 5. The algorithm could not make a statement 
about which elements of the production system were related 
to the requirement because there was no information about 
the unfulfilled requirement. This means that without a 
reference to the unfulfilled requirement, it is not possible to 
locate the cause of the failure. It seems necessary to choose a 
more consistent procedure, such as [21] that is developed for 
networks or to standardize the specification of the unfulfilled 
requirement. Figure 5 illustrates the complete fault cause 
localization. The incomplete map, which was not inserted for 
space reasons, looks the same, but only with empty fields. 
The theoretical process of localization is described in [6] in 
detail.  
 
 
Figure 5. Failure-cause localization of the complaint of the product SGW - 
complete and unprocessed according to [20]. 
Once again, it makes sense to describe unfulfilled 
requirements in complaint texts, such as those stored in the 
technical drawing or specifications. In this case, the 
algorithm can identify the causes of the failure very well 
within the production system. This statement is because of 
the evaluation of the SGW product complaint included 
exactly those system elements that led to the cause of the 
failure. The company's statements about the actual cause of 
the defect also confirmed the statement that the algorithm 
could actually perform a targeted localization of the cause of 
the defect. At this point, it should be noted that the results of 
the algorithm depend not only on the quality of the 
complaint text but also on the quality of the production 
system. 
Only 
if 
the 
system 
elements 
and 
their 
interrelationships are completely captured, a targeted 
localization of the failure-causes is possible. 
 
5) Solution-finding of the complaints 
Validation of the solution-finding process showed that 
this process is completely independent of the quality of the 
complaint text or the information basis. By the given 
solutions in the form of measures, the algorithm can act also 
with a lower quality of the information. Figure 6 visualizes 
the measures proposed by the algorithm based on 
Organizational 
measures 
(O) 
for 
the 
failure-cause 
Component 4 (C4). 
 
 
Figure 6.  Measures proposed for the cause of the failure of C4 (SGW): 
UNhine 164 according to [20]. 
The result showed that it is possible to find a solution 
with the help of the measures, regardless of the quality of the 
information base or the complaint text. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The validation using the industrial example in the field of 
precision machining and cold forming has shown that the 
performance of the algorithm is significantly influenced by 
the quality of the information in the input. In order to avoid a 
lack of information during the writing of the complaint, a 
standardization of the complaint text is strongly required. A 
lack of information would mean a high additional effort in 
the search for the cause of the failure and in finding a 
solution. This problem of probing of information could be 
solved by modifying the input mask of the complaint. Within 
the prioritization, the algorithm succeeded in compensating 
missing information by the formation of average values. 
Thereby set at least an estimated value for the prioritization 
of the complaint. In addition, here the impact was shown due 
to the quality of the complaint text, which can be improved 
by standardization. The validation has also shown that the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

quality of the complaint text has a strong effect on the 
localization of the cause of failure. On the other hand, it also 
turned out that the influence of the quality of the production 
system could be minimized. The reason lies in the self-
developed user interface for checking the production system 
by the operator. A residual risk remains, however, as 
incorrect entries by the user are still possible. A solution for 
this would be the specification of the requirements in the 
complaint text according to the technical drawing or the 
specifications. With regard to finding a solution, the 
following findings could be gained from the validation. It has 
been shown that the quality of the complaint text has no 
technical effect on the solution-finding. However, it does 
affect the quality of the solution-finding. Therefore, 
measures can be derived at any time independently of the 
quality of the complaint text. The measures proposed by the 
algorithm led to the successful elimination of the failure-
cause in the industry example. However, it was also noticed 
negatively that missing failure-cause information has strong 
effects on the probability calculation and therefore no 
adequate evaluation is possible without concrete information 
about failure rates or the competencies of persons. 
Furthermore, this information was not documented in the 
industry example. These findings follow the need for 
interfaces to Computer-Aided Quality (CAQ) systems in 
production in order to enable the algorithm to automatically 
access the necessary failure-cause information. Similarly, it 
should be examined whether alternative methods are more 
suitable for probability evaluation. The above-mentioned 
improvement potentials are now to be further investigated 
and implemented within the framework of future research 
projects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) for the support of the Project FusLa [funding code: 
SCHL 2225/1-1]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Cook, “Complaint management excellence,” Kogan Page, 
London, 2012. 
[2] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, A. Ansari, “Algorithm based 
handling of complaints data from the usage phase,” in 2019 
International Conference on Quality, Reliability, Risk, 
Maintenance, and Safety Engineering, IEEE QR2MSE, pp. 
399–406, 2019. 
[3] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, A. Ansari, “Algorithm for 
Dealing with Complaints Data from the Use Phase,” in 
Proceedings ICONS 2019, Sendra C., S. Valencia, Spanien, 
pp. 1–6, 2019. 
[4] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, A. Ansari, “Algorithmus zur 
automatisierten 
Abfrage 
relevanter 
Informationen 
aus 
Kundenreklamationen,” in Bericht zur GQW-Jahrestagung, 
Schmitt, R., pp. Status: Accepted and will be published, 2019. 
[5] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, I. Lemke, “Development of 
an automated prioritization procedure for complaints,” in 
Proceedings of Quality Management and Organisational 
Development/ an International Conference on Quality and 
Service Sciences, QMOD, 2019. 
[6] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, F. Kösling, “Localization of 
failure causes in production using complaint information by 
the means of an algorithm to achieve sustainable quality,” in 
Proceedings of Quality Management and Organisational 
Development/ an International Conference on Quality and 
Service Sciences, QMOD, 2019. 
[7] C.-G. Hong and C. Dietze, “Enabling Digital Excellence 
Through 
Business Process Management 
and Process 
Frameworks,” in Future Telco, Krüssel, P. Springer 
International Publishing Cham, 2019. 
[8] A. Holz, “Artificial Intelligence in Business. Reshaping work 
and organizations,” GRIN Verlag, vol. 1, München, 2019. 
[9] IBM Watson Compare & Comply, "Extract data from 
contracts and governing documents to in-crease productivity, 
reduce costs and minimize exposure," [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.ibm.com/cloud/compare-and-comply, 
19.12.2019. 
[10] Apache Spark, "Framework for Cluster Computing," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/index.html, 10.09.2019. 
[11] Amazon Comprehend, "Natural Language Processing," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://aws.amazon.com/de/comprehend/, 10.09.2019. 
[12] Microsoft Analytics Platform System, "Microsoft Data 
Platform," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/sql-server/default.aspx, 
10.09.2019. 
[13] Google BigQuery, "A serverless, highly-scalable, and cost-
effective cloud data warehouse," [Online]. Available from: 
https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/, 10.09.2019. 
[14] PrediCX, "Complaint Handling," [Online]. Available from: 
https://warwickanalytics.com/use-cases/complaint-handling/, 
10.09.2019. 
[15] CEMax, 
"CEMax 
Complaint 
Management," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.c-m-x.com/sol-complaint-
management/, 10.09.2019. 
[16] Adobe Analytics, "Digital Analysis Platform," [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.adobe.com/analytics/adobe-
analytics.html#, 10.09.2019. 
[17] P. Winzer, “Generic Systems Engineering,” Springer Vieweg, 
vol. 2. Auflage, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016. 
[18] J.-P. 
G. 
Nicklas, 
“Ansatz 
für 
ein 
modellbasiertes 
Anforderungsmanagement 
für 
Unternehmensnetzwerke,” 
Shaker, vol. 1, Aachen, 2016. 
[19] J. 
Brauweiler, 
A. 
Zenker-Hoffmann, 
M. 
Will, 
“Arbeitsschutzmanagementsysteme nach ISO 45001:2018,” 
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, vol. 2. Aufl. 2019, 
Wiesbaden, 2019. 
[20] M. Heinrichsmeyer, N. Schlüter, H. Dransfeld, F. Kösling, 
“Validation of a Failure Cause Searching and Solution 
Finding Algorithm for Failures in Production; based on 
Complaints of a Company in the Field of Stamping and Metal 
Forming,” in International Journal On Advances, IARIA 
2019, International Academy, Research, and Industry 
Association, 2019 - Status: Accepted and will be published. 
[21] Y. Shang, "Localized recovery of complex networks against 
failure," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nature.com/articles/srep30521#citeas, 
10.09.2019. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-771-9
ICONS 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Systems

