A Cyber-Physical System Design Approach 
 
Miroslav Sveda 
Faculty of Information Technology 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
e-mail: sveda@fit.vutbr.cz 
Radimir Vrba 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
e-mail: vrbar@feec.vutbr.cz 
 
 
Abstract— This paper exemplifies principles of cyber-physical 
systems design using original smart data acquisition systems 
capable to store and present measured data wirelessly. The 
presented temperature data logger stands for an example of 
flexible, mobile and intelligent appliances fitting various 
industrial or medical applications. Similarly, the discussed 
sensor network represents a system architecture stemming 
from wireless smart pressure sensors connected by Bluetooth 
and from a network concentrator, which is based either on 
PDA personal digital assistant or on GSM SmartPhone. Two 
pilot software implementations were developed for IPAQ PDA 
5450 and Nokia 3650 SmartPhone. The paper describes a 
cyber-physical system design approach using novel data 
acquisition systems, which can serve as components of public 
or technological process monitoring systems and allow 
collecting data also from locations difficult to reach, e.g., from 
sensors located on rotating parts. 
Keywords- Embedded system design, smart sensor, wireless 
communication, temperature and pressure measurement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The charter for the CPS (Cyber-Physical System) 
Summit in April 2008 [6] introduced the following: “The 
integration of physical systems and processes with 
networked computing has led to the emergence of a new 
generation of engineered systems: cyber-physical systems. 
Such systems use computations and communication deeply 
embedded in and interacting with physical processes to add 
new capabilities to physical systems. These cyber-physical 
systems range from miniscule (pacemakers) to large-scale 
(the national power grid). Because computer-augmented 
devices are everywhere, they are a huge source of economic 
leverage. … it is a profound revolution that turns entire 
industrial sectors into producers of cyber-physical systems. 
This is not about adding computing and communication 
equipment to conventional products where both sides 
maintain separate identities. This is about merging 
computing and networking with physical systems to create 
new revolutionary science, technical capabilities and 
products.” Embedded computers allow designers to add 
capabilities to physical systems that they could not feasibly 
add in any other way. By merging computing and 
communication with physical processes and mediating the 
way we interact with the physical world, cyber-physical 
systems bring many benefits: they make systems safer and 
more efficient; they reduce the cost of building and operating 
these systems; and they allow individual machines to work 
together to form complex systems that provide new 
capabilities.  
The kernel of this paper consists of a general part, 
covered by Section II, of case studies presenting the real-
world applications discussed in Sections III and IV, and of 
conclusions. The general part is devoted to the review of 
state of the art in frame of CPS design. The first introduced 
application discusses a new mobile temperature data logger 
with RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) capabilities. The 
second application deals with a developed sensor network 
that embodies the pressure sensing system consisting of 
wireless smart pressure sensors connected by the Bluetooth, 
and of a network concentrator, which is based either on PDA 
personal digital assistant or on GSM SmartPhone. 
II. 
CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS DESICN 
Many of the embedded systems-related studies and 
efforts in the past have focused on the challenges the 
physical environment brings to the scientific foundations of 
networking and information technology, see [2] and [4]. 
However, the full scope of the change enabled by 
introducing CPS as a new branch of science and technology 
provides much more than restructuring inside this domain. 
The new approach can turn entire industrial sectors into 
producers of CPS. Actually, CPS is about merging 
computing and networking with physical systems to create 
new capabilities and improve product quality [9]. 
Cyber-physical systems denote a new modeling paradigm 
that promotes a holistic view on real-world – and therefore 
complex – systems. These systems have been studied before 
from various particular perspectives using paradigms like 
ubiquitous and distributed computing or embedded and 
hybrid systems. The above mentioned facts require also 
another approach to the design of such systems respecting 
from the beginning of design process the application domain 
that influences quality-of-service requirements such as real-
time behavior, safety and security [12], [13] and [14], but 
also precision, reliability and other non-functional properties 
and contentment affecting attributes  specified usually by 
official standards [8]. 
In a CPS application, the function of a computation is 
defined by its effect on the physical world, which is in this 
case not only a system environment, but evidently also a 
component of the designed application system. Therefore, 
proper design environments should be used to improve or at 
12
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

least to enable efficiency of the design process. In cyber-
physical systems the passage of time becomes a central 
feature — in fact, it is this key constraint that distinguishes 
these systems from distributed computing in general. Time is 
central to predicting, measuring, and controlling properties 
of the physical world: given a (deterministic) physical 
model, the initial state, the inputs, and the amount of time 
elapsed, one can compute the current state of the plant. This 
principle provides the foundations of control theory. 
However, for current mainstream programming paradigms, 
given the source code, the program’s initial state, and the 
amount of time elapsed, we cannot reliably predict future 
program state. When that program is integrated into a system 
with physical dynamics, this makes principled design of the 
entire system difficult. Instead, engineers are stuck with a 
prototype-and-test style of design, which leads to brittle 
systems that do not easily evolve to handle small changes in 
operating conditions and hardware platforms. Moreover, the 
disparity between the dynamics of the physical plant and the 
program seeking to control it potentially leads to errors, 
some of which can be catastrophic. 
III. 
WIRELESS TEMPERATURE DATA LOGGER 
Knowledge of temperature course during a certain time is 
needed in scientific, medical and industrial applications. In 
some applications, however, the recorded temperature course 
should be read wirelessly. This section describes main 
principles applied in a set of mobile temperature data logger 
and portable reader/writer with wireless transfer of digitized 
temperature values. The pilot concepts of the system were 
originally introduced in [7].  
A. Application basics 
A mobile temperature data logger with RFID features 
was designed for applications, where portability and wireless 
data transfer is inevitable. Communicating reader/writer can 
be mounted on the wall or can also be portable.  
Two main modes of operation during temperature data 
logging may be remotely chosen for a tag: 
• 
Mode 1 - normal data collecting method in 
preprogrammed regular acquisition time intervals 
(100 milliseconds up to 2 hours) with number of 
samples limited only by a data EEPROM memory 
size.  
• 
Mode 2 - more memory size reducing method, when 
only breaking lower and upper temperature limits 
initiates storing the date and time stamp.  
In mode 2, the following date and time stamp is stored only 
when the temperature returns back into the temperature band 
between lower and upper temperature predefined limits. Also 
enhanced mode can be set when the maximum or minimum 
temperature between breaking and returning points of a 
sampling temperature course is stored, too. This is a typical 
example for monitoring of food transport, where the time 
stamp and maximum temperature after breaking the limit 
help to identify that offender who damaged the transported 
goods. 
Figure 1.  System configuration 
Wireless 
RFID 
systems 
generate 
and 
radiate 
electromagnetic waves. This is the reason why those systems 
are legally classified as radio systems. The function of other 
radio services must under no circumstances be disrupted or 
impaired by the operation of RFID systems. For this reason, 
it is usually only possible to use frequency ranges that have 
13
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

been dedicated specifically for industrial, scientific or 
medical applications. These are the frequencies classified for 
worldwide as ISM (Industrial – Scientific – Medical), and 
they can also be used for RFID applications. The most 
important frequency ranges for RFID systems are therefore 
135 kHz, 27.125 MHz, 40.68 MHz, 433.92 MHz, 869.0 
MHz, 915.0 MHz, 2.45 GHz, 5.8 GHz and 24.125 GHz.  
B. Application constraints  
The range below 135 kHz is heavily used by other radio 
services because it has not been reserved as an ISM 
frequency range. The propagation conditions in this long 
wave frequency range permit the radio services that occupy 
this range to reach wide areas at a low technical cost. In 
order to prevent collisions, the future Licensing Act for 
Inductive Radio Systems in Europe, 220 ZV 122, will define 
a protected zone of between 70 and 119 kHz, which will no 
longer be allocated to RFID systems. The main block 
diagram of designed tag and reader/writer system is shown in 
Fig. 1. 
Preferences for frequency range below 135 kHz allow 
reaching large ranges with low cost transponders. High level 
of power is available to the transponder. The transponder has 
low power consumption due to its lower clock frequency and 
often sleeping a standby mode of operation. Miniaturized 
transponder formats can be achieved due to the use of ferrite 
coils in transponder. Low absorption rate or high penetration 
depth in nonmetallic materials and water are available due to 
lower frequencies. Basic block diagram is shown in Fig. 2.  
 
 
 
An inductively coupled data logger comprises an 
electronic data-logging device and a large area coil that 
functions as an antenna. Inductively coupled logger is almost 
always operated in passive mode of data transmitting 
between an RFID tag and reader. This means that all the 
energy needed for the data transfer to the temperature logger 
has been provided by the reader. For this purpose, the 
reader’s antenna coil generates a strong, high frequency 
electromagnetic field, which penetrates the cross-section of 
the coil area and the area around the coil.  
C. Data-logger design  
Temperature is recorded using a temperature tag at user 
defined time intervals. The temperature tag can be 
programmed so that when the memory is full it either stops 
further recording or continues recording by overwriting the 
earliest of the previously recorded data. Typical stored 
information contains: date and time stamp, temperature, 
temperature tag unique ID. Recorded information can be 
transferred to a reader/writer and then to a PC or a PDA with 
wired or wireless connection to a reader/writer. Temperature 
can be displayed graphically and the zoom functions allow 
focus on time periods where the temperature exceeds 
parameters.  
The tag is a self-powered facility working like a wireless 
temperature sensor. It consists of a temperature probe and an 
active part with active RFID technology powered by an 
internal battery. The tag transmits an RF signal on demand at 
a pre-set time-interval. Tag life is estimated at several 
months depending on pre-set period of a transmission, where 
the related transmission interval can be configured via 
wireless connection by a reader/writer node. Each lifespan of 
the tag ends when the battery life is exhausted. Battery status 
can be inferred by interrogating the tag’s internal status 
value.  The lifespan of the tag can be increased by delayed 
switch on by the first communication attempt of a 
reader/writer. A portion of this tag is used to measure actual 
temperature, to store measured data and to implement real 
time clock for timing. Distinct temperature values are 
acquired in pre-set intervals. The discussed tag can work in 
two basic modes as Data Logger and Out-of-Limit-Values 
Logger: 
  
• 
Data Logger - Temperature is measured in pre-set 
intervals. All data is stored into the internal memory. 
In this mode there is stored only a start time. 
Number of measurements depends on memory size. 
Data logging principle is shown in Fig. 3.  
• 
Out-of-Limit-Values Logger - If temperature is out 
of range, time stamp and temperature data are stored 
into the internal memory. Needless to say that the 
number of stored values depends on memory size.  
Figure 2.  Basic block diagram 
 
This temperature tag is designed for usage in shipping 
containers, dairy industry, medical applications, fuel 
industry, 
refrigerated 
loads, 
agricultural 
industry, 
refrigeration 
monitoring, 
dangerous 
goods 
areas 
or 
anywhere, when temperature monitoring is required. Of 
course, the collection of possible applications is currently 
increasing for the reason that temperature is a critical process 
and quality assurance factor for many industries.  
14
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

 
Figure 3.  Data logging principle 
IV. 
WIRELESS SMART SENSOR NETWORK 
Many industrial systems cannot operate on cable 
connections among distributed components, which can be 
geographically remote, temporarily installed, allocated on 
rotating elements, etc. In such circumstances it is sometimes 
possible to connect smart sensors and actuators via RF 
wireless physical layer on ISM (Industrial, Scientific, and 
Medicine) band. For small range network with perimeter up 
to 100m the wireless connection standard Bluetooth can be 
used. This standard also enables to assure high safety and 
security of data by encryptions and related crypto-graphical 
techniques.  The current section, which stems from partial 
results published earlier [15], proposes not only how to 
represent a system’s solution as an application example, but 
also how to generalize reached research results.  
The described novel wireless smart sensor network 
system represents the system architecture formed by a set of 
the wireless smart pressure IEEE 1451 sensors. This original 
prototype is connected using a Bluetooth and a network 
concentrator/controller is based on (see Fig. 4):  
 
• 
A PDA personal digital assistant (IPAQ PDA 5450 
in this case study) or  
• 
A GSM SmartPhone (Nokia 3650 SmartPhone in 
this case study).  
 
Particular software applications are developed for both 
IPAQ PDA 5450 and Nokia 3650 SmartPhone. Those SW 
applications fit system requirements for data monitoring, 
parameter setting and exploiting all embedded functions of 
the novel smart pressure sensor with Bluetooth wireless 
interface in the slave role mode. Another SW application for 
standard PC enables to process data in MS Office formats. 
Such wireless system virtual port enables to configure the 
related sensor, to sense and to record data by remote reading 
and/or writing via a Bluetooth SPP supported port by a PC, a 
PDA or a SmartPhone equipped with a Bluetooth standard 
access module. 
A. Application basics 
Many industrial systems may not use cable connection 
between components and blocks of the system. Components 
are geographically isolated, temporarily installed or allocated 
on rotating elements etc. However, it is appropriate in such 
case to realize interconnection between components by 
wireless communication network. The conclusions enable to 
connect smart sensors and actuators via RF wireless physical 
layer on ISM (Industrial, Scientific, and Medicine) band. For 
small range network with perimeter up to 100 m an industrial 
Bluetooth wireless connection standard can be used, where 
full Bluetooth stack and basic necessary functions have been 
defined.  
This standard also accepts requirements to assure high 
safety and security of data by using encryptions and 
cryptography. Bluetooth stack and defined protocols are also 
compliant to Internet protocols.  
15
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

Figure 4.   IPAQ PDA 5450 visualizing bar graphs of measured quantities 
and GSM Nokia 3650 SmartPhone with a sample window for smart sensor parameter settings 
Most of current control and measurement applications 
deploy galvanic connection of sensors and actuators to 
central control system. That scheme can cause some 
problems and limitations in cases, where it is not possible to 
use standard cable connection between control system 
(wiring station) and local sensors and actuators. Galvanic 
interconnection is possible in cases, when the configuration 
is permanent and it is possible to make cable interconnection 
between components.  
This contribution, which stems from partial results 
published earlier, proposes not only how to represent a 
system’s solution as an application example, but also how to 
generalize reached research results.  
B. Bluetooth 
The basic concept for connection of distributed smart 
sensor to the central data acquisition station is based on 
Bluetooth standard specification [1]. This standard defines 
data exchange among remote stations using RF wireless 
interface. The Bluetooth operates in the Industrial-Scientific-
Medicine Band (ISM), which is in most countries defined as 
a band ranging from 2 400 MHz to 2 483.5 MHz.  
In many countries, including the Czech Republic, the 
radio transmissions in the ISM band are not licensed. The 
Bluetooth standard defines 79 channels with the frequency 
width of 1 MHz in the ISM band. The position of any 
channel in the ISM band can be calculated as follows  
 
f = 2402 + k, k = 0 ... 78 MHz.  
 
Devices corresponding to the Bluetooth standard are 
subdivided according to the transmitted power into three 
power classes: 100 mW, 2.5 mW and 1 mW. 
Bluetooth based systems consist of the following 
components:  radio transmitter (2.4 GHz Bluetooth radio), 
link controller (controls the transmitter), and link manager & 
I/O (provides terminal interface). The Bluetooth standard 
defines two different data transmission methods. The first 
one defines synchronous data channel (Synchronous 
Connection Oriented -SCO), which is intended mostly for 
audio 
transmission, 
while 
the 
second 
one 
defines 
16
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

asynchronous data channel (Asynchronous Connectionless - 
ACL). Both SCO and ACL utilize the same RF line.  
The wireless network is built on the PICONET, wh
the
ed by a pseudo-random sequence 
defi
tran
 
 
Central data acquisition node (data logger) utilizes bo h 
inte
Figure 5.  Structure of data acquisition system with data logger 
ich is 
C. Data acquisition system  
 simplest interconnected Bluetooth network that can 
consist of up to eight nodes. In every PICONET one node 
acts as a MASTER, the rest as SLAVEs. More PICONETs 
can form a higher-level entity called as SCATERNET. The 
formation of SCATTERNET is permit for more PICONETs 
in the same location, of course, respecting some restrictions 
on transmission capacity. 
A channel is represent
ning change of used frequency (hop sequence). All 
PICONETs share the same RF band; however, each 
PICONET has its own hop sequence. Thus at one time each 
PICONET uses its own 1 MHz wide channel. For the actual 
data acquisition the capabilities of transmission lines are very 
important. Bluetooth standard defines two different 
transmission lines that provide different throughput: 
asynchronous ACL and synchronous SCO. According to the 
demanded transmission capacity, it is possible to select the 
required type of the transmission line on the fly; so, the type 
of the transmission line can be negotiated as needed. 
The 
SCO 
line 
allows 
synchronous 
64 
Kbit/s 
The paper, in its general part, is devoted to a brief review 
of state of the art of CPS domain, including important 
properties that can be implemented for applications, and to 
the typical features of CPS design, which are demonstrated 
in the rest of the paper. The presented real-world CPS 
applications deal with two designed sensory systems 
focusing on their physical design principles, system 
structures and communication architectures.  
smission. 
The 
ACL 
line 
allows 
transmissions 
asynchronous and PICONET-wide broadcasts. As the ACL 
deploys multi-slot system, it is possible to achieve 
transmission speed of 721 Kbit/s in one direction and 57.6 
Kbit/s in the opposite direction (presented transmission 
speed expects zero error corrections). 
 
t
grated local sensory instrumentation, and distributed 
remote sensors connected to wireless Bluetooth network, see 
Fig.5. The data logger acts as a communication master, while 
the remote sensors act as slaves. In such network, there can 
be up to 7 distributed sensors. However, the distance 
between the master node and the slave cannot exceed 10/100 
meters. 
The number of possible Bluetooth masters in the central 
node defines the limitation of the entire distributed data 
acquisition system. The number of Bluetooth modules 
located in the same area is limited by the Bluetooth 
specification; 
hence, 
there 
should 
be 
guaranteed 
communication capacities that fit the application. The 
presented data acquisition system enables to include wide 
range of sensors with different requirements on their channel 
throughputs, e.g. simple temperature and humidity sensors as 
devices with narrow-band requirements, and CCD cameras 
as sensors with wide-band requirements on data throughput.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our research group is currently launching a related 
continuation research that aims at the formal tools support of 
CPS design [11], [12], [13]. Evidently, this new research 
domain requires not only formal specification and 
verification techniques extensions and modifications, but 
also novel approaches and adaptations of such general 
methods as model checking and proving, see e.g., [1], [2], 
[3], [4], [8], [9] and [14]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
authors 
acknowledge 
contributions 
of 
their 
colleagues, namely Radek Kuchta, Pavel Steffan, Ondrej 
Sajdl and Zdenek Barton. 
This project has been carried out with a financial support 
from the Czech Republic state budget through the CEZ 
MMT projects no. MSM0021630528: Security-Oriented 
Research in Information Technology and no. MSM 
0021630503: MIKROSYN - New Trends in Microelectronic 
Systems and Nanotechnologies, by the Grant Agency of the 
Czech Republic through the grant no. GACR 102/08/1429: 
Safety and Security of Networked Embedded System 
Applications, by the Ministry of Industry and Trade CR 
through the grant no. FR-TI1/037 of Ministry of Industry and 
Trade: Automatic Attack Processing, and by the Brno 
University 
of 
Technology, 
Faculty 
of 
Information 
Technology through the specific research grant no. FIT-10-
S-1: Secured, Reliable and Adaptive Computer Systems.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Akella and B.M. McMillin, Model-checking BNDC Properties in 
Cyber-Physical Systems, Proceedings of the33rd INternational 
Computer Software and Applications Conference COMPSAC 2009, 
IEEE CS, New York, NY, US, 2009, pp. 660-663. 
17
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

[2] 
Borzoo Bonakdarpour, Challenges in Transformation of Existing 
Real-Time Embedded Systems to Cyber-Physical Systems IEEE 
Symposium on Real-Time Systems RTSS RTSS - Ph.D. Forum on 
Deeply Real-Time Embedded Systems, Tucson, Arizona, 2007, 2pp. 
[3] 
M.C. Bujorianu and H.Barringer, An Integrated Specification Logic 
for Cyber-Physical Systems, Proceedings of the 14th IEEE 
International Conference on Engineering of Complex Computer 
Systems, Potsdam, Germany, 2009, pp. 91-300.  
[4] 
J. C. Eidson, E. A. Lee, S. Matic, S. A. Seshia, and J. Zou, Time-
centric Models For Designing Embedded Cyber-physical Systems, 
EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Technical 
Report No. UCB/EECS-2009-135, October 9, 2009. 
[5] 
J. Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors. New York, AIP Press, 1997. 
[6] 
B.H. Krogh, E. Lee, I. Lee, A. Mok, R. Rajkumar, L.R. Sha, A.S. 
Vincentelli, K. Shin, J. Stankovic, J. Sztipanovits, W. Wolf, and W. 
Zhao, Cyber-Physical Systems, Executive Summary, CPS Steering 
Group, 
Washington 
D.C., 
March 
6, 
2008. 
[http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2008/nsf08611/nsf08611.htm] 
[accessed: 
June 30, 2010] 
[7] 
R. Kuchta, P. Steffan, Z. Barton, R Vrba, and M. Sveda, Wireless 
Temperature Data Logger, Proceedings of the 2005 Asian Conference 
on Sensors, and International Conference on new Techniques in 
Pharmaceutical 
and 
Biomedical 
Research, 
5-7 
Sept. 
2005 
pp. 208-212. 
[8] 
E.A. Lee, Computing Needs Time, Communications of the ACM, 
Vol.52, No.5, pp. 70-79, May 2009. 
[9] 
National Science Foundation, Cyber-Physical Systems Program 
Solicitation, NSF 10-515, Arlington, VA, US, March 11, 2010 
[10] J.A. Stankovic, I. Lee, A. Mok, and R. Rajkumar, Opportunities and 
obligations for physical computing systems, IEEE Computer, 
November 2005, pp. 23-31. 
[11] M. Sveda and R. Vrba, An Embedded Application Regarded as 
Cyber-Physical System, Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Systems ICONS 2010, Les Menuires, FR, IARIA, 
2010, pp.  170-174. 
[12] M. Sveda and R. Vrba, Meta-Design with Safe and Secure Embedded 
System Networking, International Journal On Advances in Security, 
Vol. 2, No. 1, 2009, US, pp. 8-15. 
[13] M. Sveda and R. Vrba, Specifications of Secure and Safe Embedded 
System Networks, 8th International Conference on Networks 
Proceedings ICN 2009, New York, NY, US, IARIA, IEEE CS, 2009, 
pp. 220-225. 
[14] H. Tang and B.M. McMillin, Security Property Violation in CPS 
through Timing, Proceedings of the 28th on Distributed Computing 
Systems IDCS 2008, Workshops, IEEE CS, New York, NY, US, 
2008, pp. 519-524. 
[15] R. Vrba, O. Sajdl, O., R. Kuchta, and M. Sveda., Wireless Smart 
Sensor Network System. In Proceedings of the ICSE & INCOSE 
2004 Conference. Las Vegas, Nevada: CRC Press LLC, 2004, pp. 
104-109. 
 
 
18
ICONS 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-114-4

