 
 
Solar Panel Efficiency in Oman  
Ahmed Al-Aamri1, Ali Al-Humairi2&3 , 
Ayham Al-Rahawi1,  
1Department of Engineering, 2Department of 
Computer Secince, German University of 
Technology in Oman, Oman.  
Emails:15-0357@student.gutech.edu.om, 
ali.alhumairi@gutech.edu.om, 
ayham.alrahawi@gutech.edu.om 
 
 
Hayat El Asri  
Coventry University Wroclaw 
Email: hayat.elasri@coventry.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
Peter Jung3 
3Communication Technology, Duisburg 
Essen University, Germany 
Email: 
peter.jung@kommunikationstechnik.org 
Abstract—Solar panels are widely used in different locations and 
for different purposes including electricity production, 
satellites, mobile devices, and lights. It is also considered to be 
one of the cleanest and most renewable applications to produce 
electricity, yet there are various environmental factors that 
affect solar panel efficiency and production rate depending on 
the installed location. This paper aims to analyze the impact of 
dust accumulation on photovoltaic (PV) panel efficiency in 
Oman. The experiment is done on two different poles of solar 
cells, one oriented in the east direction and the other one on the 
west direction. The east side panels are cleaned daily; however, 
the west side panels are kept dirty to check the temperature and 
irradiance effect on solar panels efficiency and power output. 
The results show that the east solar panels were producing more 
efficiently than the west side due to the dust accumulation on the 
west side panels. The dust accumulation on the west side panels 
worked as a shading layer for the irradiance to enter the solar 
cells. However, the dust accumulation did not have any impact 
on temperature values, which was almost constant for both side 
panels. 
 
Keywords—Solar panel, Ambient temperature, Irradiance, 
Efficiency, Dust, Performance ratio. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
      Scientists are always looking for sources of energy which 
have less pollution, are renewable, and thermodynamically 
free. In 1839, scientist Edmond Becquerel found that sunlight 
can cause electricity to come from metals and a few other 
scientists studied the relation between material, light and 
electricity, such as Albert Einstein. Then, a scientist called 
Russell Ohl made the first functional solar cell in 1954, which 
is similar to the ones used these days, and it is made from 
Silicon. Silicon (Si) material can be found in rocks or sand. 
Furthermore, this solar cell was enough to generate electricity 
for regular electrical devices. The solar cell became very 
useful in human life as it has been used widely in electricity 
production. As a result, in 1958, scientists used the solar cell 
in space satellite for the first time and it was used as the first 
power generation plant that can produce 1000 kW in 1982 in 
California, USA [1]. 
     In 2014, Professor Shanaz Ghazi found that the North 
Africa and the Middle East (MENA) region are considered to 
have the highest dust collection area. In hot dusty areas, solar 
panels produce low electrical power due to the appearance of 
dust and the negative effect of dust on solar panel 
performance which can be daily, monthly, annually, or 
seasonally, in terms of time. Dust accumulation on PV 
modules tends to pose a reflection problem for the sunlight to 
enter the PV cells. As a result, solar panels absorb less 
irradiance and sunlight. This tends to generate less electrical 
power, which means low solar panel efficiency. Moreover, 
dust particle size varies with site and environment [2]. 
      This paper is structured as follows. Section II presents the 
review of the literature and discusses the factors affecting 
solar panel performance and the dust factors and its adhesion 
on solar panels surface. Section III discusses the research 
objectives. Section IV discusses the case study and the 
experimental setup. Finally, Section V discusses the results.    
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
      This section discusses past works in factors that affect 
solar panel performance, soiling influence on photovoltaic 
panels (case studies) and dust properties on solar panels. This 
literature review is divided into 3 subsections to ensure 
extensive understanding of the subject matter. 
A. Factors affecting solar panel performance 
       A solar panel does not exceed 20% of its efficiency 
worldwide, and there are several parameters that lead the 
solar panels to perform less than ideal [3]. In this subsection, 
the factors will be summarized in environmental terms. 
       High temperatures have a negative effect on solar panels. 
When the ambient temperature recorded is high, the power 
output and the efficiency of solar cells will decrease because 
of the high rate of the internal carrier recombination inspired 
by higher carrier concentration. The higher rate of internal 
carrier recombination occurs when the high temperature 
enters the solar cell. As a result of this phenomenon, the 
electrons inside the solar cell will recombine with positive 
charges instead of flowing in the negative charges path. This 
recombination generates electric charges collision which, in 
turn, results in thermal emissions (heat) inside the solar cell. 
Basically, solar irradiation and temperature are directly 
proportional to the photovoltaic cell temperature. Whenever 
the temperature of the solar cell increases, the current rises 
gradually, but the voltage will fall significantly, which 
translates into a big drop in power output and vice versa for 
low temperatures [4].   
      Another factor is the variation of solar irradiation. The 
differences of intensity of the solar irradiation which falls on 
the solar module influence some of the photovoltaic panel 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

characteristics including open circuit voltage, power, short-
circuit current, efficiency, and fill factor. The relation linking 
module voltage and module current is that, as the solar 
irradiance increases, the module currents increase too. Also, 
the relationship between module voltage and module power 
is that the power output will increase when the current 
increase due to their directly proportional relation. As a 
result, when the solar irradiance increases, the power output 
will rise as well [4]. 
      The last main factor is soiling. Soiling can be in the form 
of accumulation of pollutants, bird fallings, dust, and dirt. In 
essence, soiling works as shading; it is a slim screen which 
enforces in solar panels and decreases the falling of sunlight 
on the cell. Dust is a solid particle with diameter less than 500 
micro-meters. 
Soiling 
can 
happen 
when 
moisture 
condensates the dust particles which adhere to solar panel 
layers, especially at the lowest part of the tilted panel due to 
the gravitational force on the dust particles. The accumulation 
of soiling will make one thin layer, which can cause partial 
shading in the lower row cells. Moreover, the power output 
of photovoltaic system may decrease by 5% to 17% [4] due 
to the soiling factor. In terms of location, deserted areas and 
places near highways have more dust in compression to rainy 
areas. Also, it is better to put the solar panels on a roof top 
instead of ground solar panels to prevent dust and soil 
accumulation on the panels. The fine dust creates more 
performance loss than the large one; this is because the small 
particles have smaller gaps between each other so the light 
cannot pass through them [4]. 
 
B. Dust and its adhesion on solar panels surface 
      Soiling is known as a phenomenon that is affected by 
metrological factors and weather conditions. Furthermore, 
the parameters that influence the dust on solar panels can be 
divided into two groups: solar panel installation factors and 
environmental factors [5].  
      For the installation factors, horizontal surfaces tend to 
accumulate more dust than inclined surfaces. Additionally, 
small particles of dust settle on the tilted surface of solar 
panels, but the large particles of dust tend to roll down. This 
is due to the effect of the gravitational force on dust particles. 
Also, whenever the inclination angle of the solar panel 
increases, the gravitational force impact in dust accumulation 
increases. Environmentally speaking, dust has different 
properties which affect the precipitation on the solar panel 
surface. In terms of physical properties, the large size dust 
particles tend to drop off from solar panel screen and for the 
small size dust particles, they tend to stick to the solar panels 
surface [5].  
 
C. Critical dust analysis 
      There are many studies regarding soiling influence on PV 
cells performance. Some of these experiments are discussed 
in this subsection. 
      The first study was in Saudi Arabia, Jizan region, 
specifically as part of the science collage of Jazan University. 
The researchers used two PV panels with two different angles 
(30o and 55o) which produce peak power around 30 watt per 
solar cells and were placed on the roof of a building. The 
median humidity in the Jazan region is around 70 percent, the 
temperature range is between 22 oC to 38 oC and speed of 
wind approximately 15 kilometer per hour, all throughout the 
year [6]. Readings were conducted every Monday at 11:30 
AM for 112 days. At the beginning, the cells were washed 
with water to remove tiny particles to allow for detailed 
reading. The process of washing was performed whenever the 
panels got dusty [6]. Both tilted panels produced almost the 
same path (trend) of efficiency. What is more, the PV panels 
with higher tilt (55 degree) had a low amount of efficiency 
reduction compared to the solar panels with lower tilt (30 
degree) because of the gravity force that eliminates a certain 
amount of dust particles spontaneously. Consequently, the 
total decrease of photovoltaic cells performance because of 
soiling collection in the Jazan area was approximately 9.7 
percent for the 55 degrees panels and 10.4 percent for cells 
inclined at 30 degrees [6]. 
      Another experiment was conducted in Iran, specifically at 
Tehran University in 1999. Numerous solar systems with 
various inclination angles have been mounted on the roof of 
the Tehran University building. The aim of this experiment 
was to examine the impact of air contamination from local 
industry 
and 
vehicles 
on 
the 
photovoltaic 
system 
performance seasonally [2]. The results showed that the 
system production differs with the season and that the level 
of contamination that occurs in the air in various seasons is 
the justification. The highest air pollution was in the winter 
season because the air has a high density. As a result, the 
irradiance is affected by contaminated air, and this leads to a 
reduction in solar cell performance. Since the climate is 
windy in the fall season, the dust or pollution frequently flies 
away, and the efficiency is better in the fall season. The 
highest performance is in the spring season due to the rainy 
weather that helps to remove the pollution or dust from the 
panels. Finally, the summer has an efficiency production 
amount between spring and fall. The tilt angle increases the 
production amount for all four seasons. Additionally, the 
efficiency values of solar panels decrease by more than sixty 
percent due to the phenomena of air pollution which settles 
on the surface of photovoltaic panels and works as shading 
[2].  
III. RESEARCH OBJECTIVES  
      This experimental paper helps increase the performance 
ratio of the solar panel in Oman by checking the effect of dust 
and irradiance on the top surface of solar cell. Also, we 
investigated the number of cleanings needed per month for 
dusty solar panels. 
      The aim of this research work is to explore the influence 
of voltage and current parameters on the power output and 
the efficiency of solar cells and to check the impact of the 
environmental factor efficiency. The voltage and current are 
affected by two environmental factors, namely irradiance and 
temperature change.   
IV. CASE STUDY AND EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
A. Case study of solar panels 
      In this subsection, the case study of the solar panel system 
is divided into sub-case studies. This includes the location of 
the solar panel system, the website used for the information 
of PV panel system and the devices or components utilized in 
the photovoltaic panel framework. Also, we present the 
experimental setup and the tools used for this study. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

1) 
System  
       The system used in this study is Virtual Control Operator 
Room developed by meteo-control GmbH Company (mc).  
This system provides solar panels system data with graph 
analysis and location of solar panels system. It helps the 
technicians and clients to check the system to see if there are 
any problems. Also, it can be used to perform studies and 
research [7]. 
2) 
Location of the site 
     The research specifically takes place at the German 
University of Technology in Oman (GUtech), which is 
located in Halban, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman. The facility is 
located at a height of 41 meters (m) above sea level. The solar 
technology facility is structured by Shams Global Solution 
and British Petroleum Oman (BP Oman) [8]. 
 
3) 
System Components 
      The solar panels systems at GUtech consist of different 
components. Each component will be explained fully in this 
subsection. 
      The experiment is set up on a flat-roof zone, which is 
made from multi-crystalline cells 0.15675 × 0.15675 (m) and 
it is installed on a platform with a height of around 1.5 meters 
(m). The flat-roof solar module is subjected to two poles (east 
and west), and it has 12 panels (3 sets × 2 panels at the east × 
2 panels at the west) and each panel consists of 72 (12×6) 
cells, as shown in Figure 1. The dimensions of one panel are: 
0.992 m height, 1.960 m width, and 0.04 m depth and it 
weighs 2.25 kg. Also, the panels are placed at an angle of 
around 10o to get more sunlight. The panels are made by 
Trina-solar and the ID number is TSM-325-PD14 [9].  
 
 
Figure 1. Flat-roof solar module at GUtech. 
      A Fronius inverter is used for the flat-roof system and its 
module number is Fronius Symo 3.0-3-M. The inverter 
dimensions are 0.645 m height, 0.431 m width and 0.204 m 
depth, and its weight is around 19.9 kg (with mounting plate). 
It produces at a maximum efficiency of 98% [10]. 
      On site, there are two sensors used for all four zones, 
namely the weather sensor and the pyrano-meters. The flat-
roof system has one more sensor that measures the panel 
temperature and irradiance which is called the Silicon 
irradiance sensor. 
• 
Weather station sensor 
       To control the solar power plant's production and 
performance, a weather forecasting device can be incredibly 
useful, as shown in Figure 2. Additionally, it can be used for 
scheduling 
maintenance 
and 
washing 
periods. 
Fundamentally, it measures parameters like irradiance, other 
ecological factors like humidity, velocity of wind, direction 
of wind and module temperature [11].  
 
 
Figure 2. Weather station sensor at GUtech  
 
• 
Thermopile pyrano-meters 
        The thermopile pyrano-meter is an instrument used to 
detect the sun irradiance (intensity) from the hemispheric 
view of a flat surface incident. The sensor is made of a 
pyrano-meter structure, one or two domes, black body 
absorber and thermopile (it is an instrument which transforms 
the thermal energy absorbed from the sun in the form of 
electrical energy), as shown in Figure 3 [12]. 
 
 
Figure 3. Pyrano-meter sensor at GUtech 
 
• 
Silicon irradiance sensor 
       This sensor is a solar cell made from Silicon and it can 
be used to measure the radiation because the relation between 
short circuit current and radiation is directly proportional. 
Also, it can measure temperature by connecting the 
temperature sensor to the Silicon irradiance sensor, as shown 
in Figure 4 [13]. The sensor is connected near the solar panels 
directly with the same angle, so it measures the solar 
irradiance that falls to solar panel directly. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Silicon irradiance sensor at GUtech 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

B. Experimental setup 
     This study took 91 days starting from the 6th of May, 2020. 
For the first 28 days, both side panels were kept dirty, and 
this was taken as the baseline. However, for the rest of 61 
days, the east side of solar module was cleaned, and the west 
side of solar module was kept dirty.  
     At the beginning, the Virtual Control Operator Room 
website was explained by an employee who works at HTC to 
teach the user how to use the website and perform studies. 
Then, self-study of the website helped the user to learn more 
about the website and get familiar with it; in case the user did 
not understand something, he/she could go back to process 
number one (ask the HTC employer for more explanation). 
Then, an excel sheet was created to make studies and graphs 
analysis. The east side of the solar panels will be cleaned with 
a brush, microfiber cloth and water by a GUtech employee, 
taking time consumption and amount of water used into 
consideration. Then, the user will check for any sensor or 
technical problems; in case of any problem, he/she should ask 
for help from HTC employees and repeat the process starting 
with repeating the cleaning of the east solar cells. However, 
in case everything is fine, data can be withdrawn safely and 
if there is any big change in data due to weather or other side 
effects, notes should be written down. The process of 
cleaning, checking for any side effects or technical issues and 
withdrawal of data will be repeated daily for two months. 
After two months of repeating the same procedure, the final 
process will take place by analyzing graphs, comparing data 
and discussing. 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Result analysis 
      The experimental part focuses on analyzing the outcome 
of the results obtained, based on utilizing a comparison 
between different graphs for both solar panel sides (east 
(cleaned) and west (dirty)). These graphs include Irradiance-
DC current, Temperature-DC voltage, and the DC power of 
photovoltaic panels. The results were collected from the 6th 
of May to the 5th of August, 2020. The data was taken daily 
from sunrise (6:00) to sunset (19:00) because the sun is most 
present during this time frame which leads the solar panels to 
produce power output. For the first 28 days, both panels were 
not cleaned, and this was taken as baseline. However, for the 
first 18 days, the amount of irradiance and temperature falls 
 to solar cells were not stable due to the change in weather. 
1) 
 Irradiance and DC current (East) 
       Figure 5 shows the irradiance and DC current on the y-
axis and the days number on the x-axis for the cleaned panels. 
As it can be seen on the graph, the relation linking irradiance 
and DC current is directly proportional and, from day one to 
day eighteen, both parameters generate a gradual decreasing 
line due to soiling accumulation. However, for the remaining 
73 days, the production of both parameters remained constant 
because the east panels were cleaned. Most of the days, the 
irradiance which fell on the east solar module fluctuated 
between 552 W/m2 and 432 W/m2, and the DC current that 
was generated by east solar module averaged between 6.31 A 
and 4.80 A. 
 
On the 24th of May (day 18), the absorbed irradiance on the 
west solar cells was low from times 14:00 to 17:00 because 
of weather change which resulted in a low generated DC 
current, around 4.43 A. On day 39 (14th of June), the 
irradiance falling to the east solar module was around 510 
W/m2, but the generated DC current was 4.50 A which is out 
of the daily average range. This drop was due to a technical 
error that happened to the solar module which shows there 
was a problem in converting the absorbed irradiance to DC 
current and a gradual decrease in falling irradiance to solar 
module, specifically at 11:00. 
 
 
Figure 5. Experimental data of east panels between irradiance and DC 
current 
      Also, on day 72 and day 73 (17th and 18th of July), 
respectively, the absorbed irradiance by the east solar module 
was approximately 410 W/m2   and 419 W/m2 respectively, 
due to a reduction in temperature specifically from 12:00 to 
14:00. As a result of DC current, the east solar panels 
generated 4.48 A and 4.40 A, respectively. The east solar 
module generated around 3.24 A on day 82 (27th of July) due 
to a technical error that happened to solar panels specifically 
at 12:00, appearing that the DC current was 0 A and low daily 
average solar irradiance exactly from 12:00 to 19:00 around 
331 W/m2 which fall to the east solar module. 
      The largest drop in the east solar module current output 
was on day 65 (10th of July). The solar module produced 
around 2.58 A. This was because of a low amount of falling 
irradiance to the east solar module, approximately 237 W/m2, 
 which was influenced by the presence of clouds.  
2) 
 Irradiance and DC current (West) 
      Figure 6 shows DC current and irradiance on the y-axis 
and the days number on the x-axis for the non-cleaned panels. 
As per the figure, the relation between irradiance and DC 
current is directly proportional and there is a steady decrease 
in the DC current from the first day to the last day. 
Additionally, the absorbed irradiance of the west solar 
module is constant and nearly the same as the one on the east 
side. The absorbed irradiance by the west solar module 
fluctuated between 445 W/m2 and 571 W/m2, but the DC 
current which was generated by the west solar module 
declined from the peak amount of 4.52 A to about 2.96 A. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
Figure 6. Experimental data of west panels between irradiance and DC 
current 
      On the 24th of May (day 18) the falling irradiance on the 
west solar cells was low in the afternoon from 14:00 to 17:00 
due to weather change. As a result, the produced amount of 
DC current was 3.02 A. On day 72 and day 73 (17th and 18th 
of July) respectively, the absorbed irradiance by the solar 
module was around 383 W/m2   and 399 W/m2 respectively, 
due to a reduction in temperature specifically from 12:00 to 
14:00. Accordingly, the west solar panels generated around 
2.55 A and 2.67 A, respectively. A technical issue happened 
on day 82 (27th of July) to the west solar module exactly at 
12:00, and the DC current produced was 0 A. This affected 
the daily produced DC current which reached around 1.79 A.  
Also, the daily solar irradiance to the west solar panels was 
around 304 W/m2, which played a role in decreasing the 
current, especially from 12:00 to 19:00. 
       The highest decline in producing current by the west 
solar module was on day 65 (10th of July). The west solar 
module produced around 1.79 A. The problem on day 65 was 
a low amount of falling irradiance to the west solar module 
around 232 W/m2 which was influenced by dust accumulation 
and the presence of clouds. Additionally, the effect of dust on 
the west solar modules started from day 67 (12th of July). 
Consequently, a high irradiance rate was absorbed by the 
silicon irradiance sensor, but vice versa for the solar panels, 
 which shows low DC current rates.  
3) 
 Temperature and DC voltage (East) 
      Figure 7 shows cell temperature and DC voltage on the y-
axis and the days number on the x-axis for the cleaned panels. 
It appears from the graph that the relation between cell 
temperature and DC voltage is inversely proportional and 
almost constant values for cell temperature and DC voltage 
for three months. The temperature at the east solar module 
was oscillating between 57.59 oC and 46.76 oC, and DC 
voltage which was produced by east solar module was 
between 178 V and 192 V, on average.  
      On the 21st of May (day 15), the east panels were having 
a technical error to convert the absorbed temperature to DC 
voltage due to dust accumulation on the Silicon irradiance 
sensor. Consequently, the relation between these two 
parameters is shown to be a directly proportional one. On day 
57 and day 59 respectively, the cell temperatures of the east 
solar 
module 
were 
around 
50.53oC 
and 
46.53oC 
independently however, the generated DC voltages were 
190.87 V and 183.23 V independently. Consequently, in these 
two days, the east solar module was having a technical error 
issue of measuring the absorbed temperature because the 
surrounding temperature was investigated to have an inverse 
proportion relation with cell temperature. Due to this issue, 
the relation between the cell temperature and the DC voltage 
was directly proportional. The cell temperature was 50.09oC 
on day 89 but the DC voltage was high (185.38 V) which 
shows the relation is direct proportional between these two 
parameters. As a result, from 9:00 to 10:00, the surrounding 
temperature was low around 33oC and this influenced the 
average DC voltage to increase. 
 
 
Figure 7. Experimental data of east panels between temperature and DC 
voltage 
4) 
Temperature and DC voltage (West) 
      Figure 8 illustrates cell temperature and DC voltage on 
the y-axis and the days number on the x-axis for the non-
cleaned panels. Evidently, from the chart, the relation 
between cell temperature and DC voltage is inversely 
proportional and there are almost constant values for cell 
temperature and DC voltage for three months. On most days, 
the temperature of the west solar module fluctuated between 
57.76 oC and 47.88 oC, and DC voltage produced by the west 
solar module averaged between 182 V and 191 V.  
 
 
Figure 8. Experimental data of west panels between temperature and DC 
voltage 
      On day 15 (21st of May), the west module was having a 
technical error to transfer the absorbed temperature to DC 
voltage because of soiling on the Silicon irradiance sensor 
surface. As a result, the relation linking DC voltage and 
temperature is a directly proportional one. On day 82, day 85, 
and day 91 respectively, the cell temperatures of the west 
solar module were around 45.03 oC, 55.4 oC and 54.1 oC 
independently but, the generated DC voltages were 182.34 V, 
182.82 V and 181.83 V independently. As a result, in these 
three days, the west solar module was having a technical error 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

issue of measuring the absorbed temperature because the 
surrounding temperature was investigated to have an inverse 
proportion relation with the cell temperature. Because of this 
problem, the relation between the cell temperature and the 
DC voltage is shown to be directly proportional. In addition, 
during week five, exactly on day 57, day 59, day 61, day 63 
and day 65 respectively, the cell temperatures of the west 
solar module were generating a direct proportional relation 
with the DC voltage. This was due to an error that happened 
to Silicon irradiance sensor which was affected by dust 
 accumulation. 
5) 
DC Power (East and West) 
      The DC power of the photovoltaic panels is influenced by 
the DC voltage and the DC current. Both factors have a direct 
relation to power output. Consequently, if there is any sudden 
drop, rise or change in the DC power data, then there would 
be a variation for either the DC voltage or the DC current. 
 
 
Figure 9. Experimental data of east panels between DC power, DC current 
and DC voltage 
      Figure 9 shows the chart between DC power, DC current 
and DC voltage on the y-axis and days number on the x-axis 
for the cleaned panels. Clearly, from the chart, the DC power 
is mainly affected by the DC current since the DC voltage 
produces a nearly constant line. The DC power which was 
generated by the east solar module was fluctuating between 
1205 W and 917 W and it has a constant generating line.  
     Different days (18, 39, 72, 73 and 82) in Figure 5 show a 
sudden drop in the DC power which produces less than 860 
W. This happened because of the low production in the DC 
current.  The critical drop happened on day 65. It produced 
around 506 W. This was also due to a drop of the DC current 
to around 2.58 A.  
      Figure 10 depicts the DC power, the DC current and the 
DC voltage on the y-axis and the days number on the x-axis 
for the non-cleaned panels. From the chart, we see that the 
DC power is mainly affected by the DC current since the DC 
voltage is producing almost a constant line. Nonetheless, the 
DC power line is decreasing progressively from peak power 
around 907 W to minimum power approximately 569 W. 
      Several days (72, 73 and 82) in Figure 10 show dramatic 
decline in DC power generating less than 526 W, this 
happened due to low production in DC current.  The 
maximum drop occurred on day 65, producing around 350 
W. This was also attributed to a decrease in DC current to 
around 2.58 A. 
 
 
Figure 10. Experimental data of west panels between DC power, DC 
current and DC voltage 
 
B. Discussion on Results analysis 
From the above detailed analysis, it can be concluded that 
dust accumulation on solar cells affects the irradiance and 
current only because the cell temperature and voltage were 
constant for both panels. There were big differences between 
the amounts of DC power of the east panels compared to the 
west panels due to dust accumulation on the solar cell glass. 
The east panels generated more power than the west panels. 
Additionally, the power of the west panels started to drop in 
week six. As a result, the falling irradiance amount was almost 
the same for both panels, but the generated current of the west 
panels was low. 
C. Performance ratio (efficiency) analysis  
 
      The performance ratio (PR) of the photovoltaic cell is 
calculated by taking the sum of the DC power produced by 
the PV cells at time (day) to the sum amount of irradiance 
multiplied by the sectional area of PV cells and efficiency. 
The PV cells efficiency varies with the irradiance rate and the 
DC power. 
 
 
Figure 11. Solar panel efficiency 
      Figure 11 compares the performance ratio change during 
thirteen weeks for the east and the west panels. From the 
graph, the east panels tend to have a higher efficiency when 
compared to the west panels because they are cleaned daily 
for two months with no dust accumulation on their surface. 
The east panels generated constant values of efficiency 
between 113% maximum and 105% minimum for all thirteen 
weeks. The west panels started with a constant rate of 
efficiency between 83% and 81% for the first five weeks. 
After week five, the impact of dust on the west solar cells 
started to appear, the west panels generated a gradual 
decrease efficiency from 77% to 65%. As a result, the west 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

panels’ 
efficiency 
began 
to 
decrease 
weekly 
by 
 approximately 2.2%. 
D. Discussion on Performance ratio analysis  
 
      It can be concluded from the analysis of performance 
ratio that the east solar cells were more efficient than the west 
solar cells and produced constant values. This is because the 
east solar panels absorbed more irradiance compared to the 
west solar panels from sunrise to sunset in the summertime. 
Also, the dust accumulation tends to reduce the amount of 
irradiance on the west PV cells. The generated DC power for 
the east panels is higher than the west panels. Moreover, from 
the performance ratio analysis, it can be recognized that the 
performance ratio values of the east PV cells exceed 100% 
because of different reasons. One of these above-mentioned 
reasons is that the Silicon irradiance sensors for both sides 
were dusty, and this resulted in an error in reading the real 
integers. Additionally, the inclination accuracy of the Silicon 
irradiance sensor compared to the panels might affect the 
amount of absorbed irradiance which, in turn, affects the 
performance ratio. Another reason can be the relative 
humidity that could impact the Silicon irradiance sensor 
accuracy. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
      The leading target of this experiment was to measure the 
dust effect on solar panel efficiency in Oman. A case study 
was performed to understand the working system of solar 
panels at the German University of technology in Oman and 
to plan for experimental setup. The experiment was done 
using two different poles of solar cells, one oriented in the 
east direction and the other one in the west direction. The east 
side panels were cleaned daily; however, the west side panels 
were kept dirty. This was done to compare the efficiency of 
the solar panels with and without dust accumulation. 
      The results show that the east solar panels were producing 
more current than the west side panels due to the dust 
accumulation on the west side panels which works as shading 
layer for the irradiance to enter the solar cells. The generated 
current from the east solar panels was almost constant 
between 6.31 A and 4.80 A, however, the west side of PV 
cells were producing a decreasing line, at maximum 4.52 A 
to about 2.96 A. In terms of voltage, both sides panels were 
producing almost the same amount of voltage, between 178 
V to 192 V, with almost constant amount of absorbed 
temperature during the three months.    
      As a result of the analyses, the main factor that affects the 
power output and efficiency of the solar cells is the current 
which is environmentally affected by the irradiance amount. 
Moreover, the east solar panels were producing constant 
amount of power and efficiency, however, the west panels 
were generating a decreasing amount of power and 
efficiency. In addition, from the analysis of the irradiance-
current, power and efficiency of dusty solar cells, we see that 
in week five, the influence of dust on solar cell performance 
generated low values for all three parameters.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Hantula, “How Do Solar Panels Work?” New York: Chelsea 
Clubhouse, 2010. 
[2] M. R. Maghami, H. Hizam, C. Gomes, M. A. Radzi, M. I. 
Rezadad, and S. Hajighorbani, “Power loss due to soiling on 
solar panel: A review”,  Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, pp. 1307-1316, 2016. 
[3] D. R. Das, “Effect of Different Environmental Factors on 
Performance of Solar Panel”, International Journal of 
Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering (IJITEE), 
vol. 8, issue 11, pp. 15-18, 2019. 
[4] D. Vidyanandan, “An Overview of Factors Affecting the 
Performance of Solar PV Systems”, Energy Scan, vol. 27, no. 
28, pp. 216, 2017. 
[5] A. Shaju and R. Chacko, “Soiling of photovoltaic modules- 
Review”, IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering 
396, pp. 1-10, 2018. 
[6] R. Karmouch and H. E. Hor, “Solar Cells Performance 
Reduction under the Effect of Dust in Jazan Region”, Journal 
of Fundamentals of Renewable Energy and Applications, pp. 
1-4, 2017. 
[7] Cockpit SGS’ Training Centre, Retrieved June 18, 2020, from 
Hussam 
Technology 
Company: 
https://www1.meteocontrol.de/vcom/cockpit/index/systemId/
1052369 
[8] Shams Global Solutions and Partners, Retrieved June 19, 2020, 
from Shams Global Solutions: http://shamsoman.com/who-
we-are/ 
[9] TSM-PD14, 2017, Retrieved June 21, 2020, from TALLMAX 
MODULE: 
https://static.trinasolar.com/sites/default/files/EN_TSM_PD14
_datasheet_B_2017_web.pdf 
[10] Fronius Symo, June 2020, Retrieved July 8, 2020, from 
Fronius: 
https://www.fronius.com/en/photovoltaics/products/all-
products/inverters/fronius-symo/fronius-symo-3-0-3-m 
[11] Why Do Solar Power Plants Need Weather Monitoring Station 
(WMS)? 
Retrieved 
June 
28, 
2020, 
from 
Aeron: 
https://aeronsystems.com/why-do-solar-power-plants-need-
weather-monitoring-station-wms/ 
[12] Hukseflux, What is a pyranometer? Hukseflux Thermal 
Sensors, pp. 1-5, 2006. 
[13] Ammonit, Silicon Irradiance Sensor MT. Retrieved June 22, 
2020, 
from 
http://www.windup.pt/resources/pyranometer_siliconirradianc
esensor.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

