A Tool Architecture for Diagnostic in Power Electric Network Using Method 
Engineering and Multi Agent Systems 
 
Jean-Pierre LIENOU 
Department of Computer Engineering 
ENSPY/LIMSS, University of Yaounde I,  
Yaounde, Cameroon 
lienou@gmail.com 
Emmanuel TANYI 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering, University of Buea,  
Buea, Cameroon 
emmantanyi@yahoo.com 
Marcellin NKENLIFACK, Thierry NOULAMO 
Department of Computer Engineering 
IUTFV/LAIA, University of Dschang,  
Bandjoun, Cameroon 
marcellin.nkenlifack@gmail.com, thierry.noulamo@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—Electrical networks in developing countries suffer 
from several shortcomings. One can cite the scarcity of well-
trained professionals to carry out maintenance operations, the 
ageing of equipments, the lack of spare parts and especially the 
deadlines for the supply in case of purchase. Diagnosis is an 
operation often perilous, arduous, long, semi-formal and 
sometimes leading to long calculations or to not satisfactory 
results. Activities carried out during the diagnosis are 
sometimes related to particular components of equipment or 
"modular" steps of a diagnostic algorithm. These different 
diagnostic modules can be formalized or not. Since recently, 
situational method engineering is improving its formalization 
and it allows designers to reuse fragments in the design process 
in software life cycle for example. The purpose of this paper is 
to present an environment based on multi agent systems which 
allows you to apply method engineering in other areas (here 
the diagnosis in the electrical networks) in order to solve 
problems specific to subject area. The building process is 
illustrated by the decomposition of certain diagnostic 
procedures in simpler activities achievable in parallel on the 
ground or in a software application and thus, reduce 
diagnostic time while simplifying procedures. The final goal of 
this on-going work is to create depending on the context, self- 
own diagnostic procedure and instantiate it. 
Keywords- Situational Method Engineering; FDI Diagnostic; 
Multi Agent System; CIM; meta diagnostic 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since a decade, Situational Method Engineering (SME) 
has evolved and is highly appreciated by practitioners in 
information system to design methodologies for complex 
software from “chunks” of methodologies. However, outside 
of its use in process engineering and software engineering, 
SME is not visible in other areas of research. In effect, the 
SME is going in the opposite direction of the creation of a 
standard way to do things. It is focused on how to identify 
and document fragments from existing sources by including 
the practical recommendations of the industry; on how to 
store these fragments and ensure their quality and how to 
build a methodology for a specific situation from these 
fragments. Any constructed method thus uses fragments 
from a database of fragments that leads to reusability [1] 
which is very important. We are trying to check if we can 
move this experience to the field of control engineering and 
more precisely in diagnosis. The problem is complex and we 
propose to solve using agents. Agents are used in electrical 
networks on the theoretical level and they are applied in 
various features. In [2], authors use Intelligent Electronic 
Device (IED) as an element of measurement to propose a 
model for protection of equipment. In [3], authors propose 
Multi Agent System (MAS) for the diagnosis of faults in a 
distribution network of a decentralized energy production. 
Note that the international community is working to produce 
an ontology specific to power field and namely the Common 
Information Model (CIM) of the IEC that we recommend. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II presents 
the some key concepts in the diagnostic field, SME, and the 
MAS in power electrical networks. Section III presents the 
proposed approach for the construction of the method with a 
scenario on a hypothetical example, as well as the procedure 
for the selection of an elementary fragment to form a 
methodology for diagnostic. Section IV presents the platform 
model with the features of main agents. 
II. 
BASIC CONCEPTS 
A. Diagnostic 
Diagnostic is a process that determines whether a device 
or a system is in good or bad state. There are several types of 
diagnostic and several communities i.e., Fault Detection 
Isolation (FDI), Dx, and Bridge were formed in the recent 
past and each develops its conceptual diagnostic tools. Bad 
state according to FDI community is when the residue 
calculation does not match with the model. For the Dx 
community, it is when the observations are not coherent with 
the description of at least one component or of the system; 
therefore, an R-conflict can help to diagnose a system. To 
support our remarks, we will use a diagnostic approach as 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

proposed by the FDI community. By applying the diagnosis 
to the grid, it must be noted that the network must be 
modeled in the state space model. Several classes of FDI 
approach exist. These classes include: 
• 
Methods based on residuals using the model to 
predict the values to be measured. The parity space method 
that eliminates the unknown variables and the estimation 
method by state observers is to estimate the unknown 
variables 
• 
The parameter estimation methods use estimation 
techniques to calculate a value of a parameter of a model 
when its structure and design parameters are well known. 
We can list some diagnostic methods of heating wire or 
equipment (electrical panel) in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
SHORT LIST OF DIAGNOSTIC METHODS TO DIAGNOSE 
HEATING IN EQUIPMENTS 
Faults 
Diagnostic principle 
Diagnostic of 
heating 
Infra-red Thermography 
Load Flow Analysis 
Radio Frequency analysis 
Dissolved Gas Analysis (DGA) 
 
We use the term meta- diagnostic to specify the 
construction of a diagnostic approach by SME. 
B. Situational method Engineering 
Literature on SME shows the existence of several 
approaches to describe the process cycle. Researchers helped 
to formalize SME and tools are created to facilitate their 
implementation. Existing libraries appear and are enriched 
every day. They include OPFRO, Praxos, etc.. Several 
standards address issues of SME. The most common 
standard is the ISO/IEC 24744, OMG SPEM, OPF and many 
others. Most used component types in SME are "fragments", 
"components", "chunks", "OPF fragments" and services. 
a) The Brinkkemper approach 
In this approach, there are two types of method 
fragments. The "process fragment" which describes the 
steps, activities and tasks and the "product fragment" for the 
structure of the product at the end of the process to be put in 
place. A fragment can have relationships with other 
fragments and can be composed of several fragments; an 
elementary step description of the steps for successful 
description of the components to put in the database and 
extract to recompose a method. 
b) The OPF approach 
The approach is based on "Object oriented Process, 
Environment, and Notation" (OPEN), which generally 
produces five meta classes each producing a fragment 
method (process or fragment method). 
c) The FIPA approach 
In [1] and [2], SME is used for the construction of MAS 
and is now considered standard in the field of SME. It is 
important to define the meta-model of each fragment method 
to identify the architecture of the basic methods and to define 
how to connect these fragments of methods and techniques 
to describe integration method. 
d) Ralyté & Rolland approach 
In this approach, also called "chunks method" the process 
is based on the fact that any fragment of a new method to be 
build has an intermediate result [5]. The approach is 
composed of two parts: the "process aspect", which is called 
either map or direction of realization of intentions and the 
"product appearance". 
e) "Method service" approach 
This method based on services is according to us, the one 
that can be adapted to diagnostic although we have not yet 
investigated all others for suitability. Its meta model is 
shown in Fig 1. 
In general, methods can be constructed in several ways: 
ad hoc (intuitive building from scratch) by changing 
(abstraction, instantiation or adaptation of an existing 
method, taking into account the current situation) by 
extension/reduction 
a 
method 
(by 
complicating 
or 
simplifying assembly) and taking into account possible 
overlaps between fragments. The main objective is to use a 
quick way for the construction of methods corresponding to 
the specific needs of each project by: 
 
 
Figure 1.  "Method Service" meta model in SME. 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

• 
guiding the method engineer in the requirements 
definition method for a specific project to develop a 
diagnostic system. 
• 
helping the method engineer to select the 
components satisfying her method’s needs. 
• 
helping the method engineer to assemble selected 
fragments to build a new method or adapt an existing 
components method. 
C. Electrical Power Network and Multi Agents System 
An agent will be considered as a software component to 
build the system and get a multi-agent system. The choice of 
agent technology is due to a few of their properties: pro 
activity, sociality and especially the emergence from the 
activities of individual agents that is not provided in advance. 
This is actually the emerging functionality contrary to the 
program that is attractive to MAS because the designer does 
not have to consider all scenarios but the MAS can adapt 
functionalities: the analysis is less difficult in this point of 
view. But the task of distribution of subtasks on the agents 
remains complicated. 
Equation (1) shows that emergence is due to the part of 
the collective function. The sum of the functions of the 
various agents of MAS should logically be less than the 
function of the MAS for collaborative agents 
F (MAS) = collective function +∑ f (#Agent) 
(1) 
Fig 2 shows the use of a hypothetical system using a FDI 
diagnostic approach. 
Telemetry data collection used to construct the current 
system state space model is compared to the nominal model 
stored in the physical system. A residue is calculated and if 
there are discrepancies, the diagnostic process is triggered 
and if not, the system proceeds to the next data collection. 
III. 
PROPOSED APPROACH 
The fragments of diagnostic methods depositories are 
stored in a database that can be queried. The granularity of 
selection can locate, isolate or identify the faulty component. 
According to written recommendations by experts, the result 
of diagnostic is displayed and a maintenance plan is 
proposed. Fig 3 shows the creation environment of the 
diagnostic methodology we call meta- diagnostic. 
A. Environment for meta- diagnostics creation  
The diagnostic engineer perceives a need to diagnose a 
component, equipment, network or even an embedded or not 
piece of software. He works in collaboration with the method 
engineer in diagnostic that will use (" method service" here) 
SME approach to populate the basic methods and simple 
compositions that allow not get deeper into details in the 
construction of the new method of diagnostic by the field 
engineer in diagnostic. Once the methodology is ready, the 
results are monitored and there is feedback to enrich the base 
with statistics and then the fragment method that failed to 
better diagnose is modified. With these statistics, future 
queries made by the engineer will show best diagnostic 
methods deemed efficient and with what tools you need to 
build the aggregated method. 
B. Selection procedure and construction methods 
In a typical case, where by example the calculation of the 
residue alerts, Fig 4 shows how to diagnose and if possible, 
calculate a new control law and control the industrial 
process. In case the process has a model in the state space, 
we can first select with a coarse granularity a method that 
will enable you to locate the faulty equipment and continue 
diagnosis with an identification method of the component in 
question within the equipment. 
IV. 
MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM SUITABLE FOR 
PLATFORM 
The platform must have a set of agents that will remove 
from the fragments base a set of consistent fragments that 
will diagnose the network an overall goal or in a goal -
oriented equipment manner. We identify five agents for the 
realization of the system as shown in Fig 2 above. 
 
Nominal model 
of the physical 
system
Diagnostic Chunk 
repository (AFM)
Selection  of chunks to 
diagnose a device component
(Identification - ACM)
Selection of Set of methods 
to diagnose a device
(Isolation - ACM)
Level of 
diagnosability 
selection (AEM)
Collection of 
telemetric data
Build of the real 
time model of the 
physical system
Residue 
computation
Diagnostic 
Process (AIM)
Discrepancies
No
Yes
Physical system
Results and 
Maintenance or 
Repair planning
 
Figure 2.  Main components of a hypothetical system using an FDI approach of diagnostic. 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

 
 
Figure 3.  Actors’ activities in diagnostic by method engineering 
 
A. Agents functionalities 
Agent Fragments Methods (AFM): This agent whose role 
is to interface with the basic methods used to describe a 
method of one of the approaches to SME and inserts it into 
the base methods. 
Agent Construction Method (ACM): This agent from 
fragments and descriptions of engineering methods, selects 
the basic methods of the fragments that will develop new 
methods. It is responsible for the development, optimization, 
and many other features to generate the final methodology. 
The Execution Methods (AEM) Agent: Under the orders 
of the Field Engineer Method, it monitors that developers 
have all the necessary need to develop their applications 
The Interface Methods (AIM) Agent: Its role is to 
examine possible generated methods and modify the 
proposed agent construction choices if necessary. 
B. Plausible scenario 
Suppose part of the electrical network formed of bays, 
transformers, boxes and busbars. If the telemetry data create 
an alert, the engineer must create the diagnostic procedure 
based on telemetry. If he decides to go sequentially and 
check if the transformer is functioning and if not, he checks 
by Dissolved Gas Analysis (DGA), he will have the choice 
between the following basic methods: Duval’s Triangle 
Roger’s Ratio, CIGRE, IEEE, etc. These methods may not 
be feasible. He chooses a basic analysis radiofrequency 
method. If he suspects the box, he can think of a resistive or 
impedance short circuit. He moves on by studying the 
temperature in the cabinet or sensor noise, humidity, etc. If 
against the calculation of the residue shows that the voltages 
across the transformer is normal, it can check the safety 
equipment on the busbars without using selections of 
elementary algorithms. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Fragments method selection process for diagnostic method construction. 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

V. 
CONCLUSION 
We presented in this work the possibility of using SME 
to create diagnostic methodologies called here meta- 
diagnostic. We started with a background on SME and 
introduced briefly five approaches. We presented the model 
of the power grid based on the CIM and some uses of MAS 
in electrical networks. Our approach has been to propose a 
framework for describing the basic diagnostic methods 
(implemented by the method engineer using CAME tool) 
that can be recombined to form a complete method and 
instantiate (by a field engineer). As perspective, we think to 
formalize our concepts, expand the FDI diagnostic approach 
to Dx approach, refine descriptors methods and tools to use 
and implement it using Eclipse environment.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Deneckere construction bosses and certification of the 
completeness cards patterns using meta-patterns - Paris: 
Engineering of Information Systems, 2012. - 4: Vol. hal-
00701043, version 1 - 24 May, 2012. 
[2] G. Zhabelova and V. Vyatkin Multi-agent Smart Grid 
Automation Architecture based on IEC 61850/61499 
Intelligent Logical Nodes IEEE Transactions on Industrial 
Electronics. - [s.l.] : IEEE, 2011. 
[3] G. Low H. Mouratidis and B. Henderson-Sellers Using a 
Situational Method Engineering Approach to Identify 
Reusable Method Fragments from the Secure TROPOS 
Methodology Journal of Object Technology. - Zurich : ETH, 
Chair of Software Engineering, 2010. - 4 : Vol. 9. - pp. 91-
125. 
[4] H. L. G. Rosenwald and J. J. Cheng Strategic power 
infrastructure defense Proceedings of the IEEE. - May 2005. - 
5 : Vol. 93. - pp. 918-933. - 0018-9219. 
[5] J. P. Lienou M. Nkenlifack, E. Tanyi, and T. Noulamo A 
generic multi agent-based platform for reliable diagnostic by 
DGA Advances in Computer Science and Engineering. - [s.l.] 
: Pushpa, August 2010. - 1 : Vol. 5. - pp. 11-23. 
[6] J. Ralyte Engineering methods based on components [Book]. 
- Paris: University of Paris-Sorbonne 1, 2001. - Doctoral 
Thesis. 
[7] L. Ioannis, S. Baxevanos, and P. Dimitris Implementing 
multiagent systems technology for power distribution network 
control and protection management IEEE transactions on 
power delivery. - [s.l.] : IEEE, Jan 2007. - 1 : Vol. 22. - pp. 
433-443. - 0885-8977. 
[8] A. Zonkoly . El - Fault diagnosis in distribution networks with 
distributed generation // Smart Grid and Renewable Energy. - 
[s.l.] : Scientific research, Feb 2011. - published at 
http://www.SciRP.org/journal/ sgre. - pp. 1-11. - doi:10.4236/ 
sgre .201 1 .21001. 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

